Dr. Chauncy's SERMON Preached before the Society For encouraging Industry, AND
employing the Poor.

August 12. 1752.

The Idle-Poor secluded from the Bread of Charity by the Christian Law. A
SERMON Preached in BOSTON, before the Society for encouraging Industry, AND
employing the Poor., Aug. 1^. 1752.

By Charles Chauncy, D. D.

Drowsiness shall clothe a Man with Rags: But the diligent Hand makes rich.

SOLOMON. BOSTON: Printed by Thomas Fleet, 1752

The Idle-Poor secluded from the Bread of Charity by the Christian Law.
2 Thessalon. 3.10. -- This we commanded you, that if any would not work,
neither should he eat.


THE Law of Love is, in a singular and distinguishing Manner, the Law of
Christianity. This is MY Commandment, says our Savior, that ye love one
another. And again, A NEW Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one
another. And yet again, By THIS shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if
ye have Love one to another. And by this were the first Christians
distinguished from other Men, and known to be the Disciples of Jesus Christ.
And they discovered their Benevolence, not in Word only, neither in Tongue, but
in Deed and in Truth; never forgetting to do good and communicate, as they had
Opportunity. They did not judge, they could ever do too much, in a Way of
Charity, for the Relief of the poor and needy.

And no Inconvenience, one would think, could arise from the Liberalities in
which they abounded. And yet, it was owing to this, in part at least, that
among those who took upon them the Name of Christians, there were some who
indulged to Idleness; either not working at all, or not with a becoming
Diligence.

Of this Character there seems to have been a considerable Number among the
Christians at Thessalonica. The extraordinary Charities, common in that Day,
might encourage those, who were before disposed to be idle, to neglect the
Business of their proper Callings. The Hope of having their Wants supplied, by
the Bounties of their Christian Friends and Neighbors, might insensibly
slacken their Diligence, and betray them into an indolent inactive way of Life.

But, from whatever Cause it might arise, Idleness was the Fault too prevalent
among the Thessalonian Christians. The Apostle Paul seems to be concerned about
it; and is particular in his Care to do whatever might be proper to correct and
amend it. And to this Purpose it was, that, among other Things, he spoke the
Words of my Text, This we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither
should he eat. In discoursing to which Words I shall endeavor the following
Things.

I. I shall say what may be proper to ascertain the true Sense of the Command,
If any will not work, neither shall he eat. II. I shall mention a few Things,
as the Time will allow, to justify the Wisdom and Reasonableness of the
Command. III. And, Finally, I shall apply what may be offered to the Occasion
of our being now together.
I. I am to explain the Command in my Text, If any will not work, neither shall
he eat.

Some perhaps may think, that it ought to be interpreted universally, as
extending to all, the Rich, as well as the Poor; insomuch that they ought
neither of them to eat, if they will not work. But such an Interpretation does
not fall in with the Design of the Apostle in this Place. For he is here
speaking, not of those who are able, without Labor, to maintain themselves;
but of poor People, who, if they will not work, must have their Expectations of
Relief from the Charities of others.

Not but that it is a shameful Thing for any to eat the Bread of Idleness. If
Persons possess ever so great an Abundance, this gives them no License to be
lazy. They may indeed reasonably exempt themselves from the lower and more
servile Parts of Business: But still they ought not to be idle. Indulged
habitual Idleness is a Reproach to any Man, whether he be high or low, rich or
poor. We were made for Business. Both our Souls and Bodies are so constituted,
as that Exercise is a great and necessary Means to keep them in an healthful
and vigorous State; and without it we shall soon contract a strange Hebetude of
Mind, as well as Inability of Body to all the Functions of Life. If the great
and rich would but thoroughly realize this, it might happily tend to lessen
their love of Ease, and put them upon Activity and Diligence in the Employment
of their Time and Powers to some or other of the valuable Purposes of Life.

But the Rich, as I said, are not the Persons the Apostle has here to do with,
but the Poor; whose Circumstances in the World are such as that, if they will not
work, they have nothing to depend on but the Charities of their Friends and
Neighbors. And it is with respect to this kind of Persons, in special, that
the Apostle has commanded, if any will not work, neither should he eat.

And the Manner in which he has worded the Command is observable, and clearly
ascertains its true Meaning. If any WILL not work. Those that will not work,
not those that cannot, are the Persons here pointed out. Such among the Poor as
are willing to work, but cannot get Employment, are not the Persons secluded
from the Bread of Charity. Neither are they restrained from eating of this
Bread, who would be willing to work, but are incapable of Labor, by Reason of
Sickness, or Lameness, or the Decays of an infirm old Age.

As for disabled Persons, it was never the Design of the Apostle to command,
that, if any would not work, neither should they eat. No; though their Incapacity
for Labor was brought upon them by their own Follies and Vices. It is very
unhappy indeed when this is the Case, as, God knows, it too often is. And such
Persons have infinite Reason to look back upon their past mad and sinful
Conduct with Grief and Shame: But yet, if they are really unable to do any
Thing, in a way of Labor, toward their own Support, they are by no means to
be neglected. They are, in common, with other disabled Persons, the proper
Objects of Charity, the Poor of this World, concerning whom it is the Will of
God, that they should be pitied and helped. And the Rich should look upon
themselves obliged to show Compassion toward them. If any should see a Brother
or Sister, of this Character, naked, and destitute of daily Food, they should
not only say to them, depart in Peace, be ye warmed and filled, but give them
those Things which are needful to the Body; suiting their Charities to their
particular Wants and Circumstances.

But we are under no such Obligations with respect to the other Sort of poor
People, those who can work, but will not; who may have Work to do, and have
Activity of Body to do it, but no Will to employ themselves in Labor.
Concerning these Poor, it is the Command of an inspired Apostle, that they
shall not eat, i. e. shall not be maintained at the Charge of others; shall not
live upon the Charities of their Christian Friends and Brethren.

Some, perhaps, may think this a very unreasonable Command. Doubtless, it will
be complained of as hard and severe by the indolent and lazy among the Poor.
But it is really one of the most equitable Commands; a Command founded on so
much Reason and Justice, yea, and Goodness too, that not a Word can fairly be
objected against it. And this leads me, as was proposed,

II. In the second Place, to say what may be thought sufficient to justify this
Command of the Apostle, and point out its Reasonableness, Equity and Goodness.
And the following Things may be briefly offered to this Purpose.

I. The established Laws of Nature are such as render it impossible, that
Mankind should be supported, if they are generally lazy. Our Bodies are so made
as constantly to require Food and Raiment: Nor can these Necessaries be
supplied but by Labor. The Conveniences and Comforts of Life are more
numerous, and require still greater Care and Pains. The Almighty, it is true,
if he had seen fit, could have maintained the humane Race, without the
Concurrence of any Endeavors of their own, by making Nature so rich and
fruitful, in every respect, as to have rendered Art useless, and Industry
superfluous. But he has ordered Matters otherwise; and, no doubt, for wise and
good Reasons. Our Food does not spring out of the Earth without Culture;
neither does our Raiment naturally grow on us, as it does on the inferior
Creatures. The Birds of the Air sow not; neither do the Lillies of the Field
toil or spin: But we are obliged to do both. The established Order of Nature is
such, as that, if we don't, we must unavoidably suffer, if not perish, for want
of Food to eat, and Raiment to put on.

Now if Labor is thus necessary for the Support of Life, it is contrary to all
Reason, that those should eat the Bread of Charity who will not work, while yet
they have Ability therefore. What Right have the lazy and indolent, who are both
healthy and strong, to live on the Fruits of other Men's Labor? Wherein lies
the Fitness of this? If without Labor the World cannot subsist, for any to sit
idle, depending upon a Supply from other Man's Industry, is certainly
incongruous to an high Degree. Why should some Men labor and toil to get Bread
for those who are as able to work as they are, but choose rather to spend their
Time in doing nothing? The Supposition is absurd. It is not fair; it savours
neither of Reason nor Justice, that the diligent and laborious should, by their
Bounties, relieve the Wants of those, who are poor and needy, not through
Incapacity for Bodily Exertions, but because they are sluggish and idle.

2. The positive Will of God has appointed Labor the Means in order to a
Livelihood in the World. To this Purpose are those Words of the Almighty,
which, though originally directed to Adam, are yet obligatory upon all his
Posterity, Genesis 3.19. In the Sweat of thy Face thou shall eat Bread, 'till thou
return to the Ground. As this Appointment of Heaven was published after the
Fall of Man, and as a Punishment for Sin, it should seem as though humane Labor
had but an ignoble Original. And so it had, is considered as to Kind and
Degree: But as to the Thing it self, it was as truly the Requirement of God
from Man in his innocent, as in his lapsed State. Even Adam in Paradise was not
so wholly provided with every Thing by the sole Bounty of Nature, but that it
was necessary he should be employed in Labor. We therefore read, not only that
he had Work to do in his innocent State, but what it was, namely, to dress and
keep the Garden of Eden, Genesis 2.15. If therefore Sin had not entered into the
World, Men would not have lived without Labor; though it would have been of a
nobler Kind, and in a less Degree. In these respects, Sin has made a
difference. We must now sweat and toil. Nature calls for this Sort of Labor,
and will not furnish us, upon any lower Terms, with such of her good Things as
we stand in need of: And it is the express Will of God, that, in this Way, we
should earn our Bread. Laborious Diligence is the Means by which he has
ordained we should supply ourselves with Food, and other Necessaries of Life.

If any therefore indulge to Idleness, who have Ability for Labor, they
virtually set aside the Method God has been pleased to direct to, and enjoin,
in order to their being supported in Life. And is it reasonable they should be
maintained in any other? Is it fit, if Men will not work, when they can, that a
different Way, from what the Wisdom of God has instituted, should be taken for
their Supply with Bread? And yet, by supporting the needy in Idleness, we
constructively oppose the Appointment of God, and substitute a Method for their
Maintenance of our own devising. And is this reasonable? Can it be justified?
Ought Persons to be maintained in plain Contempt of the Constitution of God?

I am sensible, it has sometimes been pleaded, that, however it might be in
former Days, the Cares of Religion now, in a great Measure, supersede the
Affairs of the World; insomuch that if Men neglect their temporal Business,
provided they do it that they may have Time to attend on the Spiritual Concerns
of their Souls and another World, they ought to be considered and helped; and
that it is a Christian Duty to support such pious Persons upon the Bread of
Charity.

A specious Pretense this for Idleness, in contempt of the Government of God;
but a very poor one; as being founded on entirely wrong Notions of the
Christian Religion, which requires its Professors, not only to mind the Things
of another World, but the Affairs of this also. And it is particularly
observable, Christianity is so far from allowing Men to be slothful in the
Business of their proper Callings, that it has reinforced the Law of Labor
given to Adam, and in him to all Mankind, by adopting it into its Scheme of
Morals. Says Paul, the Apostle of Jesus Christ, addressing himself to the
Thessalonians, and in them to all Christians, We command and exhort, by our
Lord Jesus Christ, that with Quietness they work, and eat their own Bread; as
we read in the 12th v. of my Context. Very observable is the Manner, in which
these Words are delivered, We command, and exhort, by our Lord Jesus Christ. He
does not satisfy himself with exhorting only; but he commands. And he does it
by our Lord Jesus Christ, i. e. by his Authority, as commissioned, and
empowered by him. So that whosoever, in this Article, despises, despises not
Man, but God; for here the Contempt does finally terminate, as our Savior
himself has taught us, in Luke 10.16. He that despises you, despises me; and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

Industrious Labor is therefore the Law of Christianity. Instead of altering
this Method appointed by God, from the Beginning, for the Support of Life, the
Gospel has confirmed it. So that Idleness is a Reflection upon the governing
Wisdom and Authority of God under the Christian, as well as former
Dispensations. And to support Man in Sloth, though they should disguise their
Guilt under the Cover of the most pious Pretenses, is a virtual setting up our
own Wisdom in opposition to the Wisdom of God, and subverting the Method he has
established, both in the nature of Things, and by positive Revelation, for the
supply of Mankind with the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life.

3. The Command, in my Text, is founded on the public Good. For there cannot
be a flourishing People, without Labor. It is by Improvement in Arts and (...)
that they must grow in Wealth, and Power, and become possessed of the various
Emoluments tending to the Benefit and Pleasure of Life; and these Arts take
their Rise from, and are carried on by, the Industry of particular Persons. And
this is so evident, that while some Nations have increased in Riches, and
Grandeur, and Power, by being industrious, though great Obstacles, and
discouraging Difficulties have stood in the Way; others, through Sloth and
Indolence, have been kept low, and sunk in Oblivion, though under great natural
Advantages to have got into flourishing Circumstances: Or, it may be, they have
become a Prey to other more active and enterprising Nations, who knew how to
make a better Use of their Advantages. And the Truth is, the natural Advantages
a People are favored with, whether for Husbandry, Navigation, Fishery,
Manufactures, or any other Source of Wealth, will be, in a great Measure, lost,
and, as it were, thrown away upon them, without Labor and Industry, in making
a wise and good Use of them.

The Athenians were so sensible of this, that Idleness, in that State,
subjected the guilty Person, whoever he was, to a Prosecution at Law, as an
Injury to the Commonwealth: And they made Inquiry of each Man and Woman, qua
Art se Alerent? By what Trade they supported themselves? And so long ago as
the Days of Pharaoh, it was taken for granted that a Man could not be without
some Occupation, or other. Hence that Question of his to Joseph's Brethren,
upon their coming into Egypt, Genesis 47.3. What is your Occupation?

The Law, in my Text, is therefore connected with the public Good; as it tends
to encourage Industry, by restraining us from Distributions to the lazy and
slothful. And it is indeed a great Hurt to a Community, when private Persons
dispense their Charities to such, among the poor, as keep themselves so by an
Indulgence to Idleness, while yet they are able to work. For the Public loses
the whole Benefit of the Labor of those, who are thus supported in Idleness;
and not only so, but is liable to suffer all the Inconveniences which are to
be looked for, in Consequence of their indulging to Sloth, and doing nothing.

And it is observable, the Apostle had it particularly in his View to guard
against these public Inconveniences, when he gave the Command in my Text.
Hence he adds, in the Words that immediately follow, giving the Reason, at
least one Reason of the Command, For we have heard, that there are some among
you which walk disorderly, working not at all; but are Busy-bodies.

You observe, these Persons who did not work, and were the Occasion of the
Command in the Text, were disorderly. And this, in a Sense, is always the Case.
Whenever Persons are idle, they are disorderly: For an idle Life is, in the
whole of it, a Disorder. It subverts the Order God has established for the
Support of Mankind, and would introduce another Method of Livelihood than that,
infinite Wisdom has contrived and appointed.

Nor is this the only Sense in which idle Persons are disorderly. They are too
often Tempters to others to neglect their Business. Having none of their own,
and being inclined to none, they endeavor to find, or, if they cannot do that,
to make Persons as idle as themselves, to the great Detriment of the Public,
and, many Times, the entire Ruin of their Companions in Sloth. And who are so
much noted for the moral Disorders of Lying and Stealing, as those who have
settled into an Habit of Laziness? Their Laziness reduces them to Straits and
Difficulties; and these, as the readiest and easiest Way to supply their Wants,
put them upon deceiving the kind and charitable by artfully invented Falsehoods,
or else upon secretly robbing them of their Money, or their Goods. And who more
given to Tippling than the Persons who have accustomed themselves to Idleness?
The Drones in a Place are commonly the People who doze away their Time and
Senses over their Cups. There are indeed no Disorders, but the idle are liable
to them; and their Danger lies in their Idleness. Were they diligently employed
in Business of one Kind or another, their Thoughts and Time would be properly
taken up; but having settled into a Temper inclining them to sit idle and do
nothing, they lie open to every Temptation, and are in danger of being betrayed
into moral Disorders of every Kind.

And these idle Persons were not only disorderly, but Busy-bodies. We hear
there are some who work not at all, but are Busy-bodies. This may seem an
Inconsistency; but it is most commonly the Truth of the Case. None more ready
to busy themselves in other Men's Matters, than those who neglect all Business
of their own. Not minding their own Affairs, they have Leisure, and generally
Inclination, to intrude into other Men's. Hence that Character of some, in the
Apostolic Times, They learn to be idle; wandering about from House to House; and
not only idle, but Tatlers also, and Busy-bodies, speaking Things which they
ought not. 1 Timothy 5.13. And none indeed are, usually, more free with their
Tongues than idle Persons; none wander more about from House to House; none are
more ready to meddle in Things which don't belong to them; acting in the Sphere
of others, though they will not in their own. And I need not say that this
intermeddling in other Men's Concerns, greatly tends to public Hurt; -- for it
kindles Contention, creates Feuds and Animosities; and is indeed a main Scource
of that Variance and Strife, which disturb the Peace of Society.

And is it any Wonder, when Idleness is connected with such Damage to the
Public, which might be as much benefitted by Industry, that we should be
restrained from supporting those who will not work, through Slothfulness of
Disposition? It is certainly a most reasonable Restraint: And the Command that
lays it, is so far from being hard and unjust, that it kindly and equitably
consults the public Good. And it is an Honor to the Christian Religion, that
it can boast of this, and a great many other Commands, which, the more
critically they are examined, the more wise and equitable they appear to be.

4. The Command we are considering is admirably adapted to promote private as
well as public Good. For industrious Labor is the Way for Individuals, as well
as Communities, to thrive and flourish. Men, it is true, may come to the
possession of Wealth by Inheritance. But Wealth, even in this Case, was
originally the Purchase of Labor; and it is only in this Way, that it can be
improved to Advantage. Idleness naturally tends to Waste, and will, in Time,
reduce the greatest Estate to nothing. But however it be as to Men of
Substance, those, who have their Fortunes to make, must certainly take Pains.
They may as well expect to be learned without Study, as to be rich without
Diligence. If a Man's Circumstances are low, he can rise and prosper in no
other Way, but that of Industry. To this Purpose are those Proverbs of Solomon,
Chapter 10. v. 4. He becomes poor that deals with a slack Hand: But the Hand of
the diligent makes rich. And in the 12th Chapter v. 24. The Hand of the diligent
shall bear Rule: But the slothful shall be under Tribute. And so necessary an
expedient is Diligence in order to Wealth, that if Men are idle, they will
unavoidably be poor. Hence that Observation of the wise Man, Prove. 23.21.
Drowsiness shall clothe a Man with Rags. And again, Chapter 24.30.31.34. I went by
the Field of the slothful, and by the Vineyard of the Man void of
Understanding: And lo, it was all grown over with Thorns, and Nottles had
covered the Face thereof, and the Stone-wall thereof was broken down. -- So
shall thy Poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy Want as an armed Man.
And it is observable, one of the Arguments the Apostle Paul uses, to enforce
the Duty of Labor, upon the slothful among the Thessalonians, is its Tendency
to supply their Wants, so as that they should have no lack of outward good
Things. 1 Thessalonians. 4.10, 12. We beseech you, Brethren, to do your own Business,
and to work with your own Hands -- that ye may have lack of nothing.
Industrious Labor is, you see, in the Apostle's Opinion, an effectual
Expedient to prevent Want. If Persons are idle, they may expect to be needy:
Whereas, if they do their own Business, and work with their own Hands, they
will have lack of nothing; nothing for their Supply either with Necessaries or
Conveniences.

It is therefore for every Man's private Interest, that the Apostle has
commanded, if any will not work, neither shall he eat. And indeed charitable
Donations, supplying the needy without Labor, instead of being a Kindness, is
a real and great Disservice to them; as it tends to settle them in Idleness.
For if idle People find, that they can be supported by the Charities of others,
instead of employing themselves in Labor, they will indulge to Sloth, 'till it
becomes their habitual permanent Temper; than which there is not a more certain
Presage of their Ruin* For Idleness naturally and powerfully tends to keep Men
in Poverty, or to reduce them to it. If they are low in the World, it will
unavoidably keep them so: and if they possess Estates, it will soon waste them
away, or sink them into nothing. Nor is this the only bad Effect of Idleness.
It has a strange Influence to enfeeble the Powers both of Mind and Body, and
render Men useless to themselves as well as others. Besides all which, it is
the great Inlet to all manner of Wickedness, and tends to corrupt Men's Morals,
and make them Scourges to themselves, as well as Plagues to Society. It is
therefore a real and great Hurt, not only to the Public, but to private
Persons, individually considered, to support them in Sloth; and the Command, in
my Text, restraining us herefrom, is therefore an Instance, not of Severity,
but of Love and Kindness to them.

I have now said what may be thought sufficient to justify the Apostle's
Command, by showing that it is so far from being arbitrary and unreasonable,
that it is connected, in the Nature of Things, with the Good of Mankind,
considered both individually, and as coalescing in Society, and carries in it
all the Marks of Fairness, Equity, and Goodness.

III. It remains now, in the last Place, that I make some suitable Application
of what has been discoursed.

And, was it upon another Occasion, I should bespeak the poor, those among them
especially who are idle, in the Language of the Apostle, in the Verse but one
following my Text, exhorting and commanding them by our Lord Jesus Christ, that
with quietness they work, and eat their own Bread: -- But considering the
Design of our being together at this Time, with the Character of the Persons
here convened, it may be more proper to confine my Discourse to the rich; who
are as truly concerned in the great Gospel Command we have been illustrating,
as the poor.

You are hereby, my Brethren, restrained as to the Distribution of your
Charity; not being allowed to dispense it promiscuously, but obliged to take
due Care to find out suitable Objects; distinguishing properly between those
needy People who are able, and those who are unable, to employ themselves in
Labor.

You can scarce be too liberal in your Charities to those, who, in the
Providence of God, are reduced to Straits, not through Slothfulness, but real
Incapacity for Work. The Christian Law, requiring Charity, was made with a
special View to this Kind of needy People: and you may, under no Pretense, shut
up the Bowels of your Compassion against the Cry of their Wants. Charity is the
Way, the infinitely benevolent God has ordained for the supply of their
Necessities. And you should be ready, in this Way, to minister to their Relief,
according to your Ability, and as you have Opportunity. But it is superfluous
to urge you upon this Head; for, as touching charitable Ministrations to the
truly necessitous, we may even boast of this Town. The good Lord reward into
their Bosom, an hundred fold, all the Kindnesses they have shown to the
distressed, especially in the late Day of general Calamity.

But though you cannot be too generous in your Charities to the poor, yet, as I
said, you must take Care to distinguish between them. For as to them who can,
but will not, work; who have Ability for Labor, but no Disposition, you are
restrained from supporting them in Idleness. The Command in my Text is plainly
a Statute of Heaven, tying up your Hands from Charitable Distributions to the
slothful poor. And, so far as appears to me, it would be an evident Breach of
the Law of the Gospel, as well as of Nature, to bestow upon those the Bread of
Charity, who might earn and eat their own Bread, if they did not shamefully
idle away their Time.

This, if I mistake not, is both a seasonable and important Truth; and if it
were duly attended to, there would not be so much misplaced Charity, as that
certainly is, which is given to mere Drones. Many such there have been among
us; and perhaps it may be too much owing to the undistinguished Kindness and
Compassion of the Benevolent, that they have so increased upon us, to the great
Detriment of the Public; which is entirely deprived of the Labor of great
Numbers, who, instead of living upon the Charity of others, might eat their own
Bread. It is to be hoped, there will be a better Care taken upon this Head for
the Time to come; and the rather, as there is now a Way wherein the charitably
inclined may be assisting even to the slothful among the poor. They may be thus
helpful to them by their Donations to strengthen the Society, not long since
formed, for encouraging Industry, and employing the Poor.

My Text evidently countenances the formation of such a Society; the Design
whereof is one and the same with that of the Apostle Paul, who delivered the
Command contained in it, viz. the putting poor People, who are able, upon
maintaining themselves by their own Labor and Industry, conformable to the
Constitution of Nature, and the Appointment of God from the beginning of the
World.

And in what more proper Way can we show Kindness to the poor of this Sort,
than by contributing to such a generous Design of setting them to Work, that
with quietness they may Labor, and, as the Fruit thereof, eat their own Bread.
We shall herein concur with the infinitely good God himself, who does not give
Men Food and Raiment, and other Necessaries immediately from Heaven, but by
adding his Blessing to their laborious Industry.

As this Society has not subsisted for any long Time, it cannot reasonably be
supposed, they should have accomplished any great Things: And yet, more a great
deal has been effected, than Strangers to the Execution of their Scheme may be
ready to imagine. According to the Information I have received, some thousands
of Yards of good Linen Cloth have been already fitted for Market; a Specimen
whereof, you have there before your Eyes. And it is easy to determine, that, in
order to this, Employ must have been given to a very considerable Number of
Laborers, in raising Flax, in preparing it for the Wheel, in spinning it into
Thread, and then in weaving it into Cloth. Some hundreds of Women and Children
have, by this Means, been kept at Work, whereby they have done a great deal
toward supplying themselves with Bread, to the easing the Town of its Burden
in providing for the poor. And, as one good Effect of the setting up this Linen
Manufacture, it may with Truth be said, there is now to be found, in the Town,
many a virtuous married Woman, and young Maiden (some Instances whereof are
there presented to your View) who may be characterized in the Words of Solomon,
She seeks Flax, and works willingly with her Hands. She lays her Hands to
the Spindle, and her Hands hold the Distaff. She makes fine Linen, and sells
it to the Merchant.

Perhaps, scarce any Design of this Nature has afforded a more hopeful Prospect
in its Beginning, notwithstanding its Interruption, for a considerable Time, by
the late general Prevalence of the Smallpox; and, if duly encouraged, and
vigorously prosecuted, there is good Reason to think, it will soon become
extensive in its Usefulness; finding Employ for great Numbers, especially among
the Female Poor, both Women and Children, and by this Means enabling them to
assist in the support of the Families to which they belong, to the great
Advantage of the Community. It is indeed a Scheme, so far as I am able to
judge, well calculated to promote Industry, and, its Companion, Frugality; than
which nothing will more powerfully tend to deliver us from that Poverty to
which we are reduced by our Idleness and Extravagance. And every one concerned
for the Good of his Country must be sensible, it is high Time to lend an
helping Hand toward the bringing into Effect every wise Projection to raise us
out of the low Condition we are in, and make us a flourishing People.

It will, perhaps, be urged by some, that the setting up the Linen Manufacture
is too great an Undertaking for so poor and small a People, and an unwise one,
at this Time, when the Price of Labor runs so high. But as poor and small as
we are, we need Linen of most Sorts, and cannot do without it. And if,
notwithstanding the high Price of Labor, we can make it ourselves so as that
it shall turn out cheaper than if we imported it from abroad, as it is now
known by Experience that we can, it is certainly a Point of Wisdom to do so:
And the rather, as those may be employed, to good Purpose, in this Branch of
Business (Children in particular) who have hitherto been suffered in a great
Measure, to spend their Time too much in Idleness. And it ought farther to be
considered, there is no Manufacture our Soil and Climate are better sitted to
encourage the setting up, and endeavoring to cultivate and bring to
Perfection, than the Linen. And, (...) this is not the Staple Manufacture of
Great Britain, we have Reason to hope they will strengthen us in it. To be
sure, it looks as though it would be for their Interest to do so, as, in Time, if
it should extend it self through this Province, and the neighboring Colonies,
and be brought to any considerable Degree of Perfection, it might, in a good
Measure, supply them with what they are now obliged to pay their Money for to
other Nations.

Others, it may be, may fear, if this Manufacture should be encouraged, and
succeed, that it might hurt them in their Trade abroad, by lessening the Demand
for, or lowering the Price of, the Linen they import for Sale. But such are
evidently too much under the government of a selfish Spirit to be regarded in
this Matter. And indeed, if their Fears are justly grounded, there cannot be a
stronger Argument, so far as we consult the public Weal, to set forward the
present Scheme with the utmost Vigor; as the professed Intention of it is, the
Good of the Community, and not the private Interest of any individual Person
whatsoever.

There may be still others, who may think much of the Expense that must attend
the effectual carrying this Design into Execution, and imagine it better it
should drop than be supported at any considerable Charge. But what Projection
of this Nature was ever formed, but upon the Supposition of Charge in executing
it to Purpose, in the Beginning? The only proper Question is, Whether this is a
likely Scheme, under proper Cultivation, to counter-ballance, with Advantage,
the Expense necessary in order to its taking Effect? And there does not seem to
be much Room for Debate upon the Point, thus stated. The Linen Manufacture has
proved a noble Scource of Wealth to other People. And why may not we reap the
like Benefit from it? Our natural Advantages to carry it on are well adapted to
the Purpose. We are in these Respects, exceeded by no People on the Earth. And
if it be not our own Fault, we may soon find our Account in the Prosecution of
this Branch of Business. It will certainly, if not neglected, or discouraged,
save a great deal of that, which is now exported, either in Money, or other
Things, to purchase the Linen that is necessarily consumed in the Country;
besides which, it will employ a great many needy idle People, who instead of
being supported by private Charities, or public Taxes levied for that Purpose,
may be fed and clothed with the Fruit of their own Labor; by Means whereof,
instead of continuing burdensome, they will become useful and valuable,
Members of the Community. And these Advantages alone, if there were no other,
are sufficient to justify the present Undertaking, as a very wise and good one.

Upon the whole, it is not easy to conceive, but that every Lover of his
Country should wish God-Speed to this disinterested Scheme for its Welfare: Nor
is it doubted, but that many will assist, by their Donations, toward its being
vigorously carried more and more into Effect. It is indeed a difficult Day. We
are in a low impoverished Condition. But this is a Consideration powerfully
suited, not to shut, but to open wide, both the Hearts and Hands of those who
have Ability to help forward the present Design; as it was at first projected,
and then entered upon, directly with a View to relieve us under our Poverty, by
opening a new Scource of Industry, well adapted to better our Circumstances,
and that cannot well fail of doing so, if properly encouraged, and wisely
improved.

It is to be hoped therefore, the Gentlemen, to whom it is principally owing,
that we have a Linen Manufacture now set up, and so far under Improvement, as
to exhibit sensible Proof of its being a capable Fund of rich Advantage to the
Public, will continue their Supscription, till it has got more Strength, and is
better able to support it self. The same Benevolence of Spirit, which at first
prompted you to encourage so useful a Design, will powerfully urge you to go on
doing so, that it may, at length, get so well established, as to be in no
Danger of coming to nothing. Be not weary of well doing; for ye shall reap if
ye faint not.

The Society here present gratefully acknowledge the Help they received the
last Year, in this Place, not only from the Subscribers, but other well
disposed Persons; who will now also have an Opportunity, if they please, to
contribute toward the farther carrying on of their good Design. And this I can
heartily, and would earnestly, recommend to every one professing a Love to his
Country, in proportion to his Circumstances. You cannot, my Brethren, be too
liberal in your Donations upon this Occasion. For what you give for the
encouragement of Industry, and the Relief of the poor, as the Effect of their
own Labor, you may depend is well-placed Charity. Even God himself exercises
his Benevolence toward Men conformably to the great Law of Industry. And can
you have a better Pattern? It is indisputably kinder and wiser to bestow your
Money to encourage and enable poor People, according to the Law of their
Nature, and the Law of God, to feed and clothe themselves by their own Labor
and Industry, than to support them in Idleness and Uselessness. And this is the
Method of Charity you are now invited to. And if only a Part of that Charity
might be put into the Hands of this Society, which has been formerly lost and
thrown away, by being bestowed on Drones, who are Burdens, without Profit, to
the Community; it would enable them to go upon this Design with Spirit, and to
prosecute it with such Vigor, as that it would probably soon gain Strength, so
as to convince us all by Experience, that a noble Scource of Riches was thereby
laid open, within ourselves, sufficient to raise us out of our present Poverty,
and make us a happy and flourishing People. The good God prosper this, and all
other Schemes that may be projected for so desirable an End.

Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.
The Reasons for forming the Society, to whom the preceding Sermon was
preached, as originally published by themselves.
WHEREAS it is found by Experience, that this Province is not adapted for
raising Sheep, by reason of our long and tedious Winters; and therefore the
Inhabitants have been and must forever continue to be under a Necessity of
importing large Quantities of Woollen Goods from our Mother Country, Great
Britain, which with Pewter, Brass, and other Commodities bro't from thence,
that we cannot subsist without, nor produce ourselves, will require all we can
procure for Exportation to make Returns: And inasmuch as considerable Sums are
yearly exported to purchase Linens, that are not the Produce or Manufacture of
Great Britain, but imported there from Germany, Holland, etc. and which this
Province is very capable to Produce and Manufacture; and, if done, would be
much for the Benefit of our Mother Country, as well as our selves, as it would
enable us to apply our Exports to pay for Woollen and other Goods their
Produce, and employ our own Women and Children, who are now in a great measure
idle: -- For these Reasons, a Number of Gentlemen have formed themselves into a
voluntary Society, by the Name and Title of, The Society for encouraging
Industry and employing the Poor. -- And we do hereby invite all well-disposed
charitable Persons to join in promoting the good Ends abovementioned.

THE many Advantages arising from a well regulated Society of this Sort, as
they are exceeding apparent, so it is presumed the Design will meet with a
cheerful Reception, and extensive Encouragement. -- In the present State of
this Province, we are not perhaps in a Condition greatly to enlarge our
Exports, it becomes necessary therefore, that by all prudent Methods we
contrive as much as possible to lessen our Import. This will be considerably
effected, by promoting a Linen Manufacture; for which it is computed that L
50,000 Sterling are annually sent to Europe, when at the same Time it may be
carried on to such Advantage, as that Linen of all Sorts may be made cheaper
among ourselves, as is now found by Experience. -- Besides, the Husbandman will
from hence receive Encouragement for raising of Flax, to which the Lands in
this Province are known to be well adapted, and so a new Source of Riches laid
open to that useful and necessary Body of Men, extracted in the most natural
and unenvied Way, as being the Product of our own Soil: Hereby also sundry
Tradesmen and Handicrafts will receive further Employment; such as the Makers
of Looms, Spinning Wheels, Heckles, Reels, and the like; but the most immediate
Advantage is that, which will arise from the Employment of the Poor, at present
a great Burden to this Community, by the heavy Taxes levied for their Support.
Many Thousands of these may be employed in this single Manufacture, and taught
not only to support themselves, but to become useful and valuable Members of
the Community. By this Means the Price of Labor, so much and justly complained
of, will gradually be lessened, as more Hands will be industriously employed;
the Poor will be decently clothed, and fed with the Fruits of their own
Diligence; the public Taxes abated, and in general a Spirit of Frugality,
Industry and Virtue will probably take place among us.

This Town has remarkably signalized its self, for its Charity and Compassion
to the Poor; who for some Years past have been an increasing Burden, and yet
the Supplies that are annually furnished, are very far from being an adequate
Relief to their Necessities; and what is worse, there is no Prospect of
diminishing this Burden in the present Way of distributing our Charity; on the
contrary, it must be expected to increase by the continual Addition of new
Objects, from which nothing but their Death will be likely to release us, while
a new Succession of them will daily present themselves in the Room of those,
who are at rest from their Miseries: Every Man of Sense must see, and every
Lover of his Country will deplore the Calamities that must arise from
increasing Poverty, Idleness and Vice; but every Christian will feel the
Miseries of such a State, almost as if they were his own, and be uneasy till
some Method be entered upon, for providing an effectual Remedy against them. --
Temporary Methods of Relief are very commendable, till something better can be
established; but these are of the Nature of Palliatives only; it must be a
lasting and permanent Scheme, that may be expected to reach the Root of this
Malady: The Linen Manufacture, when thoroughly understood, will appear to be
such a Scheme, and under proper Cultivation will, it is apprehended, enlarge it
self into a noble Design, so as not only to yield present Relief to great
Numbers of poor People, but by gradually extending it self to all Parts of the
Province, seems to promise a perpetual Establishment; and if it be entered upon
with a proper Spirit, and vigorously supported in the Beginning, it will soon
add a new Branch of Riches to the Province, will cloth the naked, find Bread
for the hungry, and Employment for the idle.

IN hopes of accomplishing the good Ends abovementioned, and depending upon
the Blessing of Almighty GOD, to give Success to the Undertaking, we the
Subscribers do promise to pay unto (...) hereby appointed Treasurer to us the
Subscribers, within one Month from the Date of these Presents, the Sums annexed
to our respective Names, for promoting and carrying on a Linen Manufacture, and
such other Manufactures, as the Society shall hereafter think proper to
encourage. We likewise promise to pay quarterly the Sums subscribed by us, as
they shall become due, until we shall give Notice to the Society of our Desire
to be excused.


