THE SAD TENDENCY OF DIVISIONS AND CONTENTIONS IN CHURCHES, To bring on their
RUIN and DESOLATION.

As it was showed in a SERMON, Delivered at the West-Farms, in NORWICH, on a
Day of FASTING, Feb. 28. 1750.

Published at the Desire of some who heard it, and of others.

By SOLOMON WILLIAMS, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Lebanon.

NEWPORT: Printed by James Franklin, at the Printing-Office, under the
Town-School-House.

THE SAD TENDENCY OF DIVISIONS, etc.
MATT. xii. 25. -- Every Kingdom divided against itself, is brought to
Desolation; and every City or House divided against itself, shall not stand.

THE Occasion of these Words, is intimated in the first Part of the Verse: They
are Christ's Reply to a blasphemous and scandalous Insinuation of the
Pharisees. We have an Account in the 22 ver. of Christ's casting out a Devil
from a Person who was made blind and dumb by him, and his healing the Man;
insomuch, that the whole Multitude were amazed, and glorified God, and cried,
Is not this the Son of David, i. e. the promised Messiah? The Matter of Fact
(...) as plain as the Sun; and the Pharisees could not deny, but it was an
extraordinary Thing, and supernatural: And they could no Way avoid the
Conclusion, That this was the Son of David, out by suggesting, that VChrist
cast out Devils by Beelzebub; that there was a Compact between him and the
Devil, and pursuant to this, the Devil was not properly cast out, but did
voluntarily retire, and give back with Design. This was the last Refuge of an
obstinate Infidelity, that was resolved to stand it out against the clearest
Conviction. Christ's Reply to this base Imputation, is copious and cogent; that
(as Mr. Henry notes) Every Mouth may be stopped with Sense and Reason, before
it be stopped with Fire and Brimstone.

The first Argument is in my Text, in which our Lord shows them, That it would
be very strange, and was highly improbable, that Satan should be cast out by
such a Compact, because then his Kingdom would be divided against itself; which
is a Thing, considering his Subtilty, not be imagined: Wherefore, Christ's lays
down a known Rule, universally approved by the Reason and Consciences of all
Sorts of Men, That in all Societies, a common Ruin is the Consequence of mutual
Quarrels. Every Kingdom divided against itself, is brought to Desolation; and
so is every Society and Family too. This, the great Roman Orator, and
Philosopher, observes as a Thing obvious, and necessarily resulting from the
Nature of the Thing. Quae enim Domus tam Stabilis est, Quae tam firma Civitas,
quae non odiis, et dissi^^^is, ^unditus Evecti possit? What House is so stable,
What City so firm, which by Hatred and Dissension, may not be utterly
overthrown? Divisions commonly end in Desolations. If we clash, we break; if we
divide one from another, we easily become a Prey to the common Enemy; if we
bite and devour one another, (...) may expect to be consumed one of another,
Gal. 5.15. Churches, and Nations, have known this by sad Experience.

DOCT. Divisions and Contentions in Churches, as well as other Societies of
Men, tend to, and if continued in, do bring on their Ruin and Desolation.

I shall not at present, purposely consider how they tend to the Ruin of other
Societies; designing especially to consider how they tend to the Ruin and
Desolation of Churches.

These are Societies of Men combined together by a Religious and Ecclesiastical
Polity, and so partake of the common Nature of Kingdoms, and Cities, and other
Societies of Men; and the Proposition which Christ lays down here, is
universal, a known Rule, with Respect to all Societies, and holds with Respect
to Churches, as well as others.

I shall propose several Considerations, to show and illustrate the Truth of
this Assertion, and then make some Application.

1. Such Divisions and Contentions tend to increase the Allenation of
particular Members, from one another, where Churches and Church Members are
joined together, as they ought to be, according to the Apostle's Rule. 1 Cor.
1, 10. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
ye all speak the same Thing, and that there be no Divisions among you; but that
ye be perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment,
then will be no Divisions among them. All Divisions and Contentions must take
their Rise from difference of Sentiments, and (...) Alienation of Affection of
one Person from another; the Continuance of these, tend to (...) them more and
more; they tend to beget and increase hard Thoughts, and unkind Suspicions of
one another's Actions and Principles. When Church Members are divided, they are
apt to grow strange to one another, to converse cauriously or shily with, and
be afraid to trust one another; they are ready to entertain Jealousies of one
another, that this and that Man had some Design against them, and is aiming to
undermine and counteract them: For in Divisions and Contentions, the different
Parties have different Designs in View; from whence naturaily arise Jealousies
of each other, and Suspicions that their Neighbors and Brethren who differ
from them, design to overthrow their Purposes, and defeat their Intentions; and
even these Jealousies and Suspicions which arise in their Minds, do of
themselves increase the Alienation of their Affections, and still set them at a
farther Distance; and tend either to break off all Communication, or to render
what they have, an angry, or a sly, cautious, and designing Thing, and at
length to issue in open and declared Enmity. Two cannot walk together, except
they be agreed, Amos 3.3.

2. Such Divisions tend to many Sins, and sinful Carriages of Brethren and
Members toward one another.

As they create and increase Jealousies and Suspicions of one another, these
tend to break out into sinful Actions. While they wrongly interpret one
another's Views and Designs, they foster the Imputation of some Crime upon
their Brethren, which they are not guilty of; aggravate their Infirmities, and
account, and treat them as gross and wilful Sins: They dispose their Minds to
put the worst Construction upon those Actions which seem to be bad, and to put
bad ones upon those Actions which are really Virtuous and Religious. Divisions
tend to stir up Anger, and Wrath, Clamor, and Evil-speaking. When the Children
of Israel heard that their Brethren had built an Altar on the other Side Jordan,
they presently concluded that they were turning away from the Lord, and
thereupon readily concluded to go to Waagainst them, Josh. 22 12 When Ziba
fawned upon David, and flattered him, and he let in evil Thoughts of
Mephibosheph, he presently gave Credit to Ziba's Lie, and unjustly, and without
an Hearing, gave away his Land to Ziba. 2 Samuel 16.3, 4. Hence such Cautions and
Warnings are given to God's People, Lev. 19.18. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear
any grudge against the Children of thy People, but then shall love thy
Neighbor as thyself. Prove. 10.12, 18. Hatred stirs up Strifes; but Love
covers all Sins. He that bideth Hatred with lying Lips, and he that utters
Slander, is a Foel.

3. Such Divisions and Contentions among Brethren, tend to deprive themselves,
and one another, of the Means of their Spiritual Edification.

The next and immediate Work of Contention, is to break off, and put an End to
that Christian and Brotherly Conversation which Christians ought to maintain,
to instruct, comfort, and edify one another. Contentions break off most, if not
all of this Sort of Conversation; and if the Shadow of it is kept up, it is
commonly turned into Disputes and Debates about reconciling their Words and
Actions, one Side charging Crimes, the other justifying and defending
themselves; the Issue of which, is often a Wrangle, and greater Dissension, and
so one great Means of mutual Edification is at an End, and then follows such
Alienation of Affection, and hard Thoughts of one another, that they cannot hold
Communion together any longer. One thinks the other too bad, and too little of
a Christian, to have Communion with him; either that his Principles or
Practices are such, that he cannot join with him in any Thing, and the other
presently thinks as hardly of him. Besides, they often bring on such an
Alienation and Disaffection, that one will not promote the common Edification
of the Body, and will refuse his Part of the Charge of it, perhaps chiefly
because it is in a Way which the other proposes or chooses. He concludes it cannot
be right, because that Man, or that Party which proposes it, must needs be
wrong; and having determined before, that they are bad Men; and have bad
Designs, he is well satisfied, that what they are pursuing, cannot be good. By
these Means, they are in Danger to drop the Institutions of Christ, and the
ordinary Means he has appointed for their Edification and Salvation. So they
tend to break the Bands of Church Societies, and crumble them to pieces, in
full Opposition to the Direction of the Apostle, Phil. 2.3, 4. Let nothing be
done through Strife or Vainglory, but in Lowliness of Mind let each (...) other
better than themselves. Look not every Man on his own Things, but every Man
also on the Things of others. Contrary to his Direction, and his Example,
proposed for our Imitation, 1 Cor. 10.32, 33. Give none Offense; neither to the
Jew nor the Gentile, nor to the Church of God. Even as I please all Men in all
Things, not seeking mine own Profit, but the Profit of many, that they may be
saved.

4. They tend to root out true Religion, and substitute the Principles of Party
Quarrels in the Room of it.

True Religion is the great End of the Coalition and Combination of Churches,
and the Bond which is to hold them together, are the Terms of the Covenant of
Grace; and the Kingdom of Heaven, or true Religion, does not consist in Meat
and Drink but in Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans
14.17, 19 Now when Divisions and Contentions get into Churches, and they break
into Parties, it is a Wonder, if presently they don't set up the particular
Party Opinions they embrace, as the great Fundamentals of all Religion, and lay
the main Stress of it upon those peculiar Opinions which they hold, if it be
but in Matters of Church Discipline, or Terms of Church Communion, or the
peculiar Explication of some non-essential Doctrine of Religion, (...) human
Words of their own Stamp and Standard. The Christian Church has seen many a
Time sad Evidence, what Havoc these Things have made of Religion: While the
several Parties have skated and canonized those that came to their Standard,
and fall in with their peculiar Sentiments and Explications, and renounced,
unsainted, and cursed all that do not. Men's Disputes and Debates turn upon the
Principles of the Party, and they are apt to lay the main Stress upon them; by
which Means, the great and essential Things of Religion, are in a Manner
forgotten, or neglected. True Faith, real Holiness, fervent Love to God and
Man, sincere, universal Righteousness and Charity, are apt all to be
comprehended, and thought to be included in some Party Notions and
Explications, and so Religion, by not slow Degrees, dwindles away into Form,
and a furious Party Zeal; and (...) carnal World are either confirmed in their
Apprehensions, that there is nothing in Religion, but the Passions, and worldly
Interests of Men; or that it lies in such Things as are at best but mere
Appendages and Circumstances of it: Such, we see, was the Tendency of the
Contentions of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12, 13. which occasioned
that fervent Expostulation of the Apostle. For it has been declared unto me of
you, (...) Brethren, by them which are of the House of Cloe, that there are
Contentions among you New this I say, that every one of you (...) of Paul, and
I of Apollos, and I (...) has, (...) I of Christ. Is Christ divided? Was Paul
crucified for you? or are ye baptized in the Name of Paul? And chap. 3.3, 4,
etc. For ye are you carnal; for whereas there is among you Envying, and Strife,
and Divisions, are ye not carnal, (...) walk as Men? For while one faith, I am
of Paul, and another, I am of Apolles, are ye not carnal?

5. They tend to quench the Spirit of God, and provoke him to withdraw from
them.

The gracious Presence of God, and the Agency of his Holy Spirit, is the Life
of all Religion in the Church in general, and in every particular Church. It he
is withdrawn, the Church may keep up a Form of Religion, but they will have
nothing of the Power and Life of it. Now Divisions and Contentions are sad
Means to quench the Motions of the Holy Spirit in Men's Hearts, and drive Him
away. The Spirit of God, that blessed Dove, is a Spirit of Peace: He does not
dwell and converse much in Souls that are much exercised in Passion, Pride,
Contention, and Strife. These are not his Fruits, but infinitely abhorrent to
him; and tend to stifle and bear down the good Motions and Impressions he makes
on the Heart, and to provoke him to withdraw. Gal. 5.19, 23. we find reckoned
among the Works of the Flesh, ^^ulations, Wrath, Strife, Envyings; and among
the Fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. Jam. 3.14, 15, 16. But if ye have bitter
Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the (...).
This Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, (...) devilish. For
where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion, and every evil Work. If the
Spirit of God is withdrawn from the Church, they will not be held together. The
Unity of the Spirit, is the Bond of Peace. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. They will soon
become carnal (...), having little of God with them; and hold together, or
break in Pieces, just as they apprehend their carnal Interests, and worldly
Designs, are served or disserved, and according to their Passions, Prejudices,
and Party Designs; which you may easily see, is their Ruin and Desolation.

6. Divisions and Contentions tend to make Churches contemptible to others, and
a Prey to Satan, and designing Men.

To be terrible as an Army with Banners, is one Part of that fair and beautiful
Character by which the Church is described, Cant. 6.4. When Churches are
heartily united on the true Principles of their Union, they give such Testimony
against Sin; such Testimony of the Holiness of God, and of the Efficacy of the
Blood of Christ, and the Virtue of the sanctifying Spirit, as is a Terror to
evil Men, and Transgressors: Their Constancy, Courage, and Firmness in the
Cause of God, and the glorious Truths of the Gospel of Christ, strikes an Awe
upon the Spirits of carnal and wicked Men, and makes them tremble at the
Excellency and Power of Religion, and dread the Consequences of Unbelief and
Impiety. But when they are crumbled, broken, and divided into Factions and
Parties, they become contemptible to those that are without, who are apt to
look upon them as different Parties of Hypocrites; proud, conceited, designing
Men, and treat them with Scorn, despise their Discipline, and the Testimony
they pretend to give for Religion, as a Tool to serve their Passions, and
promote their Party Designs. They become a Reproach to their Neighbors, and a
Scandal to Religion, and are moreover greatly exposed to the Temptations of
Satan, who watches Advantages by Means of their Pride and Passion to betray
them into Sin, to set up themselves in the Room of Christ, and to substitute
their own Honor instead of his, to lead them into many Mistakes about their
Duty, and the great Doctrines and Interests of Religion. When their Eyes are
already much darkened by Prejudice, Self-Interests, and Self-Will, Satan easily
gets Advantage of their weak Side, where there is little Guard, and quite
blinds their Minds, and leads them to mistake Will and Interest for pure Zeal,
and the Love of God, their own Fancies and Imaginations, and their Motions, for
the Teachings and Instructions of the Holy Spirit. The Contentions of the
Church of Corinth, seem to be the special Ground of that great Caution and
Jealousy the Apostle expresses toward them, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. For I am jealous
over you with a Godly Jealousy. -- But I fear lest by any Means, as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his Subtilty, so your Minds should be corrupted from the
Simplicity that is in Christ. And such Divisions expose the particular Members
to be a Prey to Men of Design, who have some Party Interest to serve; for by
this Handle, they easily take hold of their Passions, and make Use of the
Interests of others, to draw them into their own Designs; and under a Notion of
Religion, and Zeal for Christ, engage them inadvertently to be Tools to serve
their Turn, and the Interests of a Party. Hence we have many Cautions and
Warnings in the Word of God, against Divisions. Romans 16.17, 18. Now I beseech
you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the
Dectrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such, serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly, and by good Words and fair
Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the Simple. Gal. 2.4, 8, 16. Several other
Particulars might be mentioned, to show that Divisions and Contentions tend to
the Ruin and Desolation of Churches, as well as other Societies; but these I
hope are enough to give you some sensible Conviction of the Truth, and the
Weight of Christ's Words, That every Kingdom divided against itself, is brought
to Desolation; and every City or House divided against itself, shall not stand.

USE 1. Hence Christians and Churches should dread Divisions and Contentions
among themselves. Since they have such a bad Tendency to their Ruin and
Desolation, they ought to have a great Dread of them, and watch against the
Beginnings, and all Occasions of them; for when once they are let in, it is not
easy to foresee their End: This is agreeable to the Direction of the Holy
Ghost, Prove. 17.14. The beginning of strife, is as when one lets out Water;
therefore leave off Contention before it be meddled with. One hot Word, one
peevish Reflection, one angry Demand, one spiteful Contradiction brings on
another, and that a third, and so on, 'till it proves like the outting of a
Dam; when the Water has got a little Passage, it does itself widen the Breach,
'till it bears down all before it. We should dread the first Spark of this
Fire, the first breaking forth of this Ire: Therefore leave it off, not only
when you see the worst of it, but when you see the first of it. Besides what
has been said, let me mention two Motives.

1. Contentions in Churches are a great Reproach and Dishonor to Jesus Christ.

Sometimes Men are apt to make light of Religious Contentions, and even to
boast of them as the natural and necessary Result of true Religion; as what
Christ has foretold concerning the Event of the Gospel, Matt. 10.14, 35. Think
not that I am come to send Peace on Earth; I came not to send Peace, but a
Sword. For I am come to set a Man at Variance against his Father, and the
Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter-in-Law against her Mother-in-Law.
We are not to understand that Christ came to make Quarrels in his own Church,
or to set his own Disciples at Variance with one another. He did not come to
give temporal or carnal Peace, and worldly Prosperity, as they then seemed to
think he did. His Errand was not to give his Disciples temporal Power, Ease,
and Wealth, in this World. No! He came to give us Peace with God, Peace in our
Consciences, Peace with our Brethren. Though in the World (he says) ye shall have
Tribulation. If all the World would Heardly receive Christ, and his Doctrine,
there would be an universal Peace: But while there are so many that reject him,
who are the Children of the World, and the Seed of the Serpent, the Children of
God must expect to feel their Enmity. The Quarrels and Contentions there are
among Men, are not the Fruit of the Gospel, but of the Lusts of those who do
not cordially receive it. The most violent and implacable Feuds, have been
those which have arisen about Religion. The Gospel proves the Occasion of
Divisions; but it is not because there is any Tendency in the Religion of Jesus
Christ, to make Men unpeaceable, but because Men's Lusts oppose the peaceable,
pure, and holy Doctrines which he teaches them. But all Christian Churches
profess to be Disciples of Christ, who is the Prince and Author of Peace; and
are solemnly bound by Covenant, to obey his Will, and be governed by his Laws;
and their Dissentions and Quarrels are a sad Evidence, that they are not as
they should be: That either some of them are Hypocrites, or at lest, that they
are not so much under the Power of Christ's Laws, and possessed with the true
Principles of his holy Religion as they ought to be; and they scandalize the
Name of Christ, as if he was the Patron of their Contentions, and reproach his
holy Religion, as if Devotees of it might live in such Wrath, Variance,
Emulations, and Strife, as he declares are not the Works of the Spirit, but of
the Flesh, Gal. 5.20. As if when he bids Christians, Jude 3. to contend
earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, he gave them a License to
quarrel with their Brethren, to call them hard Names and to injure and hurt
them by Force or Craft, because they see not as they do, or think differently
from them, in those Things wherein they think the Essence of Religion does not
lie; whereas Christians are only to contend for the Faith, by sound Doctrine,
strong Arguments, holy Lives, plous Examples, firm Patience, and deep Humility,
in bearing all the Evils they meet with from an evil World, in the Way of their
steadfast and persevering Obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

2. Divisions and Contentions in Churches, do much harm to others, as well as
to their own Souls. The Divisions and Contentions of the visible Body of
Christ, are, as has been said, great Hindrances to their own mutual
Edification. They are also a sad Stumbling to weak Christians, and expose them
to many Temptations, and Means of their uncharitable, uncomfortable, and unholy
Walking. And they prove an Occasion of Ruin to some, and perhaps many poor
Souls, and harden them in their Unbelief, and Atheism. It Is no uncommon Thing
to hear the Reproach of Insiders against Religion, on Account of the
unpeaceable Behavior of professing Christians. It Is not very seldom they may
be heard to say of them, That there are such Differences among themselves in
their own Doctrines and (...) of Religion, that there can be no Certainty in
them: That there are such sierce Debates, such Heats, Animosities, and envious,
and selfish Controversies, contrary to the Doctrines of Peace and Love,
Patience and Forbearance, which they all pretend to acknowledge, that it
evidences none; but the more weak and simple believe them, and so they conclude
that it is all Imposture. When carnal Men see the visible Body of Christ
bringing forth like Fruits, as the carnal World do, springing from a bitter,
persecuting, censorious, impatient, revengful Spirit, in like Works of the
Flesh, as Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strise, Seditions, Heresies, they
believe there is no more Religion in one than the other; and so they sink in
Atheism, and are confirmed in their Rejection and Neglect of Christ, and his
divine Doctrine. Wherefore Churches, and particular Christians, should dread
these Things, as they would love and promote the Honor of their Divine Master;
and dread whatsoever tends to the Reproach and Scandalizing of his sacred and
precious Name, who has bid them be one, and prayed that they might be one, as
he and his Father are one. If those who have been long engaged in Contentions
and Divisions, think it is too late for them to be warned of the Danger, and
excited to dread the beginnings of them: However, it is not too late to dread
the Mischiefs of them, and seek Deliverance.

2. Christians and Churches should be greatly concerned to heal Divisions among
themselves. How far foever any Churches have gone in Divisions, it is to be
hoped it is not too late to entreat you to put an End to them, and to use the
Means of healing. It Is not too late to put the Question to you, which Abner did
to Joab, 2 Samuel 2.26. Shall the Sword devour forever? Know thou not that it
will be Bitterness in the latter End? If Divisions have gone far, it is surely
Time to see if there be no Balm in Gilead, if there be no Physician there. --
Hoping that such Churches and Persons are heartily concerned to have the Hurt
of the Daughter of God's People healed, let me propose to your Consideration,
some Means of healing.

1. See that an hearty Desire of God's Glory, and the Advancement of the
Interests of Christ's Kingdom, rule in your Hearts.

If, my Brethren, you be all actuated and governed by a supreme Love of God,
and Jesus Christ, and if a sincere Desire of his Glory, and the Advancement of
the great, essential Interests of Religion, do govern your Hearts (and I am
persuaded there is not a Man or you, who either does not pretend it does, or at
lest owns it ought to be so), Divisions and Contentions then will soon cease.
There Is nothing in the World will so calm your Passions, sweeten your Tempers,
and bring all your Self-Will, worldly Interests and Prejudices to the Foot of
Christ, and make you willing to forego them all for that one great and common
Interest, the Edification and Salvation of the Body. This will make you willing
to sacrifice every private and Party Interest to the Honor of God, and the
common Good. If the great, necessary, all-concerning Things of Religion may be
preserved, and the common Good promoted, you will not think it of any great
Consequence, whether it be in a Way exactly, and in all Circumstances agreeable
to your Mind or not; for God's Glory, and the common Salvation, will appear to
you to be Things infinitely greater than your own Will or Humor, or particular
Opinions, or any particular Interest of yours. This will most effectually teach
you, not to separate any Interest, Design, or Desire of yours, from God's
Interest, and Christ's Kingdom; but to swallow up all in that. This will do
abundance, to convince you that Religion disdains the narrow Limits of a Party.
And if Men may be brought to Union with Christ by true Faith, sincere Love. If
they be made sincerely holy and obedient, and you yourselves abound in
Christian Virtues, it is worth all the Interests of this World; yea, that they
are nothing in Comparison with it: All other Concerns would run into this great
one, like Rivers into the Sea, which would swallow up all. For Christ shows us,
we should be ready to part with our Lives for his Sake, and to lay them down
for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16. Therefore all other Interests would be
transferred to this.

2. See that there be an hearty Union in all Things necessary to Salvation.

All true Christians are agreed in all Things absolutely necessary to
Salvation. One Lord, (...) Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all, etc.
Ephesians. 4.5, 6. The Things which belong to the Foundation the Apostle speaks of,
Heb. 6. begin: Repentance from dead Works, Faith toward God, the Doctrine of
Baptisms, the laying on of Hands, and of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of
eternal Judgment. Christians must beware to make nothing Fundamental which
Christ has not made so, and in all that he has, there must be an absolute Union
and Agreement, 1 Cor. 1.10. There they must all speak the same Thing; there
must be no Divisions among them; but they must be perfectly joined together in
the same Mind, and in the same Judgment, Romans 15.5, 6. Now the God of Patience
and Conselation, grant you to be like minded one toward another, according to
Christ Jesus; that ye may with one Mind and one Mouth, glorify God. Phil. 2.1,
2, 3. The great Essentials, that there is but one God, the glorious Jehovah,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; one Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; one Sanctifier
and Comforter, the Holy Spirit of God. That we are to be justified by the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, the only Matter, and procuring Cause of our
Righteousness before God, apprehended by Faith, according to the Warrant and
Promise of the Gospel. Repentance from dead Works, sincere, holy Obedience to
the whole revealed Will of God, is necessary, as the Way to Salvation. That the
Observance of all God's positive Institutions, and the sincere Exercise of
universal Righteousness, Love, and Charity, are the genuine and necessary
Fruits of true Faith, and Actings of Holiness. These at lest you must be all
united in, and joined together in the same Mind and Judgment.

3. There must be a Forbearing one another a all Things not essential to
Salvation. As Christians must be all of one Mind in all Things absolutely
necessary to Salvation, so in other Matters, there is little Room to expect
they should be of one wind: They never have been in any Age of Christianity,
nor is it like they ever will be in this World. It Is almost as common to differ
in their Thoughts about other Things, as in their Looks. And if you are
resolved to maintain Dissension and Contention, because there are many Things
wherein you have different Apprehensions from others, you may even sit down in
Despair of an Union. If Christians are resolved to contend, because you don't
all think alike about Church Discipline, or the Explication of every particular
Text of Scripture, you may give over the Thoughts of Peace and Union, and
conclude to tear the seamless Coat of Christ to pieces. The Christian Church,
it is like, will never be in Peace in this World, but by a kind and charitable
Forbearance of one another in all Things which are not essential to Salvation.
This is the Way of being of one Mind in these Things; and it is like God has
left these Matters liable to Disputes and Debates, among other wise Reasons,
for this, viz. to exercise the Humility, Forbearance, and Charity, as well as
Diligence of Christians; this, in these Matters, is the Rule of Peace, Phil.
3.15, 16. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in
any Thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.
Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule,
let us mind the same Thing.

4. A patient bearing, and ready forgiving one another all manner of personal
Injuries, and all supposed unchristian Wrongs, so far as the Law of Christ
allows of it. In the Multitude of Words, there wants not Sin. In the long
Contentions which have subsisted among Christian Brethren, if none of you have
by wrong and hard Speeches, and injurious Actions, wronged your Neighbors; if
none have by unchristian Actions, Words, and Behavior, and an unchristian
Temper, in the Management of your Controversies, dishonored Christ and
Religion, you are doubtless a very singular People; yea, if there be not found
much of these Things with every Party. -- Now the Rule is in these Matters, as
to what is personal, and so far as it is a personal Injury, to bear every Thing
patiently. It don't become a Christian to have any personal Quarrel with any
Man in the World, but to bear personal Injuries patiently, and eye the Hand of
God therein, as David did in Shimei's cursing him. 2 Samuel 16.17. This Rule we
are taught by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4, 5, 7. Charity bears all Things. Col.
3.12, 13. Put on therefore (at the Elect of God, holy and beloved) Bowels of
Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering; forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another; if any Man have a Quarrel against any, even
as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. Christ don't allow his Disciples to bear
any Grudge, or avenge themselves at all upon any, for any Injury; but so far as
Injuries are personal, he requires them absolutely to forgive them, asked, or
unasked, Matt. 6.14, 15. For, if ye forgive Men their Trespasses, your Heavenly
Father will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your Trespasses. And if you apprehend the Laws
and Rules of Christ are broken, you must see to it, that you don't aggravate
Matters, or treat the Fault with any farther Severity than is necessary, purely
to vindicate the Honor of Christ, and Religion. Your own Wills or Interests
must have nothing to do in handling these Matters; but purely the Will and
Glory of God and Christ, Gal. 6.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.1, 2. and ver. 31, 32. Let all
Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking, be put away
from you, with all Malice. And be ye kind one to another, tender hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's Sake has forgiven you.

5. Fervently love and pray for one another, and for the special Presence of
God among you. You must be above all Things concerned, that you may have the
special Presence of God among you, by his Divine Spirit. If he be with you,
this will make your Way easy, and lighten your Path. This will revive God's
Work in your Souls. It will make it easy to confess your Faults, and easy to
forgive, Jam. 5.16. Confess your Faults one to another, and pray for one
another. 1 John 5.16. If any Man see his Brother (...) a Sin, which is not unto
Death, he shall ask, and he shall give him Life for them that sin not unto
Death. -- If God give you an hearty Love for one another's Souls, and Spiritual
Edification, and help you fervently and sincerely to pray for one another, your
Party-Interests, and Self-Will, will wonderfully subside and die away. While
you are heartily praying God to forgive your Brethren and Neighbors, you will
not be unwilling to forgive them yourselves: You cannot sincerely say the Lord's
Prayer with an unforgiving Spirit. If God pour upon you a Spirit of hearty and
fervent Prayer for his Presence and his Spirit among you: If there were such a
Spirit of Prayer in the Churches of this Land, it would be an happy Omen of the
Revival of true Religion, of the powerful Influence of Truth, of Righteousness,
and abundance of Peace: Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, for Christ
Jesus' Sake. AMEN.

FINIS.

