A SERMON ON EDUCATION. WHEREIN Some ACCOUNT is given of the ACADEMY,
Established in the CITY of PHILADELPHIA. Preached at the OPENING thereof, on
the Seventh Day of January, 1750-1.

By the Reverend Mr. RICHARD PETER'S.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
Post Office. MDCCLI.

TO THE TRUSTEES OF THE Philadelphia ACADEMY.
GENTLEMEN,
THE hearty Thanks you were pleased to return me for my Sermon preached by your
Desire at the Opening of the Academy in January last, gave me a very sensible
Pleasure; nor had I then declined complying with your Request to make it
public, had I not been of Opinion that my Mind, which was about that Time much
engaged in the necessary Business of my Station, was not vacant enough to
permit me to treat the Subject with due Solidity and Correctness; and
especially as I had not of late been used to this Sort of Composition. But when
I came to consider that a Detail was made of the Rise of the Academy, and of
the several Matters proposed to be taught therein, and that it might be of
great Service to publish this, in order to remove Mistakes, and to enable the
Public to judge of its Usefulness and Seasonableness, I no longer hesitated to
gratify you in the Publication, confident that your Adoption and Patronage will
procure it a favorable Reception with my Fellow Citizens; and the Piety and
Goodness of the Design recommended in it, will prevail with others into whose
Hands it may come to overlook its numerous Defects.

IT affords no small Delight to every one who has the Success of this Academy
at Heart, that though many Things promised in this Discourse remain to be done,
yet there is already much more effected than in so small a Space of Time could
have been reasonably expected. The Latin and English Masters give entire
Satisfaction; indeed the Progress made by the Boys in both Schools is truly
surprising; each has now the Assistance of an Usher, made necessary by the
Number of Boys, who, notwithstanding the Prevalence of the Smallpox in Town,
amount to above an Hundred. Masters are providing for teaching Writing and
French. The Mathematical School is daily increasing. A Charity School is
established. Proper Prayers are composed for the Schools, and used every
Morning and Evening.

I must do you the Justice to say that much of this is owing to your Care, and
the Regularity of your Visitations; and I have no small Satisfaction in being
able to be thus particular, since it must needs be agreeable to the Public to
know that the most necessary and useful Parts of the Scheme are in such
Forwardness; and that there are in the Academy two good Grammar Schools, one in
the English, and the other in the Latin Language. No small Benefit this to the
Province! as in these are laid the proper Foundations for the higher
Seize in Learning, which will likewise be gone into, when the
Difficulties of the Masters, arising from the preparing and classing so many
Boys as are daily admitted from different Schools, of different Proficiencies,
and taught by different Methods, shall abate.

THOUGH a good Beginning does not insure Success in the Progress and Close of the
Work, yet it gives good Hopes that every one of the useful Purposes of the
Institutors will be gradually and satisfactorily executed, and that in a Manner
perfectly consistent with, and accommodated to, the Circumstances of the
Province; so that those who have hitherto entertained a Notion of the
Unsuitableness of the Institution to the Infant State of the Colony, being now
satisfied of the Contrary, will go, Hand in Hand, with you heartily, in one of
the most rational and well judged Charities that can be devised. I am, with the
greatest Sincerity and Respect,

GENTLEMEN, Your affectionate Humble Servant, RICHARD PETER'S.
Sept. 12. 1751.
St. JOHN viii. 32. And ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you
free.


IF Slavery be deservedly esteemed the worst and Liberty the best State Mankind
can be placed in, and Ignorance certainly leads to the the one, and Knowledge
to the other: If, upon the universal Acknowledgment of this Truth, public
Foundations for the Advancement of Learning have been instituted by wise Men in
all Countries, and these Friends to Science have been rewarded with the most
distinguishing Honors: Then, my Fellow Christians and Fellow Citizens, you
have the greatest Reason to expect the Approbation and Thanks of all good Men,
on the Opening of this Academy for the Instruction of Youth in Piety, Virtue,
and useful Knowledge.

AND seeing our blessed Savior, who understood the Connection of Things
perfectly well, has likewise put his Seal to the Truth of these Sentiments, by
joining Knowledge and Liberty so closely together in the Words of my Text, you
may, with an humble Confidence, entertain favorable Hopes, that the Almighty
will accept and hearken to your devout Prayers for his divine Blessing and
Countenance on your charitable Undertaking.

WHEN our Lord spoke these Words, Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall
make you free, he was in the Execution of an authentic and well evidenced
Commission from the God and Father of all, to publish his last and greatest
Dispensation; wherein Remission of Sins, Reconciliation with his offended
Majesty, Immortality and endless Glory, were promised to all penitent
Believers, in and through the Merits and Expiation of his Son's Death. This is
the Truth, or System of Truths, referred to in the Text, and by Christ more
emphatically applied to the Jews, as what did completely supersede the Mosaic
Religion, and was of the most certain Efficacy to free them from the Servitude
of Sin. But the Spirit of the Text reaches all Men, as well as the Jews,
implying thus much, That the Christian Religion calls upon its Professors to
consider themselves as Children of God, and Members of Christ, and as such
placed in this lower World in various Ranks and Stations of Life, and with
different Capacities and Talents, that each learning and doing his Duty here,
might be advanced to the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter; and if the Truths
respecting Man thus placed, and forming a Society, whose Interests in Christ
Jesus are the same, be generally known, and have their proper Influence, then,
and then only, is Man in Possession of true Liberty. Ye shall know the Truth,
and the Truth shall make you free.

Now, can any Thing more effectually prove the Necessity and Usefulness of
Education than this Declaration of our Savior? Will not the System of Truths
contained the Gospel remain still in Darkness, unless the Knowledge of them be
carefully taught, and the Minds of Youth early and faithfully instructed in
them? Is it not clear, from this Revelation, that Men, by doing their
respective Duties in this World, afford God the most pleasing Proof of their
Regard for his Laws, and make it evident that the Gospel has had its full Force
and Effect upon their Souls? And pray, how can they be enabled rightly to
discharge the several Duties, Offices, Professions and Employments, made
necessary by the Circumstances in which the wise Providence has put Matters
here below, without an early Improvement of their Understandings, and a
sufficient Stock of Reading? Is the Knowledge of religious or civil Truths born
with us; or does it come of itself? Must it not be obtained with much Care and
Labor; and, considering that we stand in need of good Instructors, with no
inconsiderable Expense?

THESE Questions answer themselves, and show that Those will best act up to the
Spirit of the Text, and become the truest Imitators of Christ, who employ their
Wealth, Power and Influence, in the Establishment of Schools for the more easy
and general Propagation of Knowledge; since, by doing so, they do all in their
Power that their Fellow Christians may know the Truth, and that the Truth may
make them free.

AND surely there was never more Occasion to show ourselves worthy Christians
in this Sense than now; for whoever is in such a Station of Life, as requires
frequent Intercourse with our Inhabitants, must every Hour see the deplorable
Consequences of a low and defective Education; and notwithstanding all our
Boasts of the Goodness of our civil Constitution, the Liberty allowed
conscientious Men in the Exercise of divine Worship, the Accommodation of our
Laws to the Circumstances of the Colony, the Mildness and Lenity of the
Government, the Fertility of the Soil, the Extent and flourishing Condition of
our Commerce; all which deservedly make us a conspicuous People; yet it does
not require a more than ordinary Penetration to foresee, that if some Methods
be not taken of giving a proper Education to our Youth, these very Advantages
and Privileges, for want of Knowledge, and a Capacity of exercising the Offices
necessary for the Government of so populous and indulged a Country, will run
Things into Anarchy and Confusion; and, in a very little Time, perhaps some of
us may live to see it, our Superiors may be forced to make Alterations in our
Laws and Constitution. These Considerations gave Birth to the Design of this
academical Institution, or rather Collection of several Schools, under the
Tuition of one Master, and the Inspection of a Number of the most substantial
Freeholders and Inhabitants of the City; not so much to teach the learned
Languages, for this is a small Part of Education, as to impart, in the least
expensive Manner, and in the best Order and Method, the Knowledge of religious,
moral and civil Truths, to all the Members of the Community, without Partiality
or Distinction.

AND if the Execution be equal to the good Intention of the Trustees and
Contributors, we may be justly excused, if we apply to the People of the Place
these Words of our Savior, though they were spoke by him on a much greater
Occasion, Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free.

HAVING thus evinced the Necessity of a good Education from the Meaning of my
Text, and the present Situation of the Colony, I shall, in the further
Prosecution of my Subject, observe the following Method.

First, I shall point out what Evils may be remedied by Education.

Secondly, I shall show that this Academy is well calculated to remedy these
Evils.

AND, Thirdly, I shall bespeak your Encouragement in favor of it.

First then, I have undertaken to point out what Evils may be remedied by
Education. To make you sensible of these, be pleased to consider, that the Mind
of Man, when he enters the World, is unstored with Knowledge; that he may,
through Negligence, acquire none, or a bad Sort; and that though he should be so
fortunate as to lay in even a good Sort, yet it does not follow of Course, that
he will make use of his Acquirements, since his Temper may be bad, or he may be
so much indulged, and so imprudently managed in his Youth, as not to profit by
Instruction. Now, in all these Cases, as Happiness results from knowing Persons
and Things to be what they are, and treating them accordingly, if we miss in
either, we must become unhappy. Instruction then is absolutely necessary; but
this alone will not do; the Temper must be diligently observed, and diverted
from the Evil it inclines to, which requires much Skill and Prudence; besides,
the leading Inclinations or Genius of an opening Mind, ought to be as narrowly
watched, as the Capacity, Memory and Judgment, and a suitable Kind of
Instruction adapted to them: Again, the State of the Affections, or what is in
Scripture and common Language called the Heart, as well as the Head, must be
studied, and these in Conjunction so regulated, that a good and useful
Character may be formed out of them. It ought not to be the Object of the
Concern of a Person entrusted with Education, to show to the World shining
Parts, so much as to insure to the rising Generation the Exercise of the good
Affections under the Direction of a common Understanding. Now, in Proportion,
as any of these are neglected, a Set of Evils will necessarily spring out of
such Neglect. It shall be my Business therefore to set these Evils to View with
all the Clearness I am able, so as from thence to evince the Necessity of
committing Children to the Care of Men of Knowledge, Prudence and Skill,
independent of Parents and Relations, whose Partiality and Indulgence render
them unfit to be trusted with the sole Care of their Childrens Education: And I
choose to take this Method rather than any other; because Evils, justly
represented, make stronger Impressions, and stimulate the Mind to an immediate
Application of the proper Remedies.

THE first Train of Evils, which presents itself to my examining View, flows
from Ignorance, which must inevitably be the State of an uncultivated Mind.
Methinks I see one of this Class with great Simplicity entering upon the Stage
of Business, unacquainted with himself, his Neighbors, and the World. He makes
but a very flow Progress, ever timorous and diffident of himself, and jealous
of every Body else. He soon comes to one of those material Occurrences of Life,
where it is necessary to come immediately to some Determination, and act with
Spirit, or the Opportunity slips, and never comes again. Methinks I behold him
ballancing, and in Diffidence: Letting the golden Opportunity slip: Taking
Things by the wrong Handle: Mistaking his Interest: Pursuing the worst Course,
and merely through want of Knowledge falling into a Variety of Evils, one
Disaster bringing on another: And so blundering on to the very End of his Life.
I perceive many inclinable, and making sundry Attempts to employ him, but soon,
very soon, discovering his Ignorance, they withdraw or grow disobliged, till at
last he becomes perfectly insignificant, and falls into absolute Contempt.
Favor me with your Attention, whilst I enter a little deeper into the
Mischiefs attending Ignorance. If Persons of this Class have no Property, they
are only considered as other Animals, and no other Estimate is put upon them,
than according to the Strength of their Sinews, and the Profit that may be made
of it. If they have Property, they soon confound it by ill-judg'd Pursuits, or
fall a Prey to the first Man who has Dishonor enough to take Advantage of
their Ignorance. But suppose, through the Pride of Parents, or the Affluence of
their Fortune, such ignorant Persons take upon them the Professions and
Offices, by the undue Execution of which, Men's Lives, or Health, or Properties,
may be greatly affected; what a sad Scene of Confusion is here! What terrible
Effects ensue! Their Disgrace and Ruin are in the End! But that is not all;
before this just Fate overtakes them, they have ruined all about them; their
Relations, Friends and Acquaintance, fall the first Victims to their Mistakes,
and then others promiscuously, as they have the Misfortune to fall in their Way.

FURTHER, in a State of Ignorance the rational Faculties of the Soul, for want
of Use, may be so extremely weakened, as not to exert themselves whilst in
Union with the Body. As Exercise gives Strength to the Nerves, and preserves
the Health, so Thinking strengthens the Powers of the Mind, and promotes the
Health of the Soul; but if Knowledge, its natural Food, be withheld, it falls
into a paralytick State, and becomes unable to make any vigorous Efforts. All
that magnetical Force in the Affections and Passions, by which the Soul is with
Violence carried toward Information, Merit, Excellence, Virtue, Goodness,
Elegance, Decorum, find no Place in an ignorant Mind; but in their Room one has
the Mortification to behold a perfect Vis Inertiae, or inert Power. And when
the Spirituality, Vigor and Emulation of the Soul is gone, to what a low State
is the human Form degraded? The divine Image is then so impaired, that the Soul
cannot be distinguished to be of celestial Extraction, and an Ally of the
angelick Order.

THIS naturally brings me to the Case of an ignorant Man with respect to
Religion, and with it I shall close this Branch of Evils.

RELIGION being a Transaction between the Soul and its Creator, necessarily
requires a well informed Judgment. Here more than in any other Matter: The Eyes
of the Understanding (as the Apostle expresses it) must be opened, that we may
see what are the Hopes of our Calling, and what are the Riches of the Glory of
our Inheritance in the Saints. Here all the Powers and Faculties of the Soul
are to be exerted, and should therefore be well advised. Here, as the
Affections are to be in their most vigorous and sprightly Exercise, the
Excellencies and Perfections of the Supreme Being, toward whom they are to be
exercised, should be previously perceived by the Mind. Here a great Variety of
Truths offer for our closest Examination, founded on as great a Variety of
Evidence: From whence a Set of Principles must be drawn, that must appear
indubitably conclusive, and by careful and frequent Meditation so firmly
rivetted in the Mind, as to serve with Readiness on all Occasions to combat the
Diversity of religious Opinions embraced in the World, or the Impotency and
Perverseness of our own Minds, arising from our Misconduct. If this be done
with Care, and on the best Instruction, whilst young, how many unspeakable
Comforts will issue from it; and from how many sad Evils shall we be delivered?
But if this is not done at all, or carelessly, which must be the Case, where Men
are ignorant, what Pleasure do they lose, all of the best and most affecting
Sort! and to what an Abyss of Unhappiness may they be plunged! I shall instance
only in two Passions, and those no inconsiderable Ones in the human Frame: I
mean Hope and Fear. Hopes an ignorant Man can have few or none, or at best of
an unentertaining Kind. Hopes have for their Foundation enlarged Views of Men
and Things, they reach forward by the Stretch of a well exercised Understanding
into future and invisible Worlds, concluding, by Parity of Reason and
Affection, corroborated by Revelation, that the several Ranks of intelligent
Beings, up to the most High JEHOVAH, love and esteem good and virtuous Souls;
and that therefore they will be finally rewarded, though for the present placed
in this inferior World.

BUT though the ignorant Man, from what has been said of the Nature of Religion,
will want the Chain of Reasoning on which to six well grounded Hopes; yet his
Fears remain entire, and will prove a Source of endless Uneasiness. There is a
Gloom and Dissatisfaction ever hanging on the Souls of ignorant Men; they may
not indeed often think on religious Subjects, though this will depend much on
Constitution; but whenever they do, they are perpetually representing the
Almighty in an angry and displeased Form; and indeed there is too much Reason
for this, where Ignorance is a Man's own Fault. Well, what Remedy do they
apply? Why, for want of Judgment to discern what is the proper Object of the
divine Displeasure, instead of forsaking their Sins, the only Things that can
provoke a righteous Governor, and becoming regularly pious and good in their
Lives, the only Thing to which are annexed the Benefits of the Expiation and
Reconciliation of our blessed Savior, they want to pacify their incensed
Judge, by inflicting unworthy and preposterous Punishments on themselves, or
making a Compensation, if they are wealthy, by large Donations to pious and
charitable Uses; and so fall a Prey to avaritious and ambitious Pastors.

THE next Set of Evils which occurs to me in the Examination of an
uncultivated Mind, arises from the Misapplication of the Genius.

WE are mighty apt to arraign Providence for the numerous Calamities with which
this mortal Life abounds; would we, however, but think ever so little, we
should soon discern how much this Complaint is to be laid at our own Door.
Scarce a Person comes into the World without a visible Index to his
Disposition, without a Pointer to his Genius. The Bent of the Soul discovers
itself in the very Dawn of Life; the Exercises, Entertainments, Humors and
Diversions of the Child, indicate plain enough the Delight of his
Understanding, and the State of his Affections. Achilles, whilst a Child, to
have concealed himself, might have put on the Female Dress, and associated with
Virgins; but had any one thrown amongst them in the Midst of their Play the
least Part of military Armor, the Eyes of the Infant would have sparkled, his
Cheeks glowed, and his Soul would have been all on Fire; and any Bystander,
even the little Maids themselves, observing this, would have discovered the
Hero as quickly and as certainly as the sagacious Ulysses.

PROVIDENCE shows to the discerning Eye his Designs in the Formation of every
Individual, and how he ought to be treated, in order to answer the particular
Purpose he created him for. And if this was attended to, with the Care it
deserves, what amazing Progress might be made in every Art and Science? What
eminent Men should we see in all Professions and Occupations? To what an Height
would Knowledge, Virtue, Fortitude, Piety, public Spirit, be carried? Little,
very little do we see of what the human Capacity could do, when aided with all
that Quantity of Study, Desire, Assiduity and Love, which the Genius, in the
Enjoyment of its proper Object, always brings along with it. I could indulge,
much longer indulge you in this pleasing rapturous View of the Soul's Capacity,
and set before you a thousand Excellencies and Accomplishments attainable by
it; but my Subject calls me to the melancholy Task of showing what Men are for
want of Culture, or from a wrong Culture, not what with proper Culture they
might rise to.

THE Multitudes of Geniuses, forming in this new World, may be compared to
Seeds of the finest Flowers, thrown at a Venture into the Ground, where they no
sooner take Root, and begin to expand and stretch their tender lengthening
Fibers; where they no sooner aspire, and with an erect Straightness push for
the open Sky; but they find either the Earth hard and unyielding, or covered
with Thorns, Briars and noxious Weeds, which hinder their vigorous Efforts. Is
there no Lover of Nature near, to help to soften and temper the Soil, and take
away the hard obstructing Crust of the unfavourable Earth, that they may put
forth their rich variegated Colors, and fill the Air with their diffusive
Fragrance? Alas, most of them disappear! and those which come up, discover
faint and foreign Colors, nor display their native Beauty, nor emit their
aromatic Odor!

THUS, my fellow Citizens, ought you to represent to yourselves the State of
the Infant Geniuses of the Place: How many are totally lost through Idleness and
Inactivity? How many are forced, as it were, in Opposition to their natural
Temper and Genius, into wrong Trades, Offices, Professions and Employments;
and, by these Means, become Objects of Want, Wretchedness and Misery? What
Numbers offer to the searching Eye, ever peevish and fretful, a Torment to
themselves and to all about them, always uneasy, and perpetually shifting their
Ground? Their undiscerning Neighbors can assign no Cause for it; or if they
do, attribute it to a Perverseness of Temper. Alas! examine close, and you will
find the Man is put to a wrong Business; he hates his Profession; he likes some
other much better, and his Soul is perpetually hankering after the absent
Object of his Genius; no Wonder then he is so often out of Humor, and neglects
his Calling; and that Family Disquietudes, Broils and Oppositions, are so
frequent.

WITH what Acuteness may one observe some very young Folks view, admire and
criticize on the Figure and Qualities of Plants? With what a piercing Eye do
they look into the human Frame? How sensibly do they talk of the little Ails
and Pains of their Play-fellows? What Tenderness in their Soul? What
sympathizing Pearls fill their humid Eyes, when any of their little Companions
are indisposed? What does this bespeak? Does not the Voice of God, the Voice of
Nature, cry aloud, Teach him the sanatory Art of Medicine, and he will be
eminent in his Profession, and a Blessing to the Place where he lives. Again,
another Boy discovers a reasoning, inquisitive Mind, thirsting after Knowledge,
and at his Book, when others are at Play; he is singularly Good-natured, with
an inflexible Integrity, and has an innate Love of Truth and Right. Does not
this point out the Profession of the Law, as if a Voice from Heaven should call
out, Improve that Mind, store it with the best Principles, and with proper
Knowledge. Let him study the Systems of Law, natural, national, civil,
municipal, and as far as his Influence reaches, Justice and Right will be well
defended and administered. Now, if instead of harkening to these unerring
Voices, through the Perverseness of some particular Humor or Fancy of those who
have the Care of these Children, they are not educated agreeable to their
Genius, what a most valuable Collection of noble Materials, richly provided by
Nature, is here lost to the World, and to their Families? But what it, besides
this inestimable Loss, they are put to Professions or Employments opposite to
the Bent and Love of their Minds; what an endless Fund is here laid up for
Vexation and Disappointment? The Expenses of their Education are thrown away,
and, if they are not ruined before they come to Manhood, by indulging
themselves in Pleasures, rather than adhere to disagreeable Studies; there is
an high Probability that they prove a Disgrace to their Calling, and an Injury
to the whole Neighborhood, who are so unfortunate as to be placed near them.

INCONCEIVABLE are the Mischiefs which arise from the Neglect and Misuse of
natural Talents and Endowments. But I must quit a more particular Detail of
them, as many Evils in an uncultivated Mind, arising from other Causes, remain
to be enumerated.

FOLLOW me with your closest Attention, my dear Brethren, whilst, in the next
Place, I set before you the Accumulation of all Evils, an undisciplined Spirit,
a bad Temper unrestrained, a way-ward Will, a marred, indulged Child, the Sport
of Folly, Wantonness, Passion, and every Vice.

I AM loath to turn my Eyes to the disagreeable Sight, the Figures stand before
me in so strong a Light. Blessed God, what a dreadful Train of Evils may be
brought on the rising Generation by our own Caprice, Humor, Carelessness and
Perverseness! The Infant enters the World, the Creator pointing out by the
Lines of his Face, the Tone of his Voice, the State of his Spirits, the
Quickness of his Attention, that the ruling Passions, and the leading
Inclinations of the Soul are of the impetuous and overbearing Kind, commands
Parents, Nurses and Tutors, to season the Soul with Instructions, and a
Discipline suited to this Disposition. Be sure, (says the Author of this Frame)
to keep a strict Hand over him, reprove, chastise, correct, use Severity, if
necessary, but let this be seldom, and when the Fault is glaring; nor give over
when you have begun, till you have quelled the tyrannical Spirit. If this be
done, all those inflammatory Materials will turn out for the Service of
Mankind: When advanced to mature Years, he will not be afraid to oppose and
pull down the Enemies of his Country: He will, with a just Boldness, reprove
Vice, and defend oppressed Innocence and Virtue against lawless Pride, and
over-bearing Wealth. This Advice is neglected. -- What is that which paints the
incensed Countenance of the Infant with so triumphant a Red? The Face of his
vigilant and tender Nurse is of a gore Blood, tore to Pieces with his
entrenching Nails. Now he is a little older, I see his Play-mates fly the Room,
not one without some Hurt or Disfigurement. Is he corrected? No. -- He is taken
into the Arms of his Mother, tenderly caressed, and commended for a Boy of
Spirit. Unhappy Woman, little does she think what numerous Evils will flow from
this illjudged Indulgence! -- This uncorrected Spirit, as he advances into
Years, will make him the Dupe of all his angry Passions, troublesome and
injurious to all about him. -- But what ails the Mother? Why does she heave her
Bosom, and throw her Hands about her with such a melancholy and despairing
Countenance? It seems she has just heard that her favorite Son, in one of his
Passions, by an unlucky Blow, has killed his Bosom Companion, his intimate
Friend, -- is seized by the Hands of Justice, and going to receive an infamous,
though well deserved Exit.

BLESSED and gracious God, avert these Evils from thy People, and sanctify THIS
INSTITUTION for the Purposes of thy holy Religion and Virtue.

IN the last Place, Abundance of Evils, which may be remedied by Care in
Education, arise from want of Method in the ordering of our Studies, and in the
Choice of Authors; and from want of due Care of Diet, Health, Exercise,
Temperament of the Body, and the Accommodation of the Degree, as well as
Quality of Knowledge to the State of the Understanding, Memory, Humor and
Constitution: But, above all, from the Number of bad Books, and bad Examples,
bad Morals, and bad Principles, every where to be met with; all which deserve
Consideration, but must, however, be past over, to make Room for an Account of
this present Mode of Education, in which every one will expect that I shall be
distinct and particular.

I therefore proceed to my second general Head, to show that the present
Academy is well calculated to remedy these Evils.

THERE have, of late, been several Things of a public Nature projected, and
Companies formed for carrying them into Execution within this Province, all
under better Regulations, and attended with better Success, than Schemes of the
same Nature in other Places; and what is remarkable, they have all taken their
Rise from the Citizens themselves, and have been brought to Perfection at their
own Expense: Nor should it be concealed, that this present Institution, though
one of those Kinds which generally have for their Founders sovereign Princes,
or Branches of Royal Families, or Nobles of the first Rank and Dignity, owes
likewise its Being to a Set of private Men, who, from a Sense of the Necessity
of such a Seminary of Learning, set themselves, at the Close of the War,
seriously to think about One: Frequent were their Consultations, and various
were their Sentiments; at last they agreed on the general Heads, and confident
of the Continuance of the public Spirit of their Fellow Citizens, they
ventured to publish their Proposals relating to the Education of Youth in this
Province; therein enumerating, by a Variety of Hints, the several Branches of
Science, which, in their Opinions, might be comprehended in such an
Institution, so as to make it abundantly more useful than any which had come to
their Knowledge: At the same time, having a Diffidence of their own Judgment
and Ability, they placed in the Front of these Proposals an Invitation to all
Persons of Learning, Understanding and Experience, to favor them with their
Sentiments and Advice, as to the Parts of Learning to be taught; the Order of
Study; the Method of Teaching; the Economy of the School; or any other Matter
of Importance to the Undertaking. This no sooner appeared, than the Generality
of the People, convinced of the Necessity and Advantages of some such
Institution, became sollicitous that one should be attempted; whereupon a Form
of Constitutions was immediately framed, such as was judged to be best suited
to the present Circumstances of this Colony, with Liberty to alter, abstract or
enlarge, as upon Trial it should be found most serviceable; Experience showing
Defects and Mistakes in the best concerted Schemes, and the Mutability of human
Affairs sometimes rendering it necessary to make Alterations. After these were
found to give general Satisfaction, Twenty-four Trustees, without Regard to
Difference in religious Persuasions, were appointed to carry them into
Execution; Merchants, Artificers, some likewise of the learned Professions. On
the Publication, all was so well approved, that in a very small Space of Time
the Subscriptions arose to Eight Hundred Pounds a Year for five Years; a
Generosity truly amazing, and what must convey a mighty advantageous Idea of
the good Disposition of all Orders of Men amongst us to promote the public
Good, whenever a fit Occasion presents.

THUS successful, it became a Matter of Debate where to place the Academy, and
many Arguments were offered for some Village in the Country as best favoring
the Morals of the Youth, too apt to be corrupted by the bad Examples abounding
in populous Cities: But when it came to be considered that it would take a
large Sum to erect proper Buildings at a Distance from the City; that the
Circumstances of many of the Citizens would not admit of a distant Place on
Account of the Expense; that the Trustees were Men of Business, who could not
be absent from their Habitations without much Inconvenience; and that the
Success of the whole, under God, would, in a great Measure, depend, whether in
Town or Country, on the personal Care and Attendance of those entrusted with
the Management, it was thought proper to fix it some where within the City; and
the more so, when the Minds of the Trustees of the Building, where we are now
assembled, came to be imparted. These thoughtful Persons had been for some
Years sensible that this Building was not put to its original Use, nor was it
in their Power to set forward a Charity School, which was also a Part of the
first Design; and that it was more in the Power of the Trustees of the Academy
than in theirs to do it; they therefore made an Offer to transfer their Right
in it for the Use of the Academy; provided the Debts, which remained unpaid,
might be discharged, and the Arrears of Rent on the Lot paid off. This was
thankfully accepted, and a Conveyance executed; and on the Settlement of the
Moneys due on account of the Building, some of its Trustees even generously
forgave a considerable Part of their just Demands. Whilst I am acknowledging
their Merit, let me not forget to do Justice to their absent Co-trustee for his
ready and hearty Concurrence, signified in his Letter to the President on that
Subject. How peculiarly fortunate was this, since, by the Largeness of the
Building, the Academy is furnished out of one Part of it only, and that the
smallest, with as many handsome and well proportioned Rooms for all the
Schools, as if they had been built for the Purpose; and there is still left as
much of that Part, where divine Service is performed, as will answer the
original Design; and as it is ready seated, and adorned with a beautiful
Rostrum or Pulpit, it will likewise make a spacious Oratory or Hall for public
Examinations. To add still to our good Fortune, some contiguous Lots, and small
Buildings on them, have fallen into the Trustees Hands, by Purchase, since the
Conveyance of the large One; and with a little Alteration, one of the Edifices
can be turned into a Charity School. These furnish a large and unincumbered
Area for the Childrens Exercise, and on which, in Time to come, as the Academy
Funds increase, and when a regular College may be thought to suit the
Circumstances of the Colony, there is Room to erect a commodious Square of
Buildings to accommodate the Students with Apartments for Lodgings, and all
other Conveniences.

ON this advanced Situation of the Scheme, the Corporation taking into
Consideration the numerous Advantages the City would reap by this Seminary of
Learning, to their Honor be it mentioned, have voted Two Hundred Pounds to be
paid to the Trustees in Hand, and One Hundred Pounds a Year for five Years;
Fifty Pounds whereof they have appropriated to the Use of the Charity School,
for instructing poor Children gratis in the Principles of the Christian
Religion, and in Reading, Writing and Arithmetic; which School the Trustees
intend to open the ensuing Year, not doubting but by the divine Blessing on
their Endeavors, and the further Encouragement of good People, they shall be
enabled to carry it on to the great Advantage of the Public, and Benefit of
the poorer Sort. One of the most promising Children is to be yearly chosen out
of the Charity School by the Corporation, and educated gratis in higher
Learning in the Academy.

THE setting out only with a temporary Subscription, was by many at first
disliked, not expecting there could be found any Masters of sufficient
Abilities, who would be willing to serve on these Terms, but the Authors of the
Proposals judged otherwise of the Disposition of Men of Letters, and were
sanguine enough to pronounce, that when such should come to hear of the Spirit
exerted on this Occasion, they would not be discouraged by the Limitation of
Time; but would naturally be led to think, if so handsome a Sum, as Eight
Hundred Pounds a Year, could be so readily raised under such an Uncertainty of
the Scheme's succeeding, there could be no Doubt, but if Providence should
favor it with Success, there would at the End of the Term, be a much better,
and more durable Fund. Exclusive of this Reasoning, it was judged that the Love
of Mankind, ever inseparable from solid Knowledge, and true Learning, would
engage the Persons possessed of them in its Favor. It fell out accordingly. A
Gentleman of a neighboring Province, when it was moved to him, as he was known
to be well qualified to fill the Place of Rector, and Greek and Latin Master,
generously closed with the Proposal without any Objection to the Limitation of
Time, or Stipulation for a precise Sum to be given as a Salary, which could not
then be fixed. This was a great deal, but still much more was wanting. The
Place of English Master was thought to be of as much, if not more Consequence,
and it was not probable that any one equal to the Task, and at the same time
disengaged, could be found in America: This made the Trustees uneasy, as they
could not think of running the Risque of Recommendations of Persons from
England, where, though the fittest Men might be procured, yet in case of a
Disappointment, the Inconveniency would not easily be remedied. Whilst under
this Anxiety, two of the Trustees took a Journey to the Eastern Provinces, and
being favored with the Conversation of an eminent and learned Person, well
known amongst Men of Letters for several Improvements on the Method of Study,
and acquiring the liberal Arts, he gave them Hopes of his personal visiting the
Academy, which if he had done, they flattered themselves that this Difficulty
might have been removed; but Indisposition, and some other unforeseen
Accidents, deprived them of his Assistance. In this Situation, Affairs remained
till the other Day; when a Gentleman said to be an experienced Instructor of
Youth, and practically acquainted with the Methods used in the best English
Schools and Academies, arrived in this City; and on an accidental Relation made
to him as a Stranger by one of the Trustees, of the State of the Academy, and
of the Distress occasioned by the Disappointment as to the English Master, he
offered his Service to supply the Place, till one could be provided. This made
such an Impression on the Trustees, that they recommended it to the Rector to
examine into his Abilities, and on his Report that he thought him well
qualified, they engaged him for a certain Time.

The Master employed to teach the Mathematics, and the Sciences usually taught
with them, is well known, having, for many Years, had a large School in Town.
His School is furnished by the Trustees with a very valuable Set of
Mathematical Instruments of all Sorts, for the better Instruction of the
Scholars in the Use of them. The Grammar Schools are also provided with a
Collection of the best Classicks, for the Use of the Masters.

Thus the Academy opens with a Rector, and Masters in the Schools, that are the
most material, and of the most immediate and general Use. One Tutor is already
provided in Assistance of the Rector on the Recommendation of a good Judge.
More Tutors and Ushers will be added, as the Scholars increase.

THOUGH it has been thought proper to give this Seminary of Learning the Name and
Title of an Academy, yet it is more properly a Collection of Schools under one
Roof, and the Inspection of the Trustees. And though only such Branches of
Knowledge, as are perfectly adapted to the Circumstances of the Province, are
for the present proposed to be taught in it, in which Respect its Advantage
must be considerable, since, if the Plan be successfully executed, these will
be taught in a much quicker and better Method, and at a much less Expense: Yet
it is so ordered, that with such Additions, as on Experience of its great Use
and Benefit may be reasonably expected will be made to the present Fund, it may
be improved into a Collegiate Institution, and every Kind of Knowledge be
taught in it, that the most reputed Universities lay Claim to.

IT is no inconsiderable Part of the Plan, that whilst the Pupils in the Latin
and Greek Schools are taught the grammatical Construction of the Classicks, it
is intended Lectures shall be read to those who are forward enough in their
Learning, wherein the Subject Matter of each Author will be explained and
illustrated, and his Style, Spirit and Elegance, pointed out; so that they may
be apprehended, tasted, admired, and, it is hoped, well imitated by the Pupils
in their Compositions.

NOR is it proposed in the Childrens Exercises to proceed by the Methods in
ordinary Use, which in general only consult the making Latin according to
Grammar Rules, or the right Construction of an Author by them: But that
Exercises, adapted to the Capacity and Proficiency of the Scholars, shall be
composed by the Masters, and consist of History, Morals, and the plain Parts of
Natural Philosophy; all which may, by these Means, be taught along with the
Languages. Nor will this appear too difficult to them, who know what amazing
Progress Boys may be brought to make in Knowledge, by proper Methods, and due
Care on the Part of the Masters. For Instance, if before an Exercise be put
into their Hands, the Subject be fairly opened, its several Parts explained,
and then Questions proposed in the Presence of the Class, to one or more of the
forwardest Boys, to try whether the Matter of the Exercise be clearly
understood, or it may want to be still further explained; if this is
affectionately and judiciously done beforehand, it is not to be imagined how
much the Apprehension may be quickened, the Memory aided, the Judgment
informed, and, in a small Time, all the Faculties improved. The learned
Tanaquil Faber's Son, is an Example of this; for he, at fourteen Years of Age,
had read most of the Greek and Latin Classicks, and understood them perfectly
well, as well as several other Parts of Learning. In the Latin School, the
Masters will likewise have it particularly in Charge to correct, refine and
beautify our Mother Tongue, to the End that their Scholars may be enabled to
understand it perfectly well, and to write it with Purity and Elegance. How
much this is wanted, may be easily judged, if it be considered, what a mean
Figure many, who understand the learned Languages, make when they come to write
in English; how awkward is their Mode of Expression; how forced and inelegant
are their Compositions; and how difficult to be understood; though all the Rules
of Grammar have been accurately observed?

THIS Academy has this further Advantage; the English Language is proposed to
be taught in a Grammatical Manner, and in a separate School, for the Use of
those who may not be inclined to learn Latin. The great Necessity and Use
whereof will appear, if one considers to what an infinite Pain ingenious
Persons, who speak only their Mother Tongue, but are unacquainted with Grammar,
and Propriety of Expression, are put, to write even on the most common
Subjects? It is probable that many Discoveries have been made of equal
Importance, perhaps, with any known, and yet dropped or concealed by the
Discoverers, from their Apprehensions of incurring the Censure of the World,
and being put to Shame, for want of just and proper Expressions, through their
Ignorance of Language to clothe their Sentiments; and though this is a false
Shame, yet since the Pain arising from it, is as exquisite as the Pleasure felt
on the Commendations given to any One for a fine Style and just Expression, it
is not to be wondered that it should take Place, especially as the Minds of
truly ingenious Men are generally very delicate on this Point.

As a further Proof of the Benefit of such a School, let it be considered, that
was the Mind used to form Words, and make written Descriptions of Things as
soon as the original Truths were impressed on the Brain, the Attention would be
mightily quickened, the Judgment assisted, and the Memory greatly corroborated.
Be pleased to ask yourselves, how much oftener Names bring Persons and Things
into your Minds than their Presence? Just so it would be were general
Propositions and useful Truths well described, and the Descriptions carefully
lodged in the Memory, which they would be much oftener than they are, did Men
know how to commit them early and properly to Writing. A Man in Business, who
makes Memorandums of what he does, has a vast Advantage of the best Memory; it
would be even so, if he was to make Memorandums of the Truths proper to be
known, or that come to his Knowledge; he would here also have the Advantage of
the greatest Readers of Books, who don't take this Method.

THIS is however what People in general think may be done by learning Latin,
and for that Reason, perhaps, as much as for the Advantage of knowing the
Language, give their Children a Latin Education; but it is really not so, or
not so much so as they imagine: For though, when a Person learns Latin, the Rules
of Grammar may be applied to his native Tongue, and in Effect a Man does,
whilst learning Latin, throw his Mother Tongue into grammatical Order, yet he
does not gain a Command, much less a Propriety of Expression: Indeed how should
he, since every Language has its own Idioms, its own Phrases, its own
Copiousness, Beauties and Elegance? The native Force and Energy of every
Language is so peculiar to itself, that it cannot be transferred into any other
Language, without the Loss of the specific Spirit. Make Demosthenes speak
Latin, or Tully Greek, and you will soon discover this. Try to turn Milton, or
Pope, or Swift, into Latin, Greek, or any other Language. Let the Spectators be
put into French by the first Professor of Eloquence in the Royal College, and
you will not know them to be the same. It Is as impossible as the Transmutation
of Metals; and, as I apprehend, for this Reason, because the Mother Tongue
takes its Rise from Things themselves, and from the different Lights in which
Objects or Truths make their first Entrance into the Mind. It is the first and
purest Transcript of Nature, which is ever conceived better from the Originals,
as they first appear to the Senses or the Mind on the Spot, and raise the
Virgin Affections and Passions, than as they are apprehended by Persons of
other Countries, and clothed in foreign Expressions. The Originals, whether the
Works of Nature or Art, Action, Character, or a Composition of some or all of
them, raise the Ideas quicker and stronger in the Brain, and consequently their
Impressions are more natural and durable. Besides, what is called Humor, that
is, each Man's particular Mode of conceiving and telling Things, or of acting
and behaving in the grave or lighter Concerns of Life, can be taken into the
Mind no where but upon the Spot; and as there is a national as well as personal
Humor, and this mixes more or less in almost every Narration, whether in Prose
or Verse, and as English People abound with this more than any other; it is the
Duty of every English Man to prefer and cultivate to the utmost his native
Language, that he may enjoy all that Infinity of Pleasure, which is derived
from the Spirit, Liberty, good Sense, and inimitable Humor of his Countrymen.
Nor would I have this understood, as if it was said in Derogation of the Latin
School. No; far from this, considering how great a Part of the English Tongue
is derived from the Latin; that all the Terms of Art and Science in the learned
Professions are taken from the Greek and Latin; and that there is Abundance of
useful Knowledge which can be acquired in no other Language; it is absolutely
incumbent on those who study to capacitate themselves for those Professions, or
who aim at a general Education and Acquaintance with Books, to gain a thorough
Knowledge of Latin and Greek. Add to this, that the chief Part of the System of
the English School, which is to learn Youth to write and speak it with Purity,
is proposed to be used in the Latin Schools, which will thereby be rendered
much better, and of more extensive Use.

THE Newness and Peculiarity of this School made it necessary to give a
distinct Account of it: But what the Public ought principally to be told, and
to consider, is, that the present Mode of Education is calculated to save Time,
and, by good Order and Discipline, to fix in the Childrens Mind an early Sense
and Love of Right and Decorum, of a modest and just Behavior. It is
apprehended, that by the Methods proposed to be here used, Knowledge of
Languages will be acquired much sooner, and all the while good Principles may
be instilled into the Soul; the Dispositions, if bad, corrected; if good,
encouraged. The Boys may be made to love Learning, to crave it with
Earnestness, and to apply it to their Manners with Quickness. They may be
brought to love their Masters, and when the Childrens Affections are gained by
those who preside in the Schools, they may make such Distinctions, dispose of
their Praises and Reproaches, of their Rewards and Punishments to such
Advantage; as to make every Boy discern Right and Wrong, and engage all his
Passions early on their proper Objects. They may raise an inextinguishable
Emulation, such an ardent Desire to excel, as shall take the Lead of all the
Passions. They may feed it with every worthy Character, recorded to have
appeared either in former or later Times in every Part of the World. Pupils
thus taught, will, of their own Accord, introduce a Sort of Honor and modest
Preferment of each other into their very Diversions; they will scorn to cheat,
or overreach, or take any undue Advantage, or use any over-bearing Treatment
or Language, and whoever does, (though Accusations should not be encouraged)
ought to be exposed. The principal Part of Education amongst the Orientals, old
Grecians, and early Romans, consisted in the Management of the Childrens
Diversions, Exercises and Meals; these being thought of equal Importance with
liberal Arts and Sciences. Manly and noble were their Exercises, their
Appetites in perfect Subjection, and their Manners formed on the Rules of just
Courtesy and rational Complaisance. Pity they are not more imitated, as this
would certainly promote Hardiness, Temperance, Modesty, Emulation,
Friendliness, Openness of Temper, Generosity, a Sense of Honor, and Love of
Virtue.

IT should be well considered, how to make a just Advantage of that useful
Passion Shame, the Barrier of Virtue; for the Delicacy of its Nature is such,
that though with good Management it may be of infinite Assistance in the
Formation of the Childrens Manners, yet unspeakable Hurt may be done by an
injudicious and too frequent Application to it.

CORRECTION likewise is sometimes necessary; but it is proposed that this be
administered with the utmost Prudence and Caution, never whilst under the Force
or Effects of sudden Passion; gentle should be the Reproaches at first; then,
if not regarded, louder and more pointed; and even if not then minded, it
should be well considered, whether it may be a proper Time to come to
Extremities; for on this depends the Preservation of the Child; if they have
their proper Effect, he is saved, if not, he is ruined.

I reserve to the last, as being of the most Consequence, that great Care ought
to be taken to instill into the Minds of the Children just and solid Notions of
Religion. The Masters will be instructed to have this always in their View,
since every thinking Man must be sensible that if these be neglected, all the
other Parts of Education will avail little; it is therefore proposed to begin
and end with Prayers, to be made suitable to the Occasion; and this not as a
Formality, but an Act of proper and necessary Devotion to draw down the divine
Blessing on their Endeavors, without which they cannot expect Success.

ON this Subject two Things occur to me worthy of Consideration, and some
better Regulation than has hitherto been observed. The first relates to the
sacred Name of GOD, and the other to the Use of the holy Scriptures. As to the
first, great Care should be taken that when it occurs in School Exercises, it
be pronounced with Reverence. Was that holy, tremendous and all perfect Spirit,
seen with the Eyes of the Mind when his sacred Name is read, which would be the
Case, did Persons attend to what they read, the Heart would necessarily feel
Veneration, Adoration and dutiful Regard, and we should stop a while at the
divine Majesty of the Personage: Grave and religious Men actually do so; those
eminent Philosophers Mr. Boil and Dr. Boerhaave, never used this holy Name
without a Pause, and a short mental Ejaculation of Adoration and Praise. Now as
Children do not know what it means, if when it occurs, the Masters pronounce
it, and they be permitted to gabble it over in the same careless Manner as
Mars, or Mercury, or Bacchus; from hence there will arise an habitual
Irreverence, which may remain even when they know better. This therefore should
be avoided, and the Masters use themselves to some distinguishing Mark of
Reverence when it is necessarily to be pronounced; and it may be of Use in
their Exercises, instead of the Name, to mention some Part of the divine
Character, as the Creator or Governor of the World, the invisible eternal
Spirit, the universal Parent, the Good Being, the All-powerful, All-knowing,
All-directing Spirit: Together with this cautious Use of the Name, let
particular Care be taken that worthy Sentiments of the Divine Supreme Being be
by every possible Method instilled into the Minds of the Scholars. Abstract
Notions confound the Heads of Youth. His Exercise of Justice, his Love of his
Creatures, his Impartiality, and Delight in their Improvement and Happiness,
must be engraven on their tender Minds with great Clearness and Simplicity, so
as that their little Souls may be early taught to honor and love his
Character. This adorable Being ought to be spoke of with great Devotion, and
with a suitable Persuasiveness, as the affectionate and tender Parent of their
Parents and themselves, whom they ought to love, because he loves them more
than their natural Parents or Relations can do, and can dispose their own
little Hearts aright, and influence the Hearts of others in their Favor; and
therefore they ought to be careful by Prayer and Goodness to engage his divine
Majesty to assist them in their Studies, and to give them Wisdom, and to make
them useful in the World. Heaven should be spoke of as a Place where JEHOVAH
sits upon his Throne, and at a proper Time will call to him all such as have
gone through their Studies with Diligence, and, in Virtue of a good Education,
have faithfully discharged their Duties in their respective Stations here
below. Our blessed Savior should be represented as sitting at the Right Hand
of the Throne of his Father, the Patron, Guardian, Protector, and the Head of
the universal Church, and Lord of the Souls of Men, sending the most holy and
blessed Spirit to assist and sanctify them while in this lower World; and
dispensing immense Rewards and Preferments to them, when by Death they shall be
translated to a better.

THIS is to be the more earnestly recommended to the Master, as the filial and
dutiful Reverence of God, and the Exercise of the Affections toward him, is
too too much neglected? Suffer me, though it may be deemed a Digression, to say
something on so interesting a Subject. What can make Ingratitude toward God a
less Crime than toward our Fellow Creatures? Is it that this divine Spirit is
not as free and as deliberate in the Distribution of his Favors as Man is?
When before the Creation there was an universal Blank, when nothing existed of
what our Eyes now behold, and the Almighty had under his Consideration, and
within his Option, a great Variety of Beings, must it not be perfect Choice,
and the utmost Liberty of Action, to bring into Existence any, and what Sort of
Beings, he pleased? If then he was graciously pleased to form Man after his own
Image, and in his own Likeness, and to confer upon him the inestimable
Blessings of Intelligence and Liberty, does not this infer an Obligation? And
where an intelligent Being finds himself under an Obligation, is it not highly
reasonable to acknowledge it, and to return Affection for it? I say, does it
not enter into the Essence of an Obligation, that the Person who confers it,
knows the Value of the Favor conferred, and may withhold it if he pleases? And
if he does not withhold it, when at perfect Liberty to bestow or not, does not
this necessarily engage the Praise and Thanksgiving of the Obliged? Does it
make a Difference in Point of Affection and Duty, whether it be the Supreme or
a subordinate Being who confers the Favor?

ON a fair Answer to these Questions, Reason will pronounce, that as the
Absence of the good Affections toward a proper Object is a great Fault, such
Fault must needs be the greater when the Object is most deserving; and
consequently we shall do no Injustice to our Natures, if we place Irreligion
and Indevotion among the most odious Crimes.

AGAIN; Are not the good Affections among the natural Excellencies and
Perfections of the divine Nature? Are they not the Source and Fountain from
whence spring so many kind and good Providence toward his Creatures?
Revelation expressly attributes them to GOD, nor think this is by Way of an
indulgent Complaisance to our weak Comprehensions, but as the justest and
truest Description of the real Disposition of the Almighty. Now if the Supreme
Being be an affectionate and loving Spirit, and all his Grace and Favor to us
accompanied with Love, are we not, in this View of Things, extremely faulty, to
remain without any Return of Love for him? No one who is really beloved by
another here below, can avoid the Condemnation of his Heart, if his own
Affections are not at the fame Time raised toward him. The very Brutes, who
discover Fondness for us, raise in us a Tenderness for them: Love shown by any
of our own Species certainly kindles in every well disposed Breast, a warm
Return of Affection: -- Should not then, in the Eye of Reason, the
Loving Kindness of the Lord kindle in our Breasts the greatest and most ardent
Affection toward his divine Majesty. How amazing then, how affecting to a
considerate Mind must be the Observation of the little Devotion which is paid,
by the Generality of Men, to this worthiest and most rational Object of their
Reverence, Love and Gratitude! If therefore Education is not pointed against,
and does not actually remedy this Evil, whatever else it does is of little or
no Consequence to the Soul, either in this World, or in that which is to come.

THE other Thing that occurs to me, relates to the holy Scriptures. Though they
cannot be in too common Use, and the sooner and the oftener they are read the
better, yet as by the Introduction of them into the School Exercises, and for
the learning of Languages, or Words, or Letters, there arises a Disgust to
them, or at best an insipid and careless Use of them; to prevent this, my
Notion is, and I offer it with the utmost Caution, that these Books be taught
in separate and distinct Lectures, and treated as containing a Message from the
most high JEHOVAH to Mankind, committed to his most blessed Son, sent expressly
from Heaven to deliver it; and further, that there are in them Matters of the
utmost Consequence to our everlasting Salvation. After this is well understood,
the easy Parts should be read first, and explained to them in their native
Tongue, or in Latin, or Greek, when these Languages are become familiar, then
the more difficult Passages should be treated of; and herein a just and proper
Order should be observed as the Understanding opens, and can bear them; always
remembering, that the Scripture every where takes for granted, that Men are
conscious there is in them a Power of Reasoning, moral Sense, social Affection,
Love of Truth, Approbation of good Actions and Characters, and Love of Esteem;
together with the Pains of Remorse, Shame and Sympathy. It is on the real
Existence of these Qualities and Affections in the human Soul, that the
Prophets in such pathetick Strains call upon Men to make the Almighty the
Object of their Love and Adoration, and to exercise toward his divine Majesty
in the highest Degree the same Gratitude, Awe and Reverence, which they see
good and grateful Men exercise toward their Benefactors here, and for which
they are universally admired and beloved. These Qualities are con-natural to
the Soul; and though weakened and impaired, yet not totally extinguished by the
Fall. They make up in short the Resemblance which forms the Likeness and Image
of God, after which holy Writ says we were at first made. To these the
Scripture constantly addresses itself; these are put into Motion by Grace; to
these are applied, as Seed to well prepared Ground, all those gracious
Discourses of our Savior and his Apostles; on these the Holy Ghost exerts his
efficacious Influences; from these the Saint is produced elect, precious; these
are some of the Materials out of which we are built up a spiritual House, a
royal Priesthood, a chosen Generation, an holy Nation, a peculiar People. From
these the perfect Man is formed, and by them we attain to the Measure of the
Stature of the Fullness of Christ.

These Things duly pressed, together with the Childrens constant Attendance at
their respective Places of Worship (a Point likewise to be strongly insisted
on) will be the likeliest Means to secure a just Reverence to the King of
Kings, and to the inspired Writings of the Old and New Testament.

I now proceed to my last general Head; To exhort all present to give their
utmost Encouragement to this pious Institution.

To relieve another under pressing Afflictions, is a very laudable Act. -- To
be assiduous to find out the Unfortunate and Miserable, and to administer
suitable and quick Relief, constitutes the Character of a good Man. -- Were
many such good Persons in any one Place, the Evils of Life would there be
considerably decreased. -- By well concerted Schemes to introduce into a
Country a Number of sensible and virtuous Men, or to make them so who live
already in it, and to make a Provision for a Supply of such good Men in future
Times, is the noblest Effort of the human Understanding. This last, the highest
Step in this enumerated Gradation of Good, is the Object of the Intention of
those who planned the Institution now to be recommended to you: It has
therefore the justest Claims to your Attention and Assistance. The Good which
under the divine Blessing it will immediately produce, is very considerable;
but in no wise to be put into Competition with its falutary Effects on the
rising Generation. More Evils may be prevented by it, than (were they for want
of it suffered to exist) could be remedied by all the virtuous Men of the Place
put together, aided with all the Power and Wealth of the Community. Whoever
then, lists himself amongst the Contributors, is with them cooperating for the
public Weal, projecting and consulting the Good of Thousands, the Good of them
who are in the Womb of Time to the latest Posterity. O rational, glorious, and
godlike Employment! Cherish, my dear Brethren, this Disposition in yourselves
and your Fellow Citizens; you don't know to what Length it may go; if, as some
project, others are still as ready to execute, undervaluing personal Trouble
and Expense; I can, without the Impeachment of an over-fond Love of Country,
pronounce this will become a most admired and happy Province.

With what a Transport of Joy then do I now prepare to bespeak your Favor for
an Undertaking of so extensive a Benefit!

And, first, the Principles of Duty engage me to address myself to You, Sir, to
whom the Care of this Government is committed, in Favor of this Academical
Collection of Schools. It Is what you have long rather wished for, and lamented
the Loss of, than ever expected. This you did when in a private Station; what
may not then be expected now the Event is come to pass, not only in your own
Time, but in your own Administration? Justice calls on the Trustees to express
their grateful Sense of what you have already done. Their Knowledge of the warm
Place it has in your Breast, makes them with the sincerest Confidence ready to
consult and advise with you, and to indulge large Hopes of the Continuance of
your Protection and Liberality. The Sense and Morals of the People are as much
the Object of the Care of a good Governor, as their Lives and Properties; a
Consideration which will undoubtedly lead you, conscientious in the Discharge
of your high Trust, to promote its Success with a peculiar Zeal. Happy, if the
Public may thence be provided with Persons of solid Piety, and Lovers of
Christ, from a Conviction of the Truth and Excellency of the Christian
Religion; able Counselors to assist and advise in the arduous Affairs of
Government; wise, virtuous, and knowing Magistrates to administer Justice;
sensible and learned Freeholders to furnish an improving and rational
Conversation; and finally, Men in all Ranks and Stations, of all Trades and
Professions, well qualified to serve their Country, as they may be respectively
wanted to fill the necessary Offices and Duties of the Common Wealth.

I now beg Leave to address you, Gentlemen, who have taken upon you the great
Trust of carrying into Execution the Plan of Education proposed to be observed
in this Academy. And I would do it in the most affectionate Manner, having the
Honor to be not only of your Acquaintance, but in your Friendship. What I say
will be only declaratory of the firm Purposes of your own Hearts, and of the
Expectations of the Public. The Eyes of all are upon you, and as an absolute
Confidence is placed in your personal Probity, Diligence and Abilities, it is
expected that you will be mighty careful in your Examination of the Talents and
Morals of all who offer for Instructors in the several Schools. That you admit
none from a partial Favor or Affection, or from an ill-judged Compassion to
the Lowness of their Circumstances, or any other Consideration than Merit
previously examined, and after mature Consideration approved. That you see
every Thing with your own Eyes, and for that Purpose that you be frequent in
your Visits to the Schools, and be careful to make the Rector report at proper
Periods of Time the State of each School, and the Improvement of the Scholars,
that it may be timely seen if any useful Additions or Alterations ought to be
made to the Plan. That since you stand engaged to give all becoming
Encouragements to the Scholars, you will not fail to give distinguishing Marks
of your Favor to such as deserve well of you by their Advancement in
Literature; and if any shall discover more than ordinary Talents, which will
want your Assistance to be improved to their utmost Extent, that you be not
backward in giving it. And in particular, that you do not suffer any Regard to
Party, Kindred, or Friendship, to bias you in your Judgments, but that every
Thing be done with Candor, Affection, and a disinterested Attachment to
personal Desert, and the Reputation of the Academy. And may the Almighty
direct, favor and bless your Councils.

ORDER now calls upon me to address you, who preside in the Schools. The
generous Love of Learning, of which you have given so ample a Testimony, by the
ready Tender of your Services, gives Room to expect all that Abilities,
Integrity and Care can do for the Youth committed to your Tuition. The Rector
has a Precedence given him, from which both he and you may draw many
Advantages; you will never want one to consult with who, on all Occasions, will
be sure to give you affectionate Advice, and represent to the Trustees any
Difficulties or Inconveniences which may occur in Trusts of so complex a
Nature: You may speak with perfect Freedom to him, though I am persuaded it will
not be without a just Regard to his Superiority: And he will make no other Use
of the Presidentship, than to render your respective Duties easy and delightful
to you; he will be a ready Fellow Laborer with you; his Goodnature, Prudence
and Moderation, will make him think that he has no Authority placed in him but
for the Good, and from a Regard to the Order and Subordination necessary to be
observed in such a Collection of Schools; nor will you suffer so unbecoming a
Thought to enter into your Minds, as that your respective Merits are hereby in
any Manner depreciated, or not duly considered. In truth, he who does the best
will gain the greatest Esteem. Conspire then unanimously and fervently in
raising the Name and Reputation of the Academy, and in assisting the Trustees
to put every Branch of Business on the firmest and most beneficial
Establishment. Make it your Study to obtain the Affection of your Scholars, to
find out their Genius, to direct it well, to watch their Morals, Tempers and
Behavior, and by your Tenderness and well-judg'd Commendations and Reproofs,
to infuse into their Minds the Love of Learning: Adapt their Exercises and
Learning to the State of their Understanding, Memory, or any Infirmities they
may labor under from their particular Constitutions of Mind or Body: Above
all, Testify your Concern for a religious Deportment, nor ever suffer the
sacred Name of GOD to be profaned, or any rude, immoral, or indecent
Expressions to be uttered. You will take all Opportunities to represent the
Christian Religion in its native and genuine Excellency and Perfection: As the
kindest and fullest Instruction of the wisest of Beings, and the most
affectionate of Parents: As a System of Laws authoritatively published for the
sole Rule of Faith and Manners, and completely calculated to promote every
Interest Men can have either as discretionary Tenants in this World, or as
Inheritors, by divine Favor, of the Kingdom of Heaven; and may the Lord impart
unto you the Truth, and with it perfect Freedom, and a Disposition to do all to
his Glory, and the Good of the Souls committed to your Care.

I AM under very strong Ties of Affection toward you my Fellow Citizens, who
compose the remaining Part of this Audience, and shall endeavor to Form my
particular Address to you in Terms answerable to my Esteem of you. As an
Instance of the Reality of my Regard, I have not so much as attempted to apply
to your Passions in this Discourse, but to your Understandings, in my
Endeavors to prove the absolute Necessity, and unspeakable Benefit of a
liberal Education. I am not concerned to raise a momentary Warmth in your
Breasts, but to engage your Judgments, and in Consequence thereof, your
Affections, in Behalf of the Academy. I hope to hear you enquire frequently and
importunately, of the Success of these Schools, as if you thought yourselves
more than ordinarily interested therein: I have often been a delighted Witness
of the vast Pleasure you receive, when Strangers express favorable Sentiments
of the advanced State of this Colony; this is a good Omen in their Favor. I
would not damp this just and becoming Spirit; may your Children inherit it, and
be enabled to perpetuate the Advantages you enjoy. One may venture to
pronounce, that, imbued with good Principles, intimately acquainted with the
ancient and modern Constitutions of Kingdoms; their Souls fired with the
Examples of the worthy Characters, with the noble Sentiments, and perfect
Models of Antiquity; possessed of a well-grounded and complete Knowledge in
Arts and Sciences; they will preserve the sacred Deposite of all your justly
esteemed Privileges, and deliver them down, with still greater Improvement, to
the latest Posterity.

AND now to bring this Discourse toward a Conclusion: There is one Science
worth all the rest, and to which all of us may attain; and, Oh! that I could
find Language powerful enough to give it its just Recommendation; I mean, the
Science of Living well; in this all are concerned, but principally those who
are advanced in Years, for on these the Eyes of the Young are naturally fixed,
and from them they take their Measures. Alas, could it be seen what a mighty
Train of Evils does frequently follow one bad Example, it would amaze the best
informed Man amongst us! Though the Evils which we see every Day occasioned by
bad Lives, are very numerous, and of the worst Sort, yet they are not to be put
in Comparison with the secret and unperceived Mischiefs produced by their
Influence on the present and succeeding Generations? Suffer me, to present this
sad View of Things, with all becoming Earnestness, to such as have the
Direction and Care of Families.

YOUR Children knowing that you have gone through Life before them, and thinking
that you are perfectly well acquainted with what relates to it, place an
absolute Confidence in what you say and do, and have an entire Dependence on
your Judgments and Practices. Believe me, your Children are nice Observers of
your Behavior, not only in Matters wherein they themselves are immediately
concerned, but in such as relate to others; and perhaps in these latter, a
great deal more than you think of; it is no Secret to them that in these you
act without Reserve, and on full and free Choice; and therefore from these more
than from your immediate Conduct toward them, they form their Notions of the
Value and Goodness of Actions and Characters. Now let me ask you seriously, Are
you not extremely unjust to these little Ones, your own Flesh and Blood, and
for whom you feel and express so much Tenderness, if as they grow up, you do
not form your own Examples on the Models of Piety and Goodness, for their easy
Observance and Imitation? Are you not aware, that without this, neither your
own, nor their Masters Lessons or Corrections can avail. Let therefore the
Principles of Justice and natural Affection to your Children, engage you to
lead holy and good Lives.

IF you have the Misfortune to live by wicked and bad Neighbors, as such
Persons necessarily sooner or later fall into Disasters and afflictive
Circumstances, these too will furnish good Lectures to your Children and
Dependants; Oh, what a mighty Advantage would it be to them, if every now and
then you took Occasion, from some eminent Calamity befalling any one who lived
in the notorious Neglect of Goodness and Virtue, or in the open Practice of
Vice, to set forth to your Families in a plain and affecting Manner, the
certain Connection between the sad Event and the wicked Man's Way of Living, and
this not with too much Strictness and Formality, but in the Way of Conversation
and Family Discourse, and at a Time when you find your Children and Servants in
a fit and attentive Disposition. It can scarce be believed what an Effect those
little occasional Histories would have on the Minds of the Young. The Calamity
being before their Eyes, and its Causes made evident, their Passions would be
all in Motion, and their Memories vastly retentive: On their first being
tempted to do an ill Thing, these sad Consequences would recur to them, and
with their Shame and Modesty, the natural Barrier of Youth, preserve them from
bad Courses, till their own Judgment should attain its Ripeness, and come with
a pure and uncorrupted Force to their Advice and Assistance.

BUT exclusive of these Considerations respecting others, let us learn this
Science of Living well from Motives respecting our own Happiness. By being good
in ourselves, and useful to the World, we are in the proper Exercises of our
rational Nature, our Affections then fasten on their proper Objects, and we
gradually recover the Purity, and Dignity, and Excellency of our primitive
Nature, made for the Practice of Benevolence and social Virtue: We evidence the
divine Original of our Souls, and even here taste some of the choicest of the
Joys of the Blessed above, so that our Transition from Earth to Heaven will be
easy and natural. O blessed Science, which thus prepares and exalts us through
divine Grace unto a State of Glory. To conclude:

WHETHER there be Tongues, they shall cease; whether there be Knowledge, it
shall vanish away, but this Science of Living well, shall remain. Death indeed
removes us from all further Use of human Knowledge, and the Exercise of human
Improvements, but it does not remove us from the Practice of Goodness, it does
not take away the Joys resulting from the Possession of Piety, Beneficence and
Charity: So far from this, Death will mightily enlarge their Sphere of Action,
present a much nobler World, where the Adepts in this Science instead of
bringing forth the tender Buds and Blossomings of growing Virtue, will be
enabled to bring forth the Fruits of Righteousness and Holiness, in their just
Perfection, even in angelick Maturity. In short, a good Man embraces Death as
opening to him the happy Place where the Spirits of just Men made perfect are
reaping the Rewards of their Virtue, even supreme and inconceivable Happiness,
such as Eye bath not seen, nor Ear heard, nor bath it entered into the Heart of
Man to conceive; which that we may all receive, may GOD of his infinite Mercy
grant, through the Merits of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: To whom, with the Holy Ghost,
be the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
CONSTITUTIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACADEMY, IN THE CITY of PHILADELPHIA.
AS nothing can more effectually contribute to the Cultivation and Improvement
of a Country, the Wisdom, Riches and Strength, Virtue and Piety, the Welfare
and Happiness of a People, than a proper Education of Youth, by forming their
Manners, imbuing their tender Minds with Principles of Rectitude and Morality,
instructing them in the Dead and Living Languages, particularly their
Mother Tongue, and all useful Branches of liberal Arts and Sciences; for
attaining these great and important Advantages, so far as the present State of
our Infant-Country will admit, and laying a Foundation for Posterity to erect a
Seminary of Learning more extensive and suitable to their future Circumstances;
An ACADEMY for teaching the Latin and Greek Languages, the English Tongue
grammatically, and as a Language, the most useful living foreign Languages,
French, German, and Spanish; as Matters of Erudition naturally flowing from the
Languages, History, Geography, Chronology, Logic and Rhetoric, Writing,
Arithmetic; the several Branches of the Mathematics; Natural and Mechanic
Philosophy; Drawing in Perspective, and every other Part of useful Learning and
Knowledge, shall be set up, maintained and have Continuance within the City of
Philadelphia, in Manner following. Twenty-four Persons, To wit, James Logan,
Thomas Lawrence, William Allen, John Inglis, Tench Francis, William Masters,
Lloyd Zachary, Samuel M'Call, junior, Joseph Turner, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas
Leech, William Shippen, Robert Strettell, Philip Sing, Charles Willing, Phineas
Bond, Richard Peter's, Abraham Tailor, Thomas Bond, Thomas Hopkinson, William
Plumstead, Joshua Maddox, Thomas White, and William Coleman, of the City of
Philadelphia, shall be TRUSTEES to begin and carry into Execution this good and
pious Undertaking, who shall not for any Services by them as Trustees
performed, claim or receive any Reward or Compensation; which Number shall
always be continued, but never exceeded, upon any Motive whatever.

WHEN any Trustee shall remove his Habitation far from the City of
Philadelphia, reside beyond Sea, or die, the remaining Trustees shall with all
convenient Speed, proceed to elect another, residing in or near the City, to
fill the Place of the absenting or deceased Person.

THE Trustees shall have general Conventions once in every Month, and may, on
special Occasions, meet at other Times on Notice, at some convenient Place
within the City of Philadelphia, to transact the Business incumbent on them;
and shall, in the Gazette, advertize the Time and Place of their general
Conventions.

NOTHING shall be transacted by the Trustees, or under their Authority, alone,
unless the same be voted by a Majority of their whole Number, if at a general
Convention; and if at a special Meeting, by a like Majority, upon personal
Notice given to each Trustee, at least one Day before, to attend.

THE Trustees shall at their first Meeting elect a PRESIDENT for One Year,
whose particular Duty it shall be, when present, to regulate their Debates, and
state the proper Questions arising from them, and to order Notices to be given
of the Times and Places of their special Conventions. And the (...) Election
shall be annually made, at their first Meeting, after the Expiration of each
Year.

THE Trustees shall annually choose one of their own Members for a TREASURER,
who shall receive all Donations, and Money due to them, and disburse and lay
out the same, according to their Orders; and at the End of each Year, pay the
Sum remaining in his Hands to his Successor.

ALL Contracts and Assurances for Payment of Money to them, shall be made in
the Name of the Treasurer for the Time being, and declared to be in Trust for
the Use of the Trustees.

THE Trustees may appoint a Clerk, whose Duty in particular it shall be, to
attend them in their general and special Conventions, to give Notice in Writing
to the Members, of the Time, Place, and Design of any special Meetings; to
register all their Proceedings, and extract a State of their Accounts annually,
to be published in the Gazette; for which they may pay him such Salary as they
shall think reasonable.

THE Trustees shall, with all convenient Speed, after signing these
Constitutions, contract with any Person that offers, who they shall judge most
capable, of teaching the Latin and Greek Languages, History, Geography,
Chronology and Rhetoric; having great Regard at the same Time to his Polite
Speaking, Writing, and Understanding the English Tongue; which Person shall in
Fact be, and shall be styled, the RECTOR of the Academy.

THE Trustees may contract with the Rector for the Term of Five Years, or less,
at their Discretion, for the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds a Year.

THE Rector shall be obliged, without the Assistance of any Usher, to teach
Twenty Scholars, the Latin and Greek Languages, and at the same Time, according
to the best of his Capacity, to instruct them in History, Geography,
Chronology, Logic, Rhetoric, and the English Tongue; and Twenty-five Scholars
more for every Usher provided for him, who shall be entirely subject to his
Direction.

THE Rector shall upon all Occasions, consistent with his Duty in the Latin
School, assist the English Master, in improving the Youth under his Care, and
superintend the Instruction of all the Scholars in the other Branches of
Learning, taught within the Academy, and see that the Masters in each Art and
Science perform their Duties.

THE Trustees shall, with all convenient Speed, contract with any Person that
offers, who they shall judge most capable, of teaching the English Tongue
grammatically, and as a Language, History, Geography, Chronology, Logic and
Oratory; which Person shall be styled the ENGLISH MASTER.

THE Trustees may contract with the English Master for the Term of Five Years,
or less, at their Discretion, for the Sum of One Hundred Pounds a Year.

THE English Master shall be obliged, without the Assistance of any Usher, to
teach Forty Scholars the English Tongue grammatically, and as a Language; and
at the same Time, according to the best of his Capacity, to instruct them in
History, Geography, Chronology, Logic, and Oratory; and Sixty Scholars more
for every Usher provided for him.

THE Ushers for the Latin and Greek School, shall be admitted, and at Pleasure
removed, by the Trustees and the Rector, or a Majority of them.

THE Ushers for the English School, shall be admitted, and at Pleasure removed,
by the Trustees and the English Master, or a Majority of them.

THE Trustees shall contract with each Usher, to pay him what they shall judge
proportionable to his Capacity and Merit.

NEITHER the Rector, nor English Master shall be removed, unless disabled by
Sickness, or other natural Infirmity, or for gross voluntary Neglect of Duty,
continued after two Admonitions from the Trustees, or for committing infamous
Crimes; and such Removal be voted by three Fourths of the Trustees; after which
their Salaries respectively shall cease.

THE Trustees shall, with all convenient Speed, endeavor to engage Persons
capable of teaching the French, Spanish, and German Languages, Writing,
Arithmetic, the several Branches of the Mathematics, Natural and Mechanic
Philosophy, and Drawing; who shall give their Attendance, as soon as a
sufficient Number of Scholars shall offer to be instructed in those Parts of
Learning; and be paid such Salaries and Reward, as the Trustees shall from Time
to Time be able to allow.

EACH Scholar shall pay such Sum or Sums, quarterly, according to the
particular Branches of Learning they shall desire to be taught, as the Trustees
shall from Time to Time settle and appoint.

IN Case of the Disability of the Rector, or any Master established on the
Foundation, by receiving a certain Salary, through Sickness, or any other
natural Infirmity, whereby he may be reduced to Poverty, the Trustees shall
have Power to contribute to his Support, in Proportion to his Distress and
Merit, and the Stock in their Hands.

FOR the Security of the Trustees, in contracting with the Rector, Masters, and
Ushers; to enable them to provide and fit up convent Schools; furnish them with
Books of general Use, that may be too expensive for each Scholar; Maps,
Draughts, and other Things, generally necessary, for the Improvement of the
Youth; and to bear the incumbent Charges that will unavoidably attend this
Undertaking, especially in the Beginning; the Donations of all Persons inclined
to encourage it, are to be cheerfully and thankfully accepted.

THE Academy shall be opened with all convenient Speed, by accepting the first
good Master that offers, either for teaching the Latin and Greek, or English,
under the Terms above proposed.

ALL Rules for the Attendance and Duty of the Masters, the Conduct of the
Youth, and the facilitating their Progress in Learning and Virtue, shall be
framed by the Masters, in Conjunction with the Trustees.

IF the Scholars shall hereafter grow very numerous, and the Funds be
sufficient, the Trustees may at their Discretion augment the Salaries of the
Rector or Master.

THE Trustees, to increase their Stock, may let their Money out at Interest.

IN general, the Trustees shall have Power to dispose of all Money received by
them, as they shall think best for the Advantage, Promotion, and even the
Enlargement of this Design.

THE Trustees may hereafter add to or change any of these Constitutions, except
that hereby declared to be invariable.

ALL Trustees, Rectors, Masters, Ushers, Clerks, and other Ministers, hereafter
to be elected or appointed, for carrying this Undertaking into Execution,
shall, before they be admitted to the Exercise of their respective Trusts or
Duties, sign these Constitutions, or some others to be hereafter framed by the
Trustees in their Stead, in Testimony of their then approving of, and resolving
to observe them.

UPON the Death or Absence as aforesaid of any Trustee, the remaining Trustees
shall not have Authority to exercise any of the Powers reposed in them, until
they have chosen a new Trustee in his Place, and such new Trustee shall have
signed the established Constitutions; which if he shall refuse to do, they
shall proceed to elect another, and so toties quoties, until the Person elected
shall sign the Constitutions.

WHEN the Fund is sufficient to bear the Charge, which it is hoped, through the
Bounty and Charity of well disposed Persons, will soon come to pass, poor
Children shall be admitted, and taught gratis, what shall be thought suitable
to their Capacities and Circumstances.

IT is hoped and expected, that the Trustees will make it their Pleasure, and
in some Degree their Business, to visit the Academy often, to encourage and
countenance the Youth, countenance and assist the Masters, and, by all Means in
their Power, advance the Usefulness, and Reputation of the Design; that that
they will look on the Students as, in some Measure, their own Children, treat
them with Familiarity and Affection; and when they have behaved well, gone
through their Studies, and are to enter the World, they shall zealously unite,
and make all the the Interest that can be made, to promote and establish them,
whether in Business, Offices, Marriages, or any other Thing for their
Advantage, preferable to all other Persons whatsoever, even of equal Merit.

THE Trustees shall in a Body visit the Academy once a Year extraordinary, to
view and hear the Performances and Lectures of the Scholars, in such Modes, as
their respective Masters shall think proper, and shall have Power, out of their
Stock, to make Presents to the most meritorious Scholars, according to their
several Deserts.

THE END.
IDEA of the ENGLISH SCHOOL, Sketch'd out for the Consideration of the TRUSTEES
of the PHILADELPHIA ACADEMY.
IT is expected that every Scholar to be admitted into this School, be at least
able to pronounce and divide the Syllables in Reading, and to write a legible
Hand. None to be received that are under (...) Years of Age.

First or lowest CLASS.
LET the first Class learn the English Grammar Rules, and at the same time let
particular Care be taken to improve them in Orthography. Perhaps the latter is
best done by Pairing the Scholars, two of those nearest equal in their Spelling
to be put together; let these strive for Victory, each propounding Ten Words
every Day to the other to be spelt. He that spells truly most of the other's
Words, is Victor for that Day; he that is Victor most Days in a Month, to
obtain a Prize, a pretty neat Book of some Kind useful in their future Studies.
This Method fixes the Attention of Children extremely to the Orthography of
Words, and makes them good Spellers very early. It Is a Shame for a Man to be so
ignorant of this little Art, in his own Language, as to be perpetually
confounding Words of like Sound and different Significations; the Consciousness
of which Defect, makes some Men, otherwise of good Learning and Understanding,
averse to Writing even a common Letter.

LET the Pieces read by the Scholars in this Class be short, such as Croxall's
Fables, and little Stories. In giving the Lesson, let it be read to them; let
the Meaning of the difficult Words in it be explained to them, and let them con
it over by themselves before they are called to read to the Master, or Usher;
who is to take particular Care that they do not read too fast, and that they
duly observe the Stops and Pauses. A Vocabulary of the most usual difficult
Words might be formed for their Use, with Explanations; and they might daily
get a few of those Words and Explanations by Heart, which would a little
exercise their Memories; or at least they might write a Number of them in a
small Book for the Purpose, which would help to fix the Meaning of those Words
in their Minds, and at the same Time furnish every one with a little Dictionary
for his future Use.

The Second CLASS to be taught
READING with Attention, and with proper Modulations of the Voice according to
the Sentiments and Subject.

SOME short Pieces, not exceeding the Length of a Spectator, to be given this
Class as Lessons (and some of the easier Spectators would be very suitable for
the Purpose.) These Lessons might be given over Night as Tasks, the Scholars to
study them against the Morning. Let it then be required of them to give an
Account, first of the Parts of Speech, and Construction of one or two
Sentences; this will oblige them to recur frequently to their Grammar, and fix
its principal Rules in their Memory. Next of the Intention of the Writer, or
the Scope of the Piece; the Meaning of each Sentence, and of every uncommon
Word. This would early acquaint them with the Meaning and Force of Words, and
give them that most necessary Habit, of Reading with Attention.

THE Master then to read the Piece with the proper Modulations of Voice, due
Emphasis, and suitable Action, where Action is required; and put the Youth on
imitating his Manner.

WHERE the Author has used an Expression not the best, let it be pointed out;
and let his Beauties be particularly remarked to the Youth.

LET the Lesions for Reading be varied, that the Youth may be made acquainted
with good Styles of all Kinds in Prose and Verse, and the proper Manner of
reading each Kind. Sometimes a well told Story, a Piece of a Sermon, a
General's Speech to his Soldiers, a Speech in a Tragedy, some Part of a Comedy,
an Ode, a Satyr, a Letter, Blank Verse, Hudibrastick, Heroic, etc. But let such
Lessons for Reading be chosen, as contain some useful Instruction, whereby the
Understandings or Morals of the Youth, may at the same Time be improved.

IT is required that they should first study and understand the Lessons, before
they are put upon reading them properly, to which End each Boy should have an
English Dictionary to help him over Difficulties. When our Boys read English to
us, we are apt to imagine they understand what they read because we do, and
because it is their Mother Tongue. But they often read as Parrots speak, knowing
little or nothing of the Meaning. And it is impossible a Reader should give the
due Modulation to his Voice, and pronounce properly, unless his Understanding
goes before his Tongue, and makes him Master of the Sentiment. Accustoming Boys
to read aloud what they do not first understand, is the Cause of those even set
Tones so common among Readers, which when they have once got a Habit of using,
they find so difficult to correct: By which Means, among Fifty Readers we
scarcely find a good One. For want of good Reading, Pieces published with a
View to influence the Minds of Men for their own or the public Benefit, lose
Half their Force. Were there but one good Reader in a Neighborhood, a public
Orator might be heard throughout a Nation with the same Advantages, and have
the same Effect on his Audience, as if they stood within the Reach of his Voice.

The Third CLASS to be taught
SPEAKING properly and gracefully, which is near of Kin to good Reading, and
naturally follows it in the Studies of Youth. Let the Scholars of this Class
begin with learning the Elements of Rhetoric from some short System, so as to
be able to give an Account of the most usual Tropes and Figures. Let all their
bad Habits of Speaking, all Offenses against good Grammar, all corrupt or
foreign Accents, and all improper Phrases, be pointed out to them. Short
Speeches from the Roman or other History, or from our Parliamentary Debates,
might be got by heart, and delivered with the proper Action, etc. Speeches and
Scenes in our best Tragedies and Comedies (avoiding every Thing that could
injure the Morals of Youth) might likewise be got by Rote, and the Boys
exercised in delivering or acting them; great Care being taken to form their
Manner after the truest Models.

FOR their farther Improvement, and a little to vary their Studies, let them
now begin to read History, after having got by Heart a short Table of the
principal Epochas in Chronology. They may begin with Rollin's Ancient and Roman
Histories, and proceed at proper Hours as they go through the subsequent Classes,
with the best Histories of our own Nation and Colonies. Let Emulation be
excited among the Boys by giving, Weekly, little Prizes, or other small
Encouragements to those who are able to give the best Account of what they have
read, as to Times, Places, Names of Persons, etc. This will make them read with
Attention, and imprint the History well in their Memories. In remarking on the
History, the Master will have fine Opportunities of instilling Instruction of
various Kinds, and improving the Morals as well as the Understandings of Youth.

THE Natural and Mechanic History contained in Spectacle de la Nature, might
also be begun in this Class, and continued through the subsequent Classes by
other Books of the same Kind: For next to the Knowledge of Duty, this Kind of
Knowledge is certainly the most useful, as well as the most entertaining. The
Merchant may thereby be enabled better to understand many Commodities in Trade;
the Handicraftsman to improve his Business by new Instruments, Mixtures and
Materials; and frequently Hints are given of new Manufactures, or new Methods
of improving Land, that may be set on foot greatly to the Advantage of a
Country.

The Fourth CLASS to be taught
COMPOSITION. Writing one's own Language well, is the next necessary
Accomplishment after good Speaking. It Is the Writing-Master's Business to take
Care that the Boys make fair Characters, and place them straight and even in
the Lines: But to form their Style, and even to take Care that the Stops and
Capitals are properly disposed, is the Part of the English Master. The Boys
should be put on Writing Letters to each other on any common Occurrences, and
on various Subjects, imaginary Business, etc. containing little Stories,
Accounts of their late Reading, what Parts of Authors please them, and why.
Letters of Congratulation, of Compliment, of Request, of Thanks, of
Recommendation, of Admonition, of Consolation, of Expostulation, Excuse, etc.
In these they should be taught to express themselves clearly, concisely, and
naturally, without affected Words, or high-flown Phrases. All their Letters to
pass through the Master's Hand, who is to point out the Faults, advise the
Corrections, and commend what he finds right. Some of the best Letters
published in our own Language, as Sir William Temple's, those of Pope, and his
Friends, and some others, might be set before the Youth as Models, their
Beauties pointed out and explained by the Master, the Letters themselves
transcribed by the Scholar.

DR. JOHNSON's Ethices Elementa, or first Principles of Morality, may now be
read by the Scholars, and explained by the Master, to lay a solid Foundation of
Virtue and Piety in their Minds. And as this Class continues the Reading of
History, let them now at proper Hours receive some farther Instructions in
Chronology, and in that Part of Geography (from the Mathematical Master) which
is necessary to understand the Maps and Globes. They should also be acquainted
with the modern Names of the Places they find mentioned in ancient Writers. The
Exercises of good Reading and proper Speaking still continued at suitable Times.

Fifth CLASS.
To improve the Youth in Composition, they may now, besides continuing to write
Letters, begin to write little Essays in Prose; and sometimes in Verse, not to
make them Poets, but for this Reason, that nothing acquaints a Lad so speedily
with Variety of Expression, as the Necessity of finding such Words and Phrases
as will suit with the Measure, Sound and Rhyme of Verse, and at the same Time
well express the Sentiment. These Essays should all pass under the Master's
Eye, who will point out their Faults, and put the Writer on correcting them.
Where the Judgment is not ripe enough for forming new Essays, let the
Sentiments of a Spectator be given, and required to be clothed in a Scholar's
own Words; or the Circumstances of some good Story, the Scholar to find
Expression. Let them be put sometimes on abridging a Paragraph of a diffuse
Author, sometimes on dilating or amplifying what is wrote more closely. And now
let Dr. Johnson's Noetica, or first Principles of human Knowledge, containing a
Logic, or Art of Reasoning, etc. be read by the Youth, and the Difficulties
that may occur to them be explained by the Master. The Reading of History, and
the Exercises of good Reading and just Speaking still continued.

Sixth CLASS.
IN this Class, besides continuing the Studies of the preceding, in History,
Rhetoric, Logic, Moral and Natural Philosophy, the best English Authors may be
read and explained; as Tillotson, Milton, Lock, Addison, Pope, Swift, the
higher Papers in the Spectator and Guardian, the best Translations of Homer,
Virgil and Horace, of Telemachus, Travels of Cyrus, etc.

ONCE a Year, let there be public Exercises in the Hall, the Trustees and
Citizens present. Then let fine gilt Books be given as Prizes to such Boys as
distinguish themselves, and excel the others in any Branch of Learning; making
three Degrees of Comparison; giving the best Prize to him that performs best; a
loss valuable One to him that comes up next to the best; and another to the
third. Commendations, Encouragement and Advice to the rest; keeping up their
Hopes that by Industry they may excel another Time. The Names of those that
obtain the Prizes, to be yearly printed in a List.

THE Hours of each Day are to be divided and disposed in such a Manner, as that
some Classes may be with the Writing-Master, improving their Hands, others with
the Mathematical Master, learning Arithmetic, Accounts, Geography, Use of the
Globes, Drawing, Mechanics, etc. while the rest are in the English School,
under the English Master's Care.

THUS instructed, Youth will come out of this School fitted for learning any
Business, Calling or Profession, except such wherein Languages are required;
and though unaquainted with any ancient or foreign Tongue, they will be Masters
of their own, which is of more immediate and general Use; and withal will have
attained many other valuable Accomplishments; the Time usually spent in
acquiring those Languages, often without Success, being here employed in laying
such a Foundation of Knowledge and Ability, as, properly improved, may qualify
them to pass through and execute the several Offices of civil Life, with
Advantage and Reputation to themselves and Country.

B. F.

THE END.

