Mr. Prince's SERMON On the Death of the Prince of WALES.

GOD destroys the Hope of Man!

A SERMON Occasioned by The inexpressible Loss in the Death of His late Royal
Highness FREDERICK Prince of WALES: In the Night after March 20. last, In the
45th Year of his Age.

By THOMAS PRINCE, A. M.

And a Pastor of the South Church in BOSTON.

Lam. v. 17. For this our Heart is faint! For these Things our Eyes are dim!

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill. MDCCLI.

A SERMON On the Death of the Prince of WALES.
JOB XIV. -- 19. THOU destroyest the Hope of Man!
MY reading this sad, but pious Passage, has no doubt excited your Apprehension
of my Endeavor to help you, in improving the Loss of ONE of the best of
Princes that ever raised the Hopes of the British Nations, and that by dying
has left them in universal Sorrow.

But in the midst of our Mourning, the perfect Job, the greatest Man in his Day
of all the East, who was now lamenting the sudden Death of his Children, and
who had his Eye on the sovereign Hand of GOD therein, directs us, like himself,
to raise our Views to the supreme Ruler of Heaven and Earth in this bereaving
Dispensation*

In the pungent Sense of the Loss of his Offspring, he is led to the affecting
View of the short and troublesome Life of the whole humane Race: And his
Description is so lively, tender, and pertinent to the present Occasion, that I
cannot forbear reciting some of the Passages.

For thus says that Arabian Prince in the Scene of his Sorrows -- Man that is
born of a Woman is but of few Days and full of Trouble! He comes forth as a
Flower, and is cut down: He flees also as a Shadow, and continues not! -- His
Days are determined, the Number of his Months are with THEE, THOU have
appointed his Bounds that he cannot pass! -- There is Hope of a Tree, if it be
cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender Branch thereof will
not cease: Tho the Root thereof wax old in the Earth, and the Stock thereof die
in the Ground; yet through the Scent of Water it will budd, and bring forth Boughs
like a Plant: But Man dies and wastes away; yea Man gives up the Ghost, and
where is he! -- As the Waters fail[which derive] from the Sea, and the Flood
decays and dries up; so Man lies down, and rises not 'till the Heavens be
no more: [i. e. 'till the Aerial Heavens about the Earth, shall be dissolved,
and pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements melt with fervent Heat; as
in 2 Pet. iii. 10, 12. 'Till then]'They' [or the deceased Children of Men]
shall not awake, nor be raised out of their Sleep! -- THOU washest away the
Things which grow out of the Dust of the Earth; and THOU destroyest the Hope of
Man: THOU prevailest for ever against him, and he passes: THOU changest his
Countenance, and sendest him away!

Thus this great and wise Ancient improves his Loss, to survey and bewail the
universal Frailty and Destruction of his Fellow-Race: And in the View beholds
the sovereign Will and Agency of GOD, in causing them to change and pass away,
and thereby destroying the Hope of Man, or his pleasing Expectations.

And here we see the Penetration of a true Philosopher. -- He clearly sees the
Will and Operation of GOD himself, in the common Actions of material Substances
on one another: THOU washest away the Things which grow out of the Dust of the
Earth: i. e. By making that Impression, or giving that impressive Force we
commonly call by the Name of Gravity, on the Globules of Water; it is THOU that
make them collect in Floods, and it is thy Power put forth and acting in them,
that washes away the Vegetables which grow out of the Dust of the Earth. And
then by a beautiful transition, he goes on to ascribe the same divine Will and
Agency in destroying the Hope of Man: As if he had said -- As THOU washest away
the Things which grow out of the Dust of the Earth, a lower and less important
Operation of thine in the Course of Nature; so whatever may be the Means, it is
likewise much more THOU who destroyest the Hope of Man. And in discerning this,
it only requires a little further Penetration.

And as the Scope of Job is plainly to show the Agency of GOD in destroying the
Life of Man, and thereby his Hope; He further illustrates his Intention in the
following Words -- THOU prevailest for ever against him, and be passes: THOU
changest his Countenance, and sendest him away. i. e. THOU by thy constant
Influence on natural Causes, art continually prevailing in every Age against
every Child of Man, art continually wearing away his Constitution, changing his
Countenance in every Stage of Life, and especially in Sickness and in the Time
of Dying; when Thou sendest him away from the Living, and thereby destroyest
the Hopes of Men, both of those who die and of those who survive them.

But for our fuller understanding the Text, I shall briefly consider these
three Things.

I. How GOD destroys the Lives of Men.

II. What is the Hope he thereby destroys.

III. Some of his wise Ends in these Dispensations.

I. How GOD destroys the Lives of Men.

Now, he may destroy the Lives of many by his immediate Agency; as by his
immediate Agency he first inspired them. But he usually no doubt destroys them
by Means of second Causes, both continually supported and overruled by him,
and acting by and under his sovereign Influence. He may destroy the Lives of
many by employing Angels; as he employed an Angel in destroying One Hundred and
eighty five Thousand Soldiers in one Night in the Assyrian Army, 2 King. xix.
And he destroys the Lives of Multitudes by Means of Men themselves; as in
voluntary Fights and Murders, as well as by many undesigned and incidental
Actions. He destroys the Lives of many by Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Animalcula;
as well as by Winds, Waters, Lightenings, Earthquakes, Vapors, Cold, Heat,
Poisons, and innumerable Kinds of instrumental Causes, we commonly call
accidental, because unforeseen and unexpected by us.

But as the general Means of his destroying the Lives of Men, are of these two
Sorts; (1.) His primary forming our Constitutions frail and mortal, and (2.)
His acting on them by various elementary Substances round about us, and
entering in us; I shall chiefly consider his usual Agency in these two Sorts of
Means: which are, under him of such fatal and universal Influence, that if
never a Man were killed by an Angel, or humane or other Animal, or any other
Kind of violent or accidental Means; yet by our mere present Constitution, and
the Influence of the material Substances we live and breathe in, the Death of
the whole humane Race must unavoidably come on from Age to Age, in spite of
their utmost Knowledge, Wisdom, Skill and Care, and the Power of every Kind of
known Remedy.

What the original Constitution of our first Parents was, and what the State of
the Air and other Elements before they sinned, I am utterly uncertain. Yet this
we in general seem to be sure of, that there were no Principles of unavoidable
or quick Destruction either in their Constitutions, or in the Elements without
them. Or if they might in a long Course of Years be mortal, or capable of dying
by any violent Means; yet they were some how or other secure from dying, during
their primary State of Probation, as the Representative and Head of their
Offspring. Probably, besides their perfect Constitutions and the perfect
Suitableness of all the Elements without them for their Health and Life, GOD or
his beneficent Angels under his Direction, always with them, might constantly
secure them from every mortal and hurtful Influence and Accident, both without
them and within them, and continually repair their wasting Substance.

But since they sinned, such a divine and angelical Influence are justly
withdrawn: and the Constitutions both of themselves and their Offspring are
made frail and mortal. And tho the Firmness of their Constitutions and the
remaining Suitableness of the Elements to them, might be the Means of
lengthning out their Lives until the general Deluge in the Year of the World
1657; yet then by the breaking up the Fountains of the great Deep, opening the
Floodgates of Heaven, whether by Means of a Comet or otherwise, changing the
Course of the Earth, and rendering the Seasons extremely unequal; -- the
Elements we live and breath in became so variable, disordered, poisonous and
pernicious, as exceedingly to weaken our Constitutions and shorten our Lives:
Yea subject us to numberless Kinds of Pains and fatal Maladies, at different
Times and in different Ages of Life; which no humane Knowledge can foresee or
provide against, no humane Skill remove; and which renders the Life of every
Man uncertain every Hour, yea every Minute.

I should lead you into too large a Field for our present View, if I were to
show a hundredth Part, either of the exceeding Frailty and Mortality of our
Constitutions, or the fatal Operations of the various Elements on them*

I shall only observe,

1. With Respect to our Constitutions -- That the Vessels and Membranes of the
Brain and other Parts of the Body, needful to preserve our Lives, are so
exceeding numerous, and so exquisitively fine and tender; that a a very small
Degree of Force either without or within us, may either brake them, or strain
them so as to destroy their Elasticity; either of which Events may be
inevitably fatal.

When our Food in the Stomach is digested, it is turned into the smaller Bowels
for a further Dissolution, and there made fit for Nourishment: But so exceeding
fine and thin are the slender Pipes conveying this Nourishment from them
toward a Blood Vessel which goes down to the Heart, that when they are empty,
they become invisible to the naked Eye; and their Mouths by which all our
Nourishment enters, are so extremely minute, that Keil informs us, they are not
to be seen by the best Microscopes: Yea they rise up into one small Pipe, which
ascends nearly Perpendicular to raise the Nourishment into the Blood; and
Dionis says, consists only of a single and very slender Membrane; is in dead
Bodies empty and so very small and tender, that the Searcher need be very
cautious, or 'twill readily break to Pieces; yea Boorhave says, when entirely
empty, it disappears. What a continual Wonder then, that every Moment these
exceeding fine and tender Vessels are not either stopped by some trick or clammy
Substance; or broken by continual Impressions round them, or by Fermentations,
Acids, Salts, or other pointed or corrosive Particles in them; or dried up by
continual Heat, or spirituous or hot Liquors; or by Accretions and Obstructions
mortified, dissolved and consumed! Upon either of which Events, the Life would
quickly follow: And I cannot doubt but that by some of these Means, the Lives
of Multitudes are made to fail; when none suspect it, and none could help it.

Yea every sudden Fright, or Start of other Passion, or Turn of our Bodies; yea
while we are perfectly quiet either asleep or awake, the very Action of the
Heart it self, of absolute Necessity to Life, may in some particular Cases, by
a single Pulse, either brake, or swell, or strain, or stop some tender, vital
Vessel, and in a Minute kill us. Yea, there is a mortal Frailty in every Nerve
and Fiber, in every Vein and Artery, in every Gland which secrets the Fluids,
in every Vessel and in every Membrane, which sooner or later will put an End to
our Lives. And,

2. As to the fatal Operations of the various Elements on us -- They by
piercing the Pores or shutting them, or entering the Lungs, or passing into the
Bowels, Blood or Brains, may either more or less swiftly or slowly, produce
Obstructions and Impostumes, Consumptions, Putrefactions, Fevers, Appoplexies,
or other effectual Causes of our Dissolution: Yea by only shutting the Pores on
a sudden, they may suddenly destroy us.

But I must restrain my self in these Articles; as the constitutional and
elementary Causes of Mortality and Death in the Course of Nature, are
innumerable, and beyond Imagination.

But then in all those material Causes, Operations and Effects, a little
Acquaintance with Nature and Penetration of Thought, will soon discover the
Acting of GOD, and the Truth of the Scripture in ascribing them to Him. They
are only instrumental Causes in his sovereign Hands, who continually moves them
to fulfill his wise Intentions. For,

(1.) As to our bodily Constitutions; -- The more we search into their inward
Form, the more we see the astonishing Marks of an omnipresent and intelligent
Being: That even Galen an Heathen Anatomist of Pergamus, above sixteen Hundred
Years ago, could see the wondrous Traces of the divine Contrivance and Agency
therein with Rapture, and could not help ascribing them to GOD. And how much
further the Discoveries of these have grown since the finding out of
Microscopes and vast Increase of knowing of the Works of GOD, within these two
Hundred Years, I must refer to the Draughts and Writings of the Learned common
among us.

By all our Discoveries of the Works of GOD in Nature, we clearly see they
perfectly agree with Scripture, and conspire to show us, that he is the
sovereign Former of our extremely curious, but exceeding frail and mortal
Bodies; and that in forming them, he has prepared the Way for his destroying
them in his Course of Nature, or by his following common Agency by natural
Causes: His Course of Nature being only his usual Way of acting in his Works of
Nature. For,

(2.) As to the mortal Operations of the various Elements or material
Substances on our feeble Bodies; -- Material Substances themselves have plainly
no Intelligence or Will, no Design or Wisdom, no spontaneous Springs of Action;
and yet they act as if they had: They act with a perfect and even universal
Knowledge, and in a perfectly wise and regular Manner. -- Thus, not only the
whole Globe of the Earth, Air and Water, but even every Atom in them to the
Center, acts as if it perfectly knew how much material Substance there is in
the Moon, and how exactly both her Distance and her Motion are and alter: For
as the Moon moves farther or nearer, or on one Side or other; just as she
varies, so every Atom in the Air, Water and Earth, will alter its Power and
Tendency, and act accordingly in the most regular Manner.

The Power that moves them therefore is an intelligent Power, a Power every
where always present and perfectly knowing; always awake, attentive and never
weary; and even an intelligent Power that is one and the same, and at the same
Time sees them all, has them always in his mighty Hand, and continually moves
them all in such a corresponding, various and regular Manner: And this can be
no other than the omnipresent, allseeing, allknowing, allwise, almighty GOD.

In short, the whole Compass of Nature is his own Creation, his absolute
Propriety, and ever under his wise and actual Power and Government. And all
those Attractions, Motions and Repulsions, Elasticities, Actions and Reactions,
Divisions and Cohaesions, Accretions and Obstructions, Relaxations,
Fermentations, Putrefactions, and whatever other Powers and Operations which
seem to a superficial View, subsisting in material Substances, and are the
various Causes of our Mortality and Death; -- they are only the Actings of the
Power of GOD in these material Substances, according to the Methods of his own
Appointment. Even that ancient Athenian Plato, who lived about three Hundred
and fifty Years before CHRIST was born, had so deep an Insight into the Works
of GOD in Nature, that he clearly saw and taught, that what we call the
Operations of NATURE, are really the Operations of GOD himself: Which the late
most sagacious Sir Isaac Newton has so surprizingly and clearly shown, that we
must be exceeding stupid not to see they are the Operations of a divine
Intelligence: And by these he continually destroys the Lives of men.

Yea by such Means as these, he equally destroys the Lives of all Sorts of the
Race of Men; younger and elder, weak and strong, poor and rich, ignorant and
knowing, low and high; common People, Nobles, Princes, Kings and Emperors. But
our,

II. General Head is to consider what is the Hope he thereby destroys.

Such is the present Circumstance and Nature of Man on Earth, that he cannot be
entirely contented with his present State: But as GOD has given him Power to
survey the World about him with the Course and Tendency of Things, and so, to
look into probable Futurities; he cannot help employing his Powers to look on
forward, to foresee some likely Good, and then entertain himself with the
hopeful Prospect.

This is exceeding natural to the Race of Men, and their common Practice in
every Nation, Country, Age and Family, yea in every Person capable of looking
forward. The very Hope of future Good is so agreeable to us, that it always
gives us a Degree of Delight: it yields a great Part of the Pleasure of the
present State: and in Proportion to the Greatness of the Good we hope for; so
the livelier and more pleasing is our Expectation, and when GOD destroys it,
the more afflicting is the Ruin. But as the Ruin of our Hope by Death, is in
itself irreparable, it is the greatest and the saddest Disappointment.

And the Hope of Man which GOD by causing Death destroys, may comprehend, both
the Hope of the Man himself who dies, and the Hope of his Survivors also.

1. By GOD's destroying the Life of Man, he often destroys the Hope of the Man
himself who dies.

This Hope is extensive to all Kinds of agreeable Objects which a Man can
desire, both Temporal and Eternal; and every Man alive has some agreeable Thing
in View, which he pleases himself in the Hope of, and which GOD by taking away
his Life may utterly destroy.

CHRIST indeed in those who love him is the Hope of Glory; i. e. the sure
Foundation of their Hope of the Heavenly Glory: and the righteous Man has a
Hope in Dying, which GOD will never destroy: No! But by destroying his Life,
will surely answer in a full Enjoyment, yea above his highest and most enlarged
Imagination. He shall have such Perfections and see such Glories in the Person
of CHRIST, and in the Saints and Angels, yea in Himself, in the World above;
receive such Revelations and enjoy such Happiness, so sublime, so various, so
great, so exquisite, as in the present State he cannot raise his Mind to a
Thousand Part of the full Conception. Yea his Excellencies, Powers,
Revelations, Visions, Pleasures, Wonders, will both continue and grow to
Eternity.

And as to the Unrighteous Man and Hypocrite; GOD will, by causing him to die,
destroy all his Hope both of Earth and Heaven, at once, for ever.

But it seems to be the Hope of temporal good Things, which our Text has a
special Eye to: And these are either Pleasures, Riches, Friends, Relatives,
Honors, Powers, good Deeds, or Usefulness; and are less or more in the View or
Hope of Men, according to their various Constitutions, Ages, Ideas, Relishes,
Powers, Places, and Relations to the People and Things of the Earth about them.

One has the Hope of enjoying sensitive, another of intellectual Pleasures: One
of delightful Relatives, another of great Estates and sumptuous Houses: One of
rising to gainful Offices, another to Titles of Honor: One of ascending to
high Degrees of Dignity and Power, one to the hights of Principalities, another
of Kingdoms: One to noble Actions and extensive Spheres of Usefulness, to the
Delight and Respect of all about him; and another to some or more, or even of
all these agreeable Objects. But GOD by destroying his Life destroys his Hope of
all these temporal Exaltations, Actions and Enjoyments.

2. When GOD destroys the Life of Man, he thereby destroys the pleasing Hope of
his Survivors also.

When a Man is good, kind and beneficent, he inspires a Degree of Delight in
all about him; and they cannot but please themselves with the Hope of further
Happiness in him. This is more eminently the Case with those who have agreeable
Masters, Husbands, Fathers, as also of promising Sons, and Daughters, even of
lower as well as of higher Families: and the Hope is yet more extensive, high
and delightful, with Respect to such virtuous Persons of Princely Dignity and
Heirs apparent to Principalities and Kingdoms. In the Prospect of their future
Exaltation, the Hearts of their People, as well as their Princely Consorts,
Children and Attendants, cannot but whenever they see him, dilate with
Pleasure, and anticipate their Happiness.

But when God destroys his Life, he thereby destroys these delightful Prospects
of his whole Family, and of his well-affected People: The Hope of his Royal
FATHER, of such a Son to succeed Him, and give a further Establishment to the
State of his Kingdom and the more firm Succession in his happy Line: The
Prospect of his Princely CONSORT, of seeing Herself with Him ascending the
highest Seat of Dignity, adorned together with Crowns of Glory, and enjoying
together the regal Splendors and Felicities: The Expectation of his depending
CHILDREN of seeing Him and Themselves advanced, and of their pleasing Safety
under his fatherly and sovereign Care in their tender Age: The Hope of his glad
Attendants, in the glorious Rise of their kind Master, and of their Promotions
by him: and the pleasing Hope of his affectionate People in having Him in
Reserve to spread his benign Influence over them, and continue their Happiness.

In such sorrowful Respects as these the sovereign GOD destroys the Hope of
Man, as we see at this Day!

III. and lastly, Let us briefly consider some of his wise Ends in these
afflictive Dispensations.

And they may be such as these; --

That he may show his Displeasure with the whole humane Race, for our original
revolting from him and Continuance therein from Age to Age, as well our sinful
Natures and Propensities, as the Out-breakings of them; and with particular
Persons, Families, Countries and Nations, for the various Offenses indulged in
them: that we may see the exceeding Evil of all, as directly contrary to his
holy Nature, Law, Authority and Honor; infinitely offensive to him, and
corrupting, vilifying and ruinous to us: and that we may be moved to hate,
renounce and forsake every Sin for ever.

That we may see the glorious Holiness, Justice, Truth, Sovereignty and Power
of GOD, the awful Danger of his Displeasure, and may be excited to fear him and
avoid offending him: that we may see the exceeding Value of his Favor, the
Necessity of repenting and returning to him, the Need of a Mediator, and the
Suitableness of CHRIST his Son in our sinless Nature to interpose and save us
both from temporal and eternal Ruin: and that we may be happily drawn to
embrace him heartily, and in him return to GOD in the highest Gratitude and
Love, in entire Subjection and Obedience; and thereby may come to be fully
forgiven and reconciled.

That we may see the utter Uncertainty of humane Life; and may allow of no
Delay in those Affairs of eternal Moment; but make the greatest Haste and use
the utmost Diligence therein, that so we may be always ready for every
Providence and for Death and Eternity.

That we may see the Emptiness and Insufficiency of the most desirable, earthly
Enjoyments, that there is no depending upon them with any Security; that we may
cease from placing our Happiness in them, and from trusting to their
Continuance with us: That we may see our thrice Dependence on GOD for every
Good, both the preserving what we have, and the giving us what we want both in
this World and in the other: That we may clearly see our Safety and Happiness
in HIM; that in CHRIST we may look to and seek him for them, choose and give our
selves to him in his well-ordered, sure and everlasting Covenant, comprizing
all our Salvation and all our Desire, tho he take us hence or make not our
House to grow; and confide in him to fulfill it perfectly for us.

That, in particular, by his destroying the Lives of Persons of high Dignity
and Power, he may give us livelier Views of those his Admonitions in Psalm.
cxlvi. 3. etc. Put not your Trust in PRINCES, nor in the [meer] Son of Man in
whom there is no Help: His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth; in
that very Day his Thoughts perish: Happy is he that has the GOD of Jacob for
his Help, whose Hope is in the LORD his GOD; who made Heaven and Earth, the Sea
and all that therein is; who keeps Truth for ever; who executes Judgment for
the Oppressed, -- gives Food to the Hungry, -- raises them that are bowed
down, -- loves the Righteous, -- preserves the Stranger, -- relieveth the
Fatherless and Widow, -- [and] shall reign for ever.

That he may abase our Pride and excessive Ambition of earthly Glories; humble
us down to his Feet; bring us to submit to his Pleasure in the most afflictive
Bereavments; and resign our selves with our dearest Enjoyments to his tender
and almighty Care, and to his supreme Disposal, and trust them with him.

That he may moderate our Love to all Things here below, and bring us chiefly
to view, prize, seek and secure the heavenly and eternal Kingdom; the most
exalted Objects, Revelations, Visions, Joys and Glories there, which never fail
or fade; and excite our earnest and continual Aspirations after them, and
Labors to be ripening for them.

Lastly, that Survivors may be moved to imitate every Excellency in those whose
Lives are taken away: may be quickened to fill up their Place of Service as much
as possible: and excited to improve their remaining and uncertain Time and
Powers, in bringing as much Glory to GOD and doing as much Good to Men as may
be; increasing in divine Knowledge, growing and persevering in Faith, Hope,
Love, Submission, Patience with Respect to GOD, Beneficence to Men, and every
other Grace and Duty, to the Death; that so when GOD destroys the Life of the
Body with all their earthly Expectations, he may advance the Life of Grace to
its Perfection, introduce their Faith into immediate Vision, put their Hope
into full Enjoyment, and give them the unchangable Possession of a caelestial
Crown and Kingdom that abide for ever.

Thus have we considered briefly our three General Heads, and shown the
sovereign Agency and wise Designs of GOD in destroying the Lives and Hopes of
Men.

We now come on to some IMPROVEMENT.

And here I shall chiefly apply myself to consider his awful Hand upon the
Royal Family and the whole British Empire, in destroying the inestimable Life
of the late PRINCE of WALES, the eldest Son of our most gracious SOVEREIGN, and
the Heir apparent of all his Kingdoms, and other Dominions in Asia, Africa,
Europe and America; and thereby destroying the principal Hope of these great
Nations.

And that we may more clearly see the Greatness of our Loss, and
Disappointment; -- I would first lead you back to some Review of our great
Felicity in him while he lived, and of our delighful Hope concerning him.

He was the first Prince of WALES who died since Prince HENRY the eldest Son of
King JAMES I. in 1612, in the 19 th Year of his Age, above 138 Years ago.

That Prince also was the Love and Hope of the reformed Part of the British
Nations in his Day: and as his untimely Dying was their general Sorrow; it was
followed by Transactions fatal to Multitudes, and vexatious to innumerable
more, both in that and the next Generation. For his Death made Way for his
younger, arbitrary Brother to ascend the Throne by the Name of CHARLES I, in
1625: After which, under him and his two Sons CHARLES II and JAMES II, were
scarce any other than continual Scenes of Tyranny and Cruelty, illegal
Exactions, Quarellings with Parliaments, civil Wars and Blood, Confusions,
Persecutions, Popish Plots and cutting off the Lives of the bravest Patriots of
British Liberty, destroying of Charters, and promoting Popery and Slavery, for
a Course of Sixty-three Years, till 1688: when the Nation could no longer bare
that Popish Branch of the Royal Family: But raising first the Prince and
Princess of ORANGE, and after them the Princess ANN to the Throne; and they
dying without Issue, then the Protestant Branch of the Royal Family in the
illustrious House of HANOVER, in 1714: under whose wise, mild and benign
Government in the Persons of King GEORGE the I, and II, we have enjoyed such
Happiness as the Nation scarce ever knew before: and in the perpetual
Succession in their Royal Line, under GOD, appears in all humane Prospect to
depend, both our Liberties, Religion, Territories, Safety; yea the Liberties of
Europe and North America, and the Protestant Religion in all the Earth.

But one of the happiest Prospects of this Continuance has been the rare and
wondrous Fruitfulness, Vitality and Healthiness of this blessed Family. HIS
PRESENT MAJESTY having two Sons and five Daughters all grown up and alive
together till this great Bereavement: And This his eldest Son being born in
January 1706-7; he in April 1736, to the great Pleasure of the Nation, married
to the Protestant and most amiable Princess AUGUSTA, a Daughter of the eldest
Branch of the Serene House of SAXONY, the first Protector and Incourager of
Luther, and the Reformation in Europe, beginning in 1517: And her noble
ANCESTOR for his brave Adherance to the Reformation and the Liberties of
Germany, unhappily lost his Electorate, which was by the Emperor CHARLES V,
cruelly given to a Cousin of a younger Branch of the Family, whom the ELECTOR
had as a tender Father brought up: and from which younger Branch descends the
present Popish King of Poland, who now possesses that great and Protestant
Electorate; which rather did belong to the very pious and generous Duke the
FATHER, and now belongs in Equity to the noble Duke the BROTHER of This most
virtuous PRINCESS.

However, as in 1620, the Protestant KING and QUEEN of Bohemia, espousing the
same Religion, lost both that Kingdom and the Dukedom of Bavaria; and the
sovereign GOD in 1714 brought their Grandson King GEORGE I to the Throne of the
British Empire: So THAT ELECTOR of Saxony for asserting the same noble Cause,
lost his Electorate in 1546; and the same Providence in 1736, advanced THIS
DESCENDANT of his to a Marriage-Union with THIS ELDEST GRANDSON of the same
BRITISHMONARCH, and in two Years made her the happy Mother of the present Heir
apparent to the same Empire.

From this united and exalted PAIR, thus descended from those suffering
Princes, how exceedingly rejoiced have the KING and the reformed Part of the
NATION been, almost every other Year, to see a new Accession to the Royal
Family; till we beheld even Five Princes and three Princesses derived from
them, all with their Parents alive together, as so many multiplied Tokens of
the divine Favor, and so many growing Securities of every Thing dear to us and
our Successors, both as Men and Christians!

Was there ever a British SOVEREIGN so happy as to see such a Number of his
illustrious Children and Grandchildren round his Throne, the Delight and
Satisfaction of his People, and continually receiving their joyous
Congratulations? And was the NATION ever so happy in seeing so many increasing
Pledges of their continued Felicity?

And for THIS his eldest Son the late Heir apparent, in particular.

Being born at Hanover on January 20. 1706-7, he was brought up there for the
first seven Years and half, of his Life, and received his earliest Rudiments of
Knowledge, Virtue and Wisdom under the Care of that most accomplished Princess
HIS MOTHER: when upon the Accession of King GEORGE I, to the Throne, she soon
after her Princely CONSORT came over to England. And this young Prince being
there continued during his Grandfather's Reign; his Education was happily
carried on under British Instructors, agreeable to his high Birth and Priority
of Descent and Prospects, in the best Maxims of private and public Virtue and
Polity, in the politer Accomplishments and Sciences, and in the Knowledge of
the British History, Genius, Constitution and Liberties, which entirely suited
his benevolent Heart and Temper.

On January 10. 1717-18, King GEORGE I, made him Duke of Gloucester; on April
30. 1718, Knight of the Garter; and on July 15. 1726, Duke of Edinburgh. But
HIS FATHER ascending the Throne in June 1728, when the PRINCE was in the 22d
Year of his Age, and sending for him, he on December 3, arrived in England, to
the Joy of all the Lovers of the Protestant Succession. On December 18, He was
by His MAJESTY'S Command introduced into the Privy Council; on January 9, made
PRINCE of Wales, received his Summons to Parliament the next Day: And how
pleased was the Nation to see his easy Air of Goodness, which seemed to be
natural, and appeared to be genuine by the constant Tenor of his following
Behavior and Actions.

How sweet and candid his Disposition? How tender and compassionate his Heart?
How humane, how charitable, how generous? In the midst of all his Exaltations,
how unelated, unaffected, condescending? How courteous, affable, engaging to all
about him? How fond of civil and religious Liberty? How averse to all Kinds of
Persecution and Oppression? And how discreet in his Conduct* so as to avoid the
Displeasure of every Party; but rather more and more attract them to him.

When he came to be married, how affectionate and faithful to his Princely
CONSORT? How exemplary in his well-ordered Family? How careful of the Education
of his hopeful Children? and how concerned to accomplish them for the public
Service?

How sollicitous he grew for the Safety, Welfare and Glory of the British
Nations in their wide Dispersions, even to the most distant Colonies? How
improved in the Knowledge of their State and Histories? How inquisitive to
learn yet more of the Circumstances of those various and vast Dominions he had
a natural Prospect to head and govern? What a great Encourager of their
Manufacture, Fishery, Trade, Virtue, Learning, Ingenuity, Arts and Sciences?
How abounding in beneficent Actions? And how increasing in their Affection
every Day, and in his Pleasure in seeing their Discoveries of it?

His Esteem for the Marine appeared in his being at the Head of the
Commissioners for building Greenwich-Hospital: His Concern for employing the
Poor and promoting Trade -- in his being at the Head of the North-British
Fishery: He recommended the Arts and Sciences in being a Fellow of the Royal
Society: And as the University of Dublin greatly honored themselves in choosing
Him their Chancellor, He highly honored Them and Learning in accepting the
Office; and I suppose was the only PRINCE of Wales that was ever at the Head of
a University, -- the highest Honor such a Body can well receive.

Among the other Dispersions of the British Empire, how mindful was he even of
our own Country? What a Value has he expressed for us, especially for our
heroic and successful Enterprise a Cape-Breton? Whereby he saw we exceedingly
served our KING and NATION, and even EUROPE and AMERICA: How inquisitive to
know more of us? How pleased to hear of our Attempts to christianize the
Houssatonick and Mohawk Indians? and how concerned to promote the same? In the
midst of Multitudes of Demands about him, how ready to offer Forty Pounds
Sterling a Year out of his own Revenue for these distant Purposes?

One would be apt to think that those vast Interests of the Kingdoms and People
near and about him, which must greatly employ his Mind and call for every Grain
of Munificence, besides the Support of his numerous Family, would have left him
no Room to take Notice of an Affair so remote and small in Comparison, and
nothing to his Political Advantage: But this therefore I conceive to be a very
shining Instance of his enlarged Heart and pure Generosity, yea of sublime
Christianity.

In short, in the affecting Consideration of our most gracious KING's declining
Age and our Danger of losing Him, we had the supporting View of THIS his eldest
Son to succeed him; arrived to the 45 th Year of Life, of so many suitable and
proved Excellencies, and in full Maturity of Observation, Knowledge, Judgment,
Ability to sway the Scepter and continue our Happiness* And as he every Year
improved in every amiable Talent; he gave continual Instances of his generous
Love and Concern for the Public, grew in the Esteem of the Nation, and raised
our Hopes yet higher and higher of Blessings in Him.

But now alas! The sovereign GOD has changed the pleasing Scene, and
surprizingly destroyed this great and joyful Hope of the Nation!

By the accidental Blow of a Ball on his Side, as is supposed, about two Years
since, some tender Vessels were pressed and bruised, some Fluids obstructed in
their Circulations, and thence ferment to a Putrefaction: -- The Vessels relax,
enlarge, and the Putrefaction grows with Pain till they suddenly burst, and he
fails back and dies! And thus the supreme GOD puts a grievous End to this
important Life and our most raised Hope at once together! THOU prevailest
against him, and He passes; THOU changest his Countenance and sendest Him away!

And O! the dismal Change and Horror of that Hour and Night in the surprised
Family! See how the tender CONSORT, who, though pregnant, yet it is said had sat
up seven Nights with him, now dissolves in Grief! -- For GOD has taken from her
at once, her Strength, the Joy of her Glory, and the Desire of her Eyes, as
himself describes it; and with painful Sobs she thinks -- O my dear PRINCE is
gone! mine Eyes shall see Good no more! the Eye of him that has seen me shall
see me no more! I shall see his Smiles no more! I shall hear his Voice no more!
GOD has stripped me of my Glory, and taken the Crown from my Head! he has
destroyed me on every Side, and I am gone! and my Hope has he removed for
ever! -- The doleful Noise -- ' The Prince is dead' -- goes through the House! --
The new Orphan Children throng about their lifeless Father, and distressed
Mother, and their Sight and Cries augment her Anguish! Her Grief is heavier
than the Sand of the Sea, -- her Words are swallowed up, -- her Heart convulsed
with Pangs unutterable, -- and none but GOD can help Her! --

The shocking Rumor runs to the Royal Ear and Family, through the Streets, the
City, the Kingdom; and every tender Heart is struck with Awe, Surprise and
Sorrow! It quickly roams over Seas and Oceans to every Region of the British
Empire: And all its Nations and Tribes conspire to sympathize with the Royal
Mourners, as to bewail their own vast and universal Loss, and the utter Ruin of
their great and raised Expectations!

To loose such a Prince as This -- such a Son, such a Husband, such a Father,
such a Brother, such an Heir apparent to such vast Dominions; of such an Age,
of such endearing Qualities, and in such a Time as This -- the Loss is
boundless, most awful, and utterly irreparable to the passing Generation!

But O! it is the righteous GOD who has thus destroyed our Hope! and therein he
shows his threatening Frown on these most ungrateful Kingdoms.

For when we consider further, this critical Conjuncture; the advancing Age of
our most gracious SOVEREIGN; the Youth of the present HEIR apparent, though of
the most blooming Hopes, but about 13 Years, and his great Danger from
mischievous Flatterers, and other selfish, vain, impious, immoral Persons
crowding about him, trying to get into his Favor and to lead him astray; the
Multitude, the Policy, the Activity, the growing Power of our foreign Enemies,
and the siding of the KING of Prussia with them; the domestic Foes to the
Protestant Succession; the melancholy Histories of diverse of our minor Kings;
the Difficulty of settling a satisfying and firmly united Regency, in Case HIS
present MAJESTY should soon unhappily leave us; As it was the earnest Desire of
all I conversed with on this Affair, that the KING and PARLIAMENT would appoint
a Provisional single REGENT in the Person of her Royal Highness the PRINCESS
Dowager, in whom the Nation could confide and be satisfied; so at the Printing
of This, we have the Joy to hear our Wishes answered.
the Selfishness, the Passions, the Deceit and Fickleness of Men; with the
provoking Ingratitude of these sinful Nations for many wonderful Deliverances,
and great and abundant Blessings; their horrible Corruptions, their daring
Impieties, their aggravated Guilt; the shining Day of Liberty and Grace we have
long abused, the HOLY SPIRIT awfully withdrawn, and HIMSELF with the MEDIATOR
ridiculed; yea the Coldness and Formality of the Religious among them in their
Prayers for Mercy, and GOD in this tremendous Stroke against us; with his
fearful Dealings toward his People of other Nations, both Israelites and
Christians, and solemn Admonitions in his sacred Oracles; -- It is enough to
make us tremble, least our Measure of Iniquity be also quickly full, and we
ripening apace for dreadful Devastations, except we soon repent!

Shall I not visit for these Things? said the LORD to the only People then on
the Earth who knew Him; Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as This?
Jer. v. and ix: And, YOU only have I known of all the Families of the Earth
therefore I will punish YOU for all your Iniquities! Amos iii. Yea for a
Warning to us he did so, in the most terrible Manner that was ever seen or
heard of! And what is become of the natural Race of their Gentry, Nobility,
Princes and Kings? Those of them not extinct, are Vagabonds over the Face of
the Earth, and trampled upon by almost every Nation. Yea but 1200 Years ago,
there was a magnificent Christian Empire of the greatest Extent and Power of
any at that Time on the Earth; comprizing the most civilized Part of Asia,
Africa and Europe: Whose EMPERORS resided at Constantinople near the Center,
having a Number of noble Families in every Province: Yet their degenerate Race
are now the Footstools of the Turks and Moors, and treated as the Brutes they
ride on.

But in our great Bereavement, we see, in the most gloomy Colors, the utter
Uncertainty of all earthly Friends, Enjoyments, Hopes and Glories: that there
is no Dependence on their continuing with us, or on our continuing here: But
that in the Favor of GOD all* sufficient, supreme, unchangeable, eternal, and
in Him alone is our secure Dependence.

Here we also see the infinite Evil and Mischievousness of Sin, and GOD's awful
Progress in his destroying Judgments! -- Depredations in our West India Trade
-- a most expensive War -- the Loss of great Numbers of brave Men -- the Nation
involved in the heaviest Debts -- a vexatious Rebellion -- a wasting Plague
among the Cattle -- unusual Earthquakes in the Metropolis and other Parts of
the Kingdom -- and now in the Train -- the Hearse of THIS beloved and most
hopeful of Princes! -- and what is next to follow? --

O! Here we see the Fearfulness of the Displeasure of GOD -- the exceeding
Greatness of our impending Danger -- the strongest Reasons for our justifying
Him, and for condemning and humbling ourselves before Him -- the vast
Importance of being speedily reconciled to Him through the Death and Mediation of
CHRIST -- and the urgent Necessity of our immediate repenting as in Dust and
Ashes, of embracing that only Reconciler of Sinners to GOD, of returning to
Him, and crying for Mercy.

And if This should be the general Issue of this chastizing Blow; it would be a
hopeful Token of Mercy to follow: But if we continue impenitent and refuse to
return; we shall have Reason to fear a Course of growing Judgments to our
general and amazing Ruin. For such awakening Admonitions He gives even to every
Nation in Jer. xviii. 6* -- 17.

Repentance then is the most momentous, immediate national Duty to that
ADORABLE BEING who universally corrects us; -- the Duty of every one of every
Order from the highest to the lowest throughout these wide Dominions. In the
Practice of This we may expect Salvations: And for This it therefore highly
behooves us in the most serious and earnest Manner, to stir up ourselves both to
Pray and Labor.

To CONCLUDE.

With bleeding Hearts for our afflicted KING and his bereaved ISSUE, for the
widowed PRINCESS and her orphan CHILDREN, yea for the NATION's unspeakable Loss
as well as our own, Let us deeply mourn! Let us go on to mourn for all our Sins
against the glorious GOD, and for this awful Sign of his high Displeasure! Let
us heartily relinquish every Thing offensive to him, embrace his SON our
Mediator; return to our DIVINE CORRECTOR, and then implore and hope for Mercy.

Let us pray more earnestly than ever, that in this increased Necessity, HIS
MAJESTY'S most precious LIFE, the most important LIFE at this Day in all the
Earth, with his Health and Abilities, may be lengthened out for many Years;
that his Councils may be always wisely guided and greatly prospered; and that
He may have the Joy to see his now Royal HEIR advanced to Maturity of Age and
Wisdom, possessed of the Love of the Nation, and fully accomplished to sway the
Scepter after Him.

Let us most tenderly compassionate, and earnestly pray for the Support of the
PRINCESS, under the most heavy Loss of her chief earthly Joy and Prospects:
that She may have the divine Help and Blessing in nurturing the Royal Offspring
under her happy Care: and that the infinite GOD may be inexpressibly more to
Her than even her indearing PRINCE, or the highest Title, brightest Crown, or
greatest Empire on Earth.

Let us earnestly pray for the young HEIR APPARENT, on whom the Eyes of all the
Nations round are fixed; that He may be safely preserved from Enemies,
designing Flaterers, and every Vice and hurtful Principle; may have the wisest
and most faithful Instructors and Advisers; be most carefully educated for the
regal Office; and grow in suitable Knowledge, Wisdom, Grace, Benevolence and
every other Accomplishment to govern these vast Dominions; as also in Favor
with GOD and Man; be adorned and beloved as his exemplary FATHER, and live to
reign over and bless them.

Let us earnestly pray that GOD Himself may be a tender Father to the Rest of
the PRINCELY ORPHANS: and that this signal Instance of Death in the PRIME
BRANCH of the Royal Family, may be duly impressed on his illustrious BRETHREN
and SISTERS by Blood and Marriage; to give them a livelier View of the utter
Uncertainty and transient Nature of terrestrial Life and Glory; that though they
are as Gods on Earth, they must die like the rest of Men, and fall like THIS
one of the Princes; and that their highest Ambition may aspire to glorify the
SUPREME RULER of Heaven and Earth, while here, and attain eternal Life and
Crowns in the immensely vaster and more glorious World above, hereafter.

Let us earnestly pray, that the PARLIAMENT, the Nobles, the Gentry and People
throughout these Nations* may be duly affected with this dismal Stroke of
Heaven; may universally turn to him who smites them; may be continually
watchful against all Devices of Enemies, firmly unite to comfort and support
the KING, and do their utmost to maintain the Throne in his blessed Line as
long as the Sun endures.

Lastly, Let us supremely look and submit to HIM and trust in HIM, who is the
PRINCE of the KINGS of the Earth, LORD of Lords and KING of Kings: -- whose
Dominion is universal, and eternal, and forever ordered in the most consummate
Manner: -- who directs every Change in the Universe for the harmonious Glory of
the divine Perfections, and for the increasing and perpetual Happiness of all
his cordial People: -- who is gone forth among the Nations conquering and to
conquer; not to tyranize over them, but to free them from all their Enemies,
Sins and Troubles, to bring them into the glorious Liberties of the Sons of
GOD, and to give them perfect, endless Happiness: -- who will go on conquering,
till he brings them all to be his joyful Subjects; and then he will make them
Kings and Priests to GOD, and they shall reign first on Earth, and then in
Heaven; -- and There in Transports of grateful Joy cast down their Crowns
before Him, and worship HIM, who died for them and rose to Life, and lives for
ever and ever.

FINIS.
CORRIGENDA.
Page 9, Line 21. for knowing -- read Knowledge

Page 23. Line 1, 2, 3, -- read -- in June 1727, when the PRINCE was in the
21st Year of his Age, and the next Year sending for Him* He on December 3,
1728, arrived


