THE True State of the QUESTION CONCERNING The QUALIFICATIONS Necessary to
lawful Communion in the Christian Sacraments.

Being an Answer to the Reverend Mr. JONATHAN EDWARDS his Book Entitled, An
humble INQUIRY into the Rules of the Word of GOD, concerning the QUALIFICATIONS
Requisite to a complete Standing and full Communion in the VISIBLE CHRISTIAN
CHURCH.

By Solomon Williams, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Lebanon.

Falsitas dicitur Error, quando serio sed perp^^am pro vero habetur: Dicitur
Fictio, seu Res ficta quando est Rationis Lusus, data opera Factus. -- Langius.
BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. 1751.

PREFACE
I Conclude the Reader is sensible that the Controversy concerning the
Qualifications necessary to the lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper, was many
Years ago debated between-those two great pious, and excellent Men, Dr. MATHER,
and Mr. STODDARD; who have said the Substance of all that I have read on the
Subject. So that I apprehended the reviving that Dispute was needless, and that
it would be attended with unhappy Consequences, especially at a Time so
divided, and distracted, as the present State of the Country is: when Arminian,
Independent, Antinomian Errors, if not worse, are spreading, and propagated
with so much Diligence, and Zeal. And if any Entreaties, or Interest of mine
could have prevailed; it would not have been done. But my good Kinsman, and
Brother Edwards (whom I sincerely love and honor) was so fixed in his Opinion
of the Necessity of it, that he could not be persuaded to forbear the
Publication of his Book upon this Controversy.

In my younger Years, I had examined the Controversy, with such Helps as I
could get, and as much Impartiality as I was capable of; and as my Years,
Study, Observation and Experience have increased, I have had more and more
Satisfaction of the Mind of God in it. Yet, as it is never too late to learn,
while Life lasts; upon the Publication of Mr. Edwards's Book, I sat my self
with all the Helps, and Advantages I could come at; and especially with
diligent Searching of the holy Scriptures, and Application to the Father of
Lights, thoro'ly to re-examine it; endeavoring to divest my Mind of all
Prejudice and Pre-possession. And upon the most impartial Inquiry, am fully
established in the Doctrine Mr. Stoddard maintained with Respect to the
Qualifications necessary to the lawful attending the Lord's Supper.

It Is easy to observe, that what fill the Minds of many People with Prejudice
against that Doctrine, is the Use that is made in a popular Way of Mr.
Stoddard's Ass^^^ion, ^^at Persons may and ought to attend on the Lord's
Supper, though they know themselves to be in a natural or unconverted State, to
which many frightful Ideas are fixed in popular Declamations, to make the
Doctrine appear absurd, and inconsistent. -- For since all unsanctified Men are
destitute of a gracious Love of God, and therefore represented as Enemies to
him, Haters of him. Lovers of Sin, Servants of Satan, and such like: the same
general Characters which are given to the vilest of Men: it is therefore
represented that this Doctrine asserts the Lawfulness of Men's attending the
Lord's Supper, when they know or feel their Hearts full of Enmity against God
and Christ, when they know they design to live in Sin and Unbelief, and crucify
the Son of God afresh, and put him to open Shame. A Thing which Mr. Stoddard
abhorred, and his Adherents abhor as much as their Opposers. In the same Book,
the Doctrine of instituted Churches, Mr. Stoddard says: Such Professors of the
Christian Faith as are of blameless Conversation, are visible Saints. A
Profession of the Faith, joined with a good Conversation, are the Marks that we
are directed in the Scripture to judge of Men's visible Saintship by: and these
Properties are the proper Fruits of Saintship; and therefore constitute Men
visible Saints: such a Profession as being sincere (i. e. graciously sincere)
makes a Man a real Saint, being morally sincere makes a Man a visible Saint;
viz. a Profession of the Truth, and a good Conversation. Now is it possible,
that any Man can be morally sincere, when he knows himself at the same Time to
be unconverted, by feeling in his Heart a reigning Enmity against God? and
knowing that he designs willingly to go on in a Course of Sin, and to live in
all Disobedience to the Laws of Christ, and the like? When he knows that he has
no Desire to be delivered from Sin, and keep Covenant with God? I believe there
is not a Man of Mr. Edwards's Opposers, who has such a Notion of moral
Sincerity, or who would not pronounce such a Man a Liar, or horrible
Prevaricator. I am well satisfied Mr. Stoddard would have done so; for I have
diverse Times eard him say to this Effect; that his Brother Mather differed from
him rather in Words than Reality; for his Brother Mather would admit the same
Persons to Communion that he would. But he did it, though he looked upon them
unconverted, and judging of them as a Casuist, did not admit them under a
Notion of their being converted; but his Brother Mather did it hoping they were
converted, or there was a good Work begun in them. In like Manner I suppose are
many of the Expressions of the Fathers of this Country; of the Reformation; and
Calvinistical Divines made use of, against this Doctrine. We can freely go into
the Expressions which many such Divines have used in their popular Discourses,
pressing upon Communicants the Necessity of Faith, Repentance, and holy.
Affections and Desires in their communicating. And this Necessity may be
pressed at least with equal Advantage upon Mr. Stoddard's Scheme, as that of
his Opposers: For this is what such Persons are bound to by Covenant; and
without which we as well as they hold they will never be accepted with God:
That a Man must be resolved for Christ, come to a Point, beengaged for Heaven;
for which the Reverend and Learned Author of the Appendix refers us to Dr.
Watts, Dr. Doddridge, Mr. Henry, and others; we readily join in them, and as
that worthy Gentleman observes, such Things serve clearly to determine what is
the general Sense of Protestant Churches, and Divines, but which I conceive do
not really contradict Mr. Stoddard's favorite Hypathesis; nor are his
Positions and Concessions inconsistent with one another. But I conceive the
Inconsistency is on the other Side the Question. If no Man may find these
serious Designs, Desires, and Purposes in his Heart, without sanctifying Grace;
and if he can no way be satisfied that he is unsanctified, although he have such
moral Sincerity, and does not knowingly and willingly Lie in the Profession of
these Things; then I own Mr. Stoddard's Doctrine is inconsistent with his
Concessions; but if the contrary be true, then the Inconsistency must fall some
where else.

If some of the public Formulas of Pretestant Churches are to be taken in the
Sense of Mr. Edwards's Principles, let their ordinary Practice and Writings be
examined, and they will be found to contradict them.

The first Reformers, as Mr. Timson observes, commanded a general Observance of
the Lord's Supper three Times a Year, under Punishment to be inflicted for
unnecessary Neglect. The general Practice of reformed Churches, whatever is
said about guarding against ungodly Men, I am persuaded upon the closest
Examination, will appear freely to admit to Communion all that seriously
profess they are in Earnest concerned to obtain all the Benefits of the
Redemption of Christ, and resolved by his Help to seek Salvation only in the
Way of the Gospel, whose outward Carriage does not contradict their Profession.

In what Sense the Church of Scotland understands and Practices upon the
Passage in the Westminster Confession referred to in the Appendix, I think may
be clearly explained by other Expressions in that Confession; and if the
Authority of any one Writer of that Church is of Weight in explaining their
Sense, perhaps that of the famous Mr. William Guthrie will go as far as most,
who has these Words: The Lord has in all Ages covenanted to be the reconciled
God of all these, who by their Submission to his Ordinances, did profess their
Satisfaction with this Device, and oblige themselves to acquiesce in the same,
and to seek Salvation by Jesus Christ, as God does offer him in the Gospel; so
all the People of Israel are called the Lord's People, and are said to avouch
him to be their God, and he does avouch them to be his People, Exodus 19. 5. 8.
Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. Yea, the Lord does also engage himself to be the God of the
Seed and Children of those who do so subject themselves to his Ordinances. The
Covenant is said to be made between God and all the People, Young and Old,
present and not present that Day, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, -- 15. And all are
appointed to come under same Seal of that Covenant as was enjoined to Abraham,
Genesis 17. 10. Not only was it so in the old Testament, but it is so in the new
Testament also: The Lord makes offer of himself to be our God in Christ Jesus;
and the People professing their Satisfaction in that Offer, and in Testimony
thereof, subjecting themselves unto the Ordinances, they are reckoned a
covenanted People, and are joined unto his Church in Thousands receiving a Seal
of the Covenant, without any further particular previous Trial, Act. 2. 38, 41.

A great many reformed Divines certainly are on Mr. Stoddard's Side of the
Question as to visible Saintship, and Covenant Relation, besides those who are
named in the ensuing Debate; as Zanchius, Lanuntius, Ravanellus, Salmero, Mr.
Ball, and others quoted by Mr. Blake.

If it be the general Practice of reformed Churches to admit such Persons who
in the Sense of these Divines are visible Saints; and if it be safe; if it be
agreeable to Calvinistick Principles; to teach all such People to believe that
they are sanctified, and are admitted by the Church under no other Notion than
the Church has made a positive Judgment that they are really sanctified; then I
am to seek what the Principles of Calvinistick Divines are. And if they do mean
so, the learned Author of the Appendix doubtless knows it is not difficult to
produce Hundreds of Expressions from their Writings in Contradiction to
themselves, if a Man would go about such an invidious Task. I may be mistaken,
but I own at present I do not believe there is a Protestant Reformed Church in
the World, except the Anabaptists, and Independents, who Receive and Practice
on Mr. Edwards's Principles. -- But be that as it will; to the Law, and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
Light in them.

I have no Controversy with my Brother Edwards, or any other godly Man, about
the absolute Necessity of the Faith which is of the Operation of God; unfeigned
Repentance; the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost;
without which no Man will be saved, whether he partakes of the Lord's Supper,
or not: And whosoever partakes of the Lord's Supper; and yet lives and dies
without Sanctification, will be judged as a Covenant-breaker, and meet an
aggravated Condemnation.

Since Mr. Edwards has thought best to thrust this Controversy again into the
World, I have been persuaded that it is a Duty to Christ, and a Service due to
his Churches, to bring the Matter to a fair Debate, or at least to stir up
others more capable of it, to a thorough Examination, and more full Vindication
of the Truth: And if I am mistaken, I shall be thankful to any for better
Information.

I ask the Reader's Candor and Excuse for the tedious Length of this Piece: for
which I have no other Excuse to make, than that I would not willingly pass over
any Thing which it might be thought Mr. Edwards laid Weight upon, or looked on
of Importance in the Controversy.

Every pious Reader will join with me in servent Prayers, that God would
vindicate his own Truth, and Cause, and keep the Church in a strict (...) to
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and a diligent conscientious Use of its Ordinances,
and faithful Exercise of its Discipline; which are the outward and ordinary
Means of Men's Salvation: That he would make it flourish more and more in true
Piety and Holiness; and fill the Earth with the Knowledge of the Lord.

PART I.
The true State of the QUESTION etc.
MR. Edwards has stated his Question in these Words, Page 1. Whether, according
to the Rules of CHRIST, any ought to be admitted to the Communion and
Privileges of Members of the visible Church of CHRIST in complete Standing,
but such as are in Profession, and in the Eye of the Church's Christian
Judgment, godly or gracious Persons?

I own that every Man may reasonably claim the Privilege of stating his own
Question, and propound what he intends to debate in his own Terms. But then, I
think it is just and equitable, when a Man intends to refute another Man's
Question, he should keep strictly to the Terms of that; and not take upon him
to choose other Words which are more ambiguous, and give him Scope to amuse his
Readers with Things foreign to that other Question which he undertakes to
confute, under the Terms of his own. -- Now, I think Mr. Edwards has
sufficiently shown, that this is in Fact the Case with him in managing the
Controversy he has undertaken. -- He declares in the Beginning of his Preface,
that Mr. Stoddard, his venerable Predecessor etc. Publicly and strenuously
appeared in Opposition to the Doctrine here maintained. He says, Page 3. He has
formerly been of his Opinion, though never without some Difficulties in his View,
which he could not solve. And again, Page 4. It Is far from a pleasing
Circumstance of this Publication, that it is against what my honored
Grandfather strenuously maintained both from the Pulpit and the Press. And in
his Explanation of his Question, Page 4. A Profession of a Belief of a future
State etc. is all relating to these Things, that is requisite to give a Man a
Right before the Church; but it is the real Existence of these Things that is
what lays a proper and good Foundation for his making this Profession, and so
demanding these Privileges. -- And after a great many more Words; toward the
Bottom of the same Page are these, viz. In the same Manner, and no otherwise, I
suppose that Christian Grace it self is a Qualification requisite in order to a
proper solid Ground of a Right in a Person to come to the Christian Sacraments.
By all which it appears, that his Design is to confute what Mr. Stoddard did so
strenuously maintain.

Now the Question which Mr. Stoddard did so strenuously maintain, is in these
Words, in his Appeal to the Learned, Page 2. That sanctifying Grace is not
necessary to the lawful attending the Lord's Supper. -- In the same Page Mr.
Stoddard blames Dr. Mather for adding this Consequence, as if it was held by
him -- Whether the Church may admit to their holy Communion in special
Ordinances, such as are not in the Judgment of a rational Charity true
Believers. -- Upon which, Mr. Stoddard has these Words: But I have no
Controversy with him upon that Account. My Business was to answer a Case of
Conscience, and direct those that might have Scruples about Participation of
the Lord's Supper, because they had not a Work of saving Conversion; not at all
to direct the Churches to admit any that were not to a rational Charity true
Believers; so that he blots a great deal of Paper to no Purpose, beats the Air,
and fights against a Shadow of his own making. To what other Purpose has Mr.
Edwards changed the Question, nearly into the same Shape in which Mr. Stoddard
never controverted it, in order to confute what he did maintain? Can it serve
the Cause of Truth to state a Question in such Terms as Mr. Stoddard expressly
disclaims, to blot all the Paper Mr. Edwards has done to explain, and then to
confute it, as Mr. Stoddard's Principle? Whatever Ends it may serve, surely it
is not fair Treatment of Mr. Stoddard, nor of the grand Point in Question;
which had it been strictly observed, would have needed no Explication, and I
believe might have been brought to a fair and satisfactory Decision with fewer
Words.

This Reverend Author uses a great many Words in the explaining his Question,
to show us that a main Thing intended in it is, whether any that are adult
Persons, but such as are in Profession and Appearance endowed with Christian
Grace or Piety, ought to be admitted to the Christian Sacraments; particularly
to the Lord's Supper: i. e. as I understand it, whether the Church ought to
admit them. Which was no main Thing, nor any Thing at all in Mr. Stoddard's
Question, nor ever intended or maintained by him: and which he denies to be a
Consequence from his Principles. -- I confess, I know of no Members of the
Church, unless Persons under Censure, or scandalously ignorant, or immoral, but
what the Church ought to admit to Communion and Privileges of Members in
complete Standing; if they are capable of receiving and enjoying them, and
desire to do so.

The Rev. Author notes, that it was requisite that a Distinction of Members
having a standing in the Church, and a complete Standing, should be made, to
avoid a lengthning out his Discourse exceedingly with needless Questions and
Debates concerning the State of baptized Infants; which he says, is needless to
his present Purpose. -- I am so far of his Opinion, that that Debate is
needless to the Purpose of his Book, because I imagine the State of baptized
Infants affords an Argument which utterly overthrows all that is to the Purpose
in his Argument. If it be not so, I should be glad to see such a Dissertation
as he speaks of, to clear up that Matter, and state the Difference between
Members in regular Standing, and Members in complete Standing in the visible
Church. It appears to me (to use Mr. Edwards's Similitude) if any was about to
describe that Kind of Birds called Doves; he must own when he had done, that a
young Dove is as complete a Dove as an old one, though it be not so large, nor
has so many Feathers. So I am apt to conceive an Infant who is a Member of a
Family, is as complete a Member of that Family, and has as good a Right to all
the Privileges of it that he is capable to enjoy, as a Child who is grown up,
though he be not so big. -- There are several Things which the Rev. Author says
to explain his Question; which I shall not remark upon now, because they are
brought in afterward under the Arguments, and may be taken Notice of there,
and save Repetitions.

Page 8. Mr. Edwards says, He comes to observe some Things which may tend to
evince the Truth of this Position, that none ought to be admitted to the
Communion and Privileges of Members of the visible Church of Christ in
complete Standing, but such as are in Profession, and in the Eye of the
Church's Christian Judgment godly or gracious Pesons.

He begins with observing, That it is evident from the Word of God, and granted
on all Hands, that none ought to be admitted as Members of the visible Church
of Christ, but visible Saints, and professing Saints, or visible and professing
Christians. -- He particularly notes in the 9th Page, that Mr. Stoddard allows
it in diverse Places in his Appeal, and even through the Treatise: And he thinks,
that if any Allowance is made, or the Words of it used with any Propriety of
Speech, or in any Agreement with Scripture Representations, the whole of that
which he has laid down is either implied, or will certainly follow. Page 9. and
11. he says, How Mr. Stoddard reconciled these Passages with the rest of his
Treatise, he must confess himself at a Loss.

If I can comprehend the Sense and Force of the Argument which is here offered
to prove what Mr. Edwards aims at, it wholly lies in this Compass: A visible
Saint is one that to the View, Appearance, and Judgment of the Church is a real
Saint. And since it is granted, that none but visible Saints are to be admitted
by the Church; therefore none are to be admitted, but such as appear to the
View and Judgment of the Church to be real Saints. -- Mr. Edwards has taken
much Pains by his Explication of the Words Visibility, and visible Saints, to
show that this Concession is inconsistent with Mr. Stoddard's Argument and
Scripture Representations, and a giving up the Point: And makes, and answers
diverse Objections, which we neither make, nor concern our selves about an
Answer to. And particularly Page 10, he says, There is one Way taken by some to
evade these Things, viz. Although it be true, that the Scriptures represent the
Members of the visible Church of Christ as Professors of Godliness etc. yet
this is not with any Reference to saving Holiness, but to quite another Sort of
Saintship, viz. moral Sincerity; and that is the real Saintship, Discipleship,
and Godliness, which is professed, and visible in them; with Regard to which,
as having the Appearance of it to the Eye of Reason, they have the Name of
Saints, Disciples etc. in Scripture. This, he says, is a mere Evasion, though the
only one he ever saw or heard of; and he thinks the only one possible. -- And
if this Evasion sails, all sails, and the whole Matter in Debate must be given
up. -- Now I freely give up all this Evasion. I don't remember, that ever I
heard of it, or that any Body though it of it, before I saw it in Mr. Edwards's
Book: So as I have no Concern with it, I yield Mr. Edwards all the Triumph of
his Argument for the next six Pages; in which he fights hard to beat down this
poor Man of Straw.

Since it is allowed on all Hands that the Church ought to admit none to their
holy Communion in special Ordinances, or the outward Privileges of the
Covenant of Grace, but visible Saints, and this Visibility must be such as to a
Judgment of rational Charity, makes them appear as real Saints: I conceive
therefore, that the whole Argument, and indeed the whole Controversy turns upon
this single Point, viz. What is that Evidence which by divine Appointment, the
Church is to have of the Saintship of those who are admitted to the outward
Privileges of the Covenant of Grace?

Mr. Edwards seems to suppose this must be the highest Evidence a Man can give
of Sincerity; and I apprehend to be the lowest Evidence the Nature of the Thing
will admit. And the Scripture has determined the Matter thus, that the open
Profession and Declaration of a Person's believing in Christ, or believing that
the Gospel is indeed the Revelation of God, with a true understanding of the
essential Doctrines of it, and of an hearty Consent to the Terms of the
Covenant of Grace, and Engagement on his Part to fulfill it by that Help of God
which is offered in it; when nothing appears in his Life and Conversation to
contradict this Profession, is the sole and entire Ground of that public
Judgment which the Church is to make of the real Saintship of Professors. -- It
matters not whether this be done in the Words which the Israelites used in
their entering into Covenant (...) God, or those which we find used by divine
Direction by any particular Person in the old Testament or the new; or the
visible Signs of this Thing appointed in the Word of God; or all put together
that we find any Example of in the Bible. -- This Mr. Edwards, in the close of
his Explication of his Question, and elsewhere, seems to allow at (...) he is
not determined is not sufficient, provided the Persons who use the Words are
taught to use them, and others to understand them in their proper meaning. i.
e. as he explains himself Page 5. provided they use them as Words giving an
Account of their Experience of the sanctifying Work of God's Spirit on their
Hearts: for upon his Discourse of the Ground of the good Opinion of the
Public, he adds, Whatever Suspicions and Fears any particular Person, either
the Minister or some other may entertain from what he has in particular
observed; perhaps from the Manner of his expressing himself in giving an
Account of his Experiences, or an Obscurity in the Order and Method of his
Experiences. And as he further explains himself elsewhere: The proper
Visibility which the Public is to have of a Man's being a Saint, must be on
some Account of his Experience of those Doctrines which teach the Nature of
true saving Religion. -- Therefore I understand Mr. Edwards when he seems to be
satisfied with a Profession and Engagement like to what I have expressed above,
to intend that the Person who makes that Profession and Engagement, do in it
rightly distinguish between moral and gracious Sincerity. As when he says, I
believe that Jesus is the Christ, he must intend, and is to be understood to
mean, that he really believes this in a gracious Manner, from the special,
saving Illumination of the Holy Ghost; and so of all like Words in his
professing and covenanting; and that by giving an Account of his Experiences in
some Words or other, the Church is to receive Satisfaction that that Profession
is in that Sense true, and make a positive Judgment, that the Man is a real
Christian. So that besides all moral and outward Evidence of a Man's Sincerity,
there must be some way contained in the Profession of a Man's Faith and
Engagement to God, a Discrimination of it from all that can be contained in a
Work of common Illumination, provided the Man speaks true; which I call the
highest Evidence of Sincerity. Whereas in the Sense that I understand the like
Profession and Engagement, the Ground of the Church's Judgment, is the
Profession and Engagement itself, not apparently contradicted by the Life and
visible Behavior of the Person making it; the Church taking it in the most
favorable Sense that it can bear; though not obliged by the very Nature and
Meaning of the Words to understand it in the best Sense; which I call the
lowest Evidence of Sincerity. -- And if it can be fairly determined that this
open Profession of Christianity, this Declaration and Engagement, is the sole
entire Evidence which the Church as a Church is to have by divine Appointment
in order to that public Judgment it is to make of the Saintship of Men, in
order to their being obliged in their external Carriage to treat them as
Saints, and admit them to the external Privileges of the Church; then there
the Matter must rest. Some of the Reasons which convince me of it are these.

1. That the Lord Jesus Christ in his public visible Dealings with the Church,
and in all the Administration of external Ordinances, designs to act only as
visible King of the Church, and not as the Searcher of Hearts. -- That he
always does so in Fact, Mr. Edwards has once and again allowed, and therefore I
conclude I need not prove, that he always designs to act in this Manner; and if
this be allowed, I think it is certain, that his Ministers and Churches acting
in his Name in these external Matters, are to act so too. The Judgments they
are to make with Respect to the Characters of Men, or admitting them to the
visible Privileges of his House, are to be founded only on the visible
Profession and Behavior of Men. And if their outward Profession and Behavior
be the Ground of this Judgment, then it is not the inward Experience of the
Heart, or such inward Feelings as are by Men supposed to be the certain,
discriminating Marks of Grace, or the Actings of Grace themselves. For when a
Judgment is founded on them, or positively made of their gracious State
thereby, then Christ ceases to act as visible King of the Church, and acts as
Searcher of Hearts. To say that when Men do profess and relate their
Experiences of a Work of Grace in their Hearts, or declare those Things,
wherein (according to Mr. Edwards Way of speaking) the Essence of true
Godliness, or Christian Piety consists; That this is then made visible in Men's
Words, and so still the Ground of the public Judgment is the visible
Profession and Behavior of Men, seems to be an Equivocation with Words. For
this Visibility is only of their Hearts supposed to be turned inside out; and
judging upon what never can be seen but in their Hearts. It is not a judging
that Men's Profession and Behavior Proceeds from a good Heart, but judging they
have a good Heart from what they suppose they see in the Heart itself; it is a
judging upon the next and immediate Actings of the Heart. When Christ judges so
he don't act as visible King of the Church, but as the Searcher of Hearts; and
so do his Churches too: Not according to the Rule he has given us, Luke 7. 20.
By their Fruits, ye shall know them. Nor according to his own Practice in
trusting to the Profession of his People after the Manner of Men; giving Credit
to their Profession, and Engagement to keep Covenant with him; kindly supposing
the best that can be supposed; that they will be as they seem, Isai. 63. 8.
Surely they are my People, Children that will not lie; so he was their Savior.
Which I think contains a sufficient Answer to Mr. Edwards's Enquiry, Page 11,
12. How those visible Qualifications can be the Ground of a rational Judgment,
that a Person is circumcised in Heart, which nevertheless at the same Time we
are sensible are so far from being any probable Signs of it, that they are more
frequently without it? The Profession of an hearty Belief of the Gospel, and
solemn, hearty Engagement to God, and Consent to the Terms of the Covenant of
Grace etc. contains all that is essential to Religion in it; and if this is the
Fruit of the Love of God, it is true Godliness. This Confession of the Mouth is
the proper Product of that inward Grace; and though it may more frequently be
without it; yet it can be the proper Ground of a rational Judgment of Charity.
For in all Public Judgments among Men it is esteemed rational, just and fit to
judge the most favorably of Men's Actions, that the Nature of the Thing will
admit: It Is a received Rule among Mankind by which they hold themselves bound
in all public Judgments; and it is a Rule respecting all Charters and Grants of
Privileges, that they shall be interpreted in the most extensive and
favorable Sense for the Patentees that the Nature of the Words and Expressions
will bear. And Christ when he acts as visible King of his Church, will
therefore act in such a Manner, taking visible Appearances in the most
favorable Sense and Construction for those for whom he makes that Judgment;
which is implied in the Way, Nature, and Notion of his acting as visible King
or the Church, and not as Searcher of Hearts; and is I think a fair
Determination that he will have his Churches act in like Manner in their
public Judgments, and with Respect to the visible Privileges of his House.

2. Christ has in Fact always acted thus in his outward Dispensations toward
his Church, and Administration of Ordinances, in all Ages, under the old
Testament and the New. That God took all Israel into Covenant, is a Fact which
Mr. Edwards will not deny. On what Terms he did it, is declared Deuteronomy. 20. 17,
18. Thou (...) Lord (...) Day (...) God, and to walk in his Ways, and to keep
his (...), and his Commandments, and his Judgments, and (...) his Voice; and
the Lord has avouched thee this Day (...) peculiar People as he has promised
thee, and that (...) should keep at his Commandments. Now this According,
this Engaging, this Covenanting, was such a Thing as was compatable with an
unregenerate State; yet it was such a Profession as Christ, as visible King of
the Church judged they made with all their Hearts. No doubt these who were
godly did it with a gracious and holy Sincerity, and from supreme Love to God:
others did it with no more than such a Sincerity, and Resolution as we call
moral; and under a deep Conviction of the Duty, Reasonableness, and Advantages
of it; and with all the Heart and Power they had. However, the visible
Appearance was the same, and the judgment which the King of the visible Church
as such made of them was the same; the outward Privileges and Ordinances they
were admitted to were exactly the same. Deuteronomy. 33. 3. A^ his Saints are in
(...). Psalm. 149, 1. His Praise is in the Congregation of the Saints. They were
alike called the People of God. A (...) Generation, a royal (...), an (...)
peculiar People. Here was no Declaration of their Experiences; no other
Evidence of their Saintship but their Profession, and declared Consentto the
Terms of the Covenants although their after Carriage proved there were great
Multitudes of them unregenerate Men, and it is not unlikely the greater Part of
them by far. Now it is certain, in this Affair the King of the visible Church,
in the Judgment he as such made concerning them, went upon no other Ground than
their open Declaration of their sincere Consent to the Terms of the Covenant,
and their Engagement to fulfill it; without any Discrimination by which it might
be determined that the Consent of some was a gracious Consent, of others only a
moral Sincerity: And as he went upon this Ground in his Admission of them, and
Carriage toward them, I cannot doubt but so is the Church to do in the public
Judgments they make concerning others, and their Carriage toward them: i. e.
they are to take them to be such as they profess to be, and allow them the
outward Privileges of Saints, 'till their outward Behavior proves them
Hypocrites. -- If we look through the new Testament, we find that Persons were
every where admitted into the Church by Christ and his Apostles, upon no other
Declaration than that they believed that Jesus was the Christ, and of their
Repentance. We read, Act 2. 38, 39. Then they that gladly received the Word
were baptized. Act. 8. 12, 13. it is said of the Samaritans upon Philip's
preaching to them, that when they believed the Things concerning the Kingdom of
God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both Men and Women. Then
Simon himself believed also, and was baptized. I mention not the Case of the
(...) here, because Mr. Edwards has considered it in another Place. -- In
these, and other Instances in the new Testament, of Persons Admission into the
Church by Baptism, we find nothing is demanded in order to it but their
professing Jesus Christ is the Savior, or believing the Gospel Revelation
concerning him; and so soon as they made this Profession and desired Baptism,
it was administered to them. I am ready to allow all that can be reasonably
demanded in this Case, viz. that believing does sometimes, yea very often in
the new Testament, signify saving Faith: But this will not enervate the
Argument; because it is certain, that the Words believe, and believed, as
terminated on Christ, and the Gospel, do in the New Testament sometimes not
mean saving Faith, but a Belief upon moral Evidence, and no more than a
Conviction of the Judgment and Conscience, that Jesus was the Messiah, or that
the Gospel was true. This is plain in the Case of Simon; and it is plain from
the Accounts we have in the Epistles, of great Numbers of Hypocrites and
Apostates; and because many of the temporary Disciples of Christ are said to
have believed on him; and yet afterward went away. And these Words are so used
in such Cases without any Marks or Difference whereby we are enabled to judge
when they mean a saving Faith, and when a different one; but left to learn this
from the different Consequences. From hence it seems evident, that Christ the
King of the visible Church acted on the same Ground in admitting Members into
the visible Church under the New Testament, as under the Old. And the Ground of
the Church's charitable Judgment was the same, viz. the open Profession of
Faith in Christ, and Subjection to him, with all the Heart, or Engagement to
keep Covenant with God; without any other Way of Men's determining the gracious
Sincerity of it, but what arises from the Nature of that Profession and
Engagement itself, not contradicted or proved false by the Life and Behavior
of the Person's making it: that is the lowest Kind of Evidence, and most
favorably constructed that the Nature of the Thing will admit. -- These
Persons may be godly, or they may not, as was in Fact the different Case with
those who by Christ, or the Apostles, were admitted into the Church. But the
same Profession of Faith described by the same Words and Names, without any
discriminating Marks expressed, was the Ground of rational Charity, and the
public Judgment, on which they were admitted, one, as well as the other. --
They had the same common Titles of Believers, Saints, Disciples, Christians,
which are given in common in the New Testament to all such Persons as renounced
Judaism, and Heathenism, and by a public Profession declared they did believe
the Gospel, and submit to the Proposals of it, and engage to fulfill or come up
to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, through the Help of God offered in it: And
therefore the Church is to make no other public Judgment about such Persons,
'till they contradict their own Profession by their outward Carriage.

3. Another Consideration which appears to be of some Weight to determine this
Rule of Judgment, is this, That it is a Doctrine plainly taught in Scripture;
and which I suppose all orthodox Divines are agreed in; that true Desires of
Grace are Grace. Sincere Desires of Interest in Christ, and Salvation in the
Way of the Gospel, are gracious. So says Mr. Perkins: A Desire of the Favor
and Mercy of God in Christ, and the Means to attain that Favor; this Desire is
a special Grace of God, and has the Promise of Blessedness. For though wicked
Men desire eternal Life, as Balaam did, yet they cannot sincerely desire the
Means, as Faith, Repentance, Mortification, Reconciliation etc. Page 366. It
were easy to show this is the current Doctrine of Calvinistick Divines.

Now that Man who makes a Profession of a servent Desire of Christ, and the
Benefits of the Covenant of Grace, and his earnest Purpose and Resolution to
seek his Salvation on the Terms of it: He makes a Profession of that, which for
the Matter of it is true Godliness. -- And every Man who is convinced in his
Conscience of the Truth of the Gospel, and that he is bound to seek his
Salvation by Christ, and that it is to be had on no other Terms than are
propounded in the Gospel, is not only bound to seek it in that Way, but he is
bound to make an open Profession of Christ; he holds the Truth in
Unrighteousness, and sins against his Conscience if he does not. Though this
Conviction may be only by moral Evidence, and common Illumination; yet for
ought that can be visible in the Nature of the Thing, the Church know not but
it is done upon a divine and gracious Discovery, and the Testimony of the Spirit
of God; and they are bound to make the most charitable Judgment when they act
in a public Character that the Nature of the Thing will admit. -- If the Man
thinks otherwise himself, this is nothing to the Purpose, because he may be
mistaken; and whether he be or not, his Apprehensions concerning his own State,
are not the Rule of the Church's Judgment; but his visible Character and
Behavior. -- The Church's public Judgment respects only their public
Carriage toward him, and allowing him the external Privileges of a Christian.
If this be a Judgment of Charity, it must be built on his Profession, and the
visible Effects of it, in the most favorable Construction of it.

Notwithstanding all the Difficulty in Mr. Edwards's Mind to conceive how these
visible Qualifications can be the Ground of a rational Judgment that a Person
in circumcised in Heart, which nevertheless at the same Time we are sensible
are so far from being any Signs of it that they are more frequently without it
than with it; yet he says, He can easily see how that may seem visible, and
appear probable in God's People by Reason of the imperfect and dark State they
are in, and so oblige their Charity, which yet is not real, and would not
appear at all probable to Angels, who stand in a clearer Light. Page 11, 12. I
think I can as easily see, why these visible Qualifications can be the Ground
of a rational Judgment of Charity that a Person is circumcised in Heart, when
at the same Time they are more frequently without it than with it; which no Man
ever would have known, but by the Consequence; which Consequence at the Time of
making his Judgment he does not see; and therefore is not to come into
Consideration in making his Judgment. -- It is certain, we are in a dark
imperfect State, and agreeable to this dark imperfect State, God, has appointed
the Rule and Ground of our Judgment: Which State, as to the inward Workings of
the Spirit of God upon Men's Hearts, and the secret Actings of their Souls, is
equally dark under the Gospel, as under the Law; and must remain so without a
Revelation to us of the Fact of those secret Workings of the Spirit of God upon
other Men's Hearts; though the Light of the Gospel may better enable us to Judge
of them in our own Hearts. -- How Angels would judge about it, I know not, but
all Men who know the Bible, know that Christ acting as King of the visible
Church has judged so: From whence it is certain, without any metaphysical
Speculations, or abstruse Reasonings, upon the Nature of Visibilities and
Realities, and appears plain to common Sense, that a Judgment of rational
Charity, is founded on the lowest Kind of Evidence that the Nature of the Thing
will admit; this being a public Judgment, made not to determine the final
State of Men, but only to be the Rule of the Church's granting the Privileges
of the visible Kingdom of Christ, and administering the outward Ordinances of
it. If an Appointment, can be known from the Nature of the Thing, and his own
constant Practice, we know that the King of the Church has appointed the
Plainest Rules of the Determination of this Judgment, and that the (...) Ground
of the public Judgment of the Church, shall lie in the visible Qualifications,
moral Conduct and Behavior of his professing People: And this Rule of Judging
in this Matter, serves all the Ends for which the Public is to judge at all of
the State of other Men, that is to direct our public Carriage toward them. I
think it appears from the Nature of the Thing, that public Evidence is all the
Evidence the Public can with Safety act upon; and in order to their acting,
there must be some certain Rule by which that Evidence, and the Judgment upon
it, must be determined: And this Rule must be such as may be plainly known by
all that are concerned to act by it; it must be suited to the State of those
who are to act by it; and accordingly it is. -- What though we cannot form a
rational Judgment that a Thing is, which at the same Time, and under that
Degree of Light we think we then stand, it is more probable is a mistaken one
than not -- it can argue nothing in this Case; when the Judgment we do form is
directed by that Rule of Judgment which is appointed for us in the Case we
judge about, though our Judgment may with Respect to another Rule, and Ground of
Judgment (which we have nothing to do with) be a Mistake; yet it is rightly made
upon our Rule and Evidence. Another Kind of Evidence, and another Rule, is no
Light at all to us; because that is the Rule of another Judgment, and not of
ours. -- Suppose that the Lord Jesus Christ will judge that the Judgment we
make concerning the States of Men are Mistakes in Fact ninety nine times in an
Hundred, because he sees the Bottom of Men's Hearts, and judges of their State
by what is there, and not by the visible Appearance; yet we judge rightly and
rationally when we judge according to the Rule of our judging; and keep to the
Evidence which is to determine our Judgment. -- I am apt to think, it is only a
confounding in our Minds these two different Rules of judging, that makes us
think it difficult to form a rational Judgment of Charity; and because we take
upon us to judge of Men's State by the same Rule which is only proper to the
Searcher of Hearts. God knows that Men in their present State are not fit to be
trusted with such invisible Rules of judging; and considering what Work Men
have made when they have gone upon such Grounds, it is a Wonder they don't know
it themselves. -- Therefore, although we freely allow none but visible Saints are
to be admitted by the Church to the holy Communion, and that the Judgment we
make of their visible Saintship is with Respect to real Holiness, yet I
conceive there is no Inconsistency between this, and Mr. Stoddard's Doctrine,
nor does it at all grant that sanctifying Grace is necessary in order to a
Person's lawfully partaking of the Lord's Supper. For though by a different Rule
of Judgment it may appear that Thousands of whom this charitable Judgment is
made by the Church have not sanctifying Grace, and it may appear to us in some
future Time to be so by the Rule of judging given to us; yet it does not appear
so at present: When we are called to make that Judgment, we are to have just so
must Reference to their real Godliness as the Rule of our judging requires; and
be just so certain of it as that will make us; and upon the Evidence which that
requires, we are bound to admit them, not because we are certain they have
sanctifying Grace, but because it is certain they have those visible Signs of
it, by which our public Judgment is to be determined; and our Carriage toward
them directed. When they have those Signs we make a right Judgment about our
Carriage toward them, and treat them according to the Will of God, when we
treat them as visible Saints. And since it is God's Will that his Church should
admit all such visible Saints, it follows that the Lord's Supper is a
converting Ordinance to such of them as are unconverted.

Since I suppose Mr. Edwards knows this was Mr. Stoddard's Doctrine, and he
professes to be disputing against it: I cannot but be somewhat surprised at his
going off from his Argument, to cast an Odium upon it, in his vehement
Declamation, Page 12, 13, 14, 15. That there is no need according to the
Doctrine that is taught, that the Person himself or any other, should have any
Imagination that he has sanctifying Grace, and that it clearly follows on the
Principles he opposes, no Kind of Visibility or Appearance, whether more direct
or indirect, whether to a greater or less Degree; no Charity, no Hope of it,
have any Thing to do at all in this Affair of Admission to the Lord's Supper;
and many such like Expressions.

What is there to found all this Exclamation upon? For my Part I know of no
Place in the World where any such Doctrine is taught. I believe no Minister nor
Church in the World, will own it; and I think it to be demonstratively evident,
that no such Thing follows from the Principle Mr. Edwards opposes (if I know
what it is) no such Thing follows from Mr. Stoddard's Opinion, that sanctifying
Grace is not necessary to the lawful (...) on the Lord's Supper. And Mr.
Edwards knows that Mr. Stoddard disclaimed it, and held that none but visible
Saints, and such Persons as to a Judgment of Charity were true Believers, were
to be admitted by the Church to the Communion. And when Mr. Mather argues, that
if the Lord's Supper be a converting Ordinance, then profane Persons ought to
be admitted; Mr. Stoddard denies the Consequence, and says, The Lord's Supper
is a converting Ordinance only to Church Members, Appeal, Page 20. And again,
Page 28. It is the Will of God that such as to a Judgment of rational Charity
are Believers, be admitted to the Lord's Supper, though they be unregenerate; and
the Lord's Supper may be looked on as a converting Ordinance for Church Members
that carry orderly. Now, because the Lord's Supper is said to be a converting
Ordinance to such Persons as these; to affirm so vehemently in such a Number of
Repetitions, that the Doctrine taught is, that no Manner of Pretense to any
visible Holiness is made, or designed to be made etc. may tend to reproach some
Men and their Principles, and render them odious to the unthinking Multitude;
but I can see no Tendency in it to lead any Man into the Knowledge of the
Truth, for the Thing itself is a manifest Untruth. And to treat Mr. Stoddard
and his Doctrine in this Manner, after his Declarations before mentioned, and
others who are of Mr. Stoddard's Opinion, I think must be owing to some Warmth
of Temper in the Heat of Disputation, which made my good Kinsman a little lose
the Influence of that Modesty he speaks of, when he mentions the Loss he is at
to reconcile the Concessions of his venerable and ever-honour'd Grandfather
with the rest of his Treatise.

In Page 23. Mr. Edwards comes to his second Argument, which is thus
propounded: That it is a Duty which in an ordinary State of Things is required
of all that are capable of it to make an explicit open Profession of the true
Religion, by owning God's Covenant; or in other Words, professedly, and
verbally to unite themselves to God in his Covenant by their own public Act.
He proposes, 1. To prove this Point; and then, 2. Draw the Consequence, and
show how this demonstrates the Thing in Debate. He undertakes to show that it
was not only a Duty in Israel of old, but is so in the Christian Church, and to
the End of the World; and that it is a Duty required of adult Persons before
they come to the Sacraments. -- What is here to be made out is,

1. That this was an Institution in the ordinary State of the jewish Church,
and so also of the Christian. 2. That this was a divine Institution, to be
attended in order to the Israelites partaking of the Passover, and so in order
to baptized Christians partaking of the Lord's Supper. Mr. Edwards endeavors
to prove this Institution to be made, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.and Chap. 10. 20. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and swear by his Name. Thou shall fear
the Lord thy God, him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou cleave, and swear
by his Name.

There seem to be two Things on which this Rev. Author grounds his Argument to
prove that these Texts contain an Institution of public Covenanting with God,
in the Manner and Extent he supposes.

The first is a Criticism on the Hebrew Words: He says, The Prefix Beth, which
is there used in the Word Bishmc, and rendered By his Name; signifies In, or
Into, as well as By. -- The other Thing which he thinks makes it abundantly
manifest, that the Thing intended here was a public Covenanting with God, is;
that Covenanting in Scripture is very often called by the Name of Swearing, and
a Covenant is called an Oath; and particularly God's Covenant is called his
Oath. Deuteronomy. 29. 12. and other Places of Scripture. See Page 24. Upon these, I
think, lies the whole Stress of what is offered in Proof of this Institution.

It is evident from very many Places of Scripture where Beth is prefixed to a
Word, it signifies By. And all that Mr. Edwards pretends here is, that this
Prefix signifies In, or Into, as well as By: Which is it self a Confutation of
the Argument. For if it signifies By as well as Into; then certainly, there is
nothing in the Meaning of the Prefix it self, which necessitates Mr. Edwards's
Construction. But it may as naturally be understood as our Translators have
rendered it, as in the Sense Mr. Edwards has rendered it. And therefore at best
it proves just nothing at all. -- But to confirm this Way of rendering the Words
he observes, that Swearing by the Name of the Lord is so often mentioned by the
Prophets, that it would be unreasonable to understand it only, or chiefly of
taking an Oath occasionally before a Court of Judicature, which it may be, one
tenth Part of the People never had Occasion to do once in their Lives. If it
were so, that not a tenth Part of the People ever had Occasion to do it, why
should it be thought unreasonable that God should take so much Care about their
Swearing in a religious and due Manner? since it is evident he designed to take
Care of every Part of the Religion of that People, and gave them Laws to govern
and direct the tenth and twentieth Part; yea, every one of them, as well as the
whole collective Body, in all their Business and Conduct; and if all the
Instances of Swearing by the Name of the Lord mentioned by the Prophets, or in
the Law put together, will not amount to the hundredth Part of the Directions
given to direct their Conduct, and govern their Behavior. -- But besides Oaths
and Covenants were Things which probably might concern the most of that People,
as of every other People in the World: And no Man knew before hand whom they
would concern, nor could any Man know but they would concern him. It Is
therefore far from being an unreasonable Thing to believe that God did take
Care that whosoever of his People, and wheresoever they were called to Swear,
either to their Princes, or as Witnesses, or to their Covenants or Contracts,
should Swear by the true God; which is one Part of divine Worship; and a
necessary Acknowledgement, that there is no other God; which was a Thing that
certainly God took abundant Care his People should constantly acknowledge and
profess. Of this Kind of Swearing all Protestant Writers (so far as I have
observed) have understood the Words. So Mr. Wilson in his Christian Dictionary
giving their general Sense, interprets these Words, and applies them to this
Sort of Swearing.

The other Thing which Mr. Edwards thinks gives abundant Reason to be satisfied
that the Swearing (...) spoken of intends a public Covenanting with God, seems
to have very little Weight in it. -- God's Covenant is sometimes called his
Oath, because he was pleased to Swear by Himself, to confirm it; surely not
because he Swear in to Himself. -- There are several Places wherein we read of
Persons Swearing to God; and God did sometimes call them to Swear to perform
Obedience to him; as we see 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 14, 15. but Swearing by the Lord
in this, or any other Place where the Prefix's Beth, or Lamed, are used, is no
more necessarily to be understood, to be an Institution of Covenanting with God
in order to enjoy the outward Ordinances of the Gospel, than Skenting and
(...), and Cornets, which they used on the same Occasion. When (...) required
the Spies to Swear to her (...) Josh. 9. 10. When (...) tells the Israelites,
that their Princes had (...) it is pretty evident they had no Thought about
owning the Covenant. And this very Place, Deuteronomy 6. 13. which Mr. Edwards takes
to be an Institution of public owning the Covenant, is understood, as Mr.
Wilson renders it, by (...) Fagius (...) from (...) in (...) What farther
Weight can there be in the same Criticism on the (...) 1 Kin18. 32. and Chap.
8. 44. where these Prefix's (...) and (...) signify To and not (...)? But as
they naturally may signify either the one or the other, it is therefore
impossible that by themselves they should determine the Meaning of the Text
either Way: But that must be judged of by the particular Case wherein they are
used in which something else is necessary to determine in what Sense they must
be rendered: Wherefore Isai 2. 7. and the other Texts about Swearing by the Name
of the Lord, cannot with any Certainty be shown to imply more in them, than
that, as Swearing is a Part of religious Worship, therefore the calling Jehovah
to witness is the Acknowledgement of Him as the only true God, including all
his essential, eternal, and unchangeable Perfections. In which Way Mr. Wilson
expounds Swearing in Truth, Judgment and Righteousness; and which it is easy to
show is the plain Meaning of the Words. So the Swearing by the Lord and by
(...), Expositors render halting between God, and Idois. As to all those
Prophecies which Mr. Edwards has quoted, as refering to the Gentiles, and their
Swearing by the Name of the Lord; the Sense of Protestant Commentators upon
them, I think, universally is, that when the Gentiles, in God's appointed Time
should be brought into Covenant with God, it should be as the Jews were, by
being persuaded to Consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, and engaging
themselves to God to be faithful to him, and keep Covenant with him. He who
heartily consents to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, gives up himself to
the Lord; gives the Hand to the Lord; engages to own, and serve him. Which is
the Thing signified in all those metaphorical Phrases, which describe, or Point
out this Event in the old Testament Language -- To suppose that Text, Isai. 45.
22, 25 to be a Prophecy or such a Sort of Covenanting with God as Mr. Edwards
imagines, seems to be a strange Freedom with the holy Scripture. He says
himself Page 27. It will have its last Fulfillment at the Day of Judgment; and
that the Thing most directly intended is the Conversion of the Gentile World to
the Christian Religion. If it be so, then it is certain the Thing most directly
intended is not an explicit, open Covenanting with God before the Church in
order to partake of Gospel Ordinances. -- Mr. Wilson says, it is to make
Confession, or solemn Profession that God is Searcher of Hearts, to acknowledge
him as Witness and Rewarder of Truth; and a severe and just Revenger of
halfhood and Perjury. To confirm his Exposition of (...) 45. 23. he quotes,
Romans 14. 11. Every Tongue shall (...) to God. The fore mentioned learned Man
says upon it; the latter Place expounds the former. And although the Prophecy of
Isaiah cited by Paul be in Part fulfilled now in this Life for the Wicked are
forced to confess Christ sometimes to be a just and righteous God, whom the
Faithful willingly acknowledge to be so yet it shall not be fully accomplished
'till Christ comes in the Clouds, and all appear before Him; when, will they,
nill they; they shall be forced to acknowledge him the Judge: And because none
can be the universal Judge of the World, save He which is essentially God,
therefore Paul aptly cites that Text out of Isaiah. to prove that the Glory of
the Godhead belongs to Christ; to whom all must give an Account, and all Knees
must bow. Whether this is any Proof of an Institution for baptized Christians
publicly owning the Covenant in order to their partaking of the Lord's Supper,
the Reader must judge.

It appears to me a plain Demonstration, that Deuteronomy. 6. 13. was no such
Institution, nor ever intended for any such, and that the other Texts alleged
to support that Notion never mean any such Thing: For if it were so, then every
Israelite must personally and publicly have owned the Covenant in order to his
partaking of the Passover; whereas it is certain that every Israelite was
antecedently bound by the Covenant, and divine Institution, to partake of the
Passover. Every Man that was circumcised was to eat the Passover. Exodus 12. 44.
ad finem. Numb. 9. 13. The Man that is clean, and is not in a Journey, and
forbeareth to eat the Passover, even the same Soul shall be out off from his
People. Now the 10 th. tells us the Uncleanness which hindered a Man from this,
was his touching a dead Body; not the want of public owning the Covenant. --
Mr. Edwards owns that he cannot be certain when and after what Manner the
Israelites ordinarily performed this explicit owning the Covenant. Pa. 28.
Covenanting explicitly with God, was first done (as he says) at the first
Promulgation of the Covenant at Mount Sinai. And when that Generation was dead,
about forty Years after, it was done by the new Generation on the Plains of
Moab, just before their entering into Canaan. -- It was done in Josiah's Time
after that general and dreadful Defection to Idolatry which the Jews had been
guilty of, in that great Reformation which they then set about. 2 Kin. 23. 3.
And it was done after the Return of the Captivity from Babylon at the Feast of
Tabernacles, Neh. 8. 9, 10. -- Now from this public Covenanting with God by
the whole Body of that People, upon four extraordinary Occasions during the
whole Time of the Continuance of that Church; such Occasions as that People
never had the like; the only Times we have any Account of an open explicit
Covenanting with God: It appears likely to Mr. Edwards that it was done every
seventh Year at the Feast of Tabernacles when the Law was ^read, at least by
all them who heard the Law read the first Time, and had never publicly owned
the Covenant of God before. -- And I see not why he might not with as good
Reason have supposed it was done in the Year of Jubilee, or every Year on the
Day of Atonement, or any other Occasion which he thought convenient. -- It is a
strong Supposition, but it has the Unhappiness to want Proof. -- Since this is
the Case in Fact, that we have but four Instances of any explicit Covenanting
with God by the Jews, and those upon the most extraordinary Occasions that ever
were in the State, and by the whole Body of the People together; and no
Direction in the Bible at what Time, nor in what Manner any personal explicit
Covenanting should be performed; nor no Account that it was ever done by one
single Person in the jewish Church; it appears a Demonstration that that People
knew nothing of any such Institution; as I suppose the Christian Church never
did 'till Mr. Edwards discovered it. -- But he thinks there are good Evidences
that they never had Communion with God in those Ordinances wherein themselves
were to be active, such as their Sacrifices etc. 'till they had done this; and
that they did it before they partook of the Passover, Page 28. for which he
produces, Psalm. 50. 16. taken with the preceding Part from. 5. 2 Chronicles. 30. 8.
Ezra 10. 19. The 5th. of that 50th Psalm is, Gather my Saints unto me, those
that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. So far as these Words relate to
the Jews, the best Commentators I have met with, understand them of the People
of Israel, who were Saints by Calling and Profession, as a Body taken into
Covenant with God, which was done by Sacrifice, Exodus 24. 8. they were
denominated Saints, by being in Covenant with God, which Covenant was entered
into by Sacrifice; Korathi Berithi Guali Tzaboth; who have struck a Covenant
with me, in Allusion to the cutting the Sacrifice in two Parts, as Genesis 15. 10.
one Party to have one, and the other, the other; so this Covenant was struck
over, or upon the Sacrifice; not entered into without, or in order to the
offering of the Sacrifice. -- There is no doubt they who were wilful and
obstinate Sinners dealt deceitfully and salsly, when they pretended to Covenant
with God. But how this has any Relation to owning the Covenant publicly in
order to offer Sacrifice, is hard to comprehend. -- As to the Words of
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 8. when he called the Israelites to the Passover,
bidding them yield or give the Hand to the Lord; and in Ezra, they gave the
Hand to put away the Wives: which he thinks to be an Hebrew Phrase for entering
into Covenant: it carries its own Confutation with it: for could Hezekiah call
these People to enter into Covenant with God in order to eat the Passover when
they had been in Covenant with him all their Days, and were bound upon the
Peril of their Lives to eat the Passover? Giving the Hand is an Hebrew Phrase
used to express Submission to God, or any Submission in general; to signify
Friendship, Reconciliation, and Good Will. 2 Kin. 10. 15. It Is sometimes used
as a Token of a Covenant agreed upon, as Ezekiel. 17. 18. And it signifies
Consent, in the Text quoted Ezra 10. 19. Babylon, when she surrendered, is said
to give her Hand, Jer. 50. 15. -- Mr. Edwards's own Supposition must destroy
his Argument: For if the Israelites were personally, explicitly and publicly
to own the Covenant in order to have Communion with God in the Sacrifices they
were to be active in, and so in order to eat the Passover; and this owning the
Covenant was to be every seventh Year; then all who in that seven Years had not
owned the Covenant in that Manner, must inevitably perish. For if they did not
eat the Passover every Year, they must be cut off. And besides, upon the Return
of this seventh Year, if they were not Regenerate, they could not upon Mr.
Edwards Principles own the Covenant without wilful Lying; and yet nevertheless
were by Institution bound to do it; and at the Same Time by express Law of God
bound to eat the (...) every Year. whether they were regenerated, or had owned
the (...) not. It Is very unhappy that this good Gentleman should aft (...)
Scripture in such a Manner to prove a divine Institution which (...) Existence,
and, after all that is said is but (...) nation and Chimera.

It being evident there never was any such (...) Institution for the Church
under the old Testament (...) Persons publicly and explicitly to own the (...)
to their enjoying the outward Ordinances of it, and consequently that no such
Thing is appointed in the old Testament for baptized Christians under the New;
therefore Mr. Edwards's Consequence and all his Reasonings from that
Supposition, are built upon the Sand: and I might fairly pass them over as
having nothing to do in this Controversy; -- Yet I would not willingly omit any
Thing which looks like an Argument, whether it follows from any Principle
supposed or not; being willing, as Mr. Edwards desires, to encounter every
Argument. I shall therefore, as well as I can, consider the true Force of what
is Argumentative in the next twelve Pages. -- If I can comprehend it, the whole
Force of the Argument lies in this Compass: That in the Covenant of Grace, the
one only Covenant which God enters into with Man, he offers himself to be their
God through Jesus Christ; or avouches, and takes them to be his People upon the
Terms of the Gospel: On Man's Part, there is a Consent to that Proposal, an
avouching the Lord to be their God, to walk in his Ways, to keep his Statutes,
his Commandments, and his Judgments, according to Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. i. e. Faith
and Repentance. Now to profess to consent to this Covenant without Faith and
Repentance, is false, and no Covenanting with God at all. -- These Words don't
he together in any one Place, nor are in this Shape propounded as the Argument,
but so far as I can understand the Discourse, there, these contain the
Substance, and whole Force of the Argument.

I have no Controversy with Mr. Edwards about the O^eness of the Covenant of
Grace, nor about the Terms of it, either on God's Part, or Man's. Faith and
Repentance, are the Conditions to be fulfilled on Man's Part; and unless those
be fulfilled, he cannot by Promise claim any saving and eternal Blessings. -- But
Mr. Edwards takes Notice. Page.30. of the (...) between the internal and
external Covenant. I suppose, as he does, that the Divines who make this
Distinction, don't imagine that there are two Covenants, but that there are two
Ways that this (...) Covenant of Grace is exhibited: one externally and the
other internally. This Distinction God himself has made and observed ever since
he has treated with Man in the Way at a Covenant of Grace. Though these are not
two distinct Covenants of Grace, yet they are properly two distinct Ways of the
Exhibition (...) of the Covenant of Grace. Dr. (...) expresses it in these
Words: There is a two fold Covenant: a single Covenant which God makes with his
Children when they are baptized, which is this: If you believe, repent, and
walk in my Ways, you shall be saved. Now if they break this Covenant. God is
freed. And there is a double Covenant to perform both Parts, which is this: if
ye will repent and believe, ye shall be saved; and I will give you an Heart to
repent, believe and be saved. Pa^^^s says. To be in Covenant is taken two Ways,
either according to Title to the Covenant, at to the Benefits of the Covenant.
He is said to be in Covenant, who either obtains the Benefits of the Covenant,
which are Remission of Sins, Adoption etc. or else that has the Title and
outward Budge of the Covenant: All that externally make Profession of the
Covenant engage themselves upon God's Teams that they will repent and believe:
And Remission of Sins Justification. Adoption etc. which belong only to the
Elect. Regenerate are promised to them upon these Terms.

The external Exhibition of the Covenant is all that is visible in this World,
and this is the Way of God's (...) with his People. Such as make that
Profession and Engagement, are really in that one Covenant of Grace in the
(...) and outward Dispensation of it. --

This appears,

Because God so (...) in the People of the Jews. The same Covenant of Grace God
entered into with them as with Christians; there is but one. Deuteronomy. (...). Hear
O (...) and Judgments, which I spea(...) in your Ears this Day that ye they
learn them, and keep them, and do them. The Lord our God made a Covenant with
us in Horeb. The Lord made not this Covenant with our Fathers, but with Us,
even with Us, who are all of us alive this Day. Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, -- 16. Ye
stand this Day all of you before the Lord your

^

This appears from the very Nature of Covenanting in the proper Sense of it. --
God is pleased in Scripture to call his Promise

His Covenant; his (...) his Covenant; his (...) his Covenant. These seem to be
so called in a figurative and improper Sense. But the strict and proper Nature
of a Covenant, is the Stipulation of two Parties to the Performance of Articles
upon Condition, or entering into a Compact upon Agreement on Terms and
Propositions. Mr. Edwards himself says, Page 38. The very Notion of entering
into Covenant with any Being, is entering into a mutual Agreement of doing, or
engaging that which it done, the other Party becomes engaged on his Part.

The New Testament, as Mr. Blake defines it, is a gracious Covenant of God with
fallen Man, whereby he engages Himself, upon Faith in Christ, and Repentance
for Sin, or return to God, and sincere Obedience; to confer on Man Remission of
Sins, and all whatsoever tends to everlasting Happiness. Now what can Man's
(...) be; but that (...) will believe and return to God? What else can answer,
or be a Counter part to the Stipulation which God propounds to him. -- If we
look to the Marriage Covenant, to which Mr. Edwards observes, the Covenant of
Grace is most frequently compared; in this the Bride does not profess that she
has taken the Man for her Husband, that she has been enjoyed by him, or brought
forth the Fruit of her Body to him; that she has forsaken all others, and
cleaved to him all her Days; but that she will perform all this from this Time
forth. She does not profess that she has performed the Articles of the
Marriage-Covenant, but that she will perform them from thenceforth to the End
of her Life. -- Mr. Edwards says, Page 32. For Persons merely to promise that
they will believe in Christ, this is not to own the Covenant of Grace: such
Persons don't profess to enter now into the Covenant of Grace with Christ; all
they do is to speak fair etc. Indeed with what he has put in, viz. that they
don't pretend at present to any other than to continue in Rebellion against
God; and that they know they are under the reigning Power of Enmity against God
etc. the like: It must be confessed, if Per^^ns so pretend to believe and
repent, they are guilty of the most horrid Faithood or Prevarication. -- But
this is by no Means necessarily included in the Profession which unregenerate
Men make. This was never included, nor understood in the Profession which the
Israelites made; but that they would immediately and from thenceforth comply
with (...) Terms of the Covenant; and by the Help of God offered in it, would
fulfill it. I am sure, this was what they professed; and I am sure, that God
declared he took them into Covenant with him; and that they did enter into
Covenant with him. -- In the Case of the Woman marrying, which is again
mentioned, Page 32. no Doubt, but she Professes now to accept this Man as her
Husband; but suppose she does not in her Heart renounce all others, and
secretly proves false; yet I suppose she is married, and in Covenant with her
Husband. -- As to the primitive Converts mentioned, Page 33. we may have
Occasion to consider their Admission afterward. -- Although I think Mr.
Edwards's own Definition of a Covenant overthrows his Scheme; he thinks it
militates against that which he opposes; because he says, in this Covenant, God
obliges himself to nothing in us that is exclusive of saving Faith, and the
spiritual Duties that attend it. -- His own Definition agrees only to the
external Covenant, or outward Dispensation of the Covenant; and yet his arguing
goes off from it in this View, and considers it only internally. In this
Dispensation of it, as was observed before, God engages to perform the whole.
Jer. 31. 33. This shall be the Covenant that I will make with the House of
Israel after those Days, faith the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward
Parts, and write it in their Hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be
my People. In order to the Accomplishment of this, God is pleased externally to
propound the Covenant, and give the Call and Offer of it to Men. This outward
Dispensation is all that Men have outwardly to do with it. And as the Covenant
propounds Salvation to Men upon the Terms or Conditions of Faith and
Repentance, the Restipulation of Man in Answer to this Call is, I will believe
and repent in the Sense of the Covenant: Not only I will endeavor, and pray
for Help, and the like, but by the Help of God offered in the Covenant, I will
comply, and fulfill the Part propounded to me. But Mr. Edwards thinks it
impossible for an unsanctified Man to enter into a Covenant with God; and that
he must make a lying Promise if he engages, because he has no gracious
Sincerity. -- What is this, but to say, it is impossible he should enter into
Covenant with God before he has fulfilled the Covenant, and impossible it
should be true which God tells us; that the Israelites did enter into Covenant
with him, when yet he had not given them an Heart to perceive etc. His Mind is
here evidently turned off from the external Covenant, and his own Definition or
Description of a Covenant, to the internal Covenant. -- He will forgive the
Repetition, if I set his own Words again in View: The very Notion of entering
into a Covenant with any Being, is a mutual Agreement, doing or engaging that
which if done, the other Party becomes engaged on his Part. The Covenant God
propounds to Man is believe, repent, and thou shall be saved. No unsanctified
Man, he says, can enter into this Covenant, because he don't believe and
repent. But surely if he engages to believe and repent, he engages to do that
which if done, God becomes engaged on his Part. Here is a mutual Agreement on
Covenant Terms, and an Engagement to do that which if done, God is obliged by
his Covenant, to bestow Life upon him. Here is a Proposal of Articles or Terms
on the Part of God, and a Restipulation on the Part of Man to whom the Proposal
is made, exactly answerable to the Terms propounded. -- But the Rev. Author
says; a natural Man deceives himself if he thinks he is truly willing to
perform external Obedience etc. therefore surely he deceives himself if he
thinks he is truly willing to believe and repent. He says, he cannot promise
these Things without great Deceit or palpable Absurdity; for promising supposes
the Person to be conscious to himself, or persuaded that he has such an Heart
etc. -- If the Man don't think he is willing to do this at the same Time that
he says he is, if it be not the read, earnest Purpose and Design of his Heart,
so far: as he knows himself, doubtless he makes a lying Promise, and is guilty
of wicked Prevarication. But supposing he believes he is really willing, and
earnestly desirous to do this, and it be only moral Sincerity, and not a
gracious Willing (which Mr. Edwards says there is no Room for any Distinction
between, and I don't remark upon now, because it is so often repeated, and I
shall take Notice of it elsewhere) suppose this is the Case, yet there is an
Intention, a real, earnest, hearty Desire, and Design: therefore the Man speaks
true, for in the very Notion, and Nature of a Lie, is implied a Will, and
Intent to deceive. -- But still there is a Difficulty how he can promise this,
when no natural Man has Strength to go through with it, nor is God obliged to
give him Strength. I pray that it may be thoroughly considered, what is
propounded in the Covenant of Grace, and on what Stock a Man is to finish. Mr.
Edwards, I doubt not, will own, that if a godly Man promises in his own
Strength to persevere, or do any Duty of the Covenant, he is deceived, and
guilty of great Presumption. He has nothing to trust to but the Promise and
Help of God. -- But this Promise and unsanctified Man has not. -- However Mr.
Edwards owns, that every natural Man that lives under the Gospel is obliged to
comply with the Terms of the Covenant of Grace. I suppose he means that he is
this Moment obliged to do it. -- I think all Divines are agreed that there is
some Kind of Promise implied even in a Command; an indefinite one, which
contains, great Encouragement, that God will help him, if he sets himself, with
all the Power he has to comply with that Command. I believe also they are
agreed, that in the outward Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, there is a
Promise that those who are under it, if they do as earnestly as they can
endeavor to comply with the Terms of it, shall not want the outward Means
necessary to their Salvation. There is certainly more Encouragement than any
have who are not under it, that God will send his Spirit to help them through the
Work and Trials he calls them to Deuteronomy 4 7. For what Nation is there so great,
who has God so ^igh unto them, as the Lord our God is in ALL THINGS that we
call upon him for. Now since God calls the Man this Moment to enter into
Covenant with him, commands him to do it, and sets so much Encouragement before
him, surely he is bound to answer this Call, and obey this Command; and
therefore he is bound to do it as far as he can: for no Man is called or
commanded by God to do any Thing, who is not by that Call or Command, bound to
every Thing he can to comply with that Command. Therefore he must be certainly
bound to lay himself under the strongest Engagements, and put himself under the
greatest Advantages he can to do it. Mr. Edwards owns his promising and
engaging to do it, increases his Obligation. And as it is certain from God's
Word it puts him under more Encouragement of Help to get through with it: the
increasing his Obligation, and being under greater Encouragement, and therefore
greater Advantages, are proper Means to his doing the Thing commanded. God
never commands a Man to do a Thing but he requires him to use all the Means
which are necessary and proper to the doing it. Though there be no Promise of
saving Good exclusive of Faith, yet there being a Command and Encouragement,
there are suitable Springs of his Endeavor, and Hope, in his engaging himself
to God, and casting himself upon his Mercy, with all the Earnestness and
Sincerity he can. God never will be worse than his Encouragement, nor do less
than he has encouraged; and he has said, to (...) that has shall be given. To
do this, is to bring the Man into the external Covenant. It is an entering into
Covenant with God upon the Terms propounded in the outward Dispensation of the
Gospel, and no lying Promise; which Mr. Edwards endeavors further to show it
is by bringing Psalm. 50. 16. as a great Confirmation of what he says against
unconverted Men's Covenanting with God, Page 38. to 41. And to obviate an
Objection which he foresaw would arise from. 17, 18, 19, 20. where these wicked
Men are described by hating God's Instructions, and casting his Words behind
their Backs, being Thieves, Liars, Adulterers, Slanderers; he takes much Pains
to show that the Scripture knows but of two Sorts of Men, the Righteous, and
the Wicked, Saints and (...), and (...); that all graceless Men, are in
Scripture called wicked Men; and that all unregenerate Men shall be shut out of
Heaven. -- We believe that all unsanctified Men will be shut out of Heaven, and
that the Searcher of Hearts now perfectly knows who they be, and at the Day of
Judgment will discover them to the World: But we know that the Church at
present know not who they be, nor does God allow them in their public Judgment
or open Carriage, to treat any Professor of the Gospel of Christ as wicked Men,
save those who by their apparent wicked Lives discover themselves to be so. --
To what Purpose then can be the Observation, Pa. 39. that it is a common Thing
in Scripture in the Description of Men both godly and ungodly, to insert into
their Character some excellent Practices of the one which Grace tends to; and
some gross Sins of the other, which there is a Foundation for in the reigning
Corruption of their Hearts. -- Will this serve for a Proof that when Men are
godly, there do always appear to the Church such excellent Practices as do
necessarily spring from a gracious Principle in them, by which that gracious
Principle may be certainly known; or that when a Man is ungodly, the Church may
always see such gross Sins in his Life, as there is a Foundation for in the
reigning Corruption of his Heart; and so determine that he is a Hypocrite, or
his Profession a Lie? Is it don't prove this, it proves nothing that I can see
to Mr. Edwards's Purpose; and the Church will not from hence be helped in the
Rule of admitting Men into Covenant. -- If the Church know that a Man is a
Thief, a Liar, a Slanderer, an Adulterer, I readily yield, they ought not to
admit him, or if such a Man be in the Church, without apparent Repentance, they
ought to cast him out. -- And Christ acting as King of the visible Church, lets
his People know that they are to judge of the Wickedness of Professors only by
their gross, and open or known Practices; and that these only keep, or throw
them out of the external Covenant: But he himself, when he comes to final
Judgment (of which he is speaking in this Psalm) will deal with them according
to what they really are; and not according to their visible external Relation
to him. And here is no Color to suppose he blames them for entering into
Covenant with him, but for their Hypocrisy and Falsehood in the Covenant, and
not fulfilling it. What had they to do, or with what Face could they pretend to
take his Covenant into their Mouths, or declare his Statutes, when they allowed
themselves in those very Sins which they Covenanted against, and knew those
Statutes condemned; and hated the Instructions of them. Their own Consciences
condemned them and Christ had let them know that when he comes to Judgment, he
will condemn them. In this Way I think the current of Commentators explain the
Passage. -- And it is to as little Purpose to prove, that no unsanctified
Persons may, or can come into Covenant with God, as it is to prove that the
Church may admit none such; unless we draw the Consequence in Mr. Edwards's own
Words, Page 4. Therefore I think it follows that they who know it is thus with
them; have nothing to do to take God's Covenant into their Mouths; or in other
Words, have no Warrant to do this, until it be otherwise with them.

If a Man knows and feels a relgning Enmity in his Heart against God; if he
knows he has no Desire of Salvation by Christ; that he has no Design to fulfill
the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, but designs to live in Stealing, Lying,
Adultery, Slander, or any other known Sin; I believe there is not a Divine in
this Country, who doubts, but if that Man at the same time enters into visible
Covenant with God, or seals that Covenant, he is an abominable Liar, and acts
in a most Presumptuous Manner. And if the Church knows it to be so with him,
they ought by no Means to allow him so to profane the Covenant, and the Name of
God. -- But is it not manifest that such Sort of Reasoning is a mere quibling
with Words, and begging the Question? Is it not taking it for granted that
there is no such Thing as moral Sincerity, in Distinction from that which is
gracious? that no unsanctified Man can have a real, hearty Conviction of his
Judgment, and Conscience of the Truth of the Gospel? that no such Man can be
convinced that he is undone without Christ, nor be earnestly concerned to
obtain Salvation by him? that no such Man can do the utmost he can, to obtain
it, and to come up to, and fulfill the Terms propounded in the Covenant? but
that he certainly lies, that he knows he lies, and designedly lies in all these
Things when he says them? and that the Church must conclude so of every Man,
unless they have some other Way to know he is converted, than what they can
have by his declaring these Things? If there is any Force in Mr. Edwards
Reasoning as he does; I think these Things, must be taken for granted. Whereas
these Suppositions are absolutely false, and contrary to the Scripture andto
common Sense. -- And to suppose that this Passage of Scripture, or the many
others which this Reverend Author has alleged, are designed to show, that all
the unsanctified Men in the jewish Church are by the blessed God charged with
Lying, when they pretended to enter into Covenant with God, or that these
Scriptures do show they did not enter into Covenant with God; but only lied,
and deceived themselves, is such a Gloss upon the Scripture, as is not only
contrary to the current of Commentators, but appears to be an evident
Misunderstanding and Misapplication of Scripture; because God himself in many
Places most expressly tells us, they did enter into Covenant with him; that he
did call them to it; and did in Fact take them into Covenant with him. -- All
such Glosses do contradict a Fact as notorious as the Exit of the Children of
Israel out of Egypt, and as plainly attested in Scripture as any Fact there
spoken of, unless we need except the Creation of the World, and the Death and
Resurrection of Christ. -- And certainly we know that it is impossible any Gloss
should be right, which makes the holy Scripture in such a Manner militate with,
and contradict it self.

Mr. Edwards propounds his third Argument, Page 41. in these Words, The Nature
of Things seems to afford no great Reason why the People of Christ should not
openly profess a proper Respect to him in their Hearts, as well as a true
Notion of him in their Heads, or a right Opinion of him in their Judgments. --
In this loose Way of arguing, I know of no Body who has any Controversy with
him. Those who do not think sanctifying Grace to be necessary to a lawful
partaking of the Lord's Supper, I suppose never imagine that orthodoxy in
Profession is all that is necessary to, or implied in a Person's Covenanting
with God; but there is always implied in it a professed Subjection to Christ,
and giving up themselves to be taught, ruled, and led by him in the Gospelway
to Salvation. -- If any Thing be intended in this Argument relating to the
Question in Debate, I conceive it must be this: That the Nature of external
Covenanting with God, and the Design of Christ's having a visible Church,
require that the Persons who constitute it, make a Profession of Regeneration.

Mr. Edwards mentions but one End of this Profession, which is, the giving
Honor to God: The Force of his arguing I think lies in this; that unless the
Profession of Religion be such as necessarily to imply a Profession of
sanctifying Grace, it is only a Profession of right speculative Notions of God;
and that it don't imply at most, any more than a Profession of Luke warmness,
as he speaks, Pa. 43. yet Page 41, 42. he calls it a Manifestation of their
doctrinal Knowledge, and the Assent of their Judgments. A Profession of the
Religion of Christ in the Opinion of Mr. Stoddard, and those who think with
him, implies in it such a Profession as make Men visible Saints; therefore in
the Nature of the Thing, it cannot be only an orthodox Profession of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, but also a professed Conviction of the divine Truth of
it, and that Jesus Christ is the only Savior, and the Terms of the Covenant of
Grace, propounded in the Gospel, are the only Terms of Salvation; therefore
that they do renounce all other Ways, fall in with that, and engage to seek,
and look for their Salvation in no other. This Declaration in the Nature of the
Thing imports, that their Judgments are convinced of this; that they see such
Evidence of these Truths, that they cannot withold their Assent from them. --
And God has by the Law of Nature, and the Gospel of Christ, taught them, that
the Salvation of their, Souls ought to be the great Concern of their Lives;
they find such a Concern about securing this Salvation, as upon the foregoing
Conviction to put themselves with all the Earnestness and Solicitude they can
into the Way of the Gospel Covenant, and engage to comply with the Terms of it,
as the only Way of Salvation. This we apprehend is necessarily implied in the
Profession of the Christian Religion. But all this may be from the common
Illumination of the Spirit of God; with the Use of Reason, and moral Arguments.
But the Church knows not (nor perhaps the Man who makes it) whether it be not
from gracious and special Illumination. And if the Man himself professes that
it is so, the Church knows not but he is mistaken, or an Hypocrite. The Things
he professes and engages, contain in them the Matter of real Godliness; the
Difference lies in the different Kind of Illumination, or Testimony, upon which
rises his Evidence, or the difference of the Principle from whence his
Engagement proceeds; of which the Church's Evidence is the Influence, and
Efficacy of it in the Person's Life: but the Profession in its self, and as
visible, is equally honorable to Christ.

Page 42. Mr. Edwards expresses himself at a Loss how that Visibility of
Saintship, which the honored Author of the Appeal to the Learned, supposes to
be all that is required in order to Admission to the Lord's Supper, can be much
to God's Honor, viz. Such a Visibility as leaves Room to believe that the
greater Part of those who have it, are Enemies to God in their Hearts, and
inwardly the Servants of Sin. He has once before Page 11. represented Mr.
Stoddard's Opinion in this Light. -- It Is a Piece of Justice due to the Truth,
and to the Name of that venerable Man, to enquire fairly into this Matter. --
The Words of that honored Author are these: Indeed by the Rule that God has
given for Admissions, if it be carefully attended, more unconverted Men will be
admitted than converted. He cites the venerable Mr. Cotton, who was on the
other Side of the Question; who speaks in these Words: Let Ministers use as
much Diligence and Vigilance as well they may, yet such is the Dimness of
discerning in human Frailty, and such is the Subtlety of many Hypocrites, that
it may be ninety nine Hypocrites may creep into the Church, to one single Sheep
of Christ. And further he notes, that the same Mr. Cotton preached as Boston,
"that it would be well, if ten Men in a Church were saved." Page 16, of the
Appeal. Now the plain Fact appears to be this: Mr. Stoddard is there answering
this Arment of Dr. Mather's, viz. Unsanctified Persons are not fit to be
admitted to the Lord's Supper, because they are not duly qualied to be Members
of particular Gospel Churches. He allows, that by the Rule that God has given
for Admissions, if it be carefully attended, more unconverted Persons will be
admitted than converted; and to prove that this would be the Case, even upon
Dr. Mather's Principles, and if what he thought was the Rule were carefully
attended; he quotes these Passages of Mr. Cotton, a Gentleman of the same
Principles, as Argumentum ad hominem. This I think every Reader who examines
that Matter, will see to be the plain State of that Case. Now whether Mr.
Edwards has done Honor or Justice to Mr. Stoddard, or the Truth, in the
Representation he has once and again made of this Passage. I leave the Reader
to judge.

Mr. Stoddard does not say, that when the Rule which God has given for
Admissions is carefully attended it leaves Reason to believe, that the greater
Part of those who are admitted, are (...) to God etc. Whether Mr. Edwards
intended it by so representing the Matter or not; yet this seems to imply that
according to Mr. Stoddard's Principles, the visible Church, judging upon the
visible Appearance of Things, must reasonably judge this of the most that are
admitted; whereas he intended no such Thing. He says, they must be visible
Saints who are admitted: They must be such Persons as God himself did admit
into the Church of Israel: Such Persons as the Apostles did admit into Gospel
Churches; Such as must be admitted, or else God will be greatly offended; and
whether they be such the Church is to judge by their Profession of the Gospel
Doctrines, and giving themselves up to God in Covenant. -- Now, though in Fact
many Hypocrites may do thus, and probably many more Hypocrites than real
Saints; yet the sole Ground of the public Judgment of the Church being their
outward Profession, Engagement, and Carriage, this don't leave Reason to judge
they are Hypocrites, it indeed they are so. The Rule which God has given for
Admissions, will admit such as God himself admitted into the Church of Israel,
and such as the Apostles admitted into Gospel Churches; and yet many of these
had not a thorough Work of Regeneration; yet God certainly thought it was for
his Honor to admit them. It is an Honor to the infinite Pity and
Condescension of God, to put peor Sinners under such Advantages, and
Engagements for his Glory, and their Salvation: It Is an Honor to God, that Men
openly declare their Conviction of the Truth of his Word: And as the Multitude
of the Subjects is the King's Honor, Prove. 14. 28. So the old Testament
Prophecies speak often of this Circumstance of the Honor of Christ in the
Gospel Church. The Multitude of his visible Subjects, if they carry outwardly
according to their Profession, spreads his Fame and Glory, and commends him to
the Consideration of those that are out of Covenant; and so do their Lives
commend him too,and his Religion. Their secret Hypocrisy, and breach of
Covenant, will aggravate their own Wickedness and Condemnation: But so long as
it is secret, it is no visible Dishonor to Christ.

Another Design which God has been pleased to tell us of, in admitting Members
into his Church, is to put them under Advantages for their Salvation, that they
may learn the Way of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 4. ^, -- 10. where it is plain, what one
End of his taking them into Covenant was that they may (...) fear God all (...)
Days they (...). upon the Ea^se, and (...) they may (...) And Chap. 1. 5. 1.
and Chap 14. 23. (...) Lord thy God, in the Place which i^ shall (...) place
his Name there, that (...). fear the Lord thy God always. And Chap. 31. 11. 12.
13. These Things make it evident what Way Christ is contesting with the Devil
to get the Hearts of Men; and may satisfy us that God thought it was a suitable
Way to carry on the War which he manages with the Devil; that by the visible
Dispensation of the Covenant, and its Ordinances, Men might be put under
Advantages to be, through divine Grace effectually brought to Christ, and give
him the whole Possession of their Hearts.

Mr. Edwards's 4th Argument, Page 43. is taken from various Scriptures, as Job.
1. 47. and Isai. 33. 14. and diverse others, setting forth those visible
Saints, or Professors, who are not truly pious, as Counterfeits, or Hypocrites.
From whence he argues, that it must be supposed that when they enter into
Covenant with God, they make a Profession of true Piety, whereas according to
Mr. Stoddard's Scheme, it is insinuated they never make any Pretense to any
Thing more than moral, Sincerity, and common Grace. This is a great
Misrepresention of the Matter: And so again, when Pa. 45. he speaks of all that
which he owns to be moral Sincerity, to be nothing beyond Lukewarmness. -- I am
at a Loss to conceive how it will help the Cause of Truth, to represent those
who are of Mr. Stoddard's Opinion, as teaching Men, that they may enter into
Covenant with God, with known and allowed (...), and that they have Religion
eno' if they make a lukewarm and hypocritical Profession. -- Mr. Stoddard
rightly supposes all visible Saints who are not truly pious, to be Hypocrites;
and the Scripture supposes and calls them so too: But will it therefore follow
that all Hypocrites know they are so, or because some Men may lawfully attend
the Lord's Supper, who have not sanctifying Grace, will it follow therefore
that they may lawfully come to the Sacrament with a lukewarm Spirit, and serve
two Masters? Mr. Edwards doubtless knows that such Divines as are of Mr.
Stoddard's Opinion do teach, and Mr. Stoddard himself taught Men, that they
ought to Covenant with God with their whole Hearts, to give up all their Hearts
and Lives to Christ: And being convinced of the Truth of the Gospel, and
Necessity of Salvation by Christ, they ought to enter into Covenant with God
with all the Strength and Power they have with a (...) Determination to keep
Covenant with God; and in the most (...) and diligent Use of the Ordinances of
Salvation, to cast themselves as far as they can upon the Encouragement and
Mercy of God for Help. And their making a Profession of this; and so far as we
(...) accordingly, is a sufficient Reason for their being publicly judged and
treated as visible Saints. These are as great Professions of Piety as any we
read of, made by Persons in the Old Testament, when God t^^k them into
Covenant; they are as strong Words and Profession as were used by any whom the
Apostles admitted into the Christian Church: And since God thought fit to admit
such Professions as sufficient to found a public Judgment of Charity upon
concerning the visible Saintship of those whom he admitted; and the Apostles
thought them sufficient for the same Purpose: why should any Divine now tell
us, that these same Professions don't imply, that there are any Pretenses of
any real Friendship, that they import no Pretense of loving God more, yea not
so much as his Enemies; no Pretense to love God above the World. And all this
Profession amounts to nothing more than Lukewarmness? All the Reason assigned,
is because an unsanctified Man may make them, and they don't necessarily
determine that the Person who makes them is godly. -- However, they are as good
Proofs as they were when the King of the visible Church trusted them in Mo^es's
Time: They are as good as they were in the Times of the Apostles.

To allege those Scriptures which Mr. Edwards has quoted. or all of like Sort
which are found in the Bible to prove, that Men may not lawfully enter into
Covenant with God, upon such a Profession, or that the Church may not lawfully
admit them; or that it was against the Mind of God that they should do so in
the Times of the Old Testament; is, as has been observed, to use them to
disprove as plain a Fact, as that ever the Sun shi^'d, or that Israel was the
Covenant People of God. That Text Mr. Edwards quotes Isai. 63. 8, 9, 10.
appears to me to be a full Answer to himself: He said, surely they are my
People, Children that will not lie; so he was their Savior: in all their
Affliction he was afflicted; but they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit. I
agree with him, that God speaks this, because in his present external Dealings
with his People, he did not act as Searcher of Hearts, but as King of the
visible Church. -- And so he also did, and always does in admitting them into
visible Covenant, trusting their Profession. This was not trusting a Profession
which necessarily implied they were regenerate, unless they lied: because they
never made such a Profession; nor did God require them to make such a
Profession; for then he would have required a (...): But speaking after the
Manner of Men, he trusted they would be true to their Vows, and keep Covenant
with him, as they promised to do, but did not; and therein he represents
himself as deceived by them. They were not steadfast in his Covenant, and then
Rebellions evidently appeared not to be the Spot of his Children.

Mr. Edwards's fifth Argument is propounded Pa. 45, 46. in this Manner: The
eight first Verses of the 56th Chapter of Isaiah, I think afford good Evidence
that such Qualifications are requisite in order to a due coming to the
Privileges of a visible Church State, as I have insisted on. -- Putting in the
Words due coming, seem to have made the Argument something more ambiguous than
the Terms of the Question. -- If by a due coming, we are to understand a coming
so as to be owned and accepted of God, and entitled to the Promises of
Salvation, we have no Controversy with him; nor do at all suppose, that any
Person can duly come to God, so as to be entitled to everlasting Life, without
Faith, andRepentance unfeigned, or without Sanctification. Nor, as was before
observed, am I disputing against the Substance of the Question he had laid down
in the Terms it is proposed; but against it as he has explained it, and the
Thing he disputes under the ambiguous Terms of it, which he tells us is Mr.
Stoddard's Question, That sanctifying Grace is not necessary in order to the
lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper.

If I can comprehend the Argument Mr. Edwards would draw from this Passage of
Scripture; it is to this Effect: That seeing this is a Prophecy of the
abolishing the ceremonial Law (which kept Eunuchs and Gentiles out from the
Ordinances of the Church) by the coming of Christ, by whom the ceremonial Law
should be removed out of the Way; and it is declared, that the great
Qualification for Acceptance with God in those Days, was Piety of Heart and
Practice; therefore Piety of Heart and Practice is necessary in the Time of the
Gospel, to the lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper. -- This is no more than
to say, that in the Time of the Gospel, it is necessary Persons should have
true Piety of Heart and Life, in order to God's everlasting Acceptance; and
therefore true Piety of Heart and Life, is necessary in order to the lawful
partaking of the Lord's Supper: Which is no arguing, but only begging the
Question.

If he intends by it, that in Opposition to the ceremonial Law, which kept the
Gentiles and Eunuchs out of the visible Church, the great Qualification which
should be necessary in the Gospel Times, for the Admission of Persons into the
visible Church, is in this Prophecy declared to be Piety of Heart and Practice.
This remains to be proved.

I think the right and plain Way of coming to the true understanding of this
Passage of Scripture is by considering the Antithesis in it, and its Analogy
with other Scriptures. It appears, that the Prophet for the Encouragement of
Eunuchs and Gentiles, sets forth the Antithesis or Opposition of their State
under the Gospel, to their then present State. Now this Antithesis does not lie
in the Terms of their everlasting Acceptance with God, or at their Admission
into the internal Covenant, which were Faith and Repentance, as much under the
Mosaic Dispensation, as under the Christian. It Is certain, that Men's being
Eunuchs did not hinder them from Acceptance with God upon the Terms of Faith
and Repentance. For Ebedmeleck, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, and
others, who were made Eunuchs, were accepted of God upon these Terms;
notwithstanding they were shut out from several Parts of the outward
Privileges of the Worship of God, by the ceremonial Law. Nor were the Gentiles
shut out from these invisible Blessings if they had these invisible
Qualifications, but only shut out from the outward Privileges of the Covenant,
for want of Circumcision: yet if they would submit to that, they were invited
to stand on the same Terms as did the Jews, as appears Exodus 12. 48, 49.
Therefore when the Prophet here speaks the Promises of God's Acceptance and
saving Blessings to the Eunuchs, that keep his Sabbaths, and choose the Things
that please him, and take hold on his Covenant. ^. 4. And to the Gentiles that
join themselves to the Lord to serve him, to be his Servants etc. that God will
bring them into his holy Mountain, and make them joyful in his House of Prayer,
and accept their Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices, etc. ^. 6, 7. Here is no
Antithesis at all between the State of the Gentiles and the Eunuchs in the
Christian and (...) Dispensation, for on those Terms they were accepted, and
should be as certainly entitled to God's everlasting Favor then, as now. --
The only Antithesis between the Representation of their State then, and now,
is, that under the Gospel, the ceremonial Law should be taken away, and Eunuchs
and Gentiles, should be under far greater outward Advantages for their
Salvation, than they were then; because under this Dispensation these
ceremonial Pollutions should not at all keep them out of the Church, but they
should stand upon equal Terms with the Jews, and those who were admitted to the
greatest outward Privileges in the Church; enjoy equally all the outward
Advantages of the Covenant of Grace, and Helps to keep Covenant with God, with
as much Ease, and in as great Latitude as they. It appears from the principal
Design of the Prophet, that this is the plain genuine Construction of this
Passage, and is confirmed by the 8th. The Lord which gathers the Outcasts of
Israel says, yet will I gather others unto him, besides those who are gathered
unto him. Where it is declared the Gentiles shall be gathered unto (...) Church
of Israel, to be made one Church with them. Or beside Israel, I will gather the
Gentiles, who shall be joined to him in the Church; and upon the same Terms;
for the ceremonial Law shall then make no Difference; they shall be equally
welcome to the Priesthood, from which Eunuchs were excluded by the Law; and to
the Gospel Ordinances and Privileges of the Gospel Passover, from which
uncircumcised Gentiles were excluded. So that nothing is spoken here to show
that sanctifying Grace is more necessary to the lawful partaking of the
Ordinances of the Gospel, than of the Law. -- In this Way Calovius, Forecius,
Musculus, and other most learned Commentators carry the Words and Sense of this
Passage. And what further confirms it, is, the Analogy of this Sense with other
Scriptures in the Old Testament, and the New; which abundantly assure us, that
the visible Church in the Old Testament and the New, is the same Church of
Christ; or that when the Jews rejected Christ, the Gentiles should be taken in
in their Stead, called by the same Name; the Church or People of God; and stand
in the same Relation to him; save only the Burden of the ceremonial Law
removed; and Christ known and owned as the Head and Author of the new
Dispensation. Genesis 9. 27. God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the
Tents of Shem. Shem was in Covenant, Japhet is to come into Covenant in like
Manner, the Terms the same, save only the ceremonial Law, which Christ took
away. Isai. 55. 5. In that Day Israel shall be a third with Egypt, and with
Assyria, even a Blessing in the midst of the Land, when the Lord of Hosts shall
bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my People, and Assyria the Wash of my Hands,
and Israel mine Inheritance. Here Egypt, Assyria, or the Gentiles, are taken
into Covenant in like Manner, and stood on like Terms. I omit to mention more,
because I shall have Occasion to take Notice of diverse like Passages
afterward.

Page 46. we have the sixth Argument in these Words: The Representations which
Christ makes of his visible Church from Time to Time in his Discourses and
Parables, make the Thing manifest which I have laid down. -- To show this, Mr.
Edwards first alleges Matthew. 7. and some other Places, representing the final
Issue of Things with Respect to the different Sorts of Members of the visible
Church. Page 47. from whence he thinks it is manifest, that all visible
Christians or Saints are such as profess a saving Interest in Christ and
Relation to him, and live in Hope of being hereafter owned as those that are so
interested and related. The Reason from whence this Consequence is drawn, is
this: The Paragraph in the 7th of Matthew. from. 21. ad finem, appears to be a
Description of false and insincere Professors and Members of the visible
Church, and of those who are faithful, and the issue of their Expectations at
the Day of Judgment. False, and insincere Professors are such as only say, or
cry, Lord, (...) Christ as their Lord, and professedly own Subjection to him,
but are not faithful to that Profession. Not every one, says Christ, that says
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but only those who beside
making a Profession do the Will of God. -- What plain or clear Consequence
follows from hence, but this, that it is not visibly entering into Covenant with
God, that will give Men just Ground of Hope of entering into Heaven; for it is
plain, that many who say, Lord, and enter into Covenant, prove faithless and
disobedient; and therefore will be shut out of Heaven, though they have made
never so high a Profession. Men that rest in an outward Profession, and
encourage themselves, that because of their outward Privileges and visible
Relation, to Christ, they shall be safe, without true Faith and sincere
Repentance, will be dreadfully disappointed, when the trying Time shall come.
By entering into Covenant with God, they became bound to keep Covenant, and
fulfill the Terms of the Covenant; to which Engagement they have proved false
and perfidious. This is the utmost I conceive, that will fairly follow from the
Representation given us in the Passage referred to. And that this is what
Christ intends to teach us about this Matter, I think appears evident, for that
he don't tell the Men they did not say, Lord, Lord, or that they were not in
the Church, or in Covenant; nor does he blame them for eating and drinking.
etc. but for not doing the Will of God. He don't fault them for entering into
Covenant, but for not keeping Covenant. The Prophecy of (...). Chapter 8. 2. which
Mr. Edwards refers to, appears to me a clear Confutation of his Argument.
Israel shall (...) my God, we know thee. The foregoing says, They have (...)
Covenant and trespassed against my Law. If they had (...) God's Covenant, it is
certain they were in Covenant, else it was impossible they should have
transgressed it; but being in Covenant, they cry, My God, we know thee. They
might truly say, My God, we know thee, in such a Sense as no other People in
the World could, and yet be Hypocrites. Not because they said, they had
sanctifying Grace, when they had not; but because they promised and engaged to
keep Covenant with God, and yet dealt falsely in his Covenant. This is no more
than God himself says of them, Amos. ^. 2. You only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth; therefore I will punish you for all your Iniquities. The
parallel Place, Luke 13. 2^. proves nothing different from the forecited
Passage, and needs nothing more to be said to it.

Page 48. The same Thing, Mr. Edwards says, is manifest by the Parable of the
ten Virgins, Math. 25. The two Sorts of Virgins, he says, evidently represent
two Sorts of Men in the visible Church. The wise, those who are true
Christians, and the foolish, those who are apparent, but not true Christians.
-- That there are two such Sorts of Men in the visible Church, Mr. Edwards well
knows we allow; and that all that are Members of the visible Church, are Saints
by Calling and Profession; and that they are Saints in a Judgment of rational
Charity, he knows is yielded by us; therefore all his arguing on this Head is
needless: And to prove his Question in the Terms he has worded it, is needless.
And this is all that his arguing from this Text looks like doing. But he ought
to prove it in the Sense he has explained it; and in Opposition to Mr.
Stoddard's Question, as he lets us know he designs it shall be understood. Now
I cannot find that his arguing from the Representation given us here of the
different State of Church Members, is any Thing to this Purpose. The Virgins
are the Members of the visible Church, their Lamps are their Profession of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and their Engagement to subject and give up themselves
to Jesus Christ, and seek and look for Salvation only on Gospel Terms: And all
their Attendance on Gospel Ordinances naturally holds forth, and imports this
Obligation on all the Members of the Church; and it is from the Nature and
Purpose of this Profession, we say the Church is to judge the Members to be
wise Virgins, or what they make a Show of; yea we are taught here too, that
though Fact and Experience has shown in past Ages, that great Multitudes of
Church Members who have Covenanted with God, have proved false and perfidious,
and have broken Covenant; and Christ has told us it will be so with the
Christian Church; and will so appear when the Searcher of Hearts will come to
judge the World, and make manifest the Secrets of Men's Hearts; and we may have
secret Reasons to fear this is the Case with many of the visible Church now:
Yet as the Rule of judging is the same; so our public Judgment and outward
Carriage, must, according to that Rule, be alike: But that these Virgins made
any other Profession that they were regenerate, or that that Profession, or
their Experience, is the Rule of the Church's Judgment, I cannot find here the
Shadow of a Proof.

Toward the close of this Argument, Page 49, Mr. Edwards endeavors to prove,
that true Piety is what Persons ought to look at in themselves as a proper
Ground for them to proceed upon in coming into the visible Church of Christ,
and taking the Privileges of its Members.

It would be ridiculous in any Man to dispute, that true Piety is not what
Persons ought to look to as a proper Ground to proceed in coming to the Lord's
Supper, or in praying, hearing, or any other Duty of divine Worship. True Piety
is what Men ought always to look at, and no Man does any Duty rightly without
it. But Mr. Edwards knows the Question he has here to prove is, that a Man may
not lawfully come without it.

The Evidence he brings to prove it is, from the Parable of the Marriage which
the King made for his Son, Matthew. 22. particularly. 11, 12. And when the King
came in to see the Guests, he saw there a Man that had not on a wedding
Garment; and he said unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having on
a wedding Garment? and he was speechless.

He cites Part of Mr. Stoddard's Answer to Dr. Mather's Argument from this
Text: Appeal, Page 4, 5. Here is a Representation of the Day of Judgment, and
such Persons as come for Salvation without a wedding Garment shall be rejected
in that Day. So that here being nothing said about the Lord's Supper, all
arguing from this Scripture falls to the Ground. -- If we allow Mr. Edwards's
Exposition of the Text, it does nothing help his Argument; for himself owns,
that Christ's coming to see the Guests, means his coming to Judgment: And it is
then, and not before, he condemns the Man for not having a wedding Garment. We
read nothing of his condemning him for coming into the visible Church without
saving Grace; for Good and Bad were compelled to come in,. 10. but for being
found without, now when he came to Judgment: Showing us, that all who shall be
found without that Garment at that Day, will be condemned. We know that
according to the Proverb, Parables don't run upon all Four. We are to attend to
the main Scope and Drift of them, which is plainly to show us, that all of
those who have been in the House, or Church, even to a Man, who shall be found
without a wedding Garment when Christ comes to Judgment, will be condemned:
They will not all continue in his House till he comes to Judgment. What though
this coming into the visible Church upon Christ Invitation sent forth in all
Ages, by no Means, as Mr. Edwards says, signifies Men's coming for Salvation
after the Day of Grace is at an End, at Christ's appearing in the Clouds of
Heaven: Yet without Doubt, it signifies that there are Hypocrites in the
visible Church, who deceive themselves with vain Expectations of Salvation,
though they never keep Covenant with God; and that such Hypocrites will come with
Expectation of Salvation at that Time: Which is no other than the coming of
those who are in the ninth of Matthew. represented as coming for Salvation after
the Day of Grace is at an End, and the Door is shut, and cry, Lord, Lord; as
Mr. Edwards has just been showing under the same Argument; and even here he
says too; As to the Man's being cast out of the King's House when the King
comes in to see the Guests, it is agreeable to other Representations made of
false Christians being thrust out of God's Kingdom at the Day of Judgment. --
It Is certain, that the Man was brought into the King's House by the King's
Servants, who were ordered to compel him to come in. It is also certain, that
he was turned out of the King's House at the Day of Judgment; and it appears
from the Parable, that he was not shut out of Heaven when the King came,
because he had not true Grace when he entered into the King's House, or the
visible Church; for of this there is not one Word said; but because he was
found without that wedding Garment, when the King came to Judgment. -- As Mr.
Humphrey observes, the Lord's very Exclusion of him that came to the Feast
manifests, that he must needs be first admitted, and brought in by the
Servants. His Sin consisted not in his coming thither, for that the Servants
were bid to compel him to by which I conceive is meant his Duty, but in his
Neglect of putting on the wedding Garment.

So that I think Mr. Stoddard's Argument might very well have saved Mr. Edwards
the Trouble of his Argument from this Text.

The 7th Argument is propounded, Page 52. viz. If we consider what took Place
in Fact in the Manner and Circumstances of the Admission of Members into the
primitive Christian Church, and the Profession they made in order to their
Admission, as we have these Things recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, it
will further confirm the Point I have endeavored to prove. --

I must for the Sake of some Sorts of Readers again observe, that if the
Reverend Author had only meant, it would prove the Point nearly as it stands
worded in his Question, that none but visible Saints are to be admitted, or
none but such as are in Profession, and in the Eye of the Church's Christian
Judgment or a Judgment of rational Charity, godly Persons: I should readily own
the Argument proves this; and this is a Point I don't controvert with him. --
But as he has explained it, the Point is, that Christian Grace it self is
requisite in the Person who is to come to the Sacrament, and the Dictates of
his Conscience that he has it, the Thing that obliges him, or gives him a Right
to offer himself, and a positive Judgment of the Church, founded on some
positive Appearance of it, distinguishing his Profession and Engagement from
all that is morally sincere, is to be the Ground of the Church's Proceeding in
admitting him. See Page 4, 5. and elsewhere. Or, that sanctifying Grace is
necessary to his lawful Attendance on the Sacraments, and a positive Judgment
of the Church that he has this, necessary to their admitting him. This is what
I dispute.

For the Proof of the Point, the first Thing Mr. Edwards proposes to be
considered, is the Account we have in the 2 d of Acts, of the three Thousand
Converts. -- Now the Account we have there in the first Part of the Chapter,
is, that at the Day of Pentecost, Christ sent the Promise of the Father upon
the Disciples, the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost; and then they spoke with
Tongues to the understanding of all those of all Nations that were present; to
the great Amazement of all, to. 12. but when some mocked, and represented them
as drunken Men; Peter shows them, that these Gifts of Tongues were not the
Effects of Drunkenness, but the Fulfillment of a famous Prophecy, in Jeel 2.
which was to receive its Accomplishment in the Days of the Messiah, from whence
he unanswerably proves that that Jesus of Nazareth whom they had lately
crucified was the Messiah, and that God had raised him up from the Dead, as he
foretold David he would, in the 16 th Psalm, which he proves must needs be
spoken of Christ; as also what is said Psalm. 11^ 2. From whence he bids them
know assuredly, that that same Jesus whom they had crucified is both Lord and
Christ: Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their Hearts, and said
unto Peter etc. Men and Brethren, what shall we do? It appears they were
convinced that that Jesus whom they had rejected and crucified as an Impostor,
was the true Messiah, and the Savior, whom God had promised to Israel; and
therefore in putting him to Death, they had shed innocent Blood, and rejected
the Messiah: whereupon convinced of their Sin they cry out, What shall we do?
To which the Apostle replies.. 38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall
receive the Gift of the holy Ghost; for the Promise is unto you, and to your
Children etc. There is not one Word said about any other Faith but believing
that Jesus was the Messiah, and they are called to repent of their Sin in
rejecting and crucifying him. Allowing that with suitable Explication, this
contains the Doctrine of saving Faith and gracious Repentance to which
Remission of Sins is promised; yet where is the Explication? And what Word was
said to open the Nature of Faith and Repentance; and show them the
discriminating Marks and Differences of it from an historical Belief, or
Conviction of their Judgment of the Truth of these Things, unless this is
supposed to be implied in the 40th. And with many other Words did he testify
and exhort, saying, Save your selves from this untoward Generation; who having
rejected the Messiah, and crucified him, resolve to continue in Infidelity? --
All that the Text declares is, that the Apostle proved that Jesus was the
Messiah, and that the Jews being in Covenant with God, they and their Children
had the first offer of Salvation made them by Christ. -- It would, says Mr.
Blake, have been lost Labor for the Apostle to have pressed those who had
crucified Christ as a Blasphemer and Impostor, to receive Baptism in his Name,
or hope for Remission of Sins by him, and through his Blood; so long as they took
themselves to be without Sin in shedding his Blood. -- But the Apostle shows,
that notwithstanding, they and their Seed were under a Promise of God; and puts
them into a Way in Acceptance of Christ in the GospelTender in the present Way
of Administration of the Covenant, to be continued his People, still in
Covenant, and that they might enjoy it in the former Latitude to them and to
their Children, the Promise (of which they were not yet dispossessed of, but
stood as a People of God in visible Covenant, and their Children) is here
brought as a Motive to embrace the Way which their long expected and desired
Messiah had now instituted, by which he would admit all that he should call by
the Gospel into Covenant with him.

It Is added, then they which gladly received the Word were baptized. Mr.
Edwards says, their Profession was of that Repentance for Remission of Sins,
and that Faith in Christ, which the Apostle had directed them to, in Answer to
their Inquiry, What they should do to be saved. -- We don't read that the
Apostle said any Thing about Faith, but only their believing that Jesus was the
Messiah, and shows them the Necessity of their repenting of their Sin in
rejecting and crucifying the Messiah, and of Baptism in the Name of Christ for
the Remission of Sins, that they might receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost. The
Answer therefore can by no Necessity from the Text imply more, than that they
were convinced of their Sin in crucifying and rejecting Christ; and now
believed him to be the Messiah, and submitted to Baptism instituted by him as a
Rite of Admission into his Church, and being continued in Covenant with God,
and enjoying the Ordinances of Salvation -- And what follows no more proves the
Thing in Question than what goes before; unless it proves, that it was no
Matter of Joy that the Messiah was come, nor Occasion of Praise to be continued
in Covenant with God, and under all proper Ordinances and Means of Salvation.
-- Nor does this seem to be any better Proof of the Point in the last Verse,
the Lord added to the Church daily such as shall be saved. Mr. Edwards owns
(...) was a common Appellation given to all visible Christians; therefore it
was not an Appellation appropriated to the Regenerate, in distinction from the
Unregenerate; but applied to them only as visible Christians; no more importing
that the Church made a positive Judgment that they were regenerate Persons,
than the like Appellation given to the whole Church of Israel, Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
Happy art (...). O Israel, a People saved by the Lord.

We don't dispute but that the A postles supposed, and believed in Charity, so
far as they had any Thing to do to suppose and believe about it, that God had
given these Persons saving Repentance, and an Heart purifying Faith. But the
Thing is, what was the Ground of this charitable Supposal? Nothing is expressed
in the Words which they professed, but what the Apostles knew, and we know some
unsanctified Men may say, and speak true; and yet the same Profession contains
in it, that which if understood in the most favorable Sense is a Profession of
true Piety. The Apostles not only supposed, but they knew that Christ had taken
it in this Sense as King of the visible Church, and thereby taught them to
trust to it so far as no longer to treat such Persons as were converted from
Judaism, or Heathenism to Christanity, as Jews or Heathens, but as Christians;
and People in Covenant with God: But that in Mr. Edwards Sense they made a
positive Judgment they were regenerate, we do not find. -- And it appears that
they showed them from Time to Time, that though they were in Covenant, yet if
they did not keep Covenant by Faith and Repentance, they would miss of
Salvation. -- We read (Act. 11. 21.) that the Hand of the Lord was with the
Preachers of the Gospel to the Grecians at Antioch, and a great Number believed
and turned to the Lord; and when Tidings of these Things came to the Church at
Jerusalem, they sent Barnabas and Paul to them, who when they had seen the
Grace of God were glad; and exhorted them that with Purpose of Heart they would
cleave unto the Lord, and much People was added to the Lord. Mr. Edwards
supposes diverse Things, which I cannot find he has any more Reason to suppose,
than we have that Paul and Barnabas did instruct these Gentiles Converts in the
true Nature of Faith and Repentance, and showed them that their being
Professors, and entering into Covenant with God, would be utterly insufficient,
if they were not renewed and sanctified by the Holy Ghost; and really did what
they had Covenanted to do, and was implied in their Profession. So Act. 13. 43.
Many of the Jews and religious Proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who
speaking to them, persuaded them to continue in the Grace of God. These, and
many such Exhortations to hold fast their Profession, lest they should receive
the Grace of God in vain; I think must needs lead us to suppose that these
included Instructions about the Nature and Terms of the Covenant of Grace,
which they must in Sincerity comply with, and fulfill as well as profess, or
else they would not be saved; as that they were Exhortations to persevere in
Holiness.

Upon Act. 11. 18. and 15. 19. When they heard these Things, they held their
Peace, and glorified God, saying, then has God also granted unto the Gentiles
Repentance unto Life; -- and put no Difference between us and them, purifying
their Hearts by Faith: Mr. Edwards founds a very strong Supposition that the
Apostles in his Senses supposed and believed that God had given them saving
Repentance, and an Heart purifying Faith. -- The plain Case in both these
Texts, as every Reader may see, is; that Peter's going to the Gentiles, and
making the offer of the Gospel to them which was the first Time it was done)
was a Thing which the jewish Converts had no Notions of; but supposed that
still the Covenant of Grace was to be confined to their Nation; and that it was
against the Will of God that the Jews should have any more Communion with the
Gentiles, than they had under the former Dispensation. -- And that the Gentiles
should be taken into Covenant with God without the Ceremonial Law, and stand
upon equal Terms with them, was a Mystery hidden from Ages and Generations; and
in many Places of the Gospel spoken of as a Matter of Wonder and Amazement: It
was one of the great Stumbling Blocks to the Nation of the Jews, and an
Occasion of their persecuting the Apostles: It was a Matter which needed two
Miracles to convince Peter of, as we find Chap. II. and Peter's doing as he
did, was the Occasion of the Contention of the Jewish Converts with him. Now
when Peter gives them an Account in what Manner God had convinced him, they
held their Peace, etc. What is proved by this but that God had taken, and would
take the Gentiles into Covenant with him, on the same Terms as the Jews; that
the Wall of Partition was broken down, and the want of Compliance with the
Ceremonial Law, was no Bar nor Hindrance at all to their Salvation, but they
should be as welcome to Salvation by Christ as the Jews; taken into Covenant,
in the same Latitude as they; and be saved by Faith without the Law. And if
Cornelius, and his Friends were all really gracious Persons, yet these Passages
don't prove it; for the Gift of the Holy Ghost, or his falling on them, we are
told, was in the Gift of Tongues, Chapter 10. 48. which Persons might have without
sanctifying Grace; nor do these passages prove, that the Apostles and Converts
made any more positive Judgment they were sanctified, than they had formerly
made of the whole Body of the jewish Church.

In the rest of the 54th and Beginning of the 55th Pages, there are several
Things supposed, agreeable to Mr. Edwards's Scheme, but since they want Proof,
they cannot want an Answer.

The next Passage urged in Proof, Page 55. is the Story of Philip and the
Eunuch, which we have Act. 8. -- The Argument is after this Manner: That when
the Eunuch desired to be baptized, Philip answers, ^. 37. If thou believe
with all thine Heart thou may. Mr. Edwards says, he cannot conceive what
should move Philip to utter these Wordsetc. if at the same Time he supposed
that the Eunuch had no Manner of Need to look at any such Qualification in
himself, or at all to inquire whether he had any such Faith or no.etc. I trust
the Reader will here again call to Mind that Mr. Stoddard taught, that visible
Saintship is necessary to Church Membership: And in order to a Man's being a
visible Saint, I suppose no Protestant Divine thinks less is needful than a
Declaration either by Words or Actions, or both, that a Person is solemnly
separated to God, devoted to his Service, engaged to seek all the Grace of the
Covenant in the Way, and only on the Terms of the Gospel-Offer through Jesus
Christ: and if he is adult, that he does sincerely and with all his Heart
believe the Gospel. Now to represent the Matter, as if those of a different
Opinion from Mr. Edwards looked on it as no Matter, whether a Person coming to
the Gospel Ordinances had any Grace or no, and that he has no Manner of Need to
inquire any Thing about his Sincerity, is a Way of treating Men and Questions,
that I leave to another Judgment.

In Answer to the Argument, these Things are to be observed,

1. That it does not seem at all probable, that Philip did here inquire about
the Regeneration or Sanctification of the Eunuch. -- The History informs us,
that he had gone up from Ethiopia to Jerusalem to worship at the Temple, so
that it is manifest he was a Proselyte to the jewish Religion, otherwise he
could not have been admitted to (...) the Temple. Some think we are not
literally to understand (...) Word Eunuch; that it may here signify, as the
Word will bear to be rendered, Lord-Chamberlain, or Treasurer; and if so, he was
doubtless a complete Proselyte: And this seems to be evident, because we are
told that Peter was the first by whom God did visit the Gentiles, to take out
of them a People for his Name, Act. 15. 14. And if this Man was a Proselyte to
the jewish Religion, he was already in Covenant with God; but if he was an
Eunuch in the strict Sense of the Word, and so by Reason of the Ceremonial Law
could not be admitted to all the Worship of the Jews; yet Commentators suppose
Eunuchs were owned as Members of the jewish Church, when they went so far as
the Ceremonial Law would permit them; and so (...) was in Covenant with God:
and be sure his being an Eunuch (...) not shut him out from the internal
Covenant and Grace of God: And both his Profession, and the Pains he took in
traveling so many Scores, or Hundreds of Miles to attend the instituted
Worship of God, and enjoy Communion with him, as well as the Employment Philip
found him in, gave some Reason to think he was a godly Man, and so does the
visible Humility he showed in receiving Philip, a Stranger, so readily to
instruct him; and the Desire he showed to be instructed in the Doctrine of the
Scripture: These Things make it look probable that Philip did not inquire to be
satisfied about his Regeneration, seeing it appeared he was in Covenant with
God, and there was as much Evidence of his Saintship, as was will not to be
enquired after in the jewish Church, in order to a Person's Communion in the
Sacraments. -- But if this were not so, yet

2. It seems evident Philip did not enquire to be satisfied of the Eunuch's
Experiences in order to make a positive Judgment that his Faith was a saving
Faith. If we take the Eunuch's Answer to Philip's Question, to which it was a
Reply, and compare them together, they don't from any Necessity in the Nature
or Meaning of Words declare any other Faith than it is possible for an
unregenerate Man to have. They may imply saving Faith, and they may include no
more than the clear Conviction of his Judgment, and Conscience, and the Assent
of his Understanding to that Truth that Jesus was the Messiah: And as they did
not necessarily imply more than this, Philip from thence could make no positive
Conclusion of any Thing more from them; therefore his being satisfied with that
Answer, implies that his Question designed no more. And this is further evident
from the Account we have in the Beginning of this Chapter, that this same
Philip went down, and preached the Gospel at Samaria; where we are told, that
those who had been bewitched by Simon the Sorcerer, believed Philip's preaching
the Things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, and
were baptized; and Simon himself believed also, and was baptized, Ver. 12, 13.
Now it seems to be morally certain, that Philip's enquiring of the Eunuch,
amounted to no more than his enquiring of Simon, and that he was as easily
satisfied in the one Case as the other.

To prove that Philip by the Question he put to the Eunuch, Whether he believed
with all his Heart, did intend to get Satisfaction of his Sanctification, so as
to make a positive Judgment thereof, and that the Eunuch understood that he
must give this Satisfaction, in order to his receiving Baptism; Mr. Edwards has
page 55, 56. numbered many Passages of Scripture, where serving God with all the
Heart, fearing God with all the Heart, walking before him with all the Heart,
and the like, means a gracious Sincerity. From whence he aims to show, that
Philip must needs intend this, when he asked the Eunuch, if he believed with
all his Heart; and that the Eunuch must needs answer in this Sense.

To come to a fair Determination of this Matter, we ought to consider that the
Heart, when it is spoken of in Scripture with Respect to Men, commonly signifies
the Soul, containing it is Faculties of Reason, Understanding, Judgment, Will,
and Affections. Sometimes all, sometimes one, sometimes the other: As any Man
may be satisfied who will consult the Bible himself, or look into Wilson's
Christian Dictionary, or Leigh's Critica Sacra; where he will be turned to the
Places. -- Doing a Thing with the Heart, the whole Heart, or a perfect Heart,
do signify the Engagement of a man's Soul, his Reason, his Judgment, his
Desires, or Affections, about that Thing concerning which they are spoken. This
is a Manner of Speech which is usual among Mankind in our Days; and the
Scriptures show us it was a usual Manner of speaking in the Times in which they
were written. When a Man is said to do a Thing with all his Heart, or a perfect
Heart, it signifies that he is in earnest, sincerely, cheerfully set to do it,
or in doing it. According to this usual Manner of speaking, God requires Men to
(...) him their Hearts, to serve him, to love him with all their Hearts;
intending by it such a Sincerity as he will own and accept; which besure is
nothing less than a gracious Sincerity; which never can be, unless the whole
Soul, and all its Faculties, be engaged for God. This was required in the
Covenant, Deuteronomy 11. 13 Deuteronomy (...) And when God gives the Character of a godly
Man from this usual Manner of speaking concerning the Faculties, Desires and
Affections of the Heart, he does it as (...) the Knower, or Searcher of Hearts.
But how will this any Ways prove that when Men use the Expressions of all the
Heart, or the whole Heart, and the like, that it must necessarily be understood
in the same Sense, or any otherwise than on a charitable Presumption, that
where the Heart, i. e. the Affections, Desires and Purpose of the Soul appear
to be engaged, there the Grace of God has taken hold of the Man, and turned his
Heart to God. For Men are incapable to judge in the same Way that God does, as
Knowers of other Men's Hearts, and were never trusted to do so. The like
Expressions are used not only in common Speech among Men, but in the Scripture,
when they signify only the Engagement of a Man's Soul, or his Desires and
Affections about a Thing, and not a gracious Sincerity. And Mr. Edwards is
really mistaken when he supposes, that not so much as one Place can be
produced, wherein there is the least Evidence or Appearance of their being used
to signify any Thing but a gracious Sincerity: for it is said 1 Chronicles. 12. 28.
concerning the Thousands of the several Tribes of Israel, that they all came
with perfect Heart to make David King: Here is some Appearance that the Words
perfect Heart, are used in a Sense that means nothing about a gracious
Sincerity. So when the Princes and Congregation contributed for the building of
the Temple, it is said 1 Chronicles. 29. 9. Then the People rejoiced for that they
offered willingly, because with perfect Heart, they offered willingly to the
Lord. The Expression of a perfect Heart is as strong, as all the Heart, or the
whole Heart. And Yet I suppose few think that all these People had a gracious
Sincerity, or that these Words were ever designed to testify any such Thing to
us; but that according to the usual Way of speaking, they were hearty and
engaged in this Business, they did it cheerfully, and without known Guile or
Deceit. I conceive that these Expressions are spoken after the Manner of Men;
and when God is pleased to use them, he uses a Phrase which has been usual
among Mankind to signify an Engagement of the Soul, and its Affections and
Faculties, about that of which it is spoken, without any known or allowed Guile
or Deceit. Though God who knows Men's Hearts, and is able to tell when this
Sincerity is gracious, is pleased to describe their Piety to Him by that
Engagement, and Affection of Soul, the visible Appearance of which to us is the
lowest Kind of Evidence, because we are not able to distinguish the Actings of
this Heartiness when it is human, and proceeds from moral Principles, from that
which is gracious in other Men. Whence it appears that the Rule of public
judging is upon such a Profession of the Conviction of the Heart of the Truth
of God's Word, and the Engagement of the Soul to obey it without known Guile or
Deceit. And if there can be no real Conviction and Determination of a Man's
Judgment and Affections without sanctifying Grace, or if there were no such
Distinction known in the Apostles Times, I am satisfied there is no more
Occasion for this Dispute; but I think this Distinction is as plain in the
Apostles Time as ours, Jam. 3. 2. If any Man sin not in Word, he is a perfect
Man. Which some Commentators think is as much as to say, if a Man so behave
himself, in his Speech and Conversation, as that the Rules of God's Word don't
condemn him for an Hypocrite, he is to be judged and treated as sincere.

Another Thing which seems to make Mr. Edwards very positive that Philip must
here be demanding such Satisfaction of true Grace in the Eunuch, and that the
Eunuch must himself be satisfied that he had it, in order to his receiving
Baptism, is; That the Word believing in the New Testament answers to the Word
trust in the Old, and believing with the Heart, is a Word used to signify
saving Faith. To which Purpose he quotes Romans 10 9, 10. and Chap. 8. 17, 18. --
Although believing sometimes signifies the same as trusting, yet certainly many
times it does not. So believing sometimes signifies saving Faith; and the same
Word believing is often used for Faith, when it signifies no more than the
Assent of the Understanding and Judgment upon moral Evidence, and without a
Distinction in the Word, as has been already observed; and appears not only in
the Case of Simon, but also Joh. 7. 31. And many of the People believed on him,
and said, when Christ comes will be do more Miracles than these which this Man
has done. Joh. 8. 30. 31. And as he spoke these Words many believed on him;
then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, if ye continue in my Word,
then are ye my Disciples indeed. And Joh. 2. 23, 24. Now when he was in
Jerusalem at the Passover on the Feast Day, many believed in his Name when they
saw the Miracles which he did; but Jesus did not commit himself unto them,
because he knew all Men. -- And it is certain, upon such a believing a Man is
bound to declare he does believe in the Name of Christ, or make a Profession of
the Christian Religion, from Joh. 12. 42, 43. Nevertheless among the chief
Rulers also many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did not
confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue, for they loved the
Praise of Men more than the Praise of God. From whence I think appears the
inconclusiveness of Mr. Edwards's arguing to prove that Philip inquired of the
Eunuch, in order to make a positive Judgment that he was an holy Man, and that
the Eunuch's Answer was such as to imply, that he designed, or thought himself
bound to give him Satisfaction of this, in order to his receiving Baptism from
him. It appears plainly that Philip's Enquiry was, whether he was thro'ly
convinced that Jesus was the Messiah; and he plainly answered, that he really,
or heartily believed it. This Passage shows us, that the Baptizer ought to be
satisfied by a Person's Profession, that he really believes the Gospel, and
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Savior: And the Person whose Judgment
and Conscience, is clearly convinced of this Truth, is bound to declare it. I
hope no Protestant Church will admit Persons to the Enjoyment of the Ordinances
upon lower Evidence of their Sincerity, than the Eunuch's Profession could give
Philip.

Mr. Edwards's 8th Argument, Page 58, is taken from the Manner of the Apostles
treating and addressing the primitive Churches in their Epistles; upon which he
spends more than 14 Pages.

As far as I can find out what he intends as the Topics and Force of his
arguing, I will endeavor to weigh and consider them. I take them to be these.

1. The Apostles in their Epistles speak to the Churches, and of them, as
supposing and judging them to be gracious Persons.

2. That the Members of these Churches had such an Opinion of themselves.

3. That the Members of these primitive Churches had this Judgment of one
another, and of the Members of the visible Church of Christ in general. --

The Thing to be proved from hence is, that the Apostles and primitive
Christians not only though it that these Persons were Christians by Reason of their
external Calling, and professed Compliance with that Call, but had formed a
positive Jndgment concerning every one of them singly, that they were real
Saints. -- Which Judgment must be founded upon something beyond and beside
their external Calling, and visible Profession to comply with it, and to be
separated for God. -- And therefore this Judgment must be founded either upon
Revelation, or a personal Acquaintance with their Experiences, or a Presumption
that others would not admit them without such Evidence. -- For Mr. Edwards
knows, and quotes Mr. Stoddard's Opinion, that none ought to be admitted but
what in a Judgment of rational Charity are true Christians. Appeal, Page 2, 3,
10, 28, 33, 67, 73, 93, 94. -- The Force of all his arguing from these Topics
lies, as I conceive, in this -- That their treating the Churches in the Manner
they do in their Epistles would be unaccountable, if the Members of the
primitive Churches were not admitted into them under any such Notion of their
being really godly Persons, and Heirs of eternal Life, nor with any Respect to
such a Character appearing on them; and that they themselves joined to these
Churches without any such Pretense, as having no such Opinion of themselves.
These are his Words, Page 64. -- And that the treating them in such a Manner
would not be consistent with Faithfulness in their Ministry, but the ready Way,
and the most direct Course in the World eternally to undo them. Page 69, 70.
The Reader will judge whether the Manner of Mr. Edwards's treating the
Question, and representing the Opinion of Mr. Stoddard and others, in the Words
I have quoted above, be not unaccountable; though this is neither the first nor
the last Time of his treating the Matter in such a Manner: As if Mr. Stoddard
and his Adherents, supposed Persons were to be admitted into the Church without
any Notion of their being godly, or any Respect to such a Character appearing
on them; and that they themselves are without any such Pretense: When Mr.
Stoddard has said the contrary nine Times over in the Appeal; and none of Mr.
Edwards's Opposers ever thought of admitting any but visible Saints. But they
think God has given and established a certain known Rule by which the public
Judgment is to be made of Men's visible Saintship; and that those who publicly
appear to have the Qualifications required by that Rule, are to be publicly
treated as visible Saints, and that such ought to enter into Covenant with God,
and may lawfully attend his Ordinances, whether they be real Saints or not. --
But to the Argument, I answer,

1. This Treatment of the primitive Churches by the Apostlesetc. is no more
strange nor unaccountable upon Mr. Stoddard's Opinion, than was God's Treatment
of the jewish Church. Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. For then art an holy People unto the
Lord (...) God: The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special People unto
himself (...) all People that are upon the Face of the Earth: The Lord did not
set his Love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in Number than any
People; for ye were the fewest of all People; but because the Lord loves you,
and because he would keep the Oath which he had sworn unto your Fathers. Dan.
8. 24. He shall destroy the holy People. Chapter 12. 7. When he shall have
accomplished to (...) the Power of the holy People The whole Body of the Church
are called God's (...), and (...) Prophets. 1 Chronicles. 16. 22. and the same Psalm.
105. 1^. (...). (...) And ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy
Notion. Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Yea he loved the People, all (...) Saints are in thy Hand.
Psalm. 149. 1. The Church is called the Congregation of the Saints. And many
other Places to the like Purpose may be observed through the Writings of Moses,
the (...), and Prophets. May I not now ask Mr. Edwards with as good Reason, as
he asks; how unaccountable would these Things be, if all these People were not
in such a positive Judgment, as he speaks of, real Saints? For what Difference
is there in all the Epithets and Characters he has heaped up from the
New Testament? Diverse of which are Quotations of these and like Passages from
the Old Testament, or References to them, and Applications of them to the
New Testament Church. It Is beyond all Dispute, that to (...) beloved of God, to
be a Saint, to be an holy Man, to it, (...), and the like, do signify the same
Thing in the Old Testament as the New; and therefore these Questions no more
prove the New Testament Churches to be real Saints, than the Old; nor that the
Apostles made any more positive Judgment they were so, than the King of the
visible Church or his Ministers did of the Old Testament Church; nor that they
went upon any other Grounds. -- It makes it evident, that this Manner of
treating Churches and Bodies of Men, and such Expressions used to them, and of
them, are to be understood in no other Sense than to signify a fedaeral
Holiness; their Covenant Engagement and Separation to be the Lord's; devoted to
his Service, and bound to look for his Mercy in the Way of the Covenant. I can
conceive nothing else can be manifest by all these Things, of the Judgment of
the Apostles and primitive Churches, but that they treated the Christian Church
in the same Manner in which God had treated the Jewish Church, as a People who
were called to be Saints, who by their solemn Covenanting with God had given
themselves up to him, and were bound to keep Covenant with him, and from thence
in their public Judgment and visible Treatment of them, they were bound to
suppose they did, until the contrary appeared: They trusted them as God did
Israel; I Said, surely they are Children that will not lie, so he was their
Savior. -- And what makes it further evident that they treated them in this
Manner upon no other Ground is, because they tell us that God had made known to
them that great Mystery which had been from Ages and Generations, that the
Gentiles were to be received into the Church that the Jews were. Ephesians. 3. 4, 5,
6. Whereby when ye read ye may understand my Knowledge in the Mystery of
Christ, which in other Ages was not made known unto the Sons of Men, as it is
now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, that the
Gentiles should be FELLOW HEIRS, and of the SAME BODY, and Partakers of the
Promise of Christ by the Gospel. That the Gentiles were to be engrafted into
the same Olive from whence the Jews were broken off by Unbelief; and that they
should in common with the Jews partake of the Root and Fatness of the
Olive Tree, Romans 11, 17, etc. Which Olive Tree, is sufficiently proved by Mr.
Blake, to be the jewish Church. -- And this is still further evident by the
Apostle Peter's first Epist. 2. 9. applying to Christians a Passage which is
spoken of the jewish Church, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. Ye are a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that ye should show forth the
Praises of him who has called you out of Darkness, into his mavelous Light;
which in Time past were not a People, but are now the People of God; which had
not obtained Mercy, but now have obtained Mercy. Wherein he shows that
Christians were brought into a like Covenant Relation to God, and on like Terms
are his holy People; that is, in a Way of Covenant, and on the Terms of
Covenant keeping, to which they engaged by entering in like Manner into
Covenant, which Engagement, God as King of the visible Church would trust after
the Manner of Men, 'till they appeared to contradict it; as he did by the Jews.

2. It appears from the Accounts of the New Testament, and the Nature of
Things, impossible that the Apostles should make any such positive Judgment of
the real Piety of the Generality of Christians in the primitive Church; as is
here supposed.

For in the first Place, We have no Account any where in the NewTestament of
any Thing else required of any jewish or Heathen Convert to Christianity, in
order to his Baptism, or Admission into the Christian Church, but a Profession
of his Belief that Jesus was the Christ; or the Savior by whom alone God
offered Salvation to Men; allowing that this may include in it all that is
essential to justifying Faith; yet this must be with very considerable
Explications, and the adding some very important Words from other Passages of
Scripture: And it is certain that a Profession in those Words which was will not to
be required in order to Baptism, do sometimes import no more than a Conviction
of the Understanding, and Assent of the Mind upon moral Evidence. And as the
Apostles have no where given us an Account, that in order to the Admission of
Persons, they spoke only in the first Sense, or determined that the Words must
necessarily be understood only in that Sense; therefore there is no Certainty
that they did, or that they did design to make a positive Judgment themselves,
or that the Persons admitted should understand that their Profession was
understood by them only in that Sense. -- If it be said, that they propounded
Salvation to them on the Condition of Faith, and the Faith to which Salvation
was promised, must be saving Faith, yet it cannot follow, that they made a
positive Judgment that the Profession they did make was a Declaration they had
that Kind of Faith, but only that their submitting to Baptism was an Engagement
to that Faith, and to the Terms of Salvation. John's Baptism was from Heaven,
and as Mr. Edwards owns, in Substance the same as the Christian Baptism. And
John did preach the Baptism of Repentance, Mar. 1. 4. The Publicans were
baptized with the Baptism of John, Luke 7. 29. Act. 19. 4, 5. Then said Paul,
John verily baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the People,
that they should believe on him that should come after him. When they heard
this, they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. The Apostles
immediately baptized all that made Profession of their Belief that Jesus was
the Christ; and they give us no Account of any other Evidence which was the
Ground of the Judgment they made of their Christianity.

Again, there is no rational Probability that the Apostles ever had any
personal, or particular converse with many Thousands that were admitted into
the primitive Church, Act. 21. 20. Thou (...) Brother how many Thousands there
are which believe. The Greek is (...). Myriads; How many ten Thousands. And
among all the Dispersions of the Gentiles, what Numbers of Thousands were
there. -- Mr. Edwards observes. Page 65. that the Epistle to the Hebrews was
"written to all jewish Christians in the Land of Canaan. The hundredth Part of
whom there is little Reason to believe St. Paul had ever seen, or spoken one
Word personally with. The Epistles of Peter were written to all Christian Jews
through Pontus, Galatia, Capa^^^^^, Asia, and Bithinia. The Epistle of James was
directed to all Christian Jews scattered abroad through the whole World. Now can
it be imagined that if these Apostles had spent every Day after the Day of
Pentecost to that Time, in nothing else, that they would have been able
personally to have conversed with these People, and heard their Experiences.
The Apostle Paul, as Mr. Edwards says, directs his first Epistle to the
Corinthians: to all professing Christians through the Face of the Earth; and he
takes particular Notice -- that he calls them all, Churches of Saints. Which
appears to be a sufficient Confutation of his Inference that he had made a
positive Judgment that they were all real Saints: For it was a Thing morally
impossible, that he should have had any Converse with the most of them, and
probably had never seen them. The Epistles to the Romans and Colossians were
written to Churches and Persons whom Paul himself tells us he had never seen;
and therefore he could make no positive Judgment about them, unless it was
founded upon Inspiration, or common Fame. I conclude Mr. Edwards does not think
his Judgment was founded on a particular Revelation of the spiritual State of
these Persons; and to suppose that it was founded on the Fame and Report of
these Persons being Christians, was too slender a Ground for the positive
Judgment of such a great Apostle. I know of no other Ground for it; unless it
be supposed to be founded upon a Presumption that the Ministers who baptized
them would not have done it, unless they had themselves made such a positive
Judgment concerning their State. This might do for this Scheme, but only it is a
begging the Question. --

3. It appears that the Apostles made no such positive Judgment etc. if it be
considered, that these primitive Churches consisted of all the Persons who were
baptized by the Apostles, and first Ministers, and of all their Children, for
they also with their Parents, were taken into Covenant with God. As the Apostle
Peter Shows us, Act. 2. 39. For the Promise is unto you, and to your Children,
and to all that are afar off, as many as the Lord our God shall call. -- As
none of the Epistles were written 'till about twenty Years after our Savior's
Ascension, and most of Paul's Epistles about twenty-five or thirty Years after.
The Epistles of Peter and John near thirtyone or thirty-Two Years after: In
which Time there were doubtless Thousands and Thousands of Children grown up,
who had been in Infancy admitted into the Christian Church; for as to the
Institution supposed by Mr. Edwards of a personal explicit owning the Covenant
in order to Admission, I believe all ecclesiastical History is silent about it.
And besure the New Testament speaks not a Word of it: But Baptism was the only
instituted Rite of Admission into the Christian Church, as Circumcision was
into the Jewish; as Mr. Stoddard has sufficiently shown. -- Now what Ground is
there to believe the Apostles had formed such a positive Judgment of the
gracious Experiences or real Piety of those about whom they knew nothing at
all, but only that all who were in Covenant with God, and admitted into the
Catholic Church, were Persons faederally holy, and devoted, and bound to God;
and accordingly treated them in like Manner as God had by his Example taught
them to treat his visible Church.

4. The contrary to Mr. Edwards's Supposition, viz. That the Apostles did not
make such a positive Judgment that these Persons were really godly; appears
plain to me, from the very Accounts given of their Treatment of these Persons;
and that the high Characters they gave them, and the Hopes they expressed
concerning them, could be understood in no other Sense, than as holding forth a
faederal Holiness, and that the Apostles trusted to their Profession. -- The
Apostle Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, represents many of them
as contentious Persons, indulging Strife, Divisions, and quarelling about Paul,
Apollos, and Cephas, as the Heads of their several Parties. He calls them
carnal, and tells them they walked as Men. He warns them to build on Christ,
Chap. 3. as well as to take Heed what they built upon him. And though he speaks
of them as the Temple of God, and having the Spirit of God dwelling in them:
Yet it appears that he speaks not this as having made a positive Judgment of
their Sanctification with Respect to their Profession and Covenant Engagement,
for he adds,. 17. If any Man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy.
Wherefore that very Temple which they were, might be so defiled by them as to
be destroyed; which cannot be true of sanctified Persons (really so) unless they
can fall from Grace. He charges them with being puffed up with Pride, Chapter 4.
latter End. And Chapter 5. with living in Fornication, and glorying in it, at lest
in him who lived in Incest with his Father's Wife. Chap. 6, he charges them
with quarelling, and cheating one another; and takes Occasion to warn them that
such Persons shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and evidently distinguishes
between his own Thoughts of some of them, from others. He says, the Saints
shall judge the World: and we shall judge Angels; putting himself among them,
as one of them. Yet it seems evident, he designs it shall be understood with an
if they were truly what they had engaged to be, real Saints, because he sets
before them still the Danger and horrible Nature of those Sins which he plainly
supposes some of them lived in. -- In the 10th Chap. he says, he would not have
them ignorant how that all our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed
through the Sea, and were baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and
did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
Drink, for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock
was Christ. Here is as strong an Expression holding forth the Piety of the
Church of Israel as any of those which Mr. Edwards; has produced to prove, that
all the Christian Churches were truly pious; yet the Apostle says, With many of
them God was not well pleased; and then adds,. 11, 12. Now all these Things
were our Examples, and they are written for our Admonition upon whom the Ends
of the World are come. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take Heed
least he fall. This appears to me to be undeniable Evidence that the Apostle
looked upon Christians to be taken into the Chnrch upon like Terms as the Jews
were, and that the Holiness he spoke of in them, was the same with that of the
jewish Church in common; and that he judged it likely there were proportionably
to their Numbers as many Hypocrites among them. Which surely is inconsistent
with a positive Judgment, that they were all real Saints. He strongly intimates
in the following Verse, that they were guilty of Idolatry,. 18. 20. he warns
them against it by the Consideration of the dreadful Jealousy of God, and the
Danger of provoking him,. 22. Chap. 11. he tells them that there was a Report,
and he had too much Reason to believe it; of scandalous Divisions, Disorders,
and Drunkenness among them, and intimates that there were such Heresies,
Factions, and corrupt Opinions, as struck at the Foundation of Christianity,
and all sound Religion,. 17, -- 21. Beside many lesser Disorders in the Use of
Tongues, and other spiritual Gifts among them; as Chap. 14, 1^. and Chap. 15.
12. he signifies that some among them, denied the Resurrection. He warns them
in. 33, 34. not to be deceived, but awake to Righteousness, and sin not, for
some have not the Knowledge of God; I speak this to your Shame. -- And
notwithstanding that Repentance which the greater Part of the Church
manifested, and their Submission to his Sentence of the incestuous Person about
whom he wrote to them in his first Epistle; yet I think whoever diligently and
impartially considers the Representation he makes of this Church in the latter
Part of his 2nd Epistle to them, will not be very easy to believe this Apostle
had made a positive Judgment that this Church singly considered were truly
pious and sanctified Persons, Chap. 12.. 20, 21. I fear left when I come I
shall not find you such as I would; and that I shall be found unto you such as
(...) would not; left there be Debates, Envy, Wrath, strifes, Backbitings,
Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults; and lest when I come again, my God will humble
me among you, and that I shall bewail many which have (...) already, and have
not repented of their Uncleanness, and Fornication, and Lasciviousness, which
they have committed.

The Epistle to the Galatians gives us not much more Reason to believe the
Apostle went upon Mr. Edwards's Scheme. Chap. 1.. 6. he tells them they are
removed from him that called them into the Grace of Christ unto another Gospel.
They denied (...) great Gospel Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone. In the
Beginning of the third Chap. he speaks of their Principles and Hopes, as so
different from the great Principles of the Gospel, and Way of Salvation taught
in it, that he asks them, who has bewitched them. Chap. 4. (...). he says, I
am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed on you Labor in vain.. 19. My little
Children of whom I travail in Birth until Christ be formed in you. If he had
made a positive Judgment that they were regenerate, with what Propriety could
he say this? -- There are diverse Passages in the fifth Chapter, which don't
look very favorably upon Mr. Edwards's Scheme. -- The Apostles in their
Writings sometimes speak to the Churches hypothetically, if ye have put on
Christ, and the like. -- The Epistle of James, as this Reverend Author takes
Notice, speaks of scandalous Persons among those Christians to whom he wrote:
Men of unbridled Tongues, Antinomians, who cursed their Brethren, raised Wars
and Fightings among them, were Adulterers and Adulteresses, and persecuted
Christians. -- Now are not these Accounts absolutely inconsistent with a
positive Judgment that these Persons were real Saints? And how can the
Characters which the Apostles give them of Saints, beloved of God, and such
like, be any Ways consistent with themselves, but only as they considered these
Bodies of Men as faederally holy, and by Profession engaged to God, and so long
as they continued in visible good Standing, they were outwardly, and in the
public Judgment, to be treated as Saints by Calling, and their Profession so
long to be trusted? --

When the Apostles speak of Men crept in unawares, I don't know of one Place in
the New Testament, but where the Words are spoken of Heretics and Jews, who
got into the Church by pretending to be Christians, concealing their real
Principles, and getting in with a wicked Design to corrupt the Church, or get
some Advantage against it to persecute it. So the Epistles themselves explain
the Thing, Jude 4. and Gal. 2. 4. False Brethren unawares crept in to spy out
our Liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they may bring us into Bondage.
Nothing is spoken in any Place of Persons coming in unawares so far as I can
find) merely respecting them as unconverted, or which gives Reason to suppose
that the Apostles would not have admitted any such Persons as Mr. Stoddard
would.

5. I humbly conceive that to suppose the Apostles trusting Christians in their
public Writings and Carriage, as Saints, holy, Heirs of eternal Salvation, and
the like; was understood by them to import a positive Judgment that they and
the Churches had formed of their real Piety, was a much more likely Way to be
the eternal Ruin of great Numbers, than the other Supposition. Mr. Edwards
himself supposes on his own Scheme when he has made a positive Judgment that
every one singly whom he admits into the Church is regenerate, yet when taken
collectively, its probable one in ten will be an Hypocrite: if he had supposed
five in ten, he would not have exceeded our blessed Savior's Representation of
the Matter, Matthew. 25. but be they more or less; if these Persons had known
that in all these Passages which Mr. Edwards has quoted, and others to the like
Purpose, wherein the Apostles speak of them as in a safe and happy State, and
secure of eternal Salvation, making no Distinction of the Regenerate from the
Unregenerate, nor directing their Speech to the unregenerate Members of the
Church to awaken them, and make them sensible of their miserable Condition. --
But they intended that these Christians should know that they the inspired
Apostles, and all other godly People among whom they lived, had formed a
positive Judgment upon their Experiences, or some other at lest as certain a
Ground, that they were regenerate, truly sanctified Souls; let me return Mr.
Edwards's Question: Is not this altogether unaccountable? When the Apostles
must know this was the most direct Method they could take to fix them in
Hypocrisy, and eternally undo them. For this amounts to as much Evidence as
they could have without themselves (unless by Revelation) that they were indeed
sanctified, and had nothing to do but rejoice in Expectation of eternal Life,
for the Apostles themselves had determined they were the Children of the Light,
and of the Day; and that God had not appointed them to Wrath, but to obtain
Salvation by Jesus Christ. So that they were like to sit secure under all the
Thunder of these Threatenings of the Wrath of Christ which will come on ungodly
Men as a Thief in the Night; and when they shall say, Peace and Safety, then
sudden Destruction shall come upon them as Travail upon a Woman with Child, and
they shall not escape. Shall we thus determine the Apostles to be such Prophets
as daubed with untempered Mortar, and sewed Pillows under all Arm-holes? and
healed the Hurt of immortal Souls slightly, crying Peace, Peace, when there is
no Peace? -- Whereas on Mr. Stoddard's Opinion, these Things are easily and
fairly accounted for. These Christians knew that in all such Expressions and
Characters the Apostles treated them as Persons faederally holy, and brought
into the extenal Covenant; and put under the proper Means and Ordinances of
Salvation by Christ; and if they kept Covenant, as they had engaged to do, and
came up to the Terms of it, they should be saved; and upon Presumption that
they did so, they gave them these Characters, and pronounced these
Consolations; and no otherwise. And in this View of Things, there would be no
Danger of their being setlted in Hypocrisy by these Consolations; for they well
know upon what Terms only they belonged to them.

Moreover, it ought to be remembered, the Epistles of the Apostles are not to be
considered as their Sermons, or popular Discourses, but as the Solutions of
Cases of Conscience; as the Orders, Rules, and Directions of the House of
Christ, and Directions for the Church then, and in all Ages. So that it is not
to be wondered at, that we don't find Uses of Awakening and Exhortation, as we
find in Sermons, and such popular Discourses. Yet in these Expistles we find
sufficient Rules and Directions to ground such Admonitions Warnings and
Exhortations upon, with which Mr. Stoddard was wont, and all other faithful
Ministers are wont to address their Congregations. For the Apostles have taken
great Care to let us know that Christians are taken into the visible Church, as
the Jews were, and upon like Terms with them except the Ceremonial Law which is
at an End) as in the (...) and other Places, and as the ancient Prophecies of
the Old Testament were therein fulfilled, wherein God promised to take the
Gentiles into like Church State; and therefore they stood upon like Terms;
their Holiness both real and faederal was the same, 1 Cor. 7. 14. they refer
them and us, all along to the Examples of God's Dealing with the jewish Church,
to learn (...) to expect from him. They tell them and us, over and over, that
all these Things happened to the Jewish Church for Examples to the Christian: And
therefore all the Expectations of Salvation which this Treatment of the
Apostles and others raised in them, they were to govern and measure according
to their real Conformity to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, and their
Fulfillment thereof; their Pretensions to which the Apostles trusted in the same
Manner God had done by the Jews: And yet certainly, he did not daub them with
untempered Mortar.

The 9th Argumument is Page 71st. viz. Another Evidence that such as are taken
into the Church ought to be in the Eye of a Christian Judgment truly gracious
or pious Persons, is this, That the Scripture represents the visible Church of
Christ as a Society having its several Members united by the Band of Christian
Brotherly Love. -- I desire again the Reader will remember the true State of
the Question according to the Author's Explication, and that I am not disputing
against the Words here proposed.

I shall endeavor first to consider the scriptures here urged, and the
Criticisms upon them; and then to show how they fail of proving the Question in
Debate.

The first Text is Act. 4. 32. The Multitudes of them that believed were of one
Heart and one Soul, neither said any of them that ought of the Things which he
(...) was his (...), but they had all Things common. (...). Which, says Beza,
is the same Thing which the Apostle beseeches of (...) and (...) Phil. 4. 2.
that they be of the same mind in the Lord. By the Words (...) Heart and Mind,
says he, is to be understood a full Consent in Doctrine, and Desire, or Will;
but in my most ancient (...) are these Words, (...) which he says (...)
testifies he found in many ancient Greek Copies, and cites Cyprian also to
vouch the same; and so renders the Words, There was no Separation, there was no
Difference among them. But I, say she, choose to render the Words there was no
Controversy among them. The plain Sense of the Words is, there were no Disputes
about the great Doctrines of the Gospel, (...) Controversy about Matters of
Faith, but a good Harmony and Agreement: and such was their Love to one
another, and the Cause of Christ, that they sold their (...) to promote it, and
put all into one common Stock. -- The next Texts are Math. 40. 41. 42. Mark 9.
41. He that (...) a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet (...) a Prophets (...),
and he that (...) a righteous Man, in the Name of a righteous (...) shall
receive a righteous Man's Reward; and whosoever shall give to (...) one of these
(...) Cup of cold Water only in the Name of a (...) shall in no wise loose his
Reward. (...) says, (...) to Christ. To explain this, Mr. Edwards refers us to
the new Commandment which Christ gives his Disciples, Joh. 13. 34. (...)
another as Christ has loved them. And refers to Chap. 15. 13, 14, 15. And Chap.
17, to the End. This he calls that (...) or Love the Brethren, which is a very
good and (...) thing. Note of true Grace. Be it so; but what will that prove
about (...) between the Affections of Christ's Disciples, arising from their
being satisfied of their Sanctification? The Texts teach us, that a Prophet is
to be received in the Name of a Prophet; a righteous Man in the Name of a
righteous Man; and a little One (...) he belongs to Christ; and that the Love
described is expressed in relieving their Necessities, being kind and
charitable to them for Christ's Sake according to the Account given us in the
Delineation of the Proceeding at the Day of Judgment, Matthew.25. latter End.
When a Person receives them for the Sake of Christ, and shows them Kindness and
Respect on that Account, he exercises the Christian Love here required. We
are, says Beza, to reverence Christ in it, otherwise we do nothing in this
Kindness, which the profane Nations did not most abundantly do. The Respect
that is shown to Christ is the Essence and Soul of that Love and Christian
Charity, which is here distinguished from the Love of Friendship and natural
Relation. And (...) truly exercised when a supreme Respect is exercised to
Christ. If a Man receives a lawful Minister of Christ, if he receives and owns
a visible Christian and shows him Respect and Love, from a supreme Regard to
Christian so related to him, he then exercises that Christian Love and
Kindness, which Christ will own, and which is a distin^^shing Note of true
Grace. Mr. Edwards quotes, Romans 12. 10. (...) one to another, with Brotherly
Love in Honor (...) one another. And says the Greek is more emphatical,
showing a peculiar Endearment between gracious Persons, (...) Beza observes the
Word (...) notes not only be loving, But a Propensity to love. Leigh renders it
in the time Manner, and having quoted Tertulliant's Explication, he says, it
cannot be better rendered in English than be kindly affectioned. The true Meaning
of it is, set there be a Propensity in you to love one another with
Brotherly-Love, so that you be ready to prefer one another in Honor. -- The
next Text is, 1 Pet. 1. 22. seeing (...) your Souls in (...) the Truth through
the Spirit unto (...) (...) i. e. in plain (...) with (...) or (...) Love. See
that ye love (...) Heart fervently. And again, Chap. 3. 8. (...) Brethren, be
ye all of one Mind, having Compassion one of another, (...) as Brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous. The Words in Greek Mr. Edwards thinks are much more
significant, elegant, and forcible; (...) Which Beza renders, Be ye all of one
(...) mutually affected with each others Troubles, endued with Brotherly Love,
prone or disposed to she (...) Mercy, kind or affable. In the same Manner
Grotius, Gomaras, (...), Gernard, Piscator; when all the Critics have strained
the Text as much as they can, it appears that nothing can be got out of it more
to the Purpose than our Translators have rendered it. -- Here it is to be noted,
that all these Citations out of the Epistles, are Exhortations to the paactise
of that Christian Love or Charity, which Christ requires all his Disciples to
exercise --

The Reverend Author further quotes Col. 1. 4. 1 These. 4. 9. and (...). 5.
where the Exercise of brotherly Love among Christians is spoken of, and some
further Exhortations to it, Heb. 13 1. 1 These. 5. 26. Let Brotherly Love
continue. And four Texts to exhort Christians to greet one another with an holy
Kiss. This Love to the Brethren (he says is that Love which the Apostle John
insists on as one of the most distinguishing Characteristicks of true Grace.
And then in the next Page cites some more Texts, and goes over some of the same
again, to show how the Apostles exhort visible Christians to exercise this Love
to all other Members of the visible Church. By these Things, he says, Page 72,
must needs be understood a Love to Saints as Saints, or on Account of the
spiritual Image of God supposed to be in them, and their spiritual Relation to
God. According as it has been always understood by orthodox Divines. However, I
apprehend, most orthodox Divines when they describe Christian Love as
exercised, or acting toward the moral Image of God in others, have not just
the same Idea of the Ground of our Apprehension of it or Judgment about it, as
Mr. Edwards has. The Dispute is not at all, whether it is the Image of God or
Christ appearing, or supposed to be in others, that as the Ground or Reason of
our Love to them does distinguish Christian Love from natural Love, or common
Friendship. I don't know that any orthodox Divines differ about this, nor do
they dispute whether any Act of Love or Kindness to them on the Account of any
Part of God's Image on them, be a gracious Love. So that I apprehend this
Dispute is not at all affected by these Things.

But we are now to consider how these Scriptures prove the Point Mr. Edwards
has to prove. His Argument from these Things seems to be offered Page 73,
toward the Bottom, after this Manner:

This Love must have some Apprehension of the Understanding, some Judgment of
the Mind, for its Foundation. i. e If he will speak to his Question, there must
be a positive Determination in our Minds that they are true Saints, else we
cannot exercise this Christian Love toward them, and therefore they ought not
to be admitted to Communion. As to some Apprehension, some Judgment of the
Mind, and such like Words, which have been so often used; I hope the Reader
need not again be told that we have some Apprehension, and some Judgment of the
Mind, that they are Christians; and that Apprehension and Judgment is founded
on the Rule which Christ has given for the public Judgment, as we suppose in
the utmost Extent of that Rule, though it may not so fully satisfy the Mind of a
Casuist, or a private Christian, as some other Way of judging; which Christ has
not appointed to be the Rule of public Judgments. To trifle with Words may
serve to draw out a Disp^te to a great Length, and hide the Truth, but not to
discover it. If there be any Thing in the Argument, I think it must be what I
have disserve'd, viz. that a Christian must make a positive Judgment and
Determination, that another Man is a Saint, and this Judgment must have for its
Ground something which he supposes is at least ordinarily a certain Evidence of
his Saintship, and by which gracious Sincerity is certainly distinguished from
every Thing else; otherwise he cannot exercise any Christian Love to him, and
therefore cannot join with him in the Sacrament, and consequently he ought not
to be admitted to the Lord's Supper. I think many Things evidence the
Inconsequence of this Agument; but beside what has been said, I would only beg
the Readers Patience to consider two or three Things.

1. The exercise of this Christian Love is not a Term of Communion or Admission
into the visible Church instituted by Christ.

Christ has made it the Duty of all Christians to love one another for his
Sake, and all true Christians do sincerely exercise this Love; but the Exercise
of it by the Church or particular Persons toward others, is no where in the
Bible instituted as the Rule by which the Church is to proceed in the Admission
of Persons to Communion; (...) ought to have had, and no doubt but he had both
a natural and holy Love to the Israelites, but this Love was not the (...) of
his proceeding as the Minister of God, to admit them into Covenant; but their
Profession and Engagement to love God with all their Heart, and to keep
Covenant with him. The Apostles were bound to love all Christians for Christ's
Sake, but we no where read that then Love to them was appointed to be the Rule
of their admitting Persons into the Christian Church, but the Profession of
their Faith in Christ, and their Engagement to (...) Covenant. Nor do I know of
any Place in the Bible where Christ has appointed the Exercise of this
Christian Love to be the Rule of Admission, or the Term upon which the Church
is to allow Persons the Enjoyment of Gospel Ordinances. And as there are to be
no Terms of Communion but what Christ has instituted, therefore the want of
this Love in the Church to any particular Person, is no Ground of excluding
that Person from Gospel Ordinances. The want of it may be to the Persons who
are without it an Evidence of their own want of Grace; besure of their Neglect
of their Duty: but it can no more Evidence that this or that Person is not to
be admitted to Communion, than the neglect of giving them an holy Kiss.

2. If this Supposition be true, then Men's Right to Communion in Gospel
Ordinances, must depend upon the Corruptions of other Men; or the secret and
sovereign Actings of Grace in the Hearts of other Men. -- If Men don't love
their Christian Brethren, it is because of their Corruption, and the Wickedness
that is in their Hearts; for God has made it their Duty to love them, and if
the Church be at any Time destitute of this Love toward any particular Person
who is really qualified to partake of the Lord's Supper, then by this Rule
Christ has debarred that Person from this Ordinance, because the Church is for
the present under the Prevalency of Corruption. -- Again, the Exercise of
Christian Love is not only as Mr. Edwards observes, not so at Command that we
can make it strongly go forth to an Object as having such Loveliness, when at
the same Time we don't positively judge any such Thing concerning them, but
only hope it may be so. -- But neither is it so at Command, that we can ever
make it go forth at all without the present Assistance and Grace of the Holy
Spirit. A Christian is no more able to exercise Love to another for the Sake of
Christ, or in a gracious Manner, without that, than he can act Faith, or any
Grace without it. Now these Assistances of the good Spirit of God, are
sovereignly free, and given only when God pleases. Therefore according to this
Argument, the Enjoyment of visible Ordinances by others, depends on the secret
sovereign Influences of the Spirit of God in the Hearts of the Church, and
their Exercise of Grace, and by a divine Appointment Persons are to be excluded
from these Ordinances, according to the Prevalency of the Sin and Corruption of
the Church. Both which Suppositions are inconsistent with Reason, and God's
Revelation concerning this Matter.

3. I conceive the Argument is contradictory to and inconsistent with it self.
-- The Thing to be proved is; that the Church ought not to admit unsanctified
Persons to the Lord's Supper. The Argument to prove it is taken from the Nature
of Christian Love, or that Union there is between Saints. That is, in the
Exercise of Christian Love described in the Gospel, there is such an Union of
Hearts as there cannot be of a Saint to an unsanctified Man. For though it is
said Page 71, that this Christian Love is to be exercised toward others on
Account of their supposed Relation to God as his Children, and to Christ as his
Members, and to them as their spiritual Brethren in Christ. -- And again, Page
74, there must be a positive Dictate of the Understanding, and some Degree of
Satisfaction of the Judgment to be a Ground of that Oneness of Heart and Soul,
which is agreeable to Scripture Representations of ^rotherly-Love. Now if any
Thing be intended to the Purpose for which this Argument is brought, I conceive
it must mean, that there must be such a positive Judgment of the real Holiness
of Persons as is not mistaken more than once in ten Times (according to the
former Representation of the Matter) i. e. there must be the Reality of Grace
in order to this Brotherly-Love. And if this Christian Love depends on the
Reality of Grace or Holiness in the Subject in whom we judge it to be, then let
our Judgment be more or less positive, yet if it be a Mistake in Fact, there
can be no Exercise of Brotherly-Love. If it can be exercised without the
Reality of Holiness in the Person toward whom it is exercised, then the
Argument is given up, for it proves nothing that it was brought to prove: And
yet the Reverend Author brings it down so low as to say, Christians must have
some Satisfaction of Mind, that they are cordially united with them in adorning
and expressing their Love to their common Lord. -- Now it is granted on all
Sides, that visible Saintship is necessary to any Person's Admission into the
visible Church. So that the Argument cannot be brought to prove that; and yet if
some Apprehension of the Understanding, some Judgment of the Mind of the
Saintship of Persons, be sufficient Foundation for the Exercise of this
Brotherly-Love, this proves nothing more than is granted, and we must go back
again to consider what is sufficient Evidence of visible Saintship. -- I own, I
cannot conceive any Force or Consistency in the Argument, unless it be carried
the full Length of the Independent Seperates, that the Saints have a certain
Knowledge who are the Children of God, by having Fellowship with them (as they
term it) or by feeling an ineffable Oneness with their Souls. But since Mr.
Edwards declares he has no good Opinion of their Notion of a pure Church, by
Means of Spirit of Discerning, I must conclude he will give up this Argument.
-- Mr. Edwards thinks this is well agreeing with the Wisdom of Christ, to
suppose that he has made such (...) in his Institutions etc. Page 74. -- This
is not to be wondre^ (...) since Men always suppose their Fancies about
Religion are well agreeing with the Wisdom of Christ. -- But I confess it is not
very easy to me to conceive to what good Purpose Mr. Stoddard's Expression in
his Appeal, Page 16. is here brought in again, with th^se Additions: It is
hardly credible, that Christ has so ordered Things as that there are no
instituted social Acts of Worship wherein his Saints are to manifest their
Respect to him, but such as wherein they ordinarily are obliged (if the Rules
for Admissions be carefully attended) to join with a Society of
Fellow-Worshippers, concerning whom they have not Reason to think but the
bigger Part of them are unconverted, and are more provoking Enemies to that
Lord they love and adore, than most of the very Heathen; and which Mr. Stoddard
supposes to be the Case with the Members of the visible Church. --

I beg Leave in Reply to this extraordinary Passage, to propose these Questions
to Mr. Edward's serious Consideration; viz.

1. Did Mr. Stoddard ever say in the Appeal, or any where else, of the most of
our Fellow-Worshippers at the Sacrament, that we have no Reason to think
concerning them, but that they are more provoking Enemies to that Lord whom
Christians love and adore, than most of the very Heathen?

2. Does not Mr. Stoddard say in the Bottom of the 16th and Top of the next
Page, concerning Dr. Mather's Endeavor to pro^e that Church Members must be
visible Saints; it was needless for him to prove it, to leave a Jealousy upon
some ignorant People, as it I did deny it?

3. If it was unfair for Dr. Mather to do that, what is it to make the
Insinuation, and set t forth as a Doctrine taught by Mr. Stoddard;

4. Whether this Treatment of Mr. Stoddard be perfectly harmonious with such
Words concerning him, viz. -- that great and (...) Man; that great and eminent
Divine; my venerable Predecessor; and my own Grandfather; whose Name and
Memory I am under distinguishing obligations on every Account to treat with
great Respect and Honor?

5. What Honor is it to our Lord Jesus Christ to treat visible Saints in such
a Manner, when at the same Time it is revealed Will they should be outwardly
treated as visible Saints?

I know not but I think as badly of Covenant-Breakers as Mr. Edwards. I doubt
not they ought to be warned in the most solemn Manner, what all professing
Christians are to expect, who deal falsely with Christ: And to be told this from
that Word of God which is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the
Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart.
And to this Word, and the Holy Spirit who indicted it, their Coviction is to be
left. -- But when Persons do solemnly profess and engage to give up themselves
to God, and by his Help to come up to the Terms of the Covenant, and seek their
whole Salvation through Christ, upon the Terms of the Gospel, i. e. in a Way of
Faith and Repentance; and that so far as they know they do this without known
and allowed Guile; and when they do visibly keep Covenant with God: for the
Church or its Guides, because they fear they are unconverted, or don't make a
positive Judgment that they are converted, in their public Carriage or
Applications, to treat them as the most hateful Enemies of Christ, and
provoking to the Lord whom Christians love and adore above most of the Heathen:
Whatever it be; certainly it ought seriously to be considered, whether it be
the Exercise of that Christian Love which Christ so abundantly requires of his
Disciples; and also whether it be not meddling with the Prerogative of God, and
anticipating the Work of the Day of Judgment; and what Thanks or Approbation
Christ's Disciples are like to meet with for it.

The 10th Argument Page 75, is propounded thus: It is necessary that those who
partake of the Lord's Supper, should judge themselves truly and cordially to
accept of Christ as their only Savior and chief Good; for this is what the
Actions which the Communicants perform at the Lord's Table are a solemn
Profession of. -- The Reader will observe, that the Question at first
propounded respected the Ground of the Church's admitting Persons to the
Sacrament: This Proposition respects those particular Persons themselves who
came to the Lord's Supper; and here is to be proved that they should judge
themselves converted for this Reason; because the Actions they perform at the
Lord's Table, are a solemn Profession that they are so. -- I don't find, that
Mr. Edwards has said any Thing to prove the Proposition, which is the whole
Argument offered here in Proof of the Point proposed to be proved, but only
gives his Opinion or Paraphrase of the (...) and Nature of the Sacramental
Actions: The Substance of which, if I can comprehend it, is this: That Christ
in the Sacrament offers Salvation to every one that is willing to receive him;
and he that partakes of the Sacrament professes his Willingness to receive
Christ. i. e. that he does receive him, and both Parties seal to the Truth of
this. Hence it follows, that the Lord's Supper is a Seal of Salvation to him
that receives it.

Mr. Stoddard has answered this, in the third and last Part of his Argument to
Dr. Mather's third Argument, Appeal Page 22, 23. The Sacraments do not seal up
Pardon and Salvation to all that receive them, but they are Seals to the Truth
of the Covenant: it does not seal Men's having of Faith, neither does it seal
the Salvation of the Communicants; they miserably deceive themselves if they
understand it so; but it is a Seal of the Covenant. God offers Pardon and
Salvation through Faith in Christ. Men are ready to doubt of the Truth of this.
But God seals this Covenant in the Sacraments. This is that which is intended
when it is said, that Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith.
Romans 4. 11. Whether we understand by the Righteousness of Faith, Faith it self,
which is our evangelical Righteousness, or the Righteousness of Christ, which
is Christ apprehended by Faith, it comes to one and the same; and Circumcision
seals the Effiacy of this unto Salvation; that the Promise that he has made
shall in this Way be fulfilled: and this is a great Encouragement to draw forth
the Exercise of Faith. -- And I think Mr. Humfrey has fully answered this
Argument, Page 42, ^^. The Sacraments are not properly Seals to Men's Faith; how
do we conceive Faith such a Thing as must have God's Seal put to it. God does
not attest our Faith but his own Promises, Heb.0.17. They are Seals properly of
the Covenant. -- They are not Forma^^ter in a true and proper Sense Seals to
any Thing but the Covenant. -- Let the Sacrament be offered to the Godly or to
the Hypocrite, it is the same Seal of God declaring the Truth of his Covenant
which stands most sure, and all the Unbelief in the World cannot make it of
none Effect; they are set to God's Word; and so can never be to a Blank, while
there is Truth in the Promise and Writing in the Gospel. The Sacraments being
God's Seals, certainly in the Institution and Nature of them, if I should deny
them to be Man's Seals at all there being not for it one Tittle of Scripture, I
should quite remove the Scruple from the Hearts of Men; yet in the Use of Seals
and Effect, they are to be Man's Seals also, Seals to the Condition of our
Part, Seals of Faith.

If we consider the Lord's Supper in the Use of Man as a Seal, I conceive it
must answer to the Proposal sealed by God, which is the Covenant and the Truth
of the Promise upon the Gospel Condition. In receiving therefore Man does not
seal that he has fulfilled the Covenant; but seals his Engagement to fulfill it;
and that he consents to the Truth of that Offer of Salvation; and the
Conditional Promise or Terms of Salvation, to which God seals; and therefore
that he will seek, look for, and expect Salvation in that Way, and only on
those Terms which the Covenant offers it. A Man's sealing a Covenant in the
Nature of the Thing, and the Understanding of all Mankind since the Foundation
of the World, does not import that he has already fulfilled the Covenant, but
that he stands bound and engaged to fulfill it. -- Mr. Edward's own Similitude
illustrates this Matter: A Lady's accepting a Picture from a Prince's
Ambassador in Token of her Acceptance of his Person to be her Husband, shows
that she does not seal a Profession that she has accepted him, but that she
will accept him for her Husband. -- I must leave the judicious Reader to judge
what Advantage to Truth, or what Light is conveyed to the Mind, by the
injurious Representation which this Reverend Author is pleased here again to
make of the Doctrine of Mr. Stoddard, and those of his Opinion, Page 77, and
take Leave again, to declare that I apprehend Mr. Stoddard's Doctrine to imply
no such Thing; but plainly to import that in adult Persons Covenanting with God
there is necessarily implied a Profession of a deep Conviction of a Man's
undone State without Christ, and the Way in which the Covenant of Grace
propounds Salvation to lost Sinners; and that he is in his Judgment and
Conscience persuaded there is no other Way of Salvation, and that he desires
unfeignedly so far as he knows his own Heart, to be brought up to the Terms of
this Covenant; and being under Obligation by the Command of God, and Call of
the Gospel, to improve all the Helps God gives him to obtain the Blessings of
the Covenant; he binds himself upon the Encouragement of Help from God, to keep
Covenant with God: And that Man be he Regenerate or Unregenerate, is bound to
make such a Profession, and take hold of God's Covenant in the visible
Dispensation of it. It he does not, he holds the Truth in Unrighteousness: he
(...) against the Law of Nature, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and respects
the Means appointed to promote his Salvation. If he be Unregenerate, this does
not excuse him or living in Unbelief one Moment; but he is bound so much the
(...) through God's Help to fulfill the Covenant; and it he prove false to his
Covenant Vows, will meet an aggravated Condemnation.

The 11th and last Argument Page 77, is taken from 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a Man
examine himself, and so let him eat. The Reader will take Notice that the
Argument taken from hence is not to prove the Question in the Words Mr. Edwards
has propounded it, but to disprove Mr. Stoddard's, viz. that sanctifying Grace
is not necessary to the lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper.

The Argument drawn from this Text, as I take it from the Author's Discourse
upon it, lies in this Compass: Seeing here the Apostle directs Persons to
examine themselves, and so eat; his Examination must mean a proving themselves
to themselves, to be sanctified.

If therefore upon Trial or Examination, they do not prove, or approve
themselves to be sanctified, they may not lawfully come. -- There seems to be
two Ways by which Mr. Edwards endeavors to prove that the Text must be
understood in that Sense. One is, by showing that the Greek Word translated to
examine, must necessarily imply an Examination to Approbation of the Truth of
Grace in the Heart. -- The other, by considering the Scope of the Text,
relating to the Context, and compared with the rest of the Discourse. -- As to
the Greek Word (...), which is here translated Examine, I grant that in diverse
Places in the NewTestament, and other Greek Writings, it is used to signify a
Trial of a Thing, to see whether it be true, and of the right Sort. And in
Scripture, it is diverse Times used to signify the Trial of true Piety, and
Faith of Christian Professors: But to say as Mr. Edwards does, That it is always
so used, unless where it is used as it were metonimically, and in such Places
is variously translated, is grans dictum, and but little else than to say it is
always so (...) New Testament, unless where it is used otherwise.

(...) the Word, Probo, Experior, Exploro, Examino, (...) Laudo, Item is Pretis
habeo. Leigh says, it has various Acceptations, but usually signifies to prove.
Pareus says, it is to try what there is in a Thing, and to distinguish a Thing
from those which are diverse and contrary. -- Luke 14. 19. I have bought five
(...) of Oxen, and I go to prove them i. e. says Leigh, to see whether they
will bear the Yoke or no. 1 These. 5. 21. Prove all Things, bold fast that which
is good. i. e. try all Things. Besure he does not bid us approve all Things.
Romans 12. 2. Be ye not conformed unto this World etc. That ye may prove what is
that good and acceptable, and perfect Will of God. A Discerning, says Leigh,
made with Judgment, concerning good Things. 1 These. 2. 4. But God who tries
our Heart. Which does not signify that he approves it. Romans 1. 28. As they did
not like to retain God. In all these Places the same Greek Word is used which
is used in the Text now under Consideration. And in those of the Texts which
Mr. Edwards has quoted, the Word is not used in the Sense he represents it. And
so I think Expositors take it, 1 Pet. 1. 7. That the Trial of your Faith being
much more precious than of Gold which perishes, though it be tried by Fire,
might be found unto Praise etc. The Trial of Faith here seems plainly to mean
the Exercise of it by those Afflictions which Christians endured; by their
persevering under which, it would appear to the Glory of Christ at his
Appearing, that their Faith was true. The Word here as far as it respects
Approbation is metonimically used. Jam. 1. 3. The trying of your Faith works
Patience. Here the Word (...) is used metonimically for the Afflictions
themselves, by which the Faith of Christians is tried, and cannot mean that
their Approbation of their Faith worked Patience in them. 2 Cor. 8. 8. Gal. 0.
4. Where the Word is not rendered Examine, but Prove. I think it proves nothing
to Mr. Edwards's Purpose, but rather on the contrary, that wherever it means to
examine a Man's State, so as to approve it to himself. The Word is not used in
it is natural Sense, but metonimically: Therefore all Attempts to prove that the
Examination here spoken of, must from the natural and necessary Meaning of the
Word (...) signify a Man's examining the Truth of Grace in him, to his own
Approbation, are vain.

Let us now consider the other Way, whereby this is proposed to be made out,
viz. The Scope of the Text compared with the Context, compared with the rest of
the Discourse. -- Mr. Stoddard thinks it is most evident, that the Examination
here stirred up to, is not such an Examination as Mr. Edwards supposes. If we
look to the foregoing Verses, where he blames them for communicating in a rude
Manner; or if we look to the subsequent Words, where he finds Fault with those
that don't discern the Lord's Body. Appeal, Page 6, 8.

We find the Apostle begins his Discourse to the Corinthians, concerning their
partaking of the Lord's Supper,. 17. He lets them know he did not commend them
for the Manner in which they attended this holy Ordinance, for they came not
together for the better, but for the worse. That he heard when they came
together in the Church; there were Divisions among them, and every one takes
before other his own Supper; and one is hungry, and another is drunken. He
observes that it will be so, for they as well as other Churches were obnoxious
to greater Evils, even to Heresies in Doctrines, that they who were approved,
might be made manifest. Evil and unsanctified Men, by such Sins will discover
their Hypocrisy, and ought no longer to be approved by the Church, as others
who carry themselves well should be. It appears evident, that they scandalously
profaned the Lord's Supper, both by a greedy, irreverent disorderly Manner of
taking the Elements, and by making it a carnal drunken Feast. In the next Verse
he lets them know they were not to attend the Lord's Super, to satisfy any
bodily Appetite: This was to despise the Church of God, and to scandalize Men,
it was a Profanation of the Lord's Supper. In the next, viz. 23, 24, 25, s he
sets down the Words of the Institution which he had received of the Lord Jesus,
instructing them that the Lord's Supper was instituted to be a Memorial of the
Body and Blood of Christ; and therefore as an holy Institution of Christ, to be
celebrated with great Solemnity and Reverence in Remembrance of him. What more
suitable Method can be conceived in dealing with them, than first to set forth
their Disorders, and rebuke them; then to show them what was orderly, in what
Manner, and with what Views they were to celebrate this holy Institution; then
threaten them with the heavy Displeasure of Christ for unworthy partaking. He
speaks nothing, as Mr. Stoddard observes, about unworthy Communicants, but of
their unworthy Communicating: And that this unworthy Communicating, exposed
them to the Judgments and Chastisements of the Lord; and for this Cause those
Judgments had already, come upon them.. 30. Wherefore he says,. 28. But (...) a
Man examine him, (...) and (...). What would these Corinthians suppose from
this Discourse of the Apostle, they must examine themselves about? Surely
something he had been speaking to them of. And what was this, but their
ignorant, inconsiderate, disorderly, gluttonous and drunken Profanation of
this holy Ordinance. If the Sense he to be gathered from the Apostles own
Discourse, what is there to be gathered from that, but (...) a Man should try
himself whether he discerns the Design, and Use of this Ordinance; and finds in
himself a solemn serious Apprehension of it is Nature and Design to represent
Christ, and his Sufferings? Whether he have a Disposition to attend it with a
View to the spiritual and proper Benefits of it, in Distinction from carnal
Views and Ends: If we Respect the Scope and plain Sense of the Apostle's
Discourse, and are to judge from thence; it appears more agreeable to that; and
that this was the Sum of what the Cerizticious could collect from it; than to
suppose they would understand that they were to examine themselves as to their
Sanctification, so as to stand approved in that Point. How a Man can be
inclined to put that Construction upon the Words, is not very easy to conceive,
unless it be because that is more agreeable to a presupposed Scheme, and must be
intended because a Man must be sanctified in order to his coming lawfully;
which the Apostle here has discoursed nothing about.

It is evident enough from other Scriptures, that Men ought to be very
diligent, and frequent in the Examination of their spiritual State. They ought
to set to, both the Habit and Actings of Faith. They ought doubtless to do this
both before and after the Lord's Supper, both before and after Prayer, Hearing,
and every Ordinance of the Gospel. For none of these will be of saving
Advantage to any Man, without Faith; but can this prove, if it were granted
that Examining here, has any Respect to a Man's examining himself about the
Truth of his Faith, if a Man cannot approve himself, or dare not say he has
saving Faith; that therefore he may not pray, not hear, not attend the
Sacraments. -- Is says Mr. Humfrey receiving the Sacrament unworthily,
otherwise damnable than Hearing unworthily. Where of Christ says as much. Mar.
10. 10. and Jeb. 3. 18. Go and preach -- He that believes not is damned. And
if it be not, why, upon the same Account as Men go to Prayer, to the Word, and
other Duties, though they cannot pray and hear worthily, may they not as well go
to the Sacrament? If unregenerate Men pray, hear, receive, they Sin, (not in
what they do I conceive, but in what they do not.) If they do not pray, hear,
and receive, they Sin worse, and are impious. Now what must be done here, if
there be a Necessity of sinning, of two Evils, the least must be chosen. It Is a
less Evil to do what we can, though the Matter only be done, than to fail in
Matter and Manner too. But if that Axiom be true, Nemo Angustiatur ad
Peccandum; there is no Case where in a Man is necessitated to Sin; then it is
clear that a Man ought to come, and do the best he can, which if he does, happily
he shall not Sin (at least so far he does not) and God may bless his
Endeavors. Habenti Dabitur; whereas if he neglects, he sins without Question,
this being Malum perse, the other per Accidens only.

The Apostle cannot be understood here, that a Man must so examine himself, as
to know that he shall eat in the Exercise of Faith; for if he has Faith to
Night, that cannot assure him he shall eat in Faith to Morrow, because this
depends on God's good Pleasure, and the present Influence of his Spirit: And if
he means the Habit of Faith, or a sanctified State; then, if upon Examination
he be doubtful, and the Unworthiness here spoken of, be Unworthiness of Person,
and his Want of saving Grace, and he must examine so as to approve himself to
have that, so long as he is doubtful he cannot do this; and therefore he may
not come, whether he approves himself in his own Opinion, or be doubtful. He
must according to this Interpretation of the Words, have the Thing, or he comes
under the Threatening of Damnation. If he hopes strongly that he has sanctifying
Grace, yet his Hopes alter not his State; the Thing he must have, or according
to this Interpretation of the Text, He eats and drinks Damnation, not
discerning the Lord's Body. If unworthily in the Verse before and after means
unholily, this is plain; and if it do not, this Interpretation of this Verse
cannot be right.

PART II.
IN the third Part of Mr. Edwards's Book, he under the Name of Objections,
proposes to answer the Arguments which Divines have offered, to prove that some
unsanctified Men may lawfully partake of the Sacraments; or are, and may be
admitted into Covenant with God.

The first he propounds Page 81. The Scripture calls the Members of the visible
Church by the Name of Disciples, Scholars or Learners etc.

As the Reverend Author has not referred us to the Book or Author whence this
Argument is taken, so I cannot tell whether it be fairly stated or not. -- As
far as I am acquainted with the Reasoning of Divines from this Topic, the
Substance of it is this: One Notion the Scripture gives us of the visible
Church, is under the Name of Disciples. All that in Scripture are called
Disciples of Christ, are in Covenant with God, and owned by him as the Members
of his Family, and the School of Christ. -- Whence they infer, that such
Qualifications as they had to whom Christ gives this Name, or which were the
Ground of their Admission into his School, are now sufficient for the same;
such Qualifications of Mind and Carriage, as are requisite to Persons putting
themselves under Christ as their Master and Teacher, and submitting to the
Rules of his School, are sufficient to bring them into it.

1. Mr. Edwards owns, that the Scripture calls the Members of the visible
Church Disciples, but denies that it therefore follows that the Church which
they are Members of, is duly and properly constituted of those who have not
true Piety. -- The Words duly and properly, have nothing to do with this
Question, nor with Mr. Stoddard's, nor with any Question in this Debate. We
say, the Church is lawfully constituted of such, and that some who have not
true Piety ought to be admitted into it by the Appointment of Christ the Master
of it. Let the Question stand fairly in Sight, and it will easily appear, that
it will not follow from that Argument as Mr. Edwards suggests, That not only
the (...) but the invisible Church is constituted of such as have not true
Piety. -- To show this Consequence, Mr. Edwards says, the Member of the
Mystical Church as such, and to denote the special (...) or of such, are called
Disciples. -- An observing Reader (...) see the Fallacy of this arguing. For
the Terms in the Proposition, or Premises of it, are equivocal. The Word
Disciple in those Texts which are referred to, Luke 14. 20. ^^. 33. and (...)
Chap. 13. 35. Chap.15.8. by being compared, show that the Word Disciple there
is used in a peculiar Sense, for one that is a Disciple (...), in Distinction
from one that is visibly so, and called by the same Name in other Scriptures,
in a more large and extensive Manner, as a Member of the visible Church, in
Contradistinction from the invisible: And when the Terms of an Argument are
equivocal, and not strictly and precisely used in the same Sense, the
Consequence is a Fallacy. The Word Disciple is evidently used in a different
Sense, when applied to the Members of the Church, in many Places: As Joh. 4. 1,
2. (...) 10. Go Disciple all Nations. Judas is called one of Christ's
Disciples, Mat.10.4.Saul (...) out Threatning^ against the Disciples of the
Lord, Act. ^. 10. If you would know who the Holy Ghost means there, he tells
you, they were all that Saul could find of that Way. Complaint made Act. 15.
10. that those who urged the Necessity of Circumcision, put a Yoke upon the
Neck of the Disciples, which neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear;
and many other Places: But these are enough to show, that all the Nation of the
Jews and their Children, and all the Children of Christians, are the Disciples
of Christ, and by the Sacraments of Circumcision and Baptism visibly admitted
into his Church. Now if Disciples here, and Disciples in those Texts, mean one
and the same Thing, and the same precise Ideas are expressed by the Term, then
Mr. Edwards has answered the Argument, (...) wise not. -- In such a Way of
arguing, it may be (...), that no Man can be a Minister of a Church, because
Ministers of the Church are called Angels. --

2. He says, that though Christ's visible Church is represented as his School,
yet it will not follow; it is in order to all good Seize. -- If is be not
in order to all good Seize, yet it is in order to all that they have not
as yet attained, as the proper Benefits of Christ, and his Instruction, as far
as the Instruction and Discipline of that School can be the Means of helping
them to these Seize. -- It an Indian Child is pat to a College, it is not
in order to change his Blood, and mike him an Englishman: this is not the Use
of Schools, nor to learn Him Indian Language, which he knew before; but it is
to put him under Advantage of learning all the Arts and Sciences which are
taught there. And as Christ puts visible Christians to his School, no doubt he
intends those of them who have Grace already, shall be under proper Advantages
to gain more, and those that have none, be under proper Advantages attain
Grace, and all spiritual. Improvements they want. Persons are never put to
School to attain what they have already, but something which they have not: And
the Censures of the Church are the R^d and Discipline of Christ, with which
scandalous and (...) Persons in his School, are to be corrected, that they may
learn (...) to blaspheme.

He says, He Grants that no other Qualifications are necessary in order to
being Members of that School or Christ, than (...) as their requisite in order
to their subjecting themselves to Christ as their Master, and Teacher, etc. but
denies that common Faith and moral Sincerity are sufficient for this, etc. Page
82.

Here Mr. Edwards uses Terms in a different Sense from what they are taken in
the Argument We allow that no Man graciously subjects himself to Christ,
without Grace; but to urge this, is but to beg the Question: It Is not supposed
they graciously subject themselves to Christ. But the Question is, Whether
their Submission to the Rules and Orders of Christ so far as they can by common
Grace, and the utmost Improvement of their natural and moral (...), be not such
a Subjection as Christ requires in Order to admit them into his School, and
agreeable to the Notion and Nature of that School as visible. -- Though
unconverted Men as such, are in some Sense represented in Scripture, as Enemies
of the Cross of Christ etc. Yet it they are visibly engaged with all the
Earnestness they can, to obtain Salvation by Christ in the Way of the Gospel;
the Scripture does show no Christian to treat them in their open Carriage, of
public Judgment as such. -- And to say, that the Scripture knows nothing of an
ecclesiastical School, constituted of the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, and
appointed to bring such to be reconciled to Him; -- at the same Time
understanding this of Persons solemnly professing themselves convinced of the
Truth of the Gospel, and engaged with all the Power they have to obtain
Salvation by Christ, and engaging to keep Covenant with God, is very strange.
For if this be true, the Scripture knows nothing about the jewish Church, nor
about Disciples of Christ there; among whom were more than a few no better than
these. And then the Scripture knows nothing of the Discipleship of all the
unregenerate Seed of Christians that ever were baptized by the Order of Jesus
Christ: And if this be true, the Scripture knows nothing of any visible Church
at all.

As to what Mr. Edwards says under his 4th Head, I have nothing to say, but in
the Apostle's Words, Romans 2. 1. Wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest
thy self. vide Page 74, 76. -- And when it can be made out, that Christ has
appointed humane Laws and Lawgivers, or any other Method but the Dispensation
of the Gospel Covenant, to put Men into his School, then I shall believe that
such Methods may be the Means of Men's Conversion.

Object. 2. Page 83. Visible Saintship in the Scripture Sense, cannot be the
same with that which has been supposed etc. because Israel of old were from
Time to Time called God's People, when it is certain the greater Part of them
were far from having any such visible Holiness, as this etc. -- It Is Pity Mr.
Edwards had not cited the Authors from whom he took his Objections, that he
might have appeared to have dealt fairly with them. -- It this be taken from
Mr. Blake, as I suspect, by some Things said in Reasoning against it; it must
needs be mistaken; because he never supposed that Church Members ought not to
be in the Eye of a rational Charity truly pious. Both he and Mr. Stoddard
differ from Mr. Edwards, about the Rule of the Church's public Judgment
concerning visible Saintship. -- But Mr. Blake's Question was, that some
unregenerate Men "were of the visible Church, and in Covenant with God." Mr.
Stoddard's Question was, that sanctifying Grace is not necessary to the lawful
partaking of the Lord's Supper. -- In the Defense of which, they have shows
that God did take Multitudes of unregenerate Men into visible Covenant with
him, and that by (...) Command they partook of the Sacraments and Seals of the
Covenant; and therefore they had a lawful Right to do so. I never read that
they or any other attempted to prove, that such open Idolaters, and openly
scandalous Sinners among the Jews, ought to be admitted into the Church: -- But
God had in Fact taken them into Covenant, and into his visible Church; and
their Impieties proved they were wicked Men. They were admitted as visible
Saints, taken into the Family of Christ, to be trained up in his School, and
under his Discipline, but by their Sins and Impieties, they broke the
everlasting Covenant, Isai. 24. 5. which it had been impossible for them to
have done, it they had not been in it. This they have abundantly proved, and
it is as certain as the Old Testament is a divine Revelation. So that Mr.
Edwards is evidently mistaken in his Answer. The Argument proves nothing too
much, but it demonstrates that which it is brought to prove. It overthrows the
Scheme of no Protestants, but those who oppose the Questions which they
disputed. -- What though these wicked Men had not the Visibility of moral
Sincerity, in the Times of their Apostasy and Idolatry: This was a visible
Breach of Covenant No Man pretends that as such they were admitted, or that any
other appearing such, are ever to be admitted into the visible Church. They
were admitted as visible Saints; and when they appeared to have corrupted their
Way, they ought, according to God's Appointment, to have been cut off as rotten
Members. But being taken into God's House and Family, they were of it, 'till
the Master of the House turned them out. And since he had not yet done it, he
calls them his People, and gives them the Name of his Saints, in the Passages
cited, and a great many more. -- And excepting their corporal Idolatry, I don't
know that they have worse Characters given them than those Christians to whom
the Apostle James writes, of whom he say, Chap. 2. -- that they were (...),
they despised the Peer. The (...) Men among them blasphemed the Name of Christ.
He signifies there were those among them who were (...), and had no Regard to
the Law of God pretending in Opposition to it to be (...) by Faith. Chapter 3. he
says, they (...) their Brethren, that they had bitter Envying and Strife. Chap.
4. that they were (...) and Adulteresses: they lusted and killed, were (...),
and asked for Blessings to consume them upon their Lusts; were double minded,
presumptuous. In the 5th Chap. he calls upon the Rich among them to weep and
bowl for the Miseries that shall come upon them. He tells them their Riches are
corrupted, their Garments are Moth-eaten, their Gold and their Silver cankered,
and the Rust of them shall be a Witness against them, and eat their Flesh as it
wise Fire. He charges them with cheating their Laborers, living in Wantonness,
and nourishing their Hearts as in a Day of Slaughter, of condemning and killing
the Just. And yet these are some of the Christians whom the Apostles admitted
into the visible Church, and of whom Mr. Edwards supposes they formed a
positive Judgment that they were godly Men. -- Now what blacker Crimes, except
corporal Idolatry, are charged against the Church of Israel in those degenerate
Days Mr. Edwards refers to? No Body supposes that these Persons appeared such
when the Apostles admitted them into the Church, or that Persons so appearing,
ought to be admitted into any Christian Church. But these Things show that when
unregenerate Men appear to be, and carry visibly as Saints, they ought by the
Church to be admitted into it, and are therefore lawfully there. But their
Unbelief and Impieties are a Breach of Covenant, and they will be punished
above all Men in the World for them.

I think this Controversy is nothing affected by the peculiar Way of explaining
the Name of the People God, as given to the People of Israel, and the
Endeavors Mr. Edwards has used to show there were several Senses in which they
might be called God's Covenant People, and holy; and God's affixing his
Blessing to them as a particular Blood, as to a particular Place, or Spot or
Ground, a certain Building, or particular Heap of Stones, and the like; and
several Appendages of the Covenant, which don't belong to the Gentiles. I have
read over that Explication with all the Attention I am able, but I must confess
it is perfectly unintelligible to me. Neither can I find any greater Light in
the Reasons offered to show the Convenience of such a Dispensation. I am well
satisfied with the Reason God himself has given for his taking the Israelites
into Covenant with himself, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. And I never expect to hear any
better. Mr. Edwards owns after all, that the main Thing, the Substance and
Marrow of that Covenant which God made with Abraham, and the other Patriarchs,
was the Covenant of Grace. -- And again, if we consider that Covenant with
Regard to what the Soul and Marrow o^ it was, it was the Covenant of Grace. But
then I own, that what he says, Page (...). That the Covenant by which they were
made a People of God, was a Type of the Covenant of Grace; is not only new, but
beyond my Comprehension; for I never though it before that the Covenant of Grace
was a Type of itself -- It the Soul (...) Marrow of this Covenant was the
Covenant of Grace, then it is of no Consequence to this Argument, it there were
ten Thousand Appendages to it, for they were certainly taken into the Covenant
of Grace, therefore they had a lawful Right, and it was their Duty to use the
Seals of the Covenant of Grace. And hence it follows, that all others whom God
calls into it in like Manner, and with like Qualifications, have as good a
Right as they had; and that the Gentiles are so called, I think the Apostle
undeniably proves in the 11th Chap. to the Romans, which Mr. Edwards thinks can
be understood no otherwise in Consistence with plain Fact, than that the
Gentile Christians succeeded the Jews etc. -- By which I take it, he pretends
to obviate or Answer the Argument levelled really against his Notion or Ground
of Admission Persons into the visible Church; and which he mentions Page 89.
That the Gentle Christians are visible Saints, according to the New Testament
Notion of visible Saintship, in the very same Manner as the whole Jewish Nation
were, 'till they were broken off by their obstinate Rejection of the Messiah.

Now it is not intended as I conceive that we ought to insist on no higher or
better Qualifications, in admitting Persons Members of the Christian Church;
then the whole Nation of the Jews of that Generation, who lived in Christ's
Time were possessed of. And yet the Objection is directly to the Purpose,
because it proves, that Gentiles are to be taken into Covenant, on the same
Foundation of Charity that the Jews were; that nothing more is required in
order to their being judged visible Saints: And that as God did take into
Covenant great Numbers of unregenerate Men among them, and made it their Duty
to receive the Seals and Sacraments of the Covenant; then it follows, that the
Gentiles have as good a Right, and are bound in like Manner, and on like Terms;
because that 11th Chapter to the (...) proves them to be the same Church
continued. If this Chapter proves that Point, it must entirely overthrow Mr.
Edwards's Scheme. -- That the Reader may see the true Force of the Argument, I
beg his Patience to give it in Mr. Blake's Words, for tho perhaps it might be
snortned, yet being another Man's I would not take upon me to after it. --
Attending carefully to the Apostle's Discourse from the 15th. of the 11th to
the Romans, will show the Reader that the ingraffing there spoken of, is not a
mystical ingraffing into Christ, by Election and saving Faith, but into the
visible Church by the Profession of Faith. -- Page 3^^ The Apostle having
largely discoursed of the Rejection (...) Jews out of their Church State, with
the Call of the Gentiles, and their present Adoption, lets them know that the
Fall of the Jews was not total nor final, and gives them an Account of a
twofold End of the Fall of the Jews. 1. The Call of the Gentiles. 2. A more
glorious Return of the Jews, in Emulation of the Gentiles.. 12. Whereupon he
falls upon a large Discourse of his Zeal toward them, and their re-engraffing;
adding. 18. If the first Fruit be holy, the Lump is also holy: And if the Root
be holy, so are the Branches. The first is only mentioned, the second is
largely commented upon. Here is a Supposition of the Holiness of the first
Fruits, the Holiness of the Root, and an Affirmation that the whole Lump is
holy, the Branches are holy. The last is grounded on a Principle in Nature,
universally true; as is the Root, so are the Branches: They are both of one and
the same Nature. Which he applies first to the Jews in their ancient State,
when they were a People of God, in Covenant Relation, Holy; so styled of him
frequently in Scripture: In their present State, for a great Part broken off,
and so made no People: In their future Condition, when they should be called of
God, and as it were risen from the Dead. And he applies it also to the Gentiles;

1. In their ancient State as no People. 2. In their present Estate made a
People instead of the Jews. 3. In their possible Estate and Condition to be
rejected and cast off; upon which Mr. Blake grounds several, which he calls
undeniable Positions.

1. Concerning the Subject, Root and Branch in this Place (as by Way of
Metaphor)

The 1st. Sets out the Estate of Parent and Child, Ancestor and

2. The whole Body of the Church is compared to a Tree, to an Olive Tree.

3. The Root of this Tree, viz. the first sup^^am universal Root is Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. Not Abraham alone, for so the Ishmaelites would be of the
Body: Nor Abraham with Isaac alone, so the Edomites from Esau would have been
taken in. But the Apostle in this Chapter from Old Testament Authority,
excludes both of them. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, are therefore jointly the Root.

4. The Branches of the Tree are of two Sorts, some natural, issuing from the
Root by descent; others ingraffed, put in by Way of Incision. The Jews were
natural Branches, descending from the Lions of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. The
Gentiles are Branches by Incision, put into the Stock, the natural Branches
being broken off.

5. The Fat e^s of the Tree is the Glory of Ordinances, of which the whole
Church partakes: Christ is the Fatness, only as he is tendered in the Ordinance.

2. Concerning the Predicate Holiness.

1. There is one and the same Holiness goes through the whole T^^e; a^ the
Branches natural and engrafed through the whole (...), and all the Children of
Jews, and Christian Gentiles; the (...) of this I I^^^ness is from one original
Root, and therefore one and the ame.

2. This Holiness is such as is communicable from Parent to C^^^d as a Root
communicates Sap to the Branches. This is so plan, that it this (...), all the
Apostle's Dispute falls.

3. It is no Holiness of ^ahesion, but Relation not Qualitative, but Faederal.
The (...) of the Jews who were an holy Nation, she Holiness of the (...) here
spoken of, can be no (...) Holiness of (...) is not communicable, but Holiness
of Relation.

From whence he offers these Arguments.

1. That ingraffing which into American, Isaac and Jacob, as a Root; is not an
invisible ingraffing by Election and saving Faith. We live not by Power
received from Abraham. He cannot say he bears us up in saving Graces, and that
without Support from him, we can do Nothing: But the ingraffing is into
Abraham,(...) and Jacob as a Root.

2. That ingraffing which caused Disputation and Contention is some, Emulation
in others upon the Sight and Report of it, was not by saving Faith into the
invisible Body; but is open, visible, and apparent in the visible Body. But
this ingraffing of the Gentiles into the Church of God, caused Disputation and
Contention in some. Act. 11. 2, 3. Emulation in others. Deuteronomy. 32. 21. Romans 10,
19. This therefore was into the Church visible.

3. That Privilege which is not restrained to some few in visible Churches,
but is the Privilege of all that are contained in the visible Church, and
Members of it, is not an invisible Work upon the Heart to (...) saving Change;
but only an Interest in the visible Privileges: This is evident, the invisible
Work is not in (...) Matthew. 22. 14. But this here mentioned is the Privilege
of (...) whole Body, as is clear in the Text: Therefore the ingraffing is only
into a visible Body. That Privilege wherein the Jews, while they were a People
of God, did transcend the Gentiles when they were no People, is the Privilege
which these Gentiles have by their ingraffing. This is plain,. 17. But it is
the Privilege of Ordinances, in being visibly related to God, wherein the Jews
did then exceed the Gentiles, as has been shown.

4. That Faith from which the Jews actually fell, and which the Gentiles stand
in Danger to fall from, is not a saving justifying Faith, entitling to
invisible Privileges; but a Faith of Profession, only giving a visible Title.
This is plain, unless we will assert the Apostasy of the Saints. But this Faith
whereby the Gentiles are ingraffed, is a Faith from which the Jews fell, and
from which the Gentiles then were in Danger to fall,. 20.

5. That Reconciliation or Ingraffing which is opposite to a casting out of a
visible Church State, is an ingraffing into the visible Church: But this
Reconciliation or Ingraffing, is opposite to the casting out of a Church State;
as is plain, Matt. 21. 43. It Is a casting out of them that bear no Fruit, and
not a casting off invisible Branches.

6. If the State of the Jews continued to this Day, be an exclusion from a
visible Church State, so that they are no People of God in Name, then a visible
Church State is that which they lost, and the Gentiles gained. This is plain,
the State in which they stand, being rejected, is their State of Rejection. But
their Condition since that Time, is an Exclusion out of a visible Church State.
This needs no Proof, therefore a visible Church State is that which the Jews
lost and the Gentiles gained. -- Their Church State, and Relation to God in it,
being the same; the Holiness spoken of them, or attributed to them in the
New Testament is the same faederal Holiness. -- I think this Discourse on the
11th Chap. to the Romans, and the Reasonings there from, are consistent with
plain Fact, and as plain Facts as were ever seen since the Creation of the
World. And when I shall see a fair Solution of these Arguments, and a better
Exposition of this Passage of Scripture, I think. I shall readily own the
Objection is nothing to the Purpose.

Object. 3. Page 91. Those in Israel, who made no Profession of Piety of Heart,
did according to divine Institution partake of the Passover; and particularly,
it would be unreasonable to suppose this of all those whom God commanded to
keep the first Passover in Egypt. This seems to contain two Objections.

1. That those in Israel who made no Profession of Piety of Heart, did
according to divine Institution partake of the Passover.

2. So did the Congregation in Egypt partake of the first Passover.

He first considers this last Part, or second Objection.

In Answer to his Discourse upon it, let it be observed.

1. That the Israelites in Egypt were in Covenant with God before that Time,
taken in, in their Ancestors Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and as God had not been
pleased to institute any other Seal of the Covenant, than Circumcision, 'till
the Time of the Exit from Egypt; therefore they could observe no other, and it
appears that they had carefully observed that, from the Time of its Institution
'till then. So that by God's Command, they had used all the Ordinances of the
Covenant which he had appointed.

2. That the whole Time from Jacob's coming into Egypt, 'till the Israelites
went out under Moses, was about 215 Years, and Joseph lived about 72 Years
after Jacob's coming into Egypt; And it is probable most of the Patriarchs lived
near as long. So that from the Death of the Patriarchs to the Exit, was but
about 143 Years. Considering this short Space of Time, and how many godly
People there were among them, and that Moses and Aaron were then 80 Years old.
Exodus 7. 7. And the constant Expectation they lived in, of going into the Land
of Canaan, according to God's Promise to their Ancestors: It looks wonderfully
incredible, and commonly speaking impossible, that this People should be sunk
down into such a State of horrible Ignorance of Religion as Mr. Edwards seems
to suppose, in order to turn our Argument against us; besure it is taking that
for granted, which we deny, and supposing a Thing against ten Times the
Probability of the contrary. For it is ten Times more reasonable to suppose,
they were generally well instructed in their Religion, which God had revealed
to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob which was all the revealed Religion then in the
World. And the very Attendance on the great Ordinance of the Passover, in
Obedience to God's Command by Moses, was doubtless a sufficient public
Declaration of what they were bound to declare of these Matters, who were
already in Covenant with God, and not now to be taken in.

3. As to the Want of public Profession of Repentance for their Idolatry and
scandalous Sins, Mr. Edwards has given a sufficient Answer to himself, Page 96.
observing that it was before any Institution of a public Profession of
Godliness, or of Repentance in Case of Scandal: And if there was no Institution
for it, no Man can conceive why it should be done.

4. It was God's express Command that they should eat the Passover at that
Time. And as this was Reason enough, so it implies, that God took their
Compliance with it as a Profession of then Dedication of themselves to him; and
of their Repentance of their Idolatry, and Adherence to the Covenant with him,
and a sufficient visible Profession of it at that Time; to which, after the
Manner of Men, as King of the visible Church he trusted; and in this Case,
Moses was not instructed to examine their Qualifications, nor had any Business
to demand Satisfaction about them.

I am now to consider his Answer to the other Part of the Objection, viz. Those
in Israel who made no Profession of Piety of Heart, did according to divine
Institution partake of the Passover etc.

The Sum of his Answer under his first Head, as far as I can gather it up lies
in these Things. If the same Qualifications be requisite to partake of the
Passover as the Lord's Supper, then the Partakers must have Knowledge to
discern the Lord's Body, in Mr. Stoddard's Sense of 1 Cor. 11. 29. in the
Passover as in the Lord's Supper: But this is as difficult to suppose, as that
they professed Godliness. And why were not scandalous Sinners as expressly
forbidden? and why was not moral Sincerity as expressly required? -- And that
God required them to keep the Passover no more strictly than he required them
to love the Lord their God with their whole Heart. To this I reply,

1. That, as has been shown, the Covenant in its Dispensation to, or with
Christians, as to all the Substance of it, is the same now with Christians, as
it was with the Jews; so it is certain, that Circumcision and the Passover,
were Seals of the same Covenant, as Baptism and the Lord's Supper are now. And
I cannot conceive any Difficulty in supposing that the Israelites who were to
partake of the Passover should have Knowledge to discern the Lord's Body in Mr.
Stoddard's Sense o^ 1 Cor. 11. 29. For this does not imply that they must have
as clear a discerning of the Death and Sufferings of Christ in the Passover, as
Christians now have in the Lord's Supper; when the New Testament has unvailed
the Face of Moses; and Christ the Substance being come, the Shadows of the
Ceremonial Law are dispelled. We cannot Question but the Revelation which the
OldTestament made, was sufficiently clear, and had Light enough in it for the
Salvation of the People of God under it. And therefore there was sufficient
Light held forth in it, to be the Means to lead them to Christ; and certainly
they might know that he was principally shadowed in the Passover, because the
Apostle says, He is our Passover. And the Apostle Peter Act. 10. 43. To him
give all the Prophets Witness, that through his Name, who over believes in him
shall receive Remission of Sins. If the Old Testament did not give sufficient
Light in this Matter for Salvation; then Salvation was not to be had under it.
And if it did, then the Jews might know that this was a Sacramental
Representation of the Way of Salvation by the promised Messiah, who was the
great Expectation of all the Ages and Generations of that Nation. Though they
could not so clearly apprehend the Manner in which he would work out this
Salvation by his Bloodshedding and the breaking of his Body on the Cross, yet
they might know so much as to be a sufficient Encouragement of their Faith in
him, and Compliance with the Terms of the Covenant of Grace. And this was eno',
'till God revealed farther Light. The doctrinal Knowledge of Religion is not
necessary in the same Degree under each Dispensation, but according to the
Degree of Light held forth by divine Revelation. Therefore this is by no Means
as difficult to suppose, as that Profession of Godliness in Mr. Edwards's Sense
of it.

2. Scandalous Sinners were forbidden, and moral Sincerity required expressly,
in Persons Attendance on the Passover. Mr. Stoddard has observed, Appeal Page
58, 59. That there was in the Church of Israel, a Way appointed for the
removing Scandals. Levit. 6. 6, 7. And this Offering of Sacrifice was to be
attended with Confession, Levit. 5. 5. and Numb. 5. 6, 7. Hereby Scandal was
removed, and in Case of Obstinacy, they had their ecclesiastical Censures
according to divine Institution; which as Dr. Owen calls them, were an
authoritative Exclusion from the Society of the Church, and the Members of it,
etc. as may be seen more fully, Appeal Page 59. Therefore if scandalous and
immoral Persons, were allowed to eat the Passover; it was for Want of keeping
up that Discipline which God had appointed, and so it is with Respect to the
Lord's Supper.

3. I own that God as strictly required them to love the Lord with all their
Heart, as he did to eat the Passover, etc. -- I think eno' has been said before
to answer all such Kind of Reasoning. All I shall say to it now is; God
required all the Males in Israel to go up three Times a Year to worship him at
the Temple. Now what Sort of Arguing is it for me to say, that God as strictly
required all the Males in Israel to love him with all their Heart. Will it
follow from thence, that if any of the Males in Israel did not love him with
all his Heart, therefore he must not go up to worship at the Temple? The
Consequence is as good in one Case as the other.

Mr. Edwards second Answer Page 95. is; Whatever was the Case with Respect to
the Qualifications for the Sacraments of the Old Testament Dispensation, I
humbly concieve it is nothing to the Purpose in the present Argument, nor
needful to determine us with Respect to the Qualifications for the Sacraments
of the Christian Dispensation, which is a Matter of such plain Fact in the
New Testament.

I am humbly of a very different Opinion, for these Reasons.

1. Because I am so weak not to name with me, Mr. Blake, Mr. Guthry, Mr.
Stoddard, Mr. Humfrey, Mr. Timson, and Hundreds of others) as not to think Mr.
Edwards's Notion of the Terms of Communion such plain Fact in the
New Testament. Nay, I think the other Side of the Question to be plain Fact,
and wonder Mr. Edwards should controvert it. Now in this Debate, how shall we
be determined? We have no living infallible Judge to decide it; what Way shall
we take but to turn our Eyes to the Old Testament; there we find God called a
People into the same Covenant of Grace as he has called Christians, and
instituted Seals of that Covenant; to which he has told us, the Seals of the
Covenant in the NewTestament Dispensation do succeed, and are appointed in
their Room. Now when we there see how God himself has determined these Matters,
and Facts which we controvert; when we find what were the Qualifications
necessary then, in Order to enter into Covenant with God, and enjoy the
Ordinances of it; and when we also know that the New Testament Church is
grassed into the same Olive: Methinks this affords us great Light in this
Matter: for we on both Sides own that God understands his own Word better than
we, and his Actions, and Interpretation are a better Explication of it than any
of ours; therefore when he calls a Man a Saint, a People holy, and his own
People; and his own Actions determine what Sense he put upon these Words in the
Old Testament, when we find him using the same Words, and those of like
Signification with Respect to Persons in like Circumstances, and like Bodies;
it seems to me our Wisdom should yield to the Wisdom of God, and we ought to be
determined, and set down in an absolute Submission to the divine Authority.

2. Although Divines differ as Mr. Edwards observes, as to the precise Agreement,
and Difference between the two Dispensations of the Covenant under Moses, and
under Christ; and the Dispensation of the Covenant so far as it was Ceremonial
is at an End: yet those Things wherein they agree are of great Consequence to
be understood. In God the Author, propounding the Covenant, who is the God not
of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also. Romans 3. 29. In the Party to whom it
is propounded, and who is called to accept the Terms of the Covenant; fallen
perishing Men; in the Motive or impulsive Cause; mere Grace to fallen Man in
his lost Condition: in the Mediator Jesus Christ; who is ever the same in both:
In the Terms or Conditions annexed; Remission of Sins and everlastlasting Life
on the Part of God, Faith and Repentance on the Part of Man: in the Unity of
Church Fellowship; constituting one and the same Church. Gal. 2. 14, 15, 16.
Matthew. 21. 43. Some Things wherein they differ are also of great Consequence to
be known, and want it as to the precise Difference it is of no Consequence: Yet
I find our Savior, and his Apostles often refer us to this Dispensation to
prove the Christian Dispensation and the Doctrines of it to be the (...) God,
and the Apostles declare it to be of standing Use and Direction to the Church
as long as the World lasts. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21.

3. I find the Apostles expressly declaring the Use and End of the Scriptures of
the Old Testament as well as the New, to be for the teaching, reproving,
correcting, instructing in Righteousness, that the People of God pray he
perfected, thoro'ly furnished unto all good Works, 2 (...) 16. And they refer
us to the Way of God's dealing with the (...) Church, and his Chastisements of
them, to learn what to expect in like Case. They tell us that these Things were
done, and written for our Sake, even in this very Matter. 1 Cor. 10 Chap.
begin. to. 11. I hope these are satisfying Reasons why I differ from my Brother
Edwards in this Point: And I cannot but think, if People are once persuaded by
the Ministers of Christ, to have little Regard to the Old Testament, the New
will soon go after it.

His third Answer is, that he thinks nothing can be alleged from the Scripture
that is sufficient to prove a Profession of Godliness (i. e. in his Sense) not
to be a Qualification r^quis^^e in order to a due and regular Participation of
the Passover. -- The Reader is desired to observe, the Words due and regular
must intend lawful, else they are nothing to the Purpose, nor concerned in this
Dispute.

I think enough has been said to show, that it was otherwise; but of this the
Reader must judge. I shall not swell this Answer by saying any Thing to what
Mr. Edwards thinks may be Reasons why the Matter about such a Profession may be
involved in so much Obscurity and Difficulty: Only I would observe, they seem
to be founded mostly on a Notion that there was a divine Institution for an
explicit public Covenanting with God by particular Persons, in order to their
eating the Passoever, which I think has been shown to be without any Foundation
in the Word of God; nor is there, I suppose, any Reason to believe it was ever
known, either in the Jewish or Christian Church before.

The fourth Objection proposed to be answered is Page 99. viz. It is not
reasonable to suppose that the Multitudes which John Baptist baptized, made a
Profession of saving Grace, etc. He answers, That those whom John baptized made
a Profession of some Kind of Repentance, and it is not reasonable to suppose the
Repentance they professed was specifically, or in Kind, diverse from that which
he had instructed them in, and called them to, which is called Repentance for
the Remission of Sins; and that is saving Repentance.

The plain Account the Gospel gives us of this Matter, will doubtless clearly
open it to an impartial Enquirer. John's Baptism was the Baptism of Repentance
for the Remission of Sins. Luke 3. 3. Doubtless we are to understand this as
Mr. Edwards says, that Men should now speedily turn to God by Repentance, and
Faith in the promised Savior; but surely this does not prove that hey did
declare before their Baptism, and in order to it, that they had a saving
Repentance toward God, and saving Faith in the Lamb; for the very Text he
quotes is a Confutation of this Supposition. Acts 19. 4, 5. John verily
baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the People that they
should believe on him that should come after him, that is, on Jesus Christ.

These Words seem plainly to import that John declared (as we find he did to
the People that came to him, that the Messiah was now speedily to be
manifested; and that they must engage to submit to him as soon as he should be
manifested, and willingly receive him upon the Evidences of his Mission. But
can it follow that by an Engagement that they would turn from all their Sins,
and receive and submit to Christ as soon as he was manifested; that they did
now believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah before he was manifested;
and did now trust in Him for Salvation? And because they confessed their Sins,
and engaged to turn from them, as the Way, and Term of their Expectation of the
Mercies of the Messiah's Kingdom, that this implied in it that they had
exercised this Repentance? And when John declares, Matthew. 3. 11. I indeed
baptize you with Water unto Repentance; but he that comes after me is mightier
than I, etc. he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire. If John
baptized unto Repentance, then his Baptism was a Seal of their Engagement to
repent, not a Seal of a Profession that they had savingly repented. Agreeable
to this, as the People and Nation of the Jews were at that Time in general
Expectation that the Messiah would quickly appear; great Multitudes from all
Quarters, and many of the Pharisees went out to John; and upon the foregoing
Declaration made by him, and their confessing their Sins, he baptized them; but
these Pharisees, and Multitudes of the Rest of them, when the Messiah did
appear, did not like him, and proved his most obstinate and malicious Enemies,
and broke their Engagements to God. -- The Sum of the Account the Gospel gives
us is, that upon John's Preaching that the Messiah was at Hand, and God called
them to Repentance, and to come into his Kingdom, which he would soon set up;
thereupon they confessed their Sins, and received Baptism, which implied a
Consent to John's Declaration, and Engagement to submit to the Messiah
according to it. Upon their Confession of their Sins, and such an Engagement by
Implication, to submit to the Laws of the Messiah's Kingdom, when he should set
it up, John baptized them without Delay, and sealed their Profession and
Engagement. -- What Opportunity John had to enquire, whether these People that
he Baptized made a credible Profession of true Piety, we know not: But we know
that we read not a Word in Scripture about any such Enquiry; therefore I know
of no other Reason we can have to suppose he did make it, but only first, to
suppose that he ought to have made it. As to the moral Character of the
Pharisees and Sadducees, he knew it well without Enquiry, and told them Matt 3.
7. That they were a Generation of Vipers. Yet upon the Confession of their
Sins, and being willing to receive his Baptism, he baptized them.

I think Mr. Edwards is much mistaken, to suppose he has done enough to stop
the Mouths of the Objectors, by representing it as probable that he had as much
Time to inquire into their Experiences, as into their doctrinal Knowledge,
because his Opponents suppose this to be necessary. John knew these People were
not Heathen, they were in Covenant with God, Members of his visible Church, and
were not yet turned out of it. And his Opponents therefore don't suppose, that
John did enquire at all about their doctrinal Knowledge. -- Besure it seems
evident from the Consideration of plain Facts, and all the Accounts the Gospel
gives us concerning this Matter, that there is no Appearance that John made a
positive Judgment, that every one of these People were regenerated; or that he
taught them, that they themselves must be well satisfied that it was so, and be
in Fact so, or else it was unlawful for them to be baptized, or for him to
baptize them. And yet if these Things don't appear, Mr. Edwards has said
nothing to the Purpose of his own Argument, or in Answer to the Objection.

As to the fifth Objection Page 101, it is one that I don't make, and if any
Body argues in that Manner against Mr. Edwards's Notion of the Terms of Church
Communion, I leave them to concern themselves about his Answer to it.

Object. 6. Page 102, is taken from the Parable of the Wheat and Tares, Matthew.
13. when the Servants of the Householder unexpectedly found Tares among the
Wheat, they said to their Master; Will thou that we go and gather them up? But
he said, Nay, left while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with
them, let both grow together until the Harvest.

I think Mr. Edwards's Words don't so exactly represent our Argument from this
Parable: If we may be allowed to do it our selves, it would be after this
Manner, viz. This shows the Mind of Christ, that he will not trust his Servants
in this World to pretend to discern between true Saints, and those that are
only apparent. But if they were never so much persuaded in their own Minds they
are Tares, they may not upon that Presumption, root them up, lest they should
root up the Wheat. Which we think shows us the Will of Christ in this Matter,
is; that his Servants shall proceed only upon certain established known Rules
of his visible Kingdom, and not upon any private Rules of judging about them.
-- Allowing that those Words in the Parable have only Respect to casting out of
the Church, and purging the Field; Mr. Edwards says, He agrees with us, that
adult Persons actually admitted to the Communion of the visible Church, ought
not to be cast out unless they are obstinate in Heresy, or Scandal. -- But he
thinks this Parable is a clear Evidence of what he maintains. --

Notwithstanding all he has said, I find an insuperable Difficulty left upon my
Mind respecting his Opinion. -- For I find it is the Will of Christ, that all
the Infant Seed of visible Believers should be baptized: And I find that
Baptism is the only Rite of Admission into the visible Church, that Christ has
instituted in the New Testament. -- I cannot find one Word of any other Way of
Admission, which the Apostles ever used. These Children I conceive to be born
in the Covenant, born in the House of God, as his menial Servants; and the
Covenant by his Appointment sealed by Baptism. This, says Mr. Hudson, makes
them Members of the Body of Christ; and as for particular explicit Covenant,
besides the general, imposed on Churches, I find no mention of it, no Example,
nor Warrant for it in all the Scripture; and therefore cannot account it an
Ordinance of God; but a prudential human Device, which in some Cases and Places
may happily be of good Use, so it be not urged as an Ordinance of God. Page 19.

Mr. Cotton says in his Treatise of Holiness of Church Members, Pa. 1. Such as
are born of Christian Parents, and baptized in their Infancy into the
Fellowship of the Church, are initiated Members of the same Church, though
destitute of spiritual Grace, until they justly deprive themselves of the
Privilege of that Fellowship; for even of such is the Kingdom of God, Mar. 10.
14. The Assembly's Confession of Faith defines Baptism to be a Sacrament of the
New Testament, ordained by Jesus Christ, not only for the Admission of the
Party baptized into the visible Church etc. Admission of Persons by Baptism
into Church Membership they lay down as a Thing never doubted. And says Mr.
Blake I know no orthodox Writer that questions it. -- As soon as any were
discipled, through the Acts of the Apostles, according to the Commission, Matthew.
28. 19. they were thus received. All the Seed therefore of visible Believers
who are baptized, are Seed sown by Christ in his Field the Church. When they
grow up under the Education of the Church, and come for the Privilege and Seal
of the Lord's Supper, I cannot find out why they have not as good a Right to it
as their Fathers and Brethren that we call the Church. If they are turned
Heathen, or are obstinate in Heresy or Scandal, they ought to be cast out;
otherwise Mr. Edwards agrees we have no Business to root them out.

I have often marvelled, says Mr. Blake, what Men mean when they speak of
Admission of Members into Churches, when the Parties of whom they speak, have
already equal Right with themselves to Membership. If Baptism is an Admission,
then their Title is as good, that were thus before admitted, as their's that
give them Admission.

What is it but the Covenant that gives Right to the Seal? and eadem est Ratio,
utriusque Sacramenti. These Persons Christ has admitted into the Church: He has
bound them to keep Covenant; the Seal of it by which they are Sworn to it, has
been put upon them; they come and tell the Church they are sensible of this
Engagement, and desire the confirming Seal, and other Privileges of the
Covenant; are neither Ignorant, nor obstinate in Heresy, or Scandal; shall the
Church upon a Suspicion of their Unregeneracy tell them no? They were brought
in unawares, and contrary to Design, and don't belong to the Church? Why is
there not the same Reason that they should thus purge out others that they have
the like Suspicion of? I am of Mr. Edwards's Opinion, that if these Persons
don't bring forth such Evil Fruit, such scandalous, and obstinate Wickedness,
as is visibly inconsistent with the Being of true Grace, they are not to be
cast out. And without this, I am apt to think the Church have as poor
Abilities, and as little Business to go about to separate them, as they had
when they were admitted.

And if these orderly Church Members are really unconverted, and the Ordinance
of the Lord's Supper be not Christ's Appointment a proper Means for their
Conversion, and yet nevertheless Christ, as before, has bound and sworn them to
attend it: I cannot see but this dreadful Consequence must follow; that by
Christ's Appointment they are led into a Snare, by which on one Hand or other
they are bound to Sin. -- If it be said here again, they are as much bound to
believe and repent, I grant it: But this implies, they are bound to do all they
can in order to it. If it be said, they are bound to Faith and Repentance, in
Order to the Enjoyment of this Privilege; this is begging the Question. And
beside, it implies a Supposition, that the Church knows they are Tares, and
have Right to purge them out, although they don't appear obstinate in Heresy or
Scandal; which is a Contradiction of Mr. Edwards's Concession. --

When Mr. Edwards shall help me over these Difficulties, I am ready to give up
the Argument from this Parable.

Object. 7. Page 103. Christ himself administered the Lord's Supper to Judas,
whom he knew at the same Time to be graceless.

To this he answers three Things, 1. By denying the Fact. 2. By denying the
Consequence. 3. By turning the Difficulty against the Scheme of those he
opposes.

1. By denying the Fact, for to him he says it is apparent that Judas was not
present at the Administration of the Lord's Supper.

I shall refer the Reader to the several Accounts the Evangelists give us of
this Matter, and offer some Remarks upon them. -- Matthew gives us his Account,
Chap. 20. from. 20. to 30. Mark's, Chap. 14.. 17, to 26. Luke's Account we have
Chap. 22.. 14, -- 23. John's begins with the 13th Chap. and goes on with an
Account of Christ's washing his Disciples Feet, a Discourse of Humility, and
diverse Things to the 30 th. -- If the Reader will lay all these Accounts
before him, and diligently consider them; he may observe, (1) That though they
all Four give us an Account that Judas was present at the Passover, yet only
the three first give us an Account of the Institution of the Lord's Supper.
John gives no Account of this at all. (2) He may observe, that Christ's
Discourse of the Treachery of one of his Disciples was no Discovery of Judas to
the rest. Nor does it appear, that it was discovered 'till Judas discovered it
himself. Matthew. says, ver. 21. He said, one of you shall betray me. Mark says,.
18. He said one of you which eats with me shall betray me. This was no
Discovery of one more than another; they then inquire one by one, Lord, is it
I? Matt. says. 23. He said he that dippeth his Hand with me in the Dish, the
same shall betray me. Mark says. 20. It is one of the twelve that dippeth his
Hand with me in the Dish. Still here is no Discovery who it was. If all the
Twelve dipped in the same Dish, then there was no nearer Discovery than our
Lord at first made; that it was one of them. If they had several Dishes (as was
probably the Case) then it comes nearer, and he informed them that it was one
of those that dipped in the same Dish, that himself dipped in. So this might
point out the Traitor within three or four. After this Matthew gives us an
Account,. 25. that Judas himself asked, Master is it I? Jesus replied, thou
have said; by which he knew himself. But if you compare this with John's
Account, it appears that Christ spoke this with so low a Voice, that none of
the rest heard it. For he tells us Chap. 13. 24. that Peter beck'ned, or made
some private Sign to John to ask Christ who it was. He lying on Jesus Bosom
asked him (as it seems,) as secretly as Peter had beckoned to him, and Christ's
Answer was private, and whispered only to him (as diverse of the Critics in
Pool's Synopsis observe) and told him it was he to whom he should give a Sop,
or a Morsel. -- And when he had dipped it, he gave it to Judas. For after all
this, when Jesus said to him, that thou do, do quickly. The Evangelist tells
us. 28. No Man at the Table knew for what Intent he spoke this unto him, etc.
From all which it appears, that Christ had no Design to discover Judas to the
rest; nor does it appear that he did do it. But his Discourse about this
Matter, was with Design to give them a farther Proof of his Omniscience, and
confirm their Faith in him in that trying Hour which was approaching; when they
should remember that he foreknew all Things; and that the Prophecy he quoted
from Psalm. 41. 9. was exactly verified in Judas. And by his Manner of
discoursing of this Matter, it appears also, that he designed to give Judas all
suitable Means to awaken his Conscience and bring him to Repentance, by letting
him know that he knew his Guilt; and yet treated him with the strongest
Arguments of Compassion and Tenderness. So that there is no Occasion to suppose
Judas was excluded because he was become a notorious, scandalous Sinner; for
nothing appears but the rest of the Apostles, all besure excepting John, still
took him for as good a Saint as ever they did. In this Sense do Menochius and
Lucas Brugensis in Pool's Synopsis, understand those Words, Luke 22. 21. But
behold the Hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table. q. d. Although
I am offering him my Body and Blood, and he is eating and drinking the Symbols
of them, and I am setting before him such Arguments of Repentance; yet the Hand
of a Traitor remains on the Table, and the Heart of a Traitor too. And Beza
himself owns that in this Manner the Words are best connected with the former,
and he has no other Reason against their being so interpreted; but only that he
thinks Judas was not at the Table. -- (3.) It is to be observed that there
seems much less Difficulty in reconciling the Accounts of the Evangelists, by
supposing Judas was at the Eucharist, than on the other Supposition. Matthew
and Mark give no Account when he went out; they both give an Account of the
Institution and Celebration of the Lord's Supper, immediately after the
Passover, and that while they were eating Jesus took Bread, etc. So that there
is nothing in them, to render it at all probable that he went out before the
Supper; but the quick Succession of the Words, Drink ye all of it, and they all
drank of it. Which they tell without any Intimation that Judas was gone, rather
signify that he was not. And Luke relates that he was in Fact there, and that
it was at the Celebration of the Supper that Christ said, The Hand of him that
betrayeth me, is with me on the Table. Now if we consider John gives us no
Account at all of the Institution or Celebration of the Supper, but leaves
that, as having been sufficiently done by the other Evangelists; and tells us
only of the Celebration of the Passover, and of Christ's giving the Sop with a
private Intimation to Judas, that he was the Person who should betray him; and
then says, he immediately went out. The Adverb (...) the same with (...) is
presently, quickly, straightway, which does not necessarily imply, that it was
that Instant, but soon after; as it diverse Times signifies in other Places, as
Mar. 1. 28. Where the Event spoken of required some Time.

The Account which John gives, is, that Judas went out soon after the Sop of
the Passover. Luke's Account is, that his Hand was with Christ on the Table,
when he administered the Lord's Supper. Now to suppose that John designs to tell
us that Judas went out before the Supper, because he speaks of his going out
presently after his receiving the Sop; and that the Supper did not intervene,
when yet John says nothing about the Supper, seems to be inconsistent with
Luke's Account, who tells us, the Hand of Judas was with Christ on the Table at
the Supper; and gives us a particular Account of the Celebration both of the
Passover and the Supper: By which we are naturally led to think he partook.
Whereas to suppose John mentioned the going out of Judas upon receiving the
Sop, not as an Event that was in Fact next in Order; but only the next that he
mentions, and supposing the Supper to intervene between the Sop and his going
out (as Luke relates it) since John does not pretend to give an Account of the
Supper; this appears perfectly harmonious with Luke's Account,, and agreeable to
the other Evangelists; Whether this is not the most reasonable, if not the only
Way of reconciling the Accounts which the Evangelists give us of this Matter, I
submit to the Reader's Judgment. -- Dr. Lightfoot says, it is here demonstrated
that Judas was at the Eucharist. Mr. Henry says, it seems plain that Judas did
receive the Supper, for after the Solemnity was over, Christ says, Behold the
Hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table. And many other good
Divines and Expositors are of this Opinion; which are the best Expositors, or
whether neither are best, the Reader has free Liberty to judge.

In the second Place, Mr. Edwards denies the Consequence, and says, If Judas
partook of the Supper, it affords no Consequence in Favor of what he opposes.

Now if it be so, I confess I am still at a Loss what he does oppose. Mr.
Stoddard's Question was, that sanctifying Grace is not necessary to the lawful
Attendance on the Lord's Supper. This is the Doctrine which Mr. Edwards tells
us in many Places he does oppose. He signify's often, that the church is to
make a positive Judgment of a Man's gracious State founded on some positive
Appearance that ordinarily manifests the Thing; or satisfies the Mind about it.
And does not the Consequence of Judas's partaking overthrow this Supposition?
Or did Judas creep in unawares to our Lord?

The Argument is, that Jesus Christ the King of the Church admitted Judas to
partake of the Lord's Supper.

Judas was an unregenerate Man.

The Consequence is, that it is lawful for some other unregenerate Men to be
admitted by the Church to partake of the Lord's Supper. -- Why does not this
Argument prove something in Favor of the Opinion of those whom Mr. Edwards
opposes? Because he says, He has observed once and again, concerning the Lord's
Dealings with his People under the Old Testament, so under the New, the same
Observation takes Place. Christ did not come to judge the Secrets of Men, nor
did ordinarily act in his external Dealing with his Disciples, and
Administration of Ordinances, as the Searcher of Hearts; but rather as the Head
of the visible Church, proceeding according to what was exhibited in
Profession, and visibility, etc I know Mr. Edwards has made this Observation,
if he had put in the Word always, instead of ordinarily, it would have been as
just; and as I think, this Observation confutes his whole Scheme. I could wish
he had kept the true Import of it in his Mind, because I cannot but think it
might well have saved the Church the Trouble of this Controversy. However it no
Ways weakens the Argument offered by Mr. Edwards's Opposers, from Judas's
partaking of the Lord's Supper. For from hence it appears, that the Judgment
Christ made as Head of the visible Church concerning Judas's Religion, was
founded on his outward Carriage and Behavior; his visible owning him as his
Lord, his Master, and Savior; and that he took those Words and Actions in the
most favorable Sense they could be interpreted in. It is certain he never
founded his Judgment on Judas's gracious Experiences, because he had none. And
it is certain he never put him upon declaring expressly that he had such, in
Contradistinction from a Declaration that might be made with moral Honesty,
because he knew he must lie, if he had said those Things. And it is also clear
that he expected that Declaration or Profession which was as much as he could
make with common Grace and Help; because though Judas did lie when he made this,
yet he need not have lied, but might honestly and truly have made this if he
would. I think it is plain, Christ did not as Head of the Church, make a
positive Judgment that Judas was a godly Man, founded upon his Acquaintance
with Judas's Experiences, and yet at the same Time as the Searcher of Hearts
knew that he was a Devil. And hence it follows, that when Ministers or Churches
require the gracious Experiences of Men's Hearts, or their own positive
Profession of that which necessarily implies such Experiences, in order to
their positive Judgment that they are sanctified; and this in order to know if
they have Right to the visible Ordinances of the Gospel; they then become
Searchers of Hearts, and no longer stand in the Place of the King of the
visible Church.

But in the third Place, Mr. Edwards turns the Difficulty against the Scheme of
those he opposes, and so makes it Argument^^^^ Hominem: By which he seems to
think, we must be for ever silenced; and says, He will venture to tell them
that the Difficulty lies full as hard against their own Scheme; and if there be
any Strength at all in the Argument, it is to all Intents of the same Strength
against those Qualifications which they themselves suppose to be necessary, --
as against those which I think to be so. Page 105. How so? Why, because Christ
knew all the secret Wickedness, Murder etc. which Judas was now practicing
against him, and knew that Judas had not moral Sincerity. It seems somewhat
strange how he could so soon forget what he had been speaking in the Paragraph
next foregoing, that both under the Old Testament and the New, Christ did not
in his external Dealing with his Disciples, and the Administration of
Ordinances, act as the Searcher of Hearts, but as the Head of the visible
Church etc. Now I would ask, Whether Christ knew all this secret Wickedness,
and the murderous Designs of Judas his Heart, and his secret wicked
Transactions and Agreement with the chief Priests; as the Head of the visible
Church, or as the omniscient God? -- I think only the omniscient God could know
it; when at the same Time as King of the visible Church he had moral Evidence
that Judas was morally sincere. And if Mr. Edwards will take the moral Evidence
of a Man's moral Sincerity to be equally an Evidence of saving Grace, then I
confess I know not who he is opposing in this Controversy more than himself. --
It seems to me, this sufficiently refutes Mr. Edwards's Observation in the
Close of his Answer to this Objection, with Respect to the Passover: for Christ
acted in the same Character here, as King of the visible Church, and acting as
such he knew Judas was morally sincere, seeing the proper instituted Evidences
of it in his visible Behavior, yet at the same Time as God before whom all
Things are naked and open, he clearly saw all the Treachery and Wickedness of
his Heart.

Object. 8. Page 106. If sanctifying Grace be a requisite Qualification in
order to Persons due Access to Christian Sacraments, God would have given some
certain Rule whereby those who are to admit them, might know whether they have
such Grace or not.

I suppose this is designed to be a Representation of, and what follows, an
Answer to Mr. Stoddard's 5th Argument in his Appeal, Page 74. -- It Is again
necessary, that the Reader remember, that the Question Mr. Stoddard disputed is
this, Sanctifying Grace is not necessary in order to a Person's lawful
partaking of the Lord's Supper. -- And the Argument here pretended to be
stated, the Reader may see Page 74 of the Appeal in these Words. -- If the
Lord's Supper be only for converted Men, then God would have given some certain
Rule, in the attending of which, it might be remained to converted Men: But he
has given no such Rule in attending of which it may be restrained to converted
Men. How Mr. Stoddard has proved both the major and minor Propositions of this
Argument the Reader may there see. And if those two Propositions are true, the
Consequence must be true.

Mr. Edwards says, This Objection was obviated in his stating the Question: But
he farther observes, that if there be any Strength in it, it lies in this
Proposition, viz. Whatever Qualifications are requisite in order to Persons due
Access to Christian Sacraments, God has given some certain Rule whereby those
who admit them may know whether they have those Qualifications or not. He might
also have said, that this Argument was obviated, for as he has stated it in the
Words of the Objection, it is no more akin to Mr. Stoddard's Argument, than
his Question in the Words he has propounded it without his Explication, is
akin to Mr. Stoddard's Question. Indeed I suppose the whole Controversy is
obviated by his stating the Question, provided he had not explained it to mean
another Thing than the Words of the Question might naturally speak. For whether
sanctifying Grace be requisite in under to Persons due Access, i. e. right and
acceptable Access to Christian (...), is what Mr. Stoddard never denied, nor
was denied I suppose by any Divine on Earth. This is a very different Thing
from a lawful partaking of them. If Mr. Edwards did not intend to dispute Mr.
Stoddard's Question, why did he tell us, he did in his Preface? And why should
he pretend to propound and answer Mr. Stoddard's Arguments, which are offered
only to prove that Question? If he does; why does he propound a Question in
ambiguous Words, which may be taken in different Senses, and change the Terms
of Mr. Stoddard's Arguments into ambiguous Words to suit the Terms of his own
Question? The Position upon which Mr. Edwards says, the Strength of that
Argument depends, is but a Blind. It does not depend on the Truth of that
Proposition.

Mr. Stoddard does not say, if sanctifying Grace be necessary to a Person's
lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper, that then God would have given some
certain Rule whereby those who are to admit them, may know whether they have
such Grace or not.

He says, God would have given some certain Rule, in the attending of which,
the Lord's Supper might be restrained to converted Men. It Is plain, he did not
intend that this Rule respected wholly these who admit; but as there are some
to admit, and some to be admitted; the Rule respects them both. And that he
intended this, appears, because Page 75, he mentions an Objection of Dr.
Mather's, viz. There is a certain Rule given whereby godly Men may know their
Godliness, and that they are warranted to come to the Lord's Supper To which he
replies, Mr. Mather will not stand by this Rule; for he faith, if after serious
SelfExamination, a Man cannot but hope he is a godly Man, he may come, though he
has not Assurance; and if he goes by Mr. Mather's Rule, that will not restrain
the Sacrament to converted Men. So that if Mr. Edwards had given a fair State
of the Argument, it must have been, That whatever Qualifications are necessary
to the lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper, God has given some certain Rule
in the attending of which the Lord's Supper may be restrained to such as have
those Qualifications. This is a Proposition contained in Mr. Stoddard's
Argument, and this I believe there is no Divine nor Christian upon the Face of
the Earth that understands an Argument, will deny. -- What therefore if the
Church can as well judge concerning saving Grace, as any other internal
invisible Qualification? Yet if the Rule which God has given for Admission be
attended by those who are bound to attend it; the Lord's Supper will certainly
be restrained to such as have the Qualifications necessary to the lawful
Partaking of it, and if it be only for converted Men, then in the Attendance to
that Rule it will be restrained to such. --

Object. 9. Page 107. If sanctifying Grace be requisite to a due Approach to
the Lord's Table, then no Man may come but he that knows he has sanctifying
Grace. A Man must not only think he has Right to the Lord's Supper, in order to
his lawful partaking of it; but he must know he has a Right: If nothing but
Sanctification gives him a real Right to the Lord's Supper, then nothing short
of the Knowledge of Sanctification gives him a known Right to it. Only an
Opinion, and probable Hope of a Right will not warrant his coming.

This is Mr. Stoddard's second Argument. Appeal Page 60.

Mr. Edwards's first Answer is, by desiring those who insist on this as an
invincible Argument, to consider calmly whether they themselves ever did, or
ever will stand to it.

Mr. Stoddard besure thought it was an invincible Argument, though his Grandson
derides it. For he says, Page 63. The Truth of it is as evident as the Light of
the Sun at Noon Day. -- It seems the Reason why we should not stand to it, Mr.
Edwards thinks to be because two Things are to be observed.

1. Then no unconverted Persons may come, unless they know that unconverted
Persons should come, and know that God don't require Grace in order to their
coming.

If this were so, I see no Reason why we should not stand to the Argument. --
Whatsoever Qualifications they be, which are necessary to a Person's lawful
partaking of the Lord's Supper, it is absolutely certain that a Man must have
them, or else he cannot lawfully partake. And how he can know he has a lawful
Right, unless he knows he has those Qualifications, I own is at present beyond
my Power to comprehend; and I believe it is beyond the Power of any Man to tell
me. To say that a Man may have a lawful Right to partake of the Lord's Supper,
and not have the Qualifications which God's Law requires to make it lawful for
him to partake, is a Contradiction in Terms, and the same Thing as to say, such
a Thing is necessary to warrant his coming, and yet he may warrantably come
without it. And it is the same Thing to say, a Man may know he has a Right, and
yet not know he has the Qualification which gives him that Right: This is no
better than to say, a Man may know a Thing, and not know it; or that he may
know a Thing to be true, and know the contrary to be true at the same Time. If
a Man can warrantably to a Thing, and yet not know he has the Qualification
which gives him his Warrant; then he may act warrantably, when he has no
Warrant to act.

In Answer to Mr. Edwards's Question, this I assert, and stand to as a Matter
of easy Proof, that there is no Qualification whatsoever which is necessary to
the lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper, but what a Man must have in order to
his lawful doing it; and that he must know he has it, in order to his knowing
that he may lawfully do it.

But as no Man ever taught, that the Want of Grace was a Qualification
necessary to a Man's lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper, neither can his
Knowledge of his being unconverted, be necessary in order to his knowing his
Right to come.

A Man must know he has the Qualifications which by the Gospel Charter, give
him a lawful Right to come; but if he may have these being unconverted, and not
know that he is unconverted, then there is no Necessity of his knowing that
unconverted Men may lawfully come, in order to his knowing that he has a lawful
Right to come. If it be necessary for some unconverted Men to know that
unconverted Men may lawfully come, in order to their knowing that they may
lawfully come; yet it is not necessary for all to know this. --

As Mr. Stoddard wrote his Book for the Help and Direction of Persons, whose
Consciences might be troubled on this Account; -- I hope the judicious Reader
will excuse me, if I say something more under this Head, for the Sake of the
Weak and Injudicious, who may be perplexed by this Discourse of Mr. Edwards

There are diverse Ways of knowing Things. Some are known only by Intuition,
some in a discursive Manner, by Study, Meditation and Reasoning, some by
Testimony. Accordingly there must needs be different Degrees of Certainty, in
the Knowledge which Men attain in these several Ways. And when a Man is come to
so much Knowledge of the Objects of his Search in either of these Ways, as the
Nature of the Means which God has appointed for the obtaining that Knowledge
will ordinarily allow in such Circumstances as God has placed him; he is
properly said to know those Things. He knows them as far as the Author of his
Nature has made it necessary for him to know them.

Now the Revelation of God contained in the Bible, being the only infallible
sufficient Rule to direct Men in all Matters of Faith and Practice, necessary
to Salvation; therefore to know the Terms of Christian Communion, a Man must
search the Word of God with great Care and Diligence, together with earnest
Prayer, that God would help him by his good Spirit to understand his Will, and
show him his own Duty; using withal whatsoever Means God puts in his way, to
help him to come at the right Understanding of the Mind of God revealed in his
Word: And here he will find as plain as the Sun, that God requires all Men who
hear and read the Gospel (...) (...) Christ, to believe in his Name, to repent
of their Sins, and to attend on all the Ordinances which he has appointed in
his Word; and diligently to use all Means instituted for their Salvation: That
he calls them to give up themselves to him with all their Hearts, and to bind
and engage themselves to him as far as they can, to enter into the Bond of the
Covenant through Jesus Christ, and engage to fulfill the Terms of the Covenant
of Grace, in a Way of believing, repenting, and sincere Obedience. To enable
them her into, he gives abundant Encouragement of Assistance by his holy Spirit
to them that set themselves in earnest hereunto, and lay this Matter to Heart
as their chief Business; and upon the solemn Profession hereof, he finds that
God has in all Ages admitted Persons into visible Covenant with himself, and
commanded them to use and improve all the Ordinances of his Worship. Now he
knows that these are the Qualifications which God requires of him in order
hereto, because the Word of God declares so. -- But how shall he know if he has
these Qualifications? This he must know by Intuition; by seeing them in
himself. He has no possible Way to know whether he believes the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, or is sincerely willing to give up his Heart and Life to God, and seek
his Salvation by Jesus Christ, in the Way the Gospel proposes; but by seeing
these Things in his own Heart. -- As this is the most certain Way of knowing,
so here his Knowledge must be proportionably certain to the Means of coming at
it. When he sees these Qualification, in his own Heart, he knows it is his Duty
and his Privilege to attend the Lord's Supper. -- But a Scruple is thrown in.
Perhaps this Belief and Sincerity which he knows he has, though it be without
wilful and known Guile or Deceit, may be no more than moral Sincerity; the
Effect of common Grace and Illumination, and if it be so, he is unconverted.
How must he know that he may lawfully come if that be his Case? He may know by
the Word of God, that God has admitted Men upon making such a Profession as he
finds he can truly make, and that Multitudes have had God's Warrant to use and
enjoy the Ordinances of Salvation, as God's Word shows, had not sanctifying
Grace. From whence it follows, that if that really should be the Case with him,
yet he has God's Call and Warrant to come, and cast himself upon his Mercy, and
do the utmost he can: His Unregeneracy me^rly as such is no Bar. This is such a
Fact of Knowledge of this Matter, as the Nature of the Thing makes necessary;
and is certainly proportionable to the Means of Knowledge which God ordinarily
furnishes Men with: This is a Knowledge which Boys and Girls of 16 Years old
may attain to. -- And it is of no more Necessity for them to know the
Controversies which have been among Divines about this Matter, or whether there
ever was any Controversy about it; then to know how many Stars there are. A Man
may know that he believes the Doctrine of the Trinity, and that he is bound to
adore one God in three Persons; that the human and divine Nature of Christ, are
one Person, God-Man, whom he must believe and obey, and serve as the only Lord
and Savior of the Church, as well without knowing any Thing about the
Controversies among Divines concerning these Things, and their Explications
upon them, as with. If it be necessary for a Man to stay 'till Divines and
Churches have settled their Controversies concerning these Things, and many
other Disputes, before knows whether he is in his present State bound to
worship God, and enjoy the Ordinances of the Gospel; it will be long eno'
before he will either believe, or practice any Doctrine of Religion.

But upon the Supposition that sanctifying Grace is necessary to the lawful
Attending the Lord's Supper, this is the essential Qualification which gives a
Man a Right, and without which it is impossible he should lawfully do it; and
the only possible Way of knowing this Qualification is by seeing it in his own
Soul, let him be old, or young, great or small: And the Knowledge a Man must
have of God's Will must be as certain as the Nature of the Thing ordinarily
admits. And in this Case this is not only the ordinary, but the only possible
Way (except Revelation) for any Man to know his Warrant or Right.

The second Thing Mr. Edwards says under this Head is that the venerable Author
of the Appeal to the Learned, did in his Ministry ever teach such Doctrine,
whence it unavoidably follows, that no one unconverted Man in the World can
know he has a Warrant to come to the Lord's Supper.

To this I say two Things.

1. Supposing this was true, it could not in the least Prejudice the Argument
which Mr. Edwards is here opposing. The Evidence and Consequence of which is
exactly as just and good, if that venerable Man was so weak as to contradict
himself and treat his People like an Idiot. It Is well known that Arguments
neither receive, nor loose their Force from the Conduct of the Men that use
them, they never become weak and inconclusive because the Men that used them
turn Fools, and contradict themselves. But,

2. To do Justice to Mr. Stoddard, which Honor and Conscience oblige me to; I
would observe, that this Assertion is a great Mistake. It Is only an Inference
of Mr. Edwards's own making, which he charges upon Mr. Stoddard's Doctrine,
viz. That no natural Man knows the Scripture to be the Word of God. And I
appeal to the Writings of Mr. Stoddard, and to the same Hearers that he
explained himself, and that they ever understood him to mean when he expressed
himself in that Manner; a gracious Knowledge of God, such as effectually bowed
Men's Hearts, and influenced them to a gracious Obedience: Which Knowledge was
attained, as he was wont to express it, by Way of the Spirit's Testimony to the
Divinity of the Word of God. Which overpowred those Jealousies and Doubtings of
Heart concerning it, that carnal Men are attended with; but that great Man
never taught that unregenerate Men had not or might not have as full Assurance
that the Scriptures are the Word of God, as they could have of any Matters of
Fact that were ever testified to the World, yea, and himself wrote a Treatise
on those Words, Jer. 23. 28. What is the Chaff to the Wheat (which I wish had
seen the Light) to prove that there is such a Self-evidencing Light in the Word
of God as is sufficient to convince every Man that would use his Reason, and
the Advantages God gives him with that Revelation, that it must needs come from
God. So that natural Men may as really know that unconverted Men may lawfully
come to the Lord's Supper (supposing that Doctrine to be learned from the
Bible) as know that it is their Duty to believe in Christ, or to perform any
Act of instituted Worship at all; and I appeal to the same Hearers, if they did
not always understand him so, and Mr. Stoddard knew they did, and acted
accordingly: And it will as clearly follow from the Representation Mr. Edwards
gives of Mr. Stoddard's Doctrine, that natural Men can know nothing of their
Obligation to any Duty depending on the revealed Will of God; and if this be
the genuine Consequence of the Doctrine Mr. Stoddard ever taught his People,
then it must follow that the Doctrine he ever taught his People was not the
Will of God, but a Contradiction of the Bible, and of the Light of Nature, and
of the common Sense of Mankind. I conclude it was owing to a great Degree of
Warmth in Mr. Edwards's Imagination that made him forget the Rules of Decency
as well as Reasoning, when he wrote that Passage, which does not in the least
Degree solve Mr. Stoddard's Argument, any more than it does Honor to his
Memory.

His second Answer is Page 109, viz. Men are liable to Doubt concerning their
moral Sincerity, as well as saving Grace. -- And if their Consciences were
awakned, he supposes, they would be every whit as liable to Doubts about their
moral Sincerity, as godly Men are about their gracious Sincerity. -- If this
were the Case, it would follow, that there would be equal Difficulty in acting
upon Mr. Stoddard's Scheme, as upon Mr. Edwards's. However, it will still be
absolutely necessary that Men should know the Will of God, else it will be
utterly impossible to yield any Obedience to it. It will still be necessary to
know we have the Qualifications which are essential to our enjoying the
Privileges of the Lord's Supper, or else impossible to know we have a Right to
it. So all the Advantage of this Answer will be, that according to this,
Obedience to the Law of God, either outward or inward, is for the most Part
impracticable. But I conceive this Assertion of Mr. Edwards to be a great
Mistake; and suppose herein he differs from most, if not all Divines, and moral
Philosophers in the World. The Opinion of Arch Bishop Sharp being now before
me, I will give it in his Words.

A Man's Heart being nothing else but the Principles, from which his Actions
(considered morally) differs; it is a Man's Thoughts and Designs, his
Inclinations and Affections. Now what Thing in the World is there that a Man
can know if he know not these? A Man is as sensible of the Motions and
Dispositions of his Soul; and knows as well what his Thoughts are, and what
Principles he is acted by, as he knows when he is hungry and thirsty, when he
feels Pleasure, or Pain, when he hears, or sees this or the other Object. When
we transact any Business or drive on any Bargain with Men, we know whether we
deal honestly and truly with them or no. If we have Designs of overreaching
them or imposing upon them, we cannot conceal our Design from our selves. --
Thus he. -- If it be not always so easy to know our moral Sincerity; yet it is
certainly practicable and it is in every Man's Power, if he will use the Help
God does then give him (unless he be judicially blinded or under some
Distemper) for this evident Reason; Because this Power is necessary to his
being a moral Agent, and without it he could not be subject to a moral Law.
It Is true, Men may be liable to Mistakes concerning their moral Sincerity; but
I know of no other Source of these Mistakes but either bodily Indisposition,
their own Carelessness, or some judicial Dispensation of divine Providence. And
I cannot but think Mr. Edwards is very much out in making the Question he does
at the close of this Paragraph. I am apt to think, that if a Man should put the
Case he supposes to a Divine on this Side the Question, and tell him he did not
know but he had known and allowed Guile in his Heart, in his Pretenses to give
up himself to God: That Divine would have no Imagination the Man ought in that
State to come to the Sacrament, and if he was afraid whether he really believed
the Doctrine of the Trinity, and any other fundamental Doctrine of the Gospel,
he would readily advise him to stay 'till he did know. The more tender a Man's
Conscience is, the easier it will be for him to know his moral Sincerity, (if
his Conscience be not sickly) because he will the more diligently watch against
Mistakes; and the more thoroughly examine the Principles from whence his
Actions flow. Though a Man may speak more cautiously, yet this is no Evidence he
don't know; for every Divine knows that he may know it if he will, and the more
thorough and careful he is to know, the more certainly he will know: And such
Caution as Mr. Edwards speaks of answering such Question, I believe is not
commonly with Respect to moral Sincerity; but with Respect to the Distinction
of gracious Sincerity, from moral.

The third Answer we have Page 110. -- I must desire the Rev. Author to
consider whether he has done as he desires to be dealt with, Page 136. viz.
"attended to the true State of the Question." For it is here again said; Suppose
sanctifying Grace to be requisite in order to a being properly qualified
according to God's Word for an Attendance on the Lord's Supper; yet it will not
follow that a Man must know he has this Qualification in order to his being
capable of conscienciously attending it. Though this may be agreeable to the
Words in which Mr. Edwards has at first propounded his Question; yet since he
is here professedly answering an Argument of Mr. Stoddard, I think the Laws of
Equity as well as Disputation oblige him to keep that exactly in View.

Mr. Stoddard's Argument is; If no unsanctified Persons may come to the Lord's
Supper, then no Man may come but he that knows himself to be sanctified; but
Persons may come that don't know themselves to be sanctified. -- Now this is
what Mr. Edwards says, will not follow, if he answers this Argument But if he
judges that he has it according to the best Light he can obtain etc. The Advice
of his Pastor, etc. He may be bound in Conscience to attend. The Reason he
gives, is because Chr^^ans partaking of the Lord's Supper, is not a Matter of
(...) Privilege, but a Matter of Duty which God claims. -- All the Duties
which God requires of us in his instituted Worship, are Privileges, as really
as this. But I cannot find out what (...) this can make on Mr. Edwards's
Principles. The partaking of the Lord's Supper is a Privilege granted by God
to all sanctified Persons, and to no other. It is also a Duty commanded to all
Christians, but every unsanctified Person is forbidden to attend it. So that if
a Man has sanctifying Grace, he has a Right to this Privilege, but no Right if
he has not sanctifying Grace, for this is the essential Condition of the Grant,
his Attendance is also his Duty, God commands it. How? With sanctifying Grace;
and if he has nor that he forbids him to meddle with it. So that without that
Qualification, it is no present Duty, but a Sin. For though God claims it, yet he
does not claim it from any Man in an unsanctified State. God never commands,
and forbids the same Thing in the same Circumstances. So that it is equally
necessary for him to know he has sanctifying Grace in order to know that it is
his present and immediate Duty to attend, as to know it, in order to know that
he may Claim it as his Privilege; since every Man is bound to know his Duty in
order to his doing it, he is bound to know that he has those Qualifications
which God has made necessary, and without which, he has forbidden him to
perform this Action; without which therefore it is not his present Duty, but a
Sin to do it.

Though it be allowed that God commands every Man to repent and to be holy, and
so to attend the Lord's Supper; yet on Mr. Edward's Principles, God forbids
every Man to attend the Lord's Supper without Holiness, therefore if he
partakes without Sanctification, he is not only guilty of Sin in the Want of a
necessary Qualification for that Duty, and in the Manner of his doing it; but
he also sins in the Matter, and acts against God's express Prohibition in that.
If I am possitively commanded to partake of the Lord's Supper, being converted,
and possitively forbidden to do it, being unconverted, then the Command don't
bind me to do it being unconverted, unless the Command cancel the Prohibition.
And if this be the Case, then Laws cancel themselves, and dissolve their own
Obligation. I^ i^ be a Command binding only with such Qualifications, and
forbidding without. I am equally bound to know at least, that I have those
Qualifications which make it a Law to me in my present State; as I am, if it be
considered only as a Privilege granted with such Qualifications. If I am now
commanded to partake in the State I am, it is because now I have the
Qualifications necessary by the Law for the lawful doing that Action; then I
must know that I have (...) necessary Qualification, else I cannot know that I
have now a Right; or that I am now bound, or that it is now lawful for me to do
it. If a probable Hope or Judgment binds me, then I must perform Obedience to a
divine Law, because I probably hope or judge there is such a Law, and so
perform Obedience to a divine Law, when I don't act as a moral Agent. -- I know
there are many Cases in Life wherein Men are not able to come to a certain
Determination that God requires such and such Actions, in which the best
Judgment they are able to make with the present Advantages they have (...)
oblige their Consciences to act. But when they don't certainly know that such
or such a Thing is forbidden, but upon the best Judgment they can make under
their present Advantages, it appears probable that God forbids them, it is not
only safest, but they are bound in Conscience to abstain, with Respect to all
Actions which full under the Prohibition of the divine Law, or which the
Prohibition respects: a Man must not only hope, but he must be certain God has
not forbidden him: The very Doubt and Suspicion of his Mind that he may be
forbidden binds his conscience to abstain. The Apostle's Determination has put
this beyond Question. (...) (...)

The (...) given to illustrate the Case, Page 111. is to me no Manner (...)
Illustration, more than the Case it self. -- No Man may take upon him the Work
of the Ministry, unless he be called of God. No Man is called of God if he have
not the essential Qualifications requisite to that Work; and it he may
undertake without knowing that he has them, then he may obey a Call of God
without knowing he has a Call, and consequently when he has none. God did never
call a Man to do a Thing, without giving him the Means to know that Call; which
if he uses to the utmost of his Capacity and present Assistance, he may know.
If then a Man don't know that he has the essential Qualifications for the
Ministry, and is not come to a proper Certainty that he is called of God, and
yet his best Judgment tells him he may not neglect that Work, his b^st Judgment
is a wrong one, and his Practice upon it is no proper Obedience to a divine
Call.

Some of the Qualifications for the Ministry, a Man has one Way of knowing,
some, another. No Man is a proper Judge of his own Gifts; these he must submit
to be tried by those whom God has appointed to judge of them, and when they
have been duly tried and pronounced sufficient by those whom God has appointed
to judge of them; whatever Diffidence he has of them himself, yet he may know
them sufficient by that Testimony which God has appointed to determine him. --
But suppose also that sanctifying Grace is necessary; this is a Thing which he
can no more know by the Opinion, Advice or Judgment of others, than he can know
the Actings of his own (...), or Affections, or any other Motion of his Mind:
For no Man in the World can know their Things but him self; these therefore he
must know by seeing them in his own Soul, because this is the only Way they can
be known to him. Here then a probable Judgment will not be sufficient; for a
Thousand Probabilities will not give him one Certainty: And if he (...) God
requires him and calls him without that Knowledge, he runs (...) being sent. --
That ever Gentlemen of Mr. Edwards's Principles should think Men run the
greatest Risk in abstaining from the Lord's Supper, because they are doubtful
whether they have sanctifying Grace, and only hope they have, or think it
probable, looks very strange; when according to them the Gospel does
peremptorily sentence Men to Damnation for eating and drinking without
sanctifying Grace. And he himself supposes, or else his 11th Argument is a
Self-Contradiction, that the Word unworthily, 1 Co^. 11. 27, -- 29.) means
unholily, or the same as to be without sanctifying Grace. Therefore he that
eats and drinks unsanctified, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and
seals his own Damnation; and yet runs a greater Risk to abstain, though he doubts
about his Conversion, than to eat in the Face of a positive Prohibition in Case
his Hopes be mistaken; though this awful Denunciation assures him that if he be
in Fact unconverted, he is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and eats
and drinks Damnation to himself. This is such a Way of easing wounded and
fearful Consciences, as I never read of before.

As to the Case of the Priests Ezra 2. it appears to me to have all the Force
in this Argument, which Mr. Stoddard alleged it for. He says, The Case of Men
that don't know their Saintship upon Mr. Mather's Principles, is like the Case
of the Priests that could not find their Register: They were put from the
Priesthood as polluted, that they should not eat of the holy Things still there
stood up a Priest with Urim and Thummim. -- The plain Law in this Case was
this: The Family of Aaron was separated to the Priesthood; and were to offer
Sacrifice to God; and it was utterly unlawful for any other to do it. Lev. 3.
10. The Stranger that comes nigh shall be put to Death. The Priests, and no
other were to eat the holy Things, Levit. 22 9, 10. So it is here. The
Converted or Sanctified, on Mr. Edwards's Principles, are to eat the Lord's
Supper; it is God's Command; but if any other eat, he must die. He eats and
drinks Damnation to himself. These Priests in Ezra's Time, were satisfied
they were Priests; so were the Sanhedrim, for they are called the Children of
the Priests,. 61. but they could not prove it by the Register of their
Genealogy, therefore they were put (...). So here, the Man hopes, yea, he
strongly hopes, he is converted, but he does not know. The Church suppose him
to be coverted, but they don't know. The Case is the same; and therefore the
Rule is Good, the Man is to be put by as polluted, 'till there is a Revelation
by special Inspiration; 'till there stand up a Priest with Urim and Thummim. --
In the Case of the Priests, the Persons must know themselves they were Priests,
else it was unlawful for them to officiate; the Sanhedrim must know it, else
they might not admit them. -- Though Mr. Stoddard only alleged this Example
respecting the Persons themselves, to show that it must be unlawful for them to
take the Lord's Supper, notwithstanding they had a strong Hope and probable
Persuasion, if they did not know they were sanctified: For the Church's
admitting them is not the (...) Question in this Argument. -- Yet if there ever
was a Similitude, I believe this is one in the Case of both. -- To what Purpose
is it said, that the Ways of knowing are different? Ceremonial Holiness must be
proved in the one Case, so must real Holiness in the other; and they must be
known according to the different Ways by which such different Things can be
known. But be that as it will, the Thing must be known. Mr. Edwards don't
pretend that the Profession of the Parties themselves, is the Way by which they
are to Evidence to themselves their Qualifications to partake of the Lord's
Supper, any more than the Profession of the Priests. And to say, that such a
Profession of internal, invisible Things etc. is the Rule to direct the Church
in the Admission of Persons to the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, is to hide
the Parallel, and beg the Question. For the Question here is about the Person's
Right to come, and not about the Church's admitting them. -- For my Part, I see
not but this Argument of Mr. Stoddard's is invincible, for ought any Thing Mr.
Edwards has done to conquer it.

Object. 10. Page 112. The natural Consequence of the Doctrine which has been
maintained, is to being Multitudes of Persons of a tender Conscience and true
Piety, into great Perplexities.

This I suppose is designed to represent Mr. Stoddard's 9th Argument Appeal
Page 86. how exactly the Reader will see. The Argument is this: If sanctifying
Grace be necessary unto the lawful attending the Lord's Supper, then none but
those that have a saving Work of Conversion may attend it. But that is not true
Doctrine.

The minor he says is evident from hence.

That Doctrine which has a Tendency to discourage many godly Men from doing
their Duty, and the Means of Comfort, and to make their attending their Duty to
be a Torment to them, is not according to Scripture etc.

Mr. Edwards 1st Answer is, That it is for want of like Tenderness of
Conscience, that the other Doctrine which insists on moral Sincerity, don't
naturally bring them who are received on those Principles, into the same
Perplexities etc.

Having had occasion before to speak of the same Thing, I shall only say here,
that this is an Assertion, which I take to be contrary to common Sense, and the
Experience of Mankind, and the allowing it to be true, must overthrow the Law
of Nature, and cast infinite Reproach upon the Author of it.

Answ. 2. Supposing the Doctrine which I have maintained be indeed the Doctrine
of God's Word, yet it will not follow that the Perplexities true Saints are in,
through doubting of their State, are Effects owing to the Revelation of God's
Word.

If indeed this Doctrine which he maintains be supposed to be the Doctrine of
God's Word, I believe no protestant Divine would have been hardy enough to
attempt to show, that such Consequences would follow. For it is certain, that
God never made a Revelation of his Will that tended to hinder Men from doing
their Duty, or perplex them in it, but the contrary. Mr. Stoddard's Argument
is, that therefore this Doctrine is not according to the Scripture, because in
Fact it has such a Tendency. These Perplexities are certainly not owing to the
Word of God, but because they are the natural Consequences of this Doctrine,
therefore it is evident, ab absurdo, that this Doctrine cannot be the Word of
God; the Design of which is to encourage Men to do their Duty. -- Mr. Stoddard
says, There be many godly Men that are not assured of their Conversion, but are
exercised with many Fears about their Sincerity. Though Grace be visible, yet
several Persons that have it, do not certainly know it. Grace may be so
counterfeited,andfalse Hearts may go so far in Religion, that many godly Men
are held down with great Suspicions that they are not godly, especially at
Times. Hence godly Men are advised to give all Diligence to make their Calling
and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. -- That this is the Doctrine of Calvinistick
Divines in general, and of the Fathers of the Reformation, is incontestible:
And that it is true Doctrine, the Generation of God's Children will bear
Witness. -- This Doctrine which Mr. Edwards maintains, Mr. Stoddard says has
two bad Effects upon these Persons (1. It makes some neglect the Lord's Supper,
whose Duty it is to attend it. (2. It makes some of them attend it with Guilt
and Torment. Don't these Things naturally follow from this Doctrine? Suppose a
Christian believes no Man may lawfully come to the Ordinance without
sanctifying Grace, and that he will eat and drink Damnation if he does so; and
that it is the Command of God, that all sanctified Persons shall come: What
shall he now do? What can he do while these Doubts remain? He seriously
examines himself, and he hopes he is converted: It may be his Pastor tells him
it is his Duty to come. Will this satisfy his Conscience? He knows the Hopes of
many are Delusions, and he has no Certainty that his are not; and so he may be
undone if he comes. He would fain yield Obedience to God's Command; but it
being Sanctification only that gives him a Warrant to come, he must be afraid
of displeasing God by coming. If Sanctification be the Foundation on which his
Right depends, and without which God forbids him to come, it is not the Hope of
it, it is not the Advice of all the Pastors in the World, nor any Thing else but
the Thing it self in Reality. In this Case, it is impossible but a tender
Conscience must be in great Perplexity. So long as the Man is afflicted with
these Doubtings, those Things must follow from this Doctrine which Mr. Stoddard
says do follow. God's Revelations are by no Means answerable for these
Perplexities. But since these are the necessary Consequences of this Doctrine,
it is certain that God has made no such Revelation. For this Effect is contrary
to some plain Designs of his Revelations. Suppose these Doubts are mostly owing
to Christian Sloth: Yet is the Assurance of their Sanctification a Thing which
Christians in the diligent Use of Means do ordinarily soon obtain, and
continually keep? Though it may sometimes be the Case, yet that it is not
ordinarily so, the most and best of Protestant Divines do teach. -- And if
sometimes Christians Doubts do arise from the sovereign Pleasure of God, or
from Melancholy or other Causes, which are not in their Power, then in those
Cases this Doctrine necessarily involves them in those Perplexities about doing
their Duty, and therefore it is not of God. -- Can this be like the
Perplexities of Saints at the sensible Approaches of Death? -- Death is no
instituted Ordinance of divine Worship. When this approaches, a Saint cannot be
put into any Perplexity of Conscience to knows whether it is his Duty to die;
but he is in Perplexity only through Fear he is not ready to die; or for Fear he
shall not glorify God in the Manner of his dying. -- Now what Shadow of
Resemblance is in this Case to that wherein it is supposed that God has made an
Ordinance of his Worship, the attending or not attending of which, is a Matter
concerning which, a Christian doubting of his Conversion, cannot determine his
Duty. He can neither act nor forbear acting with a safe and quiet Conscience.

To Mr. Edward'ss third Answer, I say, Doubtless Assurance is attainable; and
where it is attained, and so long as it is preserved, his Scheme is
practicable. -- But the Difficulty here is, how to practice where it is not
attained; and how Christians can act 'till they are free from Doubts: Whether
acting against the Doubts of their Consciences will ease them at present; or
whether for bearing to act, though that be also against the Doubts of their
Consciences, will give them Ease? On will it be best at present to act
Blindfold? Will this still the present Perplexity, or quiet the guilty Fears
and Torment of Conscience? And in this Perplexity to go to the Lord's Supper,
depending upon Mr. Edwards's Opinion, that attending the Ordinance in such a
Manner, would on the whole be an happy Occasion of much more Comfort than
Trouble to them? -- Tender Consciences, as Mr. Stoddard says, will not be
baffled in this Manner.

Object. 11. Page 113. You may as well say, that unsanctified Persons may not
attend any Duty of divine Worship, as that they may not attend the Lord's
Supper etc.

This I take to be put for Mr. Stoddard's 6th Argument, Appeal Page 76, where
it stands thus, If unsanctified Men may attend all other Ordinances or Duties
of Worship, then they may lawfully attend the Lord's Supper; but they my attend
all other Ordinances or Duties of Worship.

Mr. Edwards undertakes to answer this Argument by reducing it into the Form of
the major Propositions of two Categorick Syllogisms, viz. Whosoever is
qualified for Admission to one Duty of divine Worship, is qualified for
Admission to all: He that is unqualified for one, and may be forbidden one, is
unqualified for all, and ought to be allowed to attend none. Let us reduce
these into Categorick Syllogisms: And they must stand thus. -- Whosoever is
qualified for Admission to one Duty of divine Worship, is qualified for
Admission to all; But some unsanctified Men are qualified for Admission to one
Duty. Ergo.

He that is unqualified for one Duty, is unqualified for all: But some
unsanctified Men are unqualified for one Duty. Ergo.

Now the Sophistry of this Answer is easily detected by showing that the Terms
of these different Propositions are not taken precisely in the same Sense in
both, which they must be to support the Conclusion.

When Mr. Stoddard says, unsanctified Men may attend all other Ordinances or
Duties, etc. he evidently intends that they may do it, non obstante, their Want
of Sanctification; or that the Want of sanctifying Grace, simply and of it
self, does not exclude them, as whoever will read what he says under the
Argument will easily see.

The Terms of Mr. Edwards's Proposition equivocally stretch to some other
Grounds or Causes of Disqualification, some of which are common, to sanctified
and unsanctified Men; and which Mr. Stoddard excepted, such as Scandal, Heresy,
etc. Mr. Stoddard in the Qualification implied in his Argument, intends
Unregeneracy, simply, and perse considered. Mr. Edwards by Qualification
includes all the Requisites to every Duty. The Weight of the Argument no more
rests upon either, or both those false or equivocal Propositions which Mr.
Edwards has laid down; than his Manhood depends on the Truth of this Argument.
He that says you are an Animal, says true; but he that says, you are a Goose,
says you are an Animal; therefore he that says you are a Goose, says true.

If Mr. Stoddard has not said eno' to make a Man understand, that that which is
a sufficient Qualification for Admission to one Duty, is not so for all; and
that the Proposition which is the Foundation of the Argument, cannot with any
Color be understood in the Sense it stands in Mr. Edwards's Proposition, I
know not what Words can be plain eno'. Mr. Stoddard makes no such triffling
Distinction as Mr. Edwards suggests, and has been so far from begging the
Question, that he has fairly shown there never was any Duty of natural or
instituted Worship, since the Foundation of the World, which unsanctified Men
might not attend, merely because they were unsanctified; though they were
excluded on some other Accounts.

Mr. Stoddard shows the Consequence of his Argument from hence. -- Because
there can be no Reason assigned, why unsanctified Persons may attend all other
Duties of Worship, and not the Lord's Supper. If there be a like Reason for
them to forbear other Duties o^ Worship, as to forbear this, and the like
Reason to attend this Act of Worship, as others; then the Lawfulness of
attending them, shows the Lawfulness of attending this.

This Mr. Edwards humbly conceives must be an Inadvertence from this very
notable Distinction among Duties of Worship, viz. That some are such whose very
Nature and Design is an Exhibition of those vital and active Principles, and
inward Exercise wherein consists the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, and
the Union of the Soul to God, etc. And such are the Christian Sacraments;
others are not so, but the Expression of general Virtues.

The English of which is this: The Christian Sacraments do in their very Nature
and Design, manifest and declare the Soul's Regeneration and Sanctification, or
it is saving Union to Christ. -- Which is the same Thing as to say, the Lords
Supper may not be attended by unsanctified Men, though other Duties of Worship
may, because the Lord's Supper in the very Nature and Design of it, proves that
it was appointed only for sanctified Men: but this is the very Thing to be
proved: And here the Medium of the Proof is the same in Effect with the Point
in Debate. How much better than perfect begging the Question this is, I must
refer to Logicians?

The Conclusion which he makes in this Paragraph and the next, and which is
(...) expressed in like Words, is, That for an unsanctified Man to make the
Profession which he makes at the Sacrament, and his Pretention to lay hold on
God's Covenant, is a Lie; and a Lying in a very aggravated Manner; and again, a
Lie, and a Lie told in the most solemn Manner.

Mr. Edwards well knows that his Opposers are not of his Opinion, that the very
Nature and Design of a Person's partaking of the Lord's Supper, is to declare
that he^s regenerated, and savingly united to Christ. But (...) as the Lord's
Supper is a Seal of the Truth of the Covenant, and not of Salvation to the
Receiver; so it is on the Communicant's Part a Seal of a solemn Engagement to
keep Covenant with God, and come up to the Terms on which he offers Salvation
to Sinners, by Christ in that Covenant; and that to the utmost of his Power,
and with all the Heart, he casts himself upon the Mercy of God to help him to
keep Covenant. If an unsanctified Man believes and designs this, besure it is
no Lie, if Divines and Moralists have given us any true Definition of a Lie.
It Is no more a Lie, than an unsanctified Man tells, when he prays God for
Christ's Sake to pardon his Sins, and enable him sincerely to love and obey
God. Such Assertions seem the more surprising, when Mr. Edwards could not but
have taken Notice, that one Reason Mr. Stoddard assigns to prove the
Consequence of his Argument is, That the Lord's Supper being a Seal of the
Covenant, can be no Reason why unsanctified Men cannot lawfully partake of it,
because then unregenerate Persons, must be forbidden all Sacraments.
Circumcision was a (...) of the Righteousness of Faith. Romans 4. 11. Yet God
commanded (...) at (...) to circumcise (...) the Mak^s who were several Hundred
Thousands, (...) ^. 2.

Now it Mr. Edwards Assertion be just, the Consequence is unavoidable, that God
commanded all those Persons who were then unregenerate, to (...) aggravated and
(...) Manner. For if (...) by God's Command was then to Circumcise them, they
were bound by God's Command at that Instant, to receive Circumcision; and to
profess Consent to the Covenant of which it was a Seal. And if because they
were unregenerate, they must needs Lie when they did this, then God's
commanding them at that Instant to do this, was a Command to tell a solemn Lie.
It must surely be an inadvertence to charge Men with telling a solemn
aggravated Lie, when the Guilt of it must fall upon the God of infinite Truth,
and to suppose that he binds Men to do what he unchangeably hates.

Object. 12. Page 116. The Lord's Supper has a proper Tendency to promote Men's
Conversion, etc.

This is taken from Mr. Stoddard's 4th Argument, Appeal Page 70. it is this. If
the Lord's Supper be instituted for Conversion of Sinners, as well as for the
Edification of Saints; then sanctifying Grace is not necessary to Men's
attending of it; but it is instituted for the Conversion of Sinners, not for
the Conversion of the Heathens to the Christian Religion; but for the saving
Conversion of professing Men. For the Proof of the Minor, which is only in
Question, he proposes several Considerations. The first is, That this Ordinance
has a proper Tendency to promote Men's Conversion. -- This Head of the Argument
Mr. Edwards thinks best to deal with. And he says, Nothing follows from this
Argument, unless it be an evident Truth that what the Lord's Supper may have a
Tendency to promote, the same it was appointed to promote.

Mr. Stoddard has shown, that this is a natural and proper Tendency of it; at
least it follows from thence, there is a strong probability that it was
appointed for this End, unless, God had told us the contrary. I think it is
ever accounted (...) arguing from the Nature and Tendency of Things, to the
Will and Design of their Author. -- I allow that where the Premises are true,
the Consequence is just as strong in any other like Case: But then I turn this
off, neither by giving up the Argument, nor begging the Question, when I say
that scandalous Persons are expressly forbidden: If it be probable in one Case,
that those Actions which have a Tendency to promote Men's Conversion, God
designs shall be done for that and; because it appears congruous to his Wisdom
and Goodness to suppose he appoints Actions to be done to promote that which
there is a suitable Tendency in them to promote: Is it therefore equally
probable in another Case, wherein perhaps I may think the like Actions have a
like Tendency; but God has expressly forbidden them in that Case to be done? God
has a Right to make Rules about his own Worship, and Men's Actions; and when we
know he has done so, as all are agreed in the Case of scandalous Persons, his
Rule determines the Matter. And where God has expressly determined the Matter, I
think we shall not be immodest if we suspect we are mistaken, when we imagine
there is any such Probability: And I cannot apprehend how this is a begging the
Question. For though it supposes, that unconverted Mer^ are not evidently
forbidden; yet there is certainly after all Mr. Stoddard had said, some Reason
to suppose this had been proved. To suppose that unconverted Persons as such,
are as evidently forbidden, as scandalous Persons are, which Mr. Edwards seems
to suppose, is what remains to be proved, and was never yet done; and is at
least, as much to beg the Question. And if they are not evidently forbidden as
we know all scandalous Persons are) then the Tendency of this Ordinance to
promote their Conversion, at least proves it highly probable, that this was
God's Design in it: Quad (...) probanium.

But Mr. Edwards gives us another Instance of his Grand Father's begging the
Question, and yielding up his Argument, which is his saying, The Lord's Supper
is a converting Ordinance only to orderly Members, and that there is another
Ordinance appointed for bringing Scandalous Persons to Repentance. Because this
concedes that the Tendency of an Ordinance don't prove it appointed to all the
Ends which it seems to have a Tendency to promote. I am utterly insensible how
it concedes any such Thing. Mr. Stoddard never pretended, and I believe never
Thought, that it had a Tendency to promote the Conversion of scandalous
Persons, or Heathens, nor did I before ever read of any, except Mr. Chub, who
thought so. All Christians know that God has instituted the Ordinance of
ChurchCensure for scandalous Persons, on Purpose to awaken their Consciences
and promote their Repentance, therefore I believe God knows that the Ordinance
of the Lord's Supper under their present State would not have a Tendency to
promote their Conversion. But be that as it will, the express Declaration of
God's Will is alone sufficient to determine us, whatever seems to Men.

Mr. Edwards says, that this supposes there is not any other Ordinance
appointed for the Conversion of such Sinner, exclusive of this. -- How it
supposes any such Thing is beyond my Comprehension. It only supposes that this,
as well as other Ordinances, and in Conjunction with them, is appointed for
that End. Not that if Men wrongfully exclude them from one of the Ordinances
which God has appointed to promote their Conversion, or if through a mistaken
Judgment, and misinformed Conscience, they dare not attend it, that there are
no other, which by God's Blessing, may be sufficien^. It Is indeed supposed,
that the Lord's Supper is not excluded from other converting Ordinances to
orderly Church Members: To distinguish in what Sense he means it to be a
converting Ordinance, and to what Subjects; and to what, and whom not so: This
is not a Thing taken for granted in the Argument, but proposed to be proved
from the Tendency of the Lord's Supper; and to represent this Distinction made
to show the Extent of the Proposition of the Argument as a begging the
Question, is an unusual Way of seeing through Arguments. -- But Mr. Stoddard has
three other Considerations to prove the Consequence of this Argument. Page
(...) 2. Some unsanctified Persons ought to offer themselves to Communion in
the Lord's Supper because they are in Covenant with God, and because it is a
Scandal if they do not. 3. The Church by the Ordinance of God is bound to admit
many unconverted Persons to the Lord's Supper. 4. The Lord's Supper is for the
spiritual Good of all that are regularly to be admitted thereunto. Which
Reasons Mr. Edwards has not yet thought (...) to answer.

Object. 13. Page 117, etc. All that are Members of the visible Church and in
the external Covenant, and neither ignorant nor scandalous are commanded to
perform all external Covenant Duties, and particularly they are commanded to
attend the Lord's Supper in those Words of Christ. (...)

This is Mr. Stoddard's (...) Argument Appeal Page. ^2. -- To this Mr. Edwards
answers again by telling us the Question is begged. Who so? Because it supposes
that of all Persons in the external Covenant, only ignorant and scandalous
Persons are unqualified, when as Mr. Edwards says it takes for granted that
unconverted Persons are not excluded, which is the very Point in Question. The
Force and Sense of Mr. Stoddard's Argument is plainly this. All those Persons
whom God has taken into the external Covenant, are bound to attend all the
external Duties of it, except such as God has expressly excluded; but he has
expressly excluded none but ignorant and scandalous Persons. From hence it
follows that it there be any unconverted Persons in the external Covenant
besides them, it is their Duty to attend. The Thing in Question is, (...)
unsanctified Persons (...) a (...) Right I^ attend the Lord's Supper. This is
not taken for granted in the Argument but proved by this Medium, that all in
the Covenant have Right to the Ordinances, unless they are specially and
expressly excluded by God's Appointment. If it be true that none in the Covenant
are excluded who are not excluded by a special Prohibition of God, and also
true that none are excluded by such a Prohibition but ignorant and scandalous
Persons, then it follows that unconverted Persons as such, are not excluded:
which is the Point to be proved. It Is certain that all in the external Covenant
but such as are so prohibited, are commanded, they are sworn to attend: Nothing
but God's express Prohibition can discharge any in Covenant from attending the
Duties of it; let it be shown that there is any such Prohibition of any other
Persons in the external Covenant, and the Business is done. -- They are in
Covenant. D^^^ 5. 2. God has made them Promise to keep his Covenant, and will
he make it Criminal for them to attend those Duties of the Covenant which he
has made them promise to keep? This Rev. Author says, it is supposed in this
Argument:

1. That those who have externally entered into God's Covenant, are thereby
obliged to no more than the external Duties of the Covenant. And also supposed.

2. That God don't require those Things of Men that are out of their natural
Power, particula^ that he don't require them to be converted.

Now these Things are neither ^^^posed in the Argument, nor ever were supposed
by Mr. Stoddard, nor any of his Opinion. -- Men in the external Covenant are
bound as the Israelites were, and no otherwise; to Love the Lord their God with
all their Heart etc. In short, they are bound to keep Covenant. The Reasoning
of Mr. Stoddard is plain, and not touched by this Answer. He says, Page 84. It
is unreasonable to say, that natural Men are commanded to come, and yet they
are forbidden to come 'till they are sanctified; for their Sanctification is a
Thing out of their Power: The visible People of God are able to keep the
external Covenant. It cannot be said to be lawful for them to keep the external
Covenant, if it does depend upon their Conversion, which is indeed out of their
Power; but indeed there is no Part of the external Covenant that is beyond
Men's natural Power, or their legal Power. Allow that God requires Men to be
converted, to yield holy, spiritual, acceptable Obedience to him,and that in
order to this, there must be Love to God; before this, there must be Faith; and
before that, there must be Knowledge of God; and before that, there must be a
thoro' Humiliation. -- All included in one Word; God commands Men to be holy.
-- Now, when God commands Men to be holy, he commands every Preparative, and
every Step thereunto; then he commands them to attend every Ordinance, and do
every Part of his Will, that in its own Nature, or by his Appointment is
necessary to their fulfilling the Covenant, their being holy. Now because
Holiness, the internal Duties of the Covenant, are beyond Man's natural Power,
can therefore his Obligation to keep the external Covenant, i. e. to do what is
in his Power, be forbidden or suspended? Is he now forbidden to do what he can
do, and what he is commanded to do? because there is also something further to
be done which he cannot do? When a Man is commanded to keep Covenant, the very
Nature, and necessary Import of that Command binds him to do all he possibly
can to yield Obedience to that Command. If we suppose, that when a Man's
keeping the internal Covenant depends on the sovereign Will of God, and the
Bestowment of special Grace, which for the present God is pleased to with-bold,
that Man is then forbidden to keep the external Covenant; that is, to do what
he can to keep Covenant with God; it inevitably follows that Man's Obligation
to do what he can, is discharged, yea forbidden, by God's withholding from him
a Power to do what he cannot. So that the Case of unconverted Men in Covenant,
must be this: -- God has brought them into Covenant; he has bound them to keep
Covenant, therefore be sure bound them to do the utmost they possibly can;
which is to attend all the external Duties of the Covenant, with all the
Seriousness, Diligence, and Earnestness, they can. This he has made them Swear
they will do; which God and Man know they can do, and know they Lie if they do
not do: And yet at the same Time forbids them to do this, till he give them
something which is beyond all their natural Power to obtain. Whether this is
the Condition that a God of infinite Purity, and of all Grace, has put these
Men into, I refer not only to Christians, but even sober Heathens, to judge.

Mr. Edwards's Talk about a legal Power to be converted etc. seems not much
more intelligible. -- A Man's legal Right depends on a Law; and to have a legal
Right to come to the Lord's Supper, supposes a Law commanding him now to come,
at least allowing him to come: And yet at the same Time to say, that the Law
forbids him, because he has not sanctifying Grace, is the same Thing as to say,
God gives a Man a Law now to do a Thing, and at the same Time forbids him by a
Law to do that Thing, 'till he gives him a Power to do something that he cannot
do now: Which is to have a Law commanding him, and a Law forbidding him to do
the same Thing at the same Time.

When One sees with what Epithets of Honor Mr. Edwards in some Parts of his
Book, has complimented Mr. Stoddard, it must needs look like a strange Medly to
tack to them; -- that he was a weak Beggar of his Question; a Supposer of what
was to be proved; taking for granted the Point in Controversy; inconsistent
with himself; ridiculously contradicting his own Arguments. -- I cannot but
wonder that the Modesty and Humility which Mr. Edwards has so large a Share of,
had not made him rather suspect his own Understanding, than to make so free
with his Suspicions of the Arguments and Consistency of that vastly superior
Man, more thorough Divine, and clearheaded Disputant.

Object. 14. Page. 120. Either unsanctified Persons may come to the Lord's
Supper, or it is unlawful to carry themselves as Saints; but it is not unlawful
for them to carry themselves as Saints. This is Mr. Stoddard's eighth Argument,
Page 84. of his Appeal.

Mr. Edwards would have done Justice, if he had put in the Word some
unsanctified Persons, etc. Which Word some, Mr. Stoddard carefully inserts, to
distinguish his Doctrine from the invidious Representation which is cast upon
it, as if it let in the vilest Sinners and known Hypocrites into the Church.

Mr. Stoddard did not suppose that the Fruits of Saints would be brought forth
by Men 'till they were Saints: But he knew, and all other Divines know, that
the external Carriage of some unsanctified Men is to the outward Appearance,
and the public Judgment of the Church, the same with the Carriage of Saints;
and they know that they are bound to such a Behavior. And in all those Things
which are the appointed Ways of the Church's judging of Men's visible
Saintship, they are bound to carry themselves as Saints. And to say that a
natural Man may not attend the Lord's Supper, because that is a Seal of a
Profession which contains the discriminating Evidences of Saintship, is a
begging the Question; a Fault often charged upon Mr. Stoddard. And to say that
all unsanctified Men do profess and seal their Consent to the Covenant of Grace
in the Lord's Supper, when they know at the same Time they do not consent to
it, nor have their Heart at all in the Affair, implying that this is contained
in, or follows from the Doctrine Mr. Edwards opposes; is something worse than
begging the Question.

Object. 15. Page 121. This Scheme will keep out of the Church some true
Saints; for there are some such who determine against; themselves, and their
prevailing Judgment is, they are not Saints and we had better let in several
Hypocrites, than exclude one true Child of God.

To this he answers, I think it is better to insist on some visibility to
Reason of true Saintship, than by express Liberty given to open the Door to as
many as please of those who have no visibility of real Saintship, and make no
Profession of it, nor Pretention to it. This is the like Representation of Mr.
Stoddard's Doctrine, as we have had over and over again.

How often has Mr. Edwards said, none but visible Saints are to be admitted? Do
not all Mr. Edwards's Opposers say, that no Man is to be admitted, who does not
profess his hearty Belief of the Gospel, and the earnest sincere Purpose of his
Heart, so far as he knows it, to obey all God's Commands, and keep his
Covenant? None who do not make as full and express a Profession as the
Israelites did, or was ever required by Christ or his Apostles, in any
Instances that can be produced in the Bible, of Bodies of Men or particular
Persons Admission into visible Covenant with God. -- After all this to repeat
it again and again, that these Persons have no Visibility to Reason of real
Saintship, make no Profession of it, nor Pretention to it, I think gives the
better Ground to retort Mr. Edwards's Words under the next Objection, than he
has to use them in the Place he does, viz. This is not so much an Objection
against the Doctrine he opposes, as it is a Reflection against the Scripture it
self, with Regard to the Rules it gives for Persons to form a charitable
Judgment by.

The Thing to be proved is, that no Man has a lawful Right to the Sacrament,
without Sanctification. To prove this, is Mr. Edwards's avowed Design, as
appears by his often declaring that he opposes Mr. Stoddard's Opinion, and by
his own Explication Page 4. which has been observed before. His Business
according to his own Explication of his Question, is to prove, that no Man who
is unsanctified, has a lawful Right to come. And as to the Church they must
make a positive Judgment concerning the Man that he has a Right on that
Foundation. Now what has some Visibility, some Profession, some Pretention, to
do with this Question, unless it be to keep it out of Sight? But the Rev.
Author endeavors to show that the admitting unsanctified Persons, 'tends to
the Ruin and Reproach of the Christian Church; and to the Ruin of the Persons
admitted.

1. To the Ruin and Reproach of the Persons admitted.

To prove this he quotes again that Passage from the Appeal, Page 36. For by
the Rule which God has given for Admissions, if it be carefully attended, more
unconverted than converted Persons will be admitted. And adds upon it, It is
then confessedly the Way to have the greater Part of the Members of the
Christian Church ungodly Men etc. As if Mr. Stoddard had asserted this with a
peculiar Relation to his own Scheme; whereas it is only an Application of a
Saying of Mr. Cotton, who was of a different Opinion, and said upon a different
Scheme; to show that upon their own Principles the Matter will not be mended;
-- as has been observed before. -- If it be an exact State of the Case, that
the Godly in the visible Church be few in Comparison of the Ungodly, how will
it demonstrably follow on Scripture Principles, that the far bigger Part of the
Church will be Persons not of moral Sincerity, etc? I see nothing offered to
prove this; but only that unsanctified Men remaining unsanctified, will be in
Danger to loose the good Impressions of Convictions and Awaknings; and the
Scripture says of some Hypocrites that their Goodness is like the Morning Cloud
and early Dew, and that it will happen to them according to the true Proverb,
the Dog is returned to his Vomit, and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the Mire. Now if the Scripture gives any Demonstration of the Consequence
Mr. Edwards supposes, upon Mr. Stoddard's Principles, more than upon his; it
must be, because the Men live under all proper Means of their Conversion and
Salvation: Yet attending the Lord's Supper in an unsanctified State, will do
more to make them worse, than that, and all other Ordinances, will do to make
them better; and if so, it must be because this is a Seal of their Damnation;
being appointed only for the Regenerate: Which is the Thing to be proved. If I
had A list to Reproach Mr. Edwards or his Principles, I might reckon up as many
sad Consequences which will likely follow on his Scheme; and perhaps I could
tell of some Churches where the Principles Mr. Edwards maintains, have been
long professed and pretended to be practiced upon, in which it is well if the
Case be not so in Fact as he supposes. -- But the Truth is, if the Discipline
which Christ has appointed in his Church, be duly maintained, none of these
Effects will follow: And if it be not, the Church falls into Reproach and tends
to Ruin, let them practice upon what Scheme they will. But he says,

2. It tends to the eternal Ruin of the Parties admitted; because it lets in,
yea persuades such to come in as know themselves to be impenitent and
unbelieving, in a dreadful Manner to take God's Name in vain, etc. -- The whole
of any Color of Argument here, lies in this; that the Profession made in
taking the Sacrament is a Profession of a saving Faith, and saving Repentance;
and so that the Person who takes it has fulfilled the Covenant on his Part, and
to this Profession he Seals; which is a Thing often taken for granted, but
never was yet proved: Of which eno' has been said before. -- If there be some
who do enter into Covenant with God, and with all the Earnestness and Sinc^^ity
of Soul they possibly can, do engage to keep Covenant, still knowing themselves
to be impenitent and unbelieving: It Is what many do not know of themselves, and
it is what the Church know not by any Rule of public Judgment, which God has
given them in his Word. And to admit Persons so qualified has, no Tendency to
Ruin them, nor do I believe so much by a Thousand-fold, as to admit Hypocrites
on Mr. Edwards's Principles. Although true Saints who are shut out of the Church
by Mr. Edwards's Scheme, will not therefore be shut out of Heaven, yet many who
according to his State of the Question are admitted, (notwithstanding their own
Judgment, and the Churches Skill in judging) will be Hypocrites: And if his
Principles are Right, they have sealed their Damnation by coming, and so are
like to be shut out of Heaven. -- And if Mr. Stoddard's Principles are Right,
then many such as ought to be admitted, and who are by Mr. Edwards's Scheme
kept out of the Church, are so far as the Church can do it, shut out of Heaven,
by being denied the Ordinances which God has appointed for their Salvation.

As to the Objection made in the Margin, Page 122, viz. That Mr. Edwards's
Principles tend to keep the Church small. -- I own I am not of the Objector's
Mind. I think that Scheme tends greatly to increase the Church of England, and
all Arminian Churches, who professedly act upon that Principle, that no
unsanctified Person ought to be admitted: But admit all as regenerate or
sanctified, who make such a Profession of Faith andObedience, as appears
morally sincere. And when Persons see themselves shut out from the Ordinances
of the Gospel on such Terms as they think Christ has given them a Right to
them, they will be apt to go where they may enjoy them; though some other Things
are not agreeable to their Sentiments, rather than be debarred the ordinary
Means of their Salvation. Or if they think themselves Calvinists, they will
fall into the independent Antinomian Separations, and crumble into as many
separate Churches, as they have different Methods of determining Men's
Conversion; which as Mr. Humfrey and Mr. Timson observes, was the Way of the
Independents in England, and has been the Way of the Separates in New England,
-- And I own that at present I have no more Expectation to see the Scheme which
Mr. Edwards aims to establish, defended upon Calvinistick Principles, than the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. --

I fully agree with him that Holiness would cause the Light of the Church to
shine, so as to induce others to resort to it; and it is the Wickedness of it is
Members, that above all Things in the World prejudices Men against it. But then
I never expect to see much Holiness among Men out of the Church, and do finally
believe that the Word and Ordinances of the Gospel, and the right Exercise of
Discipline in the Church, are the best outward Means that ever were devised to
promote the Holiness of Church Members.

The 16th 17th and 18th Objections, Page 123, 124, 126. are such as I have
never happened to see in that Shape before, and don't think them of much
Importance as they stand.

If the Opposers of Mr. Edwards's Scheme have made them, I own they have herein
weakly defended their Cause: If he has made, or put them into proper Form for
them, it is not to be though it strange if they are propounded in such Terms as
might be best to deal with. But as they all relate only to the Part the Church
is to act in the Admission of Persons to Communion; and all the arguing against
them seems to be founded on the Nature or Ground of that charitable Judgment
the Church is to make of the Saintship of Professors; which Mr. Edwards
supposes to be an Acquaintance with the spiritual Experiences of Persons, or
the Churches Knowledge of their Application of the Rules and Teaching of God's
Word, respecting the Work of Conversion, and their own serious Profession, that
they find these Things in their own Souls which their Pastor or Church teach
them are the Rules of God's Word to judge of their Conversion by. See Page 125.
and other Places. These Things have been already discussed. And if the Rule of
the public Judgment concerning the visible Saintship of Professors is once
determined, there had been no Need of any farther Dispute. This I think has
been fairly done, and of which the Reader will judge. --

Object. 19. Page 126. If it be necessary that adult Persons should make a
Profession of Godliness, in order to their own Admission to Baptism, then
undoubtedly it is necessary in order to their Children's being Baptized on
their Account.

I readily grant, the same Profession which is necessary for Heathens to make
in order to their own Baptism, is necessary for them to make in order to the
Baptism of their Children; for it is one and the same individual Profession and
Engagement, which brings them and their Children into Covenant. -- And if there
is one Instance in the Bible where God ever took any Man into Covenant, and not
his Children at the same Time, I should be glad to see it. It is by Virtue of
their being in Covenant that they have a Right to the Seals; and if these
Children are not cast out of Covenant by God, their Children have as good a
Right to the Seals as they had. It Is God's Will that his Mark and Seal should
be set upon them and their Children, and their Children for ever; 'till God
cast them out of Covenant. -- If there arises a Generation of ungodly Children
in the Church for Want of a pious Education, it is not only the Sin of the
Parent, but it is also the Sin of the Church: who are bound to see to it that
they have a godly Education. But it is certain they have an Interest in the
Covenant, and they have a Right to the Privileges of the Covenant, so long as
they remain in Covenant; and that is, 'till God cuts them off, and casts them
out. We all agree that Christ is the best Judge of the Tendency of his own
Institutions, therefore the Question should be only whether these Persons whom
the Church shall judge to be unconverted, be in Covenant with God or not; if
they be not, their Children have no Right to Baptism; if they be, their
Children by the Appointment of God have a Right to it; and it is Sacrilege for
Men to deny it them. I must needs say, he is a bold Man that dare say, that the
Children of such Persons as are in Covenant with God have no Title to the
Honor of Baptism, or that dare say, it is contrary to Scripture, Reason and
Experience to say, the denying Baptism to them is the Way to promote Irreligion
and Profaneness. But the Substance of the Discourse under this Objection, I
suppose the Reader will observe is a taking for granted what wants to be
proved, or such Sort of Representations of the Profession, and covenanting of
unconverted Men as Men making no Pretensions to any Thing of Godliness; nothing
but what God's Enemies have remaining in open and avowed Rebellion against him.
The Inconsistency and Unreasonableness of which Treatment of visible Professors
of Religion, when their Lives and Conversation don't give Proof of this, has
been eno' observed already.

I shall therefore only further take Notice of two extraordinary and surprising
Passages, if I understand them: And I have with great Diligence tried to find
out the Meaning of them. One is Page 129. between the 17th and 23 Lines, if it
be rightly printed, I take that Concession of Mr. Edwards to be in Effect. --
That the practicing on his Scheme would be a plain Contradiction to the great
Scope and merciful Tendency of the Gospel Dispensation: And if his Principles
have such a Tendency, I hope he will soon renounce them. The other is Page 130.
from the 23 to the 28 Line. "May it not be suspected, etc;. -- We all hold that
all ought to make a proper Profession of Godliness, such an one as God's People
of Israel made, such as the Apostles required Men to make when they baptized
them. But says Mr. Edwards, this Way of baptizing Children without a proper
Profession of Godliness (which must mean such as he thinks proper for them to
make) may it not be suspected that it was invented for this very End, to give
Ease to Ancestors with Respect to their Posterity in Time of general Declension
and Degeneracy? Now did not God invent the Rite of Circumcision, and command
all the Males in Israel to be Circumcised? Did he not appoint it as a Token and
Seal of the Covenant of Grace? Did not Christ invent and appoint Baptism, as a
Token and Seal of the same Covenant, to succeed it in the Christian Church? And
did God invent this as an Expedient to give Ease to Ancestors with Respect to
their Posterity in Times of general Declension? Do Mr. Edwards's Opposers
administer it but upon a Profession in the same Words which God, and Jesus
Christ and his Apostles did it, and commanded it to be done; leaving out
nothing but Mr. Edwards's Addition and Explication, which they did not put in.
--

Object. 20. Some Ministers have been greatly blessed in the other Way of
Proceeding, and some Men have been converted at the Lord's Supper. -- Why not
by Means of the Lord's Supper? As probably very many have been.

Mr. Edwards answers, That we are not to interpret the Works of God to a Sense,
or apply them to a Scope, inconsistent with the Word of God etc. -- This we
agree with him in; but we think, if Mr. Edwards had rightly interpreted, and
applied the Word of God, he would have been abundantly satisfied of his Mistake
in pretending to maintain the Doctrine which he has espoused. -- Thus far it is
safe arguing from the Works and Providence of God; that they are a great
Confirmation of the Truth of his Word; and a great Help to explain the doubtful
Passages of it. -- The Apostle thought the Conversion of the Corinthians by his
Ministry, was a Confirmation of his Mission from Christ. 1 Cor. 9. 1, 2. Are
not you my Work in the Lord; the Seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord. 2
Cor. 3. 2. Ye are our Epistle. If this Controversy were doubtful, and not
clearly and plainly determined by the Word of God; then if it pleased God to
use Ministers in this Way to be greatly Instrumental to promote Men's
Conversion, as he did Mr. Stoddard, and I trust he did Mr. Edwards: If he makes
Use of the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, to be the Means of the Conversion of
many; or of some Souls; this certainly does something to determine us, that
it is lawful for some unsanctified Men to attend it, and that it is not a Seal of
the Damnation of unsanctified Men, as such: And that God will bless it to be a
Means of Conversion still to Persons in Covenant, if they need Conversion. --
That other Ministers who think differently should be blessed also, and owned of
God in their Work, is no Argument at all against what is supposed to be proved
in the Objection. For it is not supposed that the Lord's Supper, or Baptism, are
the only Ordinances which God has appointed to promote Men's Conversion, but
also all other Ordinances, and the whole Dispensation of the Gospel. If many
are savingly converted by the Preaching of the Word before they come to the
Lord's Table, this does not at all weaken the Argument. -- I conclude Mr.
Edwards does not think that Jacob's Lying, or Solomon's worshipping in an high
Place, or Readiness persecuting the Church, were the Means of their Conversion, or
obtaining God's Blessing; and if not, it seems they must be impertinently
alleged, or brought in as a Parallel here.

Page 132, ^re these Words: As to the two last Arguments in the Appeal to the
Learned, concerning the Subjects of the Christian Sacraments, their being
Members of the visible Church, and not the invisible; the Force of those
Arguments depend, entirely on the Resolution of that Question, who are visible
Saints? or what adult Persons are regularly admitted to the Privileges of
Members of the visible Church? Which Question has already been largely
considered; and I think it has been demonstrated that they are those who
exhibit a credible Profession and Visibility of Gospel Holiness, or vital
Piety, and not merely or moral Sincerity; so that there is no Need of farther
debating the Point in this Place.

I have all along been sensible that the whole Controversy turns upon that
Point, who are visible Saints; and therefore might have been finished in one
Quarter of the Paper which has been blotted with it; but if Mr. Edwards's
Determination of this Point is a good Reason why it is not worth while to answer
the two last Arguments in the Appeal, I cannot see why it was not full as
weighty against answering any of the rest: For Mr. Stoddard always held, that
none but visible Saints have Right to the Seals, or are in Covenant. But the
Demonstration that those who exhibit a credible Profession and visibility of
Gospel Holiness, and not merely of moral Sincerity, will nothing serve to the
Purpose, for we don't suppose Persons to be visible Saints without this. But to
defend the Principle which Mr. Edwards Disputes for, he ought to have
demonstrated that none are visible Saints, but real Saints; for the Doctrine he
pretends to maintain is, that none but real Saints have a lawful Right to the
Sacraments; that none but such may lawfully receive them, and the Church may
not lawfully give them to any but those whom they positively judge to be such,
by knowing the inward Experiences of their Hearts: or which amounts to the same
Thing: Their own serious Profession of having experienced such Workings of the
Spirit of God, as the Church and their Pastor account to contain the Essence of
vital Piety. If Mr. Edwards has demonstrated this to be the proper Exhibition
of a credible Profession of Gospel-Holiness, in the public Judgment of the
Church, and according to the Rule God has given the Church for that public
Judgment, the Reader must judge. -- Or whether after all his Demonstration, it
does not appeal a plain and certain Truth, that (...) Scripture neither does,
nor ^ver did give the Church any other (...) for their public Judgment of the
Credibility of any Pers^^ (...) Profession of Gospel Holiness, than their own
Declaration of their Belief of the Gospel Doctrine, and their Engagement to
keep Covenant with God upon his Encouragement, and through his Grace helping
them; nothing appearing in their outward Carriage to contradict it. It is not
the Visibility of moral Sincerity, but the moral Evidence of Gospel Sincerity,
which God's Word make the Church's Rule of judging of the Visibility of Gospel
Holiness in other Men. --

If this be the Case, them Mr. Stoddard's Arguments remain in full Force,
notwithstanding all Mr. Edwards's Demonstrations. --

The 10th Argument in the Appeal, Page 89. is this, They who do convey to their
Children a Right to the Sacrament of Christian Baptism, have a Right themselves
to the Lord's Supper, provided they carry inoffensively.

But some unsanctified Persons do convey to their Children, (...) Right to the
Sacrament of Baptism.

The minor I suppose no Christian, but an Anabaptist will deny.

The Consequence, Mr. Stoddard says, is evident, because this shows they are in
Covenant with God: if they were not in Covenant with God, their Children would
not be in Covenant; neither would they have any Right to Baptism: But God has
made Promises to them, and they are under Covenant Engagements to him; and
because they are in Covenant, and inoffensive in their Conversation, the Seal
of the Covenant does belong to them.

Argument 11. Page 91. If the invisible Church Catholic is not the prime and
principal Subject of the Seal of the Covenant, then some unsanctified Persons
may lawfully partake of the Lord's Supper: But the invisible Church Catholic
is not the prime and principal Subject of the Seals of the Covenant. -- Where
the Author remarks, that the Minor is laid down as a Conclusion by Mr. Thomas
Hooker in his Survey; which he proves by several Arguments. Particularly he
argues, that such as were graceless, and without an Interest in Christ, and so
none of his invisible Members, have God's Command to enjoin, and his Word to
warrant them to receive the Seals; as Ishmael and Esau, and all the Males were
enjoined to be circumcised. All the Families of the Jews were commanded to eat
the Passover; many whereof were, without all Question, not invisible and
believing Members of Christ. Thus he.

I have no doubt, but the learned and judicious Reader will be of Opinion, that
it is much easier to pass over these Arguments, and no further to debate the
Point, than it is to answer them.

I agree with my dear Brother Edwards, that if Men should set their own Wit and
Wisdom in Opposition to God's revealed Will, there is no End of Objections which
may be raised against any of God's Institutions, and if we lift up our Tool to
^^nd God's Alta^^ we shall pollute it. -- And I am of Opinion (...) both real
and imaginary may attend the Scheme which he has undertaken to maintain: And
that they are not only equal to the manifest Conveniences and happy Tendencies
of it, or to the Inconveniences and bad Consequences of the other, but vastly
greater, and that it is a Scheme contrary to God's Dispensation to his Church
in all Ages, and inconsistent with it self.

The outward Duties of Morality and Worship, when to Appearance they are
sincerely performed, are by the Church in their public Judgment to be
charitably thought to be the Product of the great inward Duties of the Love of
God; and Acceptance of Christ. The latter ought not only to be pretended to,
but exhibited by the former; and God never appointed any other Way of their
being made visible to the World: And he who is the Searcher of Hearts has only
a Right and Ability to determine of them otherwise. But in this State of
Things, he neither has given us a Rule, nor will allow us to judge otherwise in
order to Persons being taken into his Family, and to the outward Privileges of
his House. -- The Notion of Men's being able and fit to determine positively
the Condition of other Men, or the certainly of their gracious Estate; has a
direct Tendency to decieve the Souls of Men; to harden some in Hypocrisy, and
lift up others with Pride and Self-Conceit. The Effect of such a Way and
Practice in Admission of Persons into the visible Church seems naturally this,
and these Effects speak out themselves: That since the outward Duties of
Morality and Worship may proceed from other Causes than the Love of God, and
Faith in Christ, therefore some Persons look upon these as not giving any
Evidence at all of those Grace: But judge of some Accounts which they hear of
Persons relating their Experiences, or some inward Feelings; (which can only be
said to evidence their Grace if they be not decieved themselves, nor aim to
decieve others) and which without those Duties of Morality and Worship, or
separate from them, cannot be so good Evidences of Grace as these are without
them. And so they determine that if Men live never so strictly conformable to
the Laws of the Gospel, and never so diligently seek their own Salvation to
outward Appearance, they give no more public Evidence that they are not
Enemies of God, and Haters of Jesus Christ, than the very worst of the Heathen.
Nor do they stick any more to speak of them, and act openly toward them in
such a Manner; thereby violating in the most open and scandalous Manner the Law
of Christ, wherein he solemnly forbids them to judge one another: Which yet
they continually do in open Defiance of his Law, the Rules of his visible
Kingdom, and his own Example as King of the visible Church. And the greatest
Part of those who are in Covenant with God, and to whom Christ has commanded
Baptism the Seal of the Covenant to be administered, whom he has bound by the
most solemn Engagements to attend all his Ordinances, and wait at his Foot for
all the Blessings of the Covenant of Grace; are forbidden to do it by their
Brethren, though they own them at the same Time to be in Covenant with God;
because they think them not good enough to recieve the Food which Christ has
provided for them.

Mr. Edwards proposes one of two Evil Consequences inevitably following the
Method of Proceeding which he opposes. -- Either there must be no public
Notice given of the Conversion of a Sinner, or else this Notice must be given
in a Way of Conversation by the Parties themselves.

And how are these Evils remedied upon his Scheme? Supposing it be necessary
that some public Notice be given of the Conversion of every Person in a Town,
what Way can it be done? According to him the best visible Exercise of the
Worship of God, and most sincere Practice of moral Virtues to outward
Appearance; the greatest visible Appearance of the Love of God, and Concern to
please him that is compatible to the State of an unconverted Man, is not so
much as the lest Evidence of any Pretense to Godliness.

What other Way is there left but a Declaration of inward Experiences? For as
to Persons saying they are converted, this I believe will by few be thought to
be so good an Evidence as the former. Now what Way has the Church to judge of
these Experiences? Are they to take the Minister's Word for them; and so admit
the Person? If this is the Way, it may indeed give him as great Advantage in
some Respects as the Romish Priests have, or make him something like
Nebuchadnezzer, Dan. 5. 19. But it will leave the Church as much in the Dark as
they were before; and if they offer unto God Thanksgiving upon his Information,
it must surely be done upon an implicit Faith; if the Church are to judge for
themselves, there can be no Way but by hearing the Man relate his Experiences.
And this must be done by Persons declaring their Experiences from Time to Time,
and Place to Place, or else the Church must all meet together to hear them, and
this amounts to the same Thing. So that I cannot see how one of these Evil
Consequences is avoided by Mr. Edwards's Scheme. He supposes the Matter ought
to be under some Regulation, and the Direction of skilful Guides etc. -- Shall
these skilful Guides direct every Man, Woman and Child, what Experiences to
relate, and what to omit, what are fit to be published, and what not? If so, I
believe the Church will soon judge, or if they don't others will, that this is
as artificial a Sort of Conversion, as the making a common Draught, and
Formula, for the Experiences of all that are to be taken into the Church.
Whether this is like to promote the Honor of God, or be a Scandal and Reproach
to his Name, seems not very difficult to determine. -- One would think the late
dreadful Consequences of such Sort of Doings in this Land had been enough to
convince every judicious Christian of the Sinfulness of it. Neither upon Mr.
Edwards's Scheme can I conceive the making two distinct Kinds of visible
Churches, or visible Bodies of professing Saints any more unavoidable than on
the other. Indeed the very Doctrine itself makes two such Bodies within one
another, and openly distinguished one from another. One Company consisting of
such as openly declare that they judge themselves gracious Christians: And the
other of those whom these own to be in Covenant with God, who have been sealed
with the Seal of his Covenant, and Christ has taken into his Family, but only
they have no Right to so much as the outward Privileges of it belonging to the
visible Kingdom of Christ, and yet at the same Time visibly and openly
belonging to the Kingdom of the Devil; declaring that they desire above all
Things in the World to partake and enjoy the Blessings of the Kingdom of
Christ, having sworn that they will make it their chief Business to obtain
them, and use every Method which Christ has appointed therefore; moral or
visibly Religious in their Conversation, and yet treated as open and avowed
Enemies of Jesus Christ, and his Kingdom, making no Pretense to Godliness; and
this by the declared and public Judgment of the Church, in the same visible
Covenant with them. I appeal also to the common Sense of Mankind, whether this
be not the Case where that Method of Proceeding Mr. Edwards contends for, is
established; and with Mr. Edwards, leave it to the judicious Reader to make his
own Remarks, whether there be a just Foundation in Scripture or Reason for such
a State of Things; and whether this is the comely Order of the Gospel which
Christ has instituted.

How much my good Brother Edwards has had to prejudice his Mind on one Side or
other of this Question, I know not: Although I cannot but wonder, he has thought
himself constrained to act as he has done in this Controversy, from the clear
Evidences of the Word of God, and to make such Use and Application of Scripture
as he has done, when he has so little to say from Scripture or Reason, for the
maintaining the Cause he has espoused.

I have endeavored as far as I was able to comply with Mr. Edwards's
reasonable Requests: And I should think it a great Honor and no small
Felicity, if I might be so happy as to be a Means of giving him any Conviction
of his Mistake, and re-uniting him and the People of Northampton; that he might
spend the rest of his Days in great Usefulness and Comfort among them. But I
confess this is what I have no Expectation of; and however that might be, I was
persuaded the Defense of the Cause I have been pleading, is a Service due to
Christ, and to his Churches: Though I heartily wished it might have been done by
a more able Hand. He that knows the Sincerity of my Aim, I trust, will
mercifully accept through Jesus Christ, my Endeavor to vindicate what I believe
to be his Truth and Will. --

I have these reasonable Requests to make to Mr. Edwards, that in his Reply he
will keep close to the Question in Debate. That he will be so candid to his
Readers, as to think them capable to understand plain English and common Sense,
without an Explication. And that he would propound his Arguments as plain and
short as possible, and as strongly as he pleases. -- And if God should please
to continue my Life, and give me Health and Help, I will consider every Word
with as much Care and Attention as I can. I heartily join with him in his
concluding Prayer, and add to it; Since God has given to each of Us a divine
Right of judging for our Selves, that he would teach us to unite with one
another on the only true Principles of Christian Union. Phil. 3. 15, 16. And
teach us all to think soberly of our Selves, as we ought to think. -- The Event
of all I leave with God, whose Truth will finally prevail over all the Mistakes
of Men. And the Reasonings I submit to the Judgment of the Reader.

FINIS

