MISREPRESENTATIONS Corrected, And TRUTH vindicated. IN A Reply to the Rev. Mr.
SOLOMON WILLIAMS'S Book, entitled, The True State of the QUESTION concerning
the QUALIFICATIONS necessary to lawful Communion in the CHRISTIAN SACRAMENTS.

By JONATHAN EDWARDS, M. A. Minister of the Gospel at Stockbridge.

Prove. xii.17. He that speaks Truth, shows forth Righteousness.

Chap. xxii.20, 21. Have I not written to thee excellent Things in Counsels and
Knowledge; That I might make thee know the Certainty of the Words of Truth,
that thou might answer the Words of Truth to them that send unto thee?

BOSTON: N. E.

Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, opposite the Prison in Queen Street. 1752.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE I have been so repeatedly charged by Mr. Williams, with indecent and
injurious Treatment of Mr. STODDARD (whom doubtless I ought to treat with much
Respect) I may expect, from what appears of Mr. Williams's Disposition this
Way, to be charged with ill Treatment of Him too. I desire therefore that it
may be justly considered by the Reader, what is, and what is not, injurious or
unhandsome Treatment of an Author in a Controversy. And here I would crave
Leave to say, that I humbly conceive, a Distinction ought to be made between
opposing and exposing a Cause, or the Arguments used to defend it, and
reproaching Persons. He is a weak Writer indeed, who undertakes to confute an
Opinion, but dares not expose the Nakedness and Absurdity of it, nor the
Weakness or Inconsistence of the Methods taken and Arguments used by any to
maintain it, for fear he should be guilty of speaking Evil of these Things, and
be charged with reproaching Them. If an Antagonist is angry at this, he thereby
gives his Readers too much Occasion of Suspicion toward himself, as chargeable
with Weakness, or Bitterness.

I therefore now give Notice, that I have taken full Liberty in this Respect;
only endeavoring to avoid pointed and exaggerating Expressions. If to set
forth what I suppose to be the true Absurdity of Mr. Williams's Scheme, or any
Part of it, that it may be viewed justly in all it is Nakedness; withal
observing the Weakness of the Defense he has made, not fearing to show wherein
it is weak, and how the Badness of his Cause obliges him to be inconsistent
with himself, inconsistent with his own professed Principles in Religion, and
with Things conceded and asserted by him in the Book especially under
Consideration; and declaring particularly wherein I think his Arguments fail,
whether it be in begging the Question, or being impertinent and beside the
Question, or arguing in Effect against himself; also observing wherein Mr. W.
has made Misrepresentations of Words or Things; I say, if to do these Things be
reproaching Him, and injurious Treatment of Him then I have injured Him. -- But
I think I should be foolish, if I were afraid to do that (and to do it as
thoroughly as I can) which must be the Design of my Writing, if I write at all
in Opposition to his Tenets, and to the Defense he makes of them.

Indeed if I misrepresent what he says, in order to make it appear in the worst
Colors; altering his Words to another Sense, to make them appear more
ridiculous; or adding other Words, that carry the Sense beyond the proper
Import of his Words, to heighten the supposed Absurdity, and give me greater
Advantage to exclaim; if I set my self to aggravate Matters, and strain them
beyond Bounds, making mighty Things of mere Trifles; or if I use Exclamations
and Invectives, instead of Arguments; then Mr. W. might have just Cause to
complain, and the Reader would have just Reason for Disgust. But whether I have
done so, or not, must be judged by the Reader; of whom I desire nothing more
than the most impartial and exact Consideration of the Merits of the Cause, and
Examination of the Force and Weight of every Argument. I desire, that no bitter
reproachful Invectives, no vehement Exclamations, no supercilious assuming
Words and Phrases may be taken for Reasoning, on either Side. If the Reader
thinks he finds any such in what I have written, I am willing he should set 'em
aside as nothing worth; carefully distinguishing between them, and the Strength
of the Argument. I desire not, that the Cause should be judged of by the Skill
which either Mr. W. or I do manifest, in flinging one at another.

If in Places where the Argument pinches most, and there is the greatest
Appearance of strong Reason, in Mr. W -- ms's Book, I do (as some other
Disputants) instead of entering thoro'ly into the Matter, begin to flounce and
fling, and go about to divert and drown the Reader's Attention to the Argument,
by the Noise of big Words, or magisterial and disdainful Expressions; let the
Reader take it (as justly he may) for a shrewd Sign of (...) Consciousness of
the Weakness of my Cause in that Particular, or at least of a Distrust of my
own Ability to defend my self well in the Reader's Apprehension, and to come
off with a good Grace any other Way.

In this Case, I shall not think it any Injustice done me by the Reader, though
he suspects that I feel my self pressed* and begin to be in Trouble, for fear I
should not seem to come off like a Champion, if I should trust to mere
Reasoning. I can uprightly say, I never have endeavored by such Means to evade
a proper Consideration of any Part of Mr. W -- ms's Reasoning; nor have
designedly contrived, in this or any other Method, to free my self from the
Trouble of a just Answer to any Thing material in his Book; and I have been
especially careful to speak most particularly to the main Parts of his Scheme,
and such of his Reasonings, as I could suppose those of his Readers who are on
his Side, would be most likely to have their chief Dependence on, and to think
most difficult to be answered.

With Regard to my Method in this Reply, I judged it most convenient to reduce
my Remarks on Mr. W -- ms's Principles, and the Parts of his Scheme, and Kinds
of Arguing, which repeatedly appear in various Parts of his Book, to their
proper Heads. I thought, this tended to give the Reader a clearer and more
comprehensive View of the whole Controversy, and the Nature of the Arguments
made Use of* and that it also would make my Work the Shorter. For, otherwise, I
must have had the same Things, or Things of the same Nature, to have observed
often, as I found them repeated in different Parts of his Book, and the same
Remarks to make over and over again. -- And that the Reader may not be without
any Advantages which he might have had in the other Method, of keeping, in my
Reply, to the Order in which Things lie in the Book replied to, following my
Author from one Page and Paragraph to another, I have therefore subjoined a
Table, by which the Reader may readily turn to what is said on each Particular,
that is wont to be brought into this Debate, on one Side or the other.

With Regard to my Citations from Mr. W -- ms's Book, I have never designedly
altered his Words: And where I have for Brevity's sake referred to any
Sentiment of his, without citing the Words at Large, I have used Care not to
change or heighten the Sense, or in any Respect to vary from the just Import of
what he delivers. And that the Reader may himself more easily and readily judge
of the Fairness of my Citations and References, I have mentioned the Page, and
the Part of the Page, where the Thing referd to is to be found: Supposing each
Page to be divided into five equal Parts, I have noted the several Parts of the
Page by the Letters a. b. c. d. e. So that when I have referred to the Top of
the Page, or the first fifth Part of it, I have mentioned the Number of the
Page, and added the Letter a. to the Number: And if the Middle, or third fifth
Part, then I have added the Letter c. -- and so of the rest, as the Reader will
see. I have ever done thus, unless the Thing referred to is to be found through
the Whole or great Part of the Page. I have also done the same very often,
where I have Occasion to cite other Authors. Only when I have before quoted the
same Thing, I am not always so exact and particular in noting the Place again,
in my second Quotation or Reference.

Misrepresentations corrected, and Truth vindicated.
PART. I Observing the general Misrepresentations Mr. WILLIAMS makes concerning
the Book he writes against.
SECTION I. Concerning the DESIGN of my writing and publishing my Book, and the
QUESTION debated in it.
MR. Williams asserts it to be my professed and declared Design, in writing the
Book, which he has undertaken an Answer to, to oppose Mr. STODDARD. He has
taken a great Liberty in this Matter. He charges Me with a declared Design of
writing in Opposition to Mr. Stoddard, no less than nine or ten Times in his
Book. And he don't content himself merely with saying, there are Passages in my
Preface, or elsewhere, whence this may be inferred; but he says expressly, That I
profess to be disputing against Mr. Stoddard 's Doctrine. P. 14. d. -- That I
tell my Readers, I am disputing against Mr. Stoddard 's Question. P. 37. d. --
That I tell 'em so in my Preface, P. 107. d. -- That I often declare that I am
opposing Mr. Stoddard 's Opinion, P 132. d. -- And on this Foundation he
charges Me with blotting a great Deal of Paper, disserving the Cause of Truth
by changing the Question, and putting it in such Terms as Mr. S. expressly
disclaims, and then confuting it as Mr. S -- d 's Principle; unfair Treatment
of Mr. S. P. 2. d. e. -- surprizingly going off from Mr. S -- d 's Argument to
cast an Odium upon it, treating Mr. S. and his Doctrine in such a Manner as to
reproach Him and his Principles, tending to render them odious to the
unthinking Multitude, and telling a manifest Untruth. P. 14. d. and 15. c. d.
Whereas, I never once signified it to be the Thing I aimed at, to oppose Mr.
Stoddard, or appear as his Antagonist. But the very Reverse was true; and
meddling with Him, or what he had said, I studied to avoid, as much as the
Circumstances of the Debate with my People would allow, who had been taught by
Him, and who so greatly and continually alleged against Me the Things which He
had said. Nor is there any Appearance in those Passages Mr. W. cites from my
Preface, as though this was the Thing I sought or aimed at. Nay, one of those
Passages which he produces to prove it, shows the contrary: as it shows, that
its being so (as I supposed) that what I wrote was not consistent with, but
opposite to what Mr. S. had maintained, was an unsought for and unpleasing
Circumstance of that Publication. My Words are, It Is far from a pleasing
Circumstance of this Publication, that it is against what my honored
Grandfather strenuously maintained, both from the Pulpit and the Press.
Certainly my regretting and excusing such an unavoidable Circumstance was a
Thing exceeding diverse from giving Notice to the World, that the Thing I aimed
at was to set myself up as Mr. Stoddard's Antagonist, and to write an Answer
to, and confute what he had written. It will, at first Sight, be manifest to
every impartial Reader, that the Design of my Preface was not to state the
Subject and Intention of the Book: This is done professedly, and very
particularly, afterward, in the first Part of the Essay itself. And if I might
have common Justice, surely I might be allowed to tell my own Opinion, and
declare my own Design, without being so confidently and frequently charged with
misrepresenting my own Thoughts and Intentions.

The very Nature of the Case is such as must lead every impartial Person to a
Conviction, that the Design of my Writing must be to defend my self, in that
Controversy, which I had with my People at Northampton; as it is notorious and
publicly known, that That Controversy was the Occasion of my Writing; and that
therefore my Business must be to defend that Opinion or Position of mine which
I had declared to them, which had been the Occasion of the Controversy, and so
the grand Subject of Debate between us; whether this were exactly agreeable to
any Words that might be found in Mr. Stoddard's Writings on the Subject, or
not. Now this Opinion or Position was the same with that which I expressed in
the first Part of my Book. In such Terms I expressed my self to the Committee
of the Church, when I first made that Declaration of my Opinion, which was the
Beginning of the Controversy, and when writing in Defense of my Opinion was
first proposed: And this was the Point continually talked of in all
Conversation at Northampton, for more than two Years, even 'till Mr. W -- ms's
Book came out. The Controversy was, Whether there was any Need of making a
credible Profession of Godliness, in Order to Person's being admitted to full
Communion; Whether they must profess saving Faith, or whether a Profession of
common Faith were not sufficient; whether Persons must be esteemed truly godly,
and must be taken in under that Notion, or whether if they appeared morally
sincere, that were not sufficient? And when my Book came abroad, there was no
Objection made, that I had not truly expressed the Subject of Debate, in my
stating the Question: But the Subject of Debate afterward, in Parish-Meetings,
Church-Meetings, and in all Conversation, was the Question laid down in my
Book. No Suggestion among them, that the Profession Persons made in Mr.
Stoddard's Way, was taken as a Profession of real Godliness, or
Gospel-Holiness; or that they were taken in under a Notion of their being truly
pious Persons, as Mr. W. would have it: No Suggestion, that the Dispute was
only about the Degree of Evidence. But the Dispute was, What was the Thing to
be made evident; whether real Godliness, or moral Sincerity? It was constantly
insisted on, with the greatest Vehemence, that it was not saving Religion,
which needed to be professed, or pretended to; but another Thing, Religion of a
lower Kind. -- The public Acts of the Church and Parish, from Time to Time,
show, that the Point in Controversy was, Whether the Professors of Godliness,
only, ought to be admitted? Public Votes, of which I made a Record, were
several Times to know the Church's Mind concerning the Admission of Those who
are able and willing to make a Profession of Godliness; using these Terms. And
once it was passed, That such should not be admitted in the Way of publicly
making such a Profession. And at another Time the Vote passed, That the
Admission of such Persons in such a Way (described in the same Words) should
not be referred to the Judgment of certain neighboring Ministers. At another
Time, it was insisted on by the Parish, in a Parish-Meeting, That I should put
a Vote in the Church, in these Words, Whether there be not a Dispute between
Mr. Edwards Pastor of the Church, and the Church, respecting the Question he
has argued in his Book last published? And accordingly the Vote was put and
affirmed, in a Church-Meeting, in the same Terms. -- And this was the Question
I insisted on in my public Lectures at Northampton, appointed for the giving
the Reasons of my Opinion. My Doctrine was in these Words, It Is the Mind and
Will of God, that none should be admitted to full Communion in the Church of
Christ, but such as in Profession, and in the Eye of a reasonable Judgment, are
truly Saints, or godly Persons. The Town was full of Objections against those
Sermons: but none, as ever I heard, objected, that my Doctrine was beside the
Controversy. -- And this was all along the Point of Difference between me and
the neighboring Ministers. This was the grand Subject of Debate with them, at
a Meeting of Ministers, appointed on Purpose for Conference on the Subject. It
was wholly concerning the Matter of Profession, or the Thing to be exhibited
and made evident or visible; and not about the Manner of professing, and the
Degree of Evidence. -- And this was the Doctrine directly opposed by Mr. A --
y, one of the neighboring Ministers, whom my People had got as their Champion
to defend their Cause in the Pulpit at Northampton. Thus one of the Corollaries
he drew from his Doctrine (as it was taken from his Mouth in Writing) was, That
A Man may be a visible Saint, and yet there be no sufficient Grounds for our
Charity, that he is regenerate. Quite contrary to what Mr. W. maintains Another
of his Corollaries was in these Words, A Minister or Church may judge a Man a
Saint, and upon good Grounds, and not have Grounds to judge him regenerate. He
proposed this Enquiry, Do not such as join themselves to the Church, covenant
not only to be visible Saints, but Saints in Heart? The Answer was in the
Negative; quite contrary to Mr. W. -- Another was, Does not a visible Saint
imply a Visibility of Grace, or an Appearance of it? The Answer was, "Not
always." Quite contrary to Mr. W. -- Another was, Is it not Hypocrisy in any
Man, to make a Profession of Religion, and join himself to the Church, and not
have Grace? The Answer was in the Negative; also quite contrary to Mr. W. --
But these Sermons of Mr. A -- y, were highly approved by the generality of the
People of Northampton, as agreeable to their Minds.

And the Controversy, as I have stated it in my Book, was the Controversy in
which the Church and I appeared before the Council, who determined our
Separation, when we each of us declared our Sentiments before them: The Point
of Difference was entirely the Matter of Profession, and the Thing to be made
visible; not the Degree of Evidence or Visibility. No Hint was given as though we
both agreed, that true Piety or Gospel-Holiness was the Thing to be made
visible, and that such only should be received as are truly godly Persons in
the Eye of the Church's Judgment (as Mr. W. holds) and that we only differed
about the proper Grounds of such a Judgment.

And therefore it is apparent, it was this Controversy, and it is Consequences,
that were the Ground of my Separation from my People; and not any Thing like
the Controversy which Mr. W. professes to manage in his Answer. This
Controversy, when it came out in Mr. W -- ms's Book, was new in Northampton,
and entirely aliene from all the Dispute which had filled that Part of the
Country, and a great Part of New England, with Noise and Uproar, for about two
Years and an half. The Thing which Mr. W. over and over allows to be true, was
the very same, both in Effect and in Terms, which the People had been most
vehemently fighting against, from Week to Week, and from Month to Month, during
all this Time: And therefore the Design of my Writing led and obliged me to
maintain that Position or Doctrine of mine, which was the Occasion of this
Debate.

And, be it so, that I did suppose this Position was contrary to Mr. Stoddard's
Opinion, and was opposed by Him, Whether I was mistaken in this, will appear in
the Sequel.
and therefore thought fit in my Preface to excuse my self to the World for
differing from Him; did this oblige Me, in all that I wrote for the maintaining
my Position, to keep my self strictly to the Words which he had expressed his
Question in, and to regulate and limit my self in every Argument I used, and
Objection I answered, by the Terms which he made use of in proposing his
Opinion and Arguments? And if I have not done it, do I therefore deserve to be
charged before the World with changing the Question, with unfair Treatment of
Mr. Stoddard, with surprizingly going off from his Argument, with disserving
the Cause of Truth, etc!

It would have been no great Condescension in Mr W. if he had allowed that I
knew what the Question was, which was disputed between Me and my People, as
well as He, in a distant Part of the Country: Yea, if he had acknowledged, that
I was as likely as He, to understand Mr. Stoddard's real Sentiments and
Practice; since I was in the Ministry two Years with Him, as Co-Pastor of the
same Church, and was united with Him in ecclesiastical Administrations, in
admitting Members, and in examining them as to their Qualifications, and have
stood for more than 23 Years in a Pastoral Relation to his Church, most
intimately acquainted with the Nature of it is Constitution, it is Sentiments and
Method of Administration, and all its religious Concerns, have my self been
immediately concerned in the Admission of more than three Quarters of its
present Members, and have had the greatest Occasion to look into their Way of
Admission, and have been acquainted with every living Member that Mr. S. had
admitted before my coming; and have been particularly informed, by many of
them, of the Manner of Mr. S -- d's Conduct in admitting them, their own
Apprehensions concerning the Terms of their Admission, and the Profession they
made in Order to it; and also the Sentiments of the whole of that large Town,
who were born and brought up under his Ministry, concerning his constant
Doctrine and Practice, relating to the Admission of Members, from their
Infancy. -- Whereas, Mr. W. from his Youth had lived in another Part of the
Country, at 70 Miles Distance.

SECTION II. Observing Mr. WILLIAMS'S Misrepresentations of the Principles and
Tenets, delivered in the Book which he undertakes to answer.
MR. W. does very greatly misrepresent the Opinion I am of, and the Principles
I maintain in my Book, in many Respects.

I. He says, P. 5. d. The whole Argument, and indeed the whole Controversy
turns upon this single Point, viz. What is that Evidence, which by divine
Appointment the Church is to have, of the Saintship of those who are admitted
to the outward Privileges of the Covenant of Grace? Mr. Edwards seems to
suppose, this must be the highest Evidence a Man can give of Sincerity; and I
apprehend to be the lowest Evidence the Nature of the Thing will admit. -- But
this is very strange, since I had particularly declared in my Stating of the
Question, (P. 5.) that the Evidence I insisted on, was some outward
Manifestation, that ordinarily rendered the Thing probable. Which shows, that
all I insisted on, was only, that the Evidence should amount to Probability.
And if the Nature of the Case will admit of some lower Kind of Evidence than
this, or if there be any such Thing as a Sort of Evidence that don't so much as
amount to Probability, then it is possible that I may have some Controversy with
Him and others about the Degree of Evidence: Otherwise it is hard to conceive,
how he should contrive to make out a Controversy with me.

But that the Reader may better judge, whether Mr. W. truly represents me as
supposing that the Evidence which should be insisted on, is the highest
Evidence a Man can give of Sincerity, I would here insert an Extract of a
Letter which I wrote to the Rev. Mr. Peter Clark of Salem-Village, a
Twelvemonth before Mr. W -- ms's Book was published: The Original is doubtless
in Mr. Clark's Hands. In that Letter, I declared my Sentiments in the following
Words: It don't belong to the Controversy between Me and my People, how
particular or large the Profession should be that is required. I should not
choose to be confined to exact Limits as to that Matter. But rather than
contend, I should content my self with a few Words, briefly expressing the
cardinal Virtues, or Acts implied in a hearty Compliance with the Covenant of
Grace; the Profession being made (as should appear by Inquiry into the Person's
doctrinal Knowledge) understandingly; if there were an external Conversation
agreeable thereto. Yea, I should think that such a Person, solemnly making such
a Profession, had a Right to be received as the Object of a public Charity,
however he himself might scruple his own Conversion, on Account of his not
remembering the Time, not knowing the Method of his Conversion, or finding so
much remaining Sin, etc. And (if his own Scruples did not hinder I added this,
because I supposed that such Persons as judge themselves unconverted, if of my
Principles, respecting Qualifications for Communion, would scruple coming, and
could not come with a good Conscience: But if they were of Mr. S -- d's
Principle, viz. That unconverted Men might lawfully come, neither a Man's being
of that Opinion, nor his judging himself unconverted, would hinder my receiving
him who exhibited proper Evidence to the Church of his being a Convert.
) I should think a Minister or Church had no Right to debar such a Professor,
though he should say, he did not think himself converted. For I call that a
Profession of Godliness, which is a Profession of the great Things wherein
Godliness consists, and not a Profession of his own Opinion of his good Estate.
--

Northampton, May 7. 1750.



In like Manner, I explained my Opinion, very particularly and expressly, before
the Council that determined my Separation from my People, and before the
Church, in a very public Manner in the Meeting House, many People being
present, near a Year before Mr. W -- ms's Book was published; and to make it
the more sure, that what I maintained might be well observed, I afterward sent
in the foregoing Extract of my Letter to Mr. Clark of Salem-Village, into the
Council. And, as I was informed, it was particularly taken Notice of in the
Council, and handed round among them, to be read by them.

The same Council, having heard that I had made certain Draughts of the
Covenant, or Forms of a public Profession of Religion, which I stood ready to
accept of from the Candidates for Communion, they, for their further
Information, sent for 'em. Accordingly I sent them four distinct Draughts or
Forms, which I had drawn up about a Twelvemonth before, (near Two Years before
the publishing of Mr. W -- ms's Book) as what I stood ready to accept of (any
one of them) rather than contend and break with my People. -- The two shortest
of those Forms were as follows.

One of them was;

I hope, I do truly find a Heart to give up my self wholly to God, according to
the Tenor of that Covenant of Grace which was sealed in my Baptism, and to walk
in a Way of that Obedience to all the Commandments of God, which the Covenant
of Grace requires, as long as I live.

The other,

I hope, I truly find in my Heart a Willingness to comply with all the
Commandments of God, which require me to give up my self wholly to Him, and to
serve Him with my Body and my Spirit; and do accordingly now promise to walk in
a Way of Obedience to all the Commandments of God, as long as I live.

Now the Reader is left to judge, whether I insist, as Mr. W. represents, that
Persons must not be admitted without the highest Evidence a Man can give of
Sincerity.

II. Mr. W. is abundant in suggesting and insinuating to his Readers, that the
Opinion laid down in my Book is, That Persons ought not to be admitted to
Communion without an absolute and peremptory Determination in those who admit
them, that they are truly godly; because I suppose it to be necessary, that
there should be a positive Judgment in their Favor.

Here I desire the Reader to observe, that the Word Positive is used in two
Senses. (1.) Sometimes it is put in Opposition to Doubtful, or Uncertain: And
then it signifies the same as Certain, Peremptory, or Assured. But (2.) The
Word Positive is very often used in a very different Sense; not in Opposition
to Doubtful, but in Opposition to Negative: And so understood, it signifies
very much the same as Real, or Actual. Thus, we often speak of a negative Good,
and a positive Good. A negative Good is a mere Negation or Absence of Evil. But
a positive Good is something more, it is some real, actual Good, instead of
Evil. So there is a negative Charity, and a positive Charity. A negative
Charity is a mere Absence of an ill Judgment of a Man, or forbearing to condemn
him. Such a Charity a Man may have toward any Stranger he transiently sees in
the Street, that he never saw or heard any Thing of before. A positive Charity
is something further than merely not condemning, or not judging Ill of a Man;
it implies a good Thought of a Man. The Reader will easily see that the Word
Positive, taken in this Sense, is an exceeding different Thing from Certain or
Peremptory. A Man may have something more than a mere negative Charity toward
another, or a mere forbearing to condemn him, he may actually entertain some
good Thought of him, and yet there may be no proper Peremptoriness, no Pretense
of any Certainty in the Case.

Now it is in this Sense I use the Phrase, positive Judgment, viz. In Opposition
to a mere negative Charity; as I very plainly express the Matter, and
particularly and fully explain my self in stating the Question. In my Inquiry
(P. 5.) I have the following Words: By Christian Judgment, I intend something
further than a Kind of mere negative Charity, implying that we forbear to
censure and condemn a Man, because we don't know but that he may be godly, and
therefore forbear to proceed on the Foot of such a Censure or Judgment in our
Treatment of Him; as we would kindly entertain a Stranger, not knowing but, in
so doing, we entertain an Angel, or precious Saint of God: But I mean a
positive Judgment, founded on some positive Appearance or Visibility, some
outward Manifestation that ordinarily renders the Thing probable. There is a
Difference between suspending our Judgment, or forbearing to condemn, or having
some Hope that possibly the Thing may be so, and so hoping the best, and a
positive Judgment in Favor of a Person. For a having some Hope, only implies,
that a Man is not in utter Despair of a Thing; though his prevailing Opinion may
be otherwise, or he may suspend his Opinion.

Here, I think, my Meaning is very plainly and carefully explained. However, in
as much as the Word Positive is sometimes used for Peremptory or Certain, Mr.
W. catches at the Term, and lays fast Hold of the Advantage he thinks this
gives him, and is abundant, all over his Book, in representing as though I
insisted on a positive Judgment in this Sense. So he applies the Word,
referring to my Use of it, from Time to Time. Thus, P. 69. b. If there be any
Thing in this Argument, I think it must be what I have observed, viz. That a
Christian must make a positive Judgment and Determination, that another Man is
a Saint, and this Judgment must have for it is Ground something which he
supposes is, at least ordinarily, a Certain Evidence of his Saintship, and by
which gracious Sincerity is Certainly distinguished from every Thing else. And
P. 141. a. The Notion of Men's being able and fit to determine positively the
Condition of other Men, or the Certainty of their gracious State, has a direct
Tendency to deceive the Souls of Men. And thus Mr. W. makes mention of a
positive Judgment above forty Times in his Book, with Reference to my Use of
it, and to my declared Opinion of the Necessity of it; and every where plainly
uses the Phrase in that Sense, for absolute and peremptory, in Opposition to
Doubtfulness; continually insinuating, that this is what I professedly insist
on. Whereas, every Act of the Judgment whatsoever, is a Positive Judgment in
the Sense in which I have fully declared I use it, viz. in Opposition to
Negative; which is no Act, but a mere withholding of the Act of the Judgment,
or forbearing any actual Judgment. Mr. John Glass, in his Observes upon the
original Constitution of the Christian Church, (P. 55, 56.) says as follows.
You seem to have a great Prejudice at what you call positive Evidences, and
judging upon them in the Admission of Church Members. And I am at some Loss to
understand what you mean by them, though I have heard the Expression frequently,
among People of your Opinion, used to express some very ill Thing. If you mean
by positive Evidences, infallible Evidences of a Thing that none but God
infallibly knows, and can assure a Man's own Conscience of, with Respect to a
Man himself; I think, it would be a very great Evil for a Man to require such
Evidence to found his Judgment of Charity, concerning another Man's Faith and
Holiness, or concerning his being an Object of brotherly Love. And I think, he
is bound by the Law of Christ to form his Judgment in this Matter upon less
Evidence. But if you mean positive Evidence in Opposition to negative, which is
no Evidence, I must own, I know not how to form a Judgment of Charity without
some positive Evidence. And is not a credible Profession something positive? --
Is not a credible Profession of the Faith, Love, and Hope that is in Christ, or
of Christianity, a positive Evidence of a Man's being an Object of brotherly
Love, which Evidence ought to be the Ground of my Judgment of Charity
concerning Him, that He is a Christian, a Believer in Christ, a Brother for
whom Christ died? If it be otherwise, and if there be no Evidence upon which I
can charitably judge, that a Man is a Brother for whom Christ died, then tell
me, how I can evidence my Love to Jesus Christ, in the Labor of Love toward
my Brother, whom I have seen; and my Love to God, in my Love to them that are
begotten of Him.
Mr. W. himself does abundantly suppose, that there must be a positive Judgment
in this Sense: He grants the very Thing, though he rejects the Term: For he
holds, there must be such a Visibility as makes Persons to appear to be real
Saints. P. 5. b. -- He allows, that the moral Image of God or Christ must
appear, or be supposed to be in them, as the Ground and Reason of our Charity;
and that there must be some Apprehension, some Judgment of Mind, of the
Saintship of Persons, for it is Foundation. P. 68. c. d. e. and 69. a. and 71.
d. -- That they must have such a Character appearing in them. P. 55. e. -- That
there must be a Judgment founded on moral Evidence of Gospel-Holiness. P. 139.
d.

III. Mr. W. to make my Scheme appear the more ridiculous, does more than once
represent it as my Opinion, that in Order to Persons being admitted into the
Church, there must be a Judgment of their being regenerate, founded on such a
Degree of Evidence, as that it shall not be liable to be mistaken more than
once in ten Times. Thus, P. 63. c. Mr. Edwards himself supposes, in his own
Scheme, when he has made a positive Judgment that every one singly whom he
admits into the Church is regenerate; yet, when taken collectively, it is
probable one in ten will be an Hypocrite? So, P. 71. b. If any Thing be
intended to the Purpose for which this Argument is brought, I conceive, it must
mean, that there must be such a positive Judgment of the real Holiness of
Persons, as is not mistaken more than once in ten Times. -- Now, I desire the
Reader to observe what is the whole Ground, on which he makes such a
Representation. In explaining my Opinion, in the Beginning of my Inquiry (P.
6.) I desired it might be observed, that I did not suppose we ought to expect
any such Degree of Certainty of the Godliness of those who are admitted into
the Church, as that when the whole Number admitted are taken collectively, or
considered in the Gross, we should have any Reason to suppose every one to be
truly godly; though we might have Charity for each one that was admitted, taken
singly, and by himself. And to show, that such a Thing was possible, I
endeavored to illustrate it by a Comparison, or supposed Case of Probability
of ten to one, in the Example of certain Stones, with such probable Marks of a
Diamond, as by Experience had been found not to fail more than once in ten
Times. In which Case, if a particular Stone were found with those Marks, there
would be a Probability of ten to one, with Respect to that Stone, singly taken,
that it was genuine: But if ten such were taken together, there would not be
the same Probability that every one of them was so; but in this Case, it is as
likely as not, that some one in the Ten is spurious. Now it is so apparent, that
this particular Degree of Probability of ten to one is mentioned only as a
supposed Case, for Illustration, and because, in a particular Example, some
Number or other must be mentioned, that it would have been an Affront to the
Sense of my Readers to have added any Caution, that he should not understand me
otherwise. However, Mr. W has laid hold on this, as a good Handle by which he
might exhibit my Scheme to the World in a ridiculous Light; as though I had
declared it my real Opinion, that there must be the Probability, of just ten to
one, of true Godliness, in Order to Persons Admission into the Church. He might
with as much Appearance of Sense and Justice, have asserted concerning all the
supposed Cases in Books of Arithmetic, that the Authors intend these Cases
should be understood as real Facts, and that they have written their Books,
with all the Sums and Numbers in them, as Books of History; and if any Cases
mentioned there only as Examples of the several Rules, are unlikely to be true
Accounts of Fact, therefore have charged the Authors with writing a false and
absurd History*

IV. Another Thing, yet further from what is honorable in Mr. W. is This;
That, whereas I said as above, that there ought to be a prevailing Opinion
concerning those that are admitted, taken singly, or by themselves, that they
are truly godly or gracious, though when we look on the whole Number in the
Gross, we are far from determining that every one is a true Saint, and that not
one of the Judgments we have passed, has been mistaken; Mr. W. because I used
the Phrase singly taken, has laid hold on the Expression, and from thence has
taken Occasion to insinuate to his Readers, as if my Scheme were so very
extravagant, that according to this, when a great Multitude are admitted, their
Admitters must be confident of EVERY ONE's being regenerated. Hence he
observes, (P. 98. c.) There is no Appearance, that John made a positive
Judgment that every one of these People were regenerated. Plainly using the
Expression as a very strong one; leading the Reader to suppose, I insist the
Evidence shall be so clear, that when such a vast Multitude as John baptized
are viewed, the Admitter should be peremptory in it, that his Judgment has not
failed so much as in a single Instance; the very Reverse of what I had
expressed. In like Manner, Mr. W. treats the Matter from Time to Time. As in P.
55. a. The Thing to be proved from hence is, that the Apostles and primitive
Christians, not only thought that these Persons were Christians, by Reason of
their external Calling, and professed Compliance with the Call; but had formed
a positive Judgment concerning EVERY ONE OF THEM SINGLY, that they were real
Saints. Here the Expression is plainly used as a very strong one; as implying
much more than esteeming so great a Multitude, when taken in the Gross to be
generally true Saints, and with a manifest Design to carry the same Idea in the
Mind of the Reader as was before mentioned. See another like ^^^^ance P. 62. c.

V. However, my Opinion is not represented bad enough yet; but to make it
appear still worse, Mr. W. is bold to strain his Representation of it to that
Height, as to suggest that what I insist on, is a Certainty of others
Regeneration: though this be so diverse from what I had largely explained in
stating the Question, and plainly expressed in other Parts of my Book, In
stating the Question, P. 5. b. I explained the requisite Visibility, to be some
outward Manifestation, that ordinarily renders the Thing probable. To the like
Purpose, is what I say in P. 10. e. and P. 11. a. b. e. and P. 12. a. b. e. And
in P. 106. e. I say expressly, Not a Certainty, but a Profession and Visibility
of these Things, must be the Rule of the Church's Proceeding.
and also inconsistent with his own Representations in other Places. For if
what I insist on be a Probability that may fail once in ten Times, as he says
it is, P. 63. a. then it is not a Certainty that I insist on; as he suggests,
P. 141. a. -- Speaking of the evil Consequences of my Opinion, he says, The
Notion of Men's being able and fit to determine positively the Condition of
other Men, or the Certainty of their gracious Estate, has a direct Tendency to
deceive the Souls of Men. So again in P. 69. And he suggests, that I require
more than moral Evidence, in P. 6. c. and P. 139. d.

VI. Mr. W. represents Me as insisting on some Way of judging the State of such
as are admitted to Communion, by their inward and spiritual Experiences,
diverse from judging by their Profession and Behavior. So, P. 7. b. If their
outward Profession and Behavior be the Ground of this Judgment, then it is not
the inward Experience of the Heart. " -- P. 55. b. Which Judgment must be
founded on something beyond and beside their external Calling, and visible
Profession to comply with it, and to be separated for God: And therefore this
Judgment must be founded, either upon Revelation, or a personal Acquaintance
with their Experiences. etc. In like Manner he is abundant, from one End of his
Book to the other, in representing as though I insisted on judging of Men by
their inward and spiritual Experiences, in some peculiar Manner. Which is
something surprising, since there is not so much as a Word said about relating,
or giving an Account of Experiences, or what is commonly so called, as a Term
of Communion. Mr. W. (P. 6. a.) pretends to quote two Passages of mine, as an
Evidence, that this is what I insist on. One is from the 5th Page of my Book.
It Is true, I there say thus, It is a Visibility to the Eye of the public
Charity, and not a private Judgment, that gives a Person a Right to be
received* as a visible Saint by the Public. And I there say, A public and
serious Profession of the great and main Things wherein the Essence of true
Religion or Godliness consists, together with an honest Character, an agreeable
Conversation, and good Understanding of the Doctrines of Christianity, and
particularly those Doctrines that teach the grand Condition of Salvation, and
the Nature of true saving Religion; this justly recommends Persons to the good
Opinion of the public; whatever Suspicions and Fears any particular Person,
either the Minister, or some other, may entertain, from what He in particular
has observed; perhaps the Manner of his expressing Himself in giving an Account
of his Experiences, or an Obscurity in the Order and Method of his Experiences,
etc. -- But the Words don't imply, it may be demanded of the Candidate, that he
should give an Account of his Experiences to the Minister, or any Body else, as
the Term of his Admission into the Church; nor had I Respect to any such Thing*
But I knew it was the Manner in many Places for those who hoped they were godly
Persons, to converse with their Neighbors, and especially with their Minister,
about their Experiences; whether it was required of them in Order to their
coming into the Church, or no; and particularly, I was sensible, that this was
the Manner at Northampton, for whose Sake especially I wrote; and I supposed it
the Way of many Ministers, and People, to judge of others State, openly and
publicly, by the Order and Method of their Experiences, or the Manner of their
relating them. But this I condemn in the very Passage that Mr. W. quotes; and
very much condemn, in other Writings of mine which have been published; and
have ever loudly condemned, and born my Testimony against.

There is one Passage more, which Mr. W. adds to the preceding, and fathers on
me, to prove that I require an Account of Experiences in order to Admission;
pretending to rehearse my Words, with Marks of Quotation, saying as follows,
(P. 6. a.) And as he further explains himself elsewhere; The proper Visibility
which the Public is to have of a Man's being a Saint, must be on some Account
of his Experience of those Doctrines which teach the Nature of true saving
Religion. I have made long and diligent Search for such a Passage in my
Writings, but cannot find it. Mr. W. says, I thus explain my self elsewhere:
But I wish he had mentioned in what Place.

If there be such a Sentence in some of my Writings (as I suppose there is not)
it will serve little to Mr. Williams's Purpose. -- If we take the Word
Experience according to the common Acceptance of it in the English Language,
viz. a Person's perceiving or knowing any Thing by Trial or Experiment, or by
immediate Sensation or Consciousness within himself: In this Sense, I own, it
may from what I say in my Book be inferred, that a Man's Profession of his
Experience should be required as a Term of Communion: And so it may be as
justly and as plainly inferred, that Mr. W. himself insists on a Profession of
Experience as a Term of Communion; Experience of a deep Conviction of a Man's
undone State without Christ; Experience of a Persuasion of his Judgment and
Conscience, that there is no other Way of Salvation; Experience of unfeigned
Desires to be brought to the Terms of the Covenant: For such Things as these,
he says, must be professed: So P. 75. d. e. and in innumerable other Places.
There is no such Thing possible as a Man's professing any Thing within himself
or belonging to his own Mind, either good or bad, either common or saving,
unless it be something that he finds, or (which is the same Thing) experiences,
within himself.

I know, the Word Experience is used by many in a Sort of peculiar Sense, for
the particular Order and Method of what passes within the Mind and Heart in
Conversion. And in this Sense, Mr. W. knows, I disclaim the Notion of making
Experiences a Term of Communion. I say, he knows it, because (in P. 6, a.) he
quotes and rehearses the very Words wherein I do expressly disclaim it. And I am
very large and particular in testifying against it in my Book on Religious
Affections: A Book, I have good Reason to think Mr. W. has seen and read,
having been thus informed by a Man of his own Principles, that had it from his
Mouth. There, in P. 300. e. and 301. a. I say as follows: In order to Persons
making a proper Profession of Christianity, such as the Scripture directs to,
and such as the Followers of Christ should require in Order to the Acceptance
of the Professors with full Charity, as of their Society, it is not necessary
they should give an Account of the particular Steps and Method, by which the
Holy Spirit, sensibly to them, wrought, and bro't about those great essential
Things of Christianity in their Hearts. There is no Footstep in the Scripture
of any such Way of the Apostles, or primitive Ministers and Christians
requiring any such Relation in order to their receiving and treating others as
their Christian Brethren, to all Intents and Purposes; or of their first
examining them concerning the particular Method and Order of their Experiences.
They required of them a Profession of the Things wrought; but no Account of the
Manner of working was required of them. Nor is there the least Shadow in the
Scripture of any such Custom in the Church of God, from Adam to the Death of
the Apostle John. To the same Purpose again I express my self in P. 302. d. And
in the Preface to the Book that Mr. W. writes against, I make particular
mention of this Book on Religious Affections, wherein these Things are said;
and there declare expressly, that when I wrote that Book, I was of the same Mind
concerning the Qualifications of Communicants that I am of now. -- But,

VII. To make my Scheme still more obnoxious and odious, Mr. W. once and again
insinuates, that I insist on an Account of such inward FEELINGS, as are by Men
supposed to be the certain discriminating Marks of Grace (So P. 7. b. and 141.
e.) though I never once used the Phrase any where in my Book. I said not a Word
about inward Feelings, from one End of it to the other: Nor is any inward
Feeling at all more implied in my Scheme, than in his. But however, Mr. W. knew
that these Phrases, Experiences and inward Feelings, were become odious of late
to a great Part of the Country; and especially the latter of them, since Mr.
Whitefield used it so much: And he well knew, that to tack these Phrases to my
Scheme, and to suggest to his Readers that these were the Things I professed to
insist on, would tend to render me and my Scheme contemptible. If he says, though
I use not that Phrase, yet the Things I insist on, are such as are inwardly
felt; such as saving Repentance, Faith, etc. I answer, These Things are no more
inward Feelings, than the Things he himself insists on; such as a deep
Conviction of a Man's undone State, unfeigned fervent Desires after Christ, a
fixed Resolution for Christ, Engagedness for Heaven, etc.

VIII. Mr. Williams abundantly, in almost all Parts of his Book, represents my
Principles to be such as suppose Men to be the SEARCHERS of others Hearts. For
which I have given no other Ground, than only supposing that some such
Qualifications are necessary in Order to Communion, which have their Seat in
the Heart, and so not to be intuitively seen by others; and that such
Qualifications must, by Profession and Practice, be made so visible or credible
to others, that others may rationally judge they are there. And Mr. W. supposes
the same Thing as much as I. In P. 111. c. he expressly speaks of the
Qualifications necessary to Communion, as being in the Heart, and not possible
to be known any other way than by their being seen there: and also often
allows, that these Qualifications must be exhibited, and made visible, by a
credible Profession, and answerable Practice: yea, He goes further, He even
supposes that those who admit them to Sacraments, ought to be satisfied by
their Profession, that they really have these Qualifications. Thus he says, P.
54. c. The Baptizer ought to be satisfied by a Person's Profession, that he
really believes the Gospel, and that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the
Savior.

IX. Mr. W. is not contented with all these Representations of my Scheme, but
will have it appear more absurd and monstrous still; and therefore represents
me as maintaining, that it is not the visible Profession of Experiences, that I
suppose the Ground of the Church's Judgment; but these Experiences and inward
Feelings Themselves, by having the Heart turned inside out, and viewing them
immediately in the Heart itself, and judging upon the next and immediate
Actings of the Heart. -- Here, I only desire the Reader to read down Mr. W --
ms's 7th Page, and make his own Reflections.

X. Whereas, in P. 16. of my Book, I observed it to be the Opinion of some,
that, Although the Members of the visible Church are Saints in Profession and
Visibility, and in the Acceptance of others, yet this is not with Reference to
saving Holiness, but to quite another Sort of Saintship, viz. moral Sincerity;
and that this is the real Saintship, Discipleship, and Godliness, that is
professed and visible in Them, etc. Mr. W. (P. 4, 5.) says, He don't remember
that he ever heard of this, or that any Body though it of it, before he saw it in
my Book; and represents it as a poor Man of Straw, of my own framing: and he
insists upon it, that it is allowed on all Hands, that the Visibility must be
with Reference to saving Holiness.

I will not say, that Mr. W. knew it to be a false Representation which he here
makes: But this I will say, that he ought to have been better informed, before
he had thus publicly ridiculed this as a Fiction of mine; especially
considering the Opportunities and Advantages he has had to know otherwise: This
being the Notion that had been (as was before observed) so loudly and publicly
insisted on, for more than two Years, by the People of Northampton, and by the
neighboring Ministers, and those of them that were Mr. W -- ms's near
Relatives; as he has had abundant Opportunities to be fully informed, having
withal had great Inducements to inquire. Besides, that this has been the
universal Opinion of all that Part of the Country (who though it Themselves Mr.
Stoddard's Followers) for more than 20 Years, is a Fact as notorious, as that
the People there generally believe Mr. Stoddard's Doctrine of the Necessity of
a Work of Conversion in order to get to Heaven. -- And this is the Opinion
professedly maintained in a Pamphlet published in Boston (Anno 1741) Entitled,
A Right to the Lord's Supper considered: A Piece which has long been well known
among Mr. W -- ms's nearest Relatives, and in good Repute with them; as I have
had Occasion to observe. This Pamphlet insists expressly and abundantly, that
moral Sincerity is the REAL Discipleship and Holiness, with Respect to which
visible Christians are called Disciples and Saints, in Scripture. Particularly
see Pages 9, 10, 13, and 14. -- And which is more strange yet, Mr. BLAKE, the
great Author Mr. W. makes so much Use of, and in a Book which I know he has
long been the Possessor of, speaks much of a Profession of Religion that has
Respect only to a dogmatical, historical Faith, a common Faith, a Faith true
indeed (as he says) in its Kind, but short of that which is justifying and
saving, and a Profession which goes no further, as that which entitles to
sealing Ordinances. Thus he does expressly. See Blake on the Covenant, P. 241,
244, 245. -- The same Author again and again distinguishes between justifying
Faith and Faith of Profession; as in P. 284, 285, 286. -- And which is more
than all this, Mr. W. (as will appear in the Sequel) abundantly contends for
the same Thing himself, though against himself, and although he charges me in P.
35. d. with a great Misrepresentation, in supposing that according to the
Scheme of my Opposers, the Profession required in those that are admitted,
don't imply a Pretense to any Thing more than moral Sincerity and common Grace.

PART II. An Examination of Mr. Williams's SCHEME, in the various Parts of it.
SECTION I. Mr. Williams's Concessions.
MR. W. allows, that, in Order to a Man's coming to Sacraments, He ought
solemnly to profess and declare, that he is really and heartily convinced of
the divine Truth of the Gospel, (P. 30. c. P. 36. a. P. 32. c. P. 84. a.) That
he does sincerely, and with all his Heart believe the Gospel, When I first
proposed to a certain Candidate for Communion at Northampton, the publicly
making this Profession, viz. That he believed the Truth of the Gospel with all
his Heart, many of the People cried out, that I insisted on what no Saint on
Earth could profess, and that this amounted to a Profession of absolute
Perfection. Hence many Reports spread about the Country, that I insisted on
Perfection as a Term of Communion.
(P. 49. e.) And that they which admit him, ought to be satisfied he really
believes the Gospel, that Jesus is the Son of God, the Savior (P. 54. c.) That
he should profess and declare he believes in Christ, and that the Gospel is
indeed the Revelation of God. (P. 5. c.) He allows, that none ought to be
admitted, but such as openly profess and declare an hearty Consent to the
Covenant of Grace, and Compliance with the Call of the Gospel, and Submission
to the Proposals of it, and Satisfaction with that Device for our Salvation
that is revealed in the Gospel, and with the Offer which God makes of himself
to be our God in Christ Jesus, Mr. W. cites Mr Guthrie (Pref. P. 4. c. e.) as
on his Side, when he speaks of such a Profession, as that which is to be made.
and that they fall in with the Terms of Salvation propos^d in the Gospel, and
renounce all other Ways. (P. 5. c. P. 8. a. P. 9. b. c. P. 11. a. P. 18. e. P.
55. a P. 32. c.) He plainly supposes it not to be lawful for them that are
Lukewarm in Religion, or those that serve two Masters, to come to Sacraments.
(P. 32. b. P. 35. d. e. P. 36. c.) He supposes, that there must be a real
Determination of a Man's Judgment and Affection for the Word of God. (P. 53.
c.) That there ought to be a Profession of Subjection to Christ with all the
Heart, (P. 10. d.) and of a Devotedness to the Service of God (P. 49. d.) And a
professed giving up themselves to Christ, to be taught, ruled, and led by him
in the Gospel-Way to Salvation; (P. 31. e. and 32. a.) And that Communicants
ought to declare, that they do, with all their Hearts, cast themselves upon the
Mercy of God, to help them to keep Covenant; (P. 125. b.) That they ought to
profess a proper Respect to Christ in their Hearts, as well as a true Notion of
Him in their Heads; (P. 31. d) That they must make a Profession that imports a
Pretense of real Friendship to Christ, and Love to God above the World. (P. 36.
c.) That none ought to be admitted but visible Saints, and that this Visibility
must be such as to a Judgment of rational Charity makes them appear as real
Saints, wise Virgins, and endowed with Gospel Holiness; (P. 5. a. b. P. 41. e.
P. 42. b. P. 139. a. d. P. 14. a.) That there should be a charitable
Presumption, that the Spirit of God has taken hold of them, and turned their
Hearts to God. (P. 52. c.) That they should be such Persons as are in the Eye
of a Christian Judgment truly gracious Persons, supposed and believed in
Charity to be those to whom God has given saving Repentance, and an
Heart-purifying Faith; (P. 65. e. and P. 47. b. c.) Such as have the moral
Image of Christ appearing in them, or supposed to be in them, and are to be
loved on that Account. (P. 68. c.) He allows, that there ought to be some
Apprehension, some Judgment of the Mind, that they are Christians and Saints,
and have the moral Image of God in them. By this it appears, when Mr. W. speaks
of the Church's rational Judgment that Persons have real Holiness, and the
like, He don't mean merely a treating them as such, in public Administrations,
and external Conduct: For here he speaks not of the external Conduct, but of
the Apprehension of the Understanding, and Judgment of the Mind; and this as
the Foundation of the Affection of the Heart.
(P. 68. c. d. e. P. 69. a. and 71. d.) He allows, that they must be taken into
the Church under a Notion of their being godly, and with Respect to such a
Character appearing on them: And very often insists, that they themselves must
make such a Pretense. (P. 55. c. d. e. Mr. W -- ms's Words (P. 55. d. e.) are
pretty remarkable: The Reader (says he) will judge, whether the Manner of Mr.
Edwards's treating the Question, and representing the Opinion of Mr. Stoddard
and others, in the Words I have quoted above, be not unaccountable; though this
is neither the first nor the last Time of his treating the Matter in such a
Manner: As if Mr. Stoddard and his Adherents supposed Persons were to be
admitted without any Notion of their being godly, or any Respect to such a
Character, appearing on them; and that they themselves are without such a
Pretense. -- Whereas, Mr. Stoddard expressly maintains, that Men may be duly
qualified, and fit Matter for Church Membership, without saving Grace. (
Appeal, P. 15, 16.) And that they may and ought to come, though they know
themselves to be in a natural Condition. (Doct. of instituted Churches, P. 21.
See also his Sermon on the Subject, P. 13.) And according to Mr. Stoddard,
Communicants are not so much as supposed godly Persons. This ( Appeal P. 43) He
says expressly, That by the Institution Communicants at the Lord's Supper are
not supposed to be real Saints. And also asserts ( Appeal P. 76.) That we are
not obliged to believe visible Saints to be real Saints. And it seems by what
he says in his Appeal (P. 17*) the Church may admit Persons to Communion, when
at the same Time they are aware that they are Hypocrites. For there, in Answer
to Dr. Mather, who had cited certain Texts to prove, that when Hypocrites do
come into the Church, they come in unawares; He says, But neither of the Places
he cites prove that all Hypocrites come in unawares. And in the next Page he
says, The Discovery of Men's Hypocrisy is not the Reason of their being cast
out. Still evidently on the same Foundation, that some known Hypocrites are fit
to be admitted; for he says, (P. 15. d.) Such as being admitted may not be cast
out, are fit to be admitted. And these Things are agreeable to what I know Mr.
Stoddard's Church and Congregation have universally supposed to be his constant
Doctrine and Practice among them. Thus it was, without one dissenting Voice
among them, during the 24 Years that I lived with them. And now the Reader is
desired to judge, as Mr. W. would have him, Whether my representing it to be
the Opinion of Mr. S. and his Adherents, that Persons might be admitted into
the Church without any Notion of their being godly, or any Respect to such a
Character appearing on Them, be unaccountable. -- By these Things it is
evident, Mr. S -- d's Scheme was far from being what Mr. W. represents it to
be, and pretends to maintain as his. And if the Question he had to controvert
with me, were Mr. S -- d's Question, as he asserts; yet he greatly mistakes the
true State of the Question, though that be given as the Title of his Book.
P. 132. a. c. d. e. P. 136. d. P. 143. c. So he allows, that they must not
only be endowed with Christian Piety in Appearance; but that they must be so in
Profession. (P. 3. a. P. 41. e. P. 44. d.) That they make a Show of being wise
Virgins by the Nature and Purport of their Profession. (P. 42. b.) And he
insists with great Strenuousness, over and over, upon its being their Scheme,
That they ought to make a Profession of real Saintship. (P 132. a. c. d.) Yea,
he holds, that there must be not only some Visibility and Profession of real
Piety, but moral Evidence of it. (P. 139. d.) He often uses Notes of
Distinction, distinguishing between moral Sincerity, and real Piety; and
insists much upon it as belonging to their Scheme; that there must be a
Visibility of the latter, as thus distinguished from the former. So, he rejects
with great Contempt any Suggestion of it is being the Scheme of my Opposers,
that moral Sincerity is that Saintship, which is to be professed and made
visible; and in Distinction from this, he asserts, that it is real Holiness.
(P. 4. d. e. and P. 5. a. b.) And again (P. 35. c.) he uses a Note of
Distinction, and insists that the Opposers of my Opinion hold, that
Communicants must make a Profession of something (...) common Grace and moral
Sincerity. And again (P. 1^ a. d) he uses Notes of Distinction or
Discrimination, and says, that they must exhibit a credible Profession of
Gospel-Holiness, and NOT MERELY of moral Sincerity; and says, It is NOT the
Visibility of moral Sincerity, BUT the moral Evidence of Gospel-Sincerity,
which God's Word makes the Rule of judging. -- And as he holds, that
Communicants must profess Gospel-Holiness, so he seems to suppose that these
Professors must judge this of themselves; several Things He says, seem plainly
to imply it. This appears evidently implied in that Interrogation put by Mr W.
(P. 35. e.) Mr. S. rightly supposes all visible Saints who are not truly pious,
to be Hypocrites; and the Scripture supposes and calls them so too: But will it
therefore follow, that all Hypocrites know they are so? And He in Effect
asserts, that Men should look at such a Qualification, as sanctifying Grace, in
themselves, and enquire whether they have it, or no, in Order to determine
whether they should present themselves to Gospel Ordinances: for he greatly
finds Fault with me for suggesting, as if those of a different Opinion from me
supposed, that Persons have no Manner of Need to look at any such Qualification
in themselves, or at all inquire, whether they have it, in order to present
themselves to Sacraments. He refers to that Passage in my Book (P. 55. d.) I
cannot conceive what should move Philip to utter those Words, or what he should
aim at in them, if he at the same Time supposed that the Eunuch had no Manner
of Need to look at any such Qualification in himself, or at all to inquire
whether he had such a Faith, or no, in order to determine whether he MIGHT
present himself as the Subject of Baptism. It Is plain, the Qualification I have
Respect to, is Grace, or saving Faith. And so Mr. W. himself understands me; as
appears by his Reflections, P. 49. c. d. e. Where, after quoting this Passage,
he consigns me over to another Judgment, for suggesting that my Opposers hold
what I had there expressed, and for " representing the Matter, as if they
looked on it as no Matter whether a Person coming to Gospel Ordinances had any
GRACE or no, and that He had no Manner of Need to inquire any Thing about his
Sincerity." Now let all that have been acquainted with the Controversy between
Me and my People at Northampton, consider these Things, which Mr. W. earnestly
insists do belong to his Scheme; and judge whether they be agreeable to the
Scheme which my Opposers there have so vehemently and long contended for; yea,
whether they are not very opposite to it; or whether in these Things Mr. W. has
not entirely yielded up, yea, vehemently asserted, the chief Things concerning
which they contested with Me; and so, whether He has at all helped their Cause
by writing his Book, or rather, on the contrary, has fought against them.


SECTION II. Some of the plain Consequences of the foregoing Concessions of Mr.
WILLIAMS.
1. IF it be as Mr. W. says, that The Church ought to admit none to their holy
Communion, in special Ordinances, but visible Saints, and that this Visibility
must be such as to a Judgment of rational Charity, makes 'em appear as real
Saints, and those that are admitted must be such as profess real Saintship,
Gospel-Holiness, in Distinction from moral Sincerity; then the whole of my
first Argument, from the Nature of a Visibility and Profession of Christianity,
is allowed by him, in both Premises, and Consequence. And indeed Mr. W. don't
only do thus consequentially, but He is express in it. In P. 4. c. taking
Notice of this Argument, he says, The Sense and Force of it wholly lies in this
Compass; a visible Saint is one that to the View, Appearance and Judgment of
the Church, is a real Saint; and since none but visible Saints are to be
admitted by the Church, therefore none are to be admitted but such as appear to
the View and Judgment of the Church to be real Saints. But these Things, which
Mr. W. Himself allows as the Sum of the Argument, both Premises and
Consequence, are expressly allowed by Him in what there follows.

2. If there must be a Visibility and Profession of real Piety, in Distinction
from moral Sincerity, so that it can be truly said, as Mr. W. says with
discretive Terms, and Notes of Discrimination, that NOT MERELY the one must be
professed, BUT the other; and that MORE than moral Sincerity must be professed,
etc. -- Then it follows (or rather it is the same Thing) that Men must profess
Religion with some Discrimination, or Marks of Difference in their Words,
distinguishing what is professed from moral Sincerity; contrary to what Mr. W.
strenuously and frequently asserts. (P. 6. c. d. and P. 9. c. and many other
Places) For if the Profession is made in Words that signify no Difference, then
nothing different is signified or professed by those Words; and so nothing
MORE; contrary to what Mr. W. also asserts.

3. If it be as Mr. W. says, that the Scripture has determined none ought to be
admitted, but such as make an open Profession and Declaration of an hearty
Consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, such as covenant with God with
their whole Hearts, and profess Gospel-Holiness: Then the whole of my second
Argument, concerning explicit Covenanting with God, is expressly allowed, in
both Premises and Consequence; Though Mr. W. seems at the same Time, with so much
Labor and Earnestness, to militate against it. For the Premises are, that all
ought openly and explicitly to own God's Covenant, or consent to the Terms of
it: This is the same Thing that he asserts, as above. And the Consequence, or
Thing which I inferred from it, was, that all that are admitted ought to make a
Profession of real Godliness: and this also he expressly and often allows.

4. Since it is supposed, that in order to Admission, Men ought to profess real
Friendship to Christ, and Love to Him above the World, and to profess a proper
Respect to Christ in their Hearts, as well as a true Notion of Him in their
Heads; and that they ought to profess Gospel-Holiness, and not merely moral
Sincerity: Therefore the whole of what belongs to my third Argument, is
allowed, both Premises and Consequence. The Premises were, that the Nature of
Things affords as much Reason for professing a proper Respect to Christ in the
Heart, as a true Notion of Him in the Head: This he allows. What I endeavored
to infer from hence, was, that therefore Men ought to profess true Piety, and
not only moral Sincerity: and this is also allowed by him.

5. It appears, that the whole of my fourth Argument, both Premises and
Consequence, is allowed. The Premises were that the Scripture reckons all
visible Saints who are not truly pious, to be Hypocrites: This Mr W. expressly
allows. (P. 25. e.) The Consequence I inferred, was, that visible Saints are
such as make a Profession of true Godliness, and not only moral Sincerity: This
also is very fully allowed by him. (P. 139. a.)

6. Since it is supposed, that when Christ's Rules are attended, they that come
to Sacraments, don't know themselves to be Hypocrites, but must look at such a
Qualification in themselves, as Grace, and make such a Pretense, and profess
Gospel Holiness; Therefore all is in Effect allowed, that I endeavored from
the latter Part of the 7th Chapter of Matthew, which was to show, that
professing Christians in general, all those that said, Lord, Lord, both those
that built on the Sand, and those that built on a Rock, were such as imagined
themselves to have a saving Interest in Christ, and pretended to be his real
Disciples, and made such a Profession. The same was what I endeavored to show
from the Parable of the ten Virgins. And therefore All that I argued from
thence is in like Manner allowed.

7. Hence, in vain is all the Opposition Mr. W. makes to what I allege from
the Acts of the Apostles, from Chap. II. from the Story of the Eunuch, and
other Parts of that Book, concerning the Manner and Circumstances of the
Admission of Members into the primitive Christian Church, and the Profession
they made; seeing he grants the main Point I endeavored to prove by it, viz.
That they did make, and all adult Persons that are admitted into the Church,
must make, a Profession of something MORE than moral Sincerity, even
Gospel-Holiness.

8. Hence, in vain is all he says in Opposition to my eighth Argument, taken
from the Manner of the Apostles treating and addressing the primitive Churches
in their Epistles; since he does either expressly or virtually grant each of
those three Things, which he himself reckons up as the Sum of what I intend
under that Argument, viz. (1.) That the Apostles speak to the Churches, and of
them, as supposing and judging them to be gracious Persons. (2.) That the
Members of these Churches had such an Opinion of Themselves. (3.) That they had
this Judgment one of another. Mr. W. allows all these. He abundantly allows and
asserts, that the Members of Churches are such as (...) supposed and judged,
and rationally judged, to be gracious Persons, by those that admit them; that
they are taken in under that Notion, and from Respect to such a Character
appearing on them; and that they are rationally judged to be so by their
Fellow Christians; and that they must look at such a Character in themselves,
and must make such a Pretense.

9. Since Mr. W. abundantly allows, that visible Christians, must be believed
in Charity to be truly pious; and that they are such as have the moral Image of
Christ appearing in them, and supposed to be in them, and that they are to be
loved on that Account; Therefore very impertinent and inconsistent is the
Opposition he makes to my ninth Argument, from the Nature of that brotherly
Love required toward all visible Christians; which was to show, that visible
Christians by the Rule of Christ were to be apprehended to be true Christians.

10. In like Manner, vain and to no Purpose is the Opposition He makes to my
tenth Argument, from the Nature of Sacramental Actions, supposed in their
Intent and Signification to be a solemn Profession of those Things wherein real
Piety consists, viz. a cordial Acceptance of Christ and his Benefits; from
thence arguing, that a Profession of these Things is necessary; and so
inferring, that those who perform these Actions, should suppose themselves
truly to accept of Christ: Since both these Things are in Effect granted, that
Communicants must judge that they have sanctifying Grace, and also that they
must profess Gospel-Holiness, a Compliance with the Call of the Gospel, and
falling in with the Terms of Salvation proposed, etc.

11. In vain also is the Opposition he makes to my eleventh Argument, from 1
COR. 11.28. Let a Man examine himself; and so let him eat -- Inferring from
thence, that a Man ought to inquire concerning such a Qualification in himself,
as Grace, in order to know whether he may come to the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper. Since Mr. W. himself plainly supposes this very Thing, That Men ought
to look at such a Qualification in Themselves, as Grace, and to inquire whether
they have it, in order to determine whether they may present themselves to
Christian Sacraments.

12. If it be true, according to Mr. W -- ms's Representation of his own
Scheme, That Persons may not be admitted to Sacraments, but under a Notion of
their being truly godly, and with Respect to such a Character appearing on
them; And that Persons themselves had need to look at such a Qualification in
Themselves, and inquire whether they have it, in order to determine whether
they may come to Sacraments; it must be because if they find they have it not,
they may not come, or (which is the same Thing) it is not lawful for 'em to
come. For it would be ridiculous to say that others must look at such a
Qualification in them, and must not admit them but from Respect to such a
Character on them; and that they Themselves also must look at such a
Qualification in themselves, and inquire whether they have it in order to
determine whether they MAY come: when yet they may come whether they have it or
no, and have as much of a lawful Right without it as with it. So that Mr. W.
has in Effect determined against Himself the grand Point, which he Himself
insists on, as the Point in Dispute, according to the true State of the
Question. And therefore,

13. It follows from the foregoing Concessions, that Mr. W. is inconsistent
with Himself in all his Arguings that Men may come to Sacraments without such a
Qualification or Character as that of true Piety, Because God has given no
certain Rule by which Sacraments may be restrained to such; See Mr. W -- ms's
Book. P. 106. etc.
or Because that otherwise none might come but those that know they have such a
Character; Ibid. P. 108, etc.
or Because the contrary Doctrine tends to bring Saints into great Perplexities
in their Attendance on Sacraments; P. 120, etc.
or from The Lawfulness of unregenerate Men's attending other Duties. P. 123,
etc.
If there be any Force in this Arguing from other Duties to an Attendance on
Sacraments, then the Argument will infer, that Men must not be admitted to
other Duties, but under the Notion of their being truly godly, and from Respect
to such a Character appearing on them, etc. -- as Mr. W. insists with Regard to
Christian Sacraments. And so if these Things which Mr. W. concedes and asserts,
are true, in vain is all arguing from the like Tendency in Sacraments to
convert Men, as in other Duties; P. 126, etc.
And in vain is it to argue the Lawfulness of Men's coming without this
Character, from their Obligation to perform external Covenant-Duties, P. 128,
etc.
and to carry themselves like Saints; P. 131,
And in vain is all arguing from the pretended bad Consequences of the contrary
Doctrine. P. 131, etc.


14. The Opposition Mr. W. makes to my Argument from Isai. LVI. especially
those Words, v. 5, 6. The Sons of the Stranger that join themselves to the
Lord, to love the Lord, and be his Servants -- will I bring into my holy
Mountain -- to prove that none have a Right in the Sight of God to the
Privileges of the Christian Church, but those that love God, and are truly
pious; I say, the Opposition Mr. W. makes to this Argument is frivolous, since
he in Effect grants the same Thing (as above) yea, does expressly allow, that
they must make Pretenses of being God's real Friends, and loving God more than
the World. P. 36. c.

15. If it be true, as Mr. W. allows and abundantly asserts, That in Order to
Persons being admitted to holy Communion in special Ordinances, the Scripture
has determined, that there must be an open Profession and Declaration of a
PERSON'S believing, or of a personal believing, in Christ (which is the same
Thing) and of an hearty Consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, See how
Mr. W. expresses himself. P. 5. b, c.
and that therein must be a Profession of Gospel-Holiness; then avails Nothing
to the contrary that great Argument of his, taken from the State of baptized
Infants, That they are already in the Church, and in Covenant, and are Members
in complete Standing, etc. and that therefore no owning the Covenant or
professing Godliness can be demanded of 'em: See especially, P. 3.
And in vain is all that he has said to prove this in his Discourse on the
Wheat and Tares. P. 99, 100.


16. To what Purpose is it, to object from the Parable now mentioned, That the
Church ought not to go about to make a Distinction between Wheat and Tares, in
their Admission of Members, by pretending to discern the Difference? When it is
so apparent, that there is no Pretense to any proper Discerning in the Case,
nor any other Distinction pleaded, than what is made by a Judgment of Charity:
And when according to Mr. W -- ms's own Scheme, Churches are obliged to make a
Distinction, in the rational Judgment they pass, and to admit none, but what
they judge to be true Saints; so that those who are Wheat, in the Eye of their
Judgment, only are to be admitted, and such as are Tares, in the Eye of their
Judgment, are to be excluded.

17. What is said by Mr. W. of the visible Church's being the School of Christ,
and Men's being admitted into it as Disciples or Scholars, some of them in
Order to attain Grace (P. 81. and 83.) is nothing to the Purpose, if it be as
Mr. W. allows and asserts, that in Order to be admitted into this School, they
must be supposed, in a reasonable Judgment, to have this Attainment already,
and make a Pretense to it, and a solemn Profession of it, and must give moral
Evidence that they have it, and must be admitted into the School under no other
Notion than that of their being already possessed of it.

18. If it be as Mr. W. expressly says, That Persons are not visible Saints
without a credible Profession, Visibility and moral Evidence, not only of moral
Sincerity, but true Holiness (P. 139.) Then all is wholly insignificant and
vain, that is said to prove, that the Children of Israel were visible Saints
without any Evidence of such Holiness, by Reason of the Idolatry and gross and
open Wickedness of vast Multitudes of 'em, who are yet called God's People: And
so likewise, all that is said to prove, that the Members of the primitive
Christian Church had no other Visibility of Saintship than they, because they
are grafted into the same Olive: And also all that Mr. W. has said to prove,
that many of the Members of the primitive Churches were as grossly wicked as
they.

19. Since according to Mr. W. the Terms of Admission to the Jewish Ordinances,
were the same as to Christian Ordinances, the like Profession and the same
Visibility of Saintship required, and no other; as He strenuously asserts (P.
57. e. P. 61. e. and P. 65. c) it will therefore follow from his foregoing
Concessions and Assertions, That none were, by God's Appointment, to come to
the Passover, and to have their Children circumcised, but such as openly
professed and declared that they were convinced of the Truth of God's Word, and
believed it with all their Hearts; and professed a hearty Consent to the Terms
of the Covenant of Grace: such as covenanted with God with their whole Hearts,
and gave up all their Hearts and Lives to Christ; such as subjected themselves
to Christ with their whole Hearts, and gave up themselves to Him to be ruled,
taught and led by Him; such as with all their Hearts cast themselves on the
Mercy of God to enable them to keep Covenant; such as professed to love God
above the World, and professed more than common Faith and moral Sincerity, even
true Holiness, real Piety; and who gave moral Evidence, that they had such a
Qualification; and were received to the Passover, etc. under that Notion, and
with Respect to such a Character appearing in them, and apprehended to be in
them. -- And if these Things are so, what is become of the Argument from the
Passover and Circumcision, against the Necessity of the Qualifications I have
insisted on!

20. To what Purpose does Mr. W. insist (P. 98. a.) That we read not a Word in
Scripture about John the Baptist's making any Inquiry, whether the People he
baptized made a credible Profession of true Piety? when He himself insists,
that in Order to Admission to Christian Sacraments, Men must make a credible
Profession of true Piety. And why does He urge (P. 96. e. and P. 97.) That the
Profession the People made which John baptized, did not imply that they had
saving Repentance, but only an Engagement to repent, hereafter? when He himself
holds, that in Order to Admission to Sacraments, Men must profess something
more than common Grace, and not only promise it hereafter.

21. It makes nothing to any Point in Controversy between Mr. W. and Me,
whether Judas partook of the Lord's Supper or no, since according to Mr.
Williams's own forementioned Principles, as well as mine, he could not be
admitted there under any other Notion than that of being truly pious, and from
Respect to such a Character appearing on Him, and a credible Profession of
Gospel-Holiness; and since he might not lawfully come without some
Qualifications He had not, viz. Such a Friendship for Christ, as is above
Lukewarmness, and above serving two Masters, Christ and Mammon, and a giving up
all his Heart and Life to Christ, and a real Determination of his Judgment and
Affections for Christ's Word, etc.

22. If it be true, as Mr. W. allows, that Ministers and Churches ought not to
admit adult Persons to Sacraments, without a pious Character appearing on them,
and their professing and exhibiting moral Evidence of Gospel-Holiness, then no
good Argument can be brought against such a Way of Admission, from the Success
of Ministers in another Way, or in any Way whatsoever.

Besides these plain and obvious Consequences of Mr. W -- ms's Concessions,
some other Consequences will hereafter be observed under particular Heads.

Thus Mr. W. has not only abundantly given up the main Point in that
Controversy I have lately been engaged in, and the main Point which I have
written in Defense of; but he has in Effect given up every Point belonging to
the whole Controversy, every Thing material insisted on through that whole Book
which he undertakes to answer. He has established every Part of the Scheme I
have appeared in, and every particular Argument I have used to confirm it; and
answered, or overthrown every Argument which He brings, or pretends to support,
against it. And I should have no further Occasion to say any Thing in Reply to
Him, if He had not really, through great Part of his Performance, argued for
other Things, opposite to those that have been rehearsed, which He so
strenuously insists belong to his Scheme; which arguing may seem to support
another Scheme, though nothing akin to his, any otherwise than as his Scheme is
indeed a Mixture of many Schemes, one clashing with, and destroying another; as
will appear in the ensuing Part of this Reply.

SECTION III. The Inconsistence of the forementioned Concessions with the
Lawfulness of unsanctified Persons coming to the Lord's Supper, and their Right
to Sacraments in the Sight of God.
MR. W. in the Book under Consideration, which He entitles The true State of
the Question, insists upon it that the Question to be debated is the Question
Mr. Stoddard debated in his Dispute with Dr. Mather; in whose Scheme Mr. W.
declares himself to be. Mr. S. in his Dispute with Dr. Mather asserted, That it
was lawful for some unsanctified Men to come to the Lord's Supper, and that
they had a Right so to do in the Sight of God. And He declares that this was
the Point in Dispute between Him and Dr. Mather; as in Appeal, P. 20. That
which I am to show is, that some unsanctified Men have a Right before God to
the Lord's Supper. So Mr. Blake (who is so great an Author with Mr. W.) says in
his Treatise on the Covenant, P. 244. That Faith which is the Condition of the
Promise, is not the Condition in Foro dei [before God] of a Title to the Seal.
And there (in the next P.) He insists, that It Is a common Faith, that is
believed by Men not justified, which gives this Title. Agreeable to these Things
Mr. W. says (P. 132. d.) Some Men have a lawful Right to the Sacrament without
Sanctification. Which is the same Thing as to say, They have a Right in the
Sight of God. For if they have no Right in the Sight of God to come to the
Lord's Supper, then it is not lawful in the Sight of God that they should come.

Here I would lay down this as a Maxim;

There is some inward Religion and Virtue or other, some Sincerity of Heart,
either moral or saving, that is necessary to a Right to Sacraments in the Sight
of God, and in Order to a lawful Coming to 'em. No Man, I trust, will say, that
a Man has a Right in God's Sight, who has no Sort of Seriousness of Mind; and
that merely outward Sounds and Motions give Him this Right in God's Sight,
without Regard to any Property or Quality of Mind, and though this outward Show
is joined with the most horrid and resolved secret Irreligion and Wickedness.
Mr. W. in particular utterly disclaims such Doctrine as this, in the 3 and 4.
Pages of his Preface, and always maintains that in Order to Men's lawful
Coming, they must be morally sincere; as there in his Preface, and also in P.
25. d. e. P. 27. c. P. 30. d P. 35. e. P. 111. -- In P. 115. he supposes, that
if a Man makes a Doubt of his moral Sincerity, no Divine will advise Him to
come 'till he knows.

Having observed this, I now desire it may be considered, whether it be
reasonable to suppose, as Mr. W. does, that God would give Men that are without
Grace, a lawful Right to Sacraments, so that this Qualification it self should
be nothing necessary to a proper and rightful Claim to these Ordinances; and
yet that he would wholly forbid 'em to come, and others to admit 'em, without
their making some Pretense to it, and exhibiting moral Evidence that they have
it: That moral Sincerity is the Qualification which by God's own Appointment
invests Persons with a lawful Right to Sacraments, and that by his Institution
nothing more is requisite to a lawful Right; and yet that He has commanded them
not to come, nor others to allow 'em to come, without making a Profession of
something more than moral Sincerity, as Mr. W. says. Mr. W. supposes that God
requires us, before we admit Persons, to seek credible Evidence of true Piety,
and to see to it that we have reasonable Ground to believe they have it;
otherwise, not to allow 'em to come: and yet that God don't look on such a
Qualification requisite in it self, when all is done, and that He has given 'em
as true and lawful a Right to come without it, as with it. If God insists upon
it, as Mr. W. supposes, that Members should be admitted under no other Notion
than of their being truly godly, (...) from Respect to such a Character
appearing on them, is it not plain, that God looks on such a Character in
itself requisite, in Order to a Person's being a rightful Subject of such a
Privilege? If the Want of this Qualification don't in the least hinder a
Person's lawful Right to a Thing, on what Account can the Want of an Appearance
of it and Pretense to it, warrant and oblige others to hinder his taking
Possession of that Thing?

That we should be obliged to require a credible Pretense and Evidence of the
Being of a Thing, in Order to a certain Purpose, the Being of which is not
requisite to that Purpose; Or that some Evidence of a Thing should be
necessary, and yet withal no Necessity there should be any Foundation of such
Evidence, in the Being of the Thing to be made evident; That it should be
necessary for us to seek Evidence that something is true, and yet there be no
Need in Order to the intended Purpose, that there be any such Truth to be made
evident; -- If these Things are the Dictates of common Sense, I am willing all
that are possessed of any Degree of common Sense should be Judges.

If God has plainly revealed, that Gospel-Holiness is not necessary in it self
in Order to Men's lawful Right to Sacraments, as Mr. W. greatly insists, then
his Churches need not believe it to be necessary; yea, it is their Duty to
believe that it is not necessary, as it is their Duty to believe what God says to
be true. But yet Mr. W. holds, that God forbids his Churches to admit any to
Sacraments, unless they first have some rational Evidence obliging 'em to
believe that they have Gospel-Holiness. Now how palpable is the Inconsistence,
that we must be obliged to believe Men have a Qualification in Order to our
suffering them to come, which yet at the same Time we need not believe to be
necessary for 'em to have in Order to their Coming, but which God requires us
to believe to be unnecessary? Or in other Words, that God has made it necessary
for us to believe or suppose Men are truly pious, in Order to our lawfully
allowing them to take the Sacraments, and yet at the same Time requires us to
believe no such Thing as their being pious is necessary in Order to their
lawfully taking the Sacraments?

Mr. Stoddard (whose Principles Mr. W. in Preface P. 3. a. declares himself to
be fully established in) not only says, that some unsanctified Men have a Right
before God to the Lord's Supper, but strongly asserts, over and over, that they
are FIT to be admitted to the Lord's Supper, that they are DULY QUALIFIED, FIT
MATTER for Church Membership (Appeal. P. 15, 16.) and Mr. W. argues that such
Qualifications as some unsanctified Men have, are SUFFICIENT to bring 'em into
the Church. Now if it be so, what Business have we to demand Evidence or a
Pretense of any Thing further? What Case in the World can be mentioned parallel
to it, in any Nation or Age? Are there any such Kind of Laws or Regulations to
be found in any Society, Nation, City or Family, Civil Society, military or
academick, stated Society or occasional, that the Society should be required to
insist on some credible Pretense and Evidence of a certain Qualification, in
Order to Persons being admitted to the Privileges of the Society; prohibiting
their being admitted under any other Notion than as Persons possessed of that
Qualification, or without a Respect in their Admission to such a Character
appearing on them: and yet at the same Time, by the Laws of that very Society,
or the Head of it, that Qualification is not necessary; but Persons are
declared, without any such Qualification, to have a LAWFUL RIGHT, to be FIT
MATTER, to be DULY QUALIFIED, and to have SUFFICIENT Qualifications to be
admitted to these Privileges, without that Qualification?

I^ some Men have a Right in the Sight of God to Sacraments, without true
Piety, and are fit, and duly qualified without it, his Sight, and by his
Institution, and yet the Church must not admit them unless they are truly pious
in their Sight; then the Eye of Man must require higher Terms, than the
infinitely holy Eye of God himself; they must look for something that the Eye
of God looks not for, and which he judges them duly qualified without.

Mr. W. when speaking of the Evidence, on which He supposes the Church ought to
judge Persons to be real Saints, from Time to Time adds, that on such Evidence
The Church is obliged, in their external Carriage, to treat 'em as Saints, and
admit 'em to the external Privileges of the Church. So P. 9. d. P. 12. a. etc.
P. 13. a. b. and P. 14. c. and in other Places. But what does He mean by
treating them as Saints, in admitting them to the external Privileges of the
Church? If Sinners have as much of a lawful Right to these Privileges, as
Saints, then why is giving them these Privileges a treating them as Saints, any
more than as Sinners? If it belongs to an ignorant Child, to be admitted into
School, as much as one that is learned, then how is it treating Him as one that
is learned, to admit Him? Mr. VV. (P. 11. d. e.) giving a Reason why He that
professes Conviction of the Truth of the Gospel, etc. ought to be admitted to
Sacraments, says, Though this Conviction may be only by moral Evidence and common
Illumination, yet -- the Church know not but it is done on a divine and gracious
Discovery. But how can this be a Reason? What if the Church did know that it
was not on a gracious Discovery, if the Man has a Right in the Sight of God
without, and God has made it his Duty to come to Sacraments without? Surely the
Church have no Right to forbid Him to do that which God has given Him a Right
to do, and made it his Duty to do; as Mr. S. says, ( Doct. of Inst. Churches,
P. 20. b.) The Church may not hinder any Man from doing his Duty.

Therefore if this be Mr. S -- d's Question, Whether some unsanctified Men may
lawfully come to the Lord's Supper, and if this be the grand Point in Dispute,
the Thing which Mr. W. undertakes to maintain, as He often declares, then it is
most plainly evident, that in conceding and asserting those Things
forementioned, He does in Effect abudantly give up that which He himself
insists on as the grand Point in Controversy; and so makes void and vain all
his own Labor, and for himself effectually confutes all that He has written.

SECTION IV. Concerning Mr. W -- ms's Notion of a public Profession of
Godliness in Terms of an indeterminate and double Signification.
ACcording to Mr. W. the Profession of Godliness must be in Words not of a
determinate Meaning, or without any Discrimination in the Meaning of the Words,
obliging us to understand them of saving Religion. (P. 6. c. d.) They must make
an open Declaration of their sincere Consent to the Terms of the Covenant,
without any Discrimination, by which it can be determined, that the Consent
signified by the Words is a gracious Consent. (P. 9. c.) And without any Marks
of Difference, or any Distinction in the Words, whereby we can be enabled to
judge when they mean a saving Faith, and when a different one. (P. 10. c. e. P.
50. e. and 53. c.) That nothing should be expressed in the Words of the
Profession, but what some unsanctified Men may say, and speak true. (P. 47 e.)
He supposes, that the primitive Christians in the Profession they made of
Faith, did not speak only in that Sense, viz. so as to signify justifying
Faith; and that the Persons admitted did not understand that their Profession
was understood by those that admitted 'em, only in that Sense. (P. 58. c.)

Agreeable to this Notion of making a Profession in Words of indiscriminate
Meaning, and professing Godliness without Godliness, and yet speaking true, Mr.
W. (in P. 44. d. e.) allows, that Men must be by Profession godly Persons, in
order to come to the Sacrament; and yet in the next Sentence he denies, that
Christian Grace it self is requisite in the Person who is to come to the
Sacrament, or that the Dictate of his Conscience that he has it, is the Thing
that gives him a Right to offer himself. And agreeable to this last Clause, Mr.
Stoddard (of whose Opinion Mr. W. professes himself fully to be) expressly
maintains, that a Man may and ought to come to the Lord's Supper, though he knows
himself to be in a natural Condition. (Doc. of Inst. Churches. P. 21. See also
his Sermon on this Controversy. P. 13.) So that putting these Things together,
it must be agreeable to Mr. W -- ms's Scheme, that a Man has a Right to make a
Profession of Godliness, without having Godliness, and without any Dictate of
his Conscience that he has the Thing he professes, yea, though he knows he has it
not! And all this is made out by the Doctrine of professing Godliness in Words
that are ambiguous, and of two Meanings.

This Notion of a solemn Profession of Godliness, in Words of a double Meaning,
without any Marks of Difference in their Signification, is the great
Peculiarity of Mr W -- ms's Scheme; and in all his Controversy with me, this
appears to be the main Hinge, the Crisis of the whole Affair. Therefore I would
particularly consider it.

And for the greater Distinctness and Clearness, I will lay down certain
Positions, as of most evident Truth; observing some of their no less plain and
evident Consequences.

Position I. Words declare or profess nothing any otherwise than by their
Signification: For to declare or profess something by Words, is to signify
something by Words -- And therefore if nothing is signified by Words of a
pretended Profession, nothing is really professed; and if something be
professed, no more is professed than the Words of the Profession signify or
import.

Posi. II. If a Man goes about to declare or profess any particular Thing by
Words which have no distinguishing Signification, or without any Signs or
discriminating Marks by which Men may be enabled to distinguish what he mean,
his Words are vain to the pretended Purpose, and wholly fail of answering the
End of Words, which is to convey the Thing meant to others Understanding, or to
give Notice to others of the Thing that is to be supposed or understood The
Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. xiv.7. Even Things without Life, giving sound,
whether Pipe or Harp, except they give a Distinction in the Sounds, how shall
it be known what is piped or harped? -- Mr. Lock says, Hum. Und. Vol. 2. Edit.
7. P. 103. He that uses Words of any Language without DISTINCT Ideas in his
Mind, to which he applies them, does so far as he uses them in Discourse, only
make a Noise without any Sense or Signification.


Therefore to use Words thus in common Conversation, is to act in a vain
trifling Manner, more like Children than Men: But to use Words thus in the
s^^red Services of God's House, and solemn Duties of his Worship, is something
much worse than Children's Play. But thus Mr. W. expressly declares, Words are
to be used in a public Profession of Religion. He says (P. 10. c.) And these
Words are so used in such Cases, without any Marks of Difference, whereby we
are enabled to judge when they mean a saving Faith, and when a different one.

Posi. III. A Profession made in Words that are either equivocal, or general,
equally signifying several distinct Things, without any Marks of Difference or
Distinction, by which we are enabled to judge which is meant, is not a
Profession or Siginfication of any one of those several Things; nor can they
afford any rational Ground of understanding or apprehending any particular
Thing. Thus for Instance, if a Man using an equivocal Term, should say, that
such an Evening a King was in that Room, without any Marks of Difference or
Discrimination whatsoever, by which Others could discern whether by a King, he
meant the Ruler of a Kingdom, or a King used in a Game of Chess: The Word thus
used would be no Declaration, that the Head of a Kingdom was there at such a
Time; nor would they give any Notice of any such Thing to those to whom he
spoke, or give them any rational Ground to understand or judge any such Thing.

Or if a Man should use a general Term, comprehending various particular Sorts,
without at all distinguishing or pointing forth any one particular Sort, he
thereby professes no one particular Sort. Thus if a Man professes that he has
Metal in his Pocket, not saying what Sort of Metal, whether Gold, Silver,
Brass, Iron, Lead, or Tin; his Words are no Profession that he has Gold.

So if a Man professes Sincerity or Religion, designedly using Terms of double
Signification, or (which comes to the same Things) of general Signification,
equally signifying two entirely distinct Things, either moral Sincerity, or
real Piety, His Words are no Profession of real Piety; he makes no credible
Profession, and indeed no Profession at all of Gospel-Holiness.

Posi. IV. If a Man who knows himself to be destitute of any certain
Qualification, yet makes a Profession or Pretense, in Words of double Meaning,
equally signifying that Qualification, and something else very different, with
a Design to recommend himself to others Judgment and Apprehension, as possessed
of that Qualification, he is guilty of deceitful Equivocation. This is the
Notion of deceitful Equivocation, viz. the using Words of double Meaning, or
capable of double Application, with a Design to induce others to judge
something to be true, which is not true. But he that goes about to recommend
himself by such Terms to others Opinion or Judgment, as being what he at the
same Time knows he is not, endeavors to induce 'em to believe what he knows is
not true, which is to deceive 'em. To advance a dubious Proposition, knowing it
will be understood in a Sense different from what you give it in your Mind, is
an Equivocation, in Breach of good Faith and Sincerity. Chambers's Dictionary
under the Word Equivocation.


But if the Scheme which Mr. W. undertakes to defend, were true, it would
follow that such a Kind of Equivocation as this (be it far from us to suppose
it) is what the infinitely wise and holy God has instituted to be publicly
made use of in the solemn Services of his House, as the very Condition of
Persons Admission to the external Privileges of his People! For Mr. W.
abundantly asserts, that Persons must be esteemed in the Judgment and
Apprehension of Others to have true Piety; and that one Thing that must be done
in Order to it, one Thing pertaining to the moral Evidence that recommends 'em
to this Judgment, is the Profession they make of Religion. (P. 5. P. 139. P.
47, b, c. P. 132. P. 44. d.) In P. 42, speaking of the Profession of visible
Christians, he has these Words, And it is from the Nature and Purport of this
Profession, we say, the Church is to judge the Members to be wise Virgins or
what they make a Show of. And Mr. W. insists upon it, that according to
Christ's Institution, this must be in Words equally signifying true Godliness,
and something else, without any Discrimination or Marks of Difference. -- This
is the Scheme! And certainly such a Doctrine of deceitful Equivocation in the
public Exercises of Religion, is more agreeable to the Principles and Practices
of a Religion I am loath to name, than the true Religion of Jesus Christ.

Mr. W. says, (P. 35. d.) I am at a Loss to conceive how it will help the Cause
of Truth to represent those who are of Mr. S -- 's Opinion, as teaching Men
that they may enter into Covenant with God with known and allowed Guile.
Supposing I had made such a Representation, I can tell him how it would have
helped the Cause of Truth (as i^ would be speaking nothing but the Truth) if he
be one of Mr. Stoddard's Opinion (as he says he is) and represents his own
Opinion truly.

But let the Unreasonableness of this Notion of professing Gospel-Holiness in
Words of two Meanings, without any Discrimination or Mark of Difference, be a
little further considered. Since it is allowed, that Gospel-Holiness is the
Thing which is to be exhibited in the Profession, and there are Words which
signify this by a determinate Meaning, why must they needs be avoided, and
Words of doubtful and double Signification only be made use of? Mr. W. (P. 6.
d. e.) speaks of a Profession in Terms of indiscriminate Signification, when
not contradicted in Life, as The sole, entire Evidence, which the Church, as a
Church, is to have, by divine Appointment, in Order to that public Judgment it
is to make of the Saintship of Men.
Since the Design of the Profession is to exhibit to others Understanding that
very Thing; if the proper and distinguishing Names of that must nevertheless be
avoided in the Profession, and this, for that very Reason, that they point
forth to others Understanding that very Thing by a determinate Meaning; then we
are brought to this gross Absurdity, viz. That the End of a Profession is to
exhibit to others Understanding and reasonable Judgment a particular
Qualification; but at the same Time such Words only must be made Use of as do
not distinctly point forth to others Understanding and Judgment that particular
Qualification. The Church are to seek and demand a Profession, that shall
determine their rational Judgment; but yet are designedly to avoid such a
Profession, as shall determine their Understandings. -- Be it far from us to
attribute to the alwise God any such absurd and inconsistent Constitution.

Mr. W. says, Charity obliges the Church to understand the Words of the
Professors in the most favorable Sense. But Charity does not oblige us to
understand their Words in any other Sense than that in which they professedly
use them. But in Churches which professedly act on Mr. W -- ms's Scheme (if any
such there be) the Professors who are admitted, professedly use ambiguous
Words, or Words equally signifying two entirely distinct Things, without
Discrimination or Marks of Difference; and therefore Charity obliges us to
understand their Words no otherwise, than as signifying that they have one or
other of those two Things; and not that they have One in particular: for their
Words don't signify this, in the Sense they professedly use them. If a Man that
is indebted to me, professes that he has either Gold or Brass, which he
promises to pay Me; or if he uses an equivocal or general Term, that equally,
and without Marks of Difference, signifies either one or the other; Charity may
oblige Me to believe what he says, which is that he has either Gold or Brass:
But no Charity obliges me to believe that he has Gold, which he does not say.

Mr. W. in his Description of such a Profession as Christ has instituted, in
Order to Admission to Sacraments, often mentions two Things, viz. A Profession
of something present, a present believing in Christ, and cordial Consent to the
Terms of the Covenant of Grace, etc. And a Promise of something future. And
with Regard to the latter, he is very full in it, that what is promised for
Time to come is saving Faith, Repentance and Obedience. Pref. (P. 3. d. e. and
5. d. P. 24. b. 25. b. 22. d. ^7. a. 58. d. 69* d.
Now what Reason can be given why we should use Words of double Meaning in the
former Part of the Profession more than in the latter. Seeing Mr. W. allows
that we must profess Gospel-Holiness as well as promise it, and seeing we may
and must make Use of Words of indiscriminate and double Meaning in professing
present Gospel Holiness, why should not we do so too in promising what is
future; and so equivocate in our solemn Vows and Oaths as the Papists do? If
Mr. W. says, it is very hard for Men to discern the Discrimination between moral
Sincerity and Gospel-Holiness; I answer, there is as much Need to discern the
Difference in Order understandingly to promise Gospel-Holiness with
Discrimination, as to profess it with Discrimination.

Mr. W. says (P. 8. b. c.) It Is a received Rule among Mankind, in all public
Judgments, to interpret Words in the most extensive and favorable Sense, that
the Nature of the Words or Expressions will bear. I know not what he means: But
if he means (as he must, if he means any Thing to the Purpose) that it is a
received Rule amongst Mankind, to trust, or accept, or at all regard any
Professions or Declarations that Men make, with professed Design, in Words of
double and indiscriminate Meaning, without any Marks of Difference by which
their Meaning can be known, for that very End that they may be used with a safe
Conscience, though they have no Dictates of their own Consciences, that they have
that which others are to believe they have; I say, if this be a received Rule
among Mankind, it is a Rule that Mankind has lately received from Mr. W.
Heretofore Mankind, Societies or particular Persons, would have been counted
very foolish for regarding such Professions. Is this the Way in earthly
Kingdoms, in Professions of Allegiance to temporal Princes, in Order to their
Admission to the Privileges of good Subjects? Do they choose equivocal Terms to
put into their Oaths of Allegiance, to that End that Men may use 'em and speak
true, though they are secret Enemies? -- There are two Competitors for the
Kingdom of this World, Christ and Satan; The Design of a public Profession of
Religion is, to declare on which Side Men are. And is it agreeable to the Custom
of Mankind in such Cases, to make Laws that no other than ambiguous Words shall
be used, or to accept of such in Declarations of this Kind? There are two
Competitors for the Kingdom of Great Britain, King GEORGE, and the Pretender:
Is it the Constitution of King George and the British Parliament, that Men
should take Oaths of Allegiance, contrived in Words of indeterminate
Signification, to the End that Men who are in their Hearts Enemies to King
George, and Friends to the Pretender, may use them and speak true? And
certainly Mankind, those of 'em that have common Sense, never in any Affairs of
Life look on such Professions worth a Rush. Would Mr. W. himself, if tried, in
any Affair wherein his temporal Interest is concerned, trust such Professions
as these? If any Man that he has Dealings with, should profess to him that he
had pawned for him, in a certain Place, an Hundred Pounds, evidently, yea
professedly using the Expression as an ambiguous one, so that there is no
understanding by it, what is pawned there, whether an Hundred Pound in Money,
or an 100 Weight of Stones: If he should inquire of the Man what he meant, and
he should reply, you have no Business to search my Heart, or to go to turn my
Heart inside out; you are obliged in Charity to understand my Words in the most
favorable Sense; would Mr. W. in this Case stick to his own received Rule?
Would he regard such a Profession, or run the Venture of one Sixpence upon it?
Would he not rather look on such a Man as affronting Him, and treating Him as
though He would make a Fool of Him? And would not he know, that every Body else
would think him a Fool, if he should suffer himself to be gulled by such
Professions, in Things which concern his own private Interest? And yet it
seems, this is the Way in which he thinks he ought to conduct himself as a
Minister of Christ, and one entrusted by him in Affairs wherein his Honor and
the Interests of his Kingdom are concerned.

And now I desire it may be judged by such as are possessed of human
Understanding, and are not disabled by Prejudice from exercising it, whether
this Notion of (...). W -- ms's, of making a solemn Profession of
Gospel-Holiness in Words of indiscriminate Meaning, ben't too absurd to be
received by the Reason God has given Mankind. -- This peculiar Notion of his is
apparently the Life and Soul of his Scheme; the main Pillar of his Temple, on
which the whole Weight of the Building rests; which if it be broken, the whole
falls to the Ground, and buries the Builder, or at least his Work, in its
Ruins. For if this Notion of his be disproved, then, in as much as it is agreed,
that true Godliness must be professed, it will follow, that it must be
professed in Words properly signifying the Thing by a determinate Meaning,
which therefore no ungodly Men can use, and speak true; and that therefore Men
must have true Godliness in order to a Right in the Sight of God to make such
Profession, and to receive the Privileges depending thereon: which implies and
infers all those Principles of mine which Mr. W. opposes in his Book, and
confutes all that he says in Opposition to them.

SECTION V. Showing that Mr. Williams, in supposing that unsanctified Men may
profess such Things, as he allows must be professed, and yet speak true, is
inconsistent with Mr. Stoddard, and with himself.
MR. W. denies, that in order to Men's being admitted to Sacraments, they need
make any peculiar Profession, distinguished from what an unregenerate Man may
make (P. 44. c. P. 50. e. 6. c, d, e. 9. c. 10. c, e. 45. e. 46. a, and 53, e.)
or that they need to profess any Thing but what an unregenerate Man may say,
and speak true. (P. 47. c.) And that they need make no Profession but what is
compatible with an unregenerate State, (P. 8. d, e.) And yet the Reader has
seen what Things he says all must profess in order to come to Sacraments. One
Thing he says they must profess, is a real Conviction of the Heart, of the
divine Truth of God's Word; That they do sincerely and with all their Hearts
believe the Gospel. And these Things, he says, are agreeable to the Opinion of
Mr. Stoddard, and the Doctrine he taught. (P. 32. b, c. and P. 36. a.) Let us
compare these Things with the Doctrine Mr. S. taught. Mr. S. taught, that
natural Men don't believe the Gospel. (Benef. of the Gosp. P. 89. b) That they
don't properly believe the Word of God. (Guide to Christ, P 26. d.) That they
don't believe the Testimony of God, don't lay Weight on the Word of God; That
they don't believe the Report of the Gospel. (Safety of Ap. Edit. 2. P. 229. c,
e.) That they do not receive God's Testimony, nor lay Weight. (ibid. P. 99.
That there is no Man, how great soever his Profession, how large soever his
Knowledge, that continues in a natural Condition, who thoroughly believes that
Truth; i. e. that Men may be saved by Christ's Righteousness. ( ibid. P. 4. d.
and P. 5. d, e.) That common Illumination don't convince Men of the Truth of
the Gospel. (Benef. of the Gosp. P. 148, 149.) How then could it be the
Doctrine Mr. S. taught, that natural Men may really and with all their Hearts
believe and be convinced of the Truth of the Gospel?

And Mr. W. himself in his Sermons on Christ a King and Witness. (P. 114, 115.)
says, Man since the Fall is naturally ignorant of divine Truth, and an Enemy to
it, and full of Prejudices against the Truth: and says further, ( Ibid. P.
114.) The renewing of the Holy Ghost makes an universal Change of the Heart and
Life. -- He knows the Doctrine contained in the Bible in a new Manner. --
Before He had a View of the Truth as a doubtful uncertain Thing; He received it
as a Thing which was probably true; -- and perhaps for the most Part it
appeared something likely to answer the End proposed. -- But now the Gospel
appears to him divinely true and real, etc. But how do these Things consist
with Men's being before Conversion, sincerely and with all their Hearts
convinced of the divine Truth of the Gospel? Can that be, and yet Men view it
as a doubtful uncertain Thing, it not yet appearing to 'em divinely true and
real?

Again, Mr. W. supposes, that some unsanctified Men may speak true, and profess
an hearty Consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, a Compliance with the
Call of the Gospel, Submission to the Proposals of it, Satisfaction with that
Device for our Salvation that is revealed in the Gospel, and with the Offer
which God makes of himself to be our God in Christ Jesus, A fervent Desire of
Christ and the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace, and an earnest Purpose and
Resolution to seek Salvation on the Terms of it, (P. 11. c) and a falling in
with the Terms of Salvation proposed in the Gospel, with a renouncing of all
other Ways (which He speaks of as agreeable to Mr. Stoddard's Opinion. P. 32. b.
c.) Quite contrary to the current Doctrine of Calvinistic Divines; contrary to
the Opinion of Mr. Guthrie whom he cites as a Witness in his Favor ( Pref. P.
4.) who insists on Satisfaction with that Device for our Salvation which is
revealed in the Gospel, and with the Offer which God makes of himself to be our
God in Christ, as the peculiar Nature of saving Faith. And contrary to the
Principles of Mr. Perkins (another Author he quotes as his Voucher) delivered
in these very Words, which Mr. W. cites in the present Point (P. 11.) That a
Desire of the Favor and Mercy of God in Christ, and the Means to attain that
Favor, is a special Grace of God, and has the Promise of Blessedness: -- That
wicked Men cannot sincerely desire these Means of eternal Life, Faith,
Repentance, Mortification, Reconciliation, etc. And exceeding contrary to the
constant Doctrine of Mr. Stoddard (though He says it was his Opinion) Who ever
insisted, that all unconverted Sinners under the Gospel are so far from
heartily consenting to the Covenant of Grace, and complying with the Call of
the Gospel, and falling in with the Terms of Salvation proposed in it,
renouncing all other Ways, as Mr. W. supposes, That they are willful Rejecters
of Christ, Despisers of the Gospel, and obstinate Refusers of offered Mercy. So
He says, The Man that has but common Grace -- sets himself against the Way of
Salvation which God prescribes. ( Not. of Sav. Conv. P. 10. b.) In awakened
Sinners, it is not merely from Weakness, but from Pride and Sturdiness of
Spirit, that they don't come to Christ. ( Safety of Ap. P. 229. c. d.) And in
other Places he says, That it is from the Hardness and Stubbornness of natural
Men's Hearts, that they don't comply with the Gospel: That there is a mighty
Opposition in their Hearts to believe in Christ, because it is cross to their
haughty Spirit: That they are Enemies to this Way of Salvation: That they are
dreadfully averse to come to Christ. (See Book of 3 Sermons. P. 84. Guide to
Christ. P. 55. c. Safety of Ap. P. 106. and 194. e.)

And this Scheme of our Author is in a no less glaring Manner contrary to the
Doctrine of Mr. Williams himself, in his Sermon on Isai. xlv.11. (P. 25, 26,
27.) Speaking to those whose Natures remain unrenewed and unsanctified (See his
Words P. 25. d.) he says, P. 27. b. c. You are opposing all the Means of your
own Deliverance and Salvation. The Offers of Grace, the Allurements and
Invitations of the great Savior of the World, have all been ineffectual to
persuade you to accept of Deliverance from a Slavery you are willingly held in.
Nay, you strive against the Liberty of the Sons of God, and labor to find out
all Manner of Difficulties and Hindrances in the Way of it. If you pray for it,
you don't desire it should yet come, but would stay a While longer. And are
these the Persons who can truly profess, that they comply with the Call of the
Gospel, and submit to the Proposals of it, and are satisfied with the Device
for our Salvation, and with the Offers of the Gospel, and consent to the Terms
of the Covenant of Grace with all their Hearts, renouncing all other Ways? --
It Is not much more easy to make these Things consist with what he says in his
Answer to Mr. Croswell. (P. 26. b. c.) He there says, There is not a Son nor
Daughter of Adam excluded from Salvation, who will accept Christ upon God's
Offer, and take him in his Person and Offices, and whole Work of Redemption, to
be their Savior, and they find themselves willing to accept of Christ as so
offered to them, and PLEASED WITH THAT DEVICE for their Salvation, and heartily
choosing Him to be to them and in them, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption. (See also to the same Purpose, Ibid. P. 32. e. and P. 33. a. b.
and P. 94. c.)

Mr. W. though he holds, that it is lawful for some unsanctified Men to come to
Sacraments, yet supposes it not to be lawful for those that are Lukewarm in
Religion to come. (P. 35. d. e.) So that according to his Scheme some
unsanctified Professors are above Lukewarmness: that is to say, their Hearts
within 'em are truly hot or fervent with Christian Zeal, and they such as
Christ will never spue out of his Mouth; in a great Inconsistence with the
Scripture. He suggests, that it is an Injury done to the Cause of Truth, in Me,
to represent Mr. Stoddard as being of another Opinion. (P. 35 c. d. e.) But let
us see whether such a Representation be an Injury to Truth or no. Mr. S.
taught, that natural Men have no Sincerity in 'em. (Guide to Christ. P. 60.61.)
That their Hearts are dead as a Stone, that there is no Disposition or
Inclination to any Thing that is good, but a total Emptiness of all Goodness.
(Ibid. P. 63. b.) That some of them have considerable Shows of Goodness, there
is an Appearance of good Desires, etc. but there is nothing of Goodness in all
this; that all they do is in Hypocrisy. Benef. of the Gos. P. 73. d. c.) That
they are acted by a Lust of Self-love in all their Religion; -- If they are
swept and garnished, they are empty: There may be some Similitude of Faith and
Love, but no Reality, not a Spark of Goodness in their Hearts; though Corruption
may be restrained, yet it reigns. He speaks abundantly to the same Purpose in
his Sermon, entitled, Natural Men are under the Government of Self-Love.

And Mr. Williams himself in his Sermon on Psalm. xci.1. describing carnal Men,
by which He means the same with unconverted Men (as is evident through the Book,
particularly P. 36. c.) he says, P. 27, 28. That to such Religion looks like a
dull unpleasant Kind of Exercise, and so different from the sensual Joys and
Pleasures which they choose, that they hate to set about it, as long as they
dare let it alone; and would do as little as ever they can at it: -- That when
they durst not let it alone any longer, they set about it, but would fain
dispatch it as soon, and as easily as they can; because it seems to them a
miserable uncomfortable Sort of Life. Ask your own Conscience (say, He) see if
this be not the Truth of the Case. -- Now let the Reader judge, whether this be
a Description of Persons whom it would be injurious to represent as having
nothing above Lukewarmness.

Another Thing, which Mr. W. supposes must be professed in Order to come to
Sacraments, and therefore according to Him is what an unsanctified Man can
profess, and speak true, is, "That they with all their Hearts cast themselves
upon the Mercy of God, to help 'em to keep Covenant." (P. 31. e. and P. 32. a.)
And yet elsewhere He mentions a depending on Christ for Things of this Nature,
as a discriminating Mark of a true Christian. (Ser. on Christ a King and
Witness. P. 19. c.) Under a Use of Examination, he there says, Do you depend on
Christ to protect you from all your spiritual Enemies, to restore you to
Holiness, to subdue all your Heart to the Will of God, to make you Partakers of
his Image and moral Perfections, and in that Way to preserve and lead you to
your true Perfection and eternal Happiness?

Mr. W. supposes (P. 36. a, b, c.) that the Profession Men must make in Order
to come to Sacraments, implies real Friendship to God, loving God more than his
Enemies, loving Him above the World; and therefore according to Mr. W.
unsanctified Men may make this Profession also, and speak true: Contrary to the
whole Current of Scripture, which represents unsanctified Men as the Enemies of
God, those that have not the Love of God in them, under the Power of a carnal
Mind, etc. -- And contrary to the unanimous Voice of all sound Divines, yea, of
the whole Christian World. Mr. W. in the forementioned Place blames Me, that I
had intimated (as He supposes) that the Profession which Mr. Stoddard taught to
be necessary, did not imply real Friendship, and loving God above his Enemies,
and above the World. Let us then compare this with Mr. S -- d's Doctrine, as
that is extant in his Writings. He speaks of it as a Property of saving Grace,
wherein it specifically differs from common Grace, that a true Love to God
prizes God above all the World. (Not. of Sav. Conv. P. 7. b. c.) That every
natural Man prefers. vain and base Things before God. (Ibid. P. 96. b.) That
they are all Enemies to God, and the very Being of God. (Ibid. P. 5. c. d. and
P. 97.) That their Hearts are full of Enmity to God. (Ibid. P. 55. e) That they
have an Aversion to those gracious Actions of loving God, and trusting in
Christ, and are under the Dominion of a contrary Inclination. (Ibid. P. 67.)
That those of 'em whose Consciences are enlightn'd, and are reforming their
Lives, have no Love; and that it is a Burden to 'em that they suspect there is
such a God, that they wish there was not such an One. And that they are Haters
of God, and are so addicted to their own Interest, that they have a bitter
Spirit toward God, have an ill Affection to Him, and are Adversaries to his
Felicity. (Ibid. P. 97. Three Sermon. P. 38, 39.) That they are governed by a
Spirit of Self-Love, and are wholly destitute of Love to God; That some of 'em
do confess that they have but little Love to God; but indeed they have not one
Spark of Love to God in their Hearts. (Three Sermon. P. 48) That they set their
Interest at the Right Hand of God's Glory, -- as if God's Honor were not to be
regarded, compared with their Interest, etc. etc. (Ibid. P. 62, 63.)

So Mr. W. himself ( Christ a King and Witness, P. 145. e.) plainly supposes,
that before Conversion Men love the World more than God. For, speaking of the
Nature of the Change wrought in Conversion, he says, Things are quite turned
about, God and Christ are got into the Place the World had before. Again (
Ibid. P. 18. b.) he says, You must know that there is no Man who is not either
a true Subject to Christ, or his Enemy. That Man who don't submit to Christ as
his King and Lord, by bearing true Faith and Allegiance to him, is the Enemy of
Christ and his Kingdom. Such are all they who will not depend on him, believe
in him, give up themselves, and all to him. And again, (P. 106. e. 107. a.) Man
since the Fall has a natural Unlikeness to God, and hates the Holiness and
Purity of the Divine Nature. And in his Sermon on Isa. xlv.11. He says to his
Hearers, If your Nature remain unrenewed and unsanctified, -- you are the
Enemies of God and Christ by wicked Works, and an impure Heart. -- But yet now
it seems, some of these may profess real Friendship to Christ, and loving him
above the World, and speak true.

And these Things are no less inconsistent with what Mr. W. says in the very
Book under Consideration. He here says, (P. 36.) Why should any Divine now tell
us, that these same Professions don't imply that there are any Pretenses of any
real Friendship, that they import no Pretense of loving God more, yea, not so
much as his Enemies, no Pretense to love God above the World? When He himself
is the Divine that tells us so, or plainly supposes so in this very Book of
his. For, in P. 8, 9. having mentioned the Profession Communicants may be
required to make, he then says, that such a Profession contains all that is
essential to true Religion in it; And if this is the Fruit of the Love of God,
it is true Godliness: Plainly supposing, that Persons may have these Things
without the Love of God; as the Reader will see more evidently if he views the
Place. So that the Profession must imply real Friendship, and Love to God, even
above the World; and yet must contain only such Things as may be with or
without the Love of God, indiscriminately.

Mr. W. allows, that in Order to come to Sacraments Men ought to profess a
Subjection to Christ with all their Hearts, (P. 10. d.) and to be devoted to
the Service of God, (P. 49. d.) and to give up themselves to Christ, to be
taught, ruled and led by Him in a Gospel-Way to Salvation. (P 31. e and P. 32.
a.) And though He and Mr Stoddard taught, that it is lawful for some unsanctified
Men to come to Sacraments, yet Mr. W. supposes it to be unlawful for any to
come to Sacraments serving two Masters; and says, Mr. S. taught that they ought
to covenant with God with their whole Hearts, and give up all their Hearts and
Lives to Christ. We are therefore to understand Mr. W. that some unsanctified
Men can profess all these Things, and speak true. Strange Doctrine for a
Christian Divine! Let us see whether Mr. S. taught such Doctrine. He taught,
that Faith in Christ is the first Act of Obedience, that any Sinner does
perform; that it is by Faith that a Man first gives himself to be God's
Servant. (Safety of App. P. 228. e. P. 229. a.) That all those that are not
converted, are under the Dominion of Sin, Enemies to God. ( Ibid. P. 5. c. d.)
That there is no Obedience to God in what they do, who have only common Grace;
That they don't attend the Will of God. (Ibid. P. 7. d.) That all ungodly Men
are Servants of Satan, and live in a Way of Rebellion against God. (Ibid. P.
94. b.) That they are Enemies to the Authority of God; to the Wisdom, Power and
Justice of God, yea, to the very Being of God; they have a Preparedness of
Heart to all Wickedness that is committed in the World, if God did not
restrain 'em; that if they were in the Circumstances that the fallen Angels are
in they would be as the very Devils; (Ibid. P. 95.) That their Hearts are like
the Hearts of Devils, as full of Sin as a Toad is full of Poison, having no
Inclination to any Thing that is good. (Guide to Christ, P. 68. See also Benef.
of the Gos. P. 130. a. b.) That they utterly neglect the End they were made
for, and make it their Business to serve themselves; they care not whether
God's Glory sinks or swims. (Three Sermons P. 62.) That they hate God, because
God crosses them in his Laws. (Ibid. P. 38. c.) These are the Men, which Mr. W.
supposes must, and may (some of 'em) truly profess a Subjection to Christ with
all their Hearts, and to be devoted to Christ; and the Men which he would bear
us in Hand, that Mr S. taught, might covenant with God with their whole Hearts,
and give up all their Hearts and Lives to Christ. Mr. Stoddard taught, that Men
that have but common Grace, go quite in another Path than that which God
directs to, -- That they set themselves against the Way of Salvation God
prescribed; (Safety, P. 10.) That Man in his natural State is an Enemy to the
Way of Salvation; That he is an Enemy to the Law of God, and the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. (Ibid. P. 106. b. c.) But yet these, if we believe Mr. W. may
truly profess a Subjection to Christ with all their Hearts, and give up
themselves to him, to be taught ruled and led by him in a Gospel-Way of
Salvation. Yet if we believe him, we must have the Trouble of disbelieving him
again; for in these Things he is as inconsistent with himself, as he is with
Mr. S. -- For in his Sermon. on Isai. xlv.11. (P. 26, 27.) he says to those whose
Natures are unrenewed and unsanctified, If you are without Christ, you are in a
State of Slavery to Sin, led about of diverse Lusts, And yet now it seems, some
such do serve but one Master, and give up themselves to Christ to be led by Him.
and under the reigning Power and Dominion of your Corruptions, which debase
your Souls, and bring them down from the Dignity of their Nature, to the
vilest, most shameful and accursed Bondage. -- And by Means of Sin, ye are in
Bondage to the Devil, the most hateful and accursed Enemy of God and your own
Souls; -- And are opposing all the Means of your own Deliverance The Offers of
Grace, the Calls and Invitations of the Gospel have all been ineffectual to
persuade you to accept of Deliverance from a Slavery you are willingly held in.
Nay, you strive against the Liberty of the Sons of God. And yet some of these
are (if we believe what Mr. W. now says) such as are subject to Christ with all
their Hearts, give up all their Hearts and Lives to Christ, and give up
themselves to be taught, ruled and led by him in a Gospel-Way to Salvation. Mr.
W. in his Sermons on Christ a King and Witness, (P. 81.) under a Use of
Examination, giving Marks of Trial, says, Have you unreservedly given up your
Souls and Bodies to Him? [ viz. Christ] You must be all Christ's, and have NO
OTHER MASTER. You must be given to him without Reserve, both in Body and
Spirit, which are His But now it seems, these are no discriminating Evidences
of true Piety: He says, ( Ibid. P. 118.) A Man naturally hates God should
Reign. And (P. 119. c.) speaking of the natural Man, he says, He hates to be
controlled, and in all Things subjected to God; -- he really owns no God but
himself But if so, then certainly he is not subject to God with all his Heart.

Our Author in the Book more especially attended to, says, (P. 31. d, e.) He
knows of no Body who has any Controversy with me in what he calls my loose Way
of arguing, in my saying, The Nature of Things seems to afford no good Reason
why the People of Christ should not openly profess a proper Respect to him in
their Hearts, as well as a true Notion of him in their Heads. And then, in that
and the following Page, proceeds to show what Respect Mr. S. and those that
think with him, suppose Men must profess in Order to come to the Lord's Supper;
and (in P. 33. a.) speaks of such a Profession as equally honorable to Christ,
with a Profession of saving Grace. And as according to Mr. W. no Profession
discriminating what is professed from common Grace, can be required, so common
Grace must be supposed to be a proper Respect to Christ in the Heart. Now let
us see what Mr. S. says. There is (says he) an Opposition between saving and
common Grace; -- they have a Contrariety one to another, and are at War one
with the other, and would destroy one the other. -- Common Graces are LUSTS,
and do oppose saving Grace. ( Not. of Sav. Conv. P. 9. d, e.) Men that are in a
natural Condition, -- such of 'em as are addicted to Morality and Religion, are
serving their LUSTS therein. The most orderly natural Men do live an ungodly
Life; -- yea, their very Religion is Iniquity. (Ibid. P. 96, 97.) -- Their best
Works are not only sinful, but properly Sins; they are acted by a SPIRIT OF
LUST in all that they do. ( Saf. of App. P. 168. d.) -- Moral Virtues don't
render Men acceptable to God; for though they look like Virtues, yet they are
LUSTS. ( Ibid. P. 81.) -- Now the Question plainly is, Whether Lust can be a
proper Respect to Christ in the Heart? And, Whether a Profession which implies
no more in it, be equally honorable to Christ, as a credible Profession of a
gracious Respect to Him?

SECTION VI. Concerning Visibility without apparent Probability.
MR. Stoddard (Appeal P. 16.) says thus: Such Persons as the Apostles did admit
into Gospel-Churches, are fit to be admitted into them; But they admited many
that had not a thorough Work of Regeneration. Indeed by the Rule that God has
given for Admissions, if carefully attended, more Unconverted Persons will be
admitted, than Converted.

This Passage I took Notice of in my Book, where I say, I would humbly inquire,
How those visible Qualifications can be the Ground of a rational Judgment, that
a Person is circumcised in Heart, which nevertheless at the same Time, we are
sensible, are so far from being probable Signs of it, that they are more
frequently without it, than with it, etc. This seems to be a terrible Thing in
Mr. VVilliams's Way, which he strikes at from Time to Time; and is an
Impediment he boggles at exceedingly. One while he pretends, he can give a
sufficient Answer: (P. 7, 8.) At another Time he pretends, that I remove the
Difficulty my self: (P. 12.) Then again, in the same Page, he pretends to solve
the Difficulty; and then in the next Page pretends, that if the Case be as I
say, That we cannot form a rational Judgment that a Thing is, which at the same
Time, and under that Degree we then stand in, it is more probable is a mistaken
one, than not, yet it can argue Nothing to the Case; seeing the Judgment we do
form, is directed by a Rule which is appointed for us. But still as if not
satisfied with these Answers and Remarks, he seems afterward to suggest, that
Mr. S did not express this as his own Sentiment, but as Mr. Cotton's, as a
Gentleman of the same Principles with Mr. Mather, using it as Argumentum ad
Hominem. (See P. 33.)

In P. 34. a. he expressly says, Mr. S. does not say, That when the Rule which
God has given for Admissions is carefully attended, it leaves Reason to
believe, that the greater Part of those who are admitted, are Enemies to God,
etc. [True, he does not say this in Terms; but he says, More unconverted
Persons will be admitted, than converted: -- which is equivalent.] And in P.
134, a. Mr. W. presumes confidently to affirm, that Mr S. says this [the Thing
forementioned] not with peculiar Relation to his own Scheme, but only as an
Application of a Saying of Mr. Cotton's, who was of a different Opinion, and
said upon a different Scheme; to show, that upon their own Principles, the
Matter will not be mended. But this is contrary to the most plain Fact. For Mr.
S. having said, The Apostles admitted many unconverted, he immediately adds the
Passage in Dispute, Indeed by the Rule, etc. plainly expressing his own
Sentiment; though he backs it with a Saying of Mr. Cotton's. So, Mr. Cotton's
Words come in as a Confirmation of Mr. S -- d's; and not Mr. S -- d's as an
Application of Mr. Cotton's. -- However, Mr. VV. delivers the same Sentiment as
his own, once and again, in his Book: He delivers it as his own Sentiment (P.
34.) That probably many more Hypocrites, than real Saints, do make such a
Profession, as that which must be accepted. He delivers it as his own Sentiment
(P. 61. e.) That the Apostles judged it likely, that of the Christians taken
into the Church under their Direction, as many were Hypocrites in Proportion to
their Number, as of those that were taken into the Jewish Church. And as to the
latter, He delivers it as his Sentiment (P. 24. a.) That the Body of the People
were not regenerate. So that, according to his own Sentiments, when the
apostolical Rule of taking in is observed, the Body of those who are admitted
will be Hypocrites.

Now therefore, I desire that this Matter may be examined to the very Bottom.
-- And here let it be considered, whether the Truth of the following Things
ben't incontestable.

1. If indeed by the Rule God has given for Admissions, when it is carefully
attended, more unconverted Persons will be admitted, than converted; then it
will follow, That just such a Visibility or visible Appearance of Saintship as
the Rule requires, is more frequently without real Saintship, than with it.

2. If Mr. S. and Mr. W. had just Reason from the Holy Scripture, and divine
Providence, to think thus, and to publish such a Sentiment, and the Christian
Church has good Reason to believe 'em; then God has given the Christian Church
in its present State (dark and imperfect as it is) good Reason to think so too

3. If Christ by the Rule he has given for Admissions, requires his Churches to
receive such a Visibility or Appearance, which he has given the same Churches
at the same Time Reason to judge to be an Appearance that for the most Part is
without Godliness, or more frequently connected with Ungodliness; then he
requires 'em to receive such an Appearance, as he at the same Time has given
'em Reason to think does not imply a Probability of Godliness, but is attended
rather with a Probability of Ungodliness. For that is the Notion of
Probability; An Appearance, which so far as we have Means to judge, is for the
most Part connected with the Thing. Mr. Lock thus defines Probability. (Hum
Und. 7th Edit. 8 vo. Vol. 2 P. 273.) Probability is Nothing but the Appearance
of such an Agreement or Disagreement, by the Intervention of Proofs, whose
Connection is not constant and immutable, or at least is not perceived to be
so; but is, or appears FOR THE MOST PART to be so and is enough to induce the
Mind to judge the Proposition to be true, or false, rather than the contrary.

And Mr. W. himself (P. 139.) says, It Is moral Evidence of Gospel-Sincerity,
which God's Word makes the Church's Rule, etc. Now, does such an Appearance, as
we have Reason at the same Time to think is more frequently without
Gospel-Holiness than with it, amount to moral Evidence of Gospel-Sincerity?


Therefore the Sign or Appearance, let it be what it will, implies a
Probability of that, which we have Reason to think it is for the most Part
connected or attended with. Where there is only Probability without Certainty,
there is a Peradventure in the Case on both Sides; or in vulgar Language, the
Supposition on each Side stands a Chance to be true: But that Side which most
commonly proves true in such a Case, stands the best Chance; and therefore
properly on that Side lies the Probability.

4. That cannot be a credible Visibility or Appearance, which is not a probable
Appearance. To say, a Thing is credible and not probable, is a Contradiction.
And it is impossible rationally to judge a Thing true, and at the same Time
rationally to judge a Thing most probably not true. Therefore it is absurd (not
to say worse) to talk of any divine Institution thus to judge. It would be to
suppose, that God by his Institution has made that Judgment rational, which he
at the same Time makes improbable, and therefore irrational.

This Notion of admitting Members into the Church of Christ without and against
Probability of true Piety, is not only very inconsistent with it self, but very
inconsistent with what the common Light of Mankind teaches in their Dealings
one with another. Common Sense teaches all Mankind, in Admission of Members
into Societies, at least Societies formed for very great and important
Purposes, to admit none but those concerning whom there is an apparent
Probability, that they are the hearty Friends of the Society, and of the main
Designs and Interests of it; and especially not to admit such concerning whom
there is a greater Probability of their being habitual fixed Enemies. But thus
it is, according to Mr. S -- d's and Mr W -- ms's Doctrine, as well as the
Doctrine of the Scripture, with all unsanctified Men, in Regard to the Church
of Christ: They are Enemies to the Head of the Society, Enemies to his Honor
and Authority, and the Work of Salvation in the Way of the Gospel; the
upholding and promoting of which is the main Design of the Society. The Church
is represented in Scripture as the Household of God, that are in a peculiar
Manner entrusted with the Care of his Name and Honor in the World, the
Interests of his Kingdom, the Care of his Jewels, and most precious Things: And
would not common Sense teach an earthly Prince not to admit into his Household
such as he had no Reason to look upon so much as probable Friends and loyal
Subjects in their Hearts; but rather Friends and Slaves in their Hearts to his
Enemies and Competitors for his Crown and Dignity? The visible Church of Christ
is often represented as his City and his Army. Now would not common Sense teach
the Inhabitants of a besieged-City to open the Gates to none, but those
concerning whom there is at least an apparent Probability of their not being
Enemies? And would any imagine, that in a militant State of Things it is a
likely Way to promote the Interest of the War, to fill up the Army with such as
are more likely to be on the Enemies Side in their Hearts, than on the Side of
their lawful and rightful Prince, and his faithful Soldiers and Subjects?

SECTION VII. Concerning the Lord's Supper's being a converting Ordinance.
THOUGH Mr. W. holds, that none are to be admitted to the Lord's Supper, but such
as make a credible Pretense or Profession of real Godliness, and are to be
admitted under that Notion, and with Respect to such a Character appearing on
them; yet he holds at the same Time, that the Lord's Supper is a converting
Ordinance, an Ordinance designed for the bringing of some Men that have not
such a Character, to be of such a Character. (P. 14. c, d. P. 15. P 35. a, b.
P. 83. b. P. 100. e. 101. a. 126, 127.) It Is evident, that the Meaning of those
Divines who speak of the Lord's Supper as a converting Ordinance, is not merely
that God in his Sovereign Providence will use it as an Occasion of the
Conversion of some; but that it is a converting Means by his Institution given
to Men, appointing them to use it for this Purpose. Thus Mr. Stoddard expressly
declares, That the Lord's Supper is INSTITUTED to be a Means of Regeneration,
(Doct. of inst. Churches, P. 22. a.) INSTITUTED for the Conversion of Sinners,
as well as the Confirmation of Saints; (Appeal P. 70. c. P. 71. a.) That the
direct End of it is Conversion, when the Subject that it is administered unto,
stands in Need of Conversion. (Ibid. P. 73, 74.) And thus Mr. W. after Mr. S.
speaks of the Lord's Supper as by Christ's APPOINTMENT a proper Means of the
Conversion of some that are unconverted; (P. 100. e. 101. a.) So he speaks of
it as instituted for the Conversion of Sinners, through P. 126, and 127.

Now if so, what Need of Men's being to rational Charity converted already, in
Order to their Coming to the Lord's Supper? Is it reasonable to suppose God
would institute this Ordinance directly for that End, that Sinners might be
converted by it; and then charge his Ministers and Churches not to admit any
that they had not reasonable Ground to think were converted already? -- Mr. W.
(in P. 83. b.) supposes two Ends of Christ's appointing the Communion of the
Christian Church; That such as have Grace already should be under proper
Advantages to gain more, and that those who have none, should be under proper
Advantages to attain Grace. But this ill consists with other Parts of his
Scheme. -- If a King should erect a Hospital for the Help of the Poor, and
therein has two Ends; One, the nourishing of such as are in Health, and the
Other, the healing of the Sick; and furnishes the Hospital accordingly, with
proper Food for the Healthy, and proper Remedies for the Sick: But at the same
Time charges the Officers, to whom he commits the Care of the Hospital, by no
Means to admit any, unless it be under a Notion of their being in Health, and
from Respect to such a Qualification in them, and unless they have reasonable
Ground and moral Evidence, to induce 'em to believe that they are well: And if
this Pretense should be made to justify such a Conduct, that the Hospital was
indeed designed for the Healing of the Sick, yet it was designed to confer this
Benefit only on such diseased People as were Hypocrites, and made a Profession
and Pretense of being in Health; will any Man presume to say, that such a
Conduct is agreeable to the Dictates of the Understanding of rational Beings?
And to suppose, that such should be the Conduct of the infinitely wise GOD, is
as unscriptural, as it is unreasonable. We often read in God's Word, of Men's
being convinced of their Wickedness, and confessing their Sins, as a Way to be
healed and cleansed from Sin: But where do we read of Men's pretending to more
Goodness than they have, and making an hypocritical Profession and Show of
Goodness, in order to their becoming good Men? Mr. Williams (P. 42.) owns, that
Persons must make a Profession wherein they make a Show of being wise Virgins,
in order to come into the visible Church. And (P. 35. e.) He owns, that all
visible Saints who are not truly-pious, are Hypocrites. Again, it may be
observed, he abundantly insists, that Men who have no more than common Grace
and moral Sincerity, may lawfully come to Sacraments; and yet by what he says
(P. 35. c.) they must profess more. So that Men who have no more must profess
more; and this, it seems, according to divine Institution! -- Again he says (P.
35. a, b, c.) That one End God designed by appointing Men to be brought into
the Church, is, that through divine Grace they might effectually be brought to
Christ, to give him the whole Possession of their Hearts; and [yet in the very
next Paragraph (P. 35. e. and 36. a.) he speaks of it as unlawful for Men to
come to Sacraments 'till they give up all their Hearts to Christ.
Where have we a divine Institution, that any who are Wolves should put on
Sheeps Clothing, and so come to his People, that they may believe 'em to be
Sheep, and under this Notion receive 'em into the Flock, to the End that they
may truly become of his Sheep?

But to examine this Matter, of the Lord's Supper being a converting Ordinance
to ungodly Men professing Godliness, a little more exactly. -- If Christ has
appointed the Lord's Supper to be a converting Ordinance to some such as these,
then he has appointed it either only for such of them as are mistaken, and
think themselves godly when they are not; or he has appointed it not only for
such, but also for such as are sensible they are ungodly.

If the former, if it be appointed as a converting Ordinance only for such as
are mistaken, and think themselves godly, or converted; then here is an
Institution of Christ, which never can, in any one Instance, be made use of to
the End for which he has appointed Men to use it. It cannot be made Use of for
this End by those who admit Members, and administer the Ordinance: For they, as
Mr. W. says, must admit none but such as they are bound by the Rule of Christ
to look upon as godly Men already, and to administer the Sacrament to 'em under
that Notion, and with Respect to such a Character. Neither can it be made Use
of to such a Purpose by any of the Communicants: For by the Supposition, they
must be all such as think they are converted already, and also come under that
Notion. So that by this Scheme of Things, here is an Institution appointed to
be upheld and used in the Church, which the Institution itself makes void and
impossible. For, as was observed before, the Notion of a converting Ordinance
has not a Reference to any secret Decree of God, how He in his sovereign
Pleasure will sometimes use it: But to his Institution given to Men, appointing
the End for which they should use it. Therefore, on the present Supposition,
the Institution appoints the Lord's Supper to be used in some Cases for the
Conversion of Sinners, but at the same Time forbids its being either given or
received under any other Notion than that of the Communicant's being converted
already: Which is in Effect to forbid its being either given or received for
the Conversion of the Communicant, in any one Instance. So that the Institution
effectually destroys and disannuls it self. -- But God forbid, that we should
ascribe any such inconsistent Institutions to the divine Head of the Church!

Or if the other Part of the Dis-junction be taken, and it be said, the Lord's
Supper is appointed for the Conversion of some that are sensible they are
ungodly or unconverted, the Consequence is no less absurd, on Mr. W -- ms's
Principles. For then the Scheme is this. The Institution requires some Men to
make a Pretense of real Piety, and to make a public solemn Profession of
Gospel-Holiness, which at the same Time they are sensible they have none of;
and this, to the End that others may look upon them to be real Saints, and
receive 'em to the Lord's Supper under that Notion: Not putting on a Disguise,
and making a Show of what they have not, through Mistake, but doing it
consciously and wilfully, to the Honor and Glory of God: And all this strictly
required of 'em, as the instituted Means of their becoming real Saints, and the
Children of God!

Mr. W. says (P. 14. d.) Since it is God's Will, that his Church should admit
all such visible Saints [ viz. such as He had been speaking of] it follows,
that the Lord's Supper is a converting Ordinance to such of them as are
unconverted. -- But Mr. W. is mistaken as to his Consequence. The Lord's Supper
is not instituted to be a converting Ordinance to all unconverted Men, whom it
is God's Will the Church should admit. For it may be the Church's Duty, and so
God's Will, to admit those that live secretly in the grossest Wickedness, as
Adultery, Buggery, Deism, etc. -- Such Men as these may make a fair Profession,
and the Church may be ignorant of their secret Wickedness, and therefore may
have no Warrant to reject them: But yet it will not follow, that God by his
Institution has given such a lawful Right to the Lord's Supper, having
appointed it to be a converting Ordinance to them.

SECTION VIII. The Notion of moral Sincerity's being the Qualification, which
gives a lawful Right to Christian Sacraments, examined.
THOUGH our Author disdains the Imputation of any such Notion, as that of Men's
being called visible and professed Saints from Respect to a Visibility and
Profession of moral Sincerity: Yet it is manifest, that in his Scheme (whether
consistently or no, others must judge) moral Sincerity is the Qualification
which entitles, and gives a lawful Right, to Sacraments. For he holds, that
it is lawful for unsanctified Men, who have this Qualification, to come to
Sacraments; and that it is not lawful for 'em to come without it. Therefore I
desire this Notion may be thoroughly examined.

And for the greater Clearness, let it be observed what Sincerity in general
is. Now Sincerity, in the general Notion of it, is An honest Conformity of some
Profession or outward Show of some inward Property or Act of Mind, to the Truth
and Reality of it. If there be a Show or Pretense of what is not, and has no
real Existence, then the Pretense is altogether vain; it is only a Pretense,
and nothing else: And therefore is a Pretense or Show without any Sincerity, of
any Kind, either moral or gracious.

I now proceed to offer the following Arguments against the Notion of moral
Sincerity's being the Qualification, which gives a lawful Right to Sacraments.

I. There is no such Thing as moral Sincerity, in the Covenant of Grace,
distinct from gracious Sincerity. If any Sincerity at all be requisite in Order
to a Title to the Seals of the Covenant of Grace, doubtless it is the Sincerity
which belongs to that Covenant. But there is only one Sort of Sincerity which
belongs to that Covenant; and that is a gracious Sincerity: The Covenant or
Grace has nothing to do with any other Sincerity. There is but one Sort of
Faith belonging to that Covenant; and this is saving Faith in Jesus Christ,
called in Scripture unfeigned Faith. As for the Faith of Devils, it is not the
Faith of the Covenant of Grace.

Here the Distinction of an internal and external Covenant, will not help at
all; as long as the Covenant, of which the Sacraments are Seals, is a Covenant
of Salvation, or a Covenant proposing Terms of eternal Salvation. The
Sacraments are Seals of such a Covenant: They are Seals of the New Testament in
Christ's Blood, (Matthew. xxvi.28. Luke xxii.28.) a Testament which has better
Promises than the Old, (Heb. viii.6.) and which the Apostle tells us, makes us
Heirs of the eternal Inheritance (Heb. ix.15.) -- Mr. W. himself speaks of the
Covenant sealed in Baptism, as the Covenant proposing Term of Salvation. (P.
23. b. c.) So he speaks of the Covenant entered into by a visible People, as
the Covenant in which God offers everlasting Happiness. (P. 24, 25.) -- But
there is no other Religion, no other Sincerity, belonging to this Covenant of
Salvation, but that which accompanies Salvation, or is saving Religion and
Sincerity. As it is written (Psalm. li.6.) Behold, thou desire Truth in the
inward Parts. --

There is such a Thing, as what may be called a moral Sincerity, in distinction
from saving, in many moral Things; as in loving our Friends and Neighbors, in
loving our Country, in choosing the Protestant Religion before the Popish, in a
conscientious Care to do many Duties, in being willing to take a great Deal of
Pains in Religion, in being sorry for the Commission of such and such Acts of
Wickedness, etc. But there are some Duties, which, unless they are done with a
gracious Sincerity, they cannot be done at all. As Mr. Stoddard observes (
Safety of Ap. P. 216.) There are some Duties which cannot be done but from a
gracious Respect to God. Thus, there is but one Sort of Sincerity in loving God
as God, and setting our Hearts on Him as our highest Happiness, loving him
above the World, and loving Holiness above all the Objects of our Lusts. He
that don't do these Things with a gracious Sincerity, never really does them at
all: He that truly does them, is certainly a godly Man; as we are abundantly
assured by the Word of God. So, there is but one Sort of sincere and cordial
Consent to the Covenant of Grace, but one Sort of giving all our Hearts to
Jesus Christ; which Things Mr. W. allows to be necessary, to come to
Sacraments. That which a Man's Heart is full of reigning Enmity to, he cannot
with any Reality at all cordially consent to and comply with: But the Hearts of
unsanctified Men are full of reigning Enmity to the Covenant of Grace,
according to the Doctrine of Scripture, and according to the Doctrine of Mr. S.
and Mr. W. too, as we have seen before.

However, if there were any such Thing, as a being heartily willing to accept
of Christ, and a giving all our Hearts to Christ, without a saving Sincerity,
this would not be a complying with the Terms of a Covenant of Salvation. For
it is Self-evident, that it is only something which is saving, that is a
Compliance with the Terms of Salvation. Now Mr. W. himself often allows (as has
been observed) that Persons must comply with the Terms of the Covenant of
Grace, in Order to come to Sacraments. -- Yet because he also in Effect denies
it, I shall say something further in Confirmation of it.

(1.) The Sacraments are Covenant Privileges. Mr. W. himself calls them so. (P.
5. a. b.) Covenant-Privileges are Covenant-Benefits, or Benefits Persons have a
Right to by the Covenant. But Persons can have no Right to any of the Benefits
of a Covenant, without Compliance with its Terms. For that is the very Notion
of the Terms of a Covenant, viz. Terms of an Interest in the Benefits of that
Covenant. It Is so in all Covenants whatsoever; if a Man refuses to comply with
the Conditions of the Covenant, he can claim nothing by that Covenant.

(2.) If we consider the Sacraments as Seals of the Covenant, the same Thing is
evident, viz. That a Man can have no Right to 'em without a Compliance with the
Terms. The Sacraments are not only Seals of the Offer on God's Part, or
Ordinances God has appointed as Confirmations of the Truth of his Covenant, as
Mr. W. seems to insist. (P. 74, 75.) For considered merely as Seals and
Confirmations of the Truth of the Gospel, they are (as Miracles and other
Evidences of the Christian Religion) Seals equally given to Christians, Jews,
Deists, moral and vicious, and the whole World that knows of 'em. Whereas, it is
manifest, in the Nature of the Thing, Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant to
be applied to the Communicant, and of which he is the immediate Subject, in a
peculiar Manner, as a Party in Covenant. Otherwise, what Need would there be of
his being one of God's Vovenant People, in any Sense whatsoever?

But now it is not reasonable to suppose, that the Seal of the Covenant belongs
to any Man, as a Party in the Covenant, who will not accept of and comply with
the Covenant. He that rejects the Covenant, and will not comply with it, has no
Interest in it: And he that has no Interest in the Covenant, has no Right to
the Seals: For the Covenant and it is Seals go together. It Is so in all
Covenants among Mankind; after a Man has come into a Bargain proposed and
offered by another, yielding to the Terms of it, he has a Right to have the
Bargain sealed, and confirmed to Him, as a Party in the Covenant; but not
before.

And if what the Communicant does, be a Seal on his Part also, as the Nature of
the Thing demonstrates, seeing he is active in the Matter, and as Mr. W. seems
willing to allow (P. 75.) it will follow, with equal Evidence, that a Man cannot
lawfully partake, unless he yields to, and complies with the Covenant. To what
Purpose is a Man's sealing an Instrument or Contract, but to confirm it as his
own Act and Deed, and to declare his Compliance with his Part of the Contract.
As when a Servant seals his Indenture, it is a Testimony and Ratification of his
Compliance to the proposed Contract with his Master. And if a Covenant of
Friendship be proposed between two Parties, and they both put their Seal to it,
hereby they both testify and declare their mutual Friendship.

It has been already observed, that unsanctified Men, while such, cannot with
any Sincerity at all testify a present cordial Compliance with the Covenant of
Grace: And as they cannot do this, so neither can they with any Sincerity
promise a future Compliance with that Covenant. Mr. W. often allows, that in
Order to Christian Communion Men must promise a Compliance with the Covenant,
in it is spiritual and saving Duties; that they will believe and repent in the
Sense of the Covenant, willingly accept of Christ and his Salvation, love him
and live to him, and will do it immediately, henceforward, from this Moment.
(P. 25. c. e. P. 26. a. P. 28. a. c. and P. 76. a. b.) But how absurd is this!
when at the same Instant, while they are making and uttering these Promises,
they are entirely averse to any such Thing; being then Enemies to Christ,
willingly rejecting Him, opposing his Salvation, striving against it, laboring
to find out all Manner of Difficulties and Hindrances in the Way of it, not
desiring it should come yet, etc. which our Author, in a Place forecited, says
is the Case with all unsanctified Men.

And when unsanctified Men promise, that they will spend the rest of their
Lives in universal Obedience to Christ, there is no Sincerity in such Promises;
because there is not such a Heart in them. There is no Man but a true Disciple
of Christ, that is willing thoroughly to deny himself for Him, and follow Him
in a Way of Obedience to all his Commands, unto the End, through all
Difficulties which Christ has given his Followers Reason to expect, or
commanded 'em to prepare for; as is evident by Christ's frequent Declarations.
( Luke xiv.25, -- 33. Matthew. x.37, 38, 59. Chap. xiii.44, 45, 46. and many
parallel Places.) If an unsanctified Man thinks he is willing, he don't know
his own Heart: If he professes to be willing, he don't know what he says. The
Difficulty and Cost of it is not in his View; and therefore he has no proper
Willingness to comply with the Cost and Difficulty. That which he is willing
for, with a moral Sincerity, is something else that he conceives of, which is a
great Deal easier, and less cross to Flesh and Blood. If a King should propose
to a Subject his building him such a Tower, promising him a certain Reward. If
the Subject should undertake it, not counting the Cost, thinking with himself
that the King meant another Sort of Tower, much cheaper; and should be willing
only to build that cheap one, which he imagined in his own Mind; when he would
by no Means have consented to build so costly a Tower as the King proposed, if
he had understood him right: such a Man could not be said properly to be
willing to comply with his Prince's Proposal, with any Sincerity at all. For
what he consents to with a moral Sincerity, is not the Thing which the King
proposed.

The Promises of unsanctified Men are like the Promises of the Man we read of (
Luke ix.57, 58.) who said, Lord, I will follow thee whither soever thou go.
To whom Christ replied, The Foxes have Holes, and the Birds of the Air have
Nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his Head. When he made his
Promise, he probably quite mistook the Thing, and did not imagine, that to
follow Christ wherever he went, would be to follow him in such Poverty and
Hardship. I suppose, the rich young Man we read of ( Mark x.17, etc.) might
have what is called moral Sincerity. But he had no Sincerity in the Covenant of
Grace. When he came to Christ to know what he should do to have eternal Life,
it is probable he ignorantly thought himself willing to yield himself to
Christ's Direction. Yet when it came to a Trial, and Christ told him he must go
and sell all that he had, and give to the Poor, it proved that he had no
Sincerity of Willingness at all for any such Thing. -- So that it is evident,
however unsanctified Men may be morally sincere in some Things, yet they have
no Sincerity of any Sort in that Covenant, of which the Sacraments are Seals;
and that moral Sincerity, distinct from gracious, in this Covenant, is a mere
Imagination, there being indeed no such Thing.

II. Another Argument against this Notion of moral Sincerity's giving a Right
to Church Communion, is this: A Quality that is transient and vanishing, can be
no Qualification or Fitness for a standing Privilege. Unsanctified Men may be
very serious, greatly affected, and much engaged in Religion: But the Scripture
compares their Religion to a Lamp not supplied with Oil, which will go out, and
to a Plant that has no Root nor Deepness of Earth, which will soon wither; and
compares such unsanctified Men to the Dog that will return to his Vomit, and to
the Sow which though washed ever so clean, yet her Nature not being changed, will
return to her wallowing in the Mire.

Mr. W. allows, that Persons in Order to come to Sacraments must have deep
Convictions, an earnest Concern to obtain Salvation, etc. Now every one who is
in any Degree acquainted with religious Matters, knows that such Convictions
are not wont to last a great while, if they have no saying Issue. Mr. S. in his
Sermon on the Danger of speedy Degeneracy (P. 11.) says, Unconverted Men will
grow weary of religious Duties. And our Author himself (P. 78. c.) speaking of
those Professors in the primitive Churches, that fell away to Heresy and other
Wickedness, takes Notice that the Apostle observes, IT WILL BE SO, -- that they
which are approved, might be made manifest: And says Mr. W. upon it, Evil and
unsanctified Men, by such Sins, will discover their Hypocrisy.

Now seeing this is the Case with moral Sincerity and common Religion, how can
it be a Qualification for a standing Privilege? Nothing can be a Fitness for a
durable Privilege, but a durable Qualification. For no Qualification has any
Fitness or Adaptedness for more than it extends to; as a short Scabbard cannot
be fit for a long Sword. If a Man going a Journey in the Night, needs a Lamp to
light him in his Way, who will pretend that a flaming Wick without Oil, which
will last but a few Rods, is fit for his Purpose? Or if a Man were building an
House for himself and Family, should he put into the Frame, Pieces of Timber
known to be of such a Nature as that they would probably be rotten in a few
Months; or should he take Blocks of Ice, instead of hewn Stone, because during
a present cold Season they seemed to he hard and firm; and withal should for a
Covering put only Leaves that will soon fade away, instead of Tiles or
Shingles, that are solid and lasting; would not every Spectator ridicule his
Folly!

If it should be said, that unsanctified Men, when they lose their moral
Sincerity, may be cast out again: This is far from helping the Case, or showing
that such Men were ever fit to be admitted. To say, a Piece of Timber, though
not of a durable Nature, is fit to be put into the Frame of a Building, because
when it begins to rot, it may be pulled out again, is so far from proving that
it was ever fit to be put in, that the speedy Necessity of pulling it out
rather proves the contrary. If we had the Power of constituting a human Body,
or it were left to us to add Members to our own Bodies, as there might be
Occasion; we should not think such a Member was fit to (...) added to the
Frame, that had already radically seated in it a Cancer or Gangrene, by which
it could last but a little While it self, and would endanger the other Members;
though it were true, that when the Disease should prevail, there were Surgeons
which might be procured to cut that Member off.

But to consider a little further this Point of moral Sincerity's qualifying
Persons for the Privileges of the Church. I would lay down this Proposition as
a Thing of clear Evidence: Those Persons have no Fitness in themselves to come
to the Privileges of the Church, who, if they were known, would not be fit to
be admitted by others. For to say, they are fit to be Members, and yet not fit
to be allowed to be Members, is apparently absurd. But they who have no better
Fitness than moral Sincerity, if that were known, would not be fit to be
admitted by others: as is allowed by Mr. W. For he holds, that in Order to be
fit to be admitted by others, they must credibly appear to them to have
something more than moral Sincerity, even Gospel-Holiness. And it is evident in
it self, as well as allowed by Mr W. that if such were known, they would not be
fit to be admitted, only on their moral Sincerity, and the Profession and
Promises they make from such a Principle: And that for this Reason, because
such a Principle alone would not be fit to be trusted. God himself has taught
his Church, that the Religion of unsanctified Men is not fit to be trusted; as
a Lamp without Oil, and a Plant without Root, are Things not to be trusted. God
has directly taught his Church to expect, that such Religion will fail; and
that such Men, having no higher Principle, will return to their Wickedness.
Job. xxvii.8, 9, 10.) The Hypocrite -- will he delight himself in the Almighty?
will he always call upon God? -- Dan. xii.10. The Wicked will do wickedly. And
therefore God does not require his Church to accept their Profession and
Promises. If he has taught us not to credit their Profession and Promises, then
certainly he has taught us not to accept them.

III. Another Argument against this supposed Rule of allowing and requiring
unsanctified Men with moral Sincerity, to come to Sacraments, is this. That
Rule, which if fully attended, would naturally bring it to pass, that the
greater Part of Communicants would be unfit, even according to that very Rule,
cannot be a Divine Rule: But this supposed Rule of moral Sincerity is such a
Rule. For if this Rule be universally attended, then all unsanctified Men, who
have present Convictions of Conscience sufficient to make 'em morally sincere,
must come into the Communion of the Church. But this Conviction and common
Religion, if it don't issue in Conversion (as has been observed) commonly
vanishes away in a short Time: And yet still these Persons, if not convicted of
open Scandal, are left in the Communion of the Church, and remain there,
without even moral Sincerity. -- Experience gives us abundant Reason to think,
that of those who some Time or other have consirable Convictions of Conscience,
so as to make 'em for the present to be what is called morally sincere, but few
are savingly converted. How small a Proportion are there of the vast
Multitudes, that in the Time of the late religious Commotion through the Land
had their Consciences awakened, who give hopeful abiding Evidences of a saving
Conversion to God!
And if all these must be admitted (as they must, if this Rule be fully
attended) then their Convictions going away, and their Sincerity vanishing with
it, it will hereby be bro't about, that the Lord's Table is chiefly surrounded
with the worst Sort of morally insincere Persons, viz. stupid Backsliders, that
are in themselves far worse than they were before, according to the
Scripture-Account* Matthew. xii.45. and 2 Pet. ii.20. -- And this as the natural
Consequence of the forementioned Rule, appointing moral Sincerity to be the
Qualification for Communion. Thus this supposed Rule supplants its own Design.

IV. Another Argument, that moral Sincerity is not the Qualification to which
God has annexed a lawful Right to Sacraments, is, That this Qualification is
not at all inconsistent with a Man's living at the same Time in the most
heinous Wickedness, in a superlative Degree contrary to the Christian Religion.

It was before observed to be a Thing evident in itself, and allowed by Mr. W.
That there are some Sins, which, while wilfully continued and lived in, though
secretly, do wholly disqualify Persons for Christian Sacraments, and make it
unlawful for Men to partake of them.

Now if it be thus with some Sins, doubtless it is because of the Heinousness
of those Sins, the high Degree of Wickedness which is in them. And hence it
will follow, that those Sins which are in themselves most heinous, and most
contrary to the Christian Religion, do especially disqualify Persons for
Christian Sacraments, when wilfully lived in.

Let it therefore now be considered, whether it will not follow from these
Premises, That for Men to live in Enmity against God and Christ, and in wilful
Unbelief and Rejection of Christ (as the Scriptures teach, and as Mr. S. and
Mr. W. too assert, is the Case with all unsanctified Men under the Gospel)
wholly disqualifies Men for Christian Sacraments. For it is very manifest, by
Scripture and Reason, that to live in these Things, is to live in some of the
most heinous Kinds of Wickedness; as is allowed by Calvinistick Divines in
general, and by Mr. S. in particular, who says ( Safety of Ap. P. 224. d.) You
cannot anger God more by any Thing, than by continuing in the Neglect of
Christ. This is the great Controversy God has with Sinners; not that they have
been guilty of these and those particular Transgressions, but that they abide
in the Rejection of the Gospel. Again, he says, ( Ibid. P 249. e.) The great
Sin, that God is angry with you for, is your Unbelief. Despising the Gospel is
the great provoking Sin.

A Man's continuing in Hatred of his Brother, especially a Fellow-Communicant,
is generally allowed to be a Thing that disqualifies for Communion: The Apostle
compares it to Leaven in the Passover, 1 Cor. v.6, 7, 8. But now certainly it is
as bad, and as contrary to the Nature and Design of Christian Sacraments, for a
Man to live in Hatred of CHRIST, and to remain a hateful and accursed Enemy (if
I may use Mr. W -- ms's own Language) to the glorious Redeemer and Head of the
Christian Church.

None will deny, that Lying and Perjury are very gross and heinous Sins, and
(if known) very scandalous; and therefore it follows from what was observed
before, that such Sins, if lived in, though secretly, do disqualify Persons for
Christian Sacraments in God's Sight. But by our Author's own Account, all
unsanctified Men that partake of the Lord's Supper, live in Lying and Perjury,
and go on to renew these Crimes continually; in-as-much-as while they continue
ungodly Men, they live in a constant Violation of their Promise and Oath. For
Mr. W. often lays it down, that all who enter into Covenant with God, do
promise spiritual Duties, such as Repentance, Faith, Love, etc, And that they
promise to perform these hence-forward, even from the present Moment, unto the
End of Life; (See P. 25. c, e. 26. a. 28. a, c. 76. a, b.) And that they don't
only promise, but Swear to do this. (P. 18. d. 100. c. 101. a. 129. a. 130. c.
140. b.) But for a Man to violate the Promises he makes in covenanting with
God, Mr. W. once and again speaks of it as Lying. (P. 24. d, e. P. 130. c.) And
if so, doubtless their breaking the Oath they swear to God, is Perjury. -- Now
lying to Men is bad; but lying to GOD is worse. ( Act. v.4.) (...) without
Doubt, Perjury toward GOD is the worst Sort of (...). But if unsanctified Men,
when they entered into Covenant with God, promised and swore, that they would
immediately and thence-forward accept of Christ as their Savior, and love him,
and live to him; then while they continue in a wilful Rejection of him (which
according to Mr. W. all unregenerate Men do) they live continually in the
Violation of their Promise and Oath. Here I would observe, that not only in the
general do unsanctified Men, notwithstanding their moral Sincerity, thus live
in the most heinous Wickedness; but particularly, according to Mr. W -- ms's
own Doctrine, their very Attendance on the outward Ordinances and Duties of
Worship is the vilest, most flagrant, and abominable Impiety. In his Sermons on
Christ a King and Witness (P. 77, 78.) He says, If a Man could perform all the
outward Acts of Worship and Obedience, which the Bible requires, from the
Beginning to the End of it, and not do them from Faith in Christ, and Love to
God, and not express by them the Thoughts, Desires and Actings of his Soul;
They would be so far from being that Obedience which Christ requires, that they
would be a mocking of God, and hateful to him. These outward Acts ought to be
no other, and in Religion are designed to stand for nothing else, but to be
Representations of a Man's Soul, and the Acts of that: And when they are not
so, they are in their own Nature a LIE, and false Pretense of something within,
which is not there: Therefore the Lord abhors them, and reckons these false
Pretenses the VILEST WICKEDNESS. -- Now when a Man performs all outward
Obedience and Worship, but it does not come from his Heart, he practically
denies the Omniscience of Christ, while he puts before him a Show and Pretense
of something for the Reality; and so he belies his own Profession. And all
this, be it more or less, whatever it pretends to be of Religion, instead of
being that which Christ requires, is entirely different from it, yea,
INFINITELY CONTRARY TO IT. And those same Actions, which when they are the
Language of the Heart, and flow from it, are pleasing and acceptable to God and
Jesus Christ, are true Obedience to him; when they do not, are reckoned the
MOST FLAGRANT AND ABOMINABLE IMPIETY, and threatened with the SEVEREST
DAMNATION OF HELL. -- Now, who can believe, that God has, by his own holy
Institution, made that Sort of Sincerity, which is nothing better than what is
consistent with such a lying, vile, abominable, flagrantly wicked Pretense and
Show of Religion as this, the very Thing that gives a Right, even in his Sight,
to Christian Sacraments!

I might here also observe, that if moral Sincerity or common Grace gives a
Right to Sacraments in the Sight of God, then that which (according to Mr. S --
d's Doctrine before observed) is a SPIRIT OF LUST, that which is contrary to,
and at War with, and would destroy saving Grace, is the Thing which gives a
Right in the Sight of God to Christian Sacraments.




I would observe one Thing further under this Head, viz. That ungodly Men which
live under the Gospel, notwithstanding any moral Sincerity they may have, are
worse, and more provoking Enemies to God, than the very Heathen, who never
sinned against Gospel Light and Mercy. This is very manifest by the Scriptures,
particularly Matthew. X.13, 14. Amos III.2. Romans II.9. 2 Pet. II.21. Rev. III.15,
16.

I having suggested concerning Mr. Stoddard's Doctrine of admitting more
unconverted than converted, by attending Christ's Rule, that this supposes it
to be the Case of the Members of the visible Church, that the greater Part of
'em are more provoking Enemies to God than most of the Heathen; Mr. W.
represents himself as greatly alarmed at this: He calls it an extraordinary
Passage, and puts five Questions about it to my serious Consideration. (P. 72,
73.) The first and chief Question is this; Did Mr. S. ever say in the Appeal,
or any where else, of most of our Fellow-Worshippers at the Sacrament, that we
have no Reason to think concerning them, but that they are more provoking
Enemies to the Lord, whom Christians love and adore, than most of the very
Heathen? His three next Questions are to represent the Heinousness of such
supposed ill Treatment of Mr. S. -- And I think will be sufficiently answered,
by what I shall offer in Reply to the first.

I will tell him what Mr. S. said. Speaking to such as don't come to Christ,
living under the Gospel, he said ( Safety of Ap. P. 234, 235.) You may not think
to escape as the Heathen do: Your Load will be heavier, and your Fire will be
hotter, and your Judgment sorer, than the Judgment of other Men. God will
proportion every Man's Misery to his Iniquity. And as you have enjoyed greater
Light and Love, so you must expect more amazing and exquisite Wrath, than other
Men: Conscience has more to accuse you of and condemn you for; and so has God:
And you will sink down deeper into Hell, than other Men. You are treasuring up
a greater Measure of Wrath, than others, against the Day of Wrath. You will
wish you had lived in the darkest Corners of the Earth among Scythians and
Barbarians. --

And Mr. W. must allow me to remind him of what another Divine has said, and
that is himself. In his Sermon on Isa xlv.11. (P. 25, 26.) he says, It Is to be
feared, there are great Numbers here present, that are in an unconverted,
unrenewed, unpardoned State; Strangers from God, and Enemies to him. Yet you
now look with great Pity and Compassion on that poor Captive, for whom we have
now been offering up our earnest Prayers, Mrs. Eunice Williams, bro't up in
Canada, among the Caghnawaga Indians, Sister to the then Pastor of the Church
in Mansfield, where this Sermon was preached, upon a Day of Prayer kept on her
Account; she being then in that Place on a Visit.
who has been so long in so pitiable and sorrowful a Condition, and who is now
in the Thickness of Popish Darkness and Superstition. -- If you are out of
Christ, and destitute of true Faith in him, if your Natures remain unrenew'd
and unsanctified, what is your State better than hers, which looks so sorrowful
and distressing? Rather, is it not worse? When you consider, that in the
Fullness of the Means of Grace which you have enjoyed all your Days, you are as
far from any saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ, as those who have lived in the
Dregs and Abyss of Popish Ignorance, and know not what to believe, but what the
Church, that is, Antichrist, tells them. If you die thus, your Misery will be
aggravated INCONCEIVABLY beyond theirs: Which Christ has plainly enough shown
us, when he upbraided the Cities wherein most of his mighty Works were done,
and tells them how much in the Comparison they fall below Tire and Sidon
(Heathen Cities, notorious for Luxury, Debauchery, and the grossest Idolatry)
and Sodom; for whom it should be more tolerable, than for them.

The same Author says also, even in the Book under Consideration, (P. 86.) That
the Unbelief and Impieties of visible Saints, is what they will be punished for
above all Men in the World.

And now, I think it may be proper for Mr. W. himself to answer his 5th
Question, which he puts to my serious Consideration, viz. What Honor is it to
our Lord Jesus Christ, to treat visible Saints in such a Manner, when at the
same Time it is his revealed Will they should be outwardly treated as visible
Saints?

SECTION IX. A View of what Mr. W. says concerning the public Covenanting of
Professors.
I. MR. W. often speaks with Contempt, of my supposing it to be a Duty required
of such as come to Sacraments, that they should explicitly own the Covenant,
and disputes largely against it. (P. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, and many
other Places.) He says concerning me (P. 22. a, b.) It Is very unhappy, that
this good Gentleman should use the Scripture in such a Manner, to prove a
divine Institution which never had an Existence; and after all that is said, is
but a mere Imagination and Chimera; it being evident, there never was any such
divine Institution for the Church under the Old Testament, binding particular
Persons publicly and explicitly to own the Covenant, in order to their
enjoying the outward Ordinances of it. -- However, it falls out something
happily for me* that I am not quite alone in this Chimera, but have Mr. W.
himself to join me in it; who abundantly asserts the same Thing (P. 5. c. P. 8.
a. P. 9. b, c. and many other Places) who uses the Scripture in the same
Manner, and supposes the same divine Institution; and who (in P. 5. b, c. of
the Treatise in Hand) having stated the following Inquiry, What is that
Evidence, which by DIVINE APPOINTMENT the Church is to have, of the Saintship
of those who are admitted to the outward Privileges of the Covenant of Grace?
makes this Answer to it: The SCRIPTURE has determined the Matter thus, that the
open Profession and Declaration of a PERSON's believing in Christ, -- and an
hearty Consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, and Engagement on his
Part to fulfill it, etc. is the sole and entire Ground of that public Judgment,
which the Church is to make of the real Saintship of Professors. -- It Is
manifest, he cannot intend merely that they should be the Posterity of such as
thus owned the Covenant, or declared their Consent to it, and so are looked
upon as those that owned the Covenant in their Ancestors, at the Beginning of
the Covenant-Line (though sometimes he seems to suppose, this is all that is
necessary, as I shall take particular Notice by and by:) For here he expressly
speaks of a personal owning the Covenant, or the open Profession and
Declaration of a PERSON's Consent to the Covenant. And thus he often speaks of
the same Matter, in like Manner, as a personal Thing, or what is done by the
Person judged of, and received. (See P. 10. c, d. 31. e 32. e. 33. a. 34 b, c.
73. b. 84. a. 139. a.) And in the 2d Page of his Preface, he declares himself
fully established in Mr. S -- d's Doctrine concerning this Affair of
Qualifications for the Lord's Supper; who expressly declares it to be his
Judgment, that It is requisite, that Persons be not admitted unto Communion in
the Lord's Supper, without making a PERSONAL and public Profession of their
Faith and Repentance. ( Appeal. P. 93, 94.)

And as Mr. W. holds, that there msut be a public Personal owning the
Covenant; so he also maintains, that this Profession must be explicit, or
express. -- He says (P 20. d, e.) Since we have no Direction in the Bible, at
what Time nor in what Manner any personal explicit Covenanting should be
performed, -- it appears plain to a Demonstration, that the People knew nothing
of any such Institution; as I suppose, the Christian Church never did, 'till
Mr. Edwards discovered it. But if I was the first Discoverer, he should have
owned, that since I have discovered it he himself and all my Opposers have seen
Cause to follow me, and receive my Discovery. For so the Case seems to be, if
he gives us a true Account (in P. 132. b.) where he rejects, with Indignation,
the Imputation of any other Opinion. How often (says he) has Mr. Edwards said,
none but visible Saints are to be admitted? Do not ALL Mr. Edwards's OPPOSERS
say, that NO MAN is to be admitted, who does not profess his hearty Belief of
the Gospel, and the earnest and sincere Purpose of his Heart, so far as he
knows it, to obey all God's Commands, and keep his COVENANT? NONE who do not
make as full and EXPRESS a Profession as the Israelites did, or was ever
required by Christ or his Apostles, in any Instances that can be produced in
the Bible, of Bodies of Men or particular Persons Admission into visible
Covenant with God? -- He had before spoken of the WORDS which the Israelites
used in their entering into Covenant with God. (P. 5. d.) Which must refer to
their entering into Covenant in the Wilderness; for we have no Account of any
Words at all, used by that Nation, at their entering into Covenant, if not
there. And this he sometimes speaks of as the Covenant they made, when God took
'em into Covenant (P. 8. d. 36. d, e. 37. a, b.) And (P. 20.) he allows that to
be an Instance of explicit Covenanting: But ridicules my pretending to show,
that explicit Covenanting was a divine Institutution for All; when, he says, we
have an Account of but four Instances of any explicit Covenanting with God by
the Jews, and those on most extraordinary Occasions, and by the Body of the
People. But what Matter is it, whether there were four, or but two, or only
that one Instance in the Wilderness? when he himself with such Earnestness
declares, that all my Opposers hold, every Man must make as full and express a
Profession of the Covenant as ever the Israelites did, or was ever required, in
any Instance that can be produced in the Bible, whether of Bodies of Men or
particular Persons Admission, etc. If this be so, and what he said before be
also true, then all Israel, even every individual Person among them, that ever
was admitted to the Privileges of the Church, throughout all their Generations,
by his own Confession and Assertion, did personally make as explicit a
Profession of the Covenant, as the Body of the People did in that Instance in
the Wilderness. And not only so, but the same must every individual Person do,
hat ever comes to Sacraments, through all Ages, to the End of the World. --
Thus Mr. W. fights hard to beat down himself. But I will not say in his own
Language, that in so doing He fights hard to beat down a poor Man of Straw.

If any should say, that Mr. W. when speaking of an express Profession, don't
mean a Profession in Words, but only in Actions; such as an outward Attendance
on Ordinances and Duties of Worship: I answer, if such Actions are a
Profession, yet certainly they are not an express Profession; they are no more
than an implicit Profession. And besides, it is very plain, the Profession he
speaks of is a verbal Profession, or a Profession in Words* Thus (P. 36. b.)
when describing the Profession which ought to be made, he says, It is in as
strong WORDS, as were used by any whom the Apostles admitted. And elsewhere (as
was before noted) he often insists, that a Profession should be made in WORDS
without any Discrimination as to their Meaning. Which shows, it is a Profession
in Words, that he designs. And although (P. 104. e.) he speaks of a Performance
of the outward Duties of Morality and Worship, as the only Way that God ever
appointed of making real Saintship visible: Yet this is only another Instance
of his great Inconsistence with himself; as appears by what has already been
observed, and appears further by this, that when he speaks of a Profession of
Consent to the Terms of the Covenant, etc. he often speaks of it as a
Profession which ought to be made in Order to Admission to these Ordinances.
(P. 5. b, c. 10. a. 35. e. 36. a, b, c. 132. b. and other Places) If so, then
how can the Attendance it self, on these Ordinances of Worship, be all the
Profession which is to be made? Must Men first come to Ordinances, in Order to
Admission to Ordinances! And moreover, Mr. W. himself distinguishes between
Engaging and swearing to keep Covenant in the public Profession, and Attending
on the Ordinances and Duties of Worship, which he speaks of as belonging to the
Fulfillment of the Engagement and Oath. (P. 130.) And lastly I would observe,
though it could be consistently made out (which it can never be) that Mr. W.
don't mean a Professing in Words, it would be nothing to the Purpose. If it be
in Words, or in other Signs which are equivalent to Words and which are a full
and express Profession (as Mr. W. says) it is exactly the same Thing as to my
Purpose, and the Consequence of the Argument, which was, that real Godliness
must be professed. And indeed this very Thing which I endeavored to prove by
all that I said on this Head, is expressly again and again allowed by Mr. W. Yet
he makes a great Ado, as if there was a vast Difference between Him and Me in
this Affair of public Covenanting with God; and as though my Notions of it were
very singular, absurd, and mischievous.

II. Mr. W. says a great Deal in Opposition to Me, to show that swearing by
God's Name, swearing to the Lord, and the like, don't mean Covenanting with
God: But yet (in P. 18.) in the midst of his earnest Dispute against it, he
owns it. -- I mentioned several Scripture-Prophecies, referring to the Gentile
Converts in the Days of the Gospel, which foretell that they should swear by
God's Name, swear to the Lord of Hosts, etc. as a Prediction of the Gentiles
public Covenanting with God; using that as one Thing which confirmed, that
this was commonly the Meaning of such Phrases in the Old Testament. But Mr. W.
despises my interpretation of these Prophecies, and my Argument from 'em.
Nevertheless, in his Reply, he owns the very Thing: He in Effect owns, that
entering into Covenant, and owning the Covenant is what is meant by these
Prophecies; mentioning this, plainly with Approbation, as the universal Sense
of Protestant Commentators. His Words are (P. 18. d. e.) As to all these
Prophecies, which Mr. Edwards has quoted, referring to the Gentiles, and their
swearing by the Name of the Lord, the Sense of Protestant Commentators upon
them, I think, universally is, that when the Gentiles in God's appointed Time
should be brought into Covenant with God, it should be as the Jews were, by
being persuaded to consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, and engaging
themselves to God, to be faithful to Him, and keep Covenant with Him. He who
heartily consents to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, gives up himself to
the Lord, gives the Hand to the Lord, engages to own and serve Him; which is
the Thing signified in all those metaphorical Phrases, which describe or point
out this Event, in the Old Testament Language.

III. Mr. W. in these last cited Words, explains the Phrase of giving the Hand
to the Lord, as signifying engaging themselves to God in Covenant, and
consenting to the Terms of the Covenant (as the Reader sees) and yet in the
next Page but two, he contemns and utterly disallows my interpreting the same
Phrase in the same Manner. Mr. W. says (P. 21. c.) As to the Words of Hezekiah,
when he called the Israelites to the Passover, bidding them yield or give the
Hand to the Lord; and in Ezra, They gave the Hand to put away their Wives;
which he thinks to be an Hebrew Phrase for entering into Covenant, it carries
its own Confutation with it.

IV. Mr. W. often speaks of the Professions made by the ancient Israelites and
Jewish Christians, when they entered into Covenant, and were admitted into the
Church. Whereas, according to the Doctrine of the same Author, in the same
Book, we have no Account of any Profession made by either, on any such
Occasion. For he insists, that the Children of such as are in Covenant, are
born in Covenant; and are not admitted into Covenant, any otherwise than as
they were seminally in their Ancestors; and that the Profession of their
Ancestors, at the Head of the Covenant-Line, is that individual Profession,
which brings them into Covenant. His Words are (P. 135. e. P. 136. a, b, c.) It
is one and the same individual Profession and Engagement, which brings them and
their Children into Covenant. And if there is one Instance in the Bible, where
God ever took any Man into Covenant, and not his Children at the same Time, I
should be glad to see it. It is by virtue of their being in Covenant, that they
have a Right to the Seals. And if these Children are not cast out of Covenant
by God, their Children have as good a Right to the Seals as they had. It Is
God's Will, that his Mark and Seal should be set upon Them, AND THEIR CHILDREN,
AND THEIR CHILDREN FOR EVER, 'till God casts them out of Covenant. -- It Is
certain, they have an Interest in the Covenant, and they have a Right to the
Privileges of the Covenant so long as they remain in Covenant; and that is,
'till God cuts them off, and casts them out.

And accordingly he supposes, that John the Baptist never inquired into the
doctrinal Knowledge of those he baptized, because they were already in Covenant
with God, and Members of his visible Church, and not yet turned out: And he
suggests, that John knew many of them not to be of a good moral Character. (P.
98.) So he largely insists, that the three Thousand Jews and Proselytes that
the Apostles baptized ( Act. ii.) were not taken into Covenant, but only
continued in Covenant. (P. 46, 47.) So he supposes the Eunuch, before Philip
baptized him, was a Member of the Church, and in Covenant with God. (P. 50.)
Though he inconsistently mentions those same Persons in the 2d of Acts, and the
Eunuch, as admitted into the Church by the Apostles, and primitive Ministers.
(P. 9. e. P. 10. a. P. 59. a.) And so (P. 8. d. P. 26. a.) he mentions God's
taking all Israel into Covenant: He mentions the Profession which the
Israelites made (P. 25. e.) and (P. 5. d.) he speaks of the Words which the
Israelites used, in their entering into Covenant with God. And (P. 36. d. e. P.
37. a b.) he speaks of their Profession in Moses Time, which God trusted so far
as to admit 'em into Covenant. Whereas indeed, according to Mr. W. they were
not taken in, nor did they enter into Covenant, neither in the Plains of Moab,
nor at Mount Sinai. He says expressly, that they were in Covenant before that
Time, when in Egypt, being taken-in in their Ancestors, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. (P. 91. b.) But then we read of no Words, that these Patriarchs used at
their entering into Covenant. -- And it will undoubtedly follow, on Mr. W --
ms's Principles, that we must go further back still for Israel's being taken
into Covenant; we must goup even to Adam himself, the first Father of Mankind,
who was visibly in Covenant, and so his Posterity, in the Line of Noah's
Ancestors, without the Line's being broken by a visible cutting off, and
casting out by God, as we have all Reason to suppose. And after the Flood, we
have Reason to think, God had a Covenant-Race continued in Shem's Posterity,
especially in the Line of Abraham's Ancestors. And though Terah, Abraham's
Father, was tainted with the then-prevailing Idolatry; yet there is no
Appearance of the Line's being then cut off, in the Way Mr. W. speaks of, by
God's visibly casting him out. On the contrary, God took a special Fatherly
Care of Him and his Children, in bringing them from Ur of the Chaldees, the
Land of graven Images, to Haran. (Genesis xi.31.) And God is called the God of the
Father of Abraham and Nahor, that is, the God of Terah. (Genesis xxxi.53.) And if
it be said, that in Abraham began a new Dispensation of the Covenant; so that
Abraham might properly on that Account be said to be taken into Covenant, as
tho his Ancestors had not been in Covenant: I answer, The Alteration of the
Dispensation was (...) on Measure so great as that after Christ's Resurrection
and Ascension; and yet Mr. W. (...) not allow, that the Jewish Converts,
received in ( Act. ii.) on this ne^ Dispensation, were any more than continued
in Covenant, and in the Church. So that, according to Mr. W -- ms's Scheme, it
must be Adam's Profession of Religion, that was the individual Profession which
made all his Posterity, in the Line of the Church, even to the Apostles Days,
visible Saints, or (as he himself explains visible Saintship) such as we have
rational Ground to think are real Saints, possessed of Gospel-Holiness; and on
that Account have a Right to Sacraments. For so He says it is with the Children
of them that are in Covenant, and their Children, and their Children for ever,
'till cut off and cast out by God.

So that now we have the Scheme in a true View of it. -- The Pharisees and
Sadducees that John baptized, whom Mr. W. supposes John knew to be not of a
good moral Character, and whose Doctrinal Knowledge he did not inquire into
before he baptized 'em; because they had before been admitted in their
Ancestors; even These were visible Saints, and such as John had rational Ground
to think had sufficient doctrinal Knowledge and were orthodox and real Saints,
having moral Evidence that they had Gospel-Holiness, because Adam their
original Ancestor made a Profession of Religion, in Words of double Meaning,
without any Marks of Distinction or Discrimination, by which any might know
their Meaning!

And if we should go back no further than Abraham, it would not much mend the
Matter; supposing the Case had been so, that we had the Words of both Abraham's
and Adam's Profession written down in our Bibles: whereas, we have neither; no,
nor have we the Words of the Profession of any one Person, either in the Old
Testament or New, at their being taken into the Church, if the Things which Mr.
W. says are true; though he speaks so often of Professions, and Words of
Professions, and Declarations, made on such Occasions, as if we had an express
Account of 'em in Scripture.

V. As our Author abundantly maintains, that unsanctified Men in covenanting
with God, may and do promise the Exercise of saving Faith, Repentance, Love,
etc. So he holds, that they promise to begin the Exercise of these Graces
immediately, from this Moment, and to live in them from henceforth. (P. 25. c,
e. and 26. a. and 28. a. c. ^6. a, b.)

Now I desire this Matter may be looked into, and thoroughly examined. -- Not
only the holy Scriptures, and agreeable to them, Mr. Stoddard, and sound
Divines in general teach us, but Mr. W. himself maintains, that Men who are
unsanctified, do for the present refuse and oppose these Things. In a forecited
Place of his Sermon on Isai. xlv.11. our Author says, that unregenerate and
unsanctified Men oppose all Means for the bringing them to these Things, are
willingly without 'em, and labor to find out all manner of Difficulties and
Hindrances in the Way of 'em; and if they pray for 'em, don't desire they
should come yet, but would stay a while longer. Now, how is this consistent
with such Persons promising, with any Sincerity at all, that they will comply
with and perform these Things immediately, from henceforth, without staying one
Moment longer? If God calls a Man this Moment to yield his whole Heart to him
in Faith, Love and new Obedience; and if he in Answer to the Call solemnly
promises and swears It must be observed, that Mr. W. often speaks of the
Promise which an unregenerate Man makes in Covenanting with God, as his Oath.
P. ^8. ^. P. 1^0. d. P. 101. a. P. 129. a. P. 130. c. P. 143. b.
to God, that he will immediately comply with the Call, without the least
Delay, and does it with any Sincerity, inconsistent with the most vile Perfidy
and Perjury; then how does he now willingly refuse, oppose, and struggle
against it, as choosing to stay a while longer?

Besides, such Promises and Oaths of unregenerate Men must not only be contrary
to Sincerity, but very presumptuous, upon these two Accounts. (1.) Because
herein they take an Oath to the most High, which, it is ten Thousand to one,
they will break as soon as the Words are out of their Mouths, by continuing
still unconverted; yea, an Oath which they are breaking even while they are
uttering it. And what Folly and Wickedness is it for Men to take such Oaths?
and how contrary to the Counsel given by the wise Man, in Eccl. v.2, 4, 5, 6?
And to what Purpose should ungodly Men be encouraged to utter such Promises and
Oaths before the Church, for the Church's Acceptance; which are so far from
being worthy to be credited, or a Fulfillment of them to be expected, that it is
many Thousands, and perhaps Millions of Times more likely to be otherwise? That
is, it is so much more likely they will not be converted the very next Moment.
-- (2.) When an unconverted Man makes such a Promise, he promises what he has
not to give, or that which he has no Sufficiency for the Performance of; no
Sufficiency in himself, nor any Sufficiency in any other that he has a Claim
to, or Interest in. There is indeed a Sufficiency in God to enable him; but he
has no Claim to it. For God's helping a Man savingly to believe in Christ is a
saving Blessing: And Mr. W. himself owns, that a Man cannot by Promise claim any
saving Blessings, till he has fulfilled the Conditions of the Covenant of
Grace. (P. 22. e. and 28. e.) So that in vain it is said by Mr. W. (P. 27. e.)
I pray that it may be thoroughly considered what is propounded in the Covenant
of Grace, and on what Stock a Man is to finish. Meaning (as appears by the
Sequel) the Stock of God's Sufficiency. To what Purpose is this said? when the
Covenant of Grace promises or makes over no such Stock to him who has no
Interest in the Promises of it, as having not yet complied with the Condition
of its Promises. Nor does an unconverted Man promise any Thing in a humble
Dependence on that Stock: no such Men do lay hold on God's Strength, or trust
in God's Sufficiency: For this is a discriminating Mark of a true Saint; as our
Author himself observes, in that forecited Passage, in his Sermons on Christ a
King and Witness, P. 19. c.

I would here take Notice of it as remarkable, that though Mr. W. had owned that
a natural Man can claim no saving Blessings by God's Promise, yet to help out
his Scheme of a natural Man's engaging and promising, even with an Oath, the
Exercises of saving Grace, he (in P. 27, 28. especially P. 28 e) speaking of
the great Encouragement on which unsanctified Men can promise these Things,
supposes God has given such Encouragement to them who promise and engage
themselves to God, with that Degree of Earnestness and Sincerity which he often
speaks of as requisite to Communion, that we have Reason to determine that God
never will fail of bestowing on them saving Grace; so that they shall fulfill
their Promises. I say, he supposes that we have Reason to determine this,
because he himself determines it. His Words are these: Though there be no Promise
of saving Good, exclusive of Faith, yet there being a Command and
Encouragement, there are suitable Springs of his Endeavor and Hope, in his
engaging himself to God and casting himself upon his Mercy with all the
Earnestness and Sincerity he can. GOD NEVER will be worse than his
Encouragement, nor do less than he has encouraged; and he has said, To him that
has shall be given. Now if this be so, and if this will make it out, that an
unconverted Man who is morally sincere may reasonably, on this Encouragement,
promise immediately to believe and repent, though this ben't in his own Power;
then it will follow, that whenever an unconverted Man covenants, with such
moral Sincerity as gives a lawful Right to Sacraments, God NEVER will fail of
giving him converting Grace that Moment, to enable him from thence-forward to
believe and repent, as he promises. And if this be so, and none may lawfully
covenant with God without moral Sincerity (as Mr. W. also says) then it will
follow, that never any one Person comes, nor can come lawfully to the Lord's
Supper, in an unconverted State; because when they enter into Covenant lawfully
(supposing them not converted before) God always converts 'em in the Moment of
their covenanting, before they come to the Lord's Table. -- And if so, what is
become of all this grand Dispute about the Lawfulness of Person's coming to the
Lord's Table, who have not converting Grace?

VI. Mr. W. greatly misrepresents Me from Time to Time, in representing as though
I had asserted, that it is impossible for an unsanctified Man to enter into
Covenant with God; and that those who were unsanctified among the Israelites,
did not enter into Covenant with God; that the pretended Covenanting of such is
not Covenanting, but only Lying, wilful Lying; and that no natural Man can own
the Covenant, but that he certainly Lies, knows he Lies, and designedly Lies,
in all these Things, when he says them. (P. 26. d. 22. d. 24. d. 31. a, b, c.
21. c.) Whereas, I never said, nor supposed any such Thing. I never doubted but
that Multitudes of unsanctified Persons, and in all Ages of the Christian
Church, and in this Age, and here in New England, have entered visibly, and in
Profession, into the Covenant of Grace, and have owned that Covenant, and
promised a Compliance with all the Duties of it, without known or wilful Lying;
for this Reason, because they were deceived, and did not know their own Hearts:
And that they (however deceived) were under the Obligations of the Covenant,
and bound by their Engagements and Promises: And that in that Sense, they were
God's Vovenant People, that by their own binding Act they were engaged to God
in Covenant; though such an Act, performed without habitual Holiness, be an
unlawful one. If a Thing be externally devoted to God, by doing what ought not
to have been done, the Thing devoted may, by that Act, be the Lord's: As it was
with the Censers of Korah and his Company. ( Number. xvi.37, 38.)

What I asserted, was, that none could profess a Compliance with the Covenant
of Grace, and avouch JEHOVAH to be their God, and Christ to be their Savior, i
e. that they are so by their own Act and Choice, and yet love the World more
than JEHOVAH without Lying, or being deceived. See my Inquiry, P. 33* 34.
And that he who is wholly under the Power of a carnal Mind, which is not
subject to the Law of God nor indeed can be, cannot promise to love God with
all his Heart and with all his Soul, without either great Deceit, or the most
manifest and palpable Absurdity: In-as-much-as Promising supposes the Person to
be conscious to Himself, or persuaded of himself, that he has such a Heart in
him; because his Lips pretend to declare his Heart, and the Nature of a Promise
implies real Intention, Will, and Compliance of Heart. Ibid. P. 37, ^8.
And what can be more evident, than these Propositions? Surely they that reject
the Covenant of Grace in their Hearts (as Mr. W. owns, all unsanctified Men do)
cannot own it with their Lips, without either deceiving or being deceived. Words
cannot be a true Signification of more than is in the Mind. Inward Covenanting,
as Mr. S. taught, is by an Act of saving Faith. ( Safety of Ap. P. 85. e. 86.
a.) And outward Covenanting is an Expression of inward Covenanting: therefore,
if it be not attended with inward Covenanting, it is a false Expression. And
Mr. W. in Effect owns the same Thing: for he says, (.P. 21. b.) That there is
no Doubt they who are wilful obstinate Sinners, deal deceitfully and falsely
when they pretend to covenant with God. But so do all* unregenerate Sinners
under the Gospel, according to Mr. Stoddard's and his own Doctrine. And thus
the very Point, about which he contests so earnestly and so long, and with so
many great Words, is in the midst of it all, given up fully, by his own
Concession.

VII. Mr. W. is greatly displeased with my saying (as above) that none who are
under the Power of a carnal Mind can visibly own the Covenant, without lying or
being deceived, etc. And he finds great Fault with my Gloss on PSALM.
lxxviii.36, 37. They did flatter him with their Mouth, and lied to him with
their Tongue: which I interpret, as though they lied in pretending that Respect
to God, which indeed they had not. (P. 35. a. of my Inquiry) But he insists,
that what is meant is only their Lying in breaking their Promise. (P. 24. e.)
And he insists upon it (as has been observed already) that natural Men may
covenant with God and speak true. But it seems he has wonderfully changed his
Mind of late: for a little while ago he declared elsewhere for the very same
Things which he here inveighs against, and spoke of natural Men's Profession
and Pretense of Respect to God, as being actually a LIE IN IT IS OWN NATURE; and
not only becoming so by their breaking Covenant afterward. Particularly, it is
remarkable, he ha^ thus interpreted this very Text now in Dispute. In his
Sermons on Christ a King and Witness, speaking of the outward Acts of Worship
done by those that don't love God nor believe in Christ, he expressly says, (P.
77.) They are in their own Nature a LIE; a false Pretense of something within,
that is not there. -- See (says Mr. W.) this Interpretation of it, in PSALM.
lxxviii.34, -- 37. They did flatter him with their Mouths; they lied to him
with their Tongues, etc. -- ( Ibid. P. 74. b, c.) Christ's visible Church are
such as visibly and outwardly profess to be his Subjects, and act outwardly as
if they believed on him. But these outward Acts in themselves are not that
Religion and Obedience, which Christ requires; nay, of themselves, they have no
Religion in them; and Christ has nothing to do with them, but as they are the
Fruits and Expressions of the Heart, as they are the Language and Index of the
Mind and Conscience, and outward Declarations of the inward Frame, Temper and
Actings of the Soul. If they are not so, they are so far from having any
Religion in them, that they are hateful to him, being only the visible
Resemblance, the Pretense and Feigning of Religion; i. e. they are Mockery,
Hypocrisy, FALSEHOOD AND LIES; and belong not to the Kingdom of CHRIST, but of
the Devil. -- Let the Reader now compare this with my Gloss on the Text.

The CONCLUSION of this second Part.
Thus I have considered the various Parts and Principles of Mr. W -- ms's
Scheme, which are the Foundations on which he builds all his Superstructure,
and the Ground on which he proceeds in all his Reasonings, through his Book;
and many Particulars in his Answers and Arguments have been already considered.
-- Mr. W. says thus (P. 135. a.) I own, that at present I have no more
Expectation to see the Scheme which Mr. Edwards aims to establish, defended
upon Calvinistick Principles, than the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. -- On
which I shall only say, it might perhaps be though it very impertinent in me, (...)
tell my Readers what I do, or what I do not expect, concerning his Scheme.
Every Reader, that has Reason enough of his own not to take the big Words and
confident Speeches of others for Demonstration, is now left to judge for
himself, whose Scheme is most akin to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, for
Inconsistence and Self-Contradiction.

Nevertheless, I will proceed to consider our Author's Reasonings a little more
particularly, in the ensuing Part.

PART III. Containing some Remarks on Mr. Williams's exceptionable Way of
Reasoning, in Support of his own Scheme, and in Opposition to the contrary
Principles.
SECTION I. General Observations upon his Way of arguing, and answering
Arguments; with some Instances of the first Method excepted against.
MR. W. endeavors to support his own Opinion, and to confute the Book he
pretends to answer, by the following Methods.

1. By frequently misrepresenting what I say, and then disputing or exclaiming
against what he wrongfully charges as mine.

2. By misrepresenting what Others say in their Writings, whose Opinions he
pretends to espouse.

3. By seeming to oppose and confute Arguments, and yet only saying Things
which have no Reference at all to 'em, but relate entirely to other Matters,
that are altogether foreign to the Argument in Hand.

4. By advancing new and extraordinary Notions; which are both manifestly
contrary to Truth, and also contrary to the common Apprehensions of the
Christian Church in all Ages.

5. By making Use of peremptory and confident Assertions, instead of Arguments.

6. By using great Exclamation, in the Room of Arguing; as though he would amuse
and alarm his Readers, and excite Terror in them, instead of rational
Conviction.

7. By wholly overlooking Arguments, and not answering at all; pretending, that
there is no Argument, nothing to answer; when the Case is manifestly far
otherwise.

8. By frequently turning off an Argument with this Reflection, that it is
begging the Question; when there is not the least Show or Pretext for it.

9. By very frequently begging the Question himself, or doing that which is
equivalent.

10. By often alleging and insisting on Things in which he is inconsistent
with himself.

As to the first of these Methods used by Mr. W -- ms, i. e. his
misrepresenting what I say, and then disputing or exclaiming against what He
injuriously charges as mine, many Instances have been already observed: I now
would take Notice of some other Instances.

In P. 15. c. He charges me with affirming vehemently, in a Number of
Repetitions, That the Doctrine taught is, that no Manner of Pretense to any
VISIBLE Holiness is made or designed to be made. These he cites as my Words,
marking them with Notes of Quotations. Whereas I never said any such Words, nor
said or thought any such Thing, but the contrary. I knew, that those whose
Doctrine I opposed, declared that visible Holiness was necessary: And take
particular Notice of it (P. 8.) where I say, It is granted on all Hands, that
none ought to be admitted, as Members of the visible Church of Christ, but
visible Saints: and argue on this Supposition for 15 Pages together, in that
same Part of my Book where Mr. W. charges me with asserting the contrary. What
I say is, that People are taught, that they come into the Church without any
Pretense to sanctifying Grace, (P. 15. d.) I don't say, without a Pretense to
visible Holiness. Thus Mr. W. alters my Words, to make them speak something not
only diverse, but contrary to what I do say, and say very often; and so takes
Occasion, or rather makes an Occasion, to charge me before the World, with
telling a manifest Untruth. P. 15. d.

Again, Mr. W. in answering my Argument concerning brotherly Love, (P. 70. e.
71. a.) represents me as arguing, That in the Exercise of Christian Love
described in the Gospel, there is such an Union of Hearts, as there cannot be
of a Saint to an unsanctified Man. Which is a Thing I never said, and is quite
contrary to the Sentiments which I have abundantly declared. I indeed speak of
that brotherly Love, as what cannot be of a Saint to One that is not apprehended
and judged to be sanctified. But that Notion of a peculiar Love, which cannot be
to an unsanctified Man, or without the Reality of Holiness in the Person
beloved, is what I ever abhorred, and have born a most loud and open and large
Testimony against, again and again, from the Press, Marks of a Work of the true
Spirit. P. 101, 102, 103, 104. -- Thoughts on the Revival of Religion, from P.
292, to 303. -- Nature of Religious Affections, P. 85 -- 87. Preface to Inquiry
into Qualifications for Communion. P 5
and did so in the Preface to that very Book which Mr. W. writes against.

In P. 74. a, b. Mr. W. represents me as supposing, that in the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, both the covenanting Parties, viz. Christ and the
Communicant, seal to the Truth of the Communicant's Faith; or that both seal to
this as true, that the Communicant does receive Christ. Whereas, by me, no such
Thing was ever thought; nor is any Thing said that has such an Aspect. What I
say, is very plain and express, (P. 75.) That Christ by his Minister professes
his Part of the Covenant, presents himself, and professes the Willingness of
his Heart to be theirs who receive him. That on the other Hand, the Communicant
in receiving the offered Symbols, professes his Part in the Covenant, and the
Willingness of his Heart to receive Christ who is offered. How different is
this from both Parties sealing to the Truth of the Communicant's Faith?

In P. 76, 77, and 80. He greatly misrepresents my Argument from 1 COR. xi.28.
Let a Man examine himself, etc. as though I supposed, the Greek Word translated
examine, must necessarily imply an Examination to Approbation; that it
signifies to approve; and that a Man's Examination must mean his approving
himself to himself to be sanctified. This Representation he makes over and
over, and builds his Answer to the Argument, upon it; and in Opposition to
this, he says (P. 77. c.) Wherever the Word means to examine to Approbation, it
is not used in its natural Sense, but metonymically. Whereas, there is not the
least Foundation for such a Representation: No such Thing is said or suggested
by me, as if I supposed that the Meaning of the Word is to approve, or to
examine to Approbation. What I say is, that it properly signifies proving or
trying a Thing, whether it be true and of the right Sort. (P. 77. d.) And I
there, in the same Place, expressly speak of the Word (in the Manner Mr. W.
does) as not used in its natural Sense, but metonymically, when it is used to
signify approve. So that Mr. W -- ms's Representation is not only diverse from,
but contrary to what I say. Indeed I suppose (as well I may) that when the
Apostle directs Persons to try themselves with Respect to their Qualifications
for the Lord's Supper, he would not have 'em come, if upon Trial they find
themselves not qualified. But it would be ridiculous to say, that I therefore
suppose the Meaning of the Word, Try or Examine, is to Approve, when it is
evident that the trying is only in order to knowing whether a Thing is to be
approved, or disapproved.

In P. 98. b. on the Argument from John's Baptism, Mr. W. alters my Words,
bringing them the better to comport with the odious Representation he had made
of my Opinion, viz. that I required a giving an Account of Experiences, as a
Term of Communion; he puts in Words as mine, which are not mine, and
distinguishes them with Marks of Quotation; charging me with representing it as
probable that John had as much Time to inquire into their Experiences as into
their doctrinal Knowledge. -- Whereas, my Words are these, (P. 101. a.) He had
as much Opportunity to inquire into the Credibility of their Profession, as he
had to inquire into their doctrinal Knowledge and moral Character. --

In P. 118 d. (and to the like Purpose, P. 134. c.) our Author represents me,
and others of my Principles, as holding, That the Gospel does peremptorily
sentence Men to Damnation for eating and drinking without sanctifying Grace.
But surely Mr. W. would have done well to have referred to the Place in my
Inquiry, where any Thing is said that has such a Look. For, I find Nothing that
I have said in that Book, or any other Writing of mine, about the Gospel's
peremptorily sentencing such Men to Damnation, or signifying how far I thought
they were exposed to Damnation, or expressing my Sentiments more or less about
the Matter.

In P. 130. e. and 131. a. Mr. W. says, When One sees with what Epithets of
Honor Mr. Edwards in some Parts of his Book has complimented Mr. Stoddard* it
must look like a strange Medly to tack to them; -- That he was a weak Beggar of
his Question; A Supposer of what was to be proved; Taking for granted the Point
in Controversy; Inconsistent with himself; Ridiculously contradicting his own
Arguments. These Expressions, which Mr. W. speaks of as tacked to those
honorable Epithets, he represents as Expressions which I had used concerning
Mr. Stoddard: And his Readers that have not consulted my Book, would doubtless
take it so from his Manner of Representation. Whereas, the Truth is, no one of
these Expressions are used concerning Mr. S. any where in my (...); nor is
there one disrespectful Word spoken of him there. All the Ground Mr. W. had to
make such a Representation, was, that in answering Arguments against my Opinion
I endeavored to show them to be weak (though I don't find that I used that
Epithet) and certainly for one to pretend to answer Arguments, and yet allow
'em to be strong, would be to show himself to be very weak. In answering some
of these Arguments, and endeavoring to show wherein the Inconclusiveness of
'em lay, I have sometimes taken Notice that the Defect lay in what is called
begging the Question, or supposing the Thing to be proved. And if I had said so
concerning Mr. S -- d's Arguments, speaking of them as his, I don't know why it
should be represented as any personal Reflection, or unhandsome dishonorable
Treatment of Him. Every inconclusive Argument is weak; and the Business of a
Disputant is to show wherein the Weakness lies: But to speak of Arguments as
weak, is not to call Men weak. -- All the Ground Mr. W. has to speak of me as
saying, that Mr. S. ridiculously contradicted his own Arguments, is, that (in
P. 11.) citing some Passages out of Mr. S -- d's Appeal, I use these Words; But
how he reconciled these Passages with the rest of his Treatise, I would
modestly say, I must confess my self at a Loss. And particularly I observed,
that I could not see how they consist with what he says, P. 16. and so proceed
to mention one Thing which appears to me not well to consist with them. -- But
certainly this is not indecently to reflect on Mr. S. any more than Mr. W.
indecently reflects on the FIRST REFORMERS, in his Answer to Mr. Croswell, (P.
74, 75.) where speaking of their Doctrine of a particular Persuasion as of the
Essence of saving Faith, he says, They are found inconsistent with themselves,
and their Doctrine lighter than Vanity. And again (P. 82.) If ever (says Mr.
W.) any Men were confuted from their own Concessions, these Divines are. And
more to the like Purpose. -- Which gives me a fair Occasion to express the like
Wonder at him, as he does at me (P. 131. a.) but I forbear personal Reflections.

Mr. W. (in the same P. d.) has these Words; And to say, that all unsanctified
Men do profess and seal their Consent to the Covenant of Grace in the Lord's
Supper, when they KNOW at the same Time they do not consent to it, nor have
their Heart at all in the Affair, -- is something worse than begging the
Question -- that is, as I suppose, (the same that he charged me with before)
Telling a manifest Untruth. By which he plainly suggests, that I have said
thus. Whereas, I no where say, nor in any Respect signify that I suppose, all
unsanctified Communicants do KNOW that they do not consent to the Covenant of
Grace. I never made any Doubt, but that Multitudes of unsanctified Communicants
are deceived, and think they do consent to it.

In P. 132. d. he says of me, The Author endeavors to show, that the admitting
unsanctified Persons tends to the Ruin and Reproach of the Christian Church;
and to the Ruin of the Persons admitted. But how widely different is this from
what I express in the Place he refers to? (Inq. P. 121. c.) That which I say
there, is, That by express Liberty given, to open the Door to as many as
please, of those who have no Visibility of real Saintship, and make no
Profession of it, nor Pretension to it, is a Method which tends to the Ruin and
great Reproach of the Christian Church, and also to the Ruin of the Persons
admitted. I freely grant, and show abundantly in my Book, it is never to be
expected, that all unsanctified Men can be kept out, by the most exact
Attendance on the Rules of Christ, by those that admit Members.

In P. 136. d. Mr. W. wholly without Grounds speaks of me as representing, that
unconverted Men make Pretension to nothing but what God's Enemies have,
remaining in open and avowed Rebellion against him. Whereas, I suppose that
some natural Men do profess, and profess truly, many Things, which those have
not, who are open and avowed Enemies of God. They may truly profess that Sort
of moral Sincerity, in many Things belonging to Morality and Religion, which
avowed Enemies have not: nor is there any Sentence or Word in my Book, which
implies or intimates the contrary.

In P. 141. c, d. Mr. W. evidently insinuates, that I am one of those who If
Men live never so strictly conformable to the Laws of the Gospel, and never so
diligently seek their own Salvation, to outward Appearance, yet don't stick to
speak of them, and act openly toward them, as Persons giving no more public
Evidence, that they are not the Enemies of God and Haters of Jesus Christ, than
the very worst of the Heathen. -- But surely every one that has read my Book,
every one that knows my constant Conduct, and Manner of Preaching, as well as
Writing, and how much I have written, said, and done against judging and
censuring Persons of an externally moral and religious Behavior, must know how
injurious this Representation of me is.

SECTION II. Instances of the second Thing mentioned as exceptionable in Mr. W
-- ms's Method of managing this Controversy; viz. His misrepresenting what is
said in the Writings of Others, that he supposes favor his Opinion.
PErhaps Instances enough of this have already been taken Notice of; yet I
would now mention some others.

In what he says in Reply to my Answer to the eighth Objection, he says, (P.
108) Mr. Stoddard does not say, If sanctifying Grace be necessary to a Person's
lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper, then God would have given some certain
Rule, whereby those WHO ARE TO ADMIT THEM, may know whether they have such
Grace, or not. Mr. W. there intimates (as the Reader may see) as if Mr.
Stoddard spoke so, that it is to be understood disjunctively, meaning, he would
either have given some certain Rule to the Church who admit them, or else to
the Persons themselves: so that by one Means or other, the Lord's Supper might
be restrained to converted Men. And he exclaims against me for representing as
though Mr. Stoddard's Argument were concerning a certain Rule, whereby those who
are to admit them, may know whether they have Grace (see the foregoing Page)
and speaks of it as nothing akin to Mr. S -- d's Argument. Now let the Reader
take Notice of Mr. S -- d's Words, and see whether his Argument ben't something
akin to this. He says expressly ( Appeal P. 75.) God don't bind his CHURCH to
Impossibilities. If he had made such an Ordinance, He would give Gifts to his
CHURCH, to distinguish sincere Men from Hypocrites, whereby the Ordinance might
have been attended. -- The minor is also evident: He has given no such Rule to
his CHURCH, whereby it may be restrained to converted Men. This appears,
because by the Rule that they are to go by, they are allowed TO GIVE the Lord's
Supper to many unconverted Men. For all visible Signs are common to Men
converted, and unconverted. -- So that Mr. S. in Fact does say, If sanctifying
Grace be necessary to a Person's lawful partaking of the Lord's Supper, then
God would have given some certain Rule, whereby the Church [those who are to
admit them] may know, whether they have Grace, or not. Though Mr. W. denies it,
and says, this is nothing akin to Mr. S -- d's Argument; contrary to the
plainest Fact.

In P. 99. Mr. W. replying to my Answer to the sixth Objection, misrepresents
Mr. Hudson, in the following Passage. This [ i. e. Baptism] says Mr. Hudson,
makes them Members of the Body of Christ. And as for a particular explicit
Covenant, besides the general imposed on Churches, I find no Mention of it, no
Example, nor Warrant for it in all the Scripture. -- Here Mr. W. is still
manifestly endeavoring to discredit my Doctrine of an explicit owning the
Covenant of Grace; and he so manages and alters Mr. Hudson's Words, as
naturally leads the Reader to suppose, that Mr. Hudson speaks against this:
Whereas, he says not a Word about it. What Mr. H. speaks of, is not an explicit
owning the Covenant of Grace, or baptismal Covenant; but a particular
Church Covenant, by which a particular Society bind themselves explicitly, one
to another, jointly to carry on the public Worship. Mr. Hudson's Words are (P.
19.) I dare not make a particular explicit holy Covenant to be the FORM of a
PARTICULAR Church, as this Description seems to do; because I find no Mention
of any such Covenant, besides the general imposed on Churches, nor Example, nor
Warrant for it in all the Scripture. And then afterward Mr. Hudson says, But
it is the general Covenant sealed by Baptism, and not this, that makes 'em
Members of the Body of Christ. -- Mr. W. by citing distant Passages in Mr.
Hudson, and joining them, in his own Way, by Particles and Conjunctions, which
Mr. Hudson don't use, and leaving out these Words -- To be the Form of a
particular Church, as this Description seems to do, -- quite blinds the Mind
of his Reader, as to Mr. Hudson's true Sense, which is nothing to Mr. W -- ms's
Purpose. -- Mr. Hudson says not a Word here against, or about an express or
explicit covenanting, or owning the Covenant, in my Sense: but in other Places,
in the same Book, he speaks of it, and for it, as necessary for all Christians.
Thus, (in P. 69. b, c.) There is one individual, EXPRESS, external Covenant:
not only on God's Part, -- but also it is one external, visible Covenant, on
Men's Part; which all Christians, as Christians, enter into, by their PROFESSED
Acceptance, and EXPRESS Restipulation, and promised Subjection and Obedience;
though not altogether in one Place, or at one Time. He speaks again to the same
Purpose, P. 100.

SECTION III. Instances of the third Thing observed in Mr. W -- ms's Manner of
arguing, viz. His pretending to oppose and answer Arguments, by saying Things
which have no Reference to 'em, but relate to other Matters, perfectly foreign
to the Subject of the Argument.
SUch is his Answer (P. 37, etc.) to my Argument from ISAI. lvi. Particularly
from those Words, v. 6, 7* Also the Sons of the Stranger, that join themselves
to the Lord, to serve him, to love the Name of the Lord, to be his Servants --
even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my House of
Prayer, etc. For I say nothing under that Argument (as Mr. W. in his Answer
presumes) which supposes any Antithesis or Opposition here between the State of
the Gentiles and Eunuchs under the Old Testament, and under the Gospel, as to
Terms of Acceptance with God: Nor any Opposition, as to a greater Necessity of
sanctifying Grace, to the lawful partaking of Ordinances, under the Gospel,
than under the Law; as Mr. W. also supposes in his Arguings on this Head. But
the Opposition I speak of, as plainly pointed forth in the Chapter, is this:
That, whereas under the Law, not only Piety of Heart and Practice were
required, but something else, even Soundness of Body and Circumcision, It Is
foretold, that under the Gospel, Piety of Heart and Practice only should be
required; that although they were Eunuchs or Uncircumcised, yet if it appeared
that they loved the Name of the Lord, etc. they should be admitted.

So when I argued, that Christ, in the latter Part of the viith Chap. of Matthew.
representing the final Issue of Things, with Regard to the visible Church in
general, speaks of all as being such as had looked on themselves to be
interested in him as their Lord and Savior, and had an Opinion of their good
Estate; though the Hope of some was built on the Sand, and others on a Rock: --
Mr. W. in his Reply (P. 40, 41.) entirely over-looks the Argument, and talks
about other Things. He says, Christ don't fault those that cried, LORD, LORD,
for entering into Covenant, but for not keeping Covenant. (P. 41. b.) Here he
runs back to another Thing, relating to another Argument, to which this has no
Reference, which he dwells wholly upon; and says nothing to the Argument I use
in that Place.

So in his Reply to what I say on the Parable of the Wheat and Tares (P. 98,
etc.) He has entirely overlooked the Argument. He says, to vindicate the
Objection, (P. 99.) Which we think shows us, the Mind and Will of Christ in
this Matter is, that his Servants shall proceed only on certain established
Rules of his visible Kingdom, and not upon any private Rules of judging about
'em. -- Whereas, I never said, or supposed, that Christ's Servants must not
proceed on certain established Rules of his visible Kingdom, or that they ought
to go upon any private Rules of judging; but particularly and largely expressed
my Mind to the contrary, in my explaining the Question: And say ( Inq. P. 5.)
That it is properly a Visibility to the Eye of the public Charity, and not of
a private Judgment, that gives a Right to be received as visible Saints by the
Public. And repeat the same Thing again, P. 125. c, d.

And as to what Mr. W. says in this Place about Infants being born in the
Church, it entirely diverts the Reader to another Point (which I shall
hereafter particularly consider) wholly distinct from the Subject of the
Argument; which is about Rules of Admission into the Church, whenever they are
admitted. If Persons are born in the Church in complete Standing, as Mr. W.
supposes, then they are not admitted at all, but in their Ancestors. But
however, the Question returns, Whether Ancestors that are unsanctified, can
have a lawful Right to come into the Church? Mr. W. holds they may. The Subject
of the Argument is about bringing-in Tares into the Field, whenever they are
bro't in, whether sooner or later: And whether Tares have a lawful Right, by
Warrant from Christ, to be in the Field; supposing this to intend the Church of
Christ. The Argument I produced to the contrary was, that the Tares were
introduced contrary to the Owner's Design, through Men's Infirmity and Satan's
Procurement. Which Argument, being entirely overlooked by my Opponent, I desire
it may be now particularly considered.

When the Devil brought in the Tares, it is manifest, he brought in something
that did not belong there; and therein counteracted the Owner of the Field, and
did it under that very Notion of crossing his Design. An Enemy (says the
Parable) has done this. But how does this consist with the Tares having a
lawful Right, by the Owner's Warrant and Appointment, to have a Standing in his
Field? If CHRIST by his Institution has, in Mercy to unsanctified Men, given
'em a lawful Right to come into the Church, that it may be a Means of their
Conversion; then it is a Work of his Kindness, as the compassionate Redeemer of
Souls, to bring 'em in; and not the Doing of the great Enemy and Destroyer of
Souls. If the great Physician of Souls has built his Church, as an Infirmary,
in Compassion to those that are sick, for this End that they may be brought in
and healed there; shall it be said with Surprise, when such are found there,
How came these sick People HERE! And shall the compassionate Physician, who
built the Hospital, make Answer, An Enemy has done This!

Besides, if Christ has appointed that unsanctified Men should come into the
Church, in Order to their Conversion, it would be an Instance of the
Faithfulness of his Servants to bring in such. But the bringing in Tares into
the Field, is not represented as owing to the Faithfulness and Watchfulness of
the Servants; but on the contrary, is ascribed to their Sleepiness and
Remisness: They were brought in while they slept, who ought to have done the
Part of Watchmen, in keeping 'em out, and preventing the Designs of the subtle
Enemy that brought 'em in. -- Perhaps some would be ready to make the
Reflection, that those Churches whose Practice is agreeable to the loose
Principles Mr. W. espouses, do that at Noonday, in the Presence of God, Angels
and Men, which the Devil did in the dead of the Night, while Men slept!

Again, Mr. W. in his Reply to my Argument from that Christian brotherly Love,
which is required toward all Members of the visible Church, goes entirely off
from the Argument, to Things quite aliene from it. His first Answer (P. 69. c.)
is, that the Exercise of this Christian Love is not the Term of Communion or
Admission into the visible Church: which is perfectly foreign to the Business.
For the Argument respects the Object of this Love, viz. visible Saints, that
are to be thus beloved; and not at all the Qualifications of the inherent
Subject of it, or the Person that exercises this Love. If they that are
admitted, are to be loved as true Saints, or for the Image of Christ appearing
in them, or supposed to be in them (as Mr. W. allows P. 68. c.) then it will
follow, that none are to be admitted, but such as can reasonably be the Objects
of Christian Love, or be loved* as true Saints, and as those who have the Image
of Christ appearing in them. Whether the Exercise of this Love be the Term of
Communion, or not; yet if we are commanded to exercise this Love to all that
are admitted to Communion, then it will certainly follow, that some reasonable
Ground for being thus beloved, must be a Term of Communion in such as are
admitted. To suppose it appointed, that we should love all that are admitted as
true Saints, and yet that it is not appointed that such as are admitted should
exhibit any reasonable Grounds for such a Love, is certainly to suppose very
inconsistent Appointments. The Apostles looked on all those, whom they gathered
into Churches or Christian Congregations to eat the Lord's Supper, as having
the Truth dwelling in them; and so they behoved, every one of them* to look
upon one another: Seeing they could not love one another as Brethren in the
Truth, without acknowledging that Truth as dwelling in them. And so we see the
Apostles* in their Writings to the Churches, supposing all their Members
Objects of this Brotherly Love. -- Christ's visible Church then is the
Congregation of those whom the Apostle could call the Saints and Faithful in
Christ Jesus. -- GLASS'S Notes on Scripture-Texts, Numb. 5. P. 32.


Mr. W -- ms's second Answer (P. 70. b.) is no less impertinent; viz. That
Men's Right to Communion in Gospel Ordinances don't depend upon the Corruptions
of other Men, in their forbearing to love 'em. As if my Argument were, that
unless Men are actually loved, as true Saints, they have no Right to Communion!
Whereas, the Argument was very diverse, viz. That unless Men have a Right to be
so loved, they have no Right to Communion. If Men have an Appearance* to
Reason, of being true Saints, they may have a Right to be loved as true Saints,
and to be admitted as such; however corrupt and void of Love other Men are: but
without such an Appearance to Reason, it is no Corruption, not to love 'em as
true Saints; unless it be corrupt, not to act without Reason. A good Argument
might also be drawn from the Corruption of unsanctified Men; for that they are
all so under the Power of Corruption, that they are not able to love Saints, or
any one else, with truly Christian Love. Agreeable to what Mr. Stod* says in his
Three Sermons (P. 40.) Men are obliged to love their Neighbors as themselves.
But no natural Men do in any Measure live up to that Rule; but Men are great
Enemies one to another, hateful and hating one another. They do but little Good
one to another: They do a great Deal of Hurt one to another. Now is it
reasonable to suppose, that such Men have the proper Qualifications* by divine
Institution, for a lawful Right to be Members of the visible Family of God?


As to Mr. W -- ms's third Answer, and the Misrepresention it is built upon, it
has already been taken Notice of.

In Mr. Williams's Reply to my Answer to the first Objection (P. 81, etc.) He
wholly leaves the Argument, and writes in Support and Defense of other Matters,
quite different from those which I mentioned, or had any Concern with. The
Objection which I mentioned, and which had been much insisted on by some
against my Opinion, was, That Church Members are called Disciples, or Scholars;
a Name, that gives us a Notion of the visible Church as a School; and leads us
to suppose, that all who profess that Sort of Faith and Sincerity, which
implies a Disposition to seek Christian Learning and spiritual Seize, are
qualified for Admission. But Mr. W. says nothing at all in Support of this
Objection. In Answer to it, I endeavored to show, that the Name Disciples
given to Church Members, does not argue that unsanctified Persons are fit to be
Members. He says nothing to show, that it does. He says, if it will not follow
from Christ's visible Church's being represented as Christ's School, that it is
in Order to all good Seize; yet it is in Order to all that they have not
yet attained. Which is nothing to the Purpose, but foreign to the Thing in
Debate, viz. Whether sanctifying Grace (...) of those Things which are not yet
attained by those that are lawfully in the Church. He there says nothing to
prove, that it is; and especially to prove it from the Meaning of the Word,
Disciples; which was the Argument in Hand. He insists, that Men may be
sufficiently subject to Christ as their Master and Teacher, in Order to be in
his School or Church, without Grace: But then the Thing to be proved, was, That
Church Members being called Disciples makes this evident, in Order to support
the Argument or Objection I was upon: Which Argument is entirely neglected
throughout all his Discourse under this Head.

So in his Reply to my Answer to the 11 th Objection (P. 123, etc.) he wholly
neglects the Argument, and labors to support a different one. I endeavored,
without concering my self about the Words of any Argument in Mr. Stoddard's
Appeal, to answer an Argument abundantly used at Northampton against my
Doctrine, of unsanctified Men's not having a Right to come to the Lord's
Supper; which was this, You may as well say, that unsanctified Men may not
attend any other Duty of Worship: and particularly, You may as well forbid 'em
to pray. -- As for Mr. S -- d's Objection, in these Words, If unsanctified Men
may attend all other Ordinances or Duties of Worship, then they may lawfully
attend the Lords Supper; it was an Argument I was not obliged to attend to in
the Words in which He delivered it, because it was not an Argument bro't
against my Scheme of Things, but one very diverse: Sense it is not my Opinion,
that unsanctified Men may attend all other Ordinances, or Duties of Worship,
besides the Lord's Supper; for I don't suppose, such may offer themselves to
Baptism; which Mr. S. takes for granted, in his Argument. And therefore what
Mr. W. says in Support of it, is quite beside the Business. As to the Argument
I was concerned with, taken especially from the Lawfulness of unsanctified
Men's Praying, to prove, that therefore it must be lawful for 'em to come to
the Lord's Supper, certainly if there be any Consequence in it, the Consequence
depends on the Truth of this Supposition, That the same Thing which makes it
lawful for a Man to pray, also makes it lawful for him to come to the Lord's
Supper. And seeing this Position is proved to be not true, the Argument falls
to the Ground. And Mr. W -- ms's nice Observations and Distinctions, of a Non
Obstante, and a simply and per se, are nothing to the Purpose.

This good Reason (with several others) may be given, why the same that makes
it lawful for a Man to pray and hear the Word, will not make it lawful for him to
partake of Sacraments, viz. That the Sacraments are not only Duties, but
Covenant-Privileges, and are never lawfully given or received but under that
Notion. Whereas, it is not so with Prayer and hearing the Word: And therefore
they who have no Interest in the Covenant of Grace, and are in no Respect God's
Vovenant People, may lawfully hear the Word and pray. But it is agreed on all
Hands, that they who are not in some Respect God's Vovenant People, may not
come to Sacraments: And the Reason is this, because Sacraments are
Covenant-Privileges. And this same Reason will prove, that none but true
Believers, or those that have saving Faith, the only Condition of the Covenant
of Grace, have a Right to Sacraments. For, as was observed before, the
Condition of any Covenant is the Condition of all the Benefits or Privileges of
that Covenant. (See PART II. Sect. 8.)

SECTION. IV. The fourth Thing observed in Mr. W -- ms's Method of managing the
Controversy, particularly considered, viz. His advancing new and extraordinary
Notions, not only manifestly contrary to Truth, but also to the common and
received Principles of the Christian Church.
THUS it is with Regard to many Things which have already been taken Notice of.
As, that Men may be ungodly Men, and yet truly profess to love God more than
the World: That Men may be Professors of Religion and have no true Grace, and
yet not be Lukewarm, but serve God as their only Master: That such may profess
to be subject to Christ with all their Hearts, and to give up all their Hearts
and Lives to Christ, and speak true, etc. etc.

I shall now take Notice of another remarkable Instance of this, viz. That Mr.
W. in his Reply to my Argument from the Epithets and Characters given by the
Apostles to the Members of visible Christian Churches, in their Epistles,
represents (P. 56. d.) That there is no Difference in all the Epithets and
Characters, which I had heaped up from the New Testament, from those that are
given in the Old Testament, to the whole Body of the Jewish Church; which he
elsewhere abundantly supposes to be the whole Body of the Jewish Nation; yea,
even in their worst Times, 'till the Nation was rejected and cast off by God
from being any longer his People: as I shall have Occasion particularly to
observe afterward.

That it may be the easier judged, how manifestly this is contrary to Truth, I
shall here repeat some of those Epithets and Characters I before mentioned,
which Mr. W. has Reference to. This is very manifest concerning most of them:
but that I may not be tedious, I will now rehearse but a few Instances, viz.
Being made free from Sin, and becoming the Servants of Righteousness: Having
the Spirit of Adoption: Being the Children of God, Heirs of God, Joint-Heirs
with Christ: Being Vessels of Mercy, prepared unto Glory: Being such as don't
live to themselves, nor die to themselves; but live to the Lord, and die unto
the Lord; and who living and dying are the Lord's: Being those that have all
Things for theirs, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World or Life,
or Death, or Things present, or Things to come; because they are Christ's:
Being begotten through the Gospel: Being such as shall judge the World: Being
washed, sanctified, justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God: Being manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, written not
with Ink, but by the Spirit of the living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in
fleshly Tables of the Heart: Being such as behold as in a Glass the Glory of
the Lord, and are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory: Being
chosen in Christ before the Foundation of the World, that they should be holy
and without Blame before him in Love; and predestined unto the Adoption of
Children: Being sealed by that holy Spirit of Promise: Being quickened, though
once dead in Trespasses and Sins: Being made meet to be Partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light: Being dead, and having their Life hid with
Christ in God; and being those that when Christ who is our Life shall appear,
shall also appear with him in Glory; Having put off the old Man with his Deeds,
and having put on the new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image
of him that created him; Being begotten again to a living Hope -- to an
Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for 'em; who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation;
who love Christ, though they have not seen him; in whom, though now they see him
not, yet believing, they rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; having
purified their Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit; Knowing him that is
from the Beginning; having their Sins forgiven; having overcome the wicked one;
having an Unction from the holy one, by which they know all Things; who are now
the Sons of God; and who, when Christ shall appear, shall be like him, because
they shall see him as he is.

Now let the Christian Reader judge, with what Face of Reason our Author could
represent as though there were Nothing in all these Epithets and Characters, more
than used of Old to be given to the whole Nation of the Jews, and that even in
Times of their greatest Corruption and Apostasy, 'till the Nation was rejected
of God! One would think, there is no Need of arguing the Matter with any that
have read the Bible.

This Representation of Mr. W -- ms's is not only very contrary to Truth, but
also to the common Sentiments of the Christian Church. Though I pretend not to be
a Person of great Reading, yet I have read enough to warrant this Assertion. I
never yet (as I remember) met with any Author that went the same Length in this
Matter with Mr. W. but only Mr. Tailor of Norwich, in England, the Author that
lately has been so famous for his corrupt Doctrine. In his Piece which he calls
A Key to the Apostolic Writings, where he delivers his Scheme of Religion
(which seems scarcely so agreeable to the Christian Scheme, as the Doctrine of
many of the wiser Heathen) he delivers the same Opinion, and insists largely
upon it; it being a main Thing he makes Use of to establish his whole Scheme.
And it evidently appears, in the Manner of his delivering it, that he is
sensible it is exceeding far from what has hitherto been the commonly received
Sentiment in the Christian World. He supposes that as all those Epithets and
Characters belong to the whole Nation of the Jews, eyes in their most corrupt
Times, so they belong to all Christendom, even the most vicious Parts of it;
that the most vicious Men, who are baptized, and profess to believe Jesus to be
the Messiah, are chosen before the Foundation of the World, Predestined
according to the Foreknowledge of God, Regenerated, Justified, Sanctified,
Children of God, Heirs of God, Joint-Heirs with Christ, the Spouse of Christ,
the Temple of God, made to sit together in heavenly Places in Christ, being the
Family of Heaven, etc. etc. And certainly he may with as good Reason, and with
the same Reason, suppose this of all Christendom, even the most vicious Parts
of it, as of the whole Nation of the Jews, however corrupt, 'till there was a
national Rejection of them.

Indeed, it is manifest there is no other Way of evading the Force of the
Argument from the Epistles, but by falling into Taylor's Scheme. If his Scheme
of Religion ben't true, then it is plain as any Fact in the New Testament, that
all the Christian Churches, through the whole Earth, in the Apostles Days, were
constituted in the Manner that I insist on. The Scripture says ten Times as
much to demonstrate this Matter, as it does about the Manner of Discipline,
Officers, and Government of the Church, or as it does about the several Parts
of the public Worship, or about the Sanctification of the Christian Sabbath.

SECTION V. Instances of the fifth and sixth Particulars, in Mr. W -- ms's
Method of disputing, viz. his using confident and peremptory Assertions, and
great Exclamations, instead of Arguments.
WE have an Instance of the former, in his Reply to my Answer to the 14th
Objection, viz. That it is not unlawful for unsanctified Men to carry themselves
like Saints. I objected against this, if thereby be meant, that they may
lawfully carry themselves externally like Saints in all Respects, remaining
ungodly; and mentioned some Things which belonged to the external Duty of godly
Men, which no ungodly Man, remaining such, may do. To which Mr. W. makes no
Reply; but to prove the Point says, Mr. St -- d knew, and all Divines know,
That the external Carriage of some unsanctified Men is to the outward
Appearance, and the public Judgment of the Church, the same with the Carriage
of the Saints; and they know they are bound to such a Behavior. And this
peremptory confident Assertion is all the Argument he brings to prove the Thing
asserted.

Again, I observe, that sometimes Mr. W. uses great Exclamation, as though he
intended to alarm, and excite Terror in his Readers, and raise their
Indignation: Though they are perhaps never like to know for what. We have two
very remarkable Instances of this, (P. 136, and 137.) where he says, I shall
further take Notice of two extraordinary and surprising Passages, if I
understand them. And I have with great Diligence tried to find out the Meaning
of them. One is P. 129. between the 17th and 23d Lines; if it be rightly
printed. He don't quote my Words: This mighty Exclamation would have become too
flat, and appeared ridiculous, if he had. The Passage referred to is in these
Words -- Indeed such a Tendency (i. e. a Tendency to Irreligion and
Profaneness) it would have, to shut Men out from having any Part in the Lord,
in the Sense of the two Tribes and Half, Josh. xxii.25. or to fence 'em out by
such a Partition Wall, as formerly was between Jews and Gentiles; and so to
shut 'em out as to tell 'em, if they were never so much disposed to serve God,
he was not ready to accept 'em: According to the Notion the Jews seem to have
had of the uncircumcised Gentiles. That is, plainly, to shut 'em out so as to
tell 'em, that let 'em have Hearts never so well and piously disposed to love
and serve God, their Love and Service could not be accepted. This doubtless
would have a Tendency to discourage Religion in Men. (...) ^ow the owning of
it, is an owning my Scheme to have (...) Tendency, I don't know. Mr. W. might
as well (...) out any other Sentence through all the 136 Pages of the Book, and
called it an extraordinary Passage, and stood astonished over it, and told how
he was ready to doubt whether it was rightly printed, and what great Diligence
he had used to find out the Meaning of it!

The other extraordinary Passage he stands thunderstruck with, is in these
Words; May it not be suspected, that this Way of baptizing Children of such as
never make any proper Profession of Godliness, is an Expedient originally
invented for that very End, to give Ease to Ancestors with Respect to their
Posterity, in Times of great Declension and Degeneracy? Mr. W. knows, that
through the whole of my Book I suppose, this Practice of baptizing the Children
of such as are here spoken of, is wrong; and so does He too; for he abundantly
allows, that Persons in Order to be admitted to the Privileges of visible
Saints, must make a Profession of real Piety, or Gospel-Holiness. -- And if it
be wrong, as we are both agreed, then surely it is nothing akin to Blasphemy, to
suspect that it arose from some bad Cause.

SECTION VI. Instances of the seventh Particular observed in Mr. W -- ms's Way
of disputing, viz. His wholly overlooking Arguments, pretending there is no
Argument, nothing to answer; when the Case is far otherwise.
THUS in his Reply to my tenth Argument, which was this, It is necessary, that
those who partake of the Lord's Supper, should judge themselves truly and
cordially to accept of Christ as their Savior, and chief Good; for this is
what the Actions, which Communicants perform at the Lord's Table, are a solemn
Profession of. I largely endeavored (in P. 75, 76, and 77.) to prove this,
from the Nature of those significant Actions, of receiving the Symbols of
Christ's Body and Blood when offered, representing their accepting the Thing
signified, as their spiritual Food* etc. To all which Mr. W. says (P. 74. a.) I
don't find that Mr. Edwards has said any Thing to prove the Proposition, which
is the whole Argument offered here in Proof of the Point proposed to be proved,
but only gives his Opinion, or Paraphrase of the Purport and Nature of the
Sacramental Actions. -- Since Mr. W. esteems it no Argument, I desire it may be
considered impartially whether there be any Argument in it or no.

These Sacramental Actions all allow to be significant Actions: They are a
Signification and Profession of something: They are not Actions without a
Meaning. And all allow, that these external Actions signify something inward
and spiritual. And if they signify any Thing spiritual, they doubtless signify
those spiritual Things which they represent. But what inward Thing does the
outward Taking or Accepting the Body and Blood of Christ represent, but the
inward accepting Christ's Body and Blood, or an accepting him in the Heart? And
what spiritual Thing is the outward Feeding on Christ in this Ordinance a Sign
of, but a spiritual Feeding on Christ, or the Soul's Feeding on Him? Now there
is no other Way of the Soul's feeding on him, but by that Faith, by which
Christ becomes our spiritual Food, and the Refreshment and vital Nourishment of
our Souls. The outward eating and drinking in this Ordinance is a Sign of
spiritual eating and drinking, as much as the outward Bread in this Ordinance
is a Sign of spiritual Bread; or as much as the outward Drink is a Sign of
spiritual Drink. And doubtless those Actions, if they are a Profession of any
Thing at all, are a Profession of the Things they signify. Mr. Stoddard owns,
that the Sacramental Actions, both in Baptism and the Lord's Supper, signify
saving Faith in Christ. Safety of App. P. 120. By Baptism is signified our
Fellowship with Christ in his Sufferings. That is signified hereby, that we
have an Interest in the Virtue of his Sufferings, that his Sufferings are made
over unto us, and that we do participate in the Good and Benefit of them. -- It
was John the Baptist's Manner, before he baptized Persons, to teach them that
they must believe on Christ. And the Apostles, and Apostolical Men would not
baptize any Adult Persons but such as professed to believe on Christ. -- He
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Baptism is mentioned as the
Evidence of Faith. -- So concerning the Lord's Supper, Ibid. P. 122 c. 123. a.
In this Ordinance we are invited to put our Trust in the Death of Christ. Take
eat; this is my Body: and drink ye all of it. When the Body feeds on the
Sacramental Bread and Wine, the Soul is to do that which answers unto it; The
Soul is to feed on Christ crucified; which is Nothing else but the acting Faith
on him.
To say, that these significant Actions are appointed to be a Profession of
something, but not to be a Profession of the Things they are appointed to
signify, is as unreasonable as to say, that certain Sounds or Words are
appointed to be a Profession of something, but not to be a Profession of the
Things signified by those Words.

Again, Mr. W. in his Reply to my Answer to the second Objection, with like
Contempt passes over the main Argument which I offered, to prove that the
Nation of Israel were called God's People, and Vovenant People, in another
Sense besides a being visible Saints. My Argument (in P. 85, 86.) was this:
That it is manifest, that something diverse from being visible Saints, is often
intended by that Nation's being called God's People, and that That Nation, the
Family of Israel according to the Flesh, and not with Regard to any moral and
religious Qualifications, were in some Sense adopted by God, to be his peculiar
and Vovenant People; from Romans ix.3, 4, 5. -- I could wish my self accursed
from Christ for my Brethren according to the Flesh; who are Israelites; to whom
pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the COVENANTS, and the giving of
the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises; whose are the Fathers, etc.
I observed, that these Privileges here mentioned, are spoken of as belonging to
the Jews, not now as visible Saints, not as Professors of the true Religion,
not as Members of the visible Church of Christ (which they did not belong to*
but only as a People of such a Nation, such a Blood, such an external carnal
Relation to the Patriarchs, their Ancestors; Israelites, according to the
Flesh: Inasmuch as the Apostle is speaking here of the unbelieving Jews,
professed Unbelievers, that were out of the Christian Church, and open visible
Enemies to it; and such as had no Right at all to the external Privileges of
Christ's People. -- I observed further, that in like Manner this Apostle* in
Romans xi.28, 29. speaks of the same unbelieving Jews, that were Enemies to the
Gospel, as in some Respect an Elect People, and interested in the Calling,
Promises and Covenants, God formerly gave their Forefathers, and are still
beloved for their sakes. As concerning the Gospel, they are Enemies for your
sakes: But as touching the Election, they are beloved for the Fathers sakes.
For the Gifts and Calling of God are without Repentance.

All that Mr. W. says, which has any Reference to these Things, is, That he had
read my Explication of the Name of the People of God, as given to the People of
Israel, etc. But that he confesses, it is perfectly unintelligible to him. The
impartial Reader is left to judge, whether the Matter did not require some
other Answer.

SECTION VII. What is, and what is not begging the Question; And how Mr. W.
charges me, from Time to Time, with begging the Question, without Cause.
AMong the Particulars of Mr. W -- ms's Method of disputing, I observed, that
he often causlessly charges me with begging the Question, while he frequently
begs the Question himself, or does that which is equivalent.

But that it may be determined with Justice and Clearness, who does, and who
does not beg the Question, I desire it may be particularly considered, what
that is which is called Begging the Question in a Dispute. -- This is more
especially needful for the Sake of illiterate Readers. And here,

1. Let it be observed, that merely to suppose something in a Dispute, without
bringing any Argument to prove it, is not begging the Question: for this is
done necessarily, in every Dispute, and even in the best and clearest
Demonstrations. One Point is proved by another, 'till at Length the Matter is
reduced to a Point that is supposed to need no Proof; either because it is
self-evident, or is a Thing wherein both Parties are agreed, or so clear that
it is supposed it will not be denied.

2. Nor is begging the Question the same Thing as offering a weak Argument, to
prove the Point in Question. It Is not all weak Arguing, but one particular Way
of weak Arguing* that is called begging the Question.

3. Nor is it the same Thing as missing the true Question, and bringing an
Argument that is impertinent, or beside the Question.

But the Thing which is called begging the Question, is the making use of the
very Point, that is the Thing in Debate, or the Thing to be proved, as an
Argument to prove itself. Thus, if I were endeavoring to prove that none but
godly Persons might come to Sacraments, and should take this for an Argument to
prove it, That none might come but such as have saving Faith, taking this for
granted; I should then beg the Question: for this is the very Point in
Question, whether a Man must have saving Faith or no? It Is called begging the
Question, because it is a depending as it were on the Courtesy of the other
Side, to grant me the Point in Question, without offering any Argument as the
Price of it.

And whether the Point I thus take for granted, be the main Point in Question,
in the general Dispute, or some subordinate Point, something under
Consideration, under a particular Argument; yet if I take this particular Point
for granted, and then make use of it to prove it self, it is begging the
Question.

Thus if I were endeavoring, under this general Controversy between Mr. W. and
Me, to prove that particular Point, That we ought to love all the Members of
the Church as true Saints; and should bring this as a Proof of the Point, That
we ought to love all the Members of the Church as true Christians, taking this
for granted; this is only the same Thing, under another Term, as the Thing to
be proved; and therefore is no Argument at all, but only begging the Question.

Or if the Point I thus take for granted, and make use of as an Argument, be
neither the general Point in Controversy, nor yet the Thing nextly to be proved
under a particular Argument; yet if it be some known controverted Point between
the Parties, it is begging the Question, or equivalent to it: for it is begging a
Thing known to be in Question in the Dispute, and using it as if it were a
Thing allowed.

I would now consider the Instances, wherein Mr. W. asserts or suggests that I
have begged the Question.

In P. 30. d, e. and 31. a, b. he represents the Force of my Reasoning as built
on a Supposition, That there is no unsanctified Man, but what knows he has no
Desire of Salvation by Christ, no Design to fulfill the Covenant of Grace, but
designs to live in Stealing, Lying, Adultery, -- or some other known Sin: And
then says, Is it not manifest, that such Sort of Reasoning is a mere quibbling
with Words, and begging the Question? And so insinuates, that I have thus
begged the Question. Whereas, I no where say or suppose this which he speaks
of, nor any Thing like it. But on the contrary, often say, what supposes an
unsanctified Man may think he is truly godly, and that he has truly upright and
gracious Designs and Desires. -- Nor does any Argument of mine depend on any
such Supposition. Nay, under the Argument he speaks of, I expressly suppose the
contrary, viz. That unsanctified Men who visibly enter into Covenant, may be
deceived.

In P. 38. a. Mr. W. makes a certain Representation of my Arguing from Isai.
lvi. And then says upon it, It is no Arguing, but only begging the Question.
But as has been already shown, that which he represents as my Argument from
that Scripture, has no Relation to my Argument.

In P. 59. in Opposition to my arguing from the Epistles, that the Apostles
treated those Members of Churches which they wrote to, as those who had been
received on a positive Judgment, i. e. (as I explain my self) a proper and
affirmative Opinion; that they were real Saints; Mr. W. argues, that the
Apostles could make no such Judgment of them, without either personal Converse,
or Revelation; unless it be supposed to be founded on a Presumption, that
Ministers who baptized them, would not have done it, unless they had themselves
made such a positive Judgment concerning their State: And then adds these
Words, This may do for this Scheme, but only it is a begging the Question
Whereas, it is a Point that never has been in Question in this Controversy, as
ever I knew, Whether some Ministers or Churches might reasonably, and
affirmatively suppose, the Members of other Churches, they are united with,
were admitted on Evidence of proper Qualifications, (whatever they be, whether
common or saving) trusting to the Faithfulness of other Ministers and Churches.
Besides, this can be no Point in Question between Me and Mr. W. unless it be a
Point in Question between him and himself. For he holds, as well as I, Persons
ought not to be received as visible Christians, without moral Evidence (which
is something positive, and not a mere Negation of Evidence of the contrary) of
Gospel-Holiness.

In P. 82. of my Book I suppose, that none at all do truly subject themselves
to Christ as their Master, but those who graciously subject themselves to him,
and are delivered from the reigning Power of Sin. Mr. W. suggests, (P. 83. d.)
that herein I beg the Question. For which there is no Pretext, not only as this
is no known Point in Controversy between the Parties in this Debate; but also
as it is a Point I don't take for granted, but offer this Argument to prove it,
That they who have no Grace, are under the reigning Power of Sin, and no Man
can truly subject himself to two such contrary Masters, at the same Time, as
Christ, and Sin. I think this Argument sufficient to obtain the Point, without
begging it. And besides, this Doctrine, That they who have no Grace don't truly
subject themselves to Christ, was no Point in Question between Me and Mr. W.
But a Point wherein we were fully agreed, and wherein he had before expressed
himself as fully, and more fully than I. In his Sermons on Christ a King and
Witness, (P. 18. b.) he speaks of all such as don't depend on Christ, believe
in him, and give up themselves and all to him, as not true Subjects to Christ;
but Enemies to him, and his Kingdom. We have Expressions to the same Purpose
again, in P. 74. and 91. and in P. 94. d, e. of the same Book, He says, It is
utterly inconsistent with the Nature of the Obedience of the Gospel, that it
should be a forced Subjection. -- No Man is a Subject of Christ, who does not
make the Laws and Will of Christ his Choice, and desire to be governed by him,
and to live in Subjection to the Will of Christ, as good, and fit, and best to
be the Rule of his Living, and Way to his Happiness. A forced Obedience to
Christ is no Obedience. It Is in Terms a Contradiction. Christ draws Men with
the Cords of Love, and the Bands of a Man. Our Lord has himself expressly
determined this Point. There are other Passages in the same Book, to the same
Purpose. So that I had no Need to beg this Point of Mr. W. since he had given
it largely, and that in full Measure, and over and over again, without Begging.

In P. 120. b. He observes, That to say, such a Profession of internal
invisible Things is the Rule to direct the Church in Admission, -- is to hide
the Parallel, and beg the Question. For the Question here is about the Person's
Right to come, and not about the Church's admitting them. Here Mr. W. would
make us believe, that he don't know what begging the Question is: For it is
evident, his Meaning is, that my saying so is beside the Question. But to say
something beside the Question, is a different Thing from begging the Question,
as has been observed. My saying* that a Profession of invisible Things is the
Church's Rule in Admission, is not begging the Question: Because it is not, nor
ever was any Thing in Question. For Mr. S. and Mr. W. himself are full in it,
that a Profession of invisible Things, such as a believing that Christ is the
Son of God, etc. is the Church's Rule. Yea, Mr. W. is express in it, that a
credible Profession and Visibility of Gospel-Holiness is the Church's Rule. P.
139. Nor is my saying as above, beside the Question then in Hand, relating to
the Church of Israel's admitting to the Priesthood, those that could not find
their Register. For that wholly relates to the Rule of Admission to the
Priesthood, and not to the Priests Assurance of their own Right. For, as I
observed, if the Priests had been never so fully assured of their Pedigree, yet
if they could not demonstrate it to others, by a public Register, it would not
have availed for their Admission.

Again, in P. 124. e. Mr. W. charges me with begging the Question, in supposing
that Sacraments are Duties of Worship, whose very Nature and Design is an
Exhibition of those vital and active Principles and inward Exercises, wherein
consists the Condition of the Covenant of Grace. He charges the same Thing as a
begging the Question, P. 131. d. -- But this is no begging the Question, for
two Reasons; (1.) Because I had before proved this Point, by Proofs which Mr.
W. has not seen Cause to attempt to answer, as has been just now observed, in
the last Section. (2.) This, when I wrote, was no Point in Question, wherein
Mr. W. and I differed; but wherein we were agreed, and in which he had declared
himself as fully as I, in his Sermons on Christ a King and Witness; P. 76. c.
When we attend Sacraments (says he) we are therein visibly to profess our
receiving Christ, and the Graces of his Spirit, and the Benefits of his
Redemption, on his own Terms and Offer, and giving up the All of our Souls to
him, on his Call, Covenant, and Engagement. And in the next preceding Page but
one, in a Place forecited, He speaks of these Acts "as Mockery, Hypocrisy,
Falsehood and Lies, if they are not the Expressions of Faith and Hope, and
spiritual Acts of Obedience. So that I had no Manner of Need to come to Mr. W.
as a Beggar for these Things, which he had so plentifully given me, and all the
World that would accept them, Years before.

SECTION VIII. Showing how Mr. W. often begs the Question Himself.
THE Question is certainly begged in that Argument, which Mr. W. espouses and
defends, viz. That the Lord's Supper has a proper Tendency to promote Men's
Conversion. In the Prosecution of the Argument Mr. W. implicitly yields, that
it is not the apparent natural Tendency alone, that is of any Force to prove
the Point; but the apparent Tendency under this Circumstance, That there is no
express Prohibition. And thus it is allowed, that in the Case of express
Prohibition with Respect to the scandalous and morally Insincere, no seeming
Tendency in the Nature of the Thing proves the Ordinance to be intended for the
Conviction and Conversion of such. So that it is a Thing supposed in this
Argument, that all morally insincere Persons are expressly forbidden, but
unsanctified Persons not so. Now when it is supposed, that morally insincere
Persons are expressly forbidden, the Thing meant cannot be, that they are
forbidden in those very Words; for no such Prohibition is to be found: nor are
Men that live in Sodomy, Bestiality, and Witchcraft, any where expressly
forbidden in this Sense. But the Thing intended must be, that they are very
evidently forbidden, by plain Implication, or Consequence. But then the whole
Weight of the Argument lies in this Supposition, That unsanctified Persons are
not also plainly and evidently forbidden; which is the very Point in Question.
And therefore to make this the Ground of an Argument to prove this Point, is a
manifest begging the Question. And what Mr. W. says to the contrary (P. 127.
a.) That Mr. Stoddard had proved this Point before, avails Nothing: For let it
be never so much proved before, yet, after all, to take this very Point and
make use of it as a further Argument to prove it self, is certainly begging the
Question. The Notion of bringing a new Argument is bringing additional Proof:
But to take a certain Point, supposed to be already proved, to prove it self
with over again, certainly don't add any Thing to the Evidence.

Mr. W. says, my supposing unconverted Persons, as such, to be as evidently
forbidden, as scandalous Persons, is as much begging the Question. I answer, So
it would be, if I made that Point an Argument to prove it self with, after Mr.
W -- ms's Manner. But this is far from being the Case in Fact.

And the Question is again most certainly begged, in that other Thing said to
support this Argument, viz. That though the Lord's Supper may seem to have a
Tendency to convert scandalous Sinners, yet there is another Ordinance
appointed for that. Here the Meaning must be, that there is another Ordinance
exclusive of the Lord's Supper; otherwise it is nothing to the Purpose. For they
don't deny but that there are other Ordinances for the Conversion of Sinners,
who are morally sincere, as well as of those who are scandalous. But the
Question is, Whether other Ordinances are appointed for their Conversion
exclusive of the Lord's Supper; or, Whether the Lord's Supper be one Ordinance
appointed for their Conversion? This is the grand Point in Question. And to
take this Point as the Foundation of an Argument, to prove this same Point, is
plain begging the Question. And it is also giving up the Argument from the
Tendency, and resting the whole Argument on another Thing.

Mr. W. again plainly begs the Question in his Reply (P. 127. c. d.) That God's
Prohibition is an Argument, that God saw there was no such Tendency for their
Conversion. His so saying supposes again, that there is no evident Prohibition
of unsanctified Persons. In which he again flies to the very Point in Question,
and rests the Weight of his Reasoning upon it.

Just in the same Manner, Mr. W. begs the Question in espousing and making use
of that Argument, That all in external Covenant, and neither ignorant nor
scandalous, are commanded to perform all external Covenant-Duties. Here it is
supposed, that scandalous Persons (which, according to Mr. W -- ms's Scheme,
must include all that have not moral Sincerity) though in the external Covenant,
are expressly, that is, evidently, excepted and forbidden: and that unsanctified
Men are not also evidently forbidden; Which is the Point in Question. For if
unsanctified Men, though in external Covenant, are as evidently forbidden and
excepted, as scandalous Men that are in external Covenant, then the Argument
touches not one any more than the other. So that the Argument is entirely a
Castle in the Air, resting on nothing but it self: The grand Thing to be
proved, first taken for granted, and then made an Argument to prove it self!

In explaining the Nature of begging the Question, I observed, that it is
begging the Question, or equivalent to it, whether the Point that is taken for
granted, and made an Argument of, be the main Point in Controversy, or some
particular known disputed Point between the controverting Parties: I will now
illustrate this by an Example. It Is a known disputed Point in this Controversy,
whether in the Parable concerning the Man without the wedding Garment, the King
condemned the Man for coming into the Church without Grace. Now supposing that
I, because I look on the Matter very clear, should, besides using it as one
distinct Argument, also make it the Basis of other Arguments; and should use it
in Opposition to the strongest Arguments of my Opposers, as if it were
sufficient to stop their Mouths, without offering any proper Solution of those
Arguments: As, in Case I were pressed with the Argument from the Passover, if I
should fly to the Man without the wedding Garment; and should say, It Is
certain, this Argument from the Passover can be of no Force against the express
Word of God in the xxii. of Matthew. For there it is plain as any Fact that ever
the Sun shone upon, that the King condemns the Man for coming into the Church
without a Wedding Garment; and it is plain as the Sun at Noonday, that the
Wedding Garment is Grace. -- And if when the Argument from Judas's partaking of
the Lord's Supper is alleged, I should again fly to the Man without a
Wedding Garment, and say, whatever Reasons Christ might have for admitting
Judas, yet it is plainly revealed, in Matthew. xxii.12. that God don't approve of
Men's coming into the Church without a Wedding Garment. This would be a
beggarly impertinent Way of disputing, thus to answer one Argument by throwing
another in the Way, which is contested, and the Validity of which is denied.
It Is fair, that I should have Liberty to use the Argument concerning the
Wedding Garment, in it is Place, and make the most of it: But to use it as the
Support of other Arguments, is to produce no additional Proof. And thus, from
Time to Time, to produce the disputed Hypothesis of one Argument, for Answer to
the Arguments of my Antagonist, instead of solving those Arguments, is flying
and hiding from Arguments, instead of answering them: instead of defending the
Fortress which is attacked, it is dodging and flying from one Refuge to another.

Mr. W. acts this Part from Time to Time, in the use he makes of his great
Argument from the Old Testament Church and it is Ordinances. Thus (in P. 8.) he
takes this Method to answer my Argument from the Nature of Visibility and
Profession, insisting that the Israelites Avouching and Covenanting was a Thing
compatible with Ungodliness; which he knows is a disputed Point in this
Controversy, and what I deny. -- Again, he makes Use of the same Thing, in
Answer to my Argument from the Nature of Covenanting with God. (P. 23, 24. --)
And again he brings it in (P. 25. e. 26. a.) answering what I say, by
confidently asserting that concerning the Church of Israel, which he knows is
disputed, and I deny; viz. That the Covenanting of Israel did not imply a
Profession that they did already believe and repent: As in these Words, This
was never intended nor understood, in the Profession which the Israelites made;
But that they would immediately, and from thenceforth comply with the Terms of
the Covenant; and by the Help of God, offered in it, would fulfill it. I am
sure, this was what they professed; and I am sure, God declared he took them
into Covenant with him. -- And the same Thing is brought in again to answer the
same Argument. (P. 31. c.) -- The same Thing is thrown in, once and again, as
an Answer to what I say of the Unreasonableness of accepting such Professions
as leave Room to judge the greater Part of the Professors to be Enemies of God.
(P. 34. b, c.) -- The same Thing is cast in as a sufficient Block in the Way of
my arguing from the Unreasonableness of accepting such Professions, as amount
to nothing more than Luke-warmness. (P. 36. d, e.) -- The same is brought in,
and greatly insisted on, to stop my Mouth, in arguing from the Epistles. (P.
56, 57.) -- The same is brought in again to enervate my Argument concerning
brotherly Love. (P. 69 d.) -- And this is made Use of as the Support of other
Arguments; as that from the Name Disciples, and about the Church's being the
School of Christ; and to confute what I say, in Answer to that Argument (P. 84
a.) -- The same is bro't in as a Support of the eleventh Objection, and a
Confutation of my Answer to that. (P. 12 (...) d, e.) -- And again, in Reply to
what I say in Answer to the nineteenth Objection. (P. 137. b, c.)

Another Thing, near akin to begging the Question, is resting the Weight of
Arguments on Things asserted without Proof; which, though they don't properly
make a Part of the Controversy, yet are Things not allowed by those on the
other Side. -- Thus does Mr. W. in his Arguing from the Success of the Lord's
Supper in the Conversion of Sinners (P. 137, 138.) Supposing, not only that the
Lord's Supper has been the Occasion of the Conversion of many, but that their
communicating was the Means of it. This he offers nothing to prove, and it is
not allowed by those on the other Side. Thus that very eminent Divine, and
successful Minister of Christ, the late Dr. Doddridge, in his Sermons on
Regeneration, speaking of the Means of Regeneration* (P. 251. e. 252. a.) says,
I do not mention the Administration of Sacraments* upon this Occasion; because,
though they have so noble and effectual a Tendency to improve Men's Minds in
Piety, and to promote Christian Edification; yet I do not remember to have
heard of any Instance, in which they have been the Means of Men's Conversion;
which is the less to be wondered at, as they are appointed for a very different
End.
And it is what would be very hard to prove: If many were converted at the
Lord's Table (which yet is not evident) it would not prove, that their
Partaking was the Means of their Conversion; it might be only what they saw and
heard there, which others may see and hear, that don't partake.

SECTION IX. Mr. W -- ms's Inconsistence with himself, in what he says in
Answer to my third and fourth Arguments, and in his Reply to my Arguments from
the Acts, and the Epistles.
THE last Thing observed in Mr. W -- ms's Way of disputing is his alleging and
insisting on Things wherein he is inconsistent with himself. -- His
Inconsistencies are of many Sorts: Sometimes he alleges those Things that are
inconsistent with the Doctrine of those whose Principles he pretends to
maintain: He abundantly urges those Things against my Scheme, which are in like
Manner against his own: He often argues against those Things which he allows,
and strenuously insists on: He denies what he affirms, and affirms what he
utterly denies; laying down and urging those Things which are contrary to what
he says in other Books; and sometimes contrary to what he says in the same
Book: Yielding up the Thing wherein the Argument lies, yet strenuously
maintaining the Argument; Allowing both Premises and Consequence, yet finding
Fault, and opposing: Sometimes urging Things which are contrary to what he says
under different Arguments; and sometimes contrary to what he says under the
same Argument: Sometimes contradicting himself in the plain Sense and Meaning
of what he says; at other Times even in plain Terms: Sometimes in Effect
contradicting himself in the same Breath, and in the same Sentence.

These various Kinds of Inconsistence have many of 'em been already observed:
And will further appear by a particular Consideration of what he says on
several Heads, in what remains.

In my third Argument, I insisted, that it could not be much to God's Honor,
for Men to profess the Assent of their Judgment to the true Religion, without
pretending to any real Friendship or Love to God in their Hearts. Mr. W. in
Opposition, (P. 34. d, e.) speaks of it as an Honor to God, that secret
Hypocrites openly declare their Conviction of the Truth of God's Word, etc. as
in the Multitude of Subjects is the King's Honor. And yet he himself
represents the Matter quite otherwise in his Sermons on CHRIST a King and
Witness; there (in P. 87. a.) He has these Words, To promote the Kingdom of
Christ, is not to do that which may prevail with Men to make Pretenses that
they are Christians, or that they own Jesus Christ as their Savior, and to
call him Lord, Lord, when really he is not so.

In Answer to my fourth Argument (P. 35. d.) Mr. W. says, I make a great
Misrepresentation of the Matter, in insinuating that according to Mr. S -- d's
Scheme (which Scheme he declares himself to be of) they who are admitted make a
Pretense of NO MORE than moral Sincerity, and common Grace. And yet he insists,
that when Philip required a Profession of the Eunuch's Faith, his Question
designed NO MORE than an Assent of the Understanding (P. 51. a, b.) which he
there distinguishes from saving Faith: And says, that it is morally certain that
his Enquiry amounted to NO MORE. And yet in his Discourse on the same Head (P.
49. c.) he inveigh's against me for supposing it a Consequence of the Opinion of
my Opposers, that the Eunuch, in Order to come to Sacraments, had no Manner of
Need to look at any such Qualification in himself as saving Faith. -- Certainly
the Eunuch in making Answer to Philip's Enquiry, had no Need to look at any
more than Philip enquired after. In P. 50. a. he says, It don't seem at all
probable, that Philip ENQUIRED ANY THING about the Regeneration or
Sanctification of the Eunuch. And yet in the next preceding Sentence, he refers
me over to another Judgment, for representing as though my Opposers supposed,
that it was no Matter whether a Person coming to Gospel Ordinances had any
Grace or not, and had no Manner of Need to enquire any Thing about his
Sincerity.

And though he highly blames me for insinuating, as above, that my Opposers
require a Pretense of NO MORE than common Grace and moral Sincerity; yet in
Opposition to my insisting on a Profession of saving Faith, speaking of the
Profession which the Apostles required, he says (P. 58. c.) It Is certain, that
a Profession in these Words, which was wont to be required, do sometimes import
NO MORE than a Conviction of the Understanding on moral Evidence. So he says
concerning those whose Admission into the Christian Church we have an Account
of in Acts ii. (P. 45. e.) There is not one Word said about ANY OTHER FAITH,
but believing that Jesus was the Messiah. And if so, then certainly NO MORE was
professed.

In P. 35. e. He allows, that all visible Saints who are not truly pious, are
Hypocrites; and yet maintains, that the Profession they make is no more than
what they may make and speak HONESTLY and TRULY. P. 105. d. and 47. c. How then
are they all Hypocrites, if they are honestly and truly what they profess to be?

In supporting the Argument from John's Baptism, he insists, that the
Profession the People made, did not imply, that they had savingly repented: and
that John openly supposed, that their Profession did not imply it, in what he
said to 'em. (P. 97. a, b, c.) -- And in P. 98. a, b. he says, We read not a
Word of John's enquiring whether these People made a credible Profession of
true Piety. And he there manifestly suggests, that John knew they were not
pious, as he knew they were a Generation of Vipers. Yet how often elsewhere
does Mr. W. insist, that Men in Order to come to Sacraments must make a
credible Profession of true Piety and Gospel-Holiness, and that they must in a
Judgment of Charity be supposed to have real Godliness?

In answer to my Argument from the Instance of the Converts in Acts ii. Mr. W.
speaking of their Convictions, and being pricked in their Heart, (P. 45. c, d,
e.) says, They were convinced that Jesus was the true Messiah and Savior, whom
God had promised to Israel, -- whereupon convinced of their Sin, they cry out,
What shall we do? To which the Apostle replies, Repent and be baptized, -- in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ for the Remission of Sins. -- There is not
one Word said about any other Faith, but believing that Jesus was the Messiah.
-- And in the two next Pages Mr. W. insists, that their gladly receiving the
Word can by no Necessity from the Text imply more, than that they now believed
that Jesus was the Messiah, and that it was Matter of Joy to 'em that the
Messiah was come. -- So that we have this inconsistent Account of the Matter
from Mr. W. That these People are first convinced that Jesus is the Messiah,
and this is Cause of Distress to 'em: and they ask* What they shall do?
Hereupon the Apostles direct 'em to believe that Jesus is the Messiah; which
they believed already, before they asked the Question: but however, when they
heard this, They believed that Jesus was the Messiah; They now found it out, as
a new Thing they did not know of before, and are glad at the joyful Discovery;
though just before they believed the same Thing, and the Discovery filled them
with Distress.

In P. 47. b. Whereas it is said concerning these new Converts, -- "That such
were added to the Church, as were the saved" -- Mr. W. says, The like
Appellation is given to the whole Church of Israel. And in this, and the
foregoing Page, he insists, that these Converts were before in the Church of
Israel, and were not now admitted, but only continued as some of God's People.
But if these Things were so, they were the saved before their Conversion to
Christianity, as much as after; and others that were in the Jewish Church, that
were not yet converted to Christianity, were as much the saved as they. And
then why is their being saved spoken of as what was now brought to pass, and as
a Thi^^ that distinguished the believing Jews from others?

In the same Page c. Mr. W. says, We don't dispute but that the Apostles
supposed and believed in Charity, so far as they had any. Thing to do to
suppose or believe any Thing about it, that God had given these Persons saving
Repentance, and an Heart-purifying Faith. And yet in P. 61. He speaks of the
Apostles as supposing the contrary of many of those that had been admitted into
the primitive Church; in that they speak of 'em, as such Temples of God as
might be destroyed: Which (says Mr. W.) cannot be true of sanctified Persons,
unless they can fall from Grace.

In his Answer to the Argument from Philip and the Eunuch, he supposes, that
believing with all the Heart is only such a Belief of the Doctrine of
Christianity as unsanctified Men may have. And yet in that forementioned Place
( Christ a King and Witness, P. 144.) he says, A Man before he is renewed by
the Holy Ghost, has a View of the Truth as a doubtful uncertain Thing. And in
the Book now especially attended to, he in Effect owns the Thing, which he
earnestly disputes against in Reply to this Argument. He greatly insists, that
the Phrase, with all the Heart, don't signify gracious Sincerity; and yet he
owns it does. (P. 51. e. and 52. a, b.) He owns, that according to the usual
Way of speaking among Mankind, both in our Days, and also in Times when the
Scriptures were written, GOD requires Men to give him their Hearts, intending
by it such a Sincerity as God will own and accept; which be sure (says he) is
nothing less than a gracious Sincerity; which never can be, unless the whole
Soul and all its Faculties be engaged for God. Then afterward adds, But how
will this any Ways prove, that when Men use the same Expressions, it must
necessarily be understood in the same Sense? And yet in the same Breath, he had
observed that GOD in thus using the Phrase, uses it according to the usual
Manner of speaking AMONG MANKIND. He gives this Reason, why the Phrase need not
be understood in the same Sense when used by Men, that Men are not Searchers of
Hearts. But the Argument is about the Phrase as Philip put it to the Eunuch's
own Conscience, which was or ought to be a Searcher of his Heart.

And by the Way I must observe, that Mr. W. would have done well, if he was
able, to have reconciled these repugnant Things, taken Notice of in my Book;
That with the Heart Man believes to Righteousness, and that if Men believe
with the Heart that God raised Christ from the Dead, they shall be saved;
agreeable to Romans x.9, 10. And yet that Men may believe this with their Heart,
yea, and with all their Heart, and still not believe to Righteousness, nor ever
be saved. So likewise, That whoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God,
God dwells in him, and he in God; as in 1 John iv.15. And that whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John v.1. And yet, that a
Man may believe this very Thing with all his Heart, and confess it with his
Mouth; and this in the Language of the same Apostles and primitive Ministers;
and still not be born of God, nor have a Spark of Grace in him.

It may also be worthy to be considered, whether it be reasonable to suppose,
that the Faith which a Man must profess, in order to being in the visible
Kingdom of Christ, and not in the visible Kingdom of the Devil, must not be
some other Sort of Faith than that which the Devil has: That seeing the very
Design of a public Profession of Religion is to declare on which Side we are,
whether on Christ's, or on the Devil's, no other Faith is required to be
professed, than such as Satan himself has, and such as is not at all
inconsistent with being a willing, cursed Servant and Slave of the Devil, and
Enemy to Christ; as Mr. W. says, all unsanctified Men are.

Mr. W. in his Reply to my Argument from the Epistles (P. 55. speaks of it) as
an unaccountable Thing, that I should represent as if according to the
Principles of my Opposites, the primitive Christians were not admitted under
any such Notion of their being REALLY godly Persons, or with any Respect to
such a Character So in P. 132. c. He exclaims against me thus; After all this,
to repeat it again and again, that these Persons have no Visibility to Reason
of REAL Saintship, etc. I think, gives better Ground to retort Mr. Edwards's
Words.
: and yet in his Discourse on the same Head, he abundantly insists, that it was
not REAL Holiness, but only FEDERAL Holiness, which was the Qualification,
which the Apostles had Respect to in admitting them; expressly, from Time to
Time, distinguishing federal Holiness from real. In P. 56. e. and 57. a. It
makes it evident (says he) that this Manner of treating Churches and Bodies of
Men, and such Expressions used to them and of them, are to be understood in NO
OTHER SENSE, than to signify FEDERAL Holiness. -- So in P. 60. he affirms the
same Thing, once and again, distinguishing federal Holiness from real. He says,
They formed no positive Judgment of their REAL Piety. -- And knew nothing at
all about them, but only that they were FEDERALLY Holy. And again, They did not
make a positive Judgment, that these Persons were REALLY godly; and the high
Characters they gave them, and the Hopes they expressed concerning them, could
be understood in no other Sense than as holding forth a FEDERAL Holiness. -- So
that by this, they expressed no HOPES concerning any Thing more than their
federal Holiness, as distinguished from real. And he argues earnestly, through
the two next Pages, that they could not be looked upon, many of them, as having
real Holiness. How does this consist with their being treated as visible
Saints; under the Notion of their having real Holiness, and from Respect to
such a Character appearing on them? or with none's being visible Saints, but
such as have a credible Visibility of Gospel-Holiness?

So in P. 63. b. He speaks of the gross Scandals of many of those the Apostles
wrote to, as an absolute Proof, that they considered them only as federally
holy; which he in the same Place distinguishes from real Holiness. Then how
were they treated (as he insists) as those that had the Character of REAL PIETY
appearing on them, and as making a credible Profession of Gospel-Holiness, and
Real Christianity? Which, he abundantly allows, all must make in Order to being
visible Saints. See also P. 64. e.

In P. 58. Mr. W. insists, that it don't appear, that those who were admitted
into the primitive Church, made a Declaration that they had saving Faith, but
ONLY that they engaged to that Faith. -- But how does this consist with what he
abundantly says elsewhere, That they must pretend to real Piety, make a
Profession of Gospel-Holiness, exhibit moral Evidence, that they have such
Holiness, etc? These Things are something else besides engaging to saving Faith
and Gospel-Holiness for the Future.

SECTION X. The Unreasonableness and Inconsistence of Mr. W -- ms's Answer to
my Argument from the Man without a Wedding Garment, and concerning Brotherly
Love, and from 1 Cor. xi.28. and of what he says in Support of the 15th
Objection.
MR. W. in answering my Argument from Matthew. xxii.11. allows that the King's
House, into which the Guests came, is the visible Church. P. 43. c. and 44. d.
So that the Man's coming in hither, is his coming into the visible Church. Nor
does he at all dispute but that by the Wedding Garment is meant saving Grace;
(for truly the Thing is too evident to be disputed:) And yet he says, (P. 43.
b, c.) We read nothing of Christ's condemning the Man for coming into the
Church without saving Grace. So that Mr. W -- ms's Answer amounts plainly to
this; The King, when he comes to Judgment, will say, I don't at all condemn
thee for coming in hither without a Wedding Garment: but Friend, How came
thou in hither without a Wedding Garment? And no wonder; The Case is too plain
to allow of any other than such a lamentable Refuge, as this is. -- If the
Wedding Garment be saving Grace, which is not denied; and if coming into the
King's House be coming into the visible Church, as Mr. W. owns; Then if the
King condemns the Man for coming into the House without a Wedding Garment, He
condemns him for coming into the visible Church without saving Grace.

It Is plain, the Thing the Man is blamed for, is something else than simply a
being without Grace, or without a Wedding Garment. The King's Words have
Respect to this as it stands in Connection with coming into the King's House.
If Christ has commanded Men who are not converted, to come into the Church,
that they may be converted, He will never say to them, upon their obeying this
Command, Friend, how came thou in hither before thou wast converted? Which
would be another Thing than blaming him simply for not being converted. If a
Man, at his own Cost, sets up a School, in order to teach ignorant Children to
read; and accordingly ignorant Children should go thither in order to learn to
read, would he come into the School, and say in Anger to an ignorant Child that
he found there; How came thou in hither, before thou had learnt to read!
Did the Apostle Paul ever rebuke the Heathen, who came to hear him preach the
Gospel, saying, How came you hither to hear me preach, not having Grace? This
would have been unreasonable, because Preaching is an Ordinance appointed to
that End, that Men might obtain Grace. And so, in Mr. W -- ms's Scheme, is the
Lord's Supper. -- Can we suppose, that Christ will say to Men in Indignation,
at the Day of Judgment, How came you to presume to use the Means I appointed
for your Conversion, before you were converted!

It Is true, the Servants were to invite all, both bad and good, to come to the
Feast, and to compel them to come in: but this don't prove, that bad Men,
remaining in their Badness, have a lawful Right to come. The Servants were to
invite the vicious, as well as the moral; they were to invite the Heathen, who
were especially meant by them that were in the Highways and Hedges: Yet it
will not follow, that the Heathen, while remaining Heathen, have a lawful Right
to come to Christian Sacraments. But heathen Men must turn from their
Heathenism, and come: so likewise wicked Men must turn from their Wickedness,
and come.

I endeavored to prove, that That brotherly Love, which is required toward
the Members of the Christian Church in general, is such a Love as is required
to those only whom we have Reason to look upon as true Saints. Mr. W. disputes,
through two Pages, (P. 66, 67) against the Force of my Reasoning to prove this
Point; and yet when he has done, he allows the Point. He allows it (P. 68. d,
e.) as an undisputed Thing, that it is the Image of God and Christ appearing or
supposed to be in others, that is the Ground and Reason of this Love. And so
again (P. 71. d, e.) he grants, that there must be some Apprehension, and
Judgment of the Mind, of the Saintship of Persons, in Order to this brotherly
Love. Indeed he pretends to differ from me in this, that he denies the Need of
any positive Judgment: But doubtless the Judgment or Apprehension of the Mind
must be as positive as the Love founded on that Apprehension and Judgment of
the Mind.

In P. 78, 79. He seems to insist, that what the Apostle calls unworthy
Communicating, is eating in a greedy, disorderly and irreverent Manner: as though
Men might communicate without Grace, and yet not communicate unworthily, in the
Apostle's Sense. But if so, the Apostle differed much in his Sense of Things
from Mr. W. -- The latter says, in his Sermon on Christ a King and Witness, (P.
77, 78.) These outward Acts of Worship, when not performed from Faith in
Christ, and Love to God, are mocking God, -- in their own Nature a Lie, -- The
vilest Wickedness; -- instead of being that Religion, which Christ requires,
it is infinitely contrary to it, -- The most flagrant and abominable Impiety,
and threatened with the severest Damnation. Is not this a Communicating
unworthily enough of all Reason!

In P. 132, 133. Mr. W. strenuously opposes me in my Supposition, that the Way
of freely allowing all that have only moral Sincerity to come into the Church,
tends to the Reproach and Ruin of the Church. On the contrary, he seems to
suppose it tends to the establishing and building up of the Church. But I
desire that what Mr. Stoddard says, in his Sermon on the Danger of speedy
Degeneracy, may be considered under this Head. He there largely insists, that
the prevailing of unconverted Men and unholy Professors among a People is the
principal Thing that brings 'em into Danger of speedy Degeneracy and
Corruption. He says, that Where this is the Case, there will be many bad
Examples, that will corrupt others; and that unconverted Men will indulge their
Children in Evil, will be negligent in their Education; and that by this Means
their Children will be very corrupt and ungoverned; If we have Reason to expect
it will be thus with ungodly Parents, with Respect to their Children, then
certainly such cannot reasonably expect Ministers and Churches should admit
their Children to Baptism, in a Dependence that they do give them up to God,
and will bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, if they make
no Profession that implies more than moral Sincerity; and none but what wicked
Men may as well make as the godly, and speak true.
that by this Means the godly themselves that are among 'em, will be tainted,
as sweet Liquor put into a corrupt Vessel will be tainted; that thus a People
will grow blind, will not much regard the Warnings of the Word, or the
Judgments of God; and that they will grow weary of religious Duties after a
While; and that many of their leading Men will be carnal; and that this will
expose a People to have carnal Ministers and other leading Men in the Town and
Church.

And I desire also, that here may be considered what Mr. W. himself says, in
that Passage forecited, P. 86, 87. of his Sermons on Christ a King and Witness;
where, in explaining what it is to promote the Kingdom of Christ, he says
negatively, That it is not to do that which may prevail on Men to make
Pretenses, that they are Christians, and that they own Jesus Christ as their
Savior, and to call him Lord, Lord, when really he is not so. Which he
supposes is the Case with all unsanctified Professors; for in the same Book, he
abundantly declares, that they who make such Pretenses, and have not true Faith
and Love, make false and lying Pretenses; as has been several Times already
observed.

SECTION. XI. The Impertinence of Arguments, that are in like Manner against
the Schemes of both the controverting Parties: And this exemplified in what Mr.
W. says concerning the Notion of Israel's being the People of God, and his
Manner of arguing concerning the Members of the primitive Christian Church.
IN as much as in each of the remaining Instances of Mr. W -- ms's Arguing,
that I shall take Notice of, He insists upon and urges Arguments, which are in
like Manner against his own Scheme, as against mine, I desire, that such a Way
of arguing may be a little particularly considered.

And here I would lay down this as a Maxim of undoubted Verity; That an
Argument, brought to support one Scheme against another, can avail Nothing to
the Purpose it is brought for, if it is at the same Time against the Scheme it
would support, in like Manner as against that which it would destroy.

It is an old and approved Maxim, That Argument which proves too much, proves
Nothing. i. e. If it proves too much for him that brings it, proves against
himself in like Manner as against his Opponent, then it is Nothing to help his
Cause. The Reason of it is plain: The Business of a Dispute is to make one
Cause good against another, to make one Scale heavier than the other. But when
a Man uses an Argument which takes alike out of both Scales, this don't at all
serve to make his Side preponderate, but leaves the Balance just as it was.

Arguments brought by any Man in a Dispute, if they ben't altogether
impertinent, are against the Difference between Him and his Opponent, or
against his Opponent's differing from him: For wherein there is no Difference,
there is no Dispute. But that can be no Argument against his Opponent's
differing from him, which is only an Argument against what is common to both,
and taken from some Difficulty that both Sides equally share in. If I charge
supposed Absurdities or Difficulties against him that differs from me, as an
Argument to show the Unreasonableness of his differing; and yet the Difficulty
is not owing to his differing from me, in as much as the same would lie against
him, if he agreed with me, my Conduct herein is both very impertinent and
injurious.

If one in a Dispute insists on an Argument, that lies equally against his own
Scheme as the other, and yet will stand to it that his Argument is good, he in
Effect stands to it that his own Scheme is not good; he supplants himself, and
gives up his own Cause, in opposing his Adversary; in holding fast his
Argument, he holds fast what is his own Overthrow; and in insisting that his
Argument is solid and strong, he in Effect insists that his own Scheme is weak
and vain. If my Antagonist will insist upon it, that his Argument is good, that
he brings against me, which is in like Manner against himself; then I may take
the same Argument, in my Turn, and use it against him, and he can have nothing
to answer; but has stopped his own Mouth, having owned the Argument to be
conclusive.

Now such Sort of Arguments as these Mr. W. abundantly makes use of.

For Instance, the Argument taken from the whole Nation of Israel's being
called God's People, and every Thing that Mr. W. alleges, pertaining to this
Matter, is in like Manner against his own Scheme as against mine: And that, let
the Question be what it will; whether it be about the Qualifications which make
it lawful for the Church to admit, or about the Lawfulness of Persons coming to
Sacraments; whether it be about the Profession they should make before Men, or
the internal Qualification they must have in the Sight of God. And what Mr. W.
says to the contrary, don't indeed at all deliver the Argument from this
Embarassment and Absurdity. After all he has said, in turning and twisting it,
to save the Force of it, the Argument, if any Thing related to the Controversy,
is plainly this, That because the whole Nation of Israel were God's visible
People ( which is the same as visible Saints) therefore the Scripture-Notion of
visible Saintship is of larger Extent than mine; and the Scripture supposes
those to be visible Saints, which my Scheme don't suppose to be so.

But if this be Mr. W -- ms's Argument, then let us see whether it agrees any
better with his own Scheme. Mr. Blake (Mr. W -- ms's great Author) in his Book
on the Covenant (P. 190. b.) insists, that Israel at the very WORST is owned as
God's Vovenant People, and were called God's People; and (P. 149. e.) that all
the Congregation of Israel, and every one of them, are called Holy, and God's
own People, even Corah and his Company. And (P. 253. e. 254. a.) he urges, that
every one who is descended from Jacob, even the WORST of Israel, in their
LOWEST State and Condition, were God's People in Covenant, called by the Name
of God's People. -- And Mr. W. herein follows Mr. Blake, and urges the same
Thing; that this Nation was God's Vovenant People, and were called God's
People, at the Time that they were carried Captive into Babylon (P. 24. d.)
when they were undoubtedly at their Worst, more corrupt than at any other Time
we read of in the Old Testament; being represented by the Prophets, as overrun
with abominable Idolatries, and other Kinds of the most gross, Heaven-daring
Impieties, most obstinate, abandoned, pertinacious and irreclaimable in their
Rebellion against God, and against his Word by his Prophets. But yet these,
it is urged, are called the People of God; not agreeable to my Notion of visible
Saintship, but agreeable to Mr. W -- ms's. What his Notion of visible Saints is,
he tells us in P 139. He there says expressly, that He don't suppose Persons to
be visible Saints, unless they exhibit a credible Profession and Visibility of
Gospel-Holiness. Now do those Things said about those vile Wretches in Israel,
agree with this? Did they exhibit moral Evidence of Gospel-Holiness! -- But if
we bring the Matter lower still, and say, the true Notion of visible Saintship
is a credible Appearance and moral Evidence of moral Sincerity; does this
flagrant, open, abandoned, obstinate Impiety consist with moral Evidence of
such Sincerity as that? It Is as apparent therefore, in Mr. W -- ms's Scheme as
Mine, that when these are called God's People, it is in some other Sense than
that wherein the Members of the Christian Church are called visible Saints. And
indeed the Body of the Nation of Israel, in those corrupt Times, were so far
from being God's Church of visibly pious Persons, visibly endowed with
Gospel-Holiness, that that People, as to the Body of them, were visibly and
openly declared by God, to be a Whore and a Witch, and her Children Bastards,
or Children of Adultery. Isai. lvii.3. Draw near hither, ye Sons of the
Sorceress, the Seed of the Adulterer and the Whore. (We have the like in other
Places.) And so the Body of the same People in Christ's Time (which Mr. W.
supposes even then to be Branches of the True Olive, in the same Manner, as the
Members of the Christian Church were in the Apostles Times) are visibly
declared not to be God's Children, or Children of the true Church, but Bastards
or an adulterous Brood. Matthew. xii.39. An evil and adulterous Generation
seeks after a Sign. v. 45. Even so shall it be with this wicked Generation.
And certainly the People were then, visibly and in the Eyes of Men, such as
Christ had visibly and openly and in the Sight of Men declared 'em to be.

If the Question be not concerning the Visibility which makes it lawful for
others to admit Persons, but concerning the Qualifications which render it
lawful for them to come, still the Objection is no more against my Scheme, than
against Mr. W -- ms's. He (in P. 84, 85, and 86.) says, That such openly
scandalous Persons ought not to be admitted into the Church; insinuating, that
these scandalous People among the Jews were otherwise when they were admitted
at first: But that being taken in, and not cast out again, it was lawful for
'em to be there, and they had a lawful Right to the Privileges of the Church.
But this Supposition, that all that are lawfully admitted by others, may
lawfully come into the Church, and lawfully continue to partake of its
Privileges 'till cast out, is utterly inconsistent with Mr. W -- ms's own
Scheme. For according to his Scheme, it is not lawful for Men that are not
morally sincere, to partake of the Privileges of the Church; but yet such may
in some Cases be lawfully admitted by others; for he maintains, that in
admitting them, they are not to act as Searchers of Hearts, even with Regard to
their moral Sincerity; and so argues (P. 106.) That Christ might give Judas the
Sacrament, when not morally Sincere. If Christ as Head of the visible Church
might admit Judas to his Table, when he knew he was not morally Sincere, and
when it was not lawful for Judas himself to come; then it is lawful for Men to
admit some, for whom it is not lawful to be there; contrary to Mr. W -- ms's
Assertion in P. 86. b.

It Is true, that Persons may become grossly scandalous, after having been
regularly admitted on Mr. W -- ms's Principles, on a Profession in Words of
indiscriminate Signification. And so they may after being regularly admitted,
according to my Principles, on a credible Profession of Gospel Holiness in
Words of a determinate Meaning: And therefore the gross Wickedness of such
Apostates as we read of in Scripture, is no more an Objection against my
Principles, than his.

Just in the same Manner is Mr. W -- ms's arguing (P. 59, 60, 61, 62, 63.)
concerning the Members of Churches mentioned in the Epistles, equally against
his own Scheme and mine. He largely insists on it, that the Apostle speaks of
many of them as grossly scandalous, notoriously wicked Persons, Idolaters,
Heretics, Fornicators, Adulterers, Adulteresses, etc. etc. In his Arguing from
these Things, he is inconsistent with his own Principles, two Ways. (1.) Such a
Character is as plainly inconsistent with the Character he insists on as
necessary to render it lawful for Persons themselves to come to Sacraments, as
mine. And (2.) It Is utterly inconsistent with what he often declares to be his
Notion of visible Saintship, necessary to a being admitted by others; so no
more an Argument against my Opinion of visible Saintship, than his own.

SECTION XII. The great Argument from the Jewish Sacraments, of the PASSOVER,
and CIRCUMCISION, considered.
AS has been observed concerning the Argument from the Jewish Nation, so the
Argument from the Jewish Ordinances, if it be against my Scheme, is as plainly,
in every Respect, against Mr. W -- ms's.

This grand Argument, as plainly expressed, or implied in Mr. Stoddard's Words
(which Mr. W. insists I should attend to) is this:

God did expressly command all the Nation of Israel to be Circumcised; and he
also expressly commanded the whole Nation to come to the Passover; excepting
such as were ceremonially Unclean, or in a Journey. Therefore it was lawful for
unsanctified Men to come. (See Mr. Stod -- 's Sermon on the Controv. P. 8. and
Appeal, P. 51.) The Want of Sanctification never was alleged by any Man as a
Reason for forbearing the Passover. ( Appeal, P. 51.) Unsanctified Persons
attending this Ordinance is never charged on them as a Sin in Scripture.
(Ibid.) Jesus Christ himself partook of the Passover with Judas; which proves
it to be lawful for unsanctified Men to come to the Passover. But such as might
lawfully come to the Passover, may lawfully come to the Lord's Supper.

Now let us consider what are the Qualifications, which are necessary,
according to Mr. W -- ms's Scheme, to a lawful coming to Christian Sacraments;
and then see whether this Objection, in every Part of it, and every Thing that
belongs to it, ben't as plainly and directly against his own Scheme, as mine.

According to Mr. W. it is not lawful for a Man to come unless he is morally
sincere. (Pref. P. 2. and 3. P. 21. b. 25. d, e. 30. d. 35. e. 36. a. 111. b,
c. 115. b.) And, according as he has explained that moral Sincerity, which is
necessary in Order to come to Sacraments, it implies A real Conviction of the
Judgment and Conscience of the Truth of the great Things of Religion, -- a deep
Conviction of a Man's undone State without Christ, and an earnest Concern to
obtain Salvation by him, -- a fervent Desire of Christ and the Benefits of the
Covenant of Grace, with an earnest Purpose and Resolution to seek Salvation on
the Terms of it; -- A Man's being willing to do the utmost that he can, by the
utmost Improvement of his natural and moral Power, in the most earnest and
diligent Use of the Ordinances of Salvation; -- being resolved for Christ,
coming to a Point, being engaged for Heaven; -- having a settled Determination
of the Judgment and Affections for God; -- giving up all his Heart and Life to
Christ, etc. etc. P. 10. d. 11. c* d. 30. e. 31. a, e. 35. e. 36. a. 53 b, 83.
d. 125. b. and many other Places.
Such moral Sincerity as this is necessary, according to Mr. W. to be found in
professing Christians, in order to their lawful coming to Christian Sacraments.
And he says, they are received into the Church, on like Terms, by entering into
Covenant in like Manner, as the Jews; and that their Holiness, both real, and
federal, is the same with theirs. (P. 56, 57. P. 61. e. P. 65. c.) So that
according to this Scheme, none but those that had such Qualifications as these,
such a Sincerity and Engagedness in Religion as this, might lawfully come to
the Passover. -- But now do the Things alleged agree any better with this his
Scheme, than with mine? If the Case be so, to what Purpose is it alleged, that
God in Numb. Chap. ix. expressly commanded all of that perverse, rebellious and
obstinate Generation in the Wilderness, and the whole Nation of Israel in all
Generations, to keep the Passover, excepting such as were ceremonially unclean
or in a Journey, without the Exception of any other? Was every one else of such
a Character as is above described? Was every one under deep Convictions, and
Persons of such earnest Engagedness in Religion, of such settled strong
Resolution to give up their utmost Strength and all their Heart and Life to
God, etc? Mr. W. suggests, that those who had not moral Sincerity are expressly
excepted from the Command. (P. 93. d.) But I wish, he had mentioned the Place
of Scripture. He cites Mr. Stoddard, who says, God appointed Sacrifice to be
offered for Scandal, with Confession. But where did God appoint Sacrifice, for
the Want of such Sincerity, for the Want of such deep Conviction, earnest
Desire, and fixed Resolution, as Mr. W. speaks of? And where are such as are
without these Things, expressly excepted from the Command to keep the Passover?
And besides there were many scandalous Sins, for which no Sacrifice was
appointed: As David's Murder and Adultery, and the Sin of Idolatry, (which the
Nation in general often fell into) and many other gross Sins. Nor was there any
Precept for deferring the keeping of the Passover, in Case of scandalous
Wickedness, or moral Uncleanness, 'till there should be Opportunity for
cleansing by Sacrifice, etc. as was in the Case of ceremonial Uncleanness.

Mr. S. says, The want of Sanctification was never alleged by any Man as a
Reason for forbearing the Passover. So, where do we read in any Part of the
Bible, that ever the Want of such deep Conviction etc. as Mr. W. speaks of, or
indeed any scandalous moral Uncleanness, was ever alleged by any Man, as a
Reason for forbearing to eat the Passover? -- Mr. S. urges, that unsanctified
Persons attending the Passover was never charged on them as a Sin. And where do
we read of Persons coming without such moral Sincerity being any more charged
on them as a Sin, than the other? We have Reason to think, it was a common
Thing for Parents that had no such moral Sincerity, yea, that were grossly and
openly wicked, to have their Children circumcised; for the Body of the People
were often so: But where is this charged as a (...)? Mr. S. says (Sermon. P. 7.)
Ishmael was circumcised, but yet a carnal Person. And there is as much Reason
to say, He was not of the Character Mr. W. insists on, under deep Convictions,
having earnest Desires of Grace, a full and fixed Determination, with all his
Heart, to the utmost of his Power, to give his whole Life to God, etc. -- Mr.
S. says ( Sermon. P. 8.) Hezekiah sent to invite the People of Ephraim and
Manasseh, and other Tribes, to celebrate the Passover, though they had lived in
Idolatry for some Ages. But if so, this was as much of an Evidence, that they
were not of such a (...) as Mr. W. insists on, as that they were without
sanctifying Grace. -- Mr. W. says, (P. 91. c.) The Israelites had carefully
attended the Seal of Circumcision, from the Time of its Institution, 'till the
Departure out of Egypt. But surely most of 'em at the same Time were without
Mr. W -- ms's moral Sincerity; for it is abundantly manifest, that the Body of
the People fell away to Idolatry in Egypt. (See Levit. xvii.7. Josh. xxiv.14.
Ezekiel. xx.8. and xxiii.3, 8, 27.) And there is not the least Appearance of any
more Exception, either in the Precepts or History of the Old Testament, of the
Case of moral Insincerity, in such as attended these Ordinances, than of
Ungodliness, or an unsanctified State.

Mr. S. urges, that Jesus Christ himself partook of the Passover with Judas;
and thence he would argue, that it was lawful for an unregenerate Person to
partake of the Lord's Supper. But there can be no Argument, in any Sort, drawn
from this, to prove that it is lawful for Men to partake of the Lord's Supper
without sanctifying Grace, any more than that it is lawful for 'em to partake
without moral Sincerity: for it is every Whit as evident, that Judas was at
that Time without moral Sincerity, as that he was unregenerate. We have no
greater Evidence, in all the Scripture-History, of the moral Insincerity of any
one Man, than of Judas, at the Time when he partook of the Passover with
Christ; he having just then been and bargained with the High Priest, to betray
him, and being then in Prosecution of the horrid Design of the Murder of the
Son of God.

If any Thing contrary to my Principles could be argued from all Israel's being
required, throughout their Generations, to come to the Passover and Circumcision,
it would be this; That all Persons, of all Sorts, throughout all Christendom,
might lawfully come to Baptism and the Lord's Supper; godly and ungodly, the
knowing and the ignorant, the moral and the vicious, orthodox and heretical,
Protestants and Papists alike. But this don't agree with Mr. W -- ms's
Principles* any better than with mine.

SECTION XIII. Concerning Judas's partaking of the Lord's Supper.
I Think, we have a remarkable Instance of Tergiversation, in what Mr. W. says
in support of the Argument from Judas's partaking of the Lord's Supper. By
those on his Side of the Question, it is insisted upon, as a clear Evidence of
its being lawful for unsanctified Men to come to the Lord's Table, That Christ
gave the Lord's Supper to Judas, when he knew he was unsanctified. In Answer to
which, I showed, that this is just as much against their own Principles, as
mine; because Christ knew as perfectly that he was not morally sincere, as that
he was not graciously sincere; and they themselves hold, that it is not lawful
for such as are not morally sincere, to partake. Mr. W. ridicules this, as very
impertinent and strange; because Christ did not know this as Head of the
visible Church, but only as omniscient God and Searcher of Hearts. And what
does this argue? Only, that although Judas was really not fit to come, yet,
in-as-much-as Christ, acting as King of the visible Church, did not know it, He
might admit him: But not, that it was lawful for Judas himself to come, who
knew his own Heart in this Matter, and knew his own Perfidiousness and
Treachery* for Mr. W. denies* that it is lawful for such to come, as have no
moral Sincerity. So that here the Question is changed* from, Who may lawfully
come, to Who may lawfully be admitted? Mr. W. does abundantly in his Book
insist, that the Question is not, Who shall be admitted? but, Who may lawfully
come? Not, whether it be lawful to admit those who have not a Visibility of
Saintship, or don't appear to be true Saints? but whether those who are not
true Saints, may lawfully partake? And this he insists upon in his Discourse on
this very Argument, P. 104. c, d. And to prove this latter Point, viz. That
those who are not real Saints, may lawfully come, the Instance of Judas's
coming to the Lord's Supper is produced as an undeniable Evidence. But when it
is answered, that the Argument don't prove this, any more than that the morally
insincere may lawfully come; because Judas was morally insincere: then Mr. W.
(P. 106.) to shelter himself, dodges, and evidently changes the Question, at
once, to that which he had so much exclaimed against as not the Question. Now,
to serve his Turn, the Question is not, Whether Judas might lawfully come? but,
Whether Christ might lawfully admit him, acting on a public Visibility? And he
makes an Occasion to cry out of me, as talking strangely, and soon forgetting
that I had said, Christ in this Matter did not act as Searcher of Hearts.
Whereas, let the Question be what it will, the Argument from Judas's partaking
(should the Fact be supposed) if it proves any Thing relating to the Matter, is
perfectly, and in every Respect, against the one, just as it is against the
other. If the Question be about Profession and Visibility to others, and who
others may lawfully admit, then Judas's being admitted (if he was admitted) no
more proves, that Men may be admitted without a Visibility and Profession of
Godliness, than without a Visibility of moral Sincerity. For it no more
appears, that He was without a Profession and Visibility of the former, than of
the latter. But if the Question is not about Visibility to others, or who
others may admit, but who may lawfully come, then Judas's coming no more
proves, that a Man may come without Grace, than without moral Sincerity;
because he was in like Manner without both: And Christ knew as perfectly, that
he was without the one, as the other; and was not ignorant of the one Case, as
King of the visible Church, any more than of the other. So that there is no Way
to support this Argument, or to make any Thing at all of it; but the only Way
left is, to hide the Question, by shifting and changing it; to have one
Question in the Premises, and to slip in another into the Conclusion. Which is
according to the Course Mr. W. takes. In the Premises (P. 104, 105.) He
expressly mentions Mr. S -- d's Question, as now in View; and agreably must here
have this for his Question, Whether it was lawful for a Man so qualified, to
come to the Lord's Supper? Who, according to Mr. W -- ms's own Doctrine, (P.
111.) ought to act as a Discerner of his own Heart. But in his Conclusion (P.
106.) he has this for his Question, Whether Christ might lawfully ADMIT a Man
so qualified, therein not acting as the Searcher of Hearts? -- What Shuffling
is this?

SECTION XIV. Concerning that great Argument, which Mr. W. urges in various
Parts of his Book, of those being born in the Church, who are Children of
Parents that are in Covenant.
It Is hard to understand distinctly what Mr. W. would be at, concerning this
Matter, or what his Argument is. He often speaks of Parents that are in
Covenant, as born in Covenant, and so born in the Church. (For to be in
Covenant, is the same with him as to be Members of the visible Church. See P.
98. c. 88. d. 89. b. 59. e. 60. a. 136. b.) And speaks of them as admitted into
the Church in their Ancestors, and by the Profession of their Ancestors. (P.
135. e. 136. a.) Yea, for ought I can see, He holds that they were born Members
in COMPLETE STANDING in the visible Church. (P. 3.)

And yet he abundantly speaks of their being ADMITTED into the Church, and MADE
Members, after they are born, viz. by their Baptism. And his Words (unless we
will suppose him to speak Nonsense) are such as will not allow us to understand
him, merely, that Baptism is a Sign and public Acknowlegement of their having
been admitted in their Ancestors, in preceding Generations. For he speaks of
Baptism as the ONLY Rite (or Way) of Admission into the visible Church,
applying it to the Baptism of Children; and as that which MAKES 'em Members of
the Body of Christ. (P. 99. c, d.) And he grants, that it was ordained for
(...) ADMISSION of the Party baptized into the visible Church. (P. 99. e. P.
100. a.) That Baptism is an Admission; and that they were thus before admitted
(P. 100. c.) still speaking of the Baptism of Infants, and of Admission of
Members into Churches. -- But surely these Things don't harmonize with the
Doctrine of their first receiving Being in the Church (as a Branch receives
Being in the Tree, and grows in it and from it) or their being born in the
Covenant, born in the House of God. And yet these repugnant Things are uttered
as it were in the same Breath by Mr. W. (P. 99.) And he joins 'em together in
the same Line (P. 46. e.) in these Words, -- Baptism instituted by him, as a
Rite of ADMISSION into his Church, and being CONTINUED in Covenant with God. --
Certainly a being then admitted into the Church, and a being continued in
Covenant (or in the Church) into which they were admitted before, are not the
same Thing, nor consistent one with another. -- If Infants are born Members in
complete Standing, as it seems Mr. VV. holds, then their Baptism does nothing
toward making them Members; nor is there any Need of it to make the Matter
more complete.

Again in P. 3. b. (the same Page where he speaks of Infants as Members having
a complete Standing in the Church) he maintains, that Nothing else is requisite
in Order to Communion and Privileges of Members in complete Standing, but only
that they should be capable hereof, and should desire the same, and should not
be under Censure, or scandalously Ignorant or Immoral. (See also P. 100. c, d.
to the same Purpose.) Mr. W. says this in Opposition to my insisting on
something further, viz. making a Profession of Godliness. And yet he himself
insists on something further, as much as I; which has been observed before. For
he abundantly insists on a personal, explicit Profession and open Declaration
of believing that the Gospel is indeed the Revelation of God, and of a hearty
Consent to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, etc. And speaks of the whole
Controversy as turning upon that single Point, of the Degree of Evidence to be
given, and the Kind of Profession to be made, Whether in Words of
indiscriminate Meaning? (See P. 5. b, c. P. 6. c, d.) And consequently not,
Whether they must make any Profession at all, having been completely admitted
before, in the Profession of their Ancestors?

Therefore, if it be so, that the Infants of visible Believers are born in the
Church, and are already Members in complete Standing, and don't drop out of the
Church, and fall from a complete Standing, when they grow up; and therefore if
they are not ignorant nor immoral, and desire full Communion, Nothing else can
be required of them: And it will hence follow, contrary to my Principles, that
they cannot be required to make a Profession in Words of discriminate Meaning:
But then, it also equally follows, contrary to his Principles, that neither can
they be required to make a Profession in Words of indiscriminate Meaning. If
nothing else besides those forementioned Things is necessary, then no
Profession at all is necessary, in any Words at all, neither of determinate nor
indeterminate Signification. So that Mr. W. in supposing some personal
Profession to be necessary, gives up and destroys this his grand Argument.

But if he did not give it up by this Means, it would not be tenable on other
Principles belonging to his Scheme; such as its being necessary in order to a
being admitted to Sacraments, that Persons should have a Visibility that
recommends them to the reasonable Judgment and Apprehension of the Minds of
others, as true Christians, really pious Persons, and that there should be such
a Profession as exhibits moral Evidence of this. For who will say, that the
individual Profession of an Ancestor, a Thousand or fifteen Hundred Years ago,
is a credible Exhibition and moral Evidence of the real Piety of his present
Posterity, without any personal explicit Profession of any Thing about
Religion, in any one of the succeeding Generations. And if Mr. W. had not said,
There must be a credible Exhibition of Gospel Holiness, but only some common
Faith or Virtue; yet no such Thing is made visible to a rational Judgment and
Apprehension of Mind, by this Means. How, for Instance, does it make Orthodoxy
visible? What reasonable Ground is there in it, at such a Day as this in
England, to believe concerning any Man, that he believes the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and all other fundamental Doctrines, with full Conviction, and with
all his Heart, because he descended from an Ancestor that made a good
Profession, when the ancient Britons or Saxons were converted from Heathenism,
and because withal he is free from open scandalous Immorality, and appears
willing to attend Duties of public Worship! If an Attendance on these public
Duties was in its own Nature a Profession of Orthodoxy, or even Piety; yet the
Reason of Mankind teaches them the Need of joining Words and Actions together
in public Manifestations of the Mind, in Cases of Importance: Speech being the
great and peculiar Talent, which God has given to Mankind, as the special Means
and Instrument of the Manifestation of their Minds one to another. Thus,
Treaties of Peace among Men are not concluded and finished, only with Actions,
without Words. Feasting together was used of old, as a Testimony of Peace and
Covenant-Friendship; as between Isaac and Abinrelech, Laban and Jacob, but not
without a verbal Profession. Giving the Hand, delivering the King, etc. are to
express a Marriage-Agreement and Union; but still a Profession in Words is
annexed. So we allow it to be needful, after Persons have fallen into Scandal,
that in manifesting Repentance there should be a verbal Profession, besides
attending Duties of Worship. Earthly Princes will not trust a Profession of
Allegiance, in Actions only, such as bowing, kneeling, keeping the King's Birth
Day, etc. but they require also a Profession in Words, and an Oath of
Allegiance is demanded. Yea, it is thought to be reasonably demanded, in Order
to Men's coming to the actual Possession and Enjoyment of those Privileges,
they are born Heirs to. Thus, the eldest Sons of Noblemen in Great Britain,
are born Heirs to the Honors and Estate of their Fathers; yet this no Way
hinders but they may be obliged, when they come to Ripeness of Age, in Order to
a being invested in the actual Possession, to take the Oath of Allegiance: though
in Order to their lawful doing it, it may be necessary they should believe in
their Hearts, that King GEORGE is the lawful Prince, and that they should not
be Enemies to Him, and Friends to the Pretender, in their Hearts.

But moreover, If this Objection of Mr. W. about Infants being born in the
Church be well considered, it will appear to be all beside the Question, and so
nothing to the Purpose. It is not to the Purpose of either of the Questions,
Mr. W -- ms's or Mine. The Question as I have stated it, is concerning them
that may be admitted Members in complete Standing; not about them that have a
complete Standing in the Church already, and so are no Candidates for
Admission; which* he says, is the Case of these Infants. And the Question as He
often states it, is concerning them that may lawfully come: And this Objection,
from Infants being born in the Church, as it must be understood from Mr. W.
don't touch this Question. For when Mr. W. objects, that some Persons are born
in the Church, and therefore may lawfully come to Sacraments, he cannot be
understood to mean, that their being born in the Church alone is sufficient;
but that, besides this, Persons must have some Virtue or Religion, of one Sort
or other, in order to their lawful coming. For he is full in it, that it is not
lawful for Men to come without moral Virtue and Sincerity. Therefore the
Question comes to this in the Result: Seeing Persons, besides their being born
in Covenant, must have some Sort of Virtue and Religion, in order to a lawful
coming to the Lord's Supper, What Sort of Virtue and Religion that is, whether
common or saving? Now this Question is not touched by the present Objection.
Merely Persons being born in Covenant, is no more Evidence of their having
moral Sincerity, than saving Grace. Yea, there is more Reason to suppose the
latter, than the former without it, in the Infant Children of believing
Parents. For the Scripture gives us Ground to think, that some Infants have the
Habit of saving Grace, and that they have a new Nature given them; But no
Reason at all to think, that ever God works any mere moral Change, in them, or
infuses any Habits of moral Virtue without saving Grace: And we know, They
cannot come by moral Habits in Infancy, any other Way than by immediate
Infusion: They cannot obtain them by human Instruction, nor contract them by Use
and Custom. And especially there is no Reason to think, that the Children of
such as are visible Saints, according to Mr. W -- m's Scheme, have any Goodness
infused into them by God, of any Kind. For in his Scheme, all that are morally
sincere may lawfully receive the Privileges of visible Saints; But we have no
Scripture-Grounds to suppose, that God will bless the Children of such Parents
as have nothing more than moral Sincerity, with either common or saving Grace.
There are no Promises of the Covenant of Grace made to such Parents, either
concerning themselves, or their Children. The Covenant of Grace is a
conditional Covenant; as both Sides in this Controversy suppose: And therefore,
by the Supposition, Men have no Title to the Promises without the Condition.
And as saving Faith is the Condition, the Promises are all made to that, both
those which respect Persons themselves, and those that respect their Seed. As
it is with many Covenants or Bargains among Men; by these, Men are often
entitled to Possessions for themselves and their Heirs: Yet they are entitled
to no Benefits of the Bargain, neither for themselves, nor their Children, but
by complying with the Terms of the Bargain. So with Respect to the Covenant of
Grace, the Apostle says (Act. ii.39.) The Promise is to you and to your
Children. So the Apostle says to the Jailer (Act. xvi.31.) Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and Thou shall be saved, and thy House. And we find many
Promises, all over the Bible, made to the Seed of the Righteous, that God will
bless their Seed for their sakes. Thus, Psalm. cxii.2. The Generation of the
Upright shall be blessed. Psalm. lxix.35, 36. For God will save Zion; -- The
Seed also of his Servants shall inherit it; and they that love his Name shall
dwell therein. See also Prove. xiv.26. Psalm. ciii.17, 18. Psalm. 102.28. Exodus
20.5, 6. Deuteronomy. vii.9. -- Supposing these to be what are called indefinite
Promises; yet do they extend to any but the Seed of the Righteous? Where are
any such Promises made to the Children of unsanctified Men, the Enemies of God,
and Slaves of the Devil (as Mr. W. owns all unsanctified Men are) whatever
moral Sincerity and common Religion they may have?

The Baptism of Infants is the Seal of these Promises made to the Seed of the
Righteous: And on these Principles, some rational Account may be given of
Infant Baptism; but there is no Account can be given of it on Mr. W -- ms's
Scheme, no Warrant can be found for it in Scripture; for they are Promises,
that are the Warrant for Privileges: But there are no Promises of God's Word to
the Seed of morally sincere Men, and only Half-Christians.

Thus this Argument of Mr. W -- ms's, let us take it which Way we will, has
Nothing but what is as much, yea, much more, against his Scheme, than against
mine.

However, if this were not the Case, but all the Show or Pretense of Strength
there is in the Argument, lay directly and only against Me, yet the Strength of
it, if tried, will avail to prove Nothing at all. The pretended Argument, so
far as I can find out what it is, is this; The Children of visible Saints are
born in Covenant; and being already in Covenant, they must have a Right to the
Privileges of the Covenant, without any more ado: Such therefore have a Right
to come to the Lord's Supper, whether they are truly godly, or not.

But the Show of Argument there is here, depends on the Ambiguity of the
Phrase, Being in Covenant: Which signifies two distinct Things: either (1.)
Being under the Obligations Bonds of the Covenant; or (2.) A being conformed to
the Covenant, and complying with the Terms of it. -- A being the Subject of the
Obligations and Engagements of the Covenant, is a Thing quite distinct from a
being conformed to these Obligations, and so being the Subject of the Condition
of the Covenant.

Now it is not a being in Covenant in the former, but the latter Sense, that
gives a Right to the Privileges of the Covenant. The Reason is plain, because
it is Compliance and Conformity to the Terms of a Covenant, that is the Thing
which gives Right to all the Benefits; and not merely a being under Ties to
that Compliance and Conformity. Privileges are not annexed merely to
Obligations, but to Compliance with Obligations.

Many that do not so much as visibly comply with the Conditions of the
Covenant, are some of God's Vovenant People in that Sense, that they are under
the Bonds and Engagements of the Covenant; so were Corah and his Company; so
were many gross Idolaters in Israel, that lived openly in that Sin; and so may
Heretics, Deists and Atheists be God's Vovenant People; They may still be held
under the Bonds of their Covenant-Engagements to God; for their great
Wickedness and Apostasy don't free 'em from the Obligation of the solemn
Promises and Engagements they formerly entered into. But yet a being in
Covenant, merely in this Sense, gives 'em no Right to any Privileges of the
Covenant. In Order to that, they must be in Covenant in another Sense; they
must cordially consent to the Covenant: which indeed Mr W. himself owns, when
he acknowleges, that in Order to come to Sacraments, Men must profess a cordial
Consent to, and Compliance with the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace. If it
be said here, Those who have been born of baptized Ancestors, though they don't
comply with the Terms of the Covenant, are in Covenant, in this Sense, that
they have a Right to the Promises of the Covenant Conditionally, in Case they
will hereafter comply: I answer, So are all Mankind in Covenant, God may be
said to have bound himself to 'em all Conditionally; and many have these
Promises declared to 'em, that still remain Jews, Mahometans, or Heathens.
And if Mr. W. inquires, Why those Children that were born in the Covenant,
ben't cast out, when in adult Age they make no such Profession; certainly, it
as much concerns Him to answer, as Me; for it is as much his Doctrine, as mine,
that they must profess such Consent. -- But I am willing to answer
nevertheless. -- They are not cast out, because it is a Matter held in Suspense,
whether they do cordially consent to the Covenant, or not; or whether their
making no such Profession don't arise from some other Cause. And none are to be
excommunicated, without some positive Evidence against them. And therefore they
are left in the State they were in, in Infancy, not admitted actually to
partake of the Lord's Supper (which actual Participation is a new positive
Privilege) for Want of a Profession, or some Evidence, beyond what is merely
Negative, to make it visible that they do consent to the Covenant. For it is
reasonable to expect some Appearance more than what is Negative, of a proper
Qualification, in Order to being admitted to a Privilege beyond what they have
hitherto actually received. A negative Charity may be sufficient for a negative
Privilege, such as Freedom from Censure and Punishment; but something more than
a negative Charity, is needful to actual Admission to a new positive Privilege.

SECTION XV. A particular Examination of Mr. W -- ms's Defense of the 9th
Objection, or that boasted Argument, that if it ben't lawful for unconverted
Men to come to the Lord's Supper, then none may come but they that know
themselves to be converted.
THIS Argument has been greatly gloried in, as altogether invincible. Mr. W.
seems to have been alarmed, and his Spirits raised to no small Degree of Warmth
at the Pretense of an Answer to it: And he uses many big Words, and strong
Expressions in his Reply; such as, It Is absolutely certain -- It Is beyond my
Power to comprehend, and I believe beyond the Power of any Man to tell me --
This I assert and stand to -- As plain as the Sun -- A Contradiction of the
Bible, of the Light of Nature, and of the common Sense of Mankind, etc. etc.
But let us get away from the Noise of a Torrent, and bring this Matter to the
Test of calm Reasoning, and examine it to the very Bottom.

Here let it be considered, wherein precisely the Argument consists. -- If it
has any Strength in it, it consists in this Proposition. viz. That it is not
lawful for Men to come to Sacraments, without a known Right. This is the
Proposition Mr. S. himself reduces the Argument to, in his Appeal, P. 62, 63.
And it is very evident, that the whole Strength of the Argument rests on the
supposed Truth of this Proposition.

And here let it be noted, what Sort of Knowledge of a Right Mr. S. and so Mr.
W. mean in this Argument. It Is Knowledge as distinguished from such an Opinion,
or Hope, as is founded on Probability. Thus Mr. S. expressly insists, that a Man
must not only THINK he has a Right, but he must KNOW it. ( Appeal, P. 62.) And
again, (P. 63.) He says, Probable Hopes will not warrant him to come.

Mr. W. uses many peremptory strong Expressions (P. 109.) to set forth the
Certainty of that which never was denied; viz. That a Man cannot know he has a
Right, unless he knows he has the Qualification which gives him a Right. But
this is not the Thing in Question: The Point is, Whether a Man may not have a
lawful Right, or may not lawfully come, and yet not know his Right, with such a
Knowledge and Evidence as is beyond Probability? This is the Thing asserted, and
herein lies the Argument. And the Negative of this cannot be stood to and
maintained, in Order to maintain Mr. W -- ms's Scheme, without the grossest
Absurdity; it being a Position, which, according to Scripture, Reason, Mr. S --
d's Doctrine, and Mr. W -- ms's own, effectually destroys his Scheme.

To this Purpose, I observed, If this Proposition be true, that no Man may
come, save he which not only thinks, but knows he has a Right, then it will
follow, that no unconverted Person may come, unless he knows that Doctrine to
be true, That unconverted Men may have a Right. Because an unconverted Man
cannot know, that one in particular ( viz. He himself) who is an unconverted
Man, has a Right, unless he knows that Doctrine which Mr. S. maintained, to be
true, viz. That Men may have a Right, though they are unconverted. And
consequently no one unconverted Man may lawfully come to the Lord's Supper,
unless he is so knowing in this Point of Controversy, as not only to think, and
have probable Evidence, that this Opinion is Right, but knows it to be so. --
Mr. W. endeavors to help the Matter by a Distinction, of different Kinds of
Knowledge: And by the Help of this Distinction would make it out, that common
People in general, and even Boys and Girls of 16 Years old, may with Ease know,
that his Doctrine about unsanctified Men's lawful Coming to the Lord's Supper,
is true. And we must understand him (as he is defending Mr. S -- d's Argument)
that they may know it with that Evidence that is distinguished from
Probability; and this according to Mr. VV. himself, is Certainty; which he
speaks of as above a Thousand Probabilities. (See P. 118. c.) But how miserable
is this? to pretend, that his Doctrine about Qualifications for Sacraments, is
so far from a disputable Point, that it is of such plain and obvious Evidence,
to common People and even Children, that without being studied in Divinity,
they may not only think it to be exceeding probable, but know it to be true!
When it is an undeniable Fact, that Multitudes of the greatest Ability and
Piety, that have spent their Lives in the Study of the Holy Scriptures, have
never so much as thought so.

Again, I observed, that according to Mr. S -- d's Doctrine, not one
unconverted Man in the World can know, that he has Warrant to come to the
Lord's Supper; Because, if he has any Warrant, God has given him Warrant in the
Scriptures: And therefore if any unconverted Man, not only thinks, but knows,
that he has Warrant from God, he must of Consequence not only think, but know
the Scriptures to be the Word of GOD. Whereas, it was the constant Doctrine of
Mr. S. That no unconverted Man knows the Scriptures to be the Word of God. I
did not say, that it was also a Doctrine according to Scripture; for there was
no Occasion for this, among those with whom I had chiefly to do in this
Controversy; with whom I knew it was a Point as much settled and
uncontroverted, as any Doctrine of Mr. S. whatever. And I knew it to be the
current Doctrine of orthodox Divines; who ever allow this Doctrine to be
implied in such Texts as those, J^^. xvii.7. ^ Joh. iv.15, 16. Chap. v.1, 10
and many others.
-- But Mr. W. would make it out, that Mr. S. did hold, unconverted Men might
know the Scriptures to be the Word of God; but only not know it with a gracious
Knowledge, such as effectually bowed Men's Hearts, and influenced 'em to a
gracious Obedience. (P. 113. b.) But let us see whether it was so, or not. Mr.
S. in his Nature of saving Conversion (P. 73.) says, The carnal Man is ignorant
of the divine Authority of the Word of God; -- His Wound is, that he don't know
certainly the divine Authority of these Institutions; he does not know but they
are the Inventions of Men. Again ( Ibid. P. 74.) he says, The carnal Man is
uncertain of those Things that are the Foundation of his Reasonings. He thinks,
there is a great Probability of the Truth of these Things; but he has no
Assurance. His Principles are grounded on an uncertain Proposition. And he
observes (P. 20.) Men when converted, don't look on it as probable, that the
Word is his Word, as they did before; but they have Assurance of the Truth of
it. -- So elsewhere (Guide to Christ, P. 26.) They that have not Grace, don't
properly believe the Word of GOD. -- And in another Book ( Safety of Ap. P. 6.)
The Gospel always works effectually where it is believed, and received as the
Truth of GOD. -- In another Book (Benef. of the Gos. P. 149.) Common
Illumination don't convince Men of the Truth of the Gospel. -- In his Discourse
on the Virtue of Christ's Blood (P. 27.) speaking of such as have no Interest
in the Blood of Christ, he says, They are Strangers to the divine Authority of
the Word of GOD. Again ( Ibid. P. 16.) Before [i. e before saving Faith] they
were at a Loss whether the Word was the Word of GOD. -- To the like Purpose are
many other Passages in his Writings. (See Not. of sav. Conv. P. 72. Safety of
Ap. P. 6, 7, 99, 107, 186, 187, 229. -- Benef. of the Gosp. P. 89.)

So that here, if it be true, that some unconverted Men have a divine Warrant
to come to the Lord's Supper; and if the Thing which is the Foundation of this
Argument, be also true, viz. That in Order to Men's warrantably coming to the
Lord's Supper, they must not only think, but know they have a Right; then it
must be true likewise, that they not only think, but know, that the Scripture,
wherein this Warrant is supposed to be delivered, is the Word of GOD. And then
we have the following Propositions to make hang together: That unconverted Men
are ignorant of the Scripture's being the Word of God, are uncertain of it,
have no Assurance of it, are not convinced of it, don't properly believe it,
are at a Loss whether it be the Word of God, or not; and yet they not only
think, but know, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and that the Gospel,
which is the Charter of all Christian Privileges, is Divine; they have a
Knowledge of it, which is above all probable Hope or Thought, and attended with
Evidence above a Thousand Probabilities.

And now let it be considered, whether this agrees better with Mr. VVilliams's
own Doctrine, concerning Men's knowing the Truth and divine Authority of the
Gospel, in what has been before cited from his Sermons on Christ a King and
Witness. Where he expressly says, That Man, since the Fall, is ignorant of
divine Truth, and full of Prejudices against it; has a View of the Truth
contained in the Bible, as a doubtful uncertain Thing; receives it as what is
probably true; sees it as a probable Scheme, and something likely to answer the
End proposed: But that after Conversion it appears divinely true and real. (See
P. 114, 115, and 144.) Then unconverted Men only looked on the Truth of the
Word of God, as probable, something likely, yet as a doubtful, uncertain Thing;
but now they not only think, but know it to be true.

No Distinction, about the different Kinds of Knowledge, or the various Ways of
knowing, will ever help these Absurdities, or reconcile such Inconsistencies.
If there be any such Sort of Knowing, as is contra-distinguish'd to probable
Thinking, and to such Opinion as is built on a Thousand Probabilities, which
yet is consistent with being ignorant, not believing, being uncertain, not
assured, not convinced, only looking on a Thing probable, looking on it
doubtful and uncertain, it must certainly be a new and very strange Sort of
Knowledge.

But this Argument, that is so clear and invincible, must have such Supports as
these, or must quite sink to the Earth. It is indeed a remarkable Kind of
Argument. It is not only as much against the Scheme it is brought to support,
as against that which it would confute; but abundantly more so. For if it were
the Case in Truth, that none might come to the Lord's Supper, but they that
know they have a Right, yet it would be no direct and proper Proof, that
unconverted Men might come. It would indeed prove, that many godly Men might
not come: Which, it is true, would bring some Difficulty on the Scheme opposed;
yet would be no Proof against it. But it is direct and perfect Demonstration
against the Scheme it would support: It demonstrates, according to the
Scripture, and according to the Doctrine of those that urge the Argument, that
not one unconverted Man in the World may lawfully come to the Lord's Supper; as
no one of them certainly knows the Gospel to be divine, and so no one knows the
Charter to be authentic, in which alone the Right of any to Christian
Privileges is conveyed; Hence no one unsanctified Man is sure of his Right; and
therefore (as they draw the Consequence) no one unsanctified Man may come to
the Lord's Supper. And so it follows, that the more strongly Mr. W. stands to
this Argument, the more peremptory and confident his Expressions are concerning
it, the more violently and effectually does he supplant himself.

And this Position, That a Man must not take any Privilege, 'till he not only
thinks, but knows he has a Right, is not only unreasonable, as used by Mr. W.
against me, when indeed it is ten Times as much against himself; but it is
unreasonable in it self, as it is an Argument, which if allowed and pursued,
will prove, that a Man may do nothing at all, never move Hand or Foot, for his
own Advantage, unless he first, not only thinks, but knows, it is his Duty. Mr.
W. himself owns (P. 116.) that all the Duties, which God requires of us in his
instituted Worship, are Privileges, as well as the Lord's Supper: And so is
every other Duty, which we are to do for our own Benefit. But all human Actions
are, upon the whole, either good, or evil: every Thing that we do as rational
Creatures, is either a Duty, or a Sin; and the Neglect of every Thing that is
our Duty, is forbidden. So that we must never so much as take a Step, or move a
Finger, upon only a probable Judgment and Hope; but must first know it to be
our Duty, before we do it: nay, we must neither move, nor voluntarily forbear
to move, without a Certainty of our Duty in the Case, one Way or other!

As to its being alike difficult for Men to know or be assured of their moral
Sincerity, as of their real Sanctification, I shall speak to that under the
next Head; whereby it will appear again, another Way, that this Argument is
vastly more against Mr^ W -- m's's Scheme, than mine.

SECTION XVI. A Consideration of Mr. W -- ms's Defense of the 10th Objection,
against the Doctrine of the Unlawfulness of unsanctified Men's coming to the
Lord's Supper, That it tends to the great Perplexity and Torment of many godly
Men in their Attendance on this Ordinance.
MY first Reply to this Objection was, that it is for Want of like Tenderness of
Conscience, that the other Doctrine which insists on moral Sincerity, don't
naturally bring such as are received on those Principles, into as great
Perplexities. -- Mr. Williams in his Animadversion upon it says, This is an
Assertion which I take to be contrary to common Sense, and the Experience of
Mankind; and the allowing of it to be true, must overthrow the Law of Nature,
and cast infinite Reproach upon the Author of it.

These are strong Expressions; but let us bring the Matter to the Test of
Reason. -- The necessary Qualification, on Mr. W -- ms's Principles, is moral
Sincerity, and a certain Degree of moral Sincerity. For there is scarcely any
Man, that lives under the Light of the Gospel, and is not an Atheist, or Deist,
but what has some Degree of moral Sincerity, in some Things pertaining to
Christianity and his Duty; some Degree of common Faith, some Degree of
Conviction of the Need of Christ, some Desire of Him, and moral Willingness,
though from selfish Considerations, to be good; and some Purpose to endeavor a
Conformity to the Covenant of Grace, and to seek Salvation on the Terms of it.
But how shall a Man know, what is a sufficient Degree of these Things? Mr. W.
has determined the Matter thus; That his Belief of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and moral Willingness to be conformed to the Covenant of Grace, must be with
his WHOLE Heart, (P. 49. e. P. 5. c. 36. a.) And that his Conviction of his
undone State without Christ must be deep; And his Desire of Christ and his
Benefits fervent, and his Purpose earnest, (P. 75. e. P. 11. c.) so as to
induce him to enter into Covenant with ALL the Earnestness he can, and engage
him to use Endeavors with ALL the Strength and Power that he has. (P. 83. e.
P. 32. d. P. 36. a.)

Now, how exceeding difficult must it be for unsanctified Men to determine,
with any Assurance, whether they have moral Sincerity to such a Degree? -- How
difficult for them to know, whether their Convictions are thus deep? Every one
that is used to deal with Souls under Conviction, knows, that when they are
indeed under deep Convictions, they are especially apt to complain of the
Hardness of their Hearts, and to think their Convictions are not deep. -- How
difficult to determine, with any Assurance, whether their Assent rises so high,
that they can truly be said to believe with all their Hearts? Whether their
moral Willingness to be conformed to the Covenant of Grace, be with their whole
Heart? And whether they are really engaged with all the Solicitude they can,
and are willing to do all that they can? These Things, I am pretty sure, are of
vastly more difficult Determination, than whether a Man has any true Holiness,
or not. For in the former Case, the Determination is concerning the Degree of
Things, that are capable of an infinite Variety of Degrees; some of which are
nearer to, and others are further from, the lowest sufficient Degree: And
consequently some of the Degrees that are not sufficient, may yet be very near;
which renders the Matter of very difficult Determination; unspeakably more so,
than when what is to be distinguished, is the Nature of Things, which in all
Degrees is widely diverse, and even contrary to that which it is to be
distinguished from: As is the Case between saving and common Grace; which Mr.
W. himself acknowledges. See his Sermon. on Christ a King and Witn. (P. 84. e.)
where he says, Notwithstanding the visible Likeness of nominal and real
Christians, there is a wide Difference, as there is between the Subjects of
CHRIST, and the Slaves of the Devil.
It Is more easy to distinguish Light from Darkness, though there may be
innumerable Degrees of Light, than to determine the precise Degree of Light:
and so it is more easy to determine, whether a Man be alive, or dead, than
whether there be exactly such a certain Degree of Vigor and Liveliness.

This moral Sincerity, which Mr. W. insists on, is a most indeterminate
uncertain Thing; a Phrase without any certain precise Meaning; and must for
ever remain so. It being not determined, how much Men must be morally sincere;
how much they must believe with a moral Sincerity; whether the deeply awakened
and convinced Sinner must believe, that God is absolutely Sovereign with
Respect to his Salvation, and that Christ is perfectly sufficient to save him
in particular; and to what Degree of moral Assent and Consent, he must believe
and embrace these Things, and comply with the Terms of the Covenant of Grace;
whether he must be willing to obey all God's Commands, the most difficult, as
well as the most easy, and this in all Circumstances, even the most difficult
that can arise in Providence; or whether only in some Circumstances; and what,
and how many. The Scripture gives us many infallible Rules, by which to
distinguish between saving Grace, and common: But I know of no Rules given in
the Bible, by which Men may certainly determine this precise Degree of moral
Sincerity. So that if Grace is not the Thing which gives a Right to Sacraments
in the Sight of God, we have no certain Rule in the Bible, commensurate to the
Understanding of Mankind, by which to determine when we have a Right, and when
not. -- Now let the impartial Reader judge, which Scheme lays the greatest
Foundation for Perplexity to Communicants, of tender Consciences, concerning
their Qualifications for the Lord's Supper; and whether this Argument drawn
from such a supposed Tendency to such Perplexity (if there be any Force in it)
is not vastly more against Mr. W -- ms's Scheme, than mine.

And here by the Way, let it be noted, that by these Things it is again
demonstrated, that the ninth Objection, the great Argument considered in the
preceding Section, concerning the Necessity of a known Right, in order to a
lawful Partaking, is exceedingly more against Mr. W -- ms's Principles, than
mine; In-as-much-as, on his Principles, it is so much more difficult for Men to
know, whether they have a Right, or have the prescribed Qualification, or not.

I answered this Argument in the second Place, by alleging, that this Doctrine
of the Necessity of saving Grace in Order to a Right to the Lord's Supper, is
not properly the Cause of the Perplexities of doubting Saints, in their
Attendance on this Ordinance; though it may be the Occasion: But that their own
Negligence and Sin is the true Cause; and that this Doctrine is no more the
Cause of these Perplexities, than the Doctrine of the Necessity of saving Grace
in Order to Salvation, is the Cause of the Perplexity of doubting Saints when
they come to die. Upon which Mr. W. says, There is no Shadow of Resemblance of
these Cases, because Death is no Ordinance, etc. But if Death is no Ordinance,
yet it is the required Duty of the Saints to yield themselves to the Lord, and
resign to the Will of God, in their Death. And in this Respect, the Cases are
exactly parallel, that Perplexities are just so much the Consequence of the
respective Doctrines, in one Case, as in the other; That is, the Perplexities
of a doubting Saint on a Deathbed, the Difficulty and Trouble he meets with in
resigning himself to the Will of God in dying, is just in the same Manner the
Consequence of the Doctrine of the Necessity of saving Grace in Order to
eternal Salvation, as the Perplexities of a doubting Saint at the Lord's Table
are the Consequence of the Doctrine of the Necessity of saving Grace in Order
to a Right to the Lord's Supper. And this is sufficient for my Purpose.

Mr. W. himself says, in his Answer to Mr. Croswell (P. 122. c.) Although there
are comparatively few, that obtain Assurance; yet it is through their own Sloth
and Negligence, that they do not. We fully agree with Mr. Perkins, that a Man
in this Life may ordinarily be infallibly certain of his Salvation. So Mr.
Stoddard (in his Sermon on one good Sign --) says, There is no Necessity, that
the People of God should lie under Darkness and Temptation; they may obtain
Assurance. -- Now, if this be the Case, then certainly there is no Justice in
laying the Temptation and Uneasiness, which is the Effect of Sloth and
Negligence, to the Doctrine I maintain, in those that embrace it. It Is a wise
Dispensation of God, that he has so ordered Things* that Comfort in Ordinances,
and in all Duties, and under all Providence, should be to be obtained in a Way
of Diligence; and that Slothfulness should be the Way to Perplexity and
Uneasiness, and should be a Way hedged up with Thorns, agreeable to Prove. xv.19.
-- That it is so ordered, is for the Good of the Saints, as it tends to turn
them out of this thorny Path, into the Way of Diligence. And so this Doctrine,
as it has this Tendency, has a Tendency in the End to that solid Peace and
Comfort, which is the happy Fruit of their holy Diligence. And that, and not
the Saints Perplexity, is properly the Effect of this Doctrine.

SECTION XVII. Containing some further Observations on what is said by Mr. W.
in Support of the 13th Objection, concerning God's commanding all the Members
of the visible Church, that are not ignorant nor scandalous, to attend all
external Covenant-Duties.
IT has been already demonstrated ( Sect. 8 th of this third Part) that in this
Argument the Question is begged, notwithstanding what Mr. W. has said to the
contrary; which sufficiently overthrows the whole Argument. Nevertheless, that
I may pass by Nothing, which such as are on Mr. W -- ms's Side, may be likely
to think material; I will here make some further Observations on this
Objection, as represented and supported by Mr. W.

The chief Thing, that has the plausible Appearance of Argument in what Mr. S.
and Mr. W. say on this Head, is this; That for God to require all who are in
Covenant to come to the Lord's Supper, and yet to forbid 'em to come
unconverted* is to suppose, that He both commands 'em and forbids 'em at the
same Time. And this is thought to be the more manifest, in-as-much-as
Conversion is not in Men's Power. Though it is not denied, but that God justly
requires Men to be converted, or to be truly holy. (See P. 129, 130.)

To this I would say,

(1.) If when they speak of commanding and forbidding at the same Time, they
mean God's commanding and forbidding the same Thing, at the same Time, no such
Consequence follows from my Principles. For That Thing, and that only, which I
suppose God requires of any, is to come to the Lord's Supper with a sanctified
Heart; and that this God requires at all Times, and never forbids at any Time;
And that to come without this Qualification, is what He always forbids, and
requires at no Time. So that what He requires, at the same Time he forbids
something, is not the same Thing that he forbids; but a very different and
contrary one: And it is no Absurdity, to suppose, that God requires one Thing,
and forbids a contrary Thing at the same Time.

To illustrate this by an Example: It was the Duty of the Jews at Jerusalem,
openly to confess CHRIST, to own Him as the Messiah, at that Hour when he was
led away to be crucified, and openly to testify their adoring Respect to him on
that extraordinary Occasion. But yet they did not believe him to be the
Messiah, and could not believe it (many of 'em at least) since they looked on
his present abject Circumstances as a Demonstration, that he was not the
Messiah. It was beyond their Power, at least at once, in that Instant, to give
their Assent, with all their Hearts, to such a Supposition. Nor was it in their
Power, to exercise an adoring Respect to Him: for, besides their strong
Prejudices, most of them were judicially hardened, and given up to a Spirit of
Unbelief and obstinate Rejection of Him; as appears by that Account (Joh
xii.39, 40.) Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again,
He has blinded their Eyes, and hardened their Heart, that they should not see
with their Eyes, etc. (See also Luke xix.41, 42. and Matthew. xiii.14, 15.) And
yet it would have been unlawful for 'em to have made a lying Profession; to
profess, that they believed him to be the Messiah, and that they received and
loved him as such, when at the same Time they hated him, and did not believe he
was the Messiah. But here is no requiring and forbidding the same Thing at the
same Time: for the only Thing required of them was, to have Faith and Love, and
to testify it; which was not at all forbidden.

(2.) None of the Difficulties, which Mr. S. or Mr. W. objects, either God's
supposed requiring Impossibilities, or his requiring and forbidding at the same
Time, do follow, any more on my Principles, than on Mr. W -- ms's. Mr. W.
maintains, that God calls Men this Moment to enter into Covenant with him, and
commands them to do it. (P. 28. c.) One Thing implied in this, according to his
own frequent Explanation of visibly entering into Covenant, is professing a
Belief of the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity. Now therefore, we will
suppose a Man to be a Candidate for Baptism, who has been brought up in
Arianism; and is strongly persuaded, that the Doctrine of the TRINITY is not
true: Yet he is this Moment required to profess that Doctrine; but has no
Ability in a Moment to believe the Doctrine, because he don't at present see
the Evidence of it. For as Mr. W. himself says (Sermon. on Christ a King and
Witn. P. 91. d, e. and 92. a.) The Understanding cannot be bro't to yield it is
Assent to any Truth, which it does not see the Truth or apprehend the Evidence
of. -- If you would hire him with Cart-loads or Ship-loads of Gold and Silver;
if you should imprison him, whip him, burn him; you cannot make him believe a
Thing to be true, which he apprehends to be incredible, or which he sees no
sufficient Reason to believe. -- Now therefore what shall the Man do, on Mr. W
-- ms's Principles? He is commanded to profess the Doctrine of the Trinity,
which must be professed in Order to be lawfully baptized in the Name of the
Trinity; and, on Mr. W -- ms's Principles, he is commanded to do it this
Moment: Yet also on his Principles, if the Man professes it, and is not morally
sincere, or knows he don't believe it, he is guilty of horrible Falsehood and
Prevarication* which God doubtless forbids. Therefore here is certainly as much
of an Appearance of Commanding and Forbidding the same Thing at the same Time,
as in the other Case.

Every Husbandman in Israel, that lived even in Christ's Time, was required to
offer a Basket of the First Fruits; and was commanded when he offered it,
solemnly to make that Profession, concerning the principal Facts relating to
the Redemption out of Egypt, -- which is prescribed in Deuteronomy. xxvi.5, -- 10. A
Syrian ready to perish was my Father, etc. Now supposing there had been an
Israelite, who did not believe the Truth of all these Facts, which came to pass
so many Ages before, (as there are now many in Christendom* who don't believe
the Facts concerning Jesus Christ) and continued in his Unbelief, 'till the
very Moment of his Offering; God peremptorily requires him to make this
Profession; yet none will say, that he may lawfully profess these Things, at
the same Time when he don't believe 'em to be true. However, here is no
commanding and forbidding the same Thing at the same Time: Because, though God
required the Jews to make this Profession, yet the Thing required was to
believe it and profess it. Though some might not believe it, nor be able for the
present to believe it; yet this Inability arose from Depravity and Wickedness
of Heart, which did not at all excuse their Unbelief, for one Moment. This
Instance may show us, that God's requiring all Israel to enter into Covenant
with God, and seal their Covenant in the Passover, will not prove, that it was
lawful for any to avouch the Lord to be their God, and promise and swear they
would perform universal and persevering Obedience, when at the same Moment they
had no Love to God, and even then, while speaking the Words, continued in an
habitual wilful Disobedience to God's Commands, and were willing Slaves to the
Devil. -- Nor will it follow, from these Commands given to the Israelites,
concerning their covenanting with God, and sealing their Covenant, that God
ever did, since the Foundation of the World, appoint or command any other
covenanting with him, than as giving up themselves wholly and without Reserve,
both Soul and Body, both Heart and Life; or that ever he appointed or commanded
any covenanting, wherein Men give a Part, and keep back a Part, give him the
Outside, and keep back the noblest and best Part, the Heart, Will and
Affections, for Sin and Satan; or that there is any such Covenant of God in
Being; or that such covenanting has not always been as much without Foundation
in any Institution of God, as any of the spurious Sacraments of the Church of
Rome; or that it has not always been strictly forbidden of God; or that it is
not absolutely and in it self sinful and unlawful, as truly as the Act of
Ananias and (...).
Mr. W. himself owns (P. 129. b, c.) That God may require those Things which
are out of Men's natural Power.

Now this may be laid down as a Truth, of easy and plain Evidence; If God may
require what wicked Men, while such, are unable to perform, then he may also
require those Things which are connected with it, and dependent on it, and
which, if the other be done, they would be able to do, and might do, and
without which they may not do it. So, if God may require an unsanctified Man to
love him, then he may require him to testify and profess his Love, as I suppose
Christians do in the Act of partaking of the Lord's Supper; and yet it not be
lawful for him to testify and profess Love, when he has it not.

An APPENDIX. BEING A LETTER to the People of the first Church and Congregation
in NORTHAMPTON.
Dear Brethren,
THOUGH I am not now your Pastor, yet having so long stood in that Relation to
you, I look on my self obliged, notwithstanding all that has of late passed
between us, still to maintain a special Concern for your spiritual Welfare. And
as your present Circumstances appear to me very evidently attended with some
peculiar Dangers, threatening the great Wounding of the Interest of vital
Religion among you; which probably most of you are not well aware of: I look on
my self called to point forth your Danger to you, and give you Warning. What I
now especially have Respect to, is the Danger I apprehend you are in, from the
Contents of that Book of Mr. W. of Lebanon, to which the foregoing Performance
is a Reply; which I perceive has been written and published very much by your
Procurement and at your Expense; and so (it may naturally be supposed and
expected) is dispersed in your Families, and will be valued, and much made use
of by you as a Book of great Importance. What I have Respect to, is not so much
the Danger you are in of being established by that Book in your former
Principles, concerning the Admission of Members (though I think these Principles
are indeed very opposite to the Interest of true Piety in Churches;) But what I
now mean is the Danger there is, that while you are making much of that Book as
a Means to maintain Mr. Stoddard's Doctrine concerning the Terms of Communion,
You, and especially your Children, will by the Contents of it be led quite off
from other religious Principles and Doctrines, which Mr. S. brought you up in,
and always esteemed as of vastly greater Importance, than his particular Tenet
about the Lord's Supper; and be naturally led into Notions and Principles,
which He ever esteemed as of fatal Tendency to the Souls of Men.

By the Way, I would have it observed, that when I take Notice of these Things
in his Book, my Aim is not to beget in you an ill Opinion of Mr. W. as though he
were as corrupt in his settled Persuasion, as one would be ready to think, if
we were to judge only by Things delivered in some Parts of this Book; and
especially if it should be supposed, that he embraced all the Consequences of
what he here maintains. Men often don't see or allow the plain Consequences of
their own Doctrines. And therefore, though I charge very pernicious Consequences
on some Things he says, yet I don't charge Him with embracing these
Consequences: Nor will I undertake to explain how it could come to pass, that
he should maintain Things now in this Book, in Opposition to me, which are so
contrary to the good and sound Doctrines he has formerly delivered in other
Books. Let that be as it will, and however orthodox the Principles may be,
which he more ordinarily maintains; yet the ill and unsound Things he delivers
here, may do never the less Hurt to you and your Children, who may read this
Book without having in View the more wholesome Doctrines of his other Writings.

For Instance, You have ever been taught, that unconverted Men don't really
believe the Gospel, are never truly convinced of its Truth; and that it is of
great mportance that Sinners should be sensible of the Unbelief and Atheism of
their Hearts. But contrary to this, Mr. W -- ms's Book abundantly teaches you
and your Children this Notion, That unsanctified Men may really be convinced of
the divine Truth of the Gospel, and believe it with all their Hearts.

You have been ever taught, that Christless Sinners, especially when under some
more slight Awakenings, are very ready to flatter themselves that they are
willing to accept of Christ as their Savior; but that they must be brought off
from their vain Imagination, and be brought to see that the Fault is in their
own Wills, and that their not being interested in Christ is owing to their
Obstinacy and Perverseness, and wilful wicked Refusal of God's Terms; on which
Account they are wholly inexcusable, and may justly be cast off by God. But
contrary to these Things, this Book of Mr. W. abundantly teaches you, that Men,
in an unconverted State, may indeed cordially consent to the Terms of the
Covenant of Grace, may comply with the Call of the Gospel, may submit to it is
Proposals, may have Satisfaction in the Offer God makes of himself as our God
in Christ, may fall in with the Terms of Salvation propounded in the Gospel,
and renounce all other Ways, and may sincerely and earnestly desire Salvation
in this Way; and that some unconverted Men are not wilful obstinate Sinners.
(P. 21. b.) Which Doctrines, if embraced and retained by your Children as true,
will tend forever to hinder that Conviction of the Opposition and Obstinacy of
the Heart, which Mr. Stod ever taught you to be of such Importance in Order to
the Soul's Humiliation, and thoro' Conviction of the Justice of God in it is
Damnation.

You have ever been taught, that the Hearts of natural Men are wholly corrupt,
entirely destitute of any Thing spiritually Good, not having the least Spark of
Love to God, and as much without all Things of this Nature, as a dead Corpse is
without Life: Nevertheless, that it is hard for Sinners to be convinced of this;
that they are exceeding prone to imagine, there is some Goodness in 'em, some
Respect to God in what they do: Yet that they must be brought off from such a
vain Conceit of themselves, and come to see themselves utterly depraved and
quite dead in Sin. -- But now this Book of Mr. W. leads you to quite other
Notions; it leads you to suppose, that some natural Men are above Lukewarmness
in Religion, that they may truly profess to be the real Friends of Christ, and
to love God, more than his Enemies, and above the World.

It was a Doctrine greatly inculcated on you by Mr. S. as supposing it of great
Importance for all to be convinced of it, That natural Men are not subject to
the Law of God, nor indeed can be; that they never do truly serve God, but are
wholly under the Dominion of Sin and Satan. -- But if Sinners believe Mr. W --
ms's Book, they will not be convinced of these Things; nay, will believe quite
contrary Things, viz. That Sinners, while in a State of Nature, may have a
cordial Subjection to Jesus Christ, and may be subject to him with all their
Hearts, and may be so devoted to the Service of Christ as to be above those
that serve two Masters, may give up themselves to be taught, ruled, and led by
him in a Gospel-Way of Salvation, and may give up all their Hearts and Lives to
him. -- And is it likely, while Sinners believe these Doctrines of Mr. W. --
that they will ever be brought to a thorough Humiliation, in a Conviction of
their being wholly under the Power of Enmity against God? Which Mr. S. taught
you to be of such great Importance.

You know, it was always a Doctrine greatly insisted on by Mr. S. as a Thing of
the utmost Consequence, that Sinners who are seeking converting Grace, should
be thoro'ly sensible of God's being under no Manner of Obligation, from any
Desires, Labors, or Endeavors of theirs, to bestow his Grace upon them;
either in Justice, or Truth, or any other Way; but that when they have done
all, God is perfectly at Liberty, whether to show them Mercy, or not; that they
are wholly in the Hands of God's Sovereignty. (See Guide to Christ. P. 75. c,
d. and Benef. of the Gosp. P. 64. and P. 75, 76.) -- Whereas, if a Sinner
seeking Salvation believes Mr. W -- ms's Book, it will naturally lead him to
think quite otherwise. He (in P. 28.) speaking of such Sincerity and
Earnestness of Endeavors as may be in natural Men, to qualify 'em to come to
the Sacrament, and of the great Encouragement God has given, that he will
bestow his saving Grace on such as use such Endeavors, adds these Words (near
the Bottom of the Page) God never will be worse than his Encouragement, nor do
less than he has encouraged; And he has said, To him that has shall be given.
Naturally leading the awakened Sinner, who is supposed to have moral Sincerity
enough to come to the Sacrament, to suppose, that God is not wholly at Liberty;
but that he has given so much Encouragement, that it may be depended upon he
will give his Grace; and that it would not be reasonable or becoming of God to
do otherwise; because if God should do so, he would be worse than his
Engagement, and would not fulfill that Word of his, To him which has shall be
given. And how will this tend effectually to prevent the Sinner's looking on
God as absolutely at Liberty, and prevent his resigning himself wholly into the
Hands of God, and to his sovereign Pleasure?

It is a Doctrine which has ever been taught you, and made Use of for the
warning, awakening and humbling of Gospel-Sinners, That they have greater
Guilt, and are exposed to a more terrible Punishment, than the Heathen. -- But
this is spoken of by Mr. W. as an unsufferable Treatment of visible Saints:
Naturally tending to alleviate and smooth the Matter in the Consciences of
those that are not scandalous Persons, though they live in Unbelief and the
Rejection of Christ under Gospel Light and Mercy.

If you will believe what Mr. W. says (P. 56.) Those blessed Epithets and
Characters in the Epistles of the Apostles, which you always, from the first
Foundation of the Town, have been taught to be peculiar and glorious
Expressions and Descriptions of the blessed Qualifications and State of true
Saints, and Heirs of eternal Happiness; such as being elected, chosen before
the Foundation of the World, predestined to the Adoption of Children through
Jesus Christ; quickened, and made alive to God, though once dead in Trespasses
and Sins; washed, sanctified, justified; -- made to sit together in heavenly
Places in Christ; begotten again, to an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled;
-- with innumerable others the like: -- I say, if you believe Mr. W. you have
been quite mistaken all your Days, and misled by all your Ministers; these
Things are no more than were said of the whole Nation of the Jews, even in
their worst Times! Which is (as I have observed) exactly agreeable to the
strange Opinion of Mr. Tailor of Norwich in England, that Author who has so
corrupted Multitudes in N. England. Thus you are at once deprived of all the
chief Texts in the Bible, that hitherto have been made Use of among you, as
teaching the discriminating Qualifications and Privileges of the truly pious,
and the Nature and Benefits of a real Conversion; too much paving the Way for
the Rest of Taylor's Scheme of Religion, which utterly explodes the Doctrines
you have been formerly taught concerning eternal Election, Conversion,
Justification; and so, of a natural State of Death in Sin; and the whole
Doctrine of Original Sin, and of the mighty Change made in the Soul by the
Redemption of Christ applied to it.

And this, taken with those other Things which I have observed, in Conjunction
with some other Things which have lately appeared in Northampton, tend to lead
the young People among you apace into a Liking to the new, fashionable, lax
Schemes of Divinity, which have so greatly prevailed in New England of late; as
wide as the East is from the West, from those great Principles of Religion,
which have always been taught, and have been embraced, and esteemed most
precious, and have justly been accounted very much your Glory by others.

If this Book of Mr. W. with all these Things, is made much of by you, and
recommended to your Children, as of great Importance to defend the Principles
of the Town, how far has your Zeal for that one Tenet, respecting natural Men's
Right to the Lord's Supper, transported you, and made you forget your Value and
Concern for the most precious and important Doctrines of Jesus Christ, taught
you by Mr. Stoddard, which do most nearly concern the very Vitals of Religion!

I beseech you, Brethren, seasonably to consider how dark the Cloud is that
hangs over you, and how melancholy the Prospect (especially with Regard to the
rising Generation) in many Respects. I have long been intimately acquainted
with your religious Circumstances, your Notions and Principles, your Advantages
and Dangers; having had perhaps greater Opportunity for it than any other
Person on Earth. -- Before I left you, it was very evident, that Arminianism,
and other loose Notions in Religion, and Mr. Taylor's in particular, began to
get some Footing among you; and there were some Things special in your
Circumstances, that threatened a great prevailing of such like Notions: which
if they should by Degrees generally prevail, will doubtless by Degrees put an
End to what used to be called saving Religion.

Therefore let me entreat you to take the friendly Warning I now give you, and
stand on your Guard against the encroaching Evil. If you are not inclined to
hearken to Me, from any remaining Affection to one whose Voice and Counsels you
once heard with Joy, and yielded to with great Alacrity; yet let me desire you
not to refuse, as you would act the Part of Friends to yourselves and your dear
Children.

I am, Dear Brethren, He who was once (as I hope through Grace) Your faithful
Pastor, and devoted Servant for Jesus sake, J. E.

ERRATA.
PAGE 24 Line 10 read, Distinction. -- l 12 r Scheme, that. p 37 Title, r of
ungodly. p 38 l 1 r in his Sight. p 41 l ult r Thing. p 47 l last but one, r
Weight on it p 57 l 20 r Degree of Light, -- l 35 r P 133. p 96 Title, r Part
III. -- and l 12 r is used. p 98 Title, r Part III. p 101 l 13 from Bottom dele
the Period. p 106 l 19 r Since it is. p 130 l 18 r (P 55) speaks of it as. p 151
l 6 r made to the Righteous. p 152 l 2 r and Bonds. p 168 l 30 r great
Importance. p 170 l ult, r couragement.

An INDEX, Or Alphabetical TABLE of the principal Contents.
[ N. B. The Capital P. signifies the Part.. the Section, and the small p. the
Page, where the Thing spoken of is to be found.]
ACTS of the Apostles, Arguments from thence, P 2 2 p 28. P 3 9 p 127, 128.
Actions Sacramental, P 1 2 p 29. P 3 1 p 94 6 p 112, 113, 7 p 119, 120.
Ancestors, of covenanting in them, See Covenanting. Arguments, of such as are
in like Manner against both Sides, P 3 11 p 135, etc. Assertion, instead of
Argument, one of Mr. W. -- ms's Methods of diputing, P 3 5 p 110, 111.
Assurance, concerning its Necessity, P 2 2 p 30 P 3 1 p 95 15 p 153, etc. 16.
BAptism of Infants born in the Church, makes 'em Members, according to Mr. W. P
3 14 p 146, etc. Begging the Question, What it is, P 3 7 p 115, 116. Whether I
have begged the Q. P 3 7 p 117, -- 120. Mr. W -- ms's begging the Q. P 3 8 p
120, -- 125. Believing, See Faith. Born in the Church, of being so, and Mr. W
-- ms's Argument from it, See Infants. Brotherly Love, P 1 2 p 28, 29, P 3 1 p
93, 94, 3 p 103, 104, 10 p 133. CEnsure, why not passed on those baptized in
Infancy, when in adult Age they make no Profession. P 3 14 p 152, 153. Certain
Rule, to restrain Sacraments to true Saints. P 2 2 p 30 P 3 2 p 98, 99.
Circumcision, See Passover. Commanding, and forbidding at the same Time. P 3 17
p 163, etc. Common Grace, Mr. Stoddard's Thoughts upon it. P 2 5 p 56.
Communicating Unworthily, P 3 10 p 134. Concessions of Mr. W. P 2 1 p 21, etc.
Consequences of those Concessions. P 2 2 p 26, etc. Consent, and Compliance
with the Covenant, in unsanctified Men. P 2 5 p 48, -- 50. Converting
Ordinance, whether the Lord's Supper be so. P 2 7 p 60, etc. Dr. Doddridge's
Opinion upon it. P 3 p 124. Marg. Covenant; a being in Covenant an ambiguous
Phrase. P 3 14 p 151, 152. Covenant-Duties, external. See External
Covenant-Duties. Covenanting public, of Professors. P 1 9 p 78, -- 91. C.
explicit, P 2 2 p 27 P 2 9* p 78. -- 81, C. of the ancient Israelites, P 2 9 p
83, -- 85 C. in Ancestors, P 2 9 p 83, -- 85. P 3 14 p 146, etc. DEgeneracy of
the Church, what Mr. Stoddard though it the principal Thing leading to it. P 3 10 p
134, 135. Degree of Evidence, P 1 2 p 7, -- 9. Dependence on God; concerning
this in the Unregenerate. P 2 5 p 51. Desires of the Unregenerate, P 2 5 p 48,
49. Disciples, Christians being so called, P 2 2 p 31, 32. P 3 3 p 105 7 p 118.
Discrimination, in the Words of a Profession, P 2 1 p 24 4 p 39, -- 4 --
Doctrines, taught by Mr. Stoddard, but subverted by Mr. W -- Appendix, p 168,
etc. Duties of Worship, done by unsanctify'd Men, the vilest Impiety, according
to Mr. W -- ms, P 2 8 p 75 Marg. EPistles of the Apostles, Arguments from
thence, P 2 2 p 28 P 3 4 p 107, -- 110. 7 p 117 9 p 130, 131 11 p 139. Epithets
and Characters, in the Epistles, P 3 4 p 107, etc. Evidence of Saintship, P 1 2
p 7 -- 9 P 3 7 p 117. -- 119. Examination, spoken of in 1 Cor. xi.28, P 2 2 p
29 P 3 1 p 94, 95. See Communicating unworthily. Exclamations, Mr. W -- ms's, P
3 5 p 110, -- 112. Experiences, judging by them, P 1 2 p 15, -- 18. External
Carriage of unsanctified Men, P 3 5 p 110, 111. External Covenant-Duties, P 3 8
p 122 17 p 163, etc. FAith of ungodly Men, P 2 5 p 47, -- 50. Federal Holiness,
as the Term of Communion. See Holiness. Feelings inward, P 1 2 p 18, 19. Forms,
several brief ones, of a public Profession, P 1 2 p 9. GIving the Hand to the
Lord, the Meaning of the Phrase, P 2 9 p 82. HEathen, of ungodly Men under the
Gospel being worse than they, P 2 8 p 76, 77. Holiness, only Federal, respected
by the Apostles in Admissions, according to Mr. W. P 3 9 p 130* 131. Hudson,
Mr. W -- ms's Misrepresentation of Him, P 3 2 p 99, 100. Hypocrites, of visible
Christians being so, when not truly pious. P 2 2 p 27, P 3 9 p 127. JEws, See
Old Testament, Passover, and People of God. Infants, of their being born in the
Church, P 2 2 p 31, P 3 14 p 146, etc. -- Infant Baptism, no rational Account
of it on Mr. W -- ms's Scheme. p 150, 151. Inconsistencies of Mr. W. with
himself. P 2 5 p 47, etc. P 3 9 p 125 131, and with Mr. S. Vid Stoddard. John
the Baptist, of his Practice, P 2 2 p 33 9 p 83 P 3 1 p 95 9 p 127. Isai. Chap.
lvi. Argument from thence, P 2 2 p 30, 31, P 3 3 p 101 7 p 117. Judas, of his
partaking of the Lord's Supper, P 2 2 p 33, P 3 13 p 144. Of his partaking of
the Passover, P 3 12 p 143. Of Christ's admitting him when not morally sincere,
P 3 11 p 139. Judgment, positive, P 1 2 p 10* etc. Of every one singly, 2 p 14
15, Certain 2 p 15. By Experiences 2 p 15, etc. By inward Feelings 2 p 18, 19.
KNowing the Scriptures to be the Word of God, as supposed of unregenerate Men,
P 3 15 p 155,-158. Knowing who are converted. See certain Rule. Known Right, of
coming to the Lord's Supper without it, P 3 15 p 153, etc. LAwfulness of
unregenerate Men's coming to Sacraments, P 2 2 p 29, 30, 3 p. 34, etc. Not to
be inferred from the Lawfulness of their praying, etc. P 3 3 p 106, 107. -- See
moral Sincerity. Lord's Supper, See Converting Ordinance, Tendency, Actions
Sacram. Love to God, as supposed in unsanctified Professors. P 2 5 p 51, -- 53.
Love to the Saints, See Brotherly Love. Lukewarmness, of unsanctified Men's
being above it, P 2 5 p 50, 51. Lusts, common Graces but such according to Mr.
Stoddard, P 2 5 p 56 Lying of unsanctified Professors, P 2 8 p 74, 75, 9 p 88,
-- 91. MATTHEW Chap 7, Arguments from thence P 2 2 p 27, 28. P 3 3 p 101, 102.
Misrepresentations, Mr. W -- ms's P 1 1 and 2. p 1, -- 21. P 2 9 p 88, 90. P 3
1 and 2 p 93, -- 100. Moral Sincerity, Whether it gives a Right to Sacraments P
2 8 p 64, -- 77. That which gives a Right to Sacraments, according to Mr. W.
what it implies P 3 12 p 140, 141. 16 p 160. Concerning a Visibility and
Profession of it, as a Term of Communion P 1 2 p 20, 21. P 2 3 p 35. Nothing
more required in Mr. W -- ms's Scheme P 3 9 p 126, 127. His Doctrine tends to
perplex Communicants. P 3 16 p 159, -- 162. NAture of Things, concerning the
Argument from thence P 2 2 p 27. P 3 7 p 119. 9 p 126, 127. Natural Men, Of its
being lawful for such to pray, etc. P 3 3 p 106. OLD Testament Church, and it is
Ordinances, the peculiar Use Mr. W. makes of 'em on every Occasion, P 3 8 p
123, 124. See Passover, and, People of God. Other Duties besides Sacraments,
Objection concerning them. P 2 2 p 30. P 3 3 p 106, 107. Overlooking of
Arguments, Mr. W -- ms's Way. P 3 6 p 112. PArable of the Ten Virgins, Argument
from thence P 1 2 p 28. Passover, and Circumcision P 2 2 p 32, 33. P 3 12 p
142. People of God, concerning the Jews being so called. P 2 2 p 32. P 3 6 p
114. 11 p 136, -- 138. Perplexity of doubting Saints in communicating, not
caused by the Doctr. Mr. W. opposes. P 3 16 p 162, 163. Philip and the Eunuch.
P 3 9 p 126, 129. Primitive Christians, See Epistles, and, Epithets. Positive
Judgment. P 1 2 p 10, -- 12. P 3 7 p 117, 118. 9 p 130, 131. 10 p 133, 134.
Prayer. See Other Duties -- Priests seeking their Register. P 3 7 p 119.
Probability, What it is. P 2 6 p 59. Of Ten to One P 1 2 p 12,-14. See
Visibility. Profession, explicit. P 2 2 p 27. P 3 14 p 147. The Need of an
explicit Profession. P 3 14 p 148, 149. In Words of indeterminate Meaning. P 2
4 p 39, -- 47. Promises of the Covenant of Grace, none made to those that have
only moral Sincerity. P 2 8 p 65* 66. P 3 14 p 150, 151. Promises of
unsanctified Men. P 2 8 p 68, 69, 72. P 3 9 p 85, -- 88. QUestion, What it is.
P 1 1 p 3, -- 7. Q. Begged, See Begging. Q. Changed by Mr. W. P 3 13 p 144,
145. The Q. according to Mr. Stoddard and Mr. Blake. P 2 3 p 34, 35. REspect to
God, as in the unregenerate. P 2 5 p 55, 56. Right to Sacraments in the Sight
of God, P 2 3 p 34, -- 39. Ruin of the Church, what tends to it, P 3 10 p 134,
135. Rule, See Certain Rule. SAcramental Actions, See Actions. Scandal, about
cleansing from it by Sacrifice, with Confession, P ^ 12 p 141, 142. Scheme, Mr.
W -- ms's different from that of Mr. Stoddard and of Northampton-Church, P 2 1
p 23, 24, 25, Marg. School of Christ, See Disciples. Seals of the Covenant,
concerning Sacraments being such, P 2 8 p 67, 68. Searching the Heart, P 1 2 p
19, 20. Self-dedication of unsanctified Men, P 2 5 p 53, -- 55. Serving two
Masters, P 2 5 p 53, etc. Sincerity, of some Sort, necessary to a Right to
Sacraments, in the Sight of God, P 2 3 p 34. Mr. Stoddard, Misrepresentations
of him by Mr. W -- ms, P 1 1 p 6, 7. 2 p 23, 24. 6 p 57, 58. P 3 2 p 98, 99.
Whether it be my professed Design to oppose him, P 1 1 p 1, 2. Whether I have
reproached him, P 3 1 p 95, 96* -- Mr. W -- ms's Inconsistence with him, P 2 1
p 24, 25. 3 p 37, 38. 5 p 47, -- 56. 8 p 76. Subjection to Christ, as in
unsanctified Men, P 3 7 p 118. -- See, Serving two Masters. Success of the
Practice which Mr. W. defends, P 3 8 p 124, 125. Swearing by God's Name, P 2 9
p 81, 82. TEndency of the Lord's Supper to Conversion, P 3 8 p 120, 121. -- Of
Mr. VV -- ms's Doctrine to perplex Communicants. See Moral Sincerity.
UNsanctified Men, some of 'em fit Matter for Church Membership, according to
Mr. S. and Mr. W. -- P 2 3 p 37. Visibility of Saintship, P 2 2 p 26. P 3 1 p
93. Visib. without Probability, P 2 6 p 56, etc. WArnings in a Letter to the
People of Northampton. Appendix, p. 167, etc. Wedding Garment, the Man that
came without one, P 3 10, p 132, 133. Wheat and Tares, P 2 2 p 31. P 3 3 p
102* 103. --
FINIS.

