TIMELY WARNING, against SURFEITING AND DRUNKENNESS.

SHOWING the Nature of Intemperance, with the sad Effects and fatal Consequence
of this Sin, how it is to be guarded against, and the important Necessity of
taking Heed thereto, with Constancy and Diligence.

In a Discourse preached at New-Town in Connecticut. Jan. 12. 1752.

By DAVID JUDSON, A. M. Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST, in New-Town.

We to them that rise up early in the Morning, that they may follow Strong
Drink, that continue until Night, till Wine inflame them. And the Harp and the
Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts: But they regard not
the Work of the Lord, neither consider the Operation of his Hands. Isai. v.
11.12. NEW YORK. Printed by Henry De Foreest, 1752.

Luke xxi. 34. And take Heed to yourselves, lest at any Time, your Hearts be
overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and Cares of this World, and so
that Day come upon you unawares.
AS the Day of our Death, and the Day of Judgment, will quickly overtake us
all; when we are to be eternally fixed in a State of consumate Glory and
Happiness, or of everlasting Shame and Misery: According as we shall be found,
to have conducted ourselves here in the Body. It is of the last Importance to
us all, that we live every one of our Days, so as to be in a continual
Readiness, for that great Day of solemn Accounts; when God will bring to Light
every secret and hiden Work of Darkness; and Judge the Secrets of Men's Hearts
According to the Gospel. Lest that Day coming upon us unawares; we be found
unprepared and unready; and so perish for ever without Remedy. Concerning
which, we are called upon here in our Text, to take Heed to ourselves. -- Our
Blessed Lord Jesus who spoke these Words; had been treating on the Destruction
of Jerusalem, of the fearful Signs and terrible Dissolations of that Day; when
the Son of Man should come, to execute Vengeance upon that People, for their
great Sin of Rejecting and Crucifying him, the Lord of Life and Glory. Which
Destruction of the Jewish State; was a Sort of Emblem, of the coming of the Son
of God, to judge the World. And so the Day of our Death and the Day of
Judgment; will be as Important a Day to us, as that was to the Jews; and a Day
for which we are equally concerned to be in a Readiness. and therefore the
Words of our Text, are as needful and applicable to us, in the View of
approaching Death and Judgment; as to the immediate Hearers of Christ, with
Regard to the threatened Destruction of Jerusalem. For Death and Judgment, even
as to them, were the main Things employed in the coming of that Day. But here
then, in the Words of our Text, you have the Call and Command of Christ, to
take Heed to yourselves, to look to it, with a strict Guard and Watch over
yourselves, as in a Case of great Danger, in a Matter of the utmost Importance,
lest at any Time your Hearts be overcharged; lest the Powers and Faculties of
your Minds be Cloged in their Operations; with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, by
eating or drinking to Excess, so as either to overload the Stomach or impair
the Brain; or lest the Heart be filled with carking and solicitous Cares and
Concerns about the Things of this present Life; And so that Day, the Day of
Death and Judgment, come upon you unawares. For such Indulgences, will
assuredly render you, utterly unfit and unready for that great Day; and so be
your eternal Ruin. And therefore ye had Need, take Heed to yourselves, lest at
any Time ye be overtaken therein. But it is the Surfeiting and Drunkenness here
spoken of, that I chiefly design to treat of at this Time. And so the Doctrine
to be noted from the Words may be this.

Doc. That to eat or to drink to Excess, so as to have the Heart overcharged
with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, is a very ruinous and destructive Sin, of
which it concerns every one, to take Heed to themselves, lest at any Time, they
be over taken therein.

In speaking to which I shall consider and show.

I. What it is, to eat or to Drink to Excess, so as to have the Heart
overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness. II. Set forth the very ruinous and
destractive Nature of this Sin. III. The great Need, that every one should take
Heed to themselves, lest at at any Time, they be overtaken therein.
But,

I. To consider and Show, what it is, to eat or to drink to Excess, so as to
have the Heart overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness.

Because it is innocent and Lawful, and even a Duty, to eat and to drink;
therefore Men are ready to flatter themselves, that they are not cheargeable
with Surfeiting and Drunkenness; except they run into such very gross Excess
therein, as wholly to over power all their Faculties and Senses. But every
Degree of Excess in Meats and in Drinks, is a Degree of Surfeiting and
Drunkenness. But clearly to set forth, what it is, to eat or to drink to
Excess, it is to be observed.

1. That the End and Design of Meats and of Drinks, is to satisfy the innocent
Cravings of Nature; and so to fit for the Service of God and the Business of
Life. As God has been pleased to frame our Bodies so, as that Meats and Drinks
are absolutely requisite, to nourish and strengthen our animal Nature. So he
has been pleased, wisely to implant in our Natures, those Appetites called
Hunger and Thirst; which as the Body needs Refreshment, naturally raise an
uneasy Sensation in us; thereby to excite us to take needful Sustenance;
without which, Men would some Times be in Danger of Neglecting Food, to the
great Injury of their animal Nature. And as God for wise Ends, has implanted
these Natural Appetites. So from the Openings of his bountiful Hand, he is wont
in the common Course of his Providence; to grant a plentiful Supply of Meats
and Drinks; and that in a very great and pleasing Variety, to satisfy all the
innocent Cravings of Nature. But then these Cravings of Nature, and the
Provision which God in his good Providence makes for the Supply thereof; are
for much higher and nobler Purposes, than merely to gratify and please the
Flesh: Even that our Hearts might be filled, with Gratitude and Thankfulness to
God; and that we might be strengthened for his Service, and for all the
necessary Duties and Business of Life. And therefore our Appetites of Hunger
and Thirst, are then only innocent, when they crave no more, than is good for
our Nature; for our Nounshment, Strengthening and Comfort. And indeed, so far
to gratify these Appetites, as tends to fill our Hearts with Gratitude to God
for his Bounties; and also to Capacitate us for his Service, and the necessary
Duties of Life; is not only innocent and lawful; but even a Duty, enjoined in
the sixth Commandment. Which requires all lawful Endeavors to preserve our own
Lives. And to such a Degree, Men may truly eat and drink for the Glory of God,
as we are required. 1 Cor. x. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. All Things are and were created
for God's Glory. And to this End, should we live, and to this End should we
improve all the good Creatures of God, even to his Glory. But then.

2. To eat or to drink, so as to disorder the Faculties of Body or of Mind, and
render ourselves unfit for the Service of God, or the Duties of Life; is to
overcharge the Heart with Surfeiting and Drunkenness. While a moderate Portion
of Meats and of Drinks, by the Good Providence of God, kindly nourishes and
strengthens our animal Nature; a greater Measure overloads the Stomach, blunts
the Senses, and renders Men dull and listless; or intoxicates the Brain, and
stupifies the Mind. And so indisposes Men, either for the Service of God, or
the Duties of Life. And thus to eat or to drink, to such a Degree, as to
incapacitate ourselves in any Measure, for a due Discharge of the Duties which
we owe, to God, to our Neighbor or ourselves; is so far to frustrate the good
End and Design of Meats, and of Drinks: And therefore is an excessive Use and
Abuse thereof. Every Degree of which, so far as it overcharges the Heart,
intoxicates the Mind, or blunts the Senses, and incapacitates for Duty, is a
Measure of Surfeiting and Drunkenness. But in this Excess, there are various
Degrees; though every Degree of Excess is Sin. But the more the Heart is
overcharged, and the Powers and Faculties incapacitated for Duty; the more
gross and heinous is the Sin. To eat and drink so far only, as is truly for
our Nourishment and Comfort, falls within the Laws of Christian Temperance and
Sobriety. But whatsoever is more than this, is Evil, being a Transgression of
the Laws of Nature and of Christ: And is a Measure of Surfeiting and
Drunkenness. But,

II. Of the ruinous and destructive Nature, of this Sin of Surfeiting and
Drunkenness; or of eating and drinking to Excess, with the sad and fatal
Consequences thereof.

Excess in Meats and in Drinks, have in many Respects, the same Tendency and
the same bad Consequence. Though that of intemperate drinking, as it is commonly
much the most Prevalent, so it is ordinarily attended, with much the most fatal
Consequences. And to this therefore I shall chiefly have my Eye, in considering
the ruinous and destructive Nature of Intemperance. And,

1. It impairs the Constitution, and enfeebles the Powers and Faculties of Body
and of Mind. It don't only incapacitate to Duty, while the Heart is
overcharged. But it tends to impair the animal Frame; to bring on Diseases; and
so to shorten Men's Days, and hasten them down to the Grave, as it were before
their Time. At least it much enfeebles Men's Powers and Faculties, it consumes
their Strength, it fades their Beauty, it weakens their Reason, shatters their
Judgment, and stupifies Conscience. And so it tends to bring Men down, as to
their Powers and Faculties, to be even as Children and Fools. Temperance is a
great Friend to our natural Capacities, and tends to strengthen them. But every
Fit of Intemperance, tends to enfeeble all a Man's Powers; and so to bring him
down to the Dust, or to a Level even with the Beasts.

2. It is a great Moth to Men's temporal Estates; and tends to bring Poverty
upon themselves and their Families.

Surfeiting and Drunkenness, is an eating Canker, a fatal Consumption, to Men's
Estates. Both, as it is attended with needless and extravagant Expenses, and
especially, as it incapacitates Men for their Business; prevents their being
Diligent and prudent, and occasions much mispence of Time; in drowsiness,
sauntring and Idleness, or in foolish, vain and wicked Company. And so tends to
bring on many bad Habits, which soon plunge Men and their Families into Poverty
and Distress. For as the wise Man says, The Drunkard and the Glutton shall come
to Poverty. And accordingly it is no uncommon Thing in the World, to see very
likely and promising Men, with fair and handsome Estates, not only ruined, as
to their own Usefulness and Improvement in the World; but plunged into the very
Depths of Poverty, Clothed with Rags, their Wives and Children turned out of
House and Home, and themselves become as Vagabonds on the Earth: Only through
Surfeiting and Drunkenness, as the Root of all this dreadful Calamity. A
Spectacle, that might well make a Heart of Stone to relent and weep: That to
gratify a filthy Lust, Men should bring themselves and their Families, into
such deplorable Ruin; even as to the present Life. But,

3. Surfeiting and Drunkenness unman's Men, and makes them even a Shame and
Reproach among Men.

Of all Sins, it makes Men appear the most deformed and ridiculous; so that it
renders them, a Laughing Stock and Scorn, even to Children. While Men's Heads
are intoxicated and Swim with Fumes, they are ready to count the World all
their own; who, so happy so witty and wise as they! While at the same Time, all
their Beholders look on them, with Pity and Grief, or with Scorn and Contempt,
making them the Fool of their Play, their Laugh and Derision. So that one would
think, a Man that has any Sense of Honor; and any manly Regard to his own
Reputation and good Name; would rather choose to Die, even a Thousand Deaths;
than to drink himself such a Scorn and Derision among Men. A good Name is
better than precious Ointment. But a Man's good Name is gone to all Intents,
when once he has drank himself, into the Name of a Drunkard. And instead of
being honored and esteemed, he can expect nothing, but to be the Scorn and
Derision, even of the lowest and most ignoble Part of his Species. Wine is a
Mocker, and it makes Men a Mock and Reproach among Men. And.

4. Surfeiting and Drunkenness, is a Sin leading to many other Sins.

It lays a Man open and renders him an easy Prey to every Temptation. It so
takes away the Reason and Judgment, that it leaves Men without any Guard and
Watch over themselves; and so leads to a Thousand Extravagances and Follies. It
fills Men's Mouths with vain Babblings, with unseemly, silly and foolish
Talking. Yea it imboldens Men, to take God's Name in vain, to Curse and Swear
and Lie in Jest: And to make a Mock and Derision of Things Sacred and Divine.
It prompts Men to speak Evilly and Reproachfully of their Neighbors without
Cause; and to slander and revile the Virtuous and Good; and is many Times the
Occasion of a Tumultuous Feud, of boisterous, haughty and angry Passions.
Strong Drink is Raging. Prove. xx. 1. And so hurries Men into Quarrels and
Contentions, to Spite and Revenge; and sometimes even to Blows and Blood shed.
As the Wise Man says, Who has Woe? Who has Sorrow? Who has Contentions? Who
has Babbling? Who has Wounds without Cause? Who has Redness of Eyes? They
that tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine. Prove. xxiii. 29,
30. Yea it lays open and exposes all a Man's Weakness, Frailties and
Imperfections: What ever Follies, Lust and Passions he is incident unto; an
intoxicated Brain throws off the Covering, and Exposes all the Man's Nakedness.
It betrays his most secret Betrustments, to his own Shame, and the Shame of his
Friend. Sometimes it makes Men very Talkative in Matters of Religion; full of
Confidence, and expressive of great Joys and Comforts; to their own great
Shame, and the great Reproach and Scandal of the Religion which they profess:
Which of all Thing is most grievous and shocking to behold. And it is also a
great Incentive to fleshly Lusts, and to wanton lacivious and unchaste Words and
Actions. And often occasions Quarrels and Contentions in Families. Yea it is a
leading Thing to all Manner of Iniquity. Besides, it utterly indisposes to
every Religious Duty; excludes all serious Thoughts out of the Mind; and shuts
the Reading of God's Word, and secret and Family Prayer, out of their Families
and out of their Closets; or makes Men's Prayers, offered with the Fumes of an
intoxicated Brain, a most horrid Abomination indeed to the Lord. And verily
there can be no true Fear of God; no Regard for his Glory; no true Devotion at
Heart, no true Gratitude and Praise to God, no Watching and Striving against
the World and the Flesh, no Aspiring after Heavenly Things, no true Mournings
and Relentings for Sin, no perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God and no Running
for Eternal Life, while the Heart is overcharged with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness. But all Pretensions to Religion in this Case, are a Reproach to
Religion itself; and a most horrid Offense and Abomination both to God and to
Men. And the Interest of the Soul inevitably runs back, and sinks with an
inconceivable Swiftness down into the Depths of Pollution and Guilt. And so,

5. Surfeiting and Drunkenness do inevitably unfit the Soul for Death and
Judgment; and expose it to certain and Everlasting Ruin and Destruction. As it
is a Sin that impairs Man's rational Powers, that inflames every Lust, and
leads on to a Flood of Inquity; so it is a Sin that does vile Dishonor to God,
that abates his Mercies, that pollutes the Soul, that loads it with Guilt, and
that renders it utterly unmeet for the Kingdom of Heaven; and so exposes it to
the avenging Strokes of Divine Justice. And such God has assured us, shall not
inherit his Heavenly Kingdom. 1 Cor. vi. 9. 10. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolators, etc. nor Drunkards, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. And again. Gal. v. 19. 20. Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which
are These, Adultery, Fornication, etc. and Drunkenness, of the which I tell you
before, as I have told you in Time past, that they which do such Things, shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God. And woe therefore, as it is written, Isai. v.
22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of Strength to mingle
Strong Drink. And woe to such indeed, for they are going in the high Road to
Ruin and Destruction; they are heaping up to themselves Shame, Poverty and
Reproach in this World, and treasuring up to themselves Wrath against the Day
of Wrath. And when ever Death and Judgment over takes them, they must, without
a deep and thorough Repentance, inevitably ly down in everlasting Shame and
Confusion, under the eternal Wrath and Curse of God. For He that cannot lie has
said, they shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And therefore, when that great
Day which is hastening, shall once overtake the Sinner in his Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, he can no more Delight himself in his inordinate Lusts: But must
change his delicious Cups, for the Wine of God's Wrath, poured out without
Mixture into the Cup of his Indignation: Without so much as one Drop of Water
to cool a scorched Tongue. And then may it be said with an Emphasis, as in
Joel, 1. 5. Awake ye Drunkards, and Weep, and Howl, all ye Drinkers of Wine,
because of the new Wine, for it is cut off from your Mouth. Oh how fearfully
ruinous and destructive indeed, in Time and forever, is this Sin of Surfeiting
and Drunkenness. But.

III. To show the great Need, that every one should take Heed to themselves,
lest at any Time, they be overtaken in this ruinous Sin. To take Heed lest at
any Time we be overtaken in this Sin; Implies, that we keep a very strict Guard
and Watch over ourselves: Lest under a Pretense of satisfying the innocent
Cravings of Nature; and of Eating and Drinking for the needful Refreshment and
Nourishment of our Bodies: We take more than is meet; overcharge our Hearts,
and plunge ourselves into a Degree of Surfeiting and Drunkenness. And that we
Watch and Guard ourselves, not only, against a prevailing Habit of Excess
herein, but against taking to Excess at any Time, and in any Degree; lest
Excess at one Time, and in one Degree, enlarge our Appetite and inflame our
Thirst; so as to make Way for Excess at another Time, and in a greater Degree;
till we be overborne, and carried headlong down the Precipice of this ruinous
Sin. Again, this taking Heed to ourselves, Implies, that we carefully keep at a
safe and secure Distance from this Sin. That we think not to dally with it;
that we give not way to the Gratification of our Appetites, to the farthest
Extent of what we imagine our Natures may possibly bear. Especially if we find,
that at any Time, we have been overtaken in any Degree of Excess, and have eat
or drank more than was meet; or if we find that inordinate Cravings and
Thirstings begin secretly to grow in, and prevail upon us; that we do then
awake, to a double Guard and Watch over ourselves; to keep at the greatest
Distance from, and even wholly to deny ourselves, any Use at all, of those
particular Meats, and Drinks, whereby we are in special Danger: Rather than to
venture the fatal Hazard of Surfeiting and Drunkenness. To pretend to take Heed
against any Evil, and yet tamper with the Temptations to it; as to pretend to
take Heed against Surfeiting and Drunkenness; and yet indulge ones self to the
very Borders of Excess, and frequent drinking Places and drinking Company, is
but a vain Pretense. For the intoxicating Cup is insnaring, and soon alures to
Excess. But he that would take due Heed to himself, must watchfully shun the
Way, the Place, and Company, and even the very Appearance of Excess. And stand
at the greatest Distance from those Evils, with which he finds himself most
easily beset. And now Men have all Need to watch most heedfully, against this
Sin of Intemperance. Not only because it is such a Ruinous and destructive
Evil, to themselves and their Families, to their Bodies and to their Souls, to
their Honor, Interest and Welfare, in Time and to all Eternity: All which
should be weighty and powerful Motives with us, to excite us, to utmost
watchfulness against this Sin. But there are farther Reasons also, why we had
need take Heed lest at any Time we be overtaken in this Sin. As

1. Because it is a Sin that we are all naturally incident unto, and in Danger
of. As we are fallen Creatures, the noble Powers of our Minds are woefully
ruined, and the Fleshly Appetites are prone to break out into great
Exorbitancy, to exceed their proper Bounds and run into Excess. So that we are
naturally inclined to exceed the Bounds of Temperance and Sobriety; to let
Reason and Judgment give way to Inclination and Lust; and so to be governed by
fleshly Appetites and Desires, more than by Reason and Judgment. So that unless
we take Heed to ourselves, to mortify and keep under the Deeds of the Body; our
craving Appetites will soon plunge us into Excess. And,

2. It is a Sin which Men are very ready to palliate and excuse themselves in;
at least, as to some of the first and lowest Degrees thereof. For as every Kind
of Meat and Drink is given for the Use and Benefit of Man, and may lawfully be
used for our good and Comfort. Therefore Men in Compliance with their
exorbitant Appetites and Desires, are ready to persuade themselves, that more
is for their Comfort, than is in any wise for their good. And so, under the
Notion of taking for their Comfort, they excuse themselves in taking to Excess:
So much as really to discompose their Minds, and render them foolish and
ridiculous; though they drown not all their Senses. So that it is an insnaring
Evil, that creeps upon Men unawares. And therefore had need to be heedfully
watched against; as a secret undermining Enemy, that does not make the first
Onset, by an open Assault, but by underhand Craft and Deceit. And,

3. It is a very growing Sin. Where it once begins to get Footing it often
gains Ground apace, and is rarely expelled. As Intemperance at the first,
commonly steals upon Men by insensible Degrees; so every Degree leaves vitiated
Taint, and inflamed Thirst behind, which lays the Foundation, for still greater
and greater Excess; as Time and Opportunity serves, or Temptation presents:
Till sometimes Surfeiting and Drunkenness, to a very great and shameful Degree,
gets strongly rooted, even into a prevailing Habit in Men; and they get deep in
the Pit, and woefully entangled in the Snare; ere they are aware of the Danger
they are in. And then alas, exorbitant Cravings being grown into a Habit, it is
hard for Men thoroughly to reform. As for the Ethiopian to change his Skin or
the Leopard his Spots. And thus it is in Fact too rarely seen in the World,
that an habituated Drunkard, ever escapes the Snares, to lead a Life truly
Sober and temperate. And therefore Men had need take Heed betimes, left at any
Time, their Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness; and so this
Sin steal upon them, and get the Prevalency over them unawares; to the utter
Ruin of their Name and Estate, Welfare and Happiness, for Time and Eternity.
And,

Finally, It is a Sin that does vile Dishonor to God. As it leads to many
other Sins, exposes all a Man's Frailties and Follies, and indisposeth to a due
Performance of any religious Duty; so it Leads to innumerable Provocations
against Heaven; does the vilest Dishonor to Religion; and gives even the
Heathen Occasion to scoff and Blaspheme. So that if Men have any Regard to the
Glory of God, any Fear to offend him, any Desire to honor and please him, or
any Regard for the Honor of that Religion which they profess, or desire to
share the Blessings, or Care to shun the Curses of it: They had need take Heed
to themselves in Earnest; lest at any Time their Hearts be overcharged with
Surfeiting and Drunkenness.

But to come to the,

Improvement. Our first Use, may be of Solemn Warning, to all such as are given
to intemperate Indulgences. Would to God there were none such amongst us, For
it is too shameful an Evil once to be mentioned, among those that call
themselves Christians. But alas, it is greatly to be feared, that it is a very
growing and prevailing Iniquity; both more publicly and privately; to the
great Scandal and Reproach of the Christian Name. May the Lord of his infinite
Mercy, give an hearing Ear, and an understanding Heart, to all such of you my
Hearers, as are given to inordinate Appetites and Desires; that you may awake
to a Sense of your Danger, and be roased up to take Diligent Heed to
yourselves. For is strong Drink become your Master; are you fallen into the
Habit of Being frequently overcome thereby; or of drinking to Excess, so as to
discompose and intoxicate your Mind. Alas, it is a sad, a pitiful, yea and most
dangerous Case that you are in. For you are in very-deed, next Door to Ruin and
Destruction; in the most ready way to be undone, Soul and Body for ever. There
is utmost Danger, that this Sin will prevail upon you, and that you will
henceforward wax worse and worse. Yea except you rouse up, and take the most
carnest Heed to yourselves; yours is a gone Case; a dreadful Pit that you are
fallen into; an almost inextricable Snare that you are intangied in. O that you
would yet come to yourselves, look about you, and think in carnest, what are
the certain fearful and dreadful Consequences of a Course of Intemperance,
Surfeiting and Drunkenness. Thereby, your Powers are soon impaired, your good
Name ruined your Honor lost, your Follies exposed, yourselves made a Scorn and
a Derision, your Estates impoverished, your Families injured and wronged, the
Welfare of your Souls neglected God, dishonored and provoked, Wrath treasured
up against the Day of Wrath, and your Souls ripened in Guilt and Pollution, for
an evelasting Destruction. And alas, can one that has the Reason and Spirit of
a Man, carelessly plunge himself into all these deplorable Calamities; for the
sake of gratifying, a worse than beastly Gust and Appetite? Can the
intoxicating Draught, be dearer to you than your own Life and Health, dearer to
you than your Manhood, than your Honor, than your good Name, and dearer to you
than all the Comforts of Life, than your Estates, than your Wives, than your
Husbands, and than your Children? That all must be hazarded to Ruin, to gratify
a filthy Lust. Or can any of you, be so void of Humanity, so lost to all Sense
of Honor, and to all Sense of Shame, as to let none of these Things move you?
Alas, alas, all that is worthily dear to you in the World; your Health, your
good Name, your Estates, your Families, your Wives, your Children, and all your
Dear Friends, lament after you, and bewail with bitter Sighs and Moans, the
fatal Ruin, you are bringing upon yourselves and upon them! And yet must they
all be disregarded and spurned from you with Disdain? Alas, can you so divest
yourself, of all the tenderest Ties of Nature; as to rend from the
compassionate Embraces, and Heart melting Entreaties, of your dear Partener,
dissolved in Tears, and trample your weeping Friends, and smiling Babes, as
under your Feet; to pursue the Way to Ruin with Greediness? Or can you be so
regardless, of the Honor and Glory of God; so Fearless of his Wrath and
Displeasure; so regardless of his Favor and Blessing, and of the Everlasting
Welfare of your own Souls? As to go on in Ways dishonouring to God; to provoke
him to Wrath, and to pull down everlasting Destruction upon your own Heads; for
the sake of indulging your selves, in the filthy short lived Pleasures of
Surfeiting and Drunkenness. Oh take Warning poor intemperate Soul! For not only
Diseases, Poverty, Shame and Reproach, are pursuing close at your Heels in this
World: But the great and awful Day of Judgment will quickly overtake you. For
which you are in the sure Way to be utterly unprepared; to have a most fearful
Account to give, and dreadful Doom to receive, from the Mouth of your great
Judge. Who now says it in his Word and will make it good in that Day, that
Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Wherefore for the Lord's Sake!
And for your own precious Soul Sake! And for the Sake of all that is precious
and dear to you, for Time and Eternity! Rouie up and take Heed to yourselves
that you keep at the greatest Distance from this Sin, wherewith you are most
easily beset: Lest at any Time your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, and swift Ruin and Destruction overtake you unawares. And,

Secondly, Be persuaded to break off your intemperate Indulgencies, and turn
therefrom by unfeigned Repentance.

Poison and Death are in your excessive Cups. And Judgment may soon overtake
you; and then you are inevitably lost and undone for ever. But yet there is
Mercy and Forgiveness with God through Jesus Christ, for all that repent and
turn: Wherefore be entreated seriously to consider the Folly and Evil of your
Ways. Think what great Dishonor you have done to God; how you have abused his
good Creatures, and consumed them upon your Lusts; and how greatly you have
provoked, your glorious Maker and Rightful Sovereign, to Wrath and Anger
against you. Think how you have injured your own Sonk and what fearful Ruin you
have laid yourselves open and exposed unto. And let the deepest Contrition,
Bitterness and Sorrow fill your Hearts. Judge and Condemn yourselves, and
bewail and lament your past Excesses before God. And cry earnestly to him with
Tears of unfeigned Repentance; to be merciful unto you, to wash away your Guilt
in the Blood of Jesus; and to cleanse you from all your woeful Pollution, to
mortify your Lusts, and to quicken and enable you by his Spirit and Grace, to
keep under the Deeds of the Body, and to live in all Sobriety and Temperance.
That if yet by his Grace you may be recovered out of the Snare in which you are
taken, that your Souls may live and not die. And,

Lastly, Be ye all warned and exhorted to watch and take Heed against
Surfeiting and Drunkenness.

You have heard what an insnaring, ruinous and destructive Sin this is, to Soul
and to Body, for Time and for Eternity. Wherefore take Warning and watch
betimes, against ever the least Degree of Intemperance And be excited and
entreated, as you tender all that is dear to you in the World, as you regard
the Glory of God, as you dread his Wrath and Displeasure, and as you would
escape everlasting Destruction; most carefully to shun this Sin of Surfeiting
and Drunkenness; and all the Temptations leading to it. Shun drinking Company,
and avoid tippling Places, as most dangerous Snares laid for your Ruin. And
beware of Excessive Cups as you would of the most deadly Poison: For remember;
that although the Taste seem sweet and pleasant, the certain Effects are fatal
Destruction. But put on Sobriety and Temperance at all Times. And make it your
great Concern so to walk as may redown to God's Glory, your own present Peace
and eternal Welfare. And as for yourselves, so also beware, for the Lord's sake
and for the Soul sake of your Neighbor, that you be not the Occasion, for
filthy Lucre sake, of administering to the Intemperance of others. For such have
a great Share in the Guilt of the intemperate and Drunken. Woe therefore is to
him that gives his Neighbor Drink: that puts his Bottle to him, and makes
him Drunken also, that he may look on their Nakedness. Hab. 11.15. Wherefore
take Heed and Warch over yourselves, and one over another; lest being
overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness; the great Day of the Lord overtake
you unawares and unprepared. For ye are not in Darkness, that that Day shall
overtake you as a Thief. Therefore let us not Sleep as do others, but let us
watch and be sober. And to conclude.

Receive that Exhortation of the Apostle. Romans xiii. 12, 14. The Night is far
spent, the Day is at Hand: let us therefore cast off the Works of Darkness, and
let us put on the Armor of Light. Let us walk honestly as in the Day; not in
Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and
Envying. But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not Provision for the Flesh
to fulfill the Lust thereof. Amen.

FINIS.

