SOME THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION: WITH Reasons for Erecting a College in this
Province, and fixing the same at the City of New York: To which is added, A
SCHEME for employing Masters or Teachers in the mean Time: And also for raising
and endowing an Edifice in an easy Manner.

The Whole concluding, with A POEM: Being a serious Address to the House of
Representatives.

Non solus is Reipublicae prodest, -- qui de Pac^ Belloque censet; sed qui
Juventutem exhortatur, qui, in tanta bonorum Praeceptorum Inopia, virtute in
struit Animos, -- and ad Luxuriam cursu ruentes, prensat ac retrahit: -- -- Nam
omnium Regnorum and Populorum felicitas, tum maxim Reipub. Christianae Salus,
a recta Juventutis Institutione pendet; quae quidem rudes adhue Animos ad
Humanitatem flectet; steriles alioquin and infructuosos Reip. Muniis idoneos
and utiles reddit: Dei Cultum, in Parents and Patriam Pietatem, erga
Magistratus Reverentiam and Obedientiam promovet. -- NEW YORK: Printed and Sold
by J. PARKER, at the New Printing-Office, in Beaver-Street, 1752. ( Price One
Shilling.)

To the HONORABLE James De Lancey, Esquire Of the COUNCIL, and CHIEF JUSTICE of the
Province of New York.
HON. SIR,
BEING advised that, perhaps, it might be of public Use, to print the following
Papers, which were intended originally to be laid before the House of
Representatives only in Manuscript; I must beg Leave to put them under your
Protection, to which the Subject naturally recommends them. Had I the Vanity to
hope they could ever be more extensively known, than your Name and Character
is, I could not forbear, on this Occasion, to bear Witness to that Integrity,
Knowledge, and Dignity, with which you fill the Seat of Justice among Us: --
But as these Papers must soon be forgot, and will never, in all Probability,
extend beyond the Province for which they were writ, it were very idle to tell
a People what they feel. However, I cannot dismiss this Subject, without
applying to You the following noble Character of an upright Judge; which, it is
no Compliment to say, I may do with much greater Truth and Propriety than
HORACE did to LOLLIUS, for whom he drew it: -- -- Est Animus tibi
Rerumque prudens, and secundis
Temporibus dubiisque rectus;
Vindex avarae Fraudis, and abstinens
Ducentis ad se Cuncta Pecuniae:
-- Bonus atque fidus
Judex Honestum praetulis Utili, and
Rejecis alto Dona Nocentium
Vultu, and per obstantes Catervas
Explicius tua Victor Arma:
Lib. iv. Od. 9:

But I own frankly, SIR, that Compliments, however just, are the least Part of
my Design in this Address: I would fondly hope thereby to engage One, who is
the most distinguished Scholar, and Patriot of his Country, to improve and
forward, with his whole Credit, the Scheme here offered; which, if any Thing
can, must endear Your Name, more and more, to succeeding Times, for whose
Benefit it is chiefly calculated. --

PHILOMATHES.

PREFACE.
THE following Pieces were written some Months ago, but the Publishing of them
deferred on Account of the frequent Prorogations of the Assembly, under whose
Consideration they were chiefly meant to fall. The Prose Part sufficiently
explains its Design; but, to some, the Verses may seem a needless Addition.

The Author replies, that considering how long it has been sadly neglected in
this Province to give due Attention to the Concerns of Literature and
Education, he thought it would be stopping far short, if he laid down Proposals
for this Purpose, without endeavoring at the same Time to excite his
Countrymen to a speedy Execution of them. The most pathetic Manner of doing
this, he judged, was by a Representation of the happy State we might arrive to,
upon the Supposition of our attending to our true Interests at present. Now, as
a Prospect without some Variety and Coloring cannot take the Eye; and as the
anticipating distant glorious Scenes naturally warms the Fancy, distends the
Soul, and raps it into the Enthusiasm of Poetry; he hopes, 'twere needless to
trouble Gentlemen of Taste with any other Apology, for his Choice of this
Species of Writing.

The Thought upon which the Poem chiefly turns, though a plain Maxim in Politics,
will perhaps startle some narrow Minds; but the found Politician will no more
be surpised at it, than the learned Physician, if told that his Patient of 50
cannot live 50 Years more. Our Writers at Home speak without Reserve of the
Death of the British Monarchy. Thus the amiable Prior: Long shall Britannia's
MONARCHY engage
The Teeth of Envy and the Force of Age:
Revered and happy, long shall she remain,
Of human Things, least changeable and vain.
Yet all must with the general Doom comply,
And this great glorious Power, though last, must die.
The Poet means last of all the Empires of the Eastern World; for a little
above he makes Solomon, in whose Mouth he puts these Words, declare that
America was then folded from human Eye: and this agrees exactly with our
Hypothesis. One Author has even pretended to show how long the British
Constitution can subsist; but this being one of the ARCANA of Heaven, such
Speculations are idly curious. Another Hume' s Moral Essays. No 9.
has enquired whether a Republic or absolute Monarchy would be its easiest
Death, its true EUTHANASIA; and, by a Piece of beautiful Reasoning, shown that
the latter, which in all Probability will be its Fate, is much rather to be
wished for. -- In plain Truth Conclusion of Dr. Young' s Night-Thoughts.
Virtue and Vice are Empire's Life and Death. And, as Machiavel observes, it is
almost impossible to maintain a free Government among a corrupt People; for
those good Laws, those fast Patriots, who are the Pillars of Liberty among a
virtuous People, become destructive of it when their Genius is grown corrupt:
Thus the rigid Stiffness of Cato, instead of preserving the Freedom, hastened
the Slavery of the Romans; for he knew not to make the least Allowance for a
crazy Constitution.

That great Politician and Master of all polite Learning, Lord Bolingbroke,
thinks that Nothing can give a saving Turn to the rushing British Genius, but
some extraordinary Conjuncture of ill Fortune or of good; which may purge, yet
so as by Fire. -- True, to such Purgings and Convulsions it is, that Britain
owes her present Freedom and Grandeur; but then they happened in other Times,
Thompson' s Liberty.
When more than Roman Senates met and blew
A Flame that cleared, consumed, renewed the Land:
They happened in the Reign of weak Princes, when there were brave Patriots who
knew how to improve those lucky Occasions, by obliging the Kings to give back
whatever had been illegally usurped from the People, and by drawing back the
Government to its fundamental good Principles; in short they happened when the
Constitution was able to bear them: -- but should it happen that ever an
ambitious enterprizing Prince fills the Throne, -- one that is wicked and
crafty enough to take the Advantage of the visible Decay of the ancient English
Spirit, it is easy to foresee that the Scales must be turned, and I tremble
even to think of the Consequences.

But here it will be asked, why alarm us with Dangers so seemingly distant? --
For this very Reason, because it is distant; was the Danger near, Alarms would
be in vain. Have Patience I will explain myself.

The same Analogy of Reasoning, which shows us that all Governments are subject
to Death, shows also that these Provinces may survive their Mother Country: --
Here again, methinks, I hear the same Cry as against every other Effort to
improve the Spirit of Liberty and Virtue; -- what shake off our Allegiance and
become independent? No: I Am far from thinking it will ever be our Interest, or
in our Power, to be independent of Britain, while she is able to maintain her
own Independency; but should she ever fall into the Way of other Nations, it is
not to be supposed that we, like the chief Favorites of Easter.. Tyrants,
would contentedly suffer ourselves to be laid in the same Grave with her; this
is a Test of Affection which she will never require, and which, I hope, but a
few here would be disposed to give. Indeed, so far from being in a Condition to
shake off our Dependency, in my sincere Judgment, we could not at present even
subsist in an independent State. -- We are as deeply immersed in Luxury as our
Mother Country, little reflecting that the Food of Men is not Meat for Babes;
so that were she to fall at present, we must inevitably fall with her. But,
Thanks be to Heaven, we seem secure in a long Succession of Princes, whose
Family have ever reckoned it their greatest Glory to be the Patrons of Freedom,
and to save a degenerate World from universal Slavery even against their Will.
-- We should then be greatly cautious to make a proper Use of those golden
Moments, which will not always last. If we do so, then whenever a gallic, or
home-born Tyrant shall arise (and sooner or later such will arise) threatening
to lay Britain, the Beloved of Heaven, the Pride of Earth, the Isle of Heroes
and Freedom, in the Dust, if our Assistance cannot avert the Blow from her, we
shall at least be able, at this Distance, to avert it from ourselves, and open
an Asylum to the noble Gleanings of her brave Sons who spurn the Yoke* -- But
if we neglect this favorable Opportunity of purging the Fountain, by making a
lasting Provision for educating a Succession of true Patriots and Citizens, it
may soon be too late; and though there was no Danger of being surprised in this
State of Indolence, we ourselves will soon be in no Capacity even to think of a
Reformation of Manners; for let us remember, that if once Corruption* which
treads close on the Heels of Luxury, gets Footing amongst us, all the Art of
Man cannot, and Heaven will not, save us.

To illustrate, and make the proper Use of these Thoughts, is the Design of the
following Poem; which I thought necessary to explain thus at large, that so
there may be no Room left for a sinister Construction. I hope the Reasoning
will be found connected; and the Principles upon which it is built I have
partly justified by the best Authorities. As there is a large Field open, I
might have given ample Range to Fancy: I might also have raised the Diction in
several Places; but all my Design was to communicate briefly a few important
Truths, so as readily to strike an ordinary Reader. -- As I have a greater
Ambition to be thought a good Englishman, than a good Writer; I hope, far from
harboring the least unfavourable Thought of my native Country* I have shown a
laudable Partiality to it; and indeed the stronger this Partiality is, the
stronger too will be the Apprehension of every Danger wherewith she may be
affected: I would fondly believe the Period of her Fall is yet very remote; but
while it remains uncertain, all my Arguments will be conclusive.

As I address to the Assembly, a particular Address to Mr. JONES is but a just
Compliment to their late prudent Choice of a Speaker, though other Circumstances
did not challenge it; and, having once mentioned Him* I could not forbear
adding a few Lines to encourage him to continue steadfast in the good Cause he
has engaged in: For I have seen Him, and Him alone by Name, treated in a very
ungenteel and ungenerous Manner in several Pamphlets, and that for nothing else
but his superior Zeal to preserve a just Balance between the Branches of the
Legislature, and to preserve the just Privilege of Assemblies. A Man, less a
PATRIOT than he, would scorn to throw away his Labors in Return for so much
Ingratitude; but, contra audentior ibat, he has esteemed it mean and inglorious
to exchange a Scene of great and generous Efforts in public Life for private
Ease or Interest; and therefore it should be the Part of every honest Man, to
encourage and support him in this laudable Resolution; and not only him, but
several other worthy Gentlemen of the Assembly, etc. -- who, having signalized
themselves, in the Worst of Times, by their steady Attachment to their
Country's Interest, have been as unworthily used as he: To all such I would be
understood to apply what I have said on Patriotism, though I have not thought my
self at Liberty to name them, since I have never seen them attacked under their
proper Names*

A Difference between the Branches of the Legislature is a natural Consequence
of Liberty: All Men are fond of Power; and, where the Dispute is handled with
Good-Manners, Temper and Benevolence, it gives me Pleasure to hear the
ministerial Party accuse the People of Licentiousness; and the People, in their
Turn, accus their Governors of stretching the Prerogative beyond due Bounds;
this is a certain Indication that neither Side speaks wholly true that the
Balance has just Play, and Liberty is in no Danger. But when I hear the Writers
of either Side, running into Scurrility and personal Satyr, and creating
Ill-Blood among Fellow-Citizens, for what must necessarily happen in this State
of Imperfection, where Men by their very Differences and Weaknesses, are
accommodated to one another and linked together, it raises my Indignation to
the highest Pitch, and I look upon such Scriblers as the Bane of Society, and
only fit for a Halter.

But I will conclude, having proceeded far enough on this Subject, perhaps, to
draw Ill Will on my self: For as Doctor Swift justly observes, One will get
more Ill Will by being the Author of a particular Encomium, than of a general
Invective; but, if the Doctor's Reason for this, is not itself, a Satyr on
human Nature, I apprehend none from any Gentleman that has the Honor of a Seat
in the Assembly: And, far from regarding the Censure, I should think myself
reproached by the Applause of those who praise or blame as Interest directs. I
feel a very different Satisfaction, in bearing Testimony to Truth, from what
they must feel, who never had the Goodness of Heart and honest Impartiality to
commend Worth, nor Wit enough to vent their mercenary Spleen against it without
personal Abuse.

As to these Papers, they are entirely submitted to the Candor and Judgment of
the Public; to which I should pay but a sorry Compliment, if I did not declare,
that I have done all in my Power, to make them in some Sort worthy of the
Subject. Faults* however, they must have; but, Partiality being none of them, I
hope they will be looked upon as the real Sentiments of a Heart that scorns to
entertain a Thought repugnant to what appears our general Good: There is not
perhaps, any one Person in this Province more detached than I am, from the
different Parties that have so long divided it; Interest, Health and
Inclination, concur to call me from it quickly, but if these Papers can any Way
answer the good Intent of Writing them, I shall think, I have not seen it
altogether in Vain: And though Providence may soon place me at too great a
Di^^ance to be of any further Use, either by advising, exhorting, or warning,
yet can I never be placed, where it shall not be my constant Prayer, that it
may be happy, and flourish more and more. --

THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION, etc.
IF we look into the Story of the most renowned States and Kingdoms, that have
subsisted in the different Ages of the World, we will find that they were
indebted for their Rise, Grandeur, and Happiness, to the early Provision made
by their first Founders, for the public Institution of Youth.

The great Sages and Legislators of Antiquity, were so sensible of this, that
they always made it their prime Care to plant Seminaries, and regulate the
Method of Education; and many of them even deigned, in Person, to be the
immediate Superintendants of the Manners of Youth, whom they justly reckoned
the rising Hopes of their Country.

Numa, is the only great Lawgiver, we read of, w^^ was faulty in this Respect;
and to this capital Erro of his, in the Foundation of the Roman State, has been
ascribed, that turbulent and seditious Spirit of the People, which all their
future Worthies could never thoro'ly tame; and which, in the End, occasioned
the Downfall of that mighty Empire. -- Of this Opinion was Plutarch, who,
comparing him with Lycurgus, says, that no sooner was the Breath out of Numa's
Body, than the whole Aim of his Life and Government was reversed; the Temple of
Janus was thrown open, and Italy became one Scene of Havoc and Desolation; so
that the finest and justest Constitution in the World could not subsist, even
the smallest Moment, because it wanted that Cement in it, which should have
kept all firm together; namely, good Rules for the Education of Youth. However
this be, certain it is, that those Societies, whose first Lawgivers included
Education in the Idea of Government, and thought it the Basis and very Soul of
their Work, to contrive good Laws or Plans for this Purpose, always grew up
quickest, and flourished longest in a State of Liberty and glorious
Independency.

Hence I have often wondered, that this Province should have been near a whole
Century, in the Hands of a civilized and enlightened People; and yet, not one
public Seminary of Learning planted in it; where the Taste and Manners of our
Youth may be formed; where they may be taught ( quid Verum atque Decus) the
Knowledge and Practice of Virtue; and where, without being beholden to our
Neighbors, the first and strongest Advances may be made, toward the rendering
them honest, virtuous, and social Creatures. We are the more inexcusable,
because, in this Infancy of our Province, we are not condemned to grope our Way
in the Dark, as those Heathens were, but have the Experience of all Mankind for
our Guide, and the Advantage of seeing by what Steps others have toiled, slowly
to the Summit of GLORY and EMPIRE; and therefore cannot be ignorant, that
Foundations of this Kind are of the last Consequence, to the Being and Well
being of SOCIETY.

Surely we are not inferior to our Neighbors in good Sense, and the
Refinements of civil Life, and superior to many of them in Situation, Trade and
Riches; yet so it is, that they have long got the Start of us in several
laudable and public spirited Undertakings, particularly, in this the most
interesting of all.

What must an unconcerned Spectator think; (I speak it with Deference, and
Nothing but a sincere Zeal for our Honor, could induce me to make the
Reflection) I say, what must the impartial World think, to see one City among
us arrived to such a Pitch of Luxury and Riches, as often to have entertained a
Set of dull, sorry, strolling COMEDIANS, at the Expense of near a Thousand
Pounds yearly, and yet the whole Province have never thought themselves in a
Capacity to set apart One-half of that yearly Sum, for the Entertainment of
three or four Men of Learning and Virtue, to initiate our Youth in the
Sciences; and, as Horace happily expresses it, to teach them such Things as
come home to Life, and which it is culpable and shameful not to know; namely,
what renders them fittest for the Purposes of Society; what is the great End of
their Being; wherein consists their chief Good and Happiness; and what Actions
are most worthy of human Nature: -- Quod magis ad nos
Pertinet and nescire malum est, -- utrum ne
Divitiis homines an sint Virtute beati:
Quidve ad Amicitias, usus, rectumne, trahat nos;
Et quae sit Natura Boni, Summumque quid ejus.
As such Thoughts as these have often occurred to me, it gives me Pleasure to
understand that the Founding a College in this Province, begins now to be
seriously considered; and as this great Work seems chiefly retarded, by the
Difficulty of agreeing on a proper Place for fixing it, I beg leave to submit
my impartial Thoughts on this Head, to the Consideration of the Public. --

As to the Situation then, I cannot help being surprised to hear it disputed;
some retired Corner, either within, or close by the City of New York, being
certainly the only proper Place in this Province for erecting a College.

There is (and I think can be) but the following Objection against this
Situation, viz. That here the Morals of the Scholars, will not be so safe as in
the Country; and that there will be too many Amusements to divert them from
their Studies.

Now near One-half of the Scholars, which, at first, will be young Gentlemen of
the City of New York itself, are no Way affected by this Objection; since, if
there is any Force in it, it would be equally an Argument against their
learning Grammar, or spending any Part of their Youth in their native City. I
shall then turn my Thoughts wholly to the other Half, which will be young
Gentlemen from the Country; and if I can show their Parents, that New York is
no more affected by this Objection than any other Place they can fix on, I can
easily superadd such Arguments as will induce them to prefer this Situation to
all others.

They admit, that the Conversation of polished Citizens, would be of great
Advantage to their Sons; but, say they, in such a large Place, there never
fails to be worthless rakish Persons, to debauch unwary Youth, and lead them
into what (to oblige delicate Ears) is called the polite Vices: And therefore,
If Knowledge of the World must taint Men's Morals, -- may our Sons ever live in
Ignorance! --

Before I proceed to answer this Objection, I might observe that it is wholly
grounded on false Suppositions: For it is not true, that Youth would never
learn Vice without seeing it, especially the Vices here meant, which arise from
the irregular Exercise of our best and strongest natural Passions, I mean the
Social: No more is it true that they will always learn Vice by seeing it; on
the Contrary, as Plato imagined the Vision of Virtue (if pure Virtue could be
seen) would render all Men virtuous; so, perhaps the Vision of Vice, in all its
odious Colors, is the strongest Preservative against Vice. However, I don't
say, with some, that it would be prudent to lead Youth into unnecessary
Temptation, and show them Evil in order to make them Good; nor do I deny, that
to preserve the Morals found, ought to be the chief Aim of Education; but As
Heaven's high Will has fixed us in a State
That must not yet to pure PERFECTION rise;
And in a State where Evil, being permitted, is constantly blended with Good,
we cannot show them the One without the Other, if we would ever have them
behold an original Character, or aught that is real in Life; so that were the
Force of this Objection once admitted, it will conclude equally against
collegiate Education at New York and all Places; and Nothing will be left for
those who adhere to it, but to shut their Sons up in Cloisters to be
entertained apart from Society, with the Dreams of Visionaries, and the
imaginary Virtues of Utopian Characters: There they must sleep away their whole
Lives, without daring to act, lest they act, wrong, or look into the World,
lest they see Evil, which is the same as if one should die of the Fear of
Death* -- Nay, by this Rule, they must never know themselves, or look into
their own Hearts, because there they would see a Medley of Good and Evil, or
the WORLD in Miniature; and I believe no one would give the Name of Virtue to
the mechanical, or rather negative Goodness of such passive Creatures, as may
well be said never to have existed or awaked into Life, since they deny
themselves all Opportunity of Choice, or of exerting the Freedom of their
Nature, which is their Dignity, and the noblest Gift of GOD; and refuse to act
in Society, because Plato's Republic and More's Utopia have no real Existence.

But as I know the Gentlemen, who make this Objection, intend their Sons for
Society; and only make it from a very laudable Concern for their Morals; I
shall not push its Consequences farther, but return to the main Point, and
endeavor to convince them that New York is, perhaps, the safest Place in this
Respect.

First then, Nothing is easier than to prevent the Scholars from associating
with any idle Persons, that do not belong to their College, by proper
Regulations, and laying the Plan of it, so as they may all lodge within its
Walls: It is seldom they show any Inclination to this; and every One knows
that, in the largest Cities, the Danger complained of never arises from this,
but from Clubs or Associations among the Scholars themselves, which are always
more extravagant in a pitiful Village, than in a large and well governed City.

As upon the Truth of this seeming Parodox, depends the whole Dispute; I beg
Leave to appeal to incontestable Facts and Experience, which is the best Way of
clearing up a Truth of this Nature.

I ask any One that knows England, whether the Scholars are not far more
extravagant and debauched at the Academies in the small Towns there, than at
the public Universities of Oxford or Cambridge? -- And, indeed the Reason is
obvious: Nature is the same, in the same Persons, every where; -- at Oxford,
etc. the Scholars are under the Eye of the public Magistrate, and a great many
Gentlemen whose Characters they revere; so that if they are not less vicious,
they are at least more prudent in managing all their Intrigues, so as to give
no public Offense, and in keeping within the Bounds of Decorum and good Manners
in all their Clubs and Frolics: But, at the Village-Academies, the Scholars,
with equal Propensities to Vice, are not under equal Restraints; they only see
a few illiterate Artificers, whom they soon learn to look upon as tasteless
unpolished Clowns, and whose Censure they wholly disregard: And thus being
uncontrol'd, either by Shame or the Authority of the civil Power, they
sometimes run into the wildest Riots, in the Face of Day, and in Defiance of
the whole Village, of which they are so far Masters that none dare resist, or
prefer a Complaint against them. Add to this, that, in such sorry Places, they
contract a Desire for mean Company, and a Taste for low Vices, which easily
distinguishes them from People of a genteel Education, all their Lives.

To say the Temptations are fewer in a Village than in a City, however
spacious, is saying no more to the Purpose, than that a Man (if the Comparison
may be allowed) should rather quench his Thirst in a Brook than a River, when
there is more than enough in either; for wherever there are Purchasers, there
will be found Venders or Disposers. --

To say that in the distant Village, there will be no Fellow-Rakes to lead them
into Vice, is also saying Nothing: For if we could suppose the Country Youth,
when first admitted to the College, so entirely unpolluted, and of a Make so
frigid and passionless, as never to think of Vice without being driven into it;
(which, as I observed above, is a very groundless Supposition;) yet there will
be the other Half of the Scholars from New York, to be their Masters in this,
whom the Country Gentlemen cannot suppose so untainted as their own Sons,
without destroying the Force of their own Objection; and whom surely they would
not exclude from the public Benefit.

But above all, if we should allow that a Village is the best Situation of a
College, (which few will allow) yet I deny that any Place, where a College is
fixed, can continue long in the Nature of a Village, but must soon grow into a
considerable Town; and thus without any of the Advantages of New York, the
fixing our College elsewhere, would, in a few Years, be attended with all the
Inconveniences we meant to shun; besides struggling with innumerable
Difficulties at first, and risquing the Success of the whole Scheme.

There is still less Force in the other Part of the Objection, that the
Scholars will not apply so closely to their Studies at New York, as in a more
retired Place. Is it not Emulation, or a Sense of Shame and Honor, that can
alone render Youth industrious, especially such as are become capable of
Reflection? And will not this Emulation always exert itself in Proportion to
the Notions they entertain of those in whose Sight they act? Will it not be
stronger in the City of New York, where the polished and learned Part of the
Province are their Judges, and frequently visit them, than in any other Place,
where the People know nothing of the Matter? For this Reason it was, that some
Nations not only fixed their Colleges or public Schools in their chief Cities,
but even made choice of Porticos or open Halls for this Purpose, in the most
frequented Places of those Cities; that thus, in an Affair of such general
Concern, every Person might be an Eyewitness, both of the Fidelity of the
Master and Industry of the Scholar: And that this Method begot the most ardent
Emulation, Reason as well as Experience may inform us. However, it is not
absolutely necessary, that we should imitate them too closely in this: Perhaps,
for several obvious Reasons, some well air'd Place quite without the City,
might be our most prudent Choice; -- but if there was no other Reason, I should
think this one strong enough, for fixing the College at least contiguous to
New York: For, if ever we expect to see it flourishing, there must be a few
Gentlemen of the best Character, both for Learning and Probity, chosen as
Visitors and even Directors at first, Now, though there may be Gentlemen very
well qualified for this in the Country, yet there would be no Possibility of
finding a Quorum of them near one another; and if they were chosen from
different Counties, they could never meet so often, or so conveniently, as to
answer the Design: And therefore the Majority at least of these Visitors, must
be chosen from New York, who likewise can be of little Service unless the
College is near them.

In short, in whatever Light I consider this Matter, I am still the more of
Opinion, that unless we choose this Situation, the Scheme will never succeed. --
Where can we find sufficient Accommodations for Diet, etc. but in New York? Are
there not many Gentlemen who would send their Sons to a College in New York,
who would not send them to a Village, where they must be provided with Diet,
etc. perhaps, in the House of some poor Artificer? And are not such
Circumstances likely to ruin the Undertaking, since the Success of all Schemes
depends much on the Notions first entertained of them.

But further, the Knowledge of Languages, Philosophy and Mathematics, is but a
small Part of the Education of such as are designed to be useful in Society:
Those ought to know Men and the World. For this Reason, our European
Countrymen, though educated in the most refined Cities, travel into foreign
Countries; but as our Youth can have no Opportunity of traveling, we should
make up that Loss to them as well as we can, by sending them a few Years to the
politest Part of our Province. Now such is the State of our Affairs, that the
Generality of them must be Farmers of their own Estates, and therefore, can
allot but a small Part of their Time to the Purposes of Education, which ought
to be well husbanded, by fixing the College in a Place where, at one and the
same Time, they can learn the Belles Lettres, Breeding, and some Knowledge of
Men and Things: And thus, that Frugality and Industry, so necessary in the
Infancy of States, pleads strongly for fixing the College at New York, since
the Circumstances of our Country Youth, will not admit of their spending any
Part of their Time (after their Collegiate Education is finished) in visiting
polite Cities, in order to shake off that awkward Bluntness, which they must
contract, if immured at Schools and Colleges apart from the Sight of Men, for
the first Twenty Years of their Life: And if they could afford the Expense and
Time necessary to this, then indeed would they run a hundred Times more Danger
of Corruption, when living at large, as their own Masters, than when under the
Tuition of others: -- Besides, such as have not acquired the Air of the
Gentleman when young, find it too late when grown up.

I know there are some who talk very lightly of this, and think it no necessary
Part of Education: -- But of a very different Opinion was the noble Author of
the Characteristicks; than whom, none ever scanned human Nature with a more
piercing or more candid Eye. In his Advice to an Author he speaks thus; It
seems improbable, that according to modern Erudition, and as Science is now
distributed, our ingenious Youths should obtain the full Advantage of a just
and liberal Education, by uniting the Scholar Part, with that of the real
Gentleman and a Man of Breeding: -- Letters are banished, I know not where,
into distant Cloisters and unpracticed Cells, confined to the mean Fellowship
of bearded Boys. -- The sprightly Arts and Sciences are severed from
Philosophy, which consequently must grow dronish, insipid, pedantic, useless,
and directly opposite to the real Knowledge and Practice of the World and
Mankind. Our Youth accordingly seem to have their Chance between two widely
different Roads; either that of Pedantry and School-Learning, which lies amidst
the Dregs of ancient Literature; or that of the fashionable illiterate World,
which aims merely at the Character of the fine Gentleman: But why not find the
middle Road, and unite the Scholar with the Gentleman? Why might not a Homer, a
Xenophon, a Tully, etc. be studied as well in a CAPITAL City and amid the
World, as in a Country Town? -- Thus far this great Writer: And if he thought
it a Defect in our famous English Universities, that there were no Schools in
them for the polite and manly Exercises, as in ancient Greece; -- if he thought
the Fellowship of bearded Boys, as he calls them, even in the polished Cities
of Oxford and Cambridge, unlikely to form a Man for Society, without a farther
Commerce with the World: What would he have thought had one told him; that in
half a Century after his Death, a Society of his Countrymen, in a remote
Province of the World, would be so little concerned to give their Youth the few
Advantages of this Kind, which are in their Power (by fixing their first
Seminary in their most polished City) as to propose banishing them and Learning
together, into, I know not what, lonely Corner of a half settled Country? --
Who that knows the Method of Education practiced among the Romans, and how
careful they were to accustom their Youth betimes to stand the Sight of Men,
unabash'd, by making them as early as the Age of Sixteen, (often sooner)
declaim publicly; "not on fanciful Theses, but Cases that might really be
brought into their Courts of Judicature;" I say, who that knows this, could
help being surprised it should ever enter into our Thoughts, to send our Youth
into the Depths of Woods, to perform their Collegiate Exercises, in the
unambitious Presence of inanimate Trees? -- What a sorry Figure is a young Man
like to make thus educated, in a four Retreat from the World, when he obtains
the Honor of a Seat in our Assembly, or is nominated a Judge in any of our
Counties? How thoroughly ignorant must he be of the Heart of Man, and how
incapable to trace Villainy through its various Mazes, in order to reach Truth?
Of what avail will his Learning be, but to render him so much the more a
narrow-soul'd and conceited Pedant? And what his boasted Innocence, but to make
him so much the more an ignorant Dupe. --

I am far from thinking it necessary, that our Youth should be Masters of all
the insipid Punctilios of French Politesse, nor is there any Danger of this in
our Country; but there is an artificial Manner of softning our natural
Roughness, which distinguishes the Man from the Savage; and a certain Easiness
of Behavior, which is the Characteristic of the Gentleman; -- this I could
wish to see every one Master of, who acts in any higher Sphere, it being the
peculiar Ornament of a public Station. Now I hope no one will think it any
Reflection to say, this so necessary Air of the Gentleman, is not to be
acquired in any Part of this Country but our capital City. Whoever knows the
general Character of an English Squire, that has been buried all his Days in
the Country without the Benefit of a public Education, will own the Truth of
this. It is well indeed, if we have one City that is arrived at this necessary
Pitch of Politeness; and, if She is, I hope never to see her go farther. --

It may be objected by some, that Education will be more expensive at New York,
than in the Country: But this Objection, like all the Others, arise wholly from
our not considering how Things must be some Years hence. -- Even at present, I
don't see that Provisions are much cheaper in the Country than in New York; and
I Am sure, were there a College fixed at any of our Villages, where there is no
regular Market, there would be such a Difficulty of Ending Provisions at first,
and the Country People would know so well how to take the Advantage of this,
that every Thing would for some Time be dearer than at New York; and it is
seldom that the Prices of Things, when once raised in a Place, are suffered to
fall again, especially where the Number of People would probably be increased
yearly.

But the main Expense is apprehended from the Article of Fuel for Fire: To this
I answer, that Firewood in a few Years, must be cheaper at New York than in any
Inland Place; for, fix our College where we will, the Woods near it must soon
fail, and then, it must be much more expensive to be supplied by Land than
Water Carriages. Besides, it is the Opinion of many, that in less perhaps than a
half a Century, Coal will be the cheapest Fuel that can be used in most Places
of this Province; and in that Case* I need not add that a College at New York,
can more easily be supplied with that Commodity, than in any other Place of
this Country.

As to incident Expenses, it ought to be reckoned a happy Circumstance, when a
young Man has the Taste and Spirit to be ambitious of spending what
Pocket-Money is allowed him, in the best Company he can find; and it entirely
depends on the Parents themselves how great this Expense shall be: For Youth,
at Colleges any where, always find the Way to the Bottom of their Purses, and
they can go no farther at New York: -- Besides, I hope I have said enough
above, to convince any impartial Parent, that it is absolutely necessary, their
Sons should pass some Part of their younger Years at New York; and therefore,
that the fixing our College there, will be so far from being more expensive,
that some Years of Time and a very considerable Sum of Money must thereby be
saved to Them.

Upon the Whole then, I flatter myself, the impartial Part of the Country
Gentlemen, are fully persuaded, by this Time, that to place the College at
New York, must be much to their Advantage, though it be pretty indifferent to the
People of that City. -- I have made it as probable as the NATURE of the Thing
will admit, that the Morals of their Sons will, at least, be as safe there, as
at a public College any where else: -- That they will be far more alert,
industrious and emulous of Improvement: -- That in any other Situation, the
Meaness of Company, etc. must make them contract a Lowness of Taste; and
instead of this noble Emulation, beget a lifeless Stupidity and Languor, which
must hurt the Character of our College at first, and, probably, soon prove its
Ruin: -- That as there is as yet but one Place in this Province, where the
Breeding of the Gentleman can be acquired, and our Youth can spare no Part of
their Time for this Purpose but when at College; we ought, for the Sake of
saving Time and Money, to fix our College in this ONE Place, otherwise we deny
them all Chance of uniting the Gentleman with the Scholar, or ever arriving at
that Politeness which is the Bond of ^ocial Life, -- the Ornament of human
Nature.

I can see no Way of eluding the Force of these Arguments, but by saying, that
the Politeness, which I have all along been contending for, is to be acquired
by conversing with inanimate Nature, or is altogether unnecessary; and this
would discover such a Barbarity of Taste and Sentiment, that I am far from
expecting to hear that any One, who assumes the Name of a Gentleman, will
henceforth show himself a Stickler for the rural Situation; and I am bound in
Charity to believe, those who formerly have been such, have suffered themselves
to be hurried away by the popular Objection concerning the Corruption of
Morals, without examining the Dispute in all its Consequences.

Indeed, were the Objection admitted in its full Force, the Evil would be
overbalanc'd by numberless Advantages. At New York, our Youth will, at least,
obtain as much Knowledge of the World, as will, in ordinary Occurrences, enable
them to understand their own and Country's Interest, without any Danger of
being misled or duped by designing Men: And if they should run into some more
of the Extravagancies of Youth here than elsewhere, (which I flatly deny,) yet
would it have no bad Effect upon them, when they return to the Scenes of still
Life, and a laborious Industry in the Country: -- Pater ipse colendi
Haud facilem esse Viam voluit, primusque per Artem
Movit Agros, acuens Curis mortalia Corda. --
Virg. All I shall add, is to beg my Countrymen, to consider well the Whole of
what I here submit to them, before they pronounce upon any Part of it. I have
no Aim, but to see my Country polished, flourishing and happy, which depends not
a little upon this very Matter in Question. It is very possible I may be wrong
in some of my Opinions; but, if I did not firmly believe them right, I should
not have dared to publish them in an Affair of so general Importance: And
therefore, where I am wrong, I hope to be forgiven with the same Candor, with
which unasked, I have endeavored to set this Matter in its true Light. --

The Question is indeed quite new to me, which perhaps, has made me handle it
in a different Manner from what otherwise I should have done. -- It is true, it
has been disputed, whether mere Boys should learn Grammar at private Schools,
or public Ones in large Cities: Quintilian, the best of Judges, prefers a
public School from the very first; so does a fine Writer in the Spectator, (No.
313, 337. etc.) -- The great Mr. Lock is indeed of the other Opinion, but then
he speaks warmly of the Advantages of public Education, and tells us the Method
he proposes, is only calculated for GENTLEMEN's Sons of large Fortunes, when
they are very young, and may be considered as white Paper, besides he makes
Traveling an express Condition: -- I say this has been disputed; but whether a
College for finishing the Education of such as are grown up to be Men, should
be in a polished City, was never perhaps disputed before; especially when
designed, for such as can have no other Opportunity to know any Thing of polite
Life. I am sure, we have no Instance of any European Nations, that did not
plant their first Seminaries in their best Cities; and if any of them had been
so romantic, as to choose a desert Corner for this Purpose, it would soon, as I
said before, have fallen into all the Inconveniences of a populous Place, though
perhaps in many Centuries it would not have had the Advantages of a polite ONE.
--

After all, if I might presume to advise, I cannot help saying we begin at the
wrong End, if we apply the Money already raised, to the immediate Rearing of a
Building. I submit it to the better Judgment of those concerned, whether it
were not the better Method, to apply the Interest of the L 3443: 18 s.
forthwith, as Salaries for two sufficient Men, each to teach two Classes at
first; viz. the One GREEK and LATIN, with the most useful Branches of the
MATHEMATICS; and the Other moral PHILOSOPHY, and what is comprehended under the
general Name of PHYSICS. Two such Men, no Doubt, may be found in this or some
of the neighboring Provinces; and the Interest of said Principal, together
with what may be paid by the Scholars, will make tolerable Encouragment for
them, even after deducting as much as Rent Apartments to teach in, if the Town
cannot furnish them gratis. -- Thus would our Youth immediately have most of
the Advantages of Collegiate Education, till the Wisdom of the Legislature,
shall find Ways and Means of raising a competent Sum, for erecting and endowing
a College, providing for a greater Number of Teachers, and 'till some future
Circumstances, shall fix their Choice of a fit Situation, if these Arguments
shall not have that Effect. And would not this be better, to see our Youth in
the mean Time reaping the Benefit, while our Edifice rises by Degrees, and with
the Convenience of the Country, than to expend the Money already raised in
rearing a Building, which, when finished, must stand several Years perhaps, as
a Monument of our Poverty, or something worse, before we are able to raise a
Fund for endowing it and providing for Teachers, which is the main Point: -- In
this Case it would at least be a dozen Years e're our Youth can be advantaged
by it, though the Country were much more in the Humor of contributing to this
laudable Work than they seem to be; -- and therefore

I submit it to the Wisdom of the ASSEMBLY, whether they ought not immediately
to order a Bill to be brought in, for applying the Interest of the L. 3443.
18s. as above proposed: -- And moreover, in order to do the Whole at once,
whether it where not absolutely necessary, if possible, to agree at the same
Time, upon the Site and Plan of the Building, that so by a Clause in the same
Bill, the Gentlemen already empowered to put out the present Principal at
Interest, and receive private Donations, (with any others that shall be judged
proper) may be farther empowered, and by an annual Lottery, not exceeding a
certain moderate Sum, to carry on a Building 'till it is finished, according to
said PLAN; and to receive, and let out at Interest, all private Donations,
which ought to be kept untouched, for endowing the College when the Work is
completed: Thus, as I observed above, we should see our Youth, in the Interim,
improving in polite Literature: our Edifice rising gradually by an easy
Lottery: and by the Time it can be finished, the Generosity of many pious
Donors, will, no Doubt, supply us with a very considerable Sum for Endowment.
-- If this Method is followed, I dare assert, we shall in a few Years see a
Work accomplished, which will be a lasting Honor to our Memory, and Benefit to
our Country; and that too with much greater Ease, than by any Method our
Neighbors have hit upon, or perhaps we ourselves would otherwise ever think
of. --

Having, in the first Part, been too prolix, I could only hint at these Things;
but a Hint can be easily improved by the Judgment of those to whom I chiefly
address. I must also supersede what I intended to say of the Economy and
Regulations that might be observed: I shall only add that Oxford, Leyden, etc.
are too complex and large to be any Model for us; the neighboring Colleges of
New England, Pennsylvania, etc. may be kept chiefly in our Eye; but though the
People of these Provinces have the Honor to set us an Example in this truly
noble WORK, we have the Advantage of seeing where they have been deficient, and
of being sensible that Something might be contrived more commodious than any of
their Schemes: But it will be soon enough to speak of this, if the Assembly
shall think the Proposals here laid down worthy their Attention; and then, though
I Am far from pretending to direct, I shall always be ready to offer any further
Hint that occurs to me, as every honest Man ought frankly to do on such an
Occasion. --

Mean Time, permit me, with a sincere and well-meant Zeal, to entreat my
Countrymen, particularly those at the Helm of Affairs, to think seriously of
the vast Importance of the great Undertaking, and to proceed, without losing
one Moment more, to bring it, some-how, to a speedy Issue. -- Let us think how
much the so doing is incumbent on us, and how much it will redound to our
GLORY: -- Let the distant Prospect distend every Heart with Patriot-Views, and
fire every Bosom with active Zeal, 'till no Contention remain, but who shall
bear the first and greatest Part in such a glorious WORK! -- Happy he! whose
Pen can be any Way instrumental in raising such a noble Spirit among us! --
Those who have the same Idea of its Consequences, with me, will never cease to
contribute their Mite for this good Purpose, however fruitless their Labors
may be: And those who reflect on the surprising Turns and Instability of human
Affairs, cannot but ardently wish to see an early Foundation laid for
propagating among us a Spirit of INDUSTRY, LIBERTY, LEARNING and TRUTH; with a
thoro' Contempt of Sloth, Slavery, Ignorance and religious IMPOSTURE; since
it is this, next to the auspicious Protection of HEAVEN, and our Mother Country;
which can alone make our Government live out its full Period of political Life.
-- And as we can never be too much, or too often, arrous'd to think of this; I
beg still to be indulged in summing up all I have said, with a few Reflections
more on this Head; which, for various Reasons, I have thrown into the following,

COPY of VERSES, ADDRESSED TO The GENTLEMEN of the House of Representatives.
Ad Reipublicae formandas and stabiliendas Vires, and ad sanandos Populos,
omnis pertinet Oration. -- CIC.
"AND does the Glory and the Bliss of States
"Down through their whole Existence so much hang
" On planning early Laws for tutoring Youth?
"Is this the Legislator's noblest Task,
"The very Soul and Basis of his Work?"
Oh! then, ye Patriots! whom this Infant-State
Selects to guard its Liberties, and plan
Its rising Grandeur, think how much the Fate
Of late Posterity depends on You; --
That on this long-neglected Work depends
No less, perhaps, than whether our New-World
(When by the sad Vicissitude of Things
The Old has sunk back to its pristin Sloth
And Barbarism) shall be the last Retreat
Of Arts, imperial Liberty and Truth;
The peaceful Refuge and the better Home
Of Worth distressed, and such as fly the Rage
Of Bigot-Zeal, or nobly scorn to bend
The Knee to fate a Tyrant's frantic Pride.
And let not little superficial Minds
Deem these wild Notions or Conjectures rash.
For turn impartial Reason's Eye abroad
To scan the State of Things; -- what can we see,
But Fluctuation and abhorred Decay?
From Death and from Corruption (so first willed
The all-forming SIRE) fresh Generation springs!
And the Production of One natural Mode,
Is but Destruction of Another. -- Thus,
Eternal Change is Nature's State on Earth:
Some Hand behind for ever shifts the Scene,
From seeming Jars educing Harmony,
And ALL conducting to ONE gracious End.
Thus Life destroys itself; and from the Womb
Man's Body bears the Seeds of its own Death*
Thus Empires carry in them their own Bane,
And in a fatal Circle ever run
From virtuous Industry and Valor, first
To Wealth and Conquest; next to Luxury;
And then to soul Corruption, bloted Morals,
Faction and Anarchy, a horrid Train!
Till at the last they rush, by their own Weight,
A Prey to some brave, crafty, wicked MAN
Who feeds their Wants, their Avarice, and their Vice,
And sinks them in the Gulf of rotten Sloth:
Until again, weak-shooting here and there,
From their corrupted Ruins spring a Few
That, branched in separate petty States, afford
A sickly Image of their former Fame.
The Voice of Story speaks this Truth aloud,
With this sole Difference, that some have expired
In Infancy; while some of stabler Make,
By tumbling down the Superstructure often,
Strengthening the Basis, and, on every Shock,
Still running back to their first Principles,
Have stood a Length of Years: -- But all, at last,
(Famed Lacedaemon, Albens, Carthage, Rome,)
Have fallen, and prove how frail are human Things.
And thus, since Death's the inevitable Doom
Of every Body, the Animal alike
And Politic; who does not, pensive, see
That even Britannia's self, the firmest State
That ever was built, though founded on the Rock
Of Freedom and of Right, must moulder down;
And at the last (but O indulgent HEAVEN
Roll far that Day!) must sink into the Tomb
Where the airy GHOSTS of mighty Empires stalk,
In melancholy Guise, with not one Mark
Of Glory left, their withered Laurels all
Dropped from their Brow to hiss the PRIDE OF MAN!
Then whether we survive, (if Time survives,)
Or whether this our State shall meanly fall,
Before it reach its full Maturity,
Depends entirely on our Conduct now.
Our kindly MOTHER envies not our Bliss,
But in our Glory and Prosperity,
Her truest Honor, Strength and Safety finds.
Sure, then, it much imports US to exalt
Our drooping GENIUS, and rear up a Race
Of Manners polished, mild and just in Peace;
But nobly daring and untamed in War;
That, when her Fabric once begins to slide,
We gratefully may prop her Fall, espouse
Her just Concerns; and rising dreadful, pour
Our Indignation on her every Foe:
And bid, in Ages hence, our generous Youth
Stream forth in ardent Bands (as at this Hour,
By thousand Insults roused, we greatly ought,
And, keen for Vengeance, only wait her Word)
To scourge the faithless Spaniards, when amid
The deep Tranquillity of Peace they dare
Infest her watery Reign; and, beggared, send
The MERCHANT home a Passenger despoiled
Of all that well-earn'd Wealth, for which he tore
Himself from the soft Bosom of his Wife,
And Children's dear Embrace, to beat the Surge
For many an anxious and unjoyous Moon.
Or when a Freeborn BRITON (of more Worth
Than all Iberia, with her Realms of Gold,
Her King Himself and his whole Host of Slaves)
Is chained inglorious down to tug the Oar,
Or eathed alive in the deep rayless Gloom
Of Mines inhuman; -- O then big with Rage,
To pour our hostil Thousands glowing forth;
To roll our wakened Thunders on their Head;
To drive them howling over the Atlantic Foam,
And make the Dastards shrink into their Ports,
(Alone in Insult bold, in Murder brave;)
Or whelm them in the Womb of watery Death
T'attone for guiltless Millions, in cold Blood,
Butchered unmanly, when, beneath the Mask
Of meek Religion's injured Name, they first,
With fell exterminating Rage disturbed
PAN's peaceful Reign in this blessed Hemisphere,
Peruvia's golden Glories laid in Dust,
With all the shining Pride of Mexico,
And robbed them of their ancient Race of Kings,
Their YNCA's, and their MONTEZUMA's famed:
-- Oh! thus, with Zeal indignant, to assert
Britannia's Honor, wreak our keenest Wrath
On polished Ravagers, and, duteously,
Thus stay a hoary Parent's failing Head,
Long hence, must be no vulgar Luxury!
And when at last, in Spite of human Skill,
In Spite of all her ancient Fame and Strength,
And our fond filial Struggles to protract
Her precious Period, by stern Fate's Decree,
She shall expire; and, on her joyless Shore,
Empire and Liberty their radiant Wings
Expand to quit the sluggish eastern World;
And cross the vast Atlantic meditate
Their Airy Passage to these western Climes,
In Quest of some Retreat to sojourn safe
Till Time shall end; -- then may we fondly wait
To hail the glorious Guests on their Approach
To this New World; and woo them first to fix
Their Reign with us; until again (when we
Diseased and sunk, are ripe for Death) they are called
By Fate to bless a Race of more Desert.
For as the SUN, refulgent GOD of Day,
Rejoicing Earth, diurnal, rides along,
Pompous, from East to farthest West; even so
Who knows but Empire, Liberty and Arts,
With their resplendant Train, are doomed to move
From East still Westward; and, ere the long Day
Of Time shall end, in Soul-rejoycing Tour,
Surround the Globe and every People bless?
And thus, methinks, the Universal KING,
When first he spoke this Earth from Chaos' Gloom,
Gave them in Charge: --
'Descend, ye heavenly Powers!
'And first illumin eastern Swains who tend
'Their feeding Flocks, and in the rural Cot
'With Innocence and simple Nature live:
'Then, gathering Glory still as you advance,
'Bend westward over ( Hefestia is one of the Names of ancient Egypt.
) Hefestia, Persia, Greece;
'Thence over Hesperia or Italy.
Hesperian Realms; and as you move
'Sublime along, let your Heart-gladning Rays
'Far to the North, on Scythia's lonely Race
'And vast Sarmatia, shine: Then, the Alpine Heights
'Ascend, there bidding Rocks and Mountains bare
'And Snow eternal, charm the SOUL even more
'Than Arno's teeming VALE, forsook by you:
'Then onward-coursing, over Germania bend;
'Reaching, the While, the farthest Polar Verge
'Of wintry Scandinavia's frozen Climes:
'Then westward still over fair Britannia's Isles,
'And utmost Thule's self, pursue your Course;
'There, on Europa's last, but noblest, Sons,
'Beam your full Blaze: and, fondly-lingring long,
'Forsake them not, till every virtuous Spark
'Forsakes their pulseless Breast; and the old World,
'Spurning all Cure, in broad Corruption lies.
'Then, steering over the western murmuring Main,
'Stretch over America's unknown Extent;
'Her every latent Nook explore and pierce
'The awful central Depths of her wild Woods,
'Planted of old, where (blush ye Scenes of Art)
'Untutor'd Nature holds her bloodless Reign;
'Till all her sluggish and unthinking Sons,
'Of every Language and of every Hue,
'Rous'd and exalted by your genial Beam
'Boldly t'assert their native Rights as Men,
'Enjoy by turns, their Day of polished Bliss,
'And sink, by Turns, in Slavery's gloomy Night.
'Thus, when you have performed your destined Round,
'And shone, with setting Ray, on the utmost Bourne
'Of It is certain that the last-known Head-Land of California, (the most
western Province of this Continent) is not many Degrees distant from Japan and
the Peninsula of Kamtschatka toward the N. E. Parts of Asia: But as there has
lately been discovered by the Russians, an immense Tract to the East of
Kamtschatka approaching to North America, it is highly probable that this
Continent is either immediately joined, or, by Means of a Chain of Islands, has
an easy Communication with that of Asia: And if this is denied, it will not be
easy for all the Philosophy and Invention of the World, to account far the
first Peopling of America, and the Variety of its Animals, if we allow the
Deluge to have been universal. -- Vid. Dissert: on Peopling America, annexed to
the 20 th Vol. of The Universal History. etc.
California, which, far jetting out,
'Nearly embraces Asia's eastern Coast,
'Where in the Dawn of Time you first appeared;
'Then will I, rising in my Might, stretch forth
'My strong right Arm, and Renovation give
'To Nature; will my Scepter reassume;
'And bid you reascend to the bright Realms
'Of Day, for ever there, beneath my Sway,
'With steadfast Peace and Order joined, to reign;
'Where Sloth, Corruption, Flux and sad Decay
'Can never come; where Death Himself must DIE.'
Thus has the MUSE assayed to pierce the Gloom.
Of DESTINY, to read our distant Lot,
And spread the goodly Prospect out to View;
Not the idle Dream of Fancy's forgeful Brain,
But what sound Reason tells Us we may be;
What Parent-Heaven has placed full in our Sight
And whispers us to grasp; what on Ourselves
Depends entirely -- and on this depends, --
That we maintain our Constitution sound,
Hardy and strong while now in Infancy.
This we can only do by prudent Laws
T'inform young Minds, and mold the ductil Heart
To worthiest Thoughts of GOD and social Deeds.
For Education the great Fountain is
From whence Life's Stream, must clear or turbid flow.
O then! no more delay this noble Work,
Nor let its Glory fall to others' Share!
It Is yours but to begin; then all that claim
The Patriot's godlike Name will ardent join:
So shall its blissful Influence roll down
Your Names through Ages in a Tide of Praise;
So shall the Land for ever date its dawn
Of Happiness from noble CLINTON's Day!
O how I love to dwell upon this Thought,
And wish to infuse this Love into each Breast!
Yet still indulge Me then, and stretch your Eye
Adown the Vale of Centuries remote;
Think you behold your latest Progeny,
In countless Numbers basking highest Bliss,
Illum'd by Freedom, Virtue, Knowledge, Truth,
And all that renders Men or Good or Great;
Then think you see your Names, in the long Roll
Of Worthies, first; and, from glad Swain to Swain,
From thriving Citizen to Citizen,
Through all the smiling Land, with deepest A we,
Hear them resounded high; while every Tongue
Thus pours its grateful Joy: --
'These were the MEN,
'To whom (next Heaven) we owe our present Peace,
'Our Happiness, our Grandeur, and our All!
'These were the MEN whose early Patriot Care
'Corruption's Inlets stopped, and reared the State
'On Virtue's solid Base, which best can stand
'The various Shocks of Chance, and Teeth of Time!
'These were the MEN, who, with wise, frugal, Hand,
'Alternate, ruled a Nation and the Plow!
'The MEN! who, in their Country's Infancy,
'Still as her Good required, sometimes stood forth,
'In public Life, firm Statesmen; and sometimes,
'As holy Sages shrunk to private Shade;
'And there with Nature, in her purest Forms,
'Held Converse high; in each Capacity,
'Above Ambition's Lure and feverish Sloth:
'Public, they cleared the State of weedy Vice;
'Private, the Soil of rough-encumbring Woods;
'And thus transmitted, by their manly Toils,
'A goodly-prospering Portion to their Sons.
'May we heed well the Model; imitate
'Their Worth; and their blessed Memory revere!' --
Struck-deep, O Fathers! at the flattering Thought
Of earning, thus, Posterity's Applause;
Methinks, as newly-wak'd, I see the Pulse
Of Glory heaving each ingenuous Breast;
And kindling, in the Factious every Blush
To burn their bronzed Cheek who, dead to Fame,
Dare plague their Country's Peace while such a Work
Neglected lies. -- Ah ME! how long, how long!
Shall Party-Zeal, and little sneaking Views,
Of vile Self-Interest, our chief Thoughts engross,
And dim our Fires? Ah! let us think, abashed,
That this same Zeal, Intrigue, Expense and Toil,
So ill*applied each Other to supplant,
Would, if united in this public Work,
Burst into Patriot-Flame, adorn the Land,
And consecrate our Names to latest Time.
Deem not the Muse too urgent or too warm;
Who would be cool? Whose Bosom would not beat
That sees it in our Power to taste the Joy,
The noblest Feast, the Luxury of GOD,
By giving Joy to Millions yet unborn?
Our Country's sacred Voice, the Voice of Fame,
The Voice of our Posterity, all, all,
Call loud to this, -- And shall they call in Vain?
-- O no! -- Assembled Fathers, full on You,
With highest Confidence, I turn mine Eye!
Your long-known Firmness to whatever tends
To bless your Country, swells my fondest Hopes:
And here is a Task well-worthy your first Care,
Worthy the Patriot's best-reforming Hand;
And worthy thine, O JONES! thy Country's Boast!
Thee let me call, Thou active honest Man!
(Nor can I call Thee by a higher Name!)
Hither, O hither! turn the whole generous Tide
Of thy approved and unremitting Zeal!
Often has the Muse (a Stranger to your Face,
But not your Worth) blushed for the Ingratitude
And Blindness of those mercenary Tools,
Who thwart your generous Views, -- thwart their own Good;
And see not, or pretend they do not see,
How much they owe to You, -- You Noughtto them.
But, for the Public's Sake, each private Wrong
Forget; and, pitying frail Mortality,
Go nobly on, unbending to the End.
These Things will never quench the Patriot's Flame.
As, when black-frowning Tempest wraps the Globe,
When groaning Thunder seems to rock its Frame,
And general Horror lours on Nature's Face;
Some Mountain lifts, superb, its Cloud-crown'd Head
And, glorying in its Height, unshaken stands,
Indignant baffling all the mingled Rage
Of Ocean's Billows battering its fast Base,
And Boreas howling dreadful on its Brow: --
-- So, when loud Faction's Storms involve a State,
And shed Dejection on the lukewarm Throng,
The glowing Patriot lifts his fearless Front,
Alone unmoved, exultant in his Aim,
His generous, Godlike Aim, to prop the Fall
Of Virtue, and protect his suffering Kind;
And, while this glorious Purpose swells his Breast,
Defies the Billows of the People's Hate,
His blinded, noisy, thankless Citizens,
Misconstruing all his Measures into Wrong;
Or even a blustering Tyrant's steady Rage,
Or Death itself, in every mustered Terror;
To damp his Soul, or shake his stern Resolve.
And why? Because it is not the transient Puffs
Of popular Breath that stir him on to act,
But nobler Motives far; that conscious Joy
Attending public Worth, which can alone
Be felt, not sung; which Nothing can destroy;
And which, with fresh Reflection, ever spreads:
That secret Eclat which his Heart must feel
Who Naught beholds, wherever he turns his Sight,
But Scenes of Bliss, -- and knows himself the Cause:
Who sees a People busy, unalarm'd;
Plenty and Joy smiling on every Face,
Content in every Heart, while every Eye,
Glowing with grateful Love, is fixed on Him.
Oh! speak this Joy! YE, whose incessant Toils
Are all devoted to Mankind! say, what
Must be the sacred Triumph of the Soul
That sees himself thus honored and revered
For Deeds including a whole Country's Weal?
How my Breast labors with the swelling Thought,
Too big for Utterance, and beyond the Power
Of Words t'explain, unless to those that feel!
This! this is JOY indeed. which all the Stores
The Indies roll cannot purchase for the Base:
But such, O JONES! as thou may freely taste;
And with Thee, all that here unyielding stand
To stem Corruption's all-devouring Tide!
What though your ceaseless Toils, O worthy Sires!
To bless your Country, be too much in vain,
And ill-requited by a Thoughtless Few?
Yet Naught can rob you of this Joy that flows
From calm Reflection on your upright Views:
A Joy! with which compared, luxurious Ease,
The hollow Smile, or Hatred impotent,
Of Bad-Men, courting Power, are Things of Naught,
Then let Naught slack your Zeal. The more the Bad
Bustle for Power; the more behooves it You,
To check their Aims* This do; and, trust the Muse,
Your Virtue, though it struggle hard at first,
Shall still gain Ground and triumph soon over all.
Have you not known the New-ris'n Sun look sick
And lurid, through the turbid Medium seen,
When Morning-Fogs, and Vapors, copious steam'd,
From Earth's hot Womb, obscure his beamy Head
And dim the Day? Then have you not observed
How, as his Car ascends the Vault of Heaven,
All these still melt before Him, and the Scene
Brightens apace; till, all at last revealed,
He looks down in full Majesty, and sheds
A burnished Radiance over the Hemisphere,
Enlivening Herb, and Flower, and Beast and Man?
Then general Nature smiles; and all the Soul
Of Mirth is waked at once; the mingled Low
Of Kine and Bleat of Sheep, from Hill to Dale,
Responsive ring; but, chief, the aerial Tribes
Mount on the Wing of Joy, and, grateful, pour
Their little Hearts in choral Hymns to Heaven.
-- Thus shall your Virtue, though obscured awhile,
By Envy and Detraction's baneful Fogs,
Incessant gather Brightness; these shall melt
Before it, and their Place be known no more;
But it shall soon, without a Cloud between,
Or Tongue malign to intercept its Rays,
Appear in full Effulgence, all around,
Filling the Land with Carols and sweet Glee;
Till Death's calm Sunset call YOU hence at last,
To shine eternally in better Climes!
Then too the Hind, perhaps through many an Age,
With dear Remembrance swelled, as at the Plow
HE, peaceful, toils; or in the flowery Vale,
Rejoicing, sits amid his smiling Babes
By Plenty blessed, shall chaunt his Song of YOU:
His smiling Babes shall catch it from their Sire,
And, wondering what it means, shall lisp your NAMES.
FINIS.

