THE METHOD Of Practice in the Small Pox, With Observations on the Way of
Inoculation. Taken from a Manuscript Of the late Dr. NATHANAEL WILLIAMS, Of
BOSTON in N. E.

Published for the Common Advantage, more especially of the Country Towns, who
may be visited with that Distemper.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queenstreet opposite the Prison.
MDCCLII.

PREFACE.
FOR the Sake of Those who live at a Distance and knew not the Author of the
following Tracts, I would observe; That he had his Education at
Harvard-College, and studied Chemistry and Physic, under his Uncle the Learned
Dr. James Oliver of Cambridge; one of the most esteemed Physicians in his Day;
who had a singular Help in the Art of Chemistry by the ingenious Dr. Lodowick a
German, who was also accounted an excellent Physician, and the most skilful
Chemist that ever came into these Parts of America. And Dr. Williams lived and
practiced in Boston with great Success and Reputation for near thirty seven
Years, to the Time of his Death, which was on Jan. 10. 1737, 8, in the 63d Year
of his Age.

He was well versed in the most valued Authors, especially those who wrote on
Experimental Cases, carefully comparing them with his own Observations. He made
the Case of his Patients as his own: and where he apprehended Danger, applied
himself with great Concern and Diligence, and seemed to bear them on his Mind
continually. In some Cases he has consulted with Dr. Mead, and other principal
Physicians in England for Advice and Help.

In every thing he was exceeding Cautious; especially in the Preparation of his
more important Medicines for his own Practice, that he might more surely judge
of their Operations: And his established Character for Piety, Skill and
Caution, made his Patients entirely satisfied in all his Managements.

It was his Method to reduce to Writing the more remarkable Cases with the
various Symptoms occuring, and the Course he took; that he might form his own
Practice in like Cases afterward. And by this Means we are favored with the
following Tracts; which appear to be wrote with great Judgment and Conciseness;
though without the least Thought of their being ever published.

The former Part seems to have been drawn up for some special Friend, by Way of
Direction; the latter is a more particular Account of his own Practice, in
which the Prescriptions are here rendered into English for their being of more
extensive Use.

I hope this will suffice to recommend them to those who were not acquainted
with him: for as to those who knew him, I apprehend it needless.

In the little Knowledge I have of Physical Authors and of this Distemper, I
cannot but judge these small Tracts of great Value. And as my divine and
merciful MASTER declared, that He came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save
them; and in tender Pity to all about Him, and a perfect Consistence with his
saving Office, employed his Power to heal their bodily as well as spiritual
Maladies: I cannot but judge it consistent with my Imitation of Him, to promote
the Publishing this excellent Method of Healing, and recommend it to all around
me. And in Hopes of its being a Mean in his Hand of saving the Lives of many,
especially in our Country Towns, as well as in This where the Physicians have
not now Time to attend all the Sick; I humbly commit it to his sovereign
Blessing.

Boston, April10, 1752. Thomas Prince.

General RULES to be observed.
1. WHen the Air is infected and Danger arises from thence --

Let those that are liable to the Distemper live temperate in all Things: viz,
in Eating, Drinking, Care, Exercise etc.
for nothing more exposes to it or makes it more mortal than Intemperance.

To guard against the Infection and render the Distemper more favorable when
it seizes; Let a Scruple of Brimstone very finely powdered be taken twice a
Day; first in the Morning, and about six o'Clock at Night, in a Spoonful of
Water; and drink after it 40 Drops of Elixir Proprietatis in a Glass of Water,
or any generous Wine; or where that viz. the Elixir.
cannot be obtained, let a Glass of Cider with Rue and Gentian steeped in it be
taken in its Stead.

2. When the Symptoms of the Small Pox appear (which are very various, Pains in
the Head, Back, Limbs, Stomach, Belly, Sickness etc. with a Fever, which always
accompanies what ever other Symptoms there are.)

If now there be any Signs of a foul Stomach, or its being clogged with Phlegm;
Let there be a Vomit given as soon as may be before the Eruption or Appearance
of the Pock. When it has done working, let something Cordial be given, as
Mint-water sweetened with Syrup of Saffron; or a Toast and Canary Wine.

Let the Blood be now well diluted with some small Tea made of Baum, Sage, or
any other temperate Herb; which let be sweetened with Syrup of Saffron, and
given 3 or 4 Times a Day 'till the Pock is all out. Small Beer with a Toast, or
Fair Water with a Toast, may be allowed now and then, if desired.

To bring out the Pock, it is necessary that there be some Fever which must
carefully be minded: If too high, it must be suppressed, and nothing must be
allowed but what is cooling; if too low, it must be raised by warm Cordials,
'till the Heat of the Flesh be something beyond what is common: but yet great
Care must be taken that it be not raised too high. A moist Skin is best, but
profuse Sweats are destructive, and to be checked, by keeping the Hands out of
Bed, and lessening the Bed Clothes. Let the Throat be early guarded by a
Plaistor of Paracelsus, or a Saffron Stay. If before Eruption (or any Time
after) the Person be Delirious or Raving; apply a large Blister to the Nape of
the Neck; and strong Attractives to the Soles of the Feet of Salt Beef, or Salt
Mackrill, or Beef Kidneys.

If there happen a FLUX, before Eruption (or at any other Time;) Let it be
immediately stopped by a Drahm of Diascordiam in Mint-Water; which may be
repeated once in six Hours, if Need be.

If excessive Vomiting happen now or at any other Time; give Venice Treacle a
Drahm in Mint-Water, or hot Wine if very violent, if Mint-Water with Syrup of
Saffron will not stop it. However, if it be moderate, it may be serviceable;
and therefore not to be stopped too soon. The same may be said of Bleeding at
the Nose.

3. When the Eruption is over, which is generally in 3, or 4 Days at farthest;
-- Let the same Rules be observed about the Drink as before. The Fever ought
now to cease: but yet a natural Warmth must be maintained, and the Government
of the Person be accordingly; otherwise the Pock will not fill; which is the
Thing now to be expected.

If the Pock do not grow and fill by the forementioned Regimen; Let a handful
of Sheeps-Dung be steeped in hot Water 3 or 4 Hours, and then strained off, and
be given to the Quantity of 3 or 4 Spoonfuls every 3 Hours: this continue,
'till the Maturation of the Pock, if Need be.

If they strike in; apply Blisters to the Wrists and Ankles, and give the
temperate Cordials as often as needful, to make them appear again: a Glass of
Canary with Saffron in it, or two Scruples of Venice-Treacle in Mint-water.

If the Throat be sore; gargle it with Water sweetened with Honey of Roses; or
hold in the Mouth a little Conserve of Roses made a little tart with Spirit of
Vitriol; or a little Syrup of Black-berries, or Srawberries, or Mulberries.

If the Urine be stopped, as it many Times is; Let the Person be raised up: and
if that do not answer, let him take a Decoction of Pompion and Parsley-Seed for
his Drink, 'till he be relieved.

Let the Food be Oatmeal-Caudle, Milk-porrage, Sack-whey; the one or the other,
according as the Fever allows.

If there be a Flux or loose Body; boiled Rice may be eaten, and the Water of
it drank: or the white Decoction made of Burnt-Hartshorn and Biscuit, of each an
Ounce boiled in two Quarts of Water, 'till a Pint be consumed; let the Dregs be
poured out with the rest in a Vessel wherein it is kept; and when it is drank,
let it always be stirred up 'till it looks thick like Milk.

4. When they come to turn, which is on the 7th or 9th Day commonly after
Eruption; Let Cordials be often given, and a more cordial Diet be allowed.

If the Phlegm be tough or viscid, and Raising stopped; Let it be thinned by a
little Syrup of Vinegar made with Honey; or a Syrup of Urine, made with two
Spoonfuls of Urine and one of Honey, with a little Nutmeg.

If there be any Signs of an approaching Fever upon the Turning of the Pock, or
the Person be delirious; Let there be strong Attractives to the Feet, and a
Blister to the Neck, and Arms also if Need be; which must be kept, running,
'till the Danger is over.

If the secondary Fever arises; it must be treated like a common putrid Fever.
The Balsam of Fennel in Fountain Water excels here.

When the Pock is thoroughly turned; the Body may be kept open with a loosning
Diet of Plumb-porrage, etc. If a Fever arises or is heightened for want of a
Stool; a Suppositor or Clister may be used of Milk and Sugar.

Cold chilly Fits with Sickness and Faintness often happen at the Turning;
which must carefully be watched and speedily relieved, by something Cordial; as
Toast and Wine; or Elixir Proprietatis in a Glass of Canary Wine.

5. After the Pock is dried away and the Strength recruited; Let the Body be
well purged; 3 or 4 Times at least, at due Intervals, after the Confluent Sort;
once or twice may suffice after the Distinct.

Some more general RULES.
A Cold Regimen in a flegmatic Constitution and where native Heat is wanting,
often proves fatal; though in a sanguine Constitution, where innate Heat is
strong, it is necessary. Many are lost by not observing this Difference.

Bleeding in some Cases may be necessary; but let it be directed by a judicious
Physician, and never else admitted. Opiates are also to be under the same
Direction.

Too many Medicines often do much Hurt. More People are lost through a
preposterous Use of needless Remedies, than through the Force of the Disease.

A Looseness happening before the Suppuration of the Pustules, must be stopped;
but after, may be allowed.

Medical Observations on the SMALLPOX. Anno 1730.
THE Method I took in treating this Distemper; and which I found most
successful, was as follows:

I advised my Patients, for whom I thought I should be concerned, to Temperance
in all Things, as the best Preparation for the Smallpox; and to take Morning
and Evening 20 or 30 Drops of my Smallpox Drops; A Tincture drawn from
Sulphur, to which add, Elixir Proprietatis, so as to make a pleasant Mixture.
or where those will not go down, 30 or 40 Drops of Elixir Proprietatis This
Method I found in many Instances both this Year and in 1721, very successful to
render the Distemper favorable. Those who were constant in taking it, I
observed escaped a long Time before they were seized, and had generally the
most favorable Sort and many escaped it altogether without any Complaint, though
greatly exposed. I found also a Scruple of Flower of Brimstone, in Milk or any
Vehicle, to answer this End very well, taken once, or twice a Day.

Before the Eruption.
When the Symptoms of this Distemper appeared, if they were favorable, I did
little or nothing, but advised to dilute the Blood with some small Tea of Baum,
or what pleased the Appetite; and keep to a Diet of Water Gruel for Food; Milk
one Part, and Water three Parts, boiled together for Drink; and wait for the
Eruption: which if it appeared not the third Day. I endeavored to promote,
with this Mixture,

Syrup of Saffron 1 Ounce, Treacle Water half an Ounce, Carduus Water 2 Ounces,
mixed, 3 or 4 Spoonfuls for a Dose: To be repeated once in six Hours; observing
in the mean time to drink plentifully of small Tea or Milk and Water.

If there were any Signs of a foul Stomach; I gave a Vomit as soon as I had
Opportunity, before the Eruption: and I scrupled not to give it even when the
Eruption was made, where the Signs of Foulness were manifest. For want of the
Help of this, I found great Danger arising, and a Necessity often times to give
it, even at the very Height of the Distemper. I never gave any but Ipecacuanha,
for fear of over-working, and weakening my Patient; who had now a dangerous
Distemper to go through, that required the greatest Strength to carry him through.

If there were great Fullness of Blood, Aptness to Bleed at the Nose. or Blood
over-heat with Drinking, or its Passages obstructed with taking Cold; in these
Cases I opened a Vein, and took away 8 or 10 Ounces of Blood: This I found a
good Preparatory.

In Case of Delirium or obstructed Menses; I chose to bleed in the Feet.

After the Bleeding was over, I endeavored to promote a Breathing with some
small Tea; which much facilitated the Eruption.

Sometimes before the Eruption, I have found excessive Vomiting: This I
endeavored to carry off by a Vomit, if there appeared any Symptoms of Foulness
of the Stomach: if not, I endeavored to settle it by an Anodyne in some
Alexipharmic Julep, viz.

Mint Water, Black Cherry Water, of each 2 Oz. Epidemic Water, Syrup of
Saffron, of each half an Oz. Liquid Laudanum 15 Drops, more or less, according
to the Age of the Patient; 3 or 4 Spoonfuls for a Dose, and repeated if
Occasion required. This often answered the Intention of Nature: which was now
struggling with the Malignity fixed upon the Nerves of the Stomach, and threw it
out to the Skin, which was the Thing aimed at.

If there were a Coma or Delirium, or Raving, if there were no Signs of
Overfulness of the Blood, or Humors of the Body, or Foulness of the Stomach; I
now judged these Symptoms to arise from the variolous Matter fixed on the
Nerves; and did little to remove them, but only diluted the Blood, and gave
some gentle Alexipharmic: and if they remained obstinate. I applied Attractives
to the Feet; and Blisters to the Wrists and Ankles; and if Need required,
behind the Ears: This I found most commonly to succeed.

A Purging has happened sometimes before the Eruption: which I was always very
cautious of stopping, notwithstanding the common Practice to the contrary. For
where I have found this, I generally found the Confluent Sort to follow,
especially in Children. I therefore rather chose to carry it off, with Rubarb
in small Doses repeated; a third Part of a Dose in Powder, repeated every six
Hours, in a little Syrup of Saffron, or the same Part of a Dose in Infusion,
sweetened with the same Syrup. However, if it caused Coldness in the extreme
Parts (and was very severe) or any great Faintness; I endeavored to check it
by Oil of Cinnamon; or if that would not answer, with an Anodyne in some
Alexipharmic Julep. The Mixture I used was, viz.

Mint-water 2 Oz. Diascord: one Drahm, Syrup Saffron 1 Oz. mixed, to be repeated
every six Hours, if Occasion. And the Diet, the white Decoction, with Cloves,
Cinnamon and Nutmegs with it, as the Patient liked best.

Bleeding at the Nose often happened, and that to a very great Degree. This I
endeavored not to stop 'till it fainted the Patient. I have found great Damage
ensue upon stopping it too soon. I endeavored to cool the Blood by cooling
Teas, Milk and Water etc, which was now ordinarily over-heat; and lay warm
Attractives to the Feet, which would often be very cold at this Time. I never
did bleed to turn the Blood, but always found the Method abovementioned to
succeed.

Convulsion-Fits often happen, in Children especially. -- If there were any
manifest Signs of Foulness of the Stomach and Fullness of Blood, I both bled
them, and after that gave a Vomit; after which was over, I applied Blisters and
Attractives, and ordered some Alexipharmic Julep to be repeated as the Symptoms
called for. If the Fever was high; I endeavored to lower it by Milk and Water,
Water with a Toast in it, Small Beer etc: if too low, I raised it by some
generous Alexipharmic. Here I have found Anodynes necessary and very
successful, after proper Evacuations, given in some Alexipharmic Julep. To a
Child of two Years old after bleeding and vomiting, I gave Powder of
Contrayerva Root 5 Grains, Black Cherry-Water 1 Oz. Syrup of Saffron half an
Oz. Liquid Laudanum 4 Drops, often, with good Success. This both composed the
Spirits which were now enraged, settled the over tension of the Fibers, and
threw off the variolous Matter to the Skin. This I have found succeed, even
when the Limbs have been left stiff and could not be bent without breaking,
when the Fit seemed to be over.

When the Eruption is made.
I Was careful to observe what State the Fever was in: whether there was enough
to carry on the Maturation, or too much to hinder, or precipitate it; and
accordingly applied.

Some were so hot, as to allow of nothing that was the least Cordial, but
called for the most temperate cooling Regimen.

These I treated with Milk and Water, which I allowed and persuaded them to
drink plentifully of; and Panada, or Water Gruel for their Food. This for the
most Part ripened and filled the Pustules. If it did not, I gave Gascoign
Powder, Morning and Night, in a little Carduus-Water, sweetened with Syrup of
Saffron, or a little Epidemic W ater, diluted with Carduus-water, and sweetened
with some cooling Syrup, as Strawberries etc.

Others were apt to grow cold, and want a Fever. These I treated with a Julep
of Carduus Water, 4 Oz. Syrup of Saffron 1 Oz. Treacle Water, or Epidemic
Water, half an Oz. Contrayerva Stone two Drams, mixed: of this I gave a Spoonful
every Morning till the Warmth came on and the Pock appeared bright and full,
and so continued as this Intention required: Being careful in the mean Time to
dilute the Blood with good Store of Drink. Here I allowed Sack-whey, Wine and
Water, and now and then a little Phlip. I found a Drink made of Sheeps Dung
boiled in Water to answer well here: This drank plentifully, filled the
Pustules, and raised the Swelling, and carried on the Maturation to Expectation.

I found a Necessity of observing this Difference in treating my Patients. I
observed many to die in keeping to the cooling Method without allowing them
Cordials at due Intervals, as is now the common Method in Imitation of Dr.
Sydenham; and this even in the distinct Sort of Pock.

As to the Confluent -- I found a Necessity of watching this carefully and
varying as the Symptoms directed. If I saw it coming; I endeavored to cleanse
the Body well both upwards and downwards as soon as I could, and bled them also
if there were proper Indications for it. If a Purging attended it at the
Beginning or Progress; I endeavored only to suppress and moderate it, and not
wholly to check it. In the Beginning I gave Rubarb in small Doses every six
Hours, which answered well, and ordered the white Decoct: for Food. I ordered
for Drink, Milk and Water: and if the Fever was high, a Julep of Syrup of
Elderberries well acidulated with Spirit of Vitriol, and Spirit of Vitriol in
all their Drink.

If a Cordial was wanted, or the Pustules did not fill well; I ordered Powder
of Gascoign, Morning and Night, or oftener if Need required, in some temperate
Vehicle; being careful in the mean Time to dilute and temper the Blood with
good Store of Liquid; nothing answered which Intention like Milk and Water in
great Quantities. This cooling, diluting Method kept from Delirium and Raving;
and followed closely, was the best Remedy to cure it. Bleeding I never found
succeed after the Eruption was thoroughly made, even in Distraction it self;
but sunk the Spirits and Pustules too; and I ever found it difficult to save
Life after it.

If the Pustules seem to strike in; I have found a Decoction of Snake-root,
sweetened with Syrup of Saffron given hot, to answer well. If that does not
answer immediately; I orordered Blisters to the Wrists and Ankles, and a Julep
of the Contrayerva-Stone in Carduus Water, Syrup of Saffron, and Epidemic
Water, to be followed every two Hours 'till the Intention was answered. In the
mean Time, diluting the Blood well with some temperate Liquors, as the Heat and
Temper of the Person required.

If the Throat be sore with the Pock, I found a Saffron-Stay, or a Plaster of
Paracelsus imbued with Oil of Mint, to relieve much. A Spoonful of the
following Julep help in the Mouth and gradually swallowed, has been very
serviceable; viz. Hysop-Water or common Water, three Ounces; Syrup of
Elderberries, Strawberries, Mulberries, or Honey of Roses, two Oz; Spirit of
Vitriol, so much as to make it very tart, mixed. If very much stuffed with
Phlegm, I have applied a Blister to the Nape of the Neck, and sometimes given a
Vomit, to save Life at any Time of the Pock.

I have found great Advantage in an open Body, one Stool in a Day in the whole
Course of the Distemper; contrary to the common Observation, in any Sort,
especially the Confluent: and when there has been a great Load of Humors, have
promoted it by a Suppositor, or loosening pectoral Decoction; though not by
Purges. Sometimes I have allowed them to eat Figs and Raisins, which both
brought on the ripening of the Pustules and kept the Body open sufficiently.

In raving Distraction, I have found Applications to the Feet, with strong
Attractives, Blisters, and a cooling, diluting Diet taken plentifully, to
answer best. Bleeding I never found to succeed here; except there were plain
Indications for it from over fullness of Blood, and some Stagnation from taking
Cold. If the Pustules filled well, I was not over-busy with Remedies; but I
have found it to cease of it self, when the Pock had turned.

The Pock turning.
When the Pock is ripe and begins to turn, great Care must be taken to prevent
the second Fever. A loose Body is of great Service here, in every Sort of Pock.
I therefore early ordered a Suppositor or Clister. If this answered not, I gave
a Pectoral Decoction with good Success. The Hierapicra has been very
serviceable where it could be taken. And this I continued as often as I saw a
Fever inclining to rise. However I took Care to guard the Vitals by repeated
Doses of fixed or volatile Cordials, as the Symptoms required.

If upon the Turning they were much oppressed in the Breast, or stuffed with
Phlegm in the Organs of Respiration; I have found a Vomit to succeed, of
Ipecacuanha or Vinum Emeticum and Pectoral Syrup, diluted with Hysop Water,
with a Blister to the Nape of the Neck. After this, the Pectoral Decoction, and
that with a little Sena, to make it more purging, if Need require.

Cold chilly Fits are very apt to come at the Turning; which are prevented by a
Cordial duly repeated, especially Gascoign-Powder, and helped by a Cordial
given immediately when they come.

If the second Fever arise, if it be attended with great Oppression and
Difficulty of Breathing, and Stagnation of the Blood; I have found Bleeding
succeed; but not else. If it be moderate, a loose Body suffices; if not,
Blisters and Purges of the gentle Sort have carried it off best, with a
cooling, diluting Diet; not forgetting to intermix a Cordial fixed or volatile,
as the Symtoms called for.

In the Purples, Petechiae, and Indigo Pock; I have found the aforesaid Rules
to be most serviceable. The most smoothing, diluting Diet, and large Quantities
of them, answer best: not forgetting Cordials, especially fixed Bezoardics;
without which the most cooling Regimen signifies but little. Bleeding I have
found of no Service here; except the common Indications for it were apparent. I
have seen it repeated to a third Time, but to no Advantage, but apparently
hastened the Death of the Patient. Many have lived to the 9th Day, that have but
few Remedies used; and some have recovered to a Surprise, that have been given
over; though it has been very rare.

Mrs. H. recovered of the Purple Sort in the Use of diluting Diet and great
Quantities of Elixir Proprietatis.

Mrs. R. recovered of the Indigo Pock in the Use of the diluting Diet, with
Syrup of Saffron, Treacle-Water, and Carduus-Water, and Morning and Night a
Dose of Gascoign Powder. I opened one of the Indigo Pock with a Lancet, found
congealed hardened Blood, a quarter of an Inch deep: I dare not proceed deeper
with it for fear of an Haemorage. I generally found the Pulse much depressed;
and sometimes but few Complaints, the Patients commonly thinking themselves
well 'till Death came on.

As to Anodynes; I have found them absolutely necessary, and very serviceable
to subdue the great Pain and Fever that arises from thence from the Smart of
the Pock. These I seldom gave, 'till the Pustules were thoro'ly out, and they
began to complain of Soreness and Restlesness thereby; except in Case of
Convulsions, and then not 'till due Evacuations have been made. A swelling of
the Face commonly followed it; and it would raise this Swelling when no other
Remedies would. It often took away a Delirium and Raving, and composed the
Patient to rest. I ordinarily gave them but once in 24 Hours at Night; though
sometimes in great Restlesness have given them oftener; and in the Confluent
Sort, once in eight Hours. I commonly mixed them in some cordial Julep,
according to the Temper and Circumstances of the Patient. In great Stuffage of
the Lungs and Breast, I gave them in some pectoral Mixture: Though sometimes they
checked the Salivation in the Confluent Sort, yet it returned soon with
diluting Diet.

As to purging the Body after the Smallpox; I have found it generally
necessary. For want of it, many break out in Boils etc.

I have found a Vomit more serviceable than a Purge. For want of it, many times
Purges, though very strong, work not at all: though on the same Persons the same
Purge would work much in a much less Dose.

If the Patient was weak, I began with Rubarb or Pill Ruffi: and then after
some Time, gave Jallap or Pill Cochiae Minor.

Small Pox by Inoculation. in 1730.
I Entered upon it with the utmost Caution, and was careful to use it by the
best Rules I could find prescribed.

As to the Matter I made use of; I endeavored to take it of a wholesome Person,
of a favorable distinct Sort of Pock, well ripe, white, and of a due
Consistence, and without Smell. This, as long as it would keep thus, I made use
of; having kept it in the Month of March a Fortnight, and used it with as good
Success as any just taken. I always kept it in a cool Place, contrary to the
common Precepts about it, to keep it warm 'till it was used. When I could get
it from an inoculated Person I chose it; having by Experience found it to yield
the most favorable Pock. I have used the third Produce with the best Effect.

If the Patient was very full of Blood and lived intemperately; I bled him
before the Incision was made. And if there were any Signs of Foulness at the
Stomach or Bowels; I vomited, or purged them, and ordered them Temperance in
Eating and Drinking. Meat I allowed of the easiest Digestion, but once a Day,
and that in Moderation. Strong Drink I forbad, save a Glass of Wine at Meals.
Above all, I charged them to keep out of the Way of receiving the Infection in
the common Way as much as possible.

I made the Incisions in each Arm only, and not in a Leg; having observed
great Inconvenience to arise from an Incision made in the Leg by the Humors
falling down into it.

I made the Incision not in the upper Side of the Arm, where Issues are made;
having found great Inconvenience by that Method: for this Way, a Pond was made
after a while, which contained the Matter 'till it was dressed; so that the
Orifice was made much larger, and a Sinus often produced where the Humors were
very sharp.

I therefore chose to make it in the lower Part of the Arm above the Elbow;
where the Matter vented itself as soon as it was made, and remained not in a
Body in the Place of Incision. This Way I found they run more freely, and yet
corroded the Flesh not so much.

I chose not to dress my Patients Incisions my self, for fear of carrying the
Infection to them, 'till they began to complain of the Symptoms of the
Smallpox; but directed them to dress them themselves, or some Body else for
them that would no Ways endanger them. I took Care not to bind the Roller too
hard; having found a Tumor to arise often upon too strict a Bandage, which
needed Poulticing with white Bread and Milk to abate it.

I saw no Need of making the Incisions large or deep, or putting much of the
Matter in; having found upon Trial, the least Incisions if deep enough to make
the Blood come, to answer as well as the largest; and the very least Part of
Matter to answer as well as a great deal.

I have found two Incisions in grown Persons to answer much better than one
only. I observed those that had but one, had the most Pock, and the most
troublesome Symptoms of Pains. Swellings etc. Though in Infants, I have found one
to answer very well.

The first Dress was with a simple Diachylon Plaster. When the Incision was
made, I carefully laid a Bit of Lint imbibed well with the Matter, over or in
the Incision: and having put the Plaster over it, I bound it on, and let it
lie 24 Hours; and then took off the Plaster and Lint, and having wiped the
Plaster clean, laid it on again, throwing away the Lint; and so continued to
dress daily till the third or fourth Day, when the Incision began to open and
be a little inflamed; and then I dressed it with a Pledget armed with Basilicon
laid over the Incision, and the same Plaster laid over it. This I found the
best Dress; it both draw'd and digested, and kept the Arm easy.

When the Incisions were much inflamed, I found nothing so effectual as a
Poultice of white Bread and Milk applied warm, and renewed twice a Day, and
oftener if Need called for it. Sometimes when it was apt to breed a Fungus, I
dressed it with Liniment: Areaei, which answered well.

If the Incisions are not dressed twice a Day at least, and sometimes three
Times; when they come to run much, they are very apt to be much inflamed; and I
have seen a Mortification soon gather. When the Incisions do not run well; I
fear a troublesome and full Pock, and have often seen many Swellings to arise
about the Arm especially; which if taken in Time would quickly yield to a
Poultice of white Bread and Milk better than any Thing else; and when those are
gone, others to arise and create much Trouble.

I always observed the Incisions to run much at the Turning, and more now than
at any Time else.

I never endeavored to stop the Running of the Incisions by Restringents; but
continued in the Dress of Basilicon or Liniment: Areaei, with the Plaster over
it; and with this Dress I encouraged them to Dress, 'till they run exceedingly.

When there appeared a large Sinus all round under the Skin; be not forward to
cut it, but dress it carefully by filling it full of fresh white Break and
Milk. This I have seen cure a very large one, in which I could carry my Finger
clear round half an Inch under the Skin. If it must be cut, dress it with a
little Liniment: with a few Grains of Mercurius Dulcis, and wash it with Lime
Water.

I found the more the Incisions run, the more favorable the Pock and all the
Symptoms were. I therefore encouraged the Running as much as I could: but not
by corrosive, pungent Plasters, as Hat^ase etc; but only by Basilicon,
Liniment: Areaei, Cabbage-Leaf etc.

The most troublesome Symptoms of Fever, Coma, and Tumors in the Arms and
Glandulus Parts, was in a Negro Girl; whose Incision run but very little. I
gave little or no Medicine, 'till the Symptoms of the Small Pox appeared, but
Elixir Proprietatis, which I ordered to be drank often in Water; and to abstain
from Meat; and to live upon a smoothing, diluting Diet.

When I saw the Spmptoms of the Small Pox beginning, I was very watchful to
observe them. If the Fever, Pains, and Sickness were favorable; I chose to do
nothing, but leave the Work to Nature. If the Fever was very high; I chose to
lower it with a cooling diluting Diet, of Milk and Water, Water with a Toast in
it, etc.

I never yet saw a Necessity of Bleeding any of my Patients, but one; who had
taken cold, and thereby fixed a great Pain in his Side. Neither did I ever
observe any Advantage by Bleeding, but the contrary. The Pock was retarded, and
the Patient much weakened.

If the Fever continued 'till the third Day of Complaint, and no Eruption
appeared; I applied Blisters, which answered for the most Part to draw forth
the Pock, and abate the Fever; and if Need required, Attractives to the Feet.
If there were any Signs of Foulness of the Stomach, I gave a Vomit of
Ipecacuanha.

Sometimes Convulsions arose in Children before the Eruption, which went off
themselves, or with Blisters and Attractives to the Feet. Sometimes they lay
comatous and restless, which I relieved by Blisters and Alexipharmic Julep^ to
drive out the Pustules. When once the Eruption was made, the troublesome
Symptoms went off for the most Part. However I endeavored by some gentle
Alexipharmic Julep to forward the Growth and Ripening of the Pock. I found
little Need of Anodynes: though if they were very sore and restless, I always
gave them. If they were very full of the Pock, I treated them in all Respects
as in the common Small Pox.

The most of my Patients were very favorably dealt with: more than 50 out of
65; were sitting up and walking about the Room soon after the Eruption was well
made.

But one died that I inoculated: which was a Child 8 Weeks old, and under the
Disadvantage of losing a full Breast, and put to one that was very disagreable
before to the Child, and now much more so by the Distress of the Nurse (who was
the Mother) not only with that Child but with three more Children in the same
Room. The Pock had its Course favorably enough; appeared the 9th Day, and
turned the 15th: but the Bowels filled daily with Wind, for want of proper
Nourishment, and at length threw the Child into Convulsions, of which it died
on the 22d. Two more were very full but not dangerous. One had a flat Pock;
which was also full, and did not turn 'till the ninth Day; followed with hard
Tumors in the Arms for many Days, which were all dissipated with the white
Bread Poultice only.


