A SERMON Preached before His GRACE JOHN Duke of Marlborough, PRESIDENT, THE
VICE-PRESIDENTS and GOVERNORS OF THE HOSPITAL FOR THE SMALLPOX, and for
INOCULATION, AT THE Parish Church of St. Andrew Holborn, On THURSDAY, March 5,
1752.

By ISAAC Lord Bishop of WORCESTER.

Published at the Request of the PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENTS, and GOVERNORS.

LONDON: Printed. BOSTON; N. E. Reprinted and Sold by J. DRAPER, in Cornhil,
or at the Printing-Office in Newbury-Street. 1752.

TO THE KING's Most Excellent MAJESTY.
SIR!
IT would be a Defect both in Gratitude and Duty, if the first Discourse from
the Pulpit in Favor of INOCULATION, was not most humbly inscribed to YOUR
MAJESTY.

THE Nation, among numerous other Instances of paternal Regard, stands obliged
to YOUR MAJESTY's Goodness and Resolution, for the Introduction and Progress of
that salutary Practice.

THE very early Concern YOUR MAJESTY showed for the Safety and Happiness of
this Kingdom, by exposing Your own valuable Life, with great Intrepidity, to
all the Hazards of War, was again apparent, when, with equal Firmness of Mind,
You exposed the important Lives of Your own tender and Royal Offspring, in the
first Experiments made in Britain of the Effects of this Method of
communicating an otherwise dangerous and often fatal Disease.

AND probably to thisOperation we owe the Life of that illustrious PRINCE, to
whom, under Divine Providence, this Nation, and the whole Protestant Interest,
are so deeply indebted, for the happy Victory at the Battle of Colloden.

THAT YOUR MAJESTY's vigilant Attention to the Welfare of Your People, in all
Respects, may be rewarded with a very long and happy Reign upon Earth, and
crowned with immortal Glory in Heaven, is the ardent Prayer of,

SIR! Your MAJESTY's Most obliged, and most devoted Subject and Servant, ISAAC
WORCESTER.

ISAIAH LVIII. 7. -- And that thou bring the Poor that are are cast out, to thy
House.
THESE Words are Part of a Description of that Humiliation and Worship, that is
really acceptable to the great Creator and Governor of the World; as highly
proper in itself, and as a just Imitation of his divine Goodness, which
regards the Prayer of the poor Destitute, and despises not his Desire; and
which, in the sacred Writings, is so frequently represented, both as an Example
and an Encouragement to human Benevolence.

IS not this the Fast, says Almighty God, ver. 6. that I have chosen, to loose
the Bands of Wickedness, -- to undo the heavy Burdens; -- is it not to deal thy
Bread to the Hungry; and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out, (cast out
and afflicted, as the original Word also signifies) to thy House? and that thou
hide not thyself from thine own Flesh?

THE sore Distress of our Fellow Creatures, our own Flesh, literally cast out
and afflicted, which occasions the present Solemnity, falls very naturally
under the Command of the Text, Bring the Poor that are cast out to thy House.

THE SMALL POX is a well known Distemper, to which Providence has been pleased
to subject Mankind, the Seeds of it being intermixed with the human
Constitution; this may be said in general, because the Instances of those, who
pass through Life, after having arrived at Manhood, and having been within the
Reach of Infection, are so extremely few, as scarce to form an Exception;
learned Calculations have made it as one to many Hundreds.

AT the same Time, this almost universal Disease is very loathsome and nauseous
both to the Sufferers and those who attend them; so spreading and infectious,
as to prevent all friendly Assistance from Persons who have not themselves
undergone the Distemper; and likewise so pernicious and fatal, as, upon a very
moderate Calculation, to destroy One in Seven of all whom it attacks, and very
often in much greater Proportion. An Instrument of Death that slays without
Distinction! Youth and Beauty, Dignity and Power, Wealth and Affluence, are no
Protection; the Palace and the Cottage stand in this respect upon a Level, and
the Rich and the Poor meet and fall together; possibly with some Disadvantage
to the former, if their Blood has been inflamed by luxurious Diet and high
Living.

AND where Numbers of Men are collected together, as in Garrisons, Regiments,
or the Crew of a Ship, the Havoc is prodigious; which in some Junctures has
been, and therefore may be, highly prejudicial in a national View, besides the
Loss of Lives.

THE Confusion and Terror of the Inhabitants, the Cessation of Trade and
Business, and the great Slaughter made by this dreadful Malady when, like a
destroying Angel, it attacks populous Towns and Villages, are extremely certain
and notorious.

NOW, the general View of the present charitable Undertaking, is with God's
Blessing, to render this grievous Distemper less destructive, and diminish that
horrid Devastation which it now continually makes among the human Species.

AND the Relief here proposed to the Poor, is accordingly pursued by two
different Methods; the one is, as it were preventive, to lessen the Violence
and the Danger of this malignant Disease; the other is to supply indigent,
distressed, Patients, who actually labor under it by common Infection, with
all necessary Assistance and Relief. The Aim of the previous Method is this,
viz. After due Preparation, in a known, visible Manner, to raise that Commotion
in the Blood, which sends forth into the Surface of the Body the latent
Materials of this Distemper so very dangerous, when excited in the common Way
by infectious Particles unperceived. It seems therefore (like the raising a Fit
of the Gout, when the Particles of that painful Malady are dispersed through the
whole Mass of Blood) not so properly the giving a Distemper to a human Body
entirely free from and out of Danger of that Distemper, as choosing the safest
Time and Manner of causing a Disorder, otherwise almost unavoidable in a Way
extremely more pernicious, the Fuel thereof being lodged within us. An
Intention beyond all Dispute worthy of much Approbation; and which should
always be pursued with the utmost Care and Precaution both in the Choice of the
Person from whom the infectious Matter is collected, and of unexceptionable
Subjects, upon whom the Operation is performed.

IT is needless to enter into a Disquisition, which is the properest Method of
designedly raising this Disorder in the Human Frame, by carrying the Person
that is to receive it to the contagious Steams or Effluvia; on, bringing to him
the infected Matter. Religious Difficulties ( if any still remain concerning a
Practice, that has preserved so many Lives, and prevented the heaviest Grief in
so many Families) are exactly the same, in either Method of voluntary
Communication.

FOR it is no more invading the Prerogative of Heaven, to occasion one easy and
voluntary Conveyance of the Infection than another; by a slight and hardly
sensible Rasure upon the Skin of the Arm, than communicating the same Distemper
by invisible Particles, to that tender Organ the Lungs, which are so frequently
affected by the Venom of this Disease, when contracted by the Breath, or
receiving into the Body infected Particles in what is called the natural Way.

WERE this preventive Method universally successful, and never once to fail in
any Instance whatsoever, it is scarce to be presumed that any Objection would be
raised against a salutary Expedient, to preserve from Destruction so great a
Part of the human Species, as daily fall by this mortal Enemy, when it attacks
Men as it were in the Dark, ignorant of, and unprepared for the Assault.

THIS Method of Inoculation would then be no more liable to Censure, than the
making a voluntary Wound, by Incision, to form a necessary Drain; or
administering any operative Medicine, which upon repeated Trials had proved an
unfailing Security against any other dangerous and prevailing Pestilence or
Contagion.

BUT, in order to excite and secure a Dependence upon his Divine Providence,
the GREAT GOVERNOR of the World has appointed that no human Affairs, not even
our necessary Sustenance, should be attended with such absolute Certainty; a
very wise Appointment! That vain Man might not (...) himself an independent
Being, but among all the Changes and Chances of this mortal Life, should still
look up unto, because he can only be defended by, God's most gracious and ready
Help.

EXPERIENCE alone must determine the good or bad Consequences of this
artificial Infection, as it ought to do in all other medical Attempts, which in
many Instances are, in reality, little more than curing or alleviating one
Distemper, by exciting or introducing another. And in this View the Method, now
under Consideration, of lessening the Hazard of a very mortal Disease, should
be considered in the same Light as every other Antidote, or preventive Attempt
in Physic or Surgery, against any probable, almost certain Malady, internal or
external. I forbear therefore to derive any Strength to the Argument, from the
great Number of noble, venerable, and worthy Persons of every Rank and
Profession, who appear the public Advocates of this compassionate Design: Let
it stand upon its own proper Evidence, and Foundation.

A SAFE Passage through this Distemper, like the emancipating Slaves, is a
Deliverance to vast Numbers of People, kept as it were in Bondage; who, before
they have undergone this abhorred Disease, are excluded from many Offices of
Life, and prevented from pursuing their necessary Business; and it gives
Tranquillity and Cheerfulness to Persons of better Condition, who under
Apprehensions of this loathsome and infectious Disorder, were all their former
Days subject to great Anxiety and constant Fear.

IT IS needless to enter into a Discussion of several Objections, that attended
the Infancy of this useful Practice, which Time and fuller Experience have now
removed; with respect to the Communication of other Diseases with the varielous
Matter; or that certain Ails and Complaints have followed the inoculated
Distemper; of both which Inconveniences there is at least an equal Hazard upon
Infection, by an unperceived Contagion, that, like a Pestilence walks in
Darkness: Or that the Disease is more likely to return after Inoculation. The
large Experience of many Years has now effectually removed all these
Objections, nor can it be wondered at, if in the Infancy of the Practice
especially, some few Attempts have proved ineffectual.

BEYOND all Dispute, in the voluntary Communication of this Disease, there is
an happy Opportunity to choose -- The best Season of the Year -- The early, the
properest Time of Life -- A Juncture when the Disease it self is most
favorable, and the Blood is in a right State to receive it, neither too much
enriched, nor too much impoverished -- To prevent treating the first doubtful
Symptoms in an improper manner -- To avoid Cold, or Inflammation of the Blood,
by Food, Liquors, or Exercise, after the known Infection is received.

BUT to proceed to the only sure Evidence, real Experience and Matter of Fact;
in which almost every Part of the Globe, Asia, Europe and America give a
concurrent Testimony -- GREAT BRITAIN in particular has now had a Trial of this
voluntary Method of artificially exciting the Distemper for near thirty Years
at different Times, and distant Places, with very great Success.

AT first, indeed, in this, as in other very useful Ar^^^^s, the Success was
far inferior to what longer Experience, and repeated Trials have now so happily
accomplished, in this Metropolis, as well as in diverse other Places,
particularly in that useful Establishment formed for the Reception of deserted
young Children; and more especially in this Hospital peculiarly instituted for
this good Purpose, being one Branch of the Charity for which we are now
assembled.

BESIDES this general Evidence of the Advantages of Inoculation, I can speak
with more Assurance upon the beneficial Effects of that Operation, because I
speak upon full Information, and by the Permission of three Gentlemen in
particular, of deserved Eminence and Distinction in the Profession Mr. Sergeant
(...), Mr. Sergeant (...), and Mr. Middleton* The Nation may soon hope for a
very complete, useful, and welcome Account of (...) the first of these learned
Hand^.
, who have been very largely employed for a considerable Time, in this salutary
Practice. It cannot therefore fail to give this worthy Audience much
Satisfaction, to be thus authentically assured;

I. That the artificial Communication of the Small Pox by Inoculation, is,
almost without Exception, an effectual Security against that dangerous Symptom
the second Fever, which destroys so great Part of those who perish in the
natural Way.

II. That under Inoculation, there is scarce any Difficulty in Breathing or
Complaint upon the Lungs, which Disorder produces so many bad Effects when the
Distemper is received in the unknown and accidental Manner.

The IIId and most material Article is the great and happy Success, as to
Numbers, with which God's good Providence has blessed this useful Operation;
Great, beyond the most sanguine Hopes; so great that in above FIFTEEN HUNDRED
Persons inoculated by these eminent Hands, only three have died; and this very
material Fact is also confirmed by unexceptionable Accounts from diverse other
Places Thus, for Example, the learned Dr. Langrish of Winchester, gives the
following Account:

About ten Years ago the Small Pox raged furiously in Winchester, and some
neighboring Towns, and in the natural Way proved an unkind Sort, which induced
great Numbers to be inoculated. In PORTSMOUTH, CHICHESTER, GUILFORD,
PETERSFIELD, and WINCHESTER, we reckon near two thousand that were inoculated
at that Time, and (except two Women, who were both with Child, and both
inoculated contrary to the Advice of their Physician I don't remember to have
heard of any one bad Accident that befell any of them, but what might very
reasonably have been supposed to have proved worse, if they had had the Small
Pox in the natural Way. More than this, I think, cannot well be said to prove
the Usefulness of Inoculation.


.

BUT that a Matter of such Importance many be brought to some apparent
Certainty, it may not be improper to enter a little into Calculation.

FROM the annual Account within the Bills of Mortality (in which many Places in
and near the City are omitted) it appears, that in twenty Years, viz. from the
Year 1731 to the Year 1750 inclusive, no less than 39,115 Persons have died of
this fatal Distemper; which, including the Places not inserted in the Weekly
Bills, must be considerably more than 2,000 every Year that fall in the two
adjoining Cities and Parts adjacent.

AND if only one in seven (which is a very sufficient Allowance) is supposed to
die by the Distemper taken in the natural Way, then the whole Number of Persons
who in this Period of twenty Years have been thus infected, amounts to 280,000,
and of these no less than 40,000 have perished.

BUT if in every TWO HUNDRED One should be supposed to die under Inoculation,
which, as observed already, is really much more than fall by that artificial
Infection, now continually advancing with increasing Safety; and the certain
Fact, as abovementioned, is only One in 500, being less than half of the
Number I have stated -- But suppose I say One in 200 to die under Inoculation,
then had this artificial Method of conveying the Distemper universally taken
place, instead of that prodigious Destruction of Mankind, 40,000 in the Space
of 20 Years in one District, no more than 1400 had perished; and the Difference
in that short Period would have been no less than THIRTY-EIGHT THOUSAND SIX
HUNDRED Lives preserved, besides the numerous Posterity that might have been
derived from them. And were this Practice universal in these two Cities only
NINETEEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY Lives, under the Blessing of God, would be annually
preserved.

IT IS a pleasing Observation, That the Slaughter made by this formidable
Distemper is greatly decreased, the Numbers as recorded in the Yearly Bills,
being one-fifth lessened since this Practice has prevailed.

FACTS like these, speak so strongly and so clearly, that Reasoning and
Argument must be quite superfluous, to excite your generous and ample
Contributions, which are absolutely necessary to carry on and extend this
great, this compassionate, this national Undertaking. Humanity, Regard to our
Country, the Dictates of Reason, and the Precepts of Religion, would awaken
your generous Sentiments at any Juncture; but especially at this unhappy
Period, when Debauchery, Vice, with the most destructive and as it were
pestilential Intemperance, are making such daily and dreadful Havoc among the
Inhabitants of this Island, as renders every Design, every Attempt to preserve
the Lives of the People, extremely seasonable, and to the highest Degree
necessary!

THOSE, in particular, who have themselves, or whose Children have, by God's
great Goodness, safely passed through the Dangers of so destructive a Distemper,
by this happy Expedient; those also who are desirous to obtain the divine
Blessing when the Experiment is made in their own Family, cannot fail to exceed
in Bounty, that the Lives of the Poor, (of great Regard in the Sight of God)
may also be preserved.

BUT it is high time to turn our Thoughts to the other Branch of this great and
necessary Undertaking, the Relief of destitute and miserable Creatures,
laboring under this dreadful Distemper, contracted by common Infection.

THIS mournful Case is peculiarly affecting, as these wretched Sufferers are so
really cast out and afflicted; afflicted with one of the sorest Maladies
incident to human Nature, cast out and abandoned of all human Help.

THIS beneficial Charity therefore is not a new Institution, but a most
desirable Addition, and a necessary Supplement to all other Hospitals, since
from all other Hospitals these destitute and miserable Objects are unavoidably
excluded, and sometimes even forcibly expelled, in the utmost Distress, and
without any Place of Refuge!

THE usual Danger of this terrible Disease, is by this Means greatly increased,
I might say ascertained by their absolute want of all necessary Care and
Assistance.

CAN Thought conceive a more deplorable Condition, or is any Sorrow like unto
their Sorrow? Nor Food, nor Physic, nor Bed to lie upon, nor House to cover
their diseased Bodies from the coldest Blasts of the open Air! This is no
Picture drawn by Imagination, but real and certain though most melancholy Fact,
which, to the Knowledge of many who now hear me, has occurred in numerous,
affecting, shocking Instances, one of which would be sufficient to move the
hardest Heart of any Spectator.

PERSONS unavoidably driven out from other Hospitals, as soon as this Distemper
appears to be their real Complaint; industrious Laborers that come from far,
in the busy Time of Harvest, with many others, in similar Circumstances, make
up the Instances that so frequently occur, of wretched Objects quite destitute
of Friends, or Habitation into which they can gain Admission.

BUT where the Calamity does not reach this extreme Degree of Woe and Misery,
there is still, in too many sad Instances, Distress enough to melt any human
Heart.

TAKE, for Example, a Case that lately happened, --

A POOR Man sick of this Distemper, of which his Wife lay dead in the same
Room, with four Children around him catching the dreadful Infection, but
destitute of all Relief, till they found some in that too narrow Building,
which now importunately begs your compassionate Bounty to enlarge its
Dimensions, that you may then, without Repulse or Refusal, bring the Poor that
are cast out and afflicted, to a House of Mercy!

IT would afford greater Joy to reflect, though some have died in this Place, and
no wonder, when they often come almost in the last Stage of the Distemper, that
yet near 800 poor Creatures have, by the Blessing of the Almighty, received a
Cure under this pious and charitable Institution, were not this Joy darkened by
a Cloud of unrelieved Distress and Misery.

BUT cruel it would be, in the highest Degree, to poor rejected Supplicants,
and unfaithful to the Nation, not to publish, that the present Supplies for
this excellent and necessary Undertaking, are so defective and inadequate, that
the Doors of this charitable House, all the Beds being full, are continually
shut against a great Number of miserable Objects, sometimes seven or eight, in
one Day, who implore Admittance; but, alas! implore in vain! The Extent of the
present Building is by much too small, and the present Fund quite insufficient
to enlarge it. Besides that Anguish of Heart which these unhappy Creatures
feel, upon being rejected, the Public also may suffer greatly.

FOR, could such poor Wretches be received into an Hospital before the Disease
becomes infectious, It is greatly to be wi^^ed, that the (...) Care was taken,
upon (...) Occasions. (...) Distemper, a^ is usually taken to (...) involuntary
(...)
and continued there till they had obtained a Cure, and the Infection ceased;
the spreading of this pernicious Malady might be very much lessened, which now
in a Course of Communication of its subtle Particles goes far and wide, and
sometimes makes sad Devastation in the best and greatest Houses. I desire not
to open the Wounds of those I greatly regard, or revive my own Sympathy for the
affecting Losses, in the Prime and Bloom of Life, so many noble and respectable
Families have sustained by this undistinguishing Destroyer. It Is too melancholy
a Thought to dwell upon, and is mentioned only to excite our Attention to that
Practice which renders this grievous Malady less fatal, and to engage our
Compassion to the afflicted Poor, when they have the Misfortune to be visited
by the same Disease.

MAN, it is always said, is a social Creature, and it is no less certain that
he ought to be a religious one; but if ever this Character can shine with
distinguished Luster, and Society and the Influence of pure and undefiled
Religion, appear with superior Advantage, it must be in such Assemblies as
this, collected for the Purposes of pious Benevolence and Compassion, in Behalf
of the afflicted Part of our own Species.

AND if ever Scenes of Wretchedness and Misery ought to move the Heart, and
engage these amiable Dispositions, the deep and deplorable Distress of the
Objects now under Consideration, will certainly produce that desirable Effect,
and to a Degree answerable to the large Supplies that are absolutely requisite
in a Case so very extensive.

REFLECT, with Attention, upon that beautiful, and, in the present Case, very
apposite Parable of the hardhearted rich Man, and the afflicted Lazarus, drawn
by the compassionate Savior of Mankind, to excite Benevolence and Pity, by
representing the different Fate and Condition of the uncharitable Rich, and the
distressed Poor, in this World, and in the next.

THERE was a certain rich Man who fared sumptuously every Day; and there was a
certain Beggar, named Lazarus, which was laid at the rich Man's Gate, full of
Sores, -- unpitied, unrelieved! -- Moreover the Dogs came and licked his Sores.
-- View the awful Scene that follows, where the unmerciful rich Man, lifting up
his Eyes, in Hell, being in Torment, in vain sollicits for that Mercy and
Relief, which he, in the Day of his Prosperity, had cruelly denied to his
afflicted Brother; Son, says the holy Patriarch whom he importuned for a Drop
of Water to cool his Tongue, REMEMBER that thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy
good Things, and likewise Lazarus his evil Things; but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented!

BUT observe, that in the Sense of the Gospel, whoever has sufficient Ability
to relieve his sick and destitute Brother, and does it not, that uncharitable
Person is, in truth, the rich Man intended by the Parable.

CARRY on your Thoughts then to that awful Day, when you also must appear in
Judgment; and, if your present Benevolence does not prevent it, must undergo
the same sad Doom, when your tremendous Judge shall say, and what is the
stinging Aggravation, your own Conscience say, (as the Prophet of old to the
guilty Prince) -- Thou art the Man!

BUT, Brethren, we hope better Things of you, even such as accompany Salvation;
and that with cheerful Hearts, and very liberal Hands, you will extend your
much wanted Beneficence, proportioned in some Measure to the prodigious
Distress of the prodigious Numbers that stand in need of this compassionate
Relief.

HAVE you, yourselves, undergone this loathsome, and grievous Disease? have you
seen your Friends or Children under it, assisted with all the Advantages of
affectionate Help, and skilful Art? Think then, and consider, how wretched, how
deplorable, is the Case of a destitute Creature, visited by the same dismal
Malady, without Medicine, and without Attendance.

YIELD to the benevolent Dictates of human Nature, pursue and gratify the
rational Feelings and Sympathy of your own Mind; hide not thy self from thine
own Flesh, preserve the Lives of your Brethren, afflicted, destitute, sick, and
abandoned Brethren; some of them perhaps at this very Instant, for want of a
sufficient Fund to procure more extensive Relief unavoidably delivered up to
the two most woeful Companions, Poverty and Sickness; excluded from this too
scanty House, and miserably consigned over to Grief, Despair, and almost
certain Death. Good God! Is there one Heart here present hard enough to bear
the affecting Thought!

DO Good therefore, this important Good, while you have Opportunity; to many of
us, and God only knows to whom, this may be the last Opportunity. Neglect it
not. Be grieved for the Afflictions of your Brother; Bring the Poor that are
cast out, to thy House of Mercy; promote the Welfare of your Country; derive
from the God of Heaven a Blessing upon your own Children and Family, who are
equally exposed to this Arrow of the Almighty! and secure to your self the
everlasting Favor of the Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort. AMEN.

FINIS.

