Mr. Bellamy's SERMON At a Meeting Of Litchfield-Consociation, May 30. 1753.

The Great Evil of SIN, as it is committed against GOD.

A SERMON Preached in Goshen, at a Meeting of the Consociation of
Litchfield-County, in the said Town, May 30th. 1753.

By JOSEPH BELLAMY, A.M. Pastor of the Church in Bethlem.

Numb. xiv. 9. Rebel ye not against the LORD. Jer. xliv. 4. Oh, do not this
abominable Thing which I hate. Mal. i. 14. I am a great KING, says the LORD of
Hosts, and my Name is DREADFUL among the Heathen. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and
Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. 1753.

The Great Evil of SIN, as committed against GOD.
PSALM. LI. 4. Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned.


A Sense of the great Evil of Sin, is essential to true Repentance. It may be
laid down as a general Maxim, that "we cannot be suitably affected toward
Things, unless we see them as they are." Be they, on the one Hand, ever so
amiable and lovely, yet if their Beauty is not seen, our Hearts will be
untouched. Even the infinite Glory and Excellence of GOD will not excite our
Esteem and Love, if we have no Sense of it: And let the moral Beauty of the
divine Government be ever so great, although it may ravish the heavenly World,
who see it, yet we, while blind to it, shall be wholly unmoved: And be the
Gospel-way of Salvation, by free Grace through Jesus Christ, ever so glorious,
yet if the Glories of it are not discerned, we may be far from admiring that
divine Constitution. -- So, on the other Hand, let Sin be ever so great an
Evil, yet if the great Evil of it is not seen, we shall never be suitably
affected toward it. Though it deserves to be hated ever so much, and though there
be ever so great Reason that we should be humbled and abased before God on the
Account of it, and mourn in the Bitterness of our Hearts for it, and be afraid
of, and watch against it, as the greatest of Evils; yet we shall not, unless it
be seen as it is. Did we see it perfectly as it is, we should feel toward it
perfectly as we ought: But unless we see it in some Measure as it is, we shall
feel toward it in no Measure as we ought. -- So that a Sense of the great Evil
of Sin is plainly essential to true Repentance. -- And, indeed, it is that,
from which Repentance does nextly and most immediately take its Rise. Love to
God, Faith in Christ, and Hope in the Mercy of God through Him, prepare and
dispose the Heart to mourn for Sin: But it is a Sense of the great Evil of Sin,
which immediately affects the Heart with Sorrow, and humbles and abases the
Soul before the Lord. -- My Sin is ever before me -- Against Thee have I sinned
-- Thou art just, when thou speak -- Have Mercy upon me, O God. So also St.
Paul, -- The Law is spiritual -- I am carnal, sold under Sin -- Oh, wretched
Man that I am, who shall deliver me! Romans vii. 14, 24.


Now,

The Evil of Sin arises from our Obligations to do otherwise. And the more
strongly we are obliged to do our Duty, the more wicked is it in us to neglect
it, or go contrary to it, -- and the more are we to blame, -- and the greater
Cause have we to be sorry and penitent.

We may be under various Kinds of Obligations to the Practice of Virtue. The
Honor and Authority of God may oblige us -- The Welfare of our
Fellow Creatures may oblige us -- and our own present and future Happiness may
oblige us too: and therefore we may be to blame, and have Cause of Repentance,
on several Accounts; and that, for the Evil contained in one particular Action,
viewed in various Respects, as it is -- against God -- our Fellow-Men -- or our
own Interest, for this World and the next. -- And as is our Sense of these
Things, so shall we be affected; i. e. we shall be sorry and blame our selves
accordingly.

For let our Obligations be ever so great; yet, if they are not seen, we shall
not feel our selves obliged, or look upon our selves to blame, when we do
wrong. And if ever we do blame our selves at all, it will be only as we have
gone contrary to such Obligations as we are sensible of. Although we may be to
blame, in other Respects; yet we shall not blame our selves. If we be to blame,
for instance, for going contrary to the Honor and Authority of God; yet we
shall not be disposed to blame our selves on that Account, unless we are
sensible, how that the Honor and Authority of God did oblige us. If we are
sorry for what we have done, at any Time, it will be only on such Accounts, on
which, we see, we have done Wrong; and for such Reasons, for which, we see, we
ought to have done otherwise. -- Thus, if we see our great Obligations to all
Holiness and Righteousness, arising from the Nature of God, and the
Reasonableness of his Government, Sin will, accordingly, appear as an infinite
Evil. But if we see our selves under no Obligations to God, but merely in Way
of Gratitude for the Kindnesses we have received, we shall feel to blame for
our Sins, only as they are Instances of Ingratitude. And in a Word, in what
Respects soever, we see our selves obliged to do right, in those Respects we
shall feel ourselves to blame when we do wrong; and that, in exact Proportion
to the Weight, with which, a Sense of our Obligations lies on our Spirits.

Hence,

Persons of an Epicurean and Atheistical Temper, who see themselves under no
Obligations to Virtue, but merely from present Self-Interest, as a virtuous
Conduct tends to their present Ease, Profit and Honor; if they neglect their
Duty, and do wrong, they will blame themselves, and be sorry, only because they
have hurt themselves, and gone contrary to their own Interest for this World.
-- But if Persons have some belief of a future State, and of the Rewards and
Punishments of another Life; they may be sorry for their Sins, because by them
they have forfeited Heaven, and exposed themselves to Hell. -- Or if they are
under the Influence of a compassionate Temper, or of natural Affection, and
have injured a Neighbor, a Friend, or near Relative; Nature may prompt them,
on that Account, to be sorry. -- Or, if they firmly believe, that God loves
them, that Christ died for them, and that they are made Heirs of eternal Glory;
and see, that by their Sins, they have been guilty of great Ingratitude toward
their almighty Benefactor; they may, merely, from natural Gratitude, be sorry
on that Account. -- But if the great Evil of Sin, as it is AGAINST A GOD OF
INFINITE GLORY, be not seen; they will not mourn for Sin on that Account. And
yet if that which constitutes the great Evil of Sin, is not seen; and Sin is
not hated and mourned for, upon the Account of that, which is it is chief and
principal Malignity, our Repentance is not genuine. It is of Importance
therefore, that we know wherein the great Evil of Sin does really consist. --
For which Purpose, let us attend to the Words of our Text, which contains the
Confession of a true Penitent, and exhibits the Sentiments of a contrite Heart.
Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned.

Where observe (1.) The particular Sins referred unto in these Words, viz.
Murder and Adultery. For this Psalm was composed after that Nathan the Prophet
came to David, and reproved him, and denounced the Judgments of God against him
for those Sins. And in this Psalm he expressly refers to the Sin of Murder,
which he had been guilty of. v. 14. Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness, O God!
And it is supposed, he has Reference to his other Sin, in those Words, v. 10.
Create in me a CLEAN Heart, O God! -- Now it is commonly and justly observed,
that some Sins are immediately committed against GOD, such as, Blasphemy,
Idolatry etc. while other Sins immediately respect our Neighbor, and are
injurious to him, as was David's Murder and Adultery. -- And yet, it seems, if
we injure our Neighbor, God is sinned against, and we are to blame principally
on that Account. --

For observe (2.) The great Evil of David's Sins, as set forth in his
Confession, and that which made them so exceeding heinous, was, that they were
committed against God. -- Against Thee, Thee only (Thee chiefly and
principally) have I sinned. He had injured Uriah, and done wrong on that
Account: he had exposed himself to Reproach among his Subjects, and to Anguish
in his own Heart, and was to blame for bringing so great a Calamity on himself.
-- But the Greatness of his Sin consisted in its being against God. And this
seems to swallow up all his Heart, and to overwhelm him with Sorrow. Against
thee, thee only, have I sinned. And on this Account, his Sin appeared so great
to him, that he was ready to justify God, in the dreadful Sentence which God
denounced against him, by Nathan the Prophet: That his Wives should be defiled
in the Sight of the Sun, the Sword never depart from his House, and that his
Child should die. 2 Samuel xii.
Thou art just when thou speak, and clear when thou judge. Psalm. 51.4.
God had sent Nathan to charge home his Sin and Guilt upon him, and to tell
him, that by what he had done, he had despised the Lord, and despised the
Commandment of the Lord, and given Occasion to the Enemies of God to blaspheme
2 Samuel xii. 9, 10, 14.
-- He had despised the LORD, and despised the Commandment of the LORD; for God
had said, Thou shall not Kill, Thou shall not commit Adultery; for I am the
LORD. But David had practically said, I will commit Adultery with Bathsheba,
and gratify my Lust, for all that God says: and I will murder her innocent
Husband Uriah, that I may hide my Sin and Shame by this wicked Means,
notwithstanding the divine Prohibition. I don't care for God, nor his Law, or
Authority, so much, but that I will go through with my Designs, and that, let
come what will; for I value my Lust more than God, and my Reputation more than
his Honor; and therefore neither God, nor his Law, Authority or Honor will I
regard. This was the Language of David's Conduct! And this is the Language of
every Sin! -- And thus he despised the Commandment of God, and despised God
himself. And this was, with good Reason, charged home upon him, as the great
Evil of his Sin; and for which God would severely punish him. And in a Sense of
this, with a broken Heart, he cries out, Against thee, thee only, have I
sinned, and done this Evil in thy Sight: Wherefore thou art just when thou
speak, and clear when thou judge. -- And thus we see wherein the great
Evil of David's Sins did consist, both in the Sight of God, and to his own
Sense and Apprehension after he was become a sincere Penitent. And because
every Sin is as really committed against God, as those were; and so, what was
true, in this Case, will hold true, in all other Cases: Therefore from the
Words, we may make this Doctrinal Observation, viz.

DOCTRINE.
The great EVIL of every SIN consists in this, that it is committed against GOD.
Of every Sin -- not only of those which immediately respect God; as Blasphemy,
Idolatry, Sabbath-breaking, and the like; but also of those which immediately
respect and injure our selves, or Neighbors; as in this Case of David.

Their great Evil -- their great Aggravation, that which above all Things
renders us to blame, and deserving of Punishment for our Sins, is, that they
are against God. -- They may be against our own Interest and Honor in this
World; and we may be to blame on that Account. They may be against our Welfare
in the World to come; and we may be to blame on that Account. They may be
against our Neighbor's Good, for Time, or for Eternity, or both; and we may be
to blame in that Respect. But this is the great Evil of Sin, that it is against
God.

Some assert, that our great Obligation to Virtue arises from its Tendency to
our own particular Happiness: and that therefore the great Evil of Sin consists
in its Tendency to our own particular Misery. -- Others maintain, that our
great Obligation to Virtue arises from its Tendency to promote the public
Good: and consequently the great Evil of Sin must consist in its Tendency to
injure the Public. -- But the Scripture-Scheme is different from both: for
according to that, it seems, our great Obligations to Virtue must arise from
GOD; because, it is plain, in Scripture-Account, the great Evil of Sin consists
in its being against GOD. Against Thee, Thee only have I sinned.

Here I will attempt to show,

I. How, and in what Respects, Sin is against GOD. II. How great an Evil it is
on that Account. III. That this is the great Evil of Sin.
Which Heads being gone through, I shall offer some Remarks, and then apply the
whole to our own Use.

I am to show,

I. How, and in what Respects, Sin is against GOD.

And here,

1. Sin is contrary to the Nature of God. -- A sinful Nature and a holy Nature
are in direct Opposition; they are a perfect Contrariety to each other. The
carnal Mind is Enmity against God. Romans viii. 7.
And Sin is that abominable Thing which God's Soul abbors. Jer. xliv. 4.
The holy one of Irael is a Being of infinite Understanding, and of perfect
Rectitude; and has a complete and comprehensive View of all Things; and in all
Cases sees what is right and sit and beautiful to be done -- how the DEITY
should be loved and honored in the World which he has made -- and how his
Creatures and Subjects should live together in mutual Love and Benevolence, and
not an unjust or cruel Act be ever done through out all his Dominions. And as God
sees what is right and fit and beautiful, and what is contrary; so he is
accordingly affected toward Things. He loves Righteousness, and hates
Iniquity. Psalm. xiv. 7.
-- Let God be esteemed, reverenced, honored and obeyed -- Let Love and
Good Will prevail and be established among his Subjects -- Let every Thing of a
contrary Savor be eternally banished his Dominions; and God will be well
pleased: But if any Dishonor is done to the DEITY, or Injury to our
FellowSubjects, nothing can displease him more: for there is nothing he hates
like Sin: It is the abominable Thing which his Soul hates. Sin is more odious
and detestable to him, than the most abominable Thing on Earth is to us. His
Aversion to it is vehement beyond the Conception of any finite Mind. His
Aversion to it is absolutely infinite. -- In this Respect therefore Sin is
against God. It is a going directly contrary to his Nature; and that in the
most tender Point; in a Thing which comes nearest his Heart. Nothing is so
cross to him, nothing can disoblige him so much, or displease him, or grieve
his Heart, like this. -- As when a Man's Wife departs from him, and commits
Whoredom with another Man, and breaks his Heart by her ill Carriage: So, says
God, I am broken with their whorish Heart. Ezekiel. vi. 9. I am broken with their
whorish Heart. From the Covenant Relation between God and his People Israel,
they are said to be married unto him, Jer. iii. 14. and hence, their going from
God to Idols is called Whoredom. And to prefer an Idol before the true God was
a very provoking thing: Therefore he says, I am broken with their whorish
Heart. But to prefer a vile Lust before God seems to be in like Manner
provoking: it is a Kind of spiritual Idolatry. And yet, this is done in every
Act of Sin. No Sin can be committed, but God is grieved. Ephesians. iv. 30.
And therefore, says he, to his beloved People, It ye will not for all this
hearken unto me, but WALK CONTRARY unto me; then, such a Conduct would be so
intolerably provoking, I will not, I cannot bear it, but I will WALK CONTRARY
unto you also in FURY. Lev. x.vi. 27, 28.
But a sinful Conduct is called a walking contrary to God, in Scripture, not
only because it is thus in direct Contrariety to the divine Nature: but also
because

2. Sin is against the Law, Authority and Government of Almighty GOD -- For, as
God hates Sin with an infinite hatred; so he has with the utmost Engagedness
forbidden it: saying, Cursed is every one, that continues not in ALL Things
written in the Book of the Law, to do them. Gal. iii 10.
-- As Governor of the World He sets up himself against Sin; forbidding it
with all his Authority, and standing ready to punish it with all his Power: and
it is even one main End of his universal Government, to discountenance and
suppress it, throughout all his Dominions.

No doubt, Almighty GOD has Right to govern the World: for originally He is
absolute LORD of it; and by NATURE he is GOD MOST HIGH: and his GODHEAD and his
LORDSHIP give him an undoubted Right of Government. And accordingly He has
taken the Throne, set Himself up at the Head of the Universe, and undertaken
the Government of all Things, and especially of the whole System of
Intelligences. -- And,

No doubt, his Government is WORTHY to be universally submitted unto: for it is
all perfect and glorious. His Laws and his Dispensations are perfect in Wisdom,
Rectitude and Goodness: and even as He himself is infinitely worthy of all Love
and Veneration, so that his very Being affords infinite Ground of Joy among his
Creatures; even so his Government is just like himself, and exhibits his very
Image, and is WORTHY universally to be rejoiced in. As it is written, The Lord
reigns; let the Earth rejoice. Psalm. xcvii. 1.


Wherefore it is the fittest and happiest Thing in the World, to be, and do,
just what he requires: And in his Favor, and under the Protection of his
almighty Arm, there must be the most absolute Safety and Security. -- So that
it might reasonably have been expected, that all his Subjects, throughout all his
Dominions, would join to say, LET GOD REIGN FOR EVER; and that they would all,
with one Heart, have exulted at the Thought of being in Subjection to such a
KING.

But the Sinner comes in, and dissents from his whole Constitution, and that
both in Heart and Life. As for his Law, says he, I do not like it, and will not
obey it. As for his Authority, I do not own it, and will not regard it. As for
his universal Government and glorious Kingdom, it is not to my Mind -- I revolt
-- I will not have him to reign over me. Luke xix. 14.
I can prescribe better Rules to live by. I will not be dependent on him, nor
in subjection to him. Thus the Sinner revolts from his Government, casts off
his Authority, breaks his Law, and in the Language of Scripture, rebels against
the Lord. For, in Scripture, THIS is always considered as GOD's WORLD, He our
rightful LORD and KING; and all our Duty is enjoined, and all Sin is forbidden,
by his AUTHORITY; and therefore every Act of Sin is considered as an Act of
Rebellion against the Lord, and Sinners have the Character of Rebels. Deuteronomy. ix.
24. Ezekiel. xx. 8. 13, 21.


Now, in as much as God stands ready, at the Head of the Universe, to employ
his infinite Wisdom and almighty Power, to discountenance all Rebellions, and
suppress and crush all obstinate Rebels, and maintain good Government throughout
his Dominions; so that, Things being thus, there is no Way for the obstinate
Rebel to escape an eternal Overthrow, and everlasting Shame and Contempt: it is
therefore in his Heart, to wish the ALMIGHTY dethroned, his whole Government
overturned, and the Sword of Justice wrested from Him. And had he sufficient
Power on his Side, the latent Temper of his Heart would soon form into the
terrible Resolution; nor would he delay venturing on the dreadful Attempt. --
Thus, Sin is against the Law, Authority, and universal Government of Almighty
GOD. Hence, God esteems the Sinner as his Enemy: and accordingly, Sinners are
called Enemies to God, in Scripture. Romans v. 10. Col. i. 21.
And are said to be even Enmity against him. Romans viii. 7. The carnal Mind is
Enmity against God. N. B. The Apostle means here to give the Character of every
Christless Sinner. -- For to be carnally minded and to be in the Flesh, is one
and the same Thing, in the Language of the Apostle; as is evident from ver. 8.
But he looks upon all as being in the Flesh, who have not the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in them; as is plain from ver. 9. And those who have not the Spirit of
Christ, are none of his, ver. 9. Every Christless Sinner is therefore in the
Flesh, and at Enmity against God. This is the Doctrine of St. Paul. And just
thus God looks upon every unregenerate Sinner; however they look upon
themselves. -- And no wonder; for let Subjects conduct so toward an earthly
Prince, as all unregenerate Sinners do toward God, and their Prince would look
upon them as Enemies: Read Luke xix. 14, 27.
And they are not, says the Apostle, subject to the divine Law, neither indeed
can be.

And this leads me to add, that

3. Sin is against the Being of God. -- For, since God is at the Head of the
Universe (as was before said) and unchangeably determined to maintain good
Government throughout all his Dominions, and possessed of an almighty,
irresistible Power; there is no hope, that the obstinate Rebel should escape
Punishment, so long as God lives: for so long as God lives, God will reign: and
so long as God reigns supreme, obstinate Rebels cannot escape: for God's
Determination to punish Sin is immutable as his very Being: and therefore if
God lives, the impenitent Sinner must die. -- But those, who are Enemies to
God, had rather there should be no God, than that themselves should be punished.

When once a Creature has become so vile and impious, as to revolt from the
Government of the MOST HIGH, and begin Rebellion, and enter the Lists against
the ALMIGHTY; if left to himself, without any Restraint, or hope of Mercy, (and
we know, God was not obliged, to open a Door of Hope, to any Rebel in his
Dominions,) and if armed with sufficient Power to bear down all before Him; we
may easily guess, to what Length he would carry Things. The same Disposition,
which moved him to begin Rebellion, would naturally excite him to go on. By his
first Act of Rebellion his Life and Soul are for ever forfeited, according to
Law, and might justly have remained so. To repent, and undo what he had done,
and humble himself, and sue for Mercy, is what a Sinner, in such a Case, would
never do. And as to the threatened Punishment, he could never think of bearing
that. He would venture upon the boldest and the most DREADFUL Deeds, but that
he would carry his Point: Deeds, almost too dreadful to think of, and hardly
fit to hint at. -- Whosoever hates his Brother, is a Murderer, 1 John iii. 15.
as it is written; and would therefore murder his Brother, if left to his own
Heart, without any Restraint, and having sufficient Ability and Opportunity in
his Hands: What then would the Wretch do, who hates his Maker, is an Enemy to
his God, and even Enmity against him! -- We see how a guilty World has treated
the SON of God -- We see how they have treated the Prophets, and Apostles. Mat.
xxi. 33 -- 39. Mat. xxiii. 29 -- 37.
And we may easily guess what dreadful Work there would be, were the Sinner an
over-match for OMNIPOTENCY. Such is the inexpressible Malignity of Sin.

4. Sin is against the Honor of God. It Is even a despising the Lord, and a
treating the MOST HIGH with Contempt. -- All his Perfections are despised; and
considered as our Creator, Preserver, Governor, Redeemer, and the Fountain of
all Good, he is despised by Sin.

Hear the contemptuous Language of the Sinner's Conduct. -- "God sees you, O
Sinner! and will you dare to transgress?" Yes, his all-seeing Eye shall not
terrify me -- God is near at Hand! you are in his very Presence! O Sinner, will
you venture to offend? Yes, God's Presence shall not restrain me: I don't
regard him so much. -- But he is girt with Strength, and has an almighty Arm;
and you are but a Worm, without Strength, and can make no Resistance! will you
dare to provoke him to Jealousy? Yes, I will do as I please, let him do his
worst. -- But remember, he is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity! Oh,
therefore do not that abominable Thing, which his Soul hates! I care not what
he loves, nor what he hates: I will please my self, let him take it as he will.
-- But consider, he is unchangeably determined to render to every one according
to their Deeds, to him that does Evil, Tribulation and Wrath! and who can stand
before him, when once he is angry! for our God is a consuming Fire! Therefore,
O Sinner, forbear. No, I Will not be restrained: I Will gratify my Lusts, at all
Adventures. For I regard not his Threats. -- But he is a Being of infinite
Goodness and Mercy, Patience and Forbearance; and this should lead you to a
better Mind, O Sinner! No, no, I despise his Goodness, Long-suffering and
Forbearance; and I can be hard-hearted enough to go on, in spite of all his
tender Mercies. -- But, O Sinner, infinite Wisdom pronounces, that this your
Way is your Folly! and cries, Turn, O Turn at my Reproof! lest otherwise, ere
long, I laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes! and will you not
be dictated by the infinitely wise God? -- No, no, I know what is best for my
self, and that better than be does; and I choose to be my own Director, and to
walk in my own Ways." But is he not the God that made you? Have not his Hands
formed you? Are you then your own? Are you not the Lord's? And ought you not
therefore to be for him? I renounce the God that made me: I disown his Right to
me: I will not be for him, but for my self; for I will please my self, although
he is grieved. -- But consider, He has nourished and bro't you up tenderly, as
his own Child; and fed and clothed you all your Life long! and will you be
more sottish than the Ox and the Ass? Yes, Yes, after all, I will rebel against
Him. -- But how can you answer it? for He is your sovereign LORD and KING, you
are under his Authority, bound by his Law, and accountable at his Tribunal: and
you know what Threatenings he has given out. And now, if you have any Regard for
him, in any Respect, how dare you go on? These Things move me not. I will walk
in the Ways of my own Heart: nor will I be controuled. I know not the Lord, nor
will I obey him. And in the midst of all his Thunders, I can be at Ease in
Zion, and chant to the sound of the Viol. -- But if you go on thus to despise
the Lord, and to despise his Law, Authority and Government; what will be your
End, O Sinner! will not his Wrath wax hot, and smoke against you, and consume
you? Consider, therefore, how that after all this Wickedness he offers to be
reconciled through Jesus Christ; and invites you to Repentance! TURN YE, TURN YE,
WHY WILL YE DIE! and offers to be your God, and Father, and Portion. And now,
what Answer do you make, O Sinner! Why, look on us, and observe our Conduct,
and you and all the World may see, that we make light of it, and go our Ways,
one to his Farm, and another to his Merchandise: whereby we plainly declare,
that we despise the Grace of the Gospel, and had rather have the World for our
Portion than God himself. -- Thus God, in every Point of Light, is disesteemed,
disrespected, despised, and even treated with Contempt in the common Conduct of
the Sinner.

Any vile Lust is preferred before all the Fullness of God. Those Things and
Ways which please the Devil, God's inveterate Enemy, and the most malicious and
hateful Being in the Universe, are chosen, before those Things and Ways which
please Jehovah, the greatest and best of Beings. His Authority is trampled on,
at whose Presence the Mountains melt and the Earth trembles. A Worm of the Dust
sets up himself above the most high GOD, and his Will above God's, and his
Interest above God's Glory. If God offers Heaven, Sin despises it: if he
threatens Hell, Sin disregards it: If he pleads the dying Love of his SON, and
the Riches of his Grace, and beseeches the Sinner to be reconciled, Sin slights
it all: or if he commands Men to do their Duty to one another, Sin regards it
not: and that notwithstanding his Right to us as his Creatures, and Authority
over us as his Subjects, and our Obligations to him as the LORD OUR GOD. And
thus the MOST HIGH is by Worms of the Dust treated with Disrespect and
Contempt, and that to his Face, and in the Sight of the Sun, in his own World,
before his Creatures, before his Friends and Enemies; tending to bring a public
Odium upon him and his Ways, and to countenance and encourage Rebellion
throughout all his Dominions, and sink him and his Government into universal
Discredit, and bring an everlasting Reproach upon his great Name: Thus Sin is
against the Honor of God -- And upon this View of Things, may it not, in the

5th and last Place, justly be Enquired, Whether Sin be not against the
Happiness of GOD, and whether it does not open such a Scene to his view, as
naturally tends to grieve and distress such a Being as God is.

To look down from Heaven, the Throne of his Holiness and Glory, upon this
World, which he has made for himself; and survey all Mankind, by Nature his
Creatures, by Right his Subjects. designed to show forth his Praise; and behold
and see how they are revolted from his Government, turned Enemies to his
Majesty, and combined together in Rebellion against his Crown and Dignity. --
They are set in a Way which is not good, a Way most contrary to his Heart, full
of Impiety toward God, and Injustice and Cruelty toward one another. -- They
disregard his Laws, trample under Foot his Authority, despise his Goodness, and
bid Defiance to his Vengeance. -- And they are so much against him, that were
their Influence and Power sufficient to carry the Point, they would soon take
the Field. -- The Tendency of their common Conduct is, to dethrone his Majesty,
to overturn his Government of the Universe, to bring him into the deepest
Contempt, and every Thing that is Right and Good into the utmost Disgrace, and
to introduce Disorder, Confusion and Misery into his Dominions, and Rebellion
which should spread like a contagious Pestilence throughout all his Kingdoms,
until all his Subjects should revolt, and all join to treat him with Hatred and
Contempt, and even wish him not to be.

And if the Sun in the natural System should be extinct, and all the Light
turned into Darkness, and the whole natural World flung into the utmost
Confusion, every Orb displaced, every Thing turned upside down, it would not
represent half so dreadful and distressing a Scene; as would immediately be
opened to View, could Sin, without Control, and with Power irresistible, bear
down all Good and Right before it, and rise up to all to that Height of
Wickedness and Ruin, to which it naturally tends. -- And would not such a moral
System of Intelligences exhibit to view a Sight infinitely distressing to such
a Being as God is, were it beyond his Power and Wisdom ever to regulate Things?
But to such a Pass Sin tends to bring the moral World.

So far as we are able to conceive, it seems essential to every intelligent
Being, to be liable to mental Pain and Distress, when they are crossed in the
most tender Point; when their Nature and Will, Interest and Honor, and every
Thing that is dear to them, is counteracted and despised, and, as it were,
trampled under Foot: and they in the mean Time unable ever to regulate Things.
-- So it is evidently with Mankind; with bad and good. -- Ahab took to his Bed,
and refused to eat; because Naboth denied him his Vineyard. 1 King. xxi. 4.
Haman was grieved to the Heart, because Mordecai would not how to him. Esth.
iii. 5.
The chief Priests were in Anguish, because the Apostles preached Jesus and the
Resurrection, and filled Jerusalem with their Doctrine. Act. iv. 2. and v. 28.
And Rivers of Waters ran down David's Eyes, because Men kept not God's Law;
for that was a tender Point with him. Psalm. cxix. 136.
And Jeremiah was ready to be so afflicted, if the Jews would not hearken to
their Duty, as in secret Places to weep for their Pride. Jer. xiii. 17.
-- And so it was with the Man Christ Jesus: He was grieved and distressed at
the Hardness of Men's Hearts, Mar. iii. 5.
and wept over the obstinate Jews. Luke xix. 41.


And it is remarkable, that, in Scripture, God is constantly represented, as
being affected in the same Manner as Men are; and such Words and Phrases are
used, as denote painful and distressing Sensations, in order to set forth how
he is affected with the vile Conduct of his Creatures. He is said to be
grieved, wearied, to be made angry, to be provoked to Wrath, to be vexed; Isai.
lxiii. 10.
forty Years long was I grieved with this Generation, says God, referring to
the perverse Conduct of the Israelites in the Wilderness unto whom, says he, I
swear in my Wrath, that they should not enter into my Rest. Psalm. xcv. 10, 11.
And again, I am broken with their whorish Heart. Ezez. vi. 9.
And I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of Sheaves. Amos
ii. 13
All which are strong Expressions, as used among Men, to denote and set forth
Pain and Distress of Heart, at the Sight of something exceeding grievous.

Not that we are to suppose, that He, who is over all God blessed for ever, is
indeed really pained and distressed at the Sight of the shocking Conduct of his
rebellious Creatures. For, although he nas a full comprehensive View of the whole
of it; yet, at the same Time, he as plainly foresees to what a Result and Issue
all Things will finally be brought, by his infinite Wisdom and almighty Power:
whereby his Authority and Government will be but the more established
throughout all his Dominions, and his Name and his Law but the more revered.
And although a Number of obstinate rebels will be eternally miserable, under the
Punishment they justly deserve; yet, in the whole, God will be more glorious,
and perhaps the System more happy too, than if Sin had never been permitted,
and Misery had been for ever unknown. Such Power and Authority has he over all
Things to order and overruled, and such is his Wisdom, and such his Holiness,
Justice and Goodness, that he both knows he can, and knows he will, finally
bring Good out of Evil, Light out of Darkness, Order out of Disorder, and
Holiness, Harmony and Peace, out of all the Sin, Confusion and Uproar; and all
that has happened shall, through a long Eternity, serve as a Means, in the Sight
of all Worlds, to establish his Throne, confirm his Government, make his Law
honorable, his Justice appear tremendous, his Grace glorious, and Sin an
exceeding great and dreadful Evil. Therefore he enjoys a perfect Tranquillity
and an undisturbed Felicity, although a World of Wickedness lies open to his
View, and Millions of Things are transacted, which have a natural tendency to
grieve him (and that not merely forty Years long, but from Age to Age ever
since the World began) -- to weary him -- to vex his holy Spirit -- to break
his Heart -- to press him as a Cart is pressed, that is full of Sheaves.

But no Thanks to the Sinner, that God is happy. He is no Friend to God's
Felicity. His Ways tend to grieve and distress the HOLY ONE of Israel; and that
which is God's Comfort, is a Terror to the Sinner. He dreads the Day when all
Things shall be set to rights: and when the ALMIGHTY will ease himself of his
Adversaries, and avenge himself of his Enemies. Isai. i. 24.
Thus we see how Sin. is against GOD: it is against his Nature, -- Law,
Authority, Government, -- Being, -- Honor, -- Happiness.

And now,

II. I am to show how GREAT the Evil of Sin is on this Account. -- The Evil of
Sin, as has been observed, arises from our Obligations to do otherwise. And
therefore the greater our Obligations are to God, the greater is the Evil of
sinning against him. Our Obligations to love, honor and obey God, originally
arise from his Worthiness to be loved, honored and obeyed by us: But he is
infinitely worthy to be loved, honored and obeyed by us: therefore our
Obligations to do so, are infinite: and so, to sin against him must be esteemed
an infinite Evil.

But it is quite beyond our Capacity to comprehend the Vileness there is in
treating God, as the Sinner does; unless we could, as he can, comprehend all
his Greatness and Glory, and fully see all the Grounds and Reasons there are
for us to Love, Reverence and Obey him, and feel all their binding Force. --
God is fully conscious to himself, that he is infinitely worthy of all Love,
Honor and Obedience, for what he is in Himself: besides that he is the Maker
and Lord of the Universe; the Maintainer and Upholder of the World, and
rightful King and Sovereign over all. He is fully conscious, there is infinite
Reason for us to rejoice in him, exult in his Government, and be glad in his
Service; and that the contrary Temper and Conduct of his Creatures, is
infinitely unreasonable and wicked. And although we cannot comprehend the
exceeding Vileness of rising in Rebellion against the MOST HIGH; yet we may be
easily convinced, that it is an infinite Evil. Yea, if we are but really
convinced that God is infinitely great and glorious, it will be to us
selfevident, that he is infinitely worthy of all Love, Honor and Obedience:
and that, consequently, to disesteem, despise and disobey him, is infinitely
vile. -- It Is low and mean Thoughts of God, which causes secure Sinners to be
insensible of the great Evil of Sin. -- Those Heretics who deny the infinite
Evil of Sin, do but, by the Means, proclaim to the World their Ignorance of the
DEITY. -- Had not God known Sin to be an infinite Evil, he would never have
threatened an infinite Punishment; even, the eternal Pains of Hell, where the
Worm shall never die, and the Fire shall never be quenched. Mar. ix. 44, 46, 48.
-- And were not Christ, our compassionate Redeemer, sensible of the infinite
Evil of Sin, he could never find it in his Heart, at the Day of Judgment, to
say to the Wicked on his left Hand, Depart ye Cursed, into EVERLASTING Fire.
Mat. xxv. 41.
-- And were not all the Hosts of Heaven in the same Sentiment, they would
never join to say, Hallelujah, Salvation and Glory, and Honor and Power unto
the Lord our God: for true and righteous are his Judgments -- Hallelujah, for
the Lord God omnipotent Reigns -- when they see the Smoke of their Torments
ascending for ever and ever. Rev. xix. i, -- 6.
Yea, were not the Punishment apprehended to be justly deserved, it could not
answer any of the good Ends of Punishment in the moral World: but would for
ever appear a great and dreadful Blemish in the divine Conduct, in the Sight of
all intelligent Beings: God himself could not approve of it, and would never do
it. -- And therefore, notwithstanding it is so contrary to the natural
Sentiment of a Heart secure in Sin, yet we have sufficient Matter of
Conviction, that there is really an infinite Evil in Sin, as it is against God.
-- And when these Heavens and this Earth, which are now kept in Store, and
reserved unto Fire, against the Day of Judgment, and Perdition of ungodly Men,
shall all be in a Flame and melt with fervent Heat, and the whole material
System be dissolved, and wrapped together, hurled into one general Heap (perhaps)
to be everlastingly a Lake of Fire and Brimstone for the Punishment of the
Ungodly: 2 Pet. iii. v. -- 12.
I say, when God comes thus to show his Wrath, and make his Power known, in the
Destruction of the Wicked; Romans ix. 22.
It will make all intelligent Creatures, in Earth and Hell, effectually
sensible, what an Evil Sin is, and how God stands affected toward it. Romans ii.
5.
This visible Emblem of his Wrath, this immense Lake of Fire and Brimstone,
will give an exact and infallible Comment upon God's Law, and show, beyond
Dispute, what the Threatening means: Gal. iii. 10.
nor will it any more, throughout eternal Ages, at all be doubted, whether Sin
be an infinite Evil.

And thus we have taken a brief and general View, of the Evil of Sin, as it is
against God. -- We might indeed here enter into a great variety of Particulars,
and largely show, how Sin, as it is against God, is aggravated on many
Accounts; not only considering merely what he is in himself, but the Relations
he stands in to us, and we to him, our Dependence on him, his Right to us, his
Authority over us, the greatness of redeeming Love, the freeness of
Gospel Grace, etc. And it might be distinctly considered, how amazingly vile it
is, for such as we be, to treat such a one as God is, in such Sort, under such
Circumstances, and notwithstanding such additional Bonds and Obligations lying
upon us. -- But I must omit this, and pass on

III. To prove, that the GREAT EVIL of Sin consists in THIS, that it is against
GOD. -- And this may easily appear. -- For a few Words may soon make it
evident, that, although Sin may really be a very great Evil, as it is injurious
to our Fellow-Men, or to our Selves; yet it is not so aggravated and heinous,
by infinite Odds, in these Respects, as on Account of its being against GOD. --
To injure our Fellow Creatures, is wrong, very wrong; but what is a Worm of the
Dust, compared to the LIVING GOD? If one Man sin against another, the Judge
shall judge him; (and some Recompense may be made,) but if a Man sin against
the Lord, who will entreat for him? (or make any Atonement for his Crime?) 1 Samuel ii. 25.
Yea, if by some Act of Sin we could do the greatest Injury to the whole
Creation; yet what is the whole Creation compared with GOD, the ALMIGHTY
CREATOR? It is all but as a Dust of the Balance, or a Drop of the Bucket.
Isai. xl. 17.
We may ruin our selves by Sin; we may plunge our selves headlong into
Destruction: but what are we, compared with the GREAT JEHOVAH? Less than
nothing and vanity. Isai. xl. 15.
And what is a guilty Rebel worth, compared with the MAJESTY of HEAVEN? To rise
up in Rebellion against the GREAT GOD, go contrary to him, affront him, and
treat him with Contempt, is evidently the most wicked and heinous Thing that
possibly can be done. For here the GREATEST and BEST of Beings is insulted:
yea, a BEING who is infinitely better than all other Beings put together. This
is therefore the greatest Evil there is in Sin, by infinite Odds.

And accordingly thus we find the Matter stands in Scrip ture-Account. When Men
are guilty of such wicked Deeds, as are injurious to Themselves, or to their
Fellow Creatures, yet by God, the righteous Judge, they are blamed and punished
for these Sins, principally and chiefly, under the Notion of their being
committed against the LORD. -- Thus, when the Israelites were disheartened by
the evil Report of the Spies, and refused to go up against the Canaanites, and
talked of making Captains, and returning to Egypt; although this Conduct tended
to disinherit themselves and their Posterity of the Land of Canaan for ever,
yet it is not on this Account, chiefly, that they were blamed, and so
dreadfully punished (Nay, it is not so much as once mentioned, to aggravate
their Crime, or to show the Justice of their Punishment) But it was all because
they had finned against the LORD. -- God had said, that he would drive out the
Nations before them: but they would not believe him. God had commanded them to
go up and take Possession: but they would not obey him. They did not believe he
would be as good as his Word; they were afraid to run such a Venture, as to
trust his Fidelity; they had rather rebel against his Command, return to Egypt.
Wherefore God is represented as being greatly affronted and provoked, and as
swearing in his Wrath, that they should never enter into his Rest. Psalm. xcv.
11.
As truly as I live, says the Lord, your Carcases shall fall in this
Wilderness. Numb. xiv. 28, 29.
But why was God so angry? Because they had rebelled against the Lord, ver. 9
would not believe him, ver. 11.
nor bearken to his Voice: ver. 22.
i.e. Not because their Conduct was to their own Damage, but because it offered
an Affront to God. Although it does not appear, that they had acted with a Design
to affront the ALMIGHTY; but rather from a Principle of Self Preservation. Just
as Sinners now adays do, who turn their Backs upon the heavenly Canaan, and
lust after the Leeks and Onions of Egypt, the Pleasures of Sin, not with any
Design to affront God; but from Self-Love, and to gratify the Desires of their
Hearts, all in pursuit of Happiness. But yet really in Fact they turn their
Backs upon the ALMIGHTY, and despise his Commands; and for their offering this
Affront to the DEITY, Damnation is threatened; and not so much because they go
contrary to their own Interest. -- And so again, there is the Instance of
David, who, it is plain, had no Design to affront the MOST HIGH: but first he
meant to gratify his Lust with Uriah's Wife; and afterward contrived to save
his Credit by taking away Uriah's Life: yet observe his Charge and his Doom
from the Mouth of the Lord -- Because thou have despised the Lord, and despised
the Commandment of the Lord, and given the Enemies of the Lord occasion to
blaspheme; therefore so and so will I punish you. 2 Samuel 12.
Therefore says David to God, Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned. -- See
also that Confession in Daniel ix. 9 -- 12. And that large Representation of
the Nature of what passed between God and his People of old, and the Reasons
and Grounds of the Judgments inflicted upon them, in Ezekiel. xx.throughout. --
The Scripture ever supposes, that all Manner of Sin, of what Kind soever, is
committed against the Lord, who is constantly considered as GOVERNOR of the
World; and therefore the Sinner is viewed as a Rebel. -- But to rebel against
the Lord, is to despise him, and to despise his Commands, in Scripture-Account.
-- But to despise GOD MOST HIGH, is infinitely more vile, than to injure such
Worms of the Dust, as we Mortals; because God is infinitely greater and better.
To despise God most high, is infinitely more vile, than to injure such Worms of
the Dust, as we Mortals; because God is infinitely greater and better. --
Therefore, (1.) We are under infinite Obligations to Virtue, antecedent to any
selfish Considerations. And so (2.) There is an infinite Evil in Sin, over and
above its natural Tendency to promote the Misery of our Selves or Neighbors.
-- And consequently (3.) It deserves an infinite Punishment to be inflicted,
over and above that Pain which naturally results from it. -- And hence (4.) A
rational Account may be given of the Eternity of Hell Torments. -- And (5.) We
may see why such an Atonement for Sin was needful, as the Blood of the SON of
GOD. And now also (6.) We may see the true Nature of the modern Scheme of
Divinity. -- They say, -- Our great Obligation to Virtue arises from its
Tendency to make us happy; -- therefore the great Evil of Sin consists in its
Tendency to make us miserable: -- and so Sin is not an infinite Evil, -- nor
does it deserve an infinite Punishment, nor will Hell Torments be eternal: --
nor was an infinite Satisfaction to divine Justice needful, -- nor indeed,
strictly speaking, any Satisfaction to divine Justice at all: -- So, no Need of
a GOD for our Redeemer: -- Hence, Christ Jesus was but a mere Man; -- and the
Gospel, only the Religion of Nature republished and reinforced, etc.etc. -- It
is all because they know not the Lord. As it is written, The Fool says in his
Heart, There is no God: corrupt are they. For having no Sense of God upon their
Hearts, or of the Importance of his Honor and Glory; they are prepared to
imagine, that the Happiness of the Creature is of the greatest Importance of
any Thing in Heaven or Earth. As though the Creature were better than the Creator
-- which is to make a God of the Creature -- which prepares the Way in their
Scheme, to make a Creature of GOD, i. e. of Jesus Christ, who is over all GOD
blessed for ever, -- who yet, say they, is but a mere Creature. -- For valuing
themselves so high, and GOD so low, hence they see but little or no Evil in Sin
as it is against God: and so feel little or no want of a Redeemer, or of an
Atonement: so no need of a GOD, to interpose and die in their Behalf: a mere
Creature might answer all the Ends needful: therefore they are prepared to
think Jesus Christ was no more: and it is not what the Scripture says, but what
suits with their own Notions, which, to them, will appear true, or by them be
believed.
This therefore is the great Evil in Sin, which is respected, when temporal
Judgments are threatened in the old Testament, and when eternal Damnation is
threatened in the NEW: so that it is evidently a Point, every where in the
BIBLE, taken for granted, that the great EVIL of Sin consists in its being
committed against GOD.

Having thus gone through with what was proposed, some Remarks may be made, and
then the whole be applied to our own Use.

REMARK I. How different a Thing is SIN from what an apostate rebellious World
naturally imagine! -- How blind are we naturally to the infinite Greatness,
Majesty and Glory of GOD! How insensible of the Honourableness of the almighty
Lord of Heaven and Earth, and of his Worthiness to be loved, honored and
obeyed! -- If any of our Fellow-Mortals despise, affront or injure us, they
touch, as it were, the Apple of our Eye: but God may be abused, and we take
little or no Notice of it. A thousand Times Men break his Laws, and a thousand
Times they despise and affront him by their sinful Doings; while they are
possessed of such a prodigious Degree of Stupidity, as not to pass a single
Though It upon it. And should any charge them with despising the Lord, there are
many would be ready to say (with those Mal. 1.6.) Wherein have we despised him?
You despise God in your Closets, in your Family Worship, in your public
Worship, and at the Lord's Table: and yet, O secure Sinner, will you still say,
Wherein do I despise him? You give your choicest Affections to Idols, and offer
the Blind and the Sick to the Lord: yea, a blind and a dead Heart. -- Is it not
burdensome to maintain secret Prayer? and more tedious to spend an Hour alone
with God, than a whole Day with vain Company? And is not this to despise the
Lord? Offer such Treatment to your Companions? Let them see that you are weary
of their Company; even then, when you are waiting upon them with Pretenses of
the greatest Respect: and will they accept it at your Hands? or be pleased with
your Conduct? Besides, you are continually despising God in your daily Course,
by a Disposition to take greater Delight in the Things of the World, and in the
Way of Sin, than in the ever blessed God: and by a Disposition to love your
self more than Him; and be more concerned for your Honor and Interest in the
World, than for God's Glory, and the Interest of his SON's Kingdom. -- And you
despise the Lord, and despise the Commandments of the Lord, in every of your
Thoughts, Words and Actions, that are in any Measure injurious to your
Fellow Creatures. -- But such is the Sottishness of a secure Sinner, that he
scarce passes a single Thought upon it, for Days and Weeks and Months and
Years, how the infinitely glorious and ever-blessed GOD, is by him continually
affronted and despised.

But, turn the Tables -- Let the secure Sinner meet with Abuses from his
Neighbors: let him be despised: let him be scorned: let even his Inferiors
treat him with Contempt: let his Name be cast out as evil, by all Men: let
every Man's Hand be against him, to defraud him in their Dealing with him, to
disappoint him and vex him: And now he will feel it; it will reach his Heart;
he will think of it Night and Day; aggravate it continually; and be ready to
cry out, Never was Mortal abused as I am! Never were there such wicked Doings
in the World before!

If GOD is despised, affronted, and abused; the Sinner's Heart is a Heart of
Stone: he cannot feel it: for he does not care for God. -- But let it come to
his own Case; and his Heart is a Heart of Flesh, very tender; as tender as the
Apple of one's Eye: every T^^^^ touches him to the quick: for he loves himself
dearly. -- If God is abused and injured, an apostate World care little about
it: but if themselves are wronged, it is highly resented. -- Hence, this is the
Doctrine of ungodly selfish Hearts, viz. THE GREAT EVIL OF SIN CONSISTS IN ITS
BEING AN INJURIOUS THING TO US. Nor, indeed, is it very strange, that a
rebellious World care so little for God's Honor. For this is the Nature and
Way of Rebels in earthly Kingdoms; when they have cast off their rightful
Sovereign, and turned Enemies to him, they care not what becomes of him, nor
how he is treated. Their only Concern is about themselves, and to secure their
own Welfare. In order to which, they may do many toilsom and heroic Deeds, and
call them by the Name of VIRTUE, Call them by the Name of VIRTUE. -- When
MILTON has represented Satan, the mighty Chief among the Powers of Darkness, as
willing, at all Adventures, to undertake a Voyage from Hell to Earth, in order
to seduce Man, and find out for the mselves a Habitation more comfortable than
that burning Lake: he introduces all the infernal Crow, as paying a public
Honor to his VIRTUE. " -- They rose:
" -- Toward him they bend
"With awful Reverence prone; and as a God
"Extol him equal to the highest in Heaven:
"Nor failed they to express how much they praised,
"That for the general Safety he despised
"His own: (for neither do the Spirits damned
"Lose all their Virtue; lest bad Men should boast
"Their specious Deeds on Earth, which Glory excites;
"Or close Ambition varnished over with Zeal.)"
Milton, Paradise lost, Book ii. lin. 575. And in the same Page, in very
beautiful Lines, he intimates, what indeed is agreeable to our Savior's Words,
Matt. xii. 25, 26. that there is a great Appearance of Love and good Agreement
among Devils; the Kingdoms of this World are divided against themselves; but
Satan's Kingdom is not. -- And elsewhere, the following Lines.

"O Shame to Men! Devil with Devil damned
"Firm Concord holds, Men only disagree,
"Of Creatures rational, though under hope
"Of heavenly Grace: and, God proclaiming Peace,
"Yet live in Hatred, Enmity and Strife
"Among themselves, and levy cruel Wars,
"Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:
"As if (which might induce us to accord)
"Man had not hellish Foes enough besides,
"That, Day and Night, for his Destruction wait"
Par. Lost. Book ii. l. 496. And yet the little Appearance of public Love and
public Spirit there is among Mankind, although not so well united among
themselves as Devils be, is by some Writers wonderfully applauded, as true
Virtue, and used as an unanswerable Argument, to prove that Mankind naturally
have, in a Measure, that moral Image of God, which it is acknowledged the Devils
have totally lost: and that notwithstanding we are represented in Scripture as
being dead in Sin (Ephesians. iii. 1.) -- by Nature Children of Wrath (ver. 3.) --
Enemies to God (Romans v. 10.) -- Enmity against him (Romans viii. 7.)


which Virtue of theirs they may honor and reward, and labor to countenance
and promote it; but it is all the while only to serve their own Ends. And they
are nevertheless a Company of Rebels, in the Estimation of their rightful
Sovereign. -- The Application is easy.

REM. 2. How amazing is the Patience of God, toward a rebellious guilty World!
and how astonishing the divine Goodness, which sends Rain and fruitful Seasons,
filling their Hearts with Food and Gladness; when Hell is their proper Place,
and the Pains of the Damned their just Desert! -- God looks down from Heaven
upon the Children of Men, and beholds the Work of his Hands combined in
Rebellion against him, their rightful Sovereign: contemning his Nature and
Will, despising his Law and Authority, and of a Temper bad enough to dethrone
him, and overturn his universal Government, had they sufficient Power on their
Side: and conscious to his own infinite Glory, and to the Reasonableness and
Excellency of his Government, and the infinite Obligations his Creatures are
under to him; he has an adequate Idea of the infinite Vileness of their Temper
and Conduct, and of the infinite Provocation they give him, immediately to come
out against them: yet he stays his Hand: Yet he stays his Hand. N. B. It is, in
Scripture, attributed to the GREATNESS of GOD's Power, that he is able to
contain Himself, and to keep back his Hand from destroying the God-provoking
Sinner immediately. Numb. xiv. 17. And had he not a Strength and Fortitude of
Mind infinitely great, it would doubtless be beyond him to bear with Mankind a
Minute longer. Such infinite Provocations would be too much for any but an
infinite Patience.
He holds back Destruction: He waits upon a guilty World from Age to Age; and
feeds and clothes the Wretches that aftront him to his Face. But

REM. 3. How dreadful will the Day of Wrath be! and how miserable the State of
the obstinate Sinner! when God's Patience shall be at an End, and his Hand
shall take hold on Vengeance, and render a Recompense to the Wicked, equal to
the infinite Evil of their Sins. -- If one Sin, and the least Sin, has so great
an Evil in it, and deserves so great a Punishment; how dreadful must their
State be, who have committed Hundreds and Thousands and Millions of Sins, and
Sins of the largest Size, wherein they have cast the greatest Contempt on the
MOST HIGH, Millions of Times over! Their Torments must be, not only eternal,
but exceeding intense and very dreadful. The least Sin deserves eternal
Damnation; Gal. iii. 10.
every Degree of Guilt deserves a proportionable Degree of Punishment; the more
guilty, the more miserable: Romans ii. 6.
the Torments of the Damned will therefore be not only eternal in Duration, but
most dreadful in Degree. Hence it is written, that God will show his Wrath and
make his Power known in their Destruction. Romans ix. 22.
His Power was made known in creating the Heavens and the Earth: and by the
same Power these Heavens and Earth, which are now kept in Store, reserved unto
Fire, against the Day of Judgment, and Perdition of ungodly Men; I say, by the
same Power, which first created them, they shall at last be dissolved, burnt
up, melted; and so be turned into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone: and when the
Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, all in a Flame, and the whole
material Universe be hurled together to one general Heap, then his Power will
be made known. 2 Pet. iii. 7, 10, 12.
-- And then he will show his Wrath. Now God is insulted and despised by Worms
of the Dust; and yet is very bountiful to his Enemies, and seems to take no
Notice of their Affronts. As it is written, These Things have thou done, and I
kept Silence. Psalm. l. 21.
For now is the Time for Patience to reign: But when the Day of Wrath comes,
Romans ii. 5.
God will let all the World see and know, how infinitely vile it is, for Worms
to rise in Rebellion against the MOST HIGH. When the Heavens begin to be on
Fire, and the Elements to melt with fervent Heat, a guilty World will begin
effectually to be roused to a Sense of what they have done. Now God will show
his Wrath; and now a rebellious World will feel their Guilt.

REM. 4. How far beyond the Capacity of any finite Creature is it, to make
Amends to God for the least Sin, which casts such an infinite Contempt upon the
Most High! -- A Worm may rise in Rebellion against the great Jehovah, and may
despise God, and despise the Commandments of God, and make a light Matter of
it: But if he would give Thousands of Rams, and ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil,
to make Amends for his Crime, it would not answer. Yea, if he would give his
Firstborn for his Transgression, and the Fruit of his Body for the Sin of his
Soul, it would not avail. Micah vi. 7.
It is easy, for a haughty Worm to despise the Majesty of Heaven: but it is
beyond the Reach of all created Nature, to make a proper Amends to God for such
an Injury. It is, even between Man and Man, easier to do Wrong, than to undo
it: but it is clean beyond the whole Creation, to make Amends to God for the
least Sin. For it requires an infinite Atonement: but if all finite Creatures
in Heaven and Earth should join together to do and suffer their utmost, it
would not amount to any Thing infinite. -- And besides, What can a Creature do
toward making the least Degree of Atonement for Sin? For, what he does, must
either be, what God requires, or what God does not require. If it be what God
does not require, God will not accept of it; for there is no Virtue in it: And
if it be no more than what God requires, it is no more than his Duty. And his
paying a present Debt, cannot atone for a Fault that is past. The Creature is
not his own, he wholly belongs to God, and all that he has; he has nothing
therefore to give to God, but what is his own already. If he gives himself to
God, wholly to God, it is the most that he can do: and yet he was wholly the
Lord's before. It is beyond the Capacity of the Creature, therefore, to make
the least Degree of Atonement for Sin. He may justly lie under the whole Guilt,
and be exposed to the whole Punishment of it, notwithstanding the utmost he can
do: If ever he is saved, therefore, it must be by free Grace through Jesus Christ.

REM. 5. How absolutely necessary was it, that our REDEEMER should be GOD! --
For otherwise, he could have nothing properly his own; and so nothing to offer,
for to make Atonement. But being by Nature GOD, he is now naturally his own;
and so may offer to God, that which is his own, and that which is of infinite
Worth too. A Being of infinite Dignity can make an infinite Atonement. And such
an Atonement it was, that we needed. Without such an Atonement, we must have
perished. Therefore, God purchased his Church with his own Blood. Act. xx. 28.


REM. 6. How great is the Goodness of God, that he could find it in his Heart,
to give his only begotten SON to die for such an apostate, rebellious, guilty
Race! A Race, which had treated him so vilely, that in Honor he could not
pardon them, -- the Honor of himself, of his Holiness and Justice, of his Law
and Government, and sacred Authority, would not allow of their being pardoned,
-- unless his own Son, equal to himself in Power and Glory, were set forth to
be a Propitiation for Sin. Romans iii. 25, 26.
A Race, that are habitually inclined to despise him, cast off his Government,
walk contrary to him; and who, were they able, would soon join in the most
impious Attempt against his Crown and glorious Dignity. -- O! that he could
find in his Heart, to love and pity them; and this, to so great a Degree, as to
give his only begotten SON to die in their Stead; and now, through him, offer to
be reconciled, and invite them to return, and tender them Pardon, Peace and
eternal Life; -- This is the most astonishing Goodness!

APPLICATION.
NOW, are you convinced of these Truths? Do you look upon Sin in this Light?
Are you sensible, that all Sin is thus against God, against his Nature, Law,
Authority, Honor, etc.? -- Do you know, that this is God's World? That you are
God's Creatures and Subjects? That he is your Lord and Owner? That he has an
entire Right to you, and an absolute Authority over you? That you are entirely
dependent upon Him, infinitely indebted to Him, absolutely under his
Government? -- And do you know, that the LORD your GOD is a GREAT GOD, and a
GREAT KING, infinitely worthy of all Love, Honor and Obedience? -- And do you
see what a great Evil it is, to rise in Rebellion against the MOST HIGH, slight
his Authority, throw off his Government, break his Law, go contrary to Him, do
the abominable Thing which his Soul hates? Do you see what Contempt this casts
upon God? And how it tends to grieve his Heart? For a Worm to set up against
the ALMIGHTY! For a Creature, absolutely dependent, to turn his Back upon his
Creator, in whose Hands his Life and Breath is, and whose are all his Ways! To
love Sin more than the infinitely glorious God! To delight in earthly Pleasures
more than in the supreme Fountain of all Good! To be more concerned to please
Fellow-Rebels and secure their Favor, than to please the sovereign Lord of the
Universe, and secure his Favor! Do you see the infinite Malignity of such a
Conduct?

Oh Sinner! if you never saw the great Evil of SIN, you are to this Day a
Stranger to God, and blind to the infinite Beauty of his Nature; and are to
this Day under the Power of Sin, and in an impenitent and unpardoned State.
Never was a Sinner pardoned, while impenitent: never was a Sinner truly
penitent, while insensible of the great Evil of Sin: and never did a Sinner see
the great Evil of Sin, before he was first acquainted with the infinitely great
and glorious God. -- You may indeed have been sorry for Sin on other Accounts;
as, that you have exposed your self to Shame before Men; or hurt your Estate;
or bro't God's Judgments upon you in this Life; or exposed your self to his
Judgments in the Life to come: Or, perhaps, in Times past, you have been
greatly awakened, and terrified, and then filled with Joy and even ravished,
through a false, but confident Persuasion your Sins were pardoned; and in
Consequence of this, from natural Gratitude, have felt real Grief, for your
Sins against God, considered merely as your great Benefactor. That those
religious Affections, which Men may have toward God, considered merely under
the Notion of a Benefactor, are not of the Nature of saving Grace, is evident
from Job i. 9, 10, 11. and Matthew. v. 46.
But if you never saw the great Evil of Sin, as it is against a God who is
infinitely glorious in himself, your Repentance was never genuine: and you are
yet unpardoned.

Here it may be observed, that, if ever Men were thro'ly convinced of this
great Evil of Sin, the Conviction would be permanent and abiding. For where
true Grace is ever wrought in the Heart, it will continue. The Water, that
Christ gives, will be in us a never-failing Fountain, a Well of Water,
springing up into everlasting Life. Joh. iv. 14.
Those, therefore, who were greatly terrified with their Sin and Guilt some
Years ago, but have since learnt to make a light Matter of Sin, and can easily
get quiet, and go on in their evil Ways, they never truly saw the great Evil of
Sin. -- Yea, I may add, that where true Grace was ever wrought in the Heart, it
will not only continue, but increase; like the Mustard Seed, which grows into a
Tree; Matt xiii. 31, 32.
and so a Sight and Sense of the great Evil of Sin will consequently increase
and strengthen. For as Men grow in the Knowledge of God and Sense of his Glory,
and of their Obligations to him: so proportionably will they see more and more
of the infinite Evil there is in Sin, as it is against him. -- The Case
therefore may soon be decided against all those, who were once awakened and
enlightened, but have since fallen away, and returned with the Dog to his Vomit,
and with the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire. 2 Pet. ii. 22.
Their Eyes never were truly opened: the Heart of Stone was never taken away:
They never tasted the Bitterness of Sin to good Purpose: and they are still in
the Gall of Bitterness, and Bonds of Iniquity: Act. viii. 23.
And must return to their Awakenings and Sorrows again, in this World, or in
the World to come.

Answer me, to these six Questions.

1. Does God's Government appear reasonable, and his Law just? -- Behold, and
see how God governs the World; observe how he looks upon Sin, and how he treats
it. -- The sinning Angels, for their first Transgression, are turned out of
Heaven, and doomed to an eternal Hell. -- Our fallen World too, but for the
Interposition of a Mediator, had sunk into eternal Ruin. -- Every impenitent
Sinner will, at the Day of Judgment, be sentenced to depart to everlasting
Burnings. -- Now, does it appear reasonable, that Sin should be so severely
punished? -- In Heaven, they cry, Hallelujah! just and righteous are thy
Judgments, Lord God Almighty! But what is the Language of your Heart? Say, do
you approve God's Government? or be you an Enemy to it? -- And, in all this,
God does but proceed exactly according to LAW. For the Law says, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all Things. Gal. iii. 13.
-- Now, do you heartily approve the Law as strictly just, that threatens
eternal Damnation for the least Sin? Does Sin appear so great an Evil, as to
deserve, in all Reason and Justice, to be so severely punished? Put it to your
own Case; and can you justify God and his Law?

2. Can you justify God in his present Dispensations toward you? How are you
actually affected under those Chastisements, which God inflicts upon you for
Sin in this World? -- When God told David, that for his Sins, his Wives should
be defiled in the Sight of the Sun, the Sword never depart from his House, and
his Child should die; 2 Samuel xii.
penitent David says, Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned, and done this
Evil in thy Sight: wherefore thou art just when thou speak, and clear when
thou judge. And when, afterward, he fled out of Jerusalem, from the Face of
Absalom, and Shimei cursed him, and said, Come out, come out, thou bloody Man!
broken hearted David said, The Lord has hidden him, Let him alone. 2 Samuel xvi.
Jer. xii. 1.
For he plainly saw, he deserved it at the Hands of God. -- And is it the
native Language of your Heart, when God lays his Hand heavy upon you --
Righteous art thou, O Lord! 2 Samuel xii.
Can you justify God in his Dispensations toward you? God always, in this
World, punishes us far less than our Iniquities deserve: Ezra ix. 13.
And a Sight of the great Evil of Sin will effectually make it appear so to us.

3. Is it become natural to you, to look upon Hell as your proper Due, in such
Sort, as that every Thing in your Circumstances, wherein you are better on it
than the Damned, appears as mere, pure Mercy? Are you so vile, and
Hell-deserving, in your own Account? Do you appear so, in your own Eyes, as in
the Sight of God? And do you accordingly attribute all you have, that is better
than Hell, to mere, pure Mercy? And go up and down the World, wondering at the
Goodness and Patience of God? These Things naturally arise from a Sight of the
great Evil of Sin.

4. Do you deserve eternal Damnation, Now, to your own Sense and Apprehension,
as much as ever you did? Be it so, that you have been brought to true
Repentance for your past Sins, and have been sincerely devoted to God for these
many Years, and that you live a Life of Penitency and godly Sorrow from Day to
Day, and enjoy sweet Communion with God, and a Sense of his Favor; and have
good Hopes of eternal Life; yet, considered merely as in your self, in strict
Justice, what do you deserve at the Hands of God? Do you deserve Hell still?
And do you deserve it as much as ever you did? Or does it seem as if you had
made some Amends for the Sins of former Years, by your Repentance and Piety
since? Or does your daily Repentance make any Amends to God for your daily
Short-comings? If you see the great Evil of Sin, it will be a clear Case to
you, that you never did, nor ever can, make the least Satisfaction to God, for
the least Sin. And therefore, instead of imagining, that you deserve better at
the Hands of God than once you did, you will naturally see, that you grow more
and more unworthy and ill-deserving. For, besides former Transgressions, there
are your daily Shortcomings, whereby you are continually meriting Hell, without
doing any Thing, in the least Measure, to make Amends for what is past.

And now,

5. Do all your Hopes of finding Mercy at last, take their Rise, only and
absolutely, from the free Grace of God, through Christ, as revealed in the
Gospel? St. Paul was doubtless one of the holiest Men, that ever lived: yet no
Man seems so sensible of his own Vileness, and Need of Christ and free Grace.
The Law, says he, is spiritual; But I am carnal, sold under Sin. Oh wretched
Man that I am! Romans vii. 14, 24.
I am less than the least of all Saints. Ephesians. iii. 8.
By the Deeds of the Law no Flesh can be justified. Romans iii. 20.
And he ever looks to be justified by free Grace, through the Redemption that is
in Christ Jesus. Romans iii. 24.
He is concerned, to be found, not in himself, having on his own Righteousness;
but to be found in Christ, having on his Righteousness. Phil. iii. 8, 9.
In a Word, it was his Character, to worship God in the Spirit, to rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence in the Flesh. Phil. iii. 3.
And this, which was his Character, will be your Nature, if you really see the
great Evil of Sin.

6. Is it become natural to you, to be afraid of SIN, of all Sin, as the
greatest Evil? Are you afraid of secret, as well as open Sins? Of sinful
Thoughts, as well as sinful Actions? Of an ungracious, unholy Frame of Heart,
as well as an unholy Life? Are you afraid of having your Heart turn away from
God, the Fountain of all Good? Of losing a Relish for secret Prayer? Of
wandering Thoughts on the Sabbath, and at Sacrament? And are you afraid of
whatsoever tends thereto; such as, vain Company, a merry Way of Living, Love to
the World, neglecting to watch the Heart? Do you make Conscience of walking
with God, and of maintaining Communion with the most High, in your Closets, and
Families, and in the House of God? Or does not a Round of Duties, and Form of
Religion, content you? -- Do you make Conscience of loving your Neighbor as
your self, and doing as you would be done by; paying your Debts, at the Time
agreed upon, and showing Mercy to the Poor? Do you make Conscience of it, to
bridle your Tongue, to avoid Tattling, and acting as busy-bodies in other Men's
Matters? Do you make Conscience of it, not to mispend your Time, in fruitless
Visits, -- at Taverns, -- in Frolicks, or in any other vain or unprofitable
Way: but to devote your Time and all your Talents, to the Service of God? -- If
you see your Obligations to God, you will make Conscience of pleasing him in
all Things. If you see the great Evil of Sin, you will be afraid of it in every
Shape. If it appears to you as the greatest of Evils, you will be most afraid
of it. You will be more afraid of Sin, than of any worldly Loss, or than of any
Reproach, or Shame, or Suffering, or than even of Death it self. However it may
be with a good Man, for a Fit, this is his habitual Temper. Luke xiv. 26.
Indeed, in general, Men are but little afraid of Sin: they will go into the
Way of it: they will run into Temptations, to Taverns, to Frolicks, to vain
Company; and care but little or nothing, about the Love of God, and secret
Prayer: no, nor so much as whether they are honest in their Dealings, and true
to their Promises: And yet, alas! are ready to imagine themselves to be the
Children of God.

However, an habitual Sense of the great Evil of Sin, is so essential to vital
Piety, that without it, Men (let their past Experiences and their present
Pretenses be what they will) are but mere Hypocrites. Their Repentance is
counterfeit: their Faith is false: their Religion is all unfound. If you know
not the great Evil of Sin, you know nothing, yet, as you ought to know. You are
a Stranger to God, ignorant of your own Heart, and of the deplorable Condition
you are in, and to this Day are unhumbled, impenitent and unpardoned.
Wherefore, consider these Things, answer these Questions; and see, and say,
what is your State.

Oh! how doleful is the State of secure, Christless Sinners! At Enmity against
God! Rebels against the Majesty of Heaven! Their Frame of Heart and Manner of
Life, a continual despising the Lord! a Grief to the holy One of Israel! a
constant Provocation! And yet alas, they know it not; nor does it once enter
into their Hearts: They go on at Ease, and are merry, as though all were well.
And little think, what is just before them -- The Day of Accounts drawing nigh
-- a Day of Darkness -- of Gloominess -- and of thick Darkness -- and of great
Wrath!

Awake, O stupid Sinner! Look round; see what you do; see where you are; and
consider what will be the End. Can your Hands be strong, or your Heart endure,
O guilty Rebel, when GOD ALMIGHTY shall come forth to deal with you, according
to your Crimes! --

Behold, now is a Day of Grace: and God is ready to be reconciled: a Door of
Mercy is opened, by the Blood of the Son of GOD: Pardon and Peace are
proclaimed to a rebellious, guilty World. -- Repent, therefore, and be
converted; that your Sins may be blotted out. -- But if after your Hardness and
impenitent Heart, you will venture to go on, treasuring up Wrath against the
Day of Wrath; you are like to know it, to your everlasting Sorrow, that it is a
fearful and horrible Thing, to sin against the LORD.

FINIS.

