A CAVEAT Against INJUSTICE, OR AN ENQUIRY into the evil Consequences of a
Fluctuating MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE, WHEREIN is considered, whether the Bills of
Credit on the Neighboring Governments, are a legal Tender in Payments of
Money, In the COLONY OF CONNECTICUT, FOR Debts due by Book, and otherwise,
where the Contract Mentions only Old-Tenor Money.

By PHILOEUNOMOS.

NEW YORK. Printed by Henry De Foreest in King Street. 1752.

FORASMUCH, as there have been many Disputes arisen of late concerning the
Medium of Exchange in this Colony, which have been occasioned chiefly by Reason
of our having such large Quantities of Paper Bills of Credit on some of the
Neighboring Governments, passing in Payments among us, and some of those
Governments having issued much larger Sums of such Bills than were necessary to
supply themselves with a competent Medium of Exchange, and not having supplied
their Treasuries with any Fund for the maintaining the Credit of such Bills;
they have therefore been continually depreciating and growing less in their
Value, and have been the principal Means of the Depreciation of the Bills of
Credit emitted by this Colony, by their passing promiscuously with them; and so
have been the Occasion of Much Embarrasment and Injustice, in the Trade and
Commerce of (...) ^olony, and many People and especially Widows and Orphans
have been great Sufferers thereby. But our Legislature having at length taken
effectual Care to prevent a further Depreciation of the Bills of this Colony,
and the other Governments not having taken the like prudent Care, their Bills
of Credit are still sinking in their Value, and have in Fact sunk much below
the Value of the Bills of this Colony. Yet some People among us, by long
Custom, are so far prejudiced in Favor of a sinking Medium, and others not
being really sensible of the true State of the Case, are inclined to think that
Bills of Credit on the neighboring Governments ought to be a legal Tender in
Payments in this Colony for all Debts due by Book and otherwise where there is
no special contract expressly mentioning some other Currency, and others being
of a different Opinion, the Disputes have been carried on so far, as to
occasion some Expense in the Law, and may be likely to occasion much more,
unless prevented by those Prejudices being some way removed. And since it is a
Cause wherein every one is more or less interested, I have ventured to show my
Opinion, with a sincere Desire to have Peace and Justice maintained and
promoted in the Colony. Not desiring any Person to approve of my Observations
any farther than he finds them agreeable to the Principles of Justice and right
Reason.

THE CASE STATED.

SUPPOSE a Man comes to a Trader's Shop in this Colony to buy Goods, and the
Trader sells him a certain Quantity of Goods and tells him the Price is so many
Pounds, Shillings and Pence, (let it be more or less) to be paid at the
Expiration of one Year, from that Time, and the Man receives the Goods but
their is nothing said either by Seller or Buyer, what Currency it is to be paid
in, but the Goods are charged according to the Value of Bills of Credit Old
Tenor on this Colony.

Now I Query what the Creditor has a Right to demand for a Debt so contracted;
or what the Debtor can oblige him to accept in Payment?

The Creditor says, that the Debt being contracted in the Colony of
Connecticut, he ought to have what is known by the Laws of said Colony to be
Money: And that he has no Right to demand any thing else.

The Debtor says, That Bills of Credit on the neighboring Governments have for
many Years passed promiscuously with Bills of Credit on this Colony as Money in
all Payments, (except special Contracts) and that People in general where the
Contracts ly at large have expected, and do still expect, that any of the Bills
of Credit on any of the Governments in New England, that have obtained a
Currency in this Colony will answer in Payment, and in as much as the Creditor
did not give him any Notice to the contrary, when he bought the Goods,
therefore he thinks that such Bills of Credit ought to be accepted in Payment
for the aforesaid Debt. And although there is no particular Statute in this
Colony, that such Bills of Credit shall be a legal Tender in Payments of Money:
Yet the Practice has been so universal for so long a Time, and the Creditor
himself has both received and passed them as Money constantly without making
Exceptions against them 'till this Debt was contracted, and for many Years all
Demands on Book Debts have been for Old-Tenor Money indifferently, without
Distinction of Colonies, and Judgments in all Courts have been given thereon
accordingly: And any of the aforesaid Bills of Credit have passed in Payment to
satisfy all Judgments, so obtained and this universal Custom, the Debtor says,
ought to be esteemed as common Law and ought not without some special Reason to
be set aside, and that in this Case there is nothing special; and therefore the
Creditor ought not to make Demand or obtain Judgment different from the common
Custom of the Colony.

In Answer to this the Creditor says, that although Bills of Credit on the
neighboring Governments have for a Number of Years been passed and received in
Payments: Yet it has been only by the voluntary Consent of the Persons
receiving them, and not because they were under any Obligation to receive them;
and that it is no Argument that a Person shall be obliged to receive any
species when it will not answer his End, because in Time past he has received it
when it would answer. And the Creditor further says, that such Bills of Credit
are of no intrinsic Value, and their Extrinsical Value is fluctuating and very
uncertain, and therefore it would be unjust that any Person should be obliged
to receive them in Payment as Money in this Colony, (since neither the Colony
nor any of the Inhabitants thereof are under any Obligation either to Refund
said Bills or to maintain the Credit of them) for Money ought to be something
of certain Value, it being that whereby other Things are to be valued. And I
think it is a Principle that must be granted that no Government has a Right to
impose on its Subjects any foreign Currency to be received in Payments as Money
which is not of intrinsic Value; unless such Government will assume and
undertake to secure and make Good to the Possessor of such Currency the full
Value which they oblige him to receive it for. Because in so doing they would
oblige Men to part with their Estates for that which is worth nothing in it
self and which they don't know will ever procure him any Thing. And
Rhode Island Bills of Credit have been so far from being of certain Value and
securing to the Possessor the Value that they were first stated at, that they
have depreciated almost four seventh Parts in nine Years last past, as appears
by their own Acts of Assembly. For in the Year 1743, it appears by the Face of
the Bills then emitted that Twenty-seven Shillings Old-Tenor was equal to one
Ounce of Silver. And by an Act of their General Assembly passed in March last,
they stated Fifty-four Shillings Old-Tenor Bills equal to one Ounce of Silver,
which sunk their Value one half. And by another Act in June last, (viz. 1751)
they stated Sixty-four Shillings in their Old-Tenor Bills equal to one Ounce of
Silver. And by another Act in August last they gave Order and Direction to the
Courts in that Colony to make Allowance to the Creditors in making up Judgment
from Time to Time as the Bills shall depreciate for the Future, which shows
that they expect their Bills of Credit to depreciate for the Future. And since
the Value of the Bills of Credit depend wholly on the Rate at which they are
stated and on the Credit of the Government by whom they are emitted and that
being the only Reason and foundation upon which they obtained their first
Currency and by which the same has been upheld ever since their first being
current, and therefore when the Public Faith and Credit of such Government is
violated, then the Reason upon which such Bills obtained their Currency ceases
and there remains no Reason why they should be any longer current.

And this I would lay down as a Principle that cannot be denied that a Debtor
ought not to pay any Debts with less Value than was contracted for, without the
Consent or against the Will of the Creditor,

And the Creditor further says, that his accepting Rhode Island Bills of
Credit when they stood stated equal to Silver at Twenty-seven Shillings an
Ounce, can be no Reason that he should receive them at the same Value when they
are stated equal to Silver at Fifty-four Shillings an Ounce, and still to
receive them at the same Rate when they are so reduced down that Sixty-four
Shillings is equal to but one Ounce of Silver, and whoever does receive them so
must not only act without, but against Reason.

And the Debtor cannot possibly plead without any Truth that he expected to pay
in Rhode Island Bills of Credit at their present Value and under their present
Circumstances, (any Debts contracted before the aforesaid Act of Rhode Island
were published) because there was no such Thing (as those Bills are under their
present Circumstances) existing at the Time of Contract, for as was observed
before, the Value of such Bills of Credit depend wholly upon the Rate at which
they are stated and on the Credit of the Government by whom they are emitted,
and a Bill of Credit for the same Sum that is stated equal to Silver at
Twenty-seven Shillings an Ounce, must be of more than double the Value of one
stated equal to Silver at Sixty four Shillings an Ounce if the Credit of the
Emitter may be depended on: But if the Emitter's Credit cannot be depended on
then neither of the Bills aforesaid are of any Value, because it is evident
that no Bills of Credit have any Value in themselves, but are given to secure
something of intrinsic Value, to the Possessor.

So that the Arguments drawn from Custom are of no Force, because the Reasons
upon which that Custom were grounded do now cease.

I grant that if any Thing whose Value is intrin^^^ (...) invariable the same
should obtain a Currency as a (...) of Exchange for a great Number of Years in
any (...) it might with some Reason be urg^d that it ought (...) accepted in
Payments for Debts where there is no special Agreement for any other Species.
But if what is used as a Medium of Exchange is fluctuating in its Value it is
no better than unjust Weights and Measures, both which are condemned by the
Laws of GOD and Man, and therefore the longest and most universal Custom could
never make the Use of such a Medium either lawful or reasonable.

Now suppose that Gold or Silver Coins that pass current in Payments at a
certain Rate by Tale should have a considerable Part of their Weight filed or
clipped off will any reasonable Man judge that they ought to pass for the same
Value as those of full Weight. But the State of R -- I -- d Bills of Credit is
much worse than that of Coins that are clipped, because what is left of those
Coins is of intrinsic Value: But the General Assembly of R -- I -- d having
depreciated their Bills of Credit have thereby violated their Promise from Time
to Time, and there is just Reason to suspect their Credit for the Future for
the small Value which they now promise for said Bills, and they have not only
violated their Promise as to the Value pretended to be secured to the Possessor
by said Bills; but also as to the Time of calling them in and paying the same,
they having lengthened out the Time Fifteen Years. So that if the Possessor
must be kept out of the Use of his Money until that Term is expired (and the
Bills secure nothing to him sooner.) One Ounce of Silver paid down now, would
be worth more than Seven Pounds Ten Shillings in such Bills of Credit computing
the Interest at 6 per Cent per Annum.

These Things considered can, any reasonable Man think that such Bills of
Credit (or rather of no Credit) ought to be a legal Tender in Payment of Money
in this Colony for Debts, for which the Debtor received Species of much more
Value than those Bills provided the Creditor could get the full Value of them
in Silver that they are now stated at. For it must be remembered that according
to the State of the Case now in Question the Goods were charged according to
the Value of Old-Tenor Bills of this Colony. Wherefore upon the whole it
appears that it would be evidently unjust to impose Rhode Island Bills of
Credit in payment for such a Debt, or any other in this Colony, unless the
Creditor obliged himself by a special Agreement to receive them in Payment.

And if he had agreed to receive them in Payment for Debts contracted any Time
between last March and June it would be unjust to oblige him to take them
without three Shillings on the Pound Allowance, for the General Assembly of
Rhode Island depreciated them so much in June below both their current and
stated Value in March preceding. And to oblige People to receive them without
such Allowance in this Colony; would be, to be more dishonest than they are in
Rhode Island Colony for they are obliged by Law to make Allowance for the
Depreciation. But in as much as we are not under the Jurisdiction of
Rhode Island Government and therefore can take no Benefit by their equitable
Acts, I suppose that according to the Rules of the Law, upon a Contract made in
this Colony for the Payment of Bills of Credit on the Colony of Rhode Island or
any of the neighboring Governments. If the Debtor could not procure such Bills
under the same Circumstances that they were at the Time of Contract, the Courts
would assess Damages for Connecticut Money, according to the Value of such
Bills at the Time of Contract. And the Reason is, because if on the one Hand
all such Bills should be called in and burnt between the Time of Contract and
the Time of Payment it would be unreasonable to oblige the Debtor to an
impossibility, and on the other Hand if there should between the Time of
Contract and the Time of Payment be an Act passed that all such Bills should be
brought into the Treasurer to be redeemd' by a certain Time or else be Outlawed
and rendered of no Value and that Time should be expired before the Time of
Payment, or if by an Act of Assembly they should be depreciated and sunk one
half or two third in their Value, it would be unreasonable that the Creditor
should be thereby defrauded of his just Due and lose so much of his Estate.

But to impose Rhode Island Bills of Credit in Payments for Debts in this
Colony when the Creditor never agreed to take them, and that without any
Allowance for the Depreciation, would be to take away Men's Estates and wrong
them of their just and righteous Dues without either Law or Reason.

And instead of having our Properties defended and secured to us by the
Protection of the Government under which we live; we should be always exposed
to have them taken from us by Fraud at the Pleasure of other Governments, who
have no Right of Jurisdiction over us. And according to this Argument, if
Rhode Island General Assembly had been pleased last June to have stated their
Old-Tenor Bills equal to Silver at Forty-eight Pounds Twelve Shillings an
Ounce, instead of Sixty-four Shillings, and so have cut off the Value of them
Eighteen Shillings on the Pound, instead of Three Shillings, all Creditors in
this Colony would thereby have been necessitated to lose Ninety Pounds out of
every Hundred Pounds of their Debts which were then out standing, for if they
could take away one Sixth Part of their Value and reduce them so much below the
Old-Tenor Bills of this Colony and the Creditor be notwithstanding obliged to
receive them without any Allowance, by the same Rule they might have taken away
three Quarters or Nine Tenths or indeed the whole, and the Creditor have had no
more Remedy than he has now. And the Estates of poor Widows and Orphans must
according to this Principle in the same unjust Manner be taken away from them
and given to others that have no Right to them, (for what the Creditor loses in
this way the Debtor gains because the more the Bills of Credit depreciate the
less Value the Debtor can procure them for) and according to the Debtor's
Argument the Executive Courts in this Colony must give Judgment in Favor of
all this Fraud and Iniquity at least, 'till there is some special Act of
Assembly to order them to the contrary; but I believe that every honest Man of
common Sense, upon mature Consideration of the Circumstances of the Case, will
think that this is an Iniquity not to be countenanced, but rather to be
punished by the Judges.

But in Answer to what is said concerning Demands being made for Old-Tenor
Money indifferently and the Courts giving Judgment accordingly. The Creditor
says that Phrase in all Demands made in this Colony ought to be understood to
be the Old-Tenor Money of this Colony, and no other, for there never was any
Law in this Colony that Bills of Credit on the neighboring Governments should
be a legal Tender in Payments of Money, and I have observed before that it
would be unreasonable, that any such Foreign Currency should be imposed as
Money, and the same Phrase is used in taxing Bills of Cost in the Executive
Courts, but it is understood to be the Old-Tenor Money of this Colony only, for
a Thousand Pounds in Bills of Credit on the neighboring Governments would not
be sufficient in the Law to satisfy a Bill of Cost of Twenty Shillings
Old-Tenor.

And the General Assembly of this Colony have sufficiently declared that they
don't Esteem such Bills of Credit as Money, and that no Person ought to be
obliged to receive them as such. In that, they themselves will not receive them
for their Wages neither do they oblige any other Person whose Fees or Wages are
stated by Law to receive them, but have made Provision how they shall be paid
exclusive of such Bills. And as to the Objection that they have been received
in Payment to satisfy all Judgments given as aforesaid, the Creditor says,
that it was only by the voluntary Consent of the Receiver, but there is not the
same Reasons that they should be received now at the same Value as Bills of
Credit on this Colony that there was formerly because it is evident that there
is now a real Difference in their Values. For by a Law of the Province of the
Massachusets-Bay, their Bills of Old-Tenor are stated equal to Silver at Fifty
Shillings an Ounce and Seven Shillings and Six Pence are equal to One Shilling
Proclamation Money, and the Executive Courts in this Colony reckon Eight
Shillings Old-Tenor Bills of this Colony equal to One Shilling Proclamation
Money which is equal to Silver at Fifty-four Shillings Old-Tenor an Ounce. And
by an Act of Rhode Island General Assembly Sixty-four Shillings of their
Old-Tenor Bills is stated equal to one Ounce of Silver, at which Rate Nine
Shillings and Six Pence is equal to but One Shillings Proclamation Money,
whereas three Years ago the Bills of Old-Tenor on all the three Governments
aforesaid were of equal Value.

And since it appears, that there is such a Difference in the stated Value of
the aforesaid Bills of Credit, no Man can with any Propriety be said to make
them all without Distinction, a Standard to value Things by; for a Man could
afford to sell any Goods or Merchandise for a less Sum in Old-Tenor Bills of
the Massachusets-Bay, than for the Old-Tenor Bills of this Colony and he could
afford to sell Goods for a less Sum by 15 per Cent for the Old-Tenor Bills of
this Colony, than for the Old-Tenor Bills on Rhode Island Colony.

And to say that an Account is charged in Old-Tenor Money indifferently of this
and the neighboring Governments, is to say that 7 s.-6 d. and 8 s. and 9 s.-6
d. are one and the same Sum, or that there is no Difference between Fifty and
Fifty-four, or between Fifty-four and Sixty-four Q. E. D.

And since it appears that it would be evidently absurd to make a Demand for
Old-Tenor Money indifferently of this and the neighboring Governments, it
follows that all Demands made for Old-Tenor Money in this Colony must be for
the Money of this Colony exclusive of the Old-Tenor of the neighboring
Governments, or else for the Old-Tenor Money of some one of the other
Governments exclusive of the Old-Tenor of this and the rest.

And since nothing but a special Contract can entitle any Person to demand the
Money of any other Government, for a Debt contracted and demanded in this
Colony: It necesssarily follows, that all Demands for Debts due by Book, where
the Contract lies at large must be for the Money of this Colony only.

What I would be understood to mean by Old-Tenor Money of the Colony of
Connecticut is, whatsoever is established by Law in said Colony to pass, as or
in Lieu of Money, rated according to its Value in Old-Tenor Bills on said
Colony, and I suppose that the Words (Old-Tenor) when used in Contracts are
universally understood to be intended only to assertain the Value of the Sum to
which they are affixed and they must be so understood when the Executive Courts
tax Bills of Cost in Old-Tenor Money, for they have no Right neither do they
mean to exclude Bills of the New-Tenor, or any of those Coins established by
Law (to pass in Payment for Fees) from being a sufficient Tender in Payment of
such Costs.

And now I have gone through with what I first proposed. But perhaps some, may
be ready to say, that we are sensible that it is of bad Consequence to have a
fluctuating Medium of Exchange, but what can be done to Remedy it?

I answer take away the Cause, and the Effect will necessarily cease.

But it may be further objected, that if it were not for the Bills of Credit on
the neighboring Governments, we should have no Money to Trade with, and what
should we do for a Medium of Exchange? or how could we live without?

To this I answer, that if that were indeed the Case, we had better die in a
good Cause than live in a bad one. But I apprehend that the Case in Fact is
quite the reverse, for we in this Colony are seated on a very fruitful Soil,
the Product whereof, with our Labor and Industry, and the Divine Blessing
thereon, would sufficiently furnish us with, and procure us all the Necessaries
of Life and as good a Medium of Exchange as any People in the World have or can
desire. But so long as we part with our most valuable Commodities for such
Bills of Credit as are no Profit; but rather a Cheat, Vexation and Snare to us,
and become a Medium whereby we are continually cheating and wronging one
another in our Dealings and Commerce. And so long as we import so much more
foreign Goods than are necessary, and keep so many Merchants and Traders
employed to procure and deal them out to us: Great Part of which, we might as
well make among ourselves; and another great Part of which, we had much better
be without, especially the Spiritous Liquors of which vast Quantities are
consumed in this Colony every Year, unnecessarily to the great Destruction of
the Estates, Morals, Health and even the Lives of many of the Inhabitants.

I say so long as these Things are so we shall spend great Part of our Labor
and Substance for that, which will not profit us. Whereas if these Things were
reformed, the Provisions and other Commodities which we might have to export
yearly, and which other Governments are dependant upon us for, would procure us
Gold and Silver abundently sufficient for a Medium of Trade. And we might be as
independent, flourishing and happy a Colony as any in the British Dominions.

And with Submission I would humbly beg Leave to propose it to the wise
Consideration of the Honorable General Assembly of this Colony; whether it
would not be conducive to the welfare of the Colony to pass some Act to prevent
the Bills last emitted by Rhode Island Colony from obtaining a Currency among
us. And to appoint some reasonable Time (not exceeding the Term that our Bills
of Credit are allowed to pass) after the Expiration of which none of the Bills
of Credit on New Hampshire or Rhode Island, shall be allowed to pass in this
Colony, that so People having previous Notice thereof may order their Affairs
so as to get rid of each Bills to the best Advantage that they can before the
Expiration of such Term.

And whether it would not be very much for the Public Good to lay a large
Excise upon all Rum imported in^^ this Colony or distilled herein, thereby
effectually to restrain the excessive use thereof, which is such a growing Evil
among us and is leading to almost all other Vices. And I doubt not but that if
those two great Evils that have been mentioned were restrained we should soon
see better Times.

FINIS

