A VINDICATION OF Diverse important Gospel-Doctrines, AND OF The Teachers and
Professors of them: AGAINST The injurious Reflections and Misrepresentations
CONTAINED In a late printed Discourse of the Rev. Mr. LEMUEL BRIANT's,
Entitled, The Absurdity and Blasphemy of depreciating Moral Virtue.

Also a few Remarks are subjoined, on Mr. JOHN BASS'S late Narrative.

Published as his dying Testimony to the Cause of CHRIST, in the Protestant
Churches, and particularly in New England.

By SAMUEL NILES, Pastor of a Church in Braintree.

O formose Puer, nimium ne creed Colori. Virg. Quid Romae faciam? Mentiri
nescio. -- Juven. 2 Pet. 1. 15, 16. I will endeavor, that ye may be able after
my Decease to have these Things always in Remembrance: For we have not followed
cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto you the Power and Coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Chap. 3. 15, 16. -- Even as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the
Wisdom given unto him, has written unto you: As also in all his Epistles,
speaking in them of these Things, in which are some Things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures, unto their own Destruction.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, opposite the Prison in Queen Street.
1752.

THE PREFACE
THE Remarks contained in the following Pages were, for the Sum and Scope of
them, drawn up soon after the Discourse, to which they refer, was published,
with an Intent then quickly to offer them to public View. In doing of which, I
had no Design to enter into a personal Contest with the Author, or any others
that may be Like-minded with him: but only to contend for the Faith, delivered
to the Saints, in the Days of the Apostles, and primitive Times of
Christianity; which also has been handed down to the Churches of the Saints in
New England, by those eminent Worthies, that were Instruments in the Hand of
Christ to spread the Knowledge of those important Doctrines revealed and
strongly recommended in the Gospel, which have been generally received and
professed, not in this Land only, but in all the Churches of the Reformation.
However, my Dependence is not upon human Tradition or Antiquity, with Respect
to these Doctrines, that are now by some so much decryed and condemned, yea,
even ridiculed: But on the pure and unerring Word of GOD; as firmly believing
them to be therein discovered, ratified and confirmed by Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost. -- My main Design in the Remarks before us, is, by divine
Assistance, (according to my Measure) to vindicate those Doctrines of our holy
Religion, so misrepresented and treated with so much Contempt in the Discourse
under our Examination; and to remove the groundless and injurious Reflections
cast on the whole Body of excellent Protestant Expositors, Ministers, and
Profess^rs, in general, of the last and former Age; and also, if possible, to
put a Stop to the prevailing Contagion of Arminian Errors and other loose
Opinions among us, which threaten to banish vital Piety out of the Land. --
Some worthy Gentlemen in the Ministry among us entering into the Controversy,
and engaging (as I apprehend) on the Side of Truth, this occasioned my delaying
to publish my Remarks; hoping, what was published by them, might lead our
Opponent into a laudable Retracta^ion. But my Hopes in that Case soon vanished,
upon his publishing a (pretended) Vindication of his Sentiments, not so much by
fair Scripture-Argument (which, I suppose, he found impossible) as by Banter,
and by personal Reflection and Invective, which doubtless he readily concluded
to be much the easiest Method, and perhaps most agreeing to his Genius and
Capacity.

The Time of this Delay gave me Opportunity to review what I had wrote, and to
exhibit the same to the Public with considerable Enlargement on several Heads
of Remark; by which Means, this Work is much lengthier than I at first
purposed: Yet I hope, it may not be the less useful, to such as have not fallen
into the dangerous Scheme I am opposing, and perhaps may minister some Caution
to such as are in Danger to be led away by those Self-pleasing Notions, so
industriously propagated in this Day of Degeneracy. The Prevalence of sundry
pernicious Errors, tending to the Subversion of our holy Religion, is for a
Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation, unto all the true Lovers of Zion,
and Friends to the Churches of Christ in New England. Truly sorrowful is the
State of some of our Churches, who have Ministers set over them, that contest,
and even deny, yea, I may say, deride some of the grand Articles of our holy
Profession, as they are exhibited in the Assembly's Catechism (commonly so
called) though the Doctrines contested are so plainly according to Scripture.
Therefore it is, that some (we hope, not many) who have taken on them the
pastoral Charge, do neglect the Lambs of those Flocks under their Care, by
declining to instruct them in the private Way, by Catechizing; and this in
Places where the former Ministers were wont to make Conscience of attending
this Work, as a Part of their ministerial Duty. -- This Practice has obtained
not only here in New England, but in all the reformed Churches abroad. Unto
this laudable, and necessary Practice (as I think it to be) I can give some
Evidence. When I resided in this Town of Braintree at first, and was at School
here, it was the known constant Method of the Rev. Mr. FISK, the then worthy
Minister here, to appoint certain Times for the instructing the Children and
Youth in the Catechism; the Benefit whereof I enjoyed together with others. --
And this religious and commendable Service was keptup by those worthy Ministers
that succeeded him, the Rev. Mr. MARSH and Mr. HANcock. But now, I am informed,
it is wholly laid aside; which must lie as a Reproach both upon Minister, and
People, where it is indulged; as well as must be a dreadful Injury to the Souls
of the poor Children, so shamefully and barbarously neglected. -- Some Reasons
of my Judgment I shall presently offer. -- Another Instance or two I will
mention of the like tender Care and Fidelity of godly Ministers, to the Souls
of the Children and young People under their (...) Charge. When I was under the
Tuition of the ^ev. Mr. HOBART of Newtown, whose Memory and Character will ever
be dear to me, which was when I was more capable of observing and making a
Judgment on the Conduct of Ministers, in this Point of Catechizing; his Method
was to appoint a Time for the Children to attend this Service;andalso for the
young People, Males andFemales, grown to Men's and Women's Estate. These, in
their several Turns, all attended Catechizing. Moreover, he was wont to explain
and apply the Doctrines and Duties, held forth in the Catechism, at the same
Time. -- Another Instance of constant and indefatigable Care and Pains in
Catechizing, was my deservedly much honored Father-in-Law, the Rev. Mr.
THACHER of Milton; whose Example in this and all other Acts of Piety and
Faithfulness, toward not only his own People, but the Indian Tribe, both young
and old, at Punkapaug, and Packenee, as they were then called, now Stoug^ton,
-- I say, his Example, with that of the other venerable Fathers and memorable
Brethren above mentioned, and the rest of Christ's Ministers among us, in
general, is certainly worth the Notice and Imitation of their Successors, and
of all that sustain the ministerial Character. -- Nor would I omit mentioning
on this Occasion, the great Service done the World, by that excellent Minister
of Jesus Christ, the Rev. Mr. WILLARD, in his elaborate Exposition on the
Catechism: wherein all its Instructions are confirmed by Scripture-Proofs, and
with nervous Arguments, sufficient for the Conviction of all Gainsayers.

But now, as my Sentiments in the Case I am upon, are not built on Tradition,
or the Authority of our Fathers, I shall offer some of the Reasons of my
Opinion. I apprehend it very obvious, what evil Consequences will necessarily
follow the Omission of instructing Children, in the Catechism. It is well
known, that Catechizing has been of long and singular Use among us: the
Advantages thereof Multitudes are ready from their own Experience to witness
to. As it has ever been esteemed by the Ministers in these Churches, a Part of
their ministerial Work to Catechize the Children of their Congregations, as
well as to instruct elder Persons by publicly preaching the Word of God, they
have grounded their Judgment partly on that solemn Charge our Savior laid upon
Peter as a leading Minister, and for a Test of his Love to Christ, (Joh. 21.
15^) Feed my Lambs. These are a Part of the Flock: and it is to be noted, here
the Lambs are set before the Sheep; which might be designed to show the tender
Care Christ had particularly of Children and young People, who, to answer the
Metaphor, must be principally intended by the Lambs of the Flock. Agreeable to
this is that Charge given to Ministers, and usually laid on them at their
Ordination, Feed the Flock of God which is among you; the young, as well as
old, under your pastoral Care. See 1 Pet. 5. 2. Or as it is expressed, Act. 20.
28. Take ^eed unto your selves, and to all the Flock; of which the Children are
a great, growing Part, and a hopeful Part, when well instructed in the
Principles of Religion, by Catechizing. -- We may also see (to the Shame of
such as habitually neglect this important Part of their Duty) how emphatically
Christ, the Head-Shepherd o^ his Flock, both Sheep and Lambs, has answered his
Character and Trust, and left an Example to all his Ministers or
Under-Shepherds, in fulfilling so exactly in his personal Ministry on Earth,
and leaving the same in Charge to his Ministers, what was predicted of old by
the Prophet concerning him, Isai. 40. 11. He shall food ^his Flock, like a
Shepherd: He shall gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his Bosom,
and shall gently lead those that are with young.

Ministers, Parents, or Tutors neglecting this Branch of their Duty is an
inexpressible Injury to the Souls of the Youth thus neglected. That the Soul be
without Knowledge, it is not good. And what better Expedient can be found, to
promote the good Knowledge of God, in the Minds of young Ones, than the Means I
am pleading for? How otherwise can the Lambs be said to feed after their
Manner? (Isai. 5. 17.) Or, the Kids be said in a Scripture-Sense to feed beside
the Shepherds Tents? (Cant. 1. 8.) Or can any suppose, that the Knowledge
Timothy had of the Holy Scriptures, consisted only in a mere literal Knowledge,
by the bare reading of them? and not rather, that he had been well instructed
from his Childhood, in the Contents of the Bible, especially the great Truths
contained in the Holy Scriptures; and that those Doctrines were received by him
and rested on by Faith? Otherwise they could not have had such an happy Effect
on him, as to make him wise unto Salvation. The Knowledge Timothy had in the
holy Scriptures, we may justly conclude, was through the pious Care of his
Parents, his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice (2 Epi^t. 1. 5.) who are
set as Examples, of carefully instructing Children in Religion.

Moreover, an Omission of this Duty toward Children, will necessarily and by
inevitable Consequence, not only be a Means to raze the Foundations of Zion,
but tend to banish true Religion, and bring in Heathenism like a mighty Flood
upon a People. For, it is beyond all Contradiction, I suppose, generally
speaking, that many Parents, and such as are charged with the Education of
Children, are too r^m^s^ and negligent in teaching them the Knowledge of (...)
the Scripture, and promoting them in learning their Catechism, for their early
Acquaintance with the Things of God and the Religion of Jesus: And what a
wonderful gratifying Indulgence must it be to such Parents and others, when
their Minister tells them (practically at least, if not verbally) that the
Catechism is corrupt, containing false Points of Doctrine (as some in this evil
Day pretend) and that he dare not teach the Children what ^e himself does not
believe: Or else excuses himself from Catechizing them, by a more plausible
Pretense, That it is no Part of a Minister's Work! -- These and such like
Evasions in Ministers, bear a near Resemblance with Jerob^am's carnal Policy to
secure his Authority over the People; of whom it is said -- Who sinned and made
Israel to sin. -- Such Ministers are in danger of the like Character with his,
who is also said to ^^ive Israel to Sin, and from following the Lord. (2 Kin.
17. 21.) He persuades them, that it was too far for them to go up to Jerusalem,
to worship after the Manner which God had appointed: therefore sets up Golden
Calves, under a corrupt Pretense, that these were the Gods that brought them
out of the Land of Egypt; and so drew the Body of that People into Idolatry,
which probably he learnt in Egypt, when he fled thither for fear of Solomon.
And this their Idolatry continued until God sent them into Captivity, for their
Apostasy, in casting off and forsaking the true Worship he had appointed, and
setting up a Religion of their own^ -- The Example of Abraham, and the high
Encomium God gives of him and his Conduct, respecting the Case I am upon, is
worthy the Imitation of Parents, Ministers, and all others, to whom the
Education of Children or Instruction of Youth is committed. See Genesis 18. 19. I
know him, that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and
they shall keep the Way of the Lord. Parents should train up their Children in
the Way of Truth, if they would not have them depart from it when they are old.
(Prov^ 22. 6.) They should labor to bring them up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord. (Ephesians. 6. 4.) But how can Parents do thus, if by the
Instigation of their Minister, by his Example, or by any other Means, they are
led to neglect teaching their Children the very first Principles of the Oracles
of God? Which are in an excellent Order and a clear compendious Manner
exhibited in the Catechism, that has been mostly in Use among us, and highest
in Esteem with the generality of Churches in New England. Alas, what we read in
Lam. 4. 3, 4. I think is applicable in the Case before us; Even the
Sea Monsters draw out the Breast, they give suck to their young Ones: the
Daughter of my People is become cruel, like the Ostriches in the Wilderness. --
The young Children ask Bread, and no Man breaks it unto them. -- This seems
to be the lamentable Case with poor Children, when the Catechism is thrown out
of its wonted commendable and necessary Improvement for Soul-advantage to
Children. And what can be expected to follow, but Vice, Ignorance and Atheism?
-- Thus Parents entail their Sin on their miserable Offspring: and give them
Example, to do (...) to their Children. ( Ezekiel. 16. 44.)

Before I dismiss this Point, I shall make one brief Observation upon it, which
I suppose few will deny to be just: -- Had this Neglect of Catechizing the
Children been proved upon any Minister in these Churches, though under any
Pretenses whatsoever, before our venerable Fathers in the Ministry of the last
Age, or their Predecessors, in New England, when convened in Council, they
would have thought it necessary immediately to dismiss such Minister from his
Pastoral Office: And supposing the Church he was set over, should refuse to
concur with their Determinations in this Case, I believe, then such a Church
would be deemed unworthy of Communion with the other Churches, as having in
Effect denied the Faith, and made themselves accessory to the promoting of such
Ignoranceand Error, as I think to be inconsistent with and destructive of that
vital Religion, for which our Ancestors were famous, and this People were once
greatly renowned. Certainly such an Omission must be judged by all sober and
well Principled Persons, not only irreligious in Ministers, andParents, but
even inhuman and barbarous, to the Souls of their Children! Who can account for
it! How can it be excused! I truly think, Ministers, or Parents, or others that
have the Care of educating Youth, if they habitually don't practice this Duty
of Catechizing, have no Cloak for their Sin. Neither can we rationally expect
better Times, without a Reformation in this Matter. -- I shall only add one
Word further upon it, viz. If the Minister in any Place will not be persuaded
to attend his Duty in this Point, Heads of Families will do well to take the
more Pains in catechizing their Children and Servants at Home; and in doing it,
to make frequent Use of some familiar Exposition of the Catechism, for the
safer and clearer explaining Things to them, as they go along. There are many
Books of this Kind to be had; which might be of singular Service, if made more
Use of, to spread the Knowledge of divine Things, among elder People, as well
as young ones, and to secure them in the Belief of the Truth. For, if by such
Helps they become well acquainted with the great Doctrines and Duties of
Christianity, as they will the better understand the Sermons of their Minister
on these Subjects, so they will be the more capable of distinguishing between
Truth and Error; and if they should sometimes hear any Thing advanced in
Discourses from the Pulpit, contrary to sound Doctrine, or leading to dangerous
Errors, the well-instructed Youth would be less exposed to receive ill
Impressions therefrom, or at least their more judicious and faithful Parents
would be able to fortify and guard them, and I hope would take Care to do it
seasonably and effectually, as knowing that they (as well as the Minister) must
give Account.

It may not be altogether impertinent or unseasonable, if I now take Occasion
to mention it as another dark Omen, and a Symptom of the declining State of
Religion in this Land, that our wonted Lectures on Weekdays are of late so
much laid aside, or neglected, and practically despised among us. In some
Places, perhaps the Minister may voluntarily omit them, either by Reason of his
Support's being too scanty to allow of the Expense usually arising on such
Occasions, or because the Burden of Labor created hereby takes him too much
off from other (as he thinks) more necessary Parts of his Ministry, or else
because he is discouraged by the thin Appearance of Auditors, etc. And
undoubtedly the People are very much to Blame* For eve^^^here the Minister is
not at all in Fault, but resolutely surmounting all Difficulties in his Way, as
being cheerfully willing to spend and be spent in the Cause of Christ and for
the Good of Souls, diligently keeps up his stated ^ec^^re, yet how frequently
does he see it poorly attended, and finds herein a great Discouragement to his
Labors, as it soems a practical Contempt of the Means of Grace, and an
Argument of a sad Prevalence of the Spirit of this World among his People?
Indeed it must needs be a Sign of the sorrowful Change of State in Point of
visible Godliness through the Land, unto all those who are trembling for the Ark
of God, and who have seen the crowded Assemblies for Worship on Lecture-days
(as well as on Lord's-days) in former Times, now to see the Degeneracy this
People are fallen into, by the general Neglect of such Opportunities for the
Exercises of Religion and the Care of their Souls. Which Neglect shamefully
prevails, not only in many Country-Towns, but even in our Me^ropolis also, the
chief Place of Concourse; where though in a Judgment of Charity there be some
Thousands of devout Souls, yet it was surprising to me to behold (as I lately
did) at their Thursday-Lecture, the Pews and Seats in a Manner empty; and this,
notwithstanding some Pains have lately been taken (as I am informed) to revive
that ancient Lectures, particularly by reprinting and dispersing an excellent
Discourse of the memorable and Rev.Mr. JOSHUA MOODEY'S on the choice Benefit of
Communion with God in his House; thought to be very well calculated to that
Purpose, and accompanied with a recommendatory Preface, by sundry Reverend and
worthy Ministers of Boston, viz. Dr. Sewall, Mr. Prince, and the late Mr. Webb.
Whose pathetick Wishes therein expressed, it is not unreasonable here to
repeat, in their own Words, which are these. May the Ministers of Christ be
entreated to do their utmost to revive our first Love for the ^ouse of God, by
insisting on the great ^ruths of the GOSPEL; such are, the Doctrines of the
Divinity and saving Offices of our Lord JESUS, God-Man Mediator; concerning the
Godhead and divine Operations of the HOLY SPIRIT, on which all the Success of
the Gospel Ministry depends: Such are, the Do^^rines of Original Sin, and our
lost and perishing State by the Fall; the Nature and Necessity of Regeneration
by the Spirit of God; our Justification through the perfect Righteousness of
Christ imputed to us, and received by Faith; the Nature and great Importance of
Gospel-Obedience,etc. And may God's People show their earnest Concern in this
Matter, by a diligent constant Attendance on the Word and Ordinances, and by
their Care to bear the Fruits of the Kingdom. --

On this Occasion, I would take the Liberty (which, I hope, I may do without
Offense) humbly to suggest, that as there is a Charity-Lecture, annually at the
Ministers Convention on the Day after the General Election, one View of which
is to promote the Collection then expected, for the Support of some Ministers
that have a difficult Situation, but small Congregations and so but small
Salaries, if our honored Patriots at the Council Board and in the House of
Representatives, taking the Case into Consideration, would be pleased, as many
of them as might be, to countenance so useful a Charity by attending that
Lecture in particular, and giving their Contribution, as several Members of
that honorable Body and others of distinguished Character, I know, have
sometimes done, and therein have not a little honored themselves, this
doubtless would be a Sacrifice well pleasing to God through Jesus Christ; and
such a laudable Pattern in our civil Leaders and principal Gentlemen might
happily be the Means of diffusing a Spirit of Liberality, and draw in many to
imitate them, in honoring the Lord with their Substance on such Occasions;
which would be Matter of abundant Thanksgivings to God, especially from those
who receive these yearly Benefactions. -- I hope, it will be excused, if I take
the Freedom to add here, that a Concio ad Clerum being partly the Design of
this annual Lecture, I trust, it will from Time to Time be the Care of the
Minister who preaches it, to exemplify and recommend on that Occasion the
evangelical Preacher, and lay hold of that Opportunity for bearing his faithful
Testimony, as in Behalf of the peculiar Doctrines and Duties of Christianity,
which should chiefly fill our Pulpit-Discourses, so likewise against the
growing Errors, Neglects, and Miscarriages of the Day, whether among Ministers
or People.

But to return to the special Business of this Preface --

As the Growth of Armini^nism and loose Principles in Religion among us, tends
to the utter Ruin of these Churches, in Point of Faith, Worship, and vital
Godliness, I have for my own Part determined, while Opportunity continues, to
testify the Gospel of the Grace of God, according to the Ability which God
gives. And as I though it Mr.BRIANT'S published Discourse manifestly levelled
against some important Doctrines of the Gospel, and calculated to promote
Error, to depreciate the sound Principles commonly received in the Churches of
New England, and among Protestants in general, and to reflect Disgrace on those
that profess the same; I have been moved (however unfit for such a Task) to
undertake an Examination of his Discourse, and to endeavor (after my Measure)
the Defense of the Gospel, and herewith a Vindication of the many Expositors
and Professors reflected upon by him with so much Severity and Acrimony.

If in the Course of my Remarks it should happen, that I have taken Things any
where otherwise than he intended, it is what I am not sensible of at present.
If he should make such ^an Objection, all I can now say to it, is, That to
prevent Misunderstanding he should have forborne all ambiguous Expressions, and
ought to have explained his Meaning better. I have taken Things as they stand
in his Book, and am not at all conscious of wilfully perverting his Sense. --
If he is able to offer me better Light from Scripture, on any Argument before
us, I am ready to receive the same. But Sa^yr or Banter, sophistical Cavils, or
evasive Replies, will not be worth my minding: And as for personal Reflections,
Insults, and Abuses so familiar with him, I shall not value them a Rush. --

I see by his Management of the Dispute with Mr. PORTER, that when he cannot
fairly grapple with an Argument, he knows how to shuffle and evade: And knows
how to satyrise and reflect, when he can no longer reason in any plausible
Manner. And though at first he sat out with some specious Pretension of being a
Calvinist; yet it seems* he has thought fit to drop it: And some think, after
all his loud Noise, he has given up the Text it self, which he pretended to
vindicate. -- But perhaps I go t^o far, in touching on that Contro^ersy. Yet I
had though it it not improper for me to make some Remonstrances here against the
many abusive Reflections, of a personal Aspect, which he has filled his
published L^tters with. However, because I would not unreasonably swell this
Preface, and because the worthy Gentlemen against whom he writes, are well
able, if they think it worth while, to defend themselves, I forbear. -- Only I
cannot help taking Notice of a Paragraph in his second Letter, where he deals in
Scandal at a strange Rate; not only aspersing the Character of the Living, but
even throwing Dirt upon the Memory of the Dead. I think it truly a Masterpiece
of De^amation, as black and deformed as almost ever I met with: And this, it
seems, in Retaliation for a comparatively soft Reflection; which, however, had
perhaps better have been omitted. -- Perit judicium, cum Res transit in
A^fectum. -- But I dismiss the disagreable Subject; hoping, this Author, upon a
calm Review of Things, will take Shame to himself for so unaccountable a Sally
of vindictive Passion.

I shall only further observe, that what seems to have especially provoked him
against his Opponents, is their being instrumental to bring him under the
Repute of an Arminian or worse, to the Public. And all I shall say to this,
is, That had not his printed Discourse previously laid him under such a
Character, the Rev. Gentlemen he so loudly complains of, would (I confess) have
acted an unkind Part toward him: But as the Case really stood, I think his
Offense groundless, and his Heat on this Occasion altogether unjustifiable. For
he is himself the true (exemplifying) Author of this his Character, by his said
Discourse; as he has therein disavow'd the orthodox commonly received Notions,
on the Head of the Divine Decrees, of Original Sin, o^ (...)Grace, of imputed
Righteousness, etc. To all which he discovers a strange Antipathy; and at the
same Time, makes the whole Doctrine of Christ but a more refined System of
Morality, and resolves the whole Duty of Man into the Practice of moral Virtue;
declaring this to be the Basis and whole Superstructure of the Religion of
JESUS, the very Sum and Substance of Christianity; affirming, that Revelation
every where suspends our whole Happiness on our personal good Behavior, and
constitutes this the Condition of all God's Favors; yea, that the grand Design
of Christ's coming into the World was to be a Preacher of Righteousness, to set
up the Christian Scheme, and propagate Truth and Virtue among Mankind; that to
promote moral Righteousness is the ultimate View of GOD in all his
Dispensations; that moral Virtue is the supreme Dignity of GOD himself, the
chief (if not only) Subject of proper Gospel-Preaching, etc. And in short, that
by the commonly received Principles, so inconsistent with his, the Christian
Religion is in many Places turned into an idle Speculation, a mysterious Faith,
a senseless Superstition,and a groundless Recumbency. -- This is a true
Breviate of his Discourse; and if his other Discourses from the Pulpit are
analogous to this, or consistent with it, What other Denomination can such a
Preacher expect to come under, among sober and judicious Christians, but that
of an Arminian or worse? Certainly then he had no just Reason to reflect, as he
has done, on Mr. Porter, or his Attestators. These Rev. Gentlemen's Testimony
in that Case I think truly worthy of Imitation, as well as Commendation, by the
faithful Ministers of CHRIST through the Land, and all others who have at Heart
Soundness of Doctrine and Purity of Religion: Especially as these Churches
appear now, more than ever, in Danger of being corrupted by Arminian Errors, or
worse, so industriously propagated by several, with the Author we have in View,
lately introduced into the Pastoral Charge. One flagrant Instance I cannot help
taking a particular Notice of; I mean, Mr. John Bass, who was not many Years
ago settled in the Ministry, but has lately been dismissed, as having turned
from Calvinism,andembraced the Arminian Scheme, by his own Account in his
Narrative of the Affair. And I cannot help wishing, that every one of our
Churches, which have been imposed upon by like Pretenders to Orthodoxy, would
follow the laudable Example of the People of A^^ford; and regularly labor to
get free from the dangerous Contagion of a corrupt Ministry, such as
disseminates Arminian Errors, and loose Opinions in Religion, that tend to
subvert the Truth, and destroy vital Christianity among us. Nor can I forbear
expressing my Wishes, that in the Choice and the Ordination of Ministers for
the future, more Care might be taken, by all concerned therein, to have
sufficient Evidence of their being ^ound in the Faith, and hopefully such as
will bring the everlasting Gospel to their People; and not such as under
Pretense of doing that, will only or mainly preach up moral Virtue, and this in
such a Way as tends to destroy the Faith and vacate the Gospel of Salvation.

I hope, what I have here offered to the Public may by the Blessing of God
serve some valuable Ends; if not to convince and reduce such as are already
engaged in the Arminian Scheme, yet to warn others of the Error and Danger of
it, and to establish them in the Belief of the Truth, as it is in Jesus. I send
forth this Essay with my hearty Prayers to the God of all Grace, that for
Christ's sake he would own and bless what is here said agreeable to his Mind and
Will, for those happy Purposes: And that the Lord in Mercy would help his
Ministers, like Paul, to fight the good Fight, and keep the Faith; and help his
Churches in this Land, even unto the latest Generations, to hold fast the Form
of sound Words, in Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus, to keep his Word
and not deny his Name, but to hold fast that which they have, that no Man take
their Crown from them.

And may I, who having obtained Help of God, do continue unto this Day (being
in the 78th Year of my Age) obtain Mercy to be faithful even unto the Death,
and then finish my Course with Joy, -- and with the more Joy from a Prospect of
this People's walking in the Truth and continuing in the Grace of God.

Now unto him who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, be Glory in the Church by CHRIST JESUS, throughout all Ages, World
without End. Amen.

SAMUEL NILES.
Braintree, Sept. 25 th 1751.
ERRATA.
PAge. 2. l. ^. read, Gospel Truth p. 16. l 23. r. and this p. 31. l. 18. r*
calling p. 33, l. 18. r. ^. I shall p. 41. l. 5. r. Action; -- ibid. l. 24. r.
According to what p. 42. l. 2. r. Interpretation p. 63. l. 29 r. Inconsist^^cy
p. 80. l. 15. r. might pertinently p. 89. l. 4. r. Another p. ^^. Marg. l. 4.
r. Doctrines; profes^ed p. 11^ l. 20. r can there --

A VINDICATION Of diverse important Gospel-Doctrines, with the Preachers and
Professors of them; Essayed in the Way of Remarks upon a Discourse (delivered
Sermon-wise, and published, on ISAIAH 64. 6.) Entitled, The Absurdity and
Blasphemy of depreciating moral Virtue.
IT is a memorable Observation, which some of our venerable Fathers in
New England once made by Way of Lamentation, very applicable to the present
Day; viz. It was one of the Songs (as the Jewish Masters tell us) in the Feast
of Tabernacles* -- Blessed be our Youth, which have not made our old Men
ashamed. But alas! we that are old Men, must confess ourselves ashamed, when we
see how our Youth have expressed and behaved themselves; and with what Scoffs
they have assaulted the Order of the Gospe^ in some Things lately published and
scattered about the Country. Now if in their Day Scoffers being found
assaulting the Order of the Gospel was to them Matter of Lamentation, how much
more lamentable is it, that there are to be found in our Day Scoffers among our
Youths, scoffing at and assaulting even the Doctrines of the Gospel, and some
of the most important Points of Gospel Truths, treating them with Ridicule, in
Discourses printed and scattered about the Country! I am sorry to say it, I
think we have a flagrant Instance in the Discourse (not to say Sermon) now to
come under our Examination: Where it is very obvious, sundry great Doctrines of
the Gospel are exploded and hissed at, the Characters of eminent Men, who have
espoused them, are aspersed and contemptuously treated, and as I apprehend,
some dangerous Errors asserted, in such a confident Manner, as if we were to be
insulted or flouted out of our religious Principles; -- as if truly these
Churches in New England had from the Beginning been settled on a wrong Bottom
(so have their Religion still to seek) and as if this our Author must be the
very Man to open our Eyes and illuminate the Country! Indeed if this Gentleman,
or any others, were capable of giving us better Light into divine T^^ths upon
Scripture-Authority, I hope none of us would appear so prejudiced in Favor of
our own private Sentiments, or of the commonly received Opinions in Religion,
as to shut our Eyes against it, or wilfully reject it: But I must freely say, I
have little Expectation of that, from One whose first Attempt seems calculated
to darken Counsel by Words without true Knowledge, and scatter Darkness rather
tha^ Light; and tends to obscure, yea even to subvert the Gospel, rather than
to establish and explain it; particularly in regard that the main and most
essential End of Christ's coming into the World, viz. to make Expiation for
Sin, and bring in everlasting Righteousness, is in Effect denied, by an abusive
Representation of the grand Design of Christ'^ mediatorial Undertaking; as will
be seen (...) its proper Place, in the Course of these Remarks.

It is not without much Reluctanc^ I have (...) in this Affair, having waited
some Time (...) h^p^s to hear of its being undertaken by some better (...): but
none appearing (that I was apprized (...), (...) I had almost finished what I
at first intended) to plead the Cause of Christ publicly against what carries
a threatening Aspect, if suffered to pass without Co^troul; therefore with a
View to serve the Interest of Christianity in these Churches, and particularly
in the Society under my more immediate pastoral Care, by guarding it against
the Infection of wild and dangerous Tenets* brought so near our Doors, I have
thought it my Duty, to set upon a faithful Examination of the Author's
Performance referred to. -- In doing of which, depending upon divine Grace
through Christ for Direction and Help, I have resolved to contend earnestly, though
withal I hope scripturally, for the Faith once delivered to the Saints; even
that Faith, which the Churches of the Saints in NEW ENGLAND have been in the
Possession and Profession of, now to the third Generation down from our
renowned Ancestors, whom Christ in a distinguishing Manner honored and made to
be the happy Instruments of peopling this Wilderness, of settling Churches here
in the true Faith and Order of the Gospel, and in Christian Fellowship
together, and of erecting a College, when weak and in an Infant-State, for the
educating of Youth in sound Principles and good Literature; that by the Smiles
of Heaven on their Endeavors, there might come forth a Succession of learned
and godly Ministers, furnished and disposed to feed and lead the Generations
rising up after them in the Ways of Truth, both in Doctrine and Worship, in
Discipline and in Manners. -- And shall we their Posterity, after all the
Goodness of God so remarkably experienced for a Series of near a Century and
half, give up that Cause, which is not so much our own as it is Christ's? --
Surely, if it be given up, whether by Indolency or Treachery, we shall in that
Case be justly looked upon by the Eye of a jealous God, as shamefully
degenerated, however noble and right a Seed we sprang from. -- To prevent so
dreadful a Consequence, I would contribute my best Endeavors; particularly in
the present Essay, by way of Remarks (as before hinted) on the Discourse now in
View.

In the Prosecution of which Purpose, I shall --

1. Consider the Words of the Text, as they stand connected with the Context;
and likewise compare them with parallel Passages of Scripture, both in the old
Testament and New.

2. Attempt to remove the Prejudic^s our Author would raise against many sound
Protestant Expositors and others, by his harsh and unbecoming personal
Reflections upon them, and by his abusive Representations of their Principles,
which I shall say something in Vindication of, as it falls in my Way.

3. Show the Danger of substituting or setting up a Righteousness of our own in
the Room or Stead of Christ's Righteousness; -- and consider how far our Author
is doctrinally faulty, on this Head, in his Discourse.

4. (...) whether there is not more of Absurdity and Blasphemy couched in
disowning some of the main Ends of CHRIST'S coming into the World, than can be
in the pretended Depreciation of moral Virtue.

5. Consider whether the severe Reflections on the Religion of others,
insinuated by this Author (particularly in Pages 7th and 8th of his Discourse)
are not very justly applicable to his own Religion, as exhibited therein to the
World: And also whether the Objections raised in the Close of that Discourse,
which he has framed and pretended to answer, do not appear a true and ample
Description of the whole of his Performance, notwithstanding all his labored
Solutions.

I. I am to consider the Words of his Text, particularly as they lie in
Connection with the Context; -- and to compare them with some parallel Passages
in Scripture.

H^re, to be distinct,

(1.) I shall consider the Words themselves, and view them in their Relation to
the Context; withal taking some Notice of what our Author has advanced in the
Discourse before us.

The Text is that Clause in ISAIAH 64. 6. -- All our Righteousnesses are as
filthy Rags. -- Our Author, after running through more (...) four Pages by Way of
Introduction (on several Passages of which I shall take Occasion to make some
Remarks, as they may properly fall in under one or other of* the Heads proposed
to Consideration) at length comes to his Text; which I shall first give you his
Construction of in his own Words, with some Remarks upon it; and then offer my
Sentiments upon it, backed with some Arguments, both from Reason and Revelation.

Our Author having made a long Harangue upon Premises something foreign to the
Purpose, at last recollects himself, and returns after a tedious Digression, to
his Subject; beginning thus ( Page 9.) And [not to forget my Text.] -- which
peradventure he might have done for the whole Hour, and yet carried on his
Discourse with near as much Perti^ence, and Propriety, as it now appears with.
-- However, let him go on in his own Way. --

He adds, No Passage perhaps in the whole Book of God has been more shamefully
perverted, than this I have now chosen to discourse upon: The Words, as they
are commonly recei^ed, are a standing Reflection on all Virtue and good
Manners; the most effectual Discouragement that could be gi^en to the Practice
of Christian Morality, and consequently one of the most fatal Snares that could
be laid for the Souls of Men.

A wonderful Flight! -- On which I observe, our Author's Design (it seems)
being to enlighten the Christian World, and to correct and reform our vulgar
Expositors and Preachers, might judge artfully enough, in beginning his Attempt
thus, with such swelling Words of Vanity, and of Reproach upon "the Words of
his Text as they are commonly received." -- And surely, if the Case be as he
represents it, it cannot be a venial Crime in any, after such fair Warning from
our Author, to presume ever again to apply the Words as they are " commonly
received."

Now he tells us, -- The common Notion of them is, that the Prophet is here
giving a just and literal Description of the Righteousness of the Best; while
he is only confessing and lamenting the aggravated Sins of the worst of Men. --
This his Representation of the Case seems exceptionable enough in both its
Parts, as to the Manner of Expression at least: however, I shall not stand to
criticize upon Language, or be nice about Words. He further amplifies in
stating the Notion commonly received: But miserably misses it, when he says,
The best Righteousness has been generally spoken of, as no better a
Qualification, -- than filtby Rags. -- As I shall have Occasion to show
afterward.

He comes at last ( P. 10.) to give us his Judgment concerning the genuine
meaning of the Text; -- And with the highest Assurance tells us how it is to be
understood; designing, it seems, to prevent Expositors and others, for the
future, from so "shamefully perverting" this Passage of Scripture* and that the
Words, as they are commonly received," may no longer be " a standing Reflection
on all Virtue and good Manners," or " such a fatal Snare to the Souls of Men."
-- Thus he declares himself -- The true Sense of the Words (as I trust will
appear in the Progress of this Discourse) is not, that their Righteousness
would have been as filthy Rags, if they had really been a righteous People (the
sacred Writer suggests no such thing) -- It must therefore be a Matter of great
Importance, a Design richly worth our Undertaking, to deliver the Text from
this false Gloss, this horrid Abuse that has been put upon it. --

But I doubt, our Author has sadly missed his Aim, -- and instead of delivering
his Text from a false Gloss, and horrid Abuse, has indeed rather put one upon
it himself: as, I am persuaded, will appear in the Sequel of these Remarks. --
Whereas this Gentleman has taken Pains to blacken the Character of the Jews,
and set it in the most odious Light; I think this injuriously done, and but
very little to the Purpose. -- That the Jewish Nation, at the Time of Isaiah's
Prophecy, had too generally fallen into a State of wosul Degeneracy, I con^ess,
is sufficiently evident from Scripture: But that they were so universally
ab^^d^ned to such a Degree of Immorality and Wickedness, as they are
represented by our Author, I believe wants Proof; and so does his Assertion,
that if they had really been a righteous People, their Righteousness would not
have been as filthy Rags, -- and that the sacred Writer suggests no such Thing.
With as much of an Air of Infallibility as this Gentleman here delivers his
Opinion, it may possibly before we have done with him, appear, he is under a
very gross Mistake; and the Charge of putting a " false Gloss and horrid Abuse
on the Text," returns on his own Head

The Decision of this Case is of great, and (as it appears to me) of the last
Importance. In order therefore to discover, on which Side of the Question the
Truth lies, I shall proceed, as was proposed, to offer some Tho'ts on the Text,
and shall soberly deliver my Opinion in the Case, submitting the same to the
Correction of Men of better Judgment, than either our Author or I, inModesty
can pretend to.

Now that we may come to a clear understanding of the Words of the Text, -- All
our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, -- It may be of use to premise the
following Considerations: -- Namely,

1. That GOD always had, and ever will have a Church in the World; it were easy
to prove this: but I suppose it will not be disputed; therefore I need not
labor the Point.

2. That the Church of God, under all it is Vicissitudes and Revolutions, in the
several Periods of Time, whether under the Patriarchal, or Mosaical, or
Christian Constituon, has always had in it a Number of true Believers in God
and in the Messiah. -- Even in the darkest and most degenerate Age, there
always has been a Remnant according to the Election of Grace, who were
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints and of the Household of God; though sometimes it
has been but a small Remnant, and like the Grape-gleanings of the Vintage, as
it were one of a City and two of a Tribe: Nevertheless, God, who despises not
the Day of small Things, has still owned them for his People, and not forsaken
them. -- The Name of the Church ever has been* and eve^ will be that, JEHOVAH
S^AMMAH, The Lord is there. -- Which is a Consideration, sufficient, I think,
to take off the Odium cast on the People of the Jews, by our Author, when he
represents them as being in Isaiah's Day the worst of Men, and universally so;
or else, he says, their Righteousnesses would not have had the odious Character
of filthy Rags applied to them: -- whereas, it is evident, the Confession in
this Text is the Church's Confession, and this the only Church God had then in
the World, -- which, as corrupt as the Times may be supposed to have been, yet
were called the holy People, the redeemed of the Lord, a City not forsaken,
Isai. 62. 12. -- Certainly, there was a Number of precious Saints of the most
High, then among the Jews; and if so, this destroys the Author's Hypothesis
concerning that People, that they were at this Time an abandoned People,
utterly destitute of true Righteousness, yea, as the worst of Men, given up to
the most detestable Immoralities, and that the whole Design of the sacred
Writer is to show that they had no real true Righteousness. -- But to proceed,
let it be considered,

3. That under the Church's legal and typical Administration, God put his
Prophets, in the Times of their Prophe^ying, into a double Capacity and Trust,
wherein they were eminent Types of the great Mediator between God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus, who both mediates with God for his People, and with his
People for God. Thus were the Prophets appointed to be God's Mouth to his
People, Jer. 15. 19. Thou shall be my Mouth: and as such they came to the
People in the Name of God, under his Authority, and under a like Promise as
that made to Moses, Exodus 4. 12. Go, and I will be with thy Mouth, and teach
thee what thou shall say. -- They were also the People's Mouth unto God, in a
Manner as Aaron was Spokes-man to Moses, ibid. v. 16. -- Now under this public
Character we are to consider the Prophet Isaiah, making the Confession in the
Text, All our Righteousnesses are as fil^^y Rags. The Prophet here is the
Church's Mouth in Prayer; or the Church is by the Prophet offering up her
Prayer to God in Faith: petitioning for divine Help against her Adversaries. --
It is the Church, I say, that makes this Prayer by the Mouth of the Prophet;
and even then the only true Church of God, wherein it must in Reason be
supposed, there were others besides the Prophet, and perhaps many, sincere in
their Addresses to the Throne of Grace for Salvation in a Time of Need: it was
the Prayer of the Upright, the Prayer of Faith; at least, on the Part of the
Prophet and many others. Their Petition is urged and enforced by a variety of
Pleas, particularly from the Consideration of what God had already done for his
People; and they proceed, in the lively Actings of Faith, to express their
Acquiescence in God's Promises, not only with Regard to what temporal Good he
might in Mercy bestow upon them, but also to the inconceivable Glory he had in
Store, prepared for them that wait for him, ( v. 4th of the Context) or as the
Apostle expounds it, prepared for them that love him. (1 Cor. 29) -- Then the
Church goes on ( v. 5.) to a farther Expression of her Faith, with Regard to
the Constancy of God's Mercy -- Thou meet^st, or as it may be read, Thou ownest
and acceptest, him that rejoices and works Righteousness, i. e. the same as
before described, such as wait for God, or love him; who delight themselves in
the Lord, and delight in keeping his Commandments; who rejoice not in Iniquity,
but rejoice in the Truth, and rejoice in Hope, while through Faith they are
enabled to work Righteousness; who experiencing the Joy (...) Faith, have
Confidence toward God, -- that they shall be saved; as the Church speaks in the
Close of this 5th Verse. Nevertheless the Church, as became her, makes a humble
Confession of her own Unworthiness, ( v. 6.) But we are all as an unclean Thing
-- How pertinent, seasonable and fit a Confession was this from the Church,
when supplicating for Mercy and Grace to help her, when acknowledging former
Merci^s, and when acting Faith and Hope in the Promise for further Mercies? On
such an Occasion, how meet and becoming was it in the Church and People of God,
thus to humble themselves in his Sight, under a Sense of their Uncleanness; and
consequently their Unworthiness of the Blessings received or asked at the Hands
of a holy God, who knew what sinful Creatures they were? And I would add, that
the purest Church that ever was upon Earth, ought and might with the greatest
Propriety, even in her purest Times, since Adam's Fall, as an indispensable
Duty, confess with Lamentation in the Language of the Church here, We are all
as an unclean Thing. -- Now if the Fountain be unclean, no Wonder if the
Streams are so too. For who can bring a clean Thing out of an unclean? Not one.
-- How fitly therefore does the Church, conscious of the Imperfections and
Corruptions with which the best of her Performances, whether Ceremonial or
Moral, were stained, subjoin this further Confession -- And all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags! A Confession, which the purest Church on
Earth may make, with Reference to their purest Righteousnesses, I think,
without incurring the Imputation of Absurdity and Blasphemy, in depreciating
moral Virtue, with which this Author reproaches such a Construction of the
Text; which I think, none da^^ deny, except it be such as agree with our
Author, who seems to place his whole Dependence on Morality; as will more fully
appear, I presume, from the most candid Examination of his Discourse referred to.

By our Righteousnesses, we are to understand Works of Righteousness which we
have done. The Expression is not to be construed as including that
Righteousness which is ours by Imputation, and is the Righteousness of Christ
subjectively, described by the Apostle, The Righteousness which is of God by
Faith: But it means that Righteousness which is ours by Inherence; yet, as One
faith, It does no^ mean Righteousness simply considered in the Abstract, but
considered in its Subjects; -- Creatures morally imperfect, all whose Qualities
consequently are so too: Nor does it mean the Principle of Righteousness as
infused into Believers by the Holy Spirit, but the Exercise of it, or Works of
Righteousness as done by us; and it respects all our own personal Acts of
Obedience to God's Commandments, whether respecting Rituals or Morals, -- yea,
even Gospel-Duties of Faith and Repentance, considered as Actions performed by
us. -- All our Righteousnesses, the Church confesses, are as filthy Rags. They
are so in the Eye of the Law and Justice of God, as considered in themselves,
separately from the Righteousness of Christ, which through Grace is imputed to
Believers, and in Virtue of which their sincere (though imperfect) Duties are
acceptable to God. -- All our Righteousnesses, viewed as they really be in
themselves, in Point of Conformity to the Law of God, are very defective, and
in regard of intermixing Sins are much polluted. -- The Church's Complaint in
the preceding Words was, We are all as a^ unclean Thing; -- alluding possibly
to the Cry of the Leper under the Ceremonial Law, Unclean, Unclean! (Lev. 13.
45.) And then they further take Shame to themselves, from a Sense of their
having nothing of their own that did or could hide their spiritual Nakedness
and Uncleanness: Their very Righteousnesses themselves being all but as Rags,
yea as filthy Rags. They may be called Rags, as they were so deficient, that
they would by no Means serve for a Covering to hide the Shame of their
spiritual Nakedness and Uncleanness; scarce so well as the Aprons of
Fig Leaves, that Adam and Eve se^^ed together, to cover the Shame of their
bodily Nakedness. And they may be called filthy Rags in this Respect, that if
Men essayed to cover themselves with their own Righteousnesses, as these were
so stained with Mixtures of Sin, they would rather increase their spiritual
Uncleanness; at least, the applying them to such a Use, and trusting in them
for a Cover to their Uncleanness, would but so much the more contaminate or
pollute them in the Sight of a holy God, who is always jealous for the Honor
of his Grace, and for the Glory of the Redeem^r, in whom only ^e makes us
accepted, and makes us beautiful through his Comeliness put upon us: For it is
written in the Prophet, By his Knowledge shall my righteous Serv^nt justify
many. -- And again, Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I Righteousness and
Strength: Even to Him shall Men come -- And in the Lord shall all the Seed of
Israel be justified and shall glory -- And so the Apostle, By the Obedience of
One shall many be made righteous. -- Even as David also describes the
Blessedness of the Man, to whom God imputes Righteousness without Works, --
saying, Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sins are
covered, i. e. hid from the Eye of vindictive Justice; -- Not by the poor thin
Webb of their own inherent Righteousness, but by the rich Robe of Christ's
Righteousness, imputed and received by Faith. -- Hence all our Righteousnesses
may be said to be as filthy Rags (a most apt and pertinent Comparison) as it
stands in Relation to the grand Affair of our Justification before God.
Accordingly the Apostle Paul teaches us to reject all Pretenses to
Justification in God's Sight by our moral Virtues, or personal Righteousnesses
of any Kind; all which he excludes from being the Matter or Ground of our
Justification, when he represents every Mouth stopped by what the Law faith,
and all the World as become guilty before God; and hence draws that Conclusion,
Therefore by the Deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be justified in his
Sight; for by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin, Romans 3. 19, 20. And then to show
us what it is, that is the true Ground or Matter of our Justification, and how
it is to be obtained by us, he adds in the next Verses, -- But now the
Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested; being witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets: even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe: -- being justified freely by
his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, -- through Faith in
his Blood. -- Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith without
the Deeds of the Law. So Chap. 5. 1. -- Being justified by Faith, we have Peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. -- It follows, v. ^. Much more then
being justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath through him. -- And
v. 17. For if by one Man's Offenc^ Death reigned by One, much more they which
receive abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of Righteousness, shall reign in
Life by One, Jesus Christ. The plain Scope of the Apostle is to show, that the
whole and sole Matter of our Justification before God, or our only justifying
Righteousness in his Sight, is the Righteousness of Christ, graciously given to
us in a Way of Imputation, and received by Faith alone. Hence he calls it the
the Gift, the Gift by Grace, which is by one Man, -- the free Gift unto
Justification, even Justification of Life. -- Surely, this Justification is
wholly of Grace, and not of Works. It Is true, we are said to be justified
through Faith, which is an operative Principle; but then it in through Faith as
uniting us to Christ, and receiving the Atonement; not as working
Righteousness, and producing good Works, but as receiving the Gift of
Righteousness which is by one Man, Christ Jesus. It is by the Obedience of One,
that many are made Righteous* It is the Righteousness of One, which is upon all
them which believe; and they believe through Grace; to them it is given to
believe: By Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves; it is
the Gift of God: Not of Works, le^t any Man should boast. -- So then it is not
of him that wills, no^ of him that runs; but of God that shows Mercy,
and that in his infinite Grace, imputes Righteousness without Works. -- What
are our best Works, if tried by the Law, which is holy and just, but such as
cannot, shall not profit us, in Regard of Justification before God? Surely in
compare with that Righteousness which the Law demands* All our Righteousnesses
are but as filthy Rags. -- They are such in compare with the Righteousness of
Christ, who was holy, harmless, undefiled; -- his Obedience was perfect and
spotless, his Blood pure and untainted with Sin: whereas, Corruption cleaves to
us, and to our best Performances; so that all our Righteousnesses, compared
with Christ's Righteousness, deserve no better Character than this odious one
in the Text. -- Nay, in compare with the Righteousness of the Saints in Glory,
the Righteousnesses of the best Men upon Earth, are but as filthy Rags.

This may suffice for the Illustration of the Text. I would now proceed
something further, in viewing the Context. -- That it was the Church, and the
only one that God had in the World at that Day, which made the humble
Confession, we have been considering, may be demonstrated from the repeated
Expressions of their Faith in God; not only in Passages preceding the Text,
but in several that follow it, v. 8 and 9. But now, O Lord, thou art our
Father: we are the Clay, and thou our Potter, and we are all the Work of thy
Hand. -- Behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy People. -- The Prophet
here appears plainly addressing the Throne of Grace with a Prayer of Faith, in
the Name and Behalf of the Church of God: Nor can it be supposed in Reason, but
that there was a Remnant of faithful ones at that Day, if we consider that
memorable Instance in the Time of Elijah, the Prophet, when the Ten Tribes had
revolted to such a Degree, that he made Intercession to God against Israel, and
complained as if he were left alone, in the true Worship and Fear of God: But
what said the Answer of God unto him? I have reserved to my self sevenThousand
Men, who have not bowed the Knee to Baal. (Compare 1 Kin. 19.and Romans 11.) Now
if there was such a Remnant according to the Election of Grace, in that Day of
extreme Degeneracy in Israel, when they had forsaken God's Covenant, thrown
down his Altars, and killed his Prophets, insomuch that Elijah though it he was the
only Man left to serve God; we may reasonably conclude then, That in the Tribe
of Judah, who had never been so wholly given to Idolatry, but had the Worship
of God always in some Degree kept up among them, there was at least a
proportionable Number of sincere Worshippers of God still remaining in this
Tribe, and in Isaiah's Time many such among this People; though represented by
our Author, as an abandoned People, the " worst of Men; wholly given up to the
most detestable Wickedness." -- But that this is an abusive and injurious
Representation, besides what has been already said, I might argue from the Date
of Isaiah's Prophecy; the latter Part of which (including the disputed Text)
being in the Reign of Hezekiah King of Judah, a pious Prince and a great
Reformer; when the good Knowledge of the Lord spread greatly in the Land, and
God very signally revived his Work, insomuch that diverse even of the other
Tribes, not included within Hezekiah's Dominions, we are told, humbled
themselves, and came to Jerusalem to keep the Passover, and to see^ the Lord
God of their Fathers; also in Judah the Hand of God was to give them one Heart
to do the Commandment of the King, and of the Princes by the Word of the Lord.
(2 Chronicles. 30. 11, 12.) -- And though in this good King's Reign, Isaiah prophesied
of the Babylonian Captivity, yet we read, Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is
the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken: He said moreover, For there shall
be Peace and Truth in my Days. (Isaiah 39. 8.) -- And the Prophet's next
Message, in the following Chapter, begins with Words of Consolation, Comfort
ye, Comfort ye my People, says the Lord, speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem,
etc.

I have insisted the longer on these Things, to show, That our Author's
Discourse was laid on a wrong Foundation; and, I think, has neither Scripture
nor Reason to support the Representation therein made of the Jews, as a wholly
abandoned People, at the Time when Isaiah made that Confession in the Text, All
our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags: as also by Consequence to show, this
Character, odious as it is, is justly applicable to the Righteousnesses of the
very best of Men, in the Respects which have been mentioned; since, in some
such Respects, even the holy Prophet, and godly Hezekiah, and others of the
Faithful, in whose Name he spoke, did apply this Character to their own
Righteousnesses. Upon the whole, I would add, -- Was not the Confession in the
Text dictated by the holy Spirit, and put into the Prophet's Mouth, by divine
Inspiration, for the Church's Use? What Presumption then must it be in any, to
find Fault with the Manner of Expression? or with that Construction of it,
which supposes it adapted for the Church's Use; not excluding the best of Men
from the Use of it? Would to God, there were found among us, even among us,
many more, than its to be feared there are, spirited humbly to make this
Confession in the Text; and like the Church on this Occasion, drawn off from
Dependence on their moral Virtues; and brought to place their whole Confidence
in Christ's Righteousness: yet, while renouncing their own Righteousness in the
Affair of Justification, not at all abating of their Care to maintain good
Works, but still diligently following every good Work, strictly and constantly
attending every Duty, whether religious or civil, personal or relative!

(2.) I proceed now to the other Thing proposed under my first general Head of
Remarks, which is to produce some parallel Texts of Scripture, and compare them
with this Passage in the Prophet. -- There are similar Passages enough, both in
the Old and New Testament, to prove, that the Church's Confession here has in
Effect ever been, and gives us Reason to think it still is and ever will be,
the Language of the Church of God, -- All our Righteousnesses are as filthy
Rags. And therefore that it is not a Confession peculiarly calculated for that
Age wherein it was indicted; nor to be confined to that People of the Jews only,
as our Author suggests. Indeed I grant, this Confession is not to be found any
where else in Scripture, expressed ( totidem ver^is) just in so many Words; but
it is sufficient if it be there ( eodem sensu) implicitly and virtually. It
would be almost endless, to cite all the Sayings in the Bible, that carry much
the same Sense as this Confession in the Text. -- All those Passages may fairly
be reduced under this Head, where we find the Saints or Children of God
renouncing their own Righteousness, as to any Claim founded upon it, when
asking divine Benefits; and where we find them resolving all their Hopes into
the Mercy of God; where we find them confessing their Unworthiness, pleading
for Pardon of Sin, justifying Providence in afflictive Dispensations,
magnifying the divine Grace toward them in favorable Events, deprecating
God's entering into a judicial Process, etc. -- I shall only mention a few out
of the many Instances that might be alleged, to my Purpose. -- Thus, when this
very Prophet, the Penman of the Text, said as in Isai. 6. 5. Woe is me, for I am
undone, because I am a Man of unclean Lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
People of unclean Lips; for mine Eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts:
What does this Confession import, less than that in the controverted Words, All
our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags! -- And what less than this does that of
another Prophet amount to, who while he is personating and pleading for the
Church, says, as in Dan. 9. 18. O my God, incli^e thine Ear, -- for we do not
present our Supplications before thee for our Righteousnesses, but for thy
great Mercies! Her^ we see, where the Force of the Church's Argument in the
Mouth of the Prophet, lies, when instant in Prayer for divine Relief and Help,
in their present Difficulties, -- Not for our Righteonsnesses, O our God, but
for thy great Mercies, we present our Supplications before thee. The Sense is
plainly this, Thou art our Covenant-God, and we pray in Faith and Hope for thy
Salvation: yet our only Plea at the Throne of Grace is thy Mercy, not our own
Worthiness; for we can challenge nothing at thy Hands on the Account of our own
Righteousnesses, which are even as filthy Rags, in the Sight of thine holy and
all-seeing Eyes: -- We therefore renounce all Dependence upon these for
obtaining thy Favor, and rely wholly upon thy Mercy, which is great toward
thy People: For the Lord's sake, ( v. 17.) for thy Name's sake which is in him,
who is the expected Messiah, The Lord our Righteousness. -- This Passage in the
Prophet Daniel is the more to be noticed, as it is so parallel with the
disputed Text, in Isaiah, -- giving us a full and ample Explication of the
Confession, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags: and what makes it the
more emphatical, is, that the Phrase, our Righteousnesses (in the plural
Number) is no where else to be found, that I know of, in the whole Bible, but
in these two Passages of Isaiah and Daniel; and these two Prophets lived in
different Periods of Time, near or quite a Century distant from one another;
both used this Expression in Prayer, and on the like Occasion, both pleading
the Cause and being the Mouth of the Church and People of God: so that we have
here the Church speaking the same Language in various remote Ages; and alike
renouncing their own Righteousnesses even as filthy Rags, at one Time and
another, in the most solemn Manner; not presuming to utter a Word in their own
Justification, not resting in the Law, nor drawing any Argument from their
moral Virtues, when pleading with God.

In the next Place, Let us take a View of Job's Example, a Man perfect and
upright, beyond all in his Day, yet how full is he of Language equivalent to
the Confession in the Text? Job 9. 2, 3. How should Man be just with God? (or
before God) If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a
Thousand. v.15. Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I
would make Supplication to my Judge. v. 20. If I justify my self, my own Mouth
shall condemn me. v. 30 -- 32. If I wash my self with Snow-Water, and make my
Hands never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the Ditch, and mine own
Clothes shall abhor me. For he is not a Man, that I should answer him, and we
should come together in Judgment. So Chap. 10. 15. If I be righteous, yet will
I not lift up my Head. Chap. 13. 23. How many are mine Iniquities and Sins?
Make me to know my Transgression and my Sins. Chap. 14. 4. Who can bring a
clean Thing out of an unclean? not one. -- Though Job in his Conferences often
pleads his Integrity, in Opposition to the Censures of his uncharitable
Friends; yet in his Addresses to God, his usual Manner was to humble himself
thus, and renounce all Confidence in his own Righteousness. And though sometimes
in an Hour of Temptation, the good Man fell into some Expressions too impatient
patient and arrogant, and discovering the Remains of a Self-righteous Spirit in
him; yet when recovered out of those ill Frames, and brought to himself, he
returns to his Self-judging and Self-humbling Language. Chap 40. 3, 4, 5. Then
Job answered the Lord, and said, Behold I am vile! what shall I answer thee? I
will lay my Hand upon my Mouth; once have I spoken, but I will not answer: yea,
twice, but I will proceed no further. He here retracts (makes his Recantation)
and calls back the querulous and vain glorious Expressions, that had dropped from
him, when he spoke unadvisedly with his Lips, by way of faulting of God, and
exalting himself, and setting forth his own Righteousness. -- God's Reply to
him shows, that this Kind of Language was what Job had his Eye to. v. 7, 8.
Gird up thy Loins now like a Man: I will demand of thee; and declare thou unto
me. Will thou also disannul my Judgment? Will thou condemn me, that thou may
be righteous? -- And upon the whole, we find Job most entirely submitting to
the Righteousness of God, and no longer daring to use any such Expression as
might look as if he were going about to establish has own Righteousness. When
Job answered the Lord, he concluded with saying, I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye ^eeth thee; wherefore I abhor my self, and
repent in Dust and Ashes. -- What can this mean less than confessing that all
his Righteousness was as filthy Rags?

So Job's Friends, though they did not always speak the Thing that is right, yet
are judged to have been good Men, and in their Speeches discover much of a
humble Spirit toward God, even while passing mistaken Censures upon Job. Thus
Eliphaz speaks, Chap. 15. 14, -- 16. What is Man, that he should be clean? and
he which is born of a Woman, that he should be righteous? Behold, he puts no
Trust in his Saints; yea, the Heavens are not clean in his Sight: How much more
abominable and filthy is Man, which drinks Iniquity like Water! So Bildad
says, Chap. 25, 4. How then can Man be justified with God? or how can he be
clean, that is born of a Woman: Behold even to the Moon, and it shines not;
yea, the Stars are not pure in his Sight: How much less Man, that is a Worm;
and the Son of Man, that is a Worm! ( v. 5,6.) -- What is this, in true
Construction, but pronouncing all our Righteousnesses to be as filthy Rags!

What short of this do Abraham's Words import? Genesis 18. 27. Behold now I have
taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but Dust and Ashes! -- Dust by
Nature, and Ashes by Corruption (as some have glossed on the Place) such was
the humble Sense that Abraham had of himself, and of his own Righteousness: but
if Abraham were justified by Works, he had whereof to glory. -- So Jacob, though
he could plead his Righteousness, as answering for him, respecting his Dealings
with Laban, yet when he has to do with GOD, he confesses himself less than the
least of all his Mercies. (Genesis 32. 10.) And how then must his own
Righteousness appear in his Eyes? Even as filthy Rags. -- In like manner David,
the Man after God's own Heart, though he could appeal to the supreme Judge, in
the Controversy between him and his Adversaries, and rely on God's Faithfulness
to answer him in that Case, yet he saw at the same Time such Failures staining
all his Righteousness in the Eyes of a Heart-searching God, and consequently
such Grounds of God's entering into an angry Controversy with him, in which he
could never stand, that he earnestly deprecates it. Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not
into Judgment with thy Servant; for in thy Sight shall no Man living be
justified. And again, Psalm. 130. 3. If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquity, O
Lord, who shall stand! The Reason of this is suggested by Solomon in his
Prayer, 2 Chronicles. 6. 36. For there is no Man which sins not. Which
Consideration was doubtless one Motive to his using that Expression ( v. 18.)
But will God in very Deed dwell with Men on the Earth! Even good Men, the
Saints in the Earth, though excellent comparatively with others, yet by Reason of
Sin, that dwells in them, that often breaks out, and taints all their
Righteousnesses, have just Occasion to be astonished at God's Condescension in
dwelling with them. -- What but a Sense of his moral Imperfections, as well as
intellectual, drew that Confession from Agur? Prove. 30. 2. Surely I am more
brutish than any Man, and have not the understanding of a Man! Far from being
pure in his own Eyes, or from not thinking his own Righteousness to be as
filthy Rags. -- Again, what but a Sense of his Sinfulness and the Imperfection
of his own Righteousness put John the Baptist in such humble Confusion, when
Jesus came to be baptized of him, and made him confess and wonder, saying, I
have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me! Mat. 3. 14. -- Again,
had not the Apostle Peter some such humbling View of his Case, when he fell
down at Jesus Knees, saying, Depart from me, for I am a sinful Man, O Lord!
Luke 5. 8. -- Though as to the first Part of his Speech, it may be said of him,
as on another Occasion, he spoke this, not knowing what ^e said; for he was
astonished at the Miracle he saw: yet it is evident, he had at the same Time a
very striking View and humbling Sense of his Sinfulness, which made him appear
in his own Eyes very vile, and unworthy that Christ should honor him with his
Presence. What then must be his Apprehensions of his own Righteousness? -- And
may we not well think the same View of himself was the Reason of Moses's
Conduct, when God appeared to him in the burning Bush, of which we read, Exodus
3. 6. And Moses hid his Face; for he was afraid to look upon God. The practical
Language of this is like that of Job, Behold I am vile; and that of Isaiah, Woe
is me, for I am undone. He doubtless conceived of himself appearing in a dirty
Hue (morally speaking) and utterly unworthy to approach the Presence of a holy
God. He looked, in his own Apprehension, like one in filthy Rags; even like the
high Priest we read of, Ze^h. 3. 3. Now Joshua was clothed with filthy
Garment^, and stood before the Angel. This Case was indeed typical, and
Joshua's filthy Garments may be considered as emblematical of the fordid Figure
or ^pp^arance, that the Saints themselves and their Righteousnesses, if viewed
in the Glass of the Law, must make before a holy God. Joshua's having his
filthy Garments taken away, and Change of Raiment given him, typically
represents the Need there is of our having the filthy Rags of our own
Righteousness put away from before the Eye of vindictive Justice; and shows us,
that we can appear with Safety before a holy God, only as clothed with Change
of Raiment, the Garment given us, even the Righteousness which is of Faith.

Indeed our Author ( Page 16.) pretends, that the personal Righteousness of the
Saints is the fine Linen, cl^^n and white, spoken of by John, Rev. 19. 8. Now,
though this were granted, yet if we consult the Context, it seems as if it were
the Righteousness of Saints in their glorified State, who indeed walk with God
in white, that is represented under this Similitude: and if the perfect
Righteousness of the Saints in Light be represented as such a Robe of Glory,
this does not infer, that the imperfect Righteousness of Saints in the Earth,
ought to have the (...) Resemblance applied to it. This surely will not bear
the Comparison: For the best Garment of personal Righteousness on Earth need
(...) be washed, and can only be made white in the Blood of the Lamb. --
Without being washed with the Blood of Christ, and as considered in themselves,
compared to the Law to which they should be conformable, all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. -- But the Righteousness of CHRIST is a
spotless Robe: And this has generally been thought to be the white Raiment
(spoken of Rev. 3. 18.) which our Savior counsels us to buy of him. The only
Clothing sufficient to hide the Shame of our Nakedness, to hide the Nakedness
of our moral Virtues, as well as to cover our Sins, is that best Robe, the Robe
of Christ's Righteousness, which is upon all them that believe. -- Agreeable to
this, the Apostle Paul, tells us, he counted all Things but Loss and Dung, that
he might win Christ, and be found in him, not having his own Righteousness
which is of the Law, but that which is through Faith of Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil. 3. 8,9. -- This is the fine
Linn^n, clean and white, with which Believers are arrayed, safe-guarded, and
secured unto the Day of Judgment, and at last presented spotless unto God. --
This is the Wedding Garment, in which all shall appear, that will be approved
Guests, when the Marriage of the Lamb is come. -- They will all pursuant to the
Doctrine taught by Christ, say from first to last, We are unprofitable
Servants. -- Their everlasting Song will be in such Strains as these, Worthy is
the Lamb that was slain, who has redeemed us to God by his Blood, who has
finished Transgression, made an End of Sin, and brought in an everlasting
Righteousness. -- They will eternally celebrate the Kindness and Love of God
our Savior, in some such Language as that of the Apostle, Tit. 3. 5, -- 7. Not
by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy ^e
saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which
he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior; that being justified
by his Grace, we should be Heirs according to the Hope of eternal Life.

To conclude this Head, we may observe, the Apostle having given us a Catalogue
of many primit^^e Saints, tells us, -- These all died in Faith, Heb. 11. 13. --
even as he had before remarked, Chap. 10. 38. The Just shall live by Faith, --
in the Prophet's Words. Now it is of the very Nature of Faith to exclude
boasting, and to renounce all Confidence in our own Righteousness. -- Surely
whether living or dying, we should make it our Concern, that we may be strong
in Faith, giving Glory to God: yet it must be notic'd, where there is Faith
unfeigned, this always purifieth the Heart, and influenceth to follow universal
Holiness; and besure will not permit us to neglect the Duties of M^rality, or
slight any of the social Virtues; for Faith works by Love, both toward God,
and toward our Neighbor. -- There is the Obedience of Faith, as well as the
Dependence of Faith; and both are exemplified in the sound Believer. -- Upon
the whole, I must say, we under the Gospel have as little Foundation for
boasting in our moral Seize, as had the Jewish Church in the Days of the
Prophets; and therefore should not be high-minded, but fear, though the God of
all Grace has provided some better Things for us, than he did of old for them;
fear, I say, left our superior and singular Advantages should only serve to
aggravate our Sins, in the Sight of that God, who is of purer Eyes than to
behold Iniquity, though it were but the Iniquity of our holy Things, without
Detestation, in whomsoever it be found. We should take heed, lest there be in
any of us an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the living God; and
ought to fear, lest a Promise being left us of entering into his Rest, any of us
should seem to come short of it. The Jewish Nation were at last broken off
because of Unbelief; and we stand by Faith; we should therefore take Warning
from their Sin and Ruin, and beware that we do not fall after the same Example
of Unbelief. -- And it is certain, that as the Jewish Church ever did, while
standing by Faith, so the true Christian Church ever will, unite in this grand
Article of Lamentation, and Self-abasing Confession before God, All our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. -- I have stayed the longer upon the Head
of producing parallel Texts of Scripture with the Text insisted on, to show,
that as holy Men of God spoke and wrote their Sentiments on the Case under
present Examination, by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, their united
Testimony sufficiently proves, in what Sense we are to understand the Words,
and are of sufficient Force to put our Author and all Gainsayers to Silence.
-- Thus much for the first general Head.

It was proposed in the next Place,

II. To attempt the Removal of those Prejudices, our Author has taken Pains to
raise against many sound and orthodox Protestant Expositors and others, by his
harsh and unjust Reflections, of a personal Aspect, and by his unfair
Representations of their Principles; some of which I shall mention, and
endeavor a Vindication of.

In the Introduction to his Discourse, and elsewhere, this Gentleman exhibits
very loud and bitter Complaints against certain Expositors, and others that
join with them, as having wretchedly perverted and horribly abused his Text,
All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags; and as having advanced many
Opinions in Religion, which he insinuates to be of a very bad Nature and
dangerous Tendency.

Now in order to make the fairest and fullest Answer to these Complaints, I
shall take this Method. (1.) Consider who are the Expositors and others here
intended by the Author. -- (2.) Repeat in his own Words some of the ind^cent
and severe Reflections he has cast upon them, and hint at some of his
Misrepresentations of their Opinions. -- And (3.) Defend their Memory and
Character against the Injustice done them; and withal attempt a brief
Vindication of their Principles, as it comes in my Way in the Course of these
Remarks.

1. We are to consider who the Expositors and others are, that the Author had a
View to in his Complaints and Censures. -- Now this, I think, will sufficiently
appear by the Description he has in Effect given of them, in remonstrating
against many of their known Tenets, as well as their Opinion upon his Text.
Though he has not, in several Instances, fairly stated those Doctrines of theirs,
which he excepts against, but has represented them in Language designed, as it
seems, to excite a Prejudice both against them and the Patrons and Abettors of
them, in his less judicious and more unwary Readers: yet upon the whole, I
think, he has left himself no Room for Evasion here, by pretending as though he
had really no View to such Expositors and their Adherents; for it is apparent,
that our Author's Eye was to such as held the Doctrines of personal Election,
particular Redemption, original Sin, efficacious Grace, imputed Righteousness,
Justification by Faith, the Saints final Perseverance, -- and in a Word, God's
Sovereignty in Man's Salvation. -- All these Doctrines seem very plainly struck
at, either directly or by Consequence, in his Discourse, and some of them
treated with supercilious Disdain and Contempt. -- In the general, he explodes
them under the opp^^brious Name of " Libertine Notions." P. 9, and he observes,
that for the propagating them, viz. these Notions, No Passage perhaps in the
Book of God has been more shamefully perverted, than this which he has chosen
to discourse upon: The Words (says he) as they are commonly received, are a
standing Refl^ction on all Virtue. Hence we may with the highest Reason
conclude, our Author's Invectives are levelled against Protestant Expositors,
and those in special of a Calvinistical Character and Per^wasion, and those
that adhere to the like Principles, which the Ministers in New England
generally have done, and with plain scriptural Gospel Warrant. -- It is
therefore strange and very lamentable, that any should be found among us in
these Churches and in the Ministry too, venting such Indignation and Scorn at a
Notion of his Text (by his own Confession) commonly received; yea, denying, and
even deriding, and bantering those great and important Scripture-Doctrines,
which it has been made use of to support, (with many other parallel Texts,
above cited to, under the foregoing Head) which were so dear to our pious
Predecessors, and which have hitherto been so commonly received in the whole
Protestant World; as appears particularly by the public Confessions of Faith,
and Catechisms, as well as other Writings they have left us as Memorials of
their Belief, and for Helps to us to understand the Scriptures, and that our
Faith may be fixed in the Doctrines contained in them. I think it no Trespass
upon the Rules of Charity, to suppose our Author had some Reference to these,
as they are commonly read and valued among us; and I look on the Assembly's
Catechism in particular, as struck at in his Discourse, (and no Wonder, when he
palpably denies it in some of its essential Points, and declares (by credible
Information) against instructing his own, or other ^^^ildren of his Charge
therein) Besure the distinguishing Principles of it are plainly levelled
against. -- But I pray God, that this excellent Catechism may still be had in
Esteem and Use among us, even to the latest Posterity, notwithstanding the
Attempts made to disparage it. O that all were suitably disposed to honor such
valu^^^ Remains of our worthy Ancestors, and to remember them which have spoken
to us the good Word of God, and to follow their Faith, considering the End of
their Conversation. -- But I come, as was proposed,

2. To rehearse, in our Author's own Words, some of the many injurious
Reflections, he has cast on those Expositors and others, and hint at some of
his Misrepresentations of their Opinions. -- By the Title of his Discourse,
Protestant Expositors in general, with many Protestant Preachers and others,
who understand his Text to intend the Saints acknowledgement of their own
Righteousnesses to be as filthy Rags, all these (I say) stand expressly indicted
before the World, of Absurdity and Blasphemy in depreciating moral Virtue; and
he thus draws their black Character in the Discourse itself ( Page 6.) Certain
it is, that the Word of God -- has either through the Weakness, Inattention and
Ignorance, or more criminal Designs of its Expositors, (by some such I say) in
all Ages of the World been wretchedly abused, to serve the Purposes of Error,
Superstition and Vice. -- And perhaps nothing has had a more fatal Tendency to
delude the Simple, and harden the Profane, than judging of Scripture Doctrines
from particular Scraps of Scripture, and from the bare Jingle of Words, etc.

And then this Gentleman ( Page 7.) in enumerating the particular Opinions
(concerning Election, original Sin --) held by these Expositors and others,
tells us, that for want of attending to the real Design and Drift of the
Author, and to the whole current of Inspiration, as to the Point under
Examination, it has come to pass that when they have met with this or the other
historical Passage in Scripture, (several of which he alludes to) "they have
rashly concluded," this and the other Doctrine to be founded on the Word of
God. -- Then he goes on to say, Thus stupefied and bewildred with Sounds,
without attending to the true Sense of Revelation, the pure and perfect
Religion of Jesus -- is in many Places turned into an idle Speculation, a
mysterious Faith, a senseless Superstition, and a groundless Recumbency; and in
short, every Thing but what in Fact it is. -- And he observes ( Page 8.) The
like Delusions, and by the same Means, have been introduced, in judging our
spiritual Estate. Here he mentions several Instances, and particularly observes
how some imagine, God has from all Eternity set his Love upon them -- Others
(says he) you will find amusing themselves, because they have the perfect
Righteousness of Christ imputed to them. -- And he speaks of their affected
Sorrow and groaning for Sin, especially for the Sins of others they never had
any Handin: -- which looks like a sarcastical Sneer at those that bewail and
lament their own and others Sins and indwelling Corruptions. Perhaps he has not
considered that remarkable Text, Ezekiel. 9. 2, 4. He that was clothed in Linen,
with the Writer's Inkborn by his Side, -- was commanded to go through the midst
of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a Mark upon the Foreheads
of the Men that sigh and that cry for all the ABOMINATIONS, that be done in the
midst thereof. -- Our Author appears to be something upon his Guard here, and
perhaps with a View to leaving open a Door for his Retreat, in Case his
Discourse should meet with Opposition, has thrust in qualifying Clauses, or
restraining Phrases, not only in his Account of the Delusions he instances in,
but also in his Description of the commonly received Doctrines, by which (as
hinted before) he has not a little misrepresented them. For it is evident, by
the general run of his Discourse, and by some pointed Passages in particular,
that what he strikes at, is the commonly received Notion (as he phrases it)
respecting one Doctrine and another. And if he really meant not so, but had his
Eye to some singular Enthusiastical Delusions, or Antinomian Dotages, I must
say, then he has been but beating the Air, and in a great Degree been
impertinent. Whereas doubtless he intended the Principles of Calvinists, and
has by his soul Misrepresentations thrown a great deal of Dirt upon their
Character.

Before he has passed very severe Censures on the commonly received Notion of
his Text, and so constructively and obliquely on all the Expositors and others
that embrace that Meaning of the Text. He seems so offended and incensed at
what he calls "this modern Style of filthy Rags, as applied to the Virtues of
good Men," that every Page almost has Indications of his Displeasure at and
Contempt for those who make this Application. -- Thus he speaks ( Page 18.) --
Shall we call this, I say, filthy Rags? -- God forbid! God forbid! Such a
Thought should ever enter into our Hearts; and if through the Wickedness of them
it should happen to steal in, let us look upon it as a greater Evil, and be
more solicitous to cast it out, than if we were possessed with seven Devils. --
It follows then, according to our Author, -- where such a Though It (upon his Text)
has been already admitted by Expositors or others, -- and he himself owns it is
the Notion commonly received, This must be imputed to the Wickedness of their
Hearts, unless a profound Ignorance may afford them some Excuse. And if any
will still harbor such a Thought, especially after being instructed and warned
by our Author, he declares them to be in a worse Case, than if they were
possessed even with seven Devils. -- And truly, according to this Gentleman's
Discourse, if it be considered how many pernicious Doctrines and Delusions are
so nearly connected with the common Notion of his Text, he must needs suppose
us, to be in a worse Condition than the Gadarene we read of, Mark 5. who being
asked What is thy Name? answered, My Name is Legion, for we are many. --
Accordingly our Author (Page 23.) represents this Thought, and the Doctrines
commonly connected with it, as the Fictions of weak or disordered Brains, every
Article a downright Affront to commonSense and doubtless referring to those
who entertain the same, he there speaks of some who by a few Rabble-charming
Sounds are converted into such fi^ry Bigots, as to be ready to die, in the
Defense of Stupidity and Nonsense? Yea, even to kill -- (and that for the Glory
of God) all that are so heretical and graceless as not to renounce their Reason
in Complaisance to their sovereign Dictates -- These he describes as the happy
Few, that have Sense enough, and da^e trust their own Faculties, so far as to
judge themselves what is right. -- That by no Arts how Sanctimonious soever,
can ever be brought to believe, and (much less profess when they don't believe)
Things repugnant to the first Principles of Reason.

Now these Encomiums are doubtless intended for such as join with him, in
condemning the common Notion of his Text, and the other common Notions that
usually bear it Company: but his foregoing Reflections are levelled against the
Patrons and Abetters of the commonly received Construction of the Text, That
our own Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. -- This was evidently his Design,
by those Remarks of his, toward the close of the Head he is upon -- Page 24. --
But if this be Revelation and Grace, to vilify humane Nature, and disparage all
our Improvements in divine Virtues, -- so far, I say, as any take their
Conceptions from such Corruptions of Christianity, they must necessarily be
prejudiced against it. Thunder we ever so loud without previous Lightning, He
that believes not shall be damned, it will signify nothing; for they will be
damned, before they will believe. -- These closing Remarks sufficiently show
against whom his Invectives are multiplied* as the Promoters of Libertine
Notions. -- And he insinuates, that he himself (horrid to be spoken) will be
damned before he will believe the Notion commonly received in these Matters. --
Nor can this be wondered at, if it carries such a monstrous Guilt as he
insinuates, by saying -- Pa. 17. -- Nor can this in Reason be though it a common
Reflection on the divine Being; because it is blaspheming of Him in his dearest
Attributes. -- So in another Place, Pa. 19, 20. -- He represents the commonly
received Notion of his Text, as bordering upon (if not being in Fact) the
unpardonable Sin. His Words are, -- Blaspheming the miraculous Powers of the
Holy Ghost was formerly [why formerly? as if it were not also now] -- called an
unpardonable Sin; nor can any Reason be given (if it be done with equal Light
and Malice) why reproaching his Fruits and Vertu^s* should be deemed less
beinous, or meet with a less fatal Doom. Now, that our Author supposes these
Expositors and others, who deem their own Righteousnesses, and the
Righteousnesses of the best Men upon Earth, to be as filthy Rags, (in the Sense
I have shown above in the foregoing Part of these Remarks) which he interprets
a reproaching the Fruits and Virtues of the Holy Spirit, are guilty of doing
this against Light, if not with Malice, is very evident, from the gross
Reflections he casts upon them, as having "shamefully perverted," as having
"put a false Gloss and horrid Abuse on the Text, etc. Pa. 9, 10* But more
clearly still from what he observes, -- Pa. 22. -- After all these recommending
Characters (I say) of a truly good Man's own personal Righteousness, it would
be too great a Reflection on your Understanding, to suppose, there is one Man
that does not see the Injustice and Wickedness, the Impiety and Blasphemy, of
caling this Righteousness filthy Rags. A great Complement verily this is to his
Hearers Understanding: but a very base Reflection at the same Time, on the
moral Character, as well as Understanding of all those learned and excellent
Expositors and others, who have not, or do not abuse the Text, as I think he
has done: this, it seems, has provoked him to a high Pitch of Resentment, so
that he can scarce contain himself within any Bounds of Decency, or of common
Modesty. -- Therefore (to mention another Passage) he breaks out in that rude,
abrupt Exclamation -- Pa. 19 -- "The very same Things -- (O shocking Thought!)
that are commonly styled filthy Rags" -- By this he would express his
Indignation and Amazement at the Stupidity and Impie^y of those old
Protestants, and their Abettors and Followers, who have interpreted the Text,
according ^s what he calls the common Notion of it. "O shocking Thought!" as
much as to say, O horrid Abuse of the sacred Text! the most stupid Nonsense!
and equal Blasphemy ^ to indulge such a Thought, a greater Evil surely than if
they were possessed with seven Devils! or in Virgil's Language, Monstram
horrendum inform ingens cui Lumen ademptum! O the unparalled Blindness! the
deep deformed tremendous monstrous Darkness, which attends these Expositors,
and their Followers! that such a Thought ever entered into their Hearts, it was
because there was no Light in them! This is the plain Import of our Author's
Parenthesis, "(O shocking THOUGHT!)" --

There Is one Reflection more, I shall take some Notice of, (though of a different
Nature from the rest) and that is the remarkable Fling he has at a common Usage
we have among us, -- That of keeping public Fasts. -- He takes Occasion to say
upon it, -- Page 9. -- The Solemnities of a Fast Day -- your Saints that depend
on their devotional Exercises, not only prefer to all other Duties, but are
ready to imagine they are a sufficient Atonement for all their past Vices, and
of greater Account ^'procure the Blessing of Heaven, than all the heathenish
Morality, the abominable good Works, that can be preached by all your legal
Self-righteous Men on Earth. How came our Author to pick out Fast-Days, and not
Thanksgiving Days as well, to make them the Subject of his Banter and Derision,
when these are some of our usual Solemnities also? I leave others to judge the
Reason. But it seems our Author has a wonderful Power of Penetration into the
Sentiments of your Saints (as he terms them) on Fast-Days. However, though there
is Danger on all Hands, of People's falling into the Error hinted at, carnal
Confidence in Duties, yet I presume to say, those who extol personal
Righteousness in the Manner our Author very apparently has done, to the
Disregard of imputed Righteousness, and who so applaud moral Virtue, to the
Neglect of Faith in the Blood of Atonement, seem to me to be of all Men most in
Danger of depending on their own Duties, whether devotional Exercises, or
vertuo^s Practices, and of cherishing a vain Hope, as if those would
sufficiently atone for their past Sins, or as if by Works of Righteousness
which they have done, and not according to his Mercy, God should save them.

But I now dismiss this, and pass to the next Thing in order. -- Which is,

3. To attempt the doing some Justice to the Memory and Character of these
injured Expositors and others, on whom our Author has so liberally cast his
Reflections and to offer something in Vindication of their Principles so
misrepresented and reproached by him.

It would be almost an endless Task, to go over all the Ins^tances of Calumny
and Satyr, that are of a personal Aspect, and to recite all the
Misrepresentations andAbuses, in Relation to Principles, which are to be found
in his Discourse, with a particular Reply to each distinctly. And as to some of
them it may justly be said, Recitasse est resutasse -- to recite them is a
sufficient Refutation of them. I shall therefore content my self with the
following Reflections and Replies, which I think may suffice to my present
Purpose.

I shall begin, as seems most natural, with some Remarks by Way of Vindication
of those Expositors and others, against our Author's more general Reflections
and Censures. The Scandal he has thrown out on this Occasion, falls heavy on
the Character of many eminent Worthies, from the Reformation, down to this Day,
and of the Ministers in New England in particular. It is a black Description
indeed he gives of them, while he represents them as weak, inattentive,
ignorant, or led by wicked Designs, etc. -- But surely if this Gentleman had
duly considered his juvenile Years, whereby he has had but little Opportunity
for Inquiry; -- And had he consulted that Scripture, 1 Timothy 5. 1. comparing it
with Chap. 3. 6. -- I think, the serious Meditation hereof must needs have laid
him under some Restraint, and taught him a little more Modesty, than to spit in
the Face of his Fathers, and stigmatize so many famous Divines, and excellent
Christians, as weak, inattentive, ignorant and wickedly designing Men, -- only
because their Exposition of his Text, and their Opinions concurrent with it,
don't agree with his Sen^^ments.

Our Author appears by his Title Page, to imagine he has full Warrant for what
he has done, from that Charge of the Apostle to Timothy, 1 Epist. 4. 11, 12. --
These Things command and teach -- Let no Man despise thy Youth -- His putting
these Words in the Fronti^piece of his Discourse, it seems, he expected would
stop the Mouth of all Objectors; but I presume, the Parallel will by no Means
hold between the Evangelist, and this our young Preacher; except perhaps in
Point of Age. -- Timothy was the Apostle's own Son in the Faith, -- Chap. 1. 2.
It Is well for our Author if he be found deserving of that Character, and not
rather an illegitimate Offspring, who concerning Faith has made Shipwreck, --
as the Manner of some was even in the Apostle's Days, v. 19. -- And if we
consider the Words cited by him, in their Connection with what either goes
before, or follows in the same Chapter, we shall possibly perceive they give no
Countenance to our Author's petulant Censures and Reflections. -- Let no Man
despise thy Youth. It does not mean to flush the young Preacher with a
vainglorious Idea of his Authority, and to excite haughty Airs: but to impress
him with a humble Sense of the peculiar Need he has to take Care, in such an
Age of Life, so exposed to Vanity, Precipitancy, and the Disadvantages arising
from want of Experience and Observation, le^t he should in his public
Ministration or private Conversation behave amiss, or manage imprudently, so as
to give just Occasion to others to despise his Youth. -- That Timothy might
know how he ought to behave himself in the House of God, the Apostle being such
an one as Paul the Aged, sends him particular Directions, Cautions and
Warnings. -- He reminds him, v. 1 of the Predictions of the Spirit (alluding as
some think to Dan. 11. 3^, 39.) speaking expressly, that in the latter Times
some shall depart from the Faith, giving ^eed to seducing Spirits: The
formidable Appearance of which predicted Event, seems too evident in our Day --
Whilst some are so visibly fallen from the Truth, and others ^^ving ^eed to
Seducers. Alas! is it not too notorious to be denied, that with Respect to the
Belief of the Truth, Gospel Truth, or the Doctrine of Christ revealed in the
holy Scriptures, there is a lamentable Defection in these Times (which in
Regard of Error, as well as Vice, are indeed perilous Times,) particularly as I
apprehend, in our Author's Discourse. -- The Apostle, we may further observe,
proceeds, v.6. to tell Timothy, inCase he duly put the Brethren, his christian
Hearers, in Remembrance of what he himself had how been admonished of, and
warned against, and if he nourished up himself and them in ^ound Doctrine, such
as Paul preached, and filled his Epistles with, and which the Scriptures lay so
great Stress upon, that then he would approve himself a good Minister of Jesus
Christ: but not else. -- On the whole, I infer, That if young Ministers would
avoid having their Youth despised, one of the best Methods they can take, and
that on which their future Usefulness and Reputation, as good Ministers of
Christ depend, is to look to it that they be not mere Teachers of the Law, or
unskilful Preachers of Morality, but that they themselves, and others by their
Means, be nourished up in the Words of Faith and sound Doctrine, established in
the Faith, as it was once delivered to the Saints. -- An another Expedient I
may venture to suggest, as a good Preservative, to the young Minister in
special, against being despised, is, in the Language of the same Apostle, Romans
12. 3. -- Not to think of himself more highly than be ought to think, but to
think soberly, according as God has dealt to every Man the Measure of Faith.
It was then to be Timothy's Care, in his Conduct, to guard against every Thing
that had a Tendency to blemish his Character, as a Christian and a Minister;
which would sufficiently defend him from being despised, though but a Youth.

But to return, -- The Expositors and others, though by our Author characterized
as weak, inattentive, ignorant, or acting on more criminal Designs, -- yet, for
my Part, I cannot conceive, what these Designs could be, unless they were the
Designs of magnifying the Grace of GOD, of exalting the Redeemer, and of
humbling vain Man. -- These were their avowed Designs, and are consonant to the
very Spirit and Scope of the Gospel-Doctrine, as is obvious from the whole
Tenor of the sacred Writings: yet will our Author impute it to them as a Crime,
or what they had a criminal Design in, that they did not with him cry up
extravagantly the Dignity of human Nature, extol personal good Behavior, or
magnify their own and others moral Virtue, beyond all reasonable Bounds, and
even set it up for their justifying Righteousness before God, -- but rather on
the contrary deplored the Weakness of the human Understanding, and the
Depravity of the human Will, -- and freely confessed their own Weakness and
Sinfulness, and Unworthiness in themselves of the divine Favor and Acceptance:
grounding this humble Sense of their lamentable Case on Scripture-Testimony,
backed by their own daily Experience, both which they found uniting to prove,
That all their Righteousnesses were as filthy Rags! Or shall we suppose, that
the great Disgust our Author has taken up against these Expositors, was from
this, -- That by the Construction they put on the Words of his Text, it gave
Disturbance to the Pope and whole Conclave of Rome, whose Explication is so
near of a Piece and the same Make with his. If then the criminal Designs,
imputed to these Expositors, lay in their so interpreting the Scripture as they
did, with a View the more effectually to oppose the Popish Heresy, and maintain
the Protestant Cause, their pretended Crime is their Glory; and in this they
may well triumph, rejoicing in God, that through* Grace they have been enabled to
bear a faithful and public Testimony to the Truth, even as the Truth is in
Jesus; -- and not a few of them have by suffering Martyrdom, cheerfully sealed
their Doctrine with their very Blood. -- Now, whatever the Author may, upon a
serious and calm Review of his Discourse, think of the severe Charges therein
laid against so many excellent Men, Men of God, Men of Prayer, Men of Piety,
Probity, Penetration and Learning, exemplary for the Practice of all moral
Virtue and religious Duty, mighty in the Scriptures, studious (many of them to
Admiration) to find out the Mind of God in his Word, faithful to declare it,
and careful to transmit the same to Posterity; being truly burning and shining
Lights in their several Stations, some (and not a few of them) appearing even
as brazen Wall^ or impregnable Bulwarks against the Here^ies of Rome, and
Tyrannies of the Popis^ Hierarchy, principal Founders under Christ of the
Protestant Churches, and Pillars in the spiritual House of God, eminent
Promoters of the Kingdom of Grace, which spread itself far and wide among the
Nations, and at length reached these New England Shores* where the God of all
Grace in our Beginning-times furnished and adorned the Churches here with
Ministers of the Word and Expounders of the Scripture, that were (at least many
of them) endowed with uncommon Gifts and Graces Ministerial, Men that had much
Communion with God, much Insight into divine Things, and were deeply
acquainted, by Study, Experience and Observation, with the Doctrine of Grace
and Mystery of Godliness taught in the Gospel; Men, who after Paul's Example
aimed principally to know and preach CHRIST and him crucified; whose Zeal to
maintain the Faith and Order of the Gospel (now so exploded and ridiculed by
some of their Successors) led them over into this remote and inhospitable
Wilderness; where, we have no Reason to Doubt, they served their Generation
according to the Will of God, under next to insuperable Difficulties, and
having fallen asleep, their precious Souls have been taken up to the World of
Spirits, appearing (we may venture to say) with Crowns very bright and weighty,
in proportion to their arduous Labors of Faith and Patience in the Cause of
Christ: -- now, I say, that all these our pious Forefathers, all the godly
Reformers, all Protestant Confessors, Expositors, Preachers, and Professors in
general, from the Beginning of the Reformation, that did not concur in
Sentiment with our Author, should fall together under the Lash of this
Gentleman's Pen, is truly surprising! Had these Invectives and false
Accusations (as I think I may term them without any Breach of good Manners)
proceeded from some old hardened Papist, or from an avowed and inveterate Enemy
to all Revelation, in that Case Allowances might reasonably be made. -- But for
a professed Protestant, for one sustaining the Character of a Minister, in a
Protestant Church, and One but yet in his Youth, and but as it were of
Yesterday, for such a One (I say) to take upon him to rebuke, not a single
Elder, but many, and instead of entreating them as (...) thus to behave himself
proudly against the Ancient; to traduce the Memory of the Dead, and asperse the
Character of the Living, even of Multitudes of Christ's precious Ministers and
People, -- This, I must confess, appears to me next to a Prodigy; or, to speak
in his own Language, an Instance of Stupidity and Nonsense. It is indeed one of
the greatest Absurdities in Conduct, equal at least to any in Opinion, which
those that he speaks of as converted by Rabble-charming Sounds, into fiery
Bigots, have been ready to die in the Defense of. But it seems according to
this Writer's Insinuation, Pa. 6. these Expositors criminal Designs respect the
Scriptures being "wretchedly abused to serve the Purposes of Error,
Superstition and Vice," and being expounded so as to have had a fatal Tendency
to "delude the Simple, and harden the Profane." If this be not what he intends
by the criminal Designs of the Expositors he speaks of, I am quite at a Loss
about his meaning. And I must confess, if the Case be in Truth as he
insinuates, they must be guilty of criminal Designs indeed, or at best of very
perverse Management, and wretched Abuse of the Word of God: But I trust, the
contrary has been sufficiently evinced already, and may be confirmed in the
Course of these Remarks.

Our Author in the next Place intimates (as I ^uppose) what he thinks the
Occasion of this wretched Abuse of God's Word, -- that is, judging of
Scripture-Doctrines from particular Scraps of Scripture, and from the bare
Jingle of Words, without attending to the general Drift and Design of the
Author, and the whole Current of Inspiration as to the Point under Examination.
I think truly this Gentleman stands here condemned out of his own Mouth* and
that of the Apostle, Romans 2. 1. Thou art inexcusable, O Man that judge --
seems justly applicable to him, so far as it concerns his Discourse before us:
For it must be evident to every observing Reader, how this very Way of judging
of Scripture-Doctrines, which he has here censured, runs through the whole of
his own Discourse. His Text itself he has in a Manner treated as an independent
Sentence. And though he has hinted at one Verse of the Context, yet he has done
nothing like analyzing, or commenting on the whole, or considering what
immediately goes before, or follows this disputed Text, in order to state it is
true Meaning; so far from this, that he almost forgets its general Tenor and
Form. -- As to the Arguments all along advanced in his Discourse, they are
mostly enforced only by a single Text or two (without his appearing to attend
to their Coherence and Dependence) or in his own Phrase, by particular Scraps
of Scripture; and these, many of them at least, seem to me, unjustifiably
applied, contrary to the Analogy of Faith, or the Current of sacred Writ. --
May he and I remem^^^ and wisely apply those Scripture Caveats and
Prohibitions, relating to diminishing from, or adding to the Words of God,
Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Prove. 30, 5, 6. Rev. 22. 18, 19. -- What must we then think of
the Discourse under Examination? in which the Author has arbitrarily
interpreted the Words of his Text, in a Sense so inconsistent with the Scope of
numerous parallel or similar Texts, both in the old and new Testament, a few
whereof have been produced, and many more might easily be added. -- It must be
with a very ill Grace that our Author charges that on Expositors which they are
not chargeable with, viz. judging of ScriptureDoctrines from particular Scraps
of Scripture, in which our Author has signalized himself far beyond any I have
met with. -- But he goes on -- "And from the bare Jingle of Words, without
attending to the general Drift and Design of the Author." Now as to the
particular Occasion of this his Censure upon them, their expounding his Text
contrary to his Sentiments upon it, I would observe, that it being considered
that the inspired Author, in his own and the Church's Name, made this
Confession in a solemn Prayer to God, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy
Rags; had this Gentleman in any Measure attended to the general Design and
Drift of the Prayer, I think he could not easily have missed the true Scope and
Meaning of this Confession, in particular: And had he attended to this,
answerably to the Seriousness of the Subject, to the Sacredness of the solemn
Assembly, to the Holiness of the Sabbath, and to the Solemnity of the
Humiliation-Day in the preceding Week, to which he speaks of having some
Reference, I presume, neither this Gingle of Words nor the Scraps of Scripture
would have found a Place in his Discourse; and so his grave Audience had not
been tempted to Levity by his using Phrases of so ludicrous a Sound, which run
through his Performance in the several Parts of it. See Page 5, 9, 17, 23, 24,
25, 28, and elsewhere. -- The Indec^rum of this Language is further aggravated,
as it was premeditated, it seems, to fix a Blemish on the Expositors he had in
view, and to cast an Odium on their Character. -- At best it seems like a great
Piece of Vanity, for this young Gentleman to stake his Authority and Credit
against the Judgment and Reputation of the whole Body of Protestant Expositors
in general, both Ancient and Modern, whose Works (many of them) as well as
Lives, testify for them, That in Fact they did attend very strictly and
conscientiously to the Mind of the Spirit, to the true Scope of this, as well
as other of the Scripture-Texts, and the general Drift of the inspired Penmen;
especially in Regard to the peculiar Doctrines of Christianity, and more
particularly that grand Article of Justification by Faith, which they saw so
much Stress laid upon in the holy Scriptures; insomuch that both in Principle
and Practice these pious and worthy Men renounced all SelfRighteousness, the
Idol so much admired by many at this Day; -- and in their Preaching never
fought to gratify their Hearers with Rabble-charming Sounds, or with
Fleshpleasing and great swelling Words of Vanity, such as we meet with in our
Author's Discourse. For instance, " God's choosing, not particular Persons, but
whole Nations, and that only to Privileges in this Life, -- moral Agency, (or
Free Will) -- the new Nature of right Action, the royal Robe of personal
Righteousness, -- moral Virtue, the Basis and whole Superstructure of the
Religion of JESUS, -- The moral Rectitude of his Creatures, God's ultimate
View, -- moral Virtue, the supreme Dignity of GOD himself, -- Preaching up
moral Virtue, in the best Sense Preaching of CHRIST,etc* etc. -- These are some
of the Sounds we hear in our Author's Discourse. But the Expositors he so much
condemns, never fought to tickle itching Ears, with Sounds so gratifying to
Flesh and Blood, so pleasing to the Pride and Lusts of Men; they preached both
the Law and Gospel, in their distinct Place and Order,and in such a Manner as
tended to awaken secure Sinners by the dreadful Sound of the Curse denounced in
the Law, and to win Souls to Christ by the joyful Sound of the Promise;
proclaiming Christ the Lord our Righteousness and Strength; at the same Time
persuading them which believed; to continue in the Grace of God, and to adorn
the Doctrine of God their Savior in all Things, by a Conversation becoming the
Gospel. Accordingly we find, Act. 2.42. They continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship. -- Now most surely in all this they followed
the whole Current of ScriptureDoctrine, Precept, and Example, and were not led
either by a bare Gingle of Words, or by mere Scraps of Scripture. But it will
be found by an impartial Examination of our Author's Performance, that the
heavy Reflections he has levelled at so many great and good Men, will fall upon
himself with double Weight.

I have been the larger in Vindication of these Expositors and others against
his general Reflections; because I look upon the Truth espoused by them, as
struck at, and affronted in the Persons of it is Patrons and Professors. --

I now proceed,

2. To vindicate those Expositors and others against our Author's Reflections
and Misrepresentations with Regard to their Interpretations of the Words of his
Text in particular, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags -- These are
scattered through his whole Discourse; some have (I think) been taken Notice of
already, and others will come under Consideration in the Course of this Essay.
-- I shall therefore at present only single out a Passage or two, in which
either wilfully or ignorantly he has misrepresented them. -- Thus when he is
reporting the common Notion of the Prophet's Words, he tells us, ( Pa. 10.) The
best Righteousness of the most improved Christians has been generally spoken
of, as no better a Qualification (even according to the merciful Tenor of the
Gospel) to appear before God with Acceptance, than filthy Rags are to dress and
adorn the Body for a Visit to the King and Court on Earth. But these Expositors
and others, when they speak of personal Righteousness as filthy Rags, don't at
all respect it under the Notion of a moral Qualification for future Happiness
and final Acceptance* such constantly affirm the Necessity of inherent
Righteousness, to make us (in the Gospel-Sense) meet to be Partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light: and yet they constantly and consistently
renounce it as filthy Rags in Point of Justification before God, being utterly
insufficient to answer the Demands of his Law, and procure us an Interest in
his special Favor and Acceptance, therefore they conclude with the Apostle,
Romans 5. 2. We have Access by Faith into this Grace, through Jesus Christ: they
place their Title to divine Acceptance wholly in Christ's Law fulfilling
Righteousness, made their's by Imputation on God's Part, and by a believing
Acceptance, or receiving it by Faith, on the Believer's Part, which yet is not
of them selves, but of the Grace of God enabling them thereto. Christ (partly)
came to call Sinners to Repentance; such as are weary and heavy laden with Sin,
he invites to come to him: such as have the Eyes of their Understanding
enlightened to see and be convinced of their own Misery, and Inability to help
or rescue themselves from the Force and Weight of the vindictive Justice of
God, these and no others will fly to Christ, and lay hold of his Righteousness
for Life and Salvation. The Expositors -- ever rebuked the Spirit of the
Covenant of Works, which makes Sinners imagine, it would be Presumption in them
to come to Christ, unless they are to such or such a Degree prepared, or unless
they can bring something valuable with them to recommend them to his Favor and
Compassion, some laudable Contritions, Reformations, and moral Virtues. For any
to suppose that mere moral Virtue and Self-Righteousness will recommend them to
the Favor of God, is no better than for some high-handed Malefactor or Traitor
to pretend to approach the Court or Presence of his Prince without a Pardon
first obtained. Divine Pardon is obtained by the Righteousness of Christ, and
not our own; because the Righteousness of the best Men living has so much of
Imperfection and Pollution mixed with it, that Expositors and all others who
duly consider the Case, must acknowledge with the Church by the Prophet in the
Text, that all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. It must therefore be
unreasonable, and I think, contrary to Scripture, for any to suppose, that such
imperfect polluted sinful Creatures as the best of Men are in this Life, should
obtain Favor with a just and holy God, without the perfect spotless
Righteousness of Christ imputed, and as has been said received by Faith: This,
according to Scripture, and in the Sense of these Expositors, is the only
justifying Righteousness, "even according to the merciful Tenor of the Gospel."
Howbeit, at the same time they denied not, that where any have been sanctified
through Faith which is in Christ, and so in some Measure have their Fruit unto
Holiness, God is well pleased herewith, and accepts and rewards it: yet not for
it is own Sake (it being very imperfect) but for Christ's Sake; and on the
Account of his Righteousness: for in him only, as Mediator between God and Man,
is God wellpleased, for in him the Rigor of the divine Law is taken away, and
not by Works of Righteousness which we have done or can do. -- This Gentleman's
asserting, that personal Righteousness has been generally spoken of, as no
better a Qualification in the spiritual Case, then filthy Rags are in the civil
Case, This is a gross Misrepresentation of the common Notion of the Text, and
tends both to mislead his unwary Readers, and disparage many sound Expositors,
without any Color of Reason.

But I proceed to take some Notice of another very exceptionable Passage; I
think it an Imposition on his Readers, and a great Abuse upon these Expositors
and others, to in^inuate, as he does, P^g. 25 -- That they (absolutely speaking
and without any Manner of Caution or Restriction) asperse moral Virtue as
nothing worth in the Sight of God, no more than filthy Rags! And that when
"exhorting others to the Practice of Righteousness," they are nevertheless
constantly telling them perhaps in the same Breath, that all their
Righteousness when they have obtained it, will be NOTHING BUT filthy Rags.
This, I say, is a manifest Abuse; for no learned Calvinist Expositor or
Preacher under the Sun, I presume, ever used such irrespective or unlimitted
and unguarded Language, as our Author here pretends: I may with the utmost
Safety, I think, challenge him to produce so much as a single Instance. It
appears to me a very groundless Reflection, if by moral Virtue he means true
Gospel-Holiness, (in which Sense I think he cannot be understood, by the whole
Scope of his Discourse before us) -- However, let him name the Man that ever
asserted it as nothing worth in the Sight of God, speaking absolutely and
without any Limitation or particular Respect: Let him name the Man who was
constantly telling the People, All their Righteousness, when they have obtained
it, will be nothing but filthy Rags, in every Sense, and in all Respects. And
if he cannot, or will not do this, what must we judge of his Misrepresentation, but
that it is wilful? and therefore must stand as a designed Reproach, with all
unprejudiced Judges; and such as is very much aggravated in the Circumstances
of it, -- delivered on the Lord's Day, -- Sermon-wise, -- and levelled against
many of his Fathers and Superiors; so is a Breach of a variety of Commandments
in the moral Law! -- However, I would not forget to Note by the Way, that
amidst all his Exclamations against these Expositors and Preachers, for
depreciating moral Virtue, our Author has seen fit here to make a Concession in
their Favor; (though it be done in an ill Manner, -- with a View, as it plainly
appears, to make them guilty of a Self-Contradiction*) -- The Concession is
implied in the Passage last referred to; which begins thus, -- To speak freely,
I never yet saw with what Face a Man can pretend to exhort others to the
Practice of Righteousness, who is continually telling them -- (the rest you had
before) It seems then that however this Gentleman is incensed against those
Calvinistical Ministers, he here appears willing to grant, that they don't
neglect exhorting others to the Practice of Righteousness; and certainly it
were the highest Injustice to the Memory of the Dead, and to the Character of
the Living, not to allow them the Repute of their exhorting to the Practice of
Righteousness: so that, for ought I see, they still preserve some little
Kindness for moral Virtue, after all that is pretended about their depreciating
it, even their Enemies themselves being Judges. -- Indeed such as our Author
intends thus to fault, don't exhort to the Practice of Righteousness, just in
such a Manner as perhaps he and some others may, -- as if they looked upon
Righteousness to be merely a Habit, acquired by repeated Acts: But are wont to
exhort others as the Scriptures do, to seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, to seek to God in earnest Prayer, accompanied with the diligent
Use of the Means of Grace, that he would put his Spirit within them, and purify
their Hearts by Faith, and implant in them a Principle of Righteousness, and
enable them by Strength derived from Christ through Faith to work Righteousness,
and to show their Faith by good Works, and Acts of moral Virtue. -- Though they
lay out much of their Ministry, it is true, in exhibiting a Redeemer, and
preaching Salvation by Grace through Faith in him; yet agreeable to the Charge
given them Tit. 3. 8. one View they have in so constantly affirming these
Things, is, That they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain
good Works. --

However, I perceive our Author is stumbled at their Conduct; and the Mystery
with him lies here, -- that he does not know very well how to reconcile their
Exhortations to the Practice of Righteousness, with their Doctrine of
Justification by imputed Righteousness, or (which comes to the same Thing) with
their telling People, that in Relation to that Affair, All their
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags: and he says upon it, as is before hinted,
"I never saw with what Face," they could thus exhort and thus teach at the same
time. Doubtless he reckons it a very glaring Contradiction, and an odious
Inconsistency, that requires a good Stock of Assurance in any to venture upon
it. -- But to speak freely also in my Turn, I note here, That it is not hard to
discern what a Face our Author put on, when he gave himself such a Liberty,
beyond all Bounds of Modesty, to cast (as doubtless he intended) Reproach on
the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel in general through the Land, not only
such as are surviving at this Day in their Charges, but those also that are
gone to Rest in the several past Generations: For it is well known, that the
Ministers, mostly, and I may venture to say, near to a Man, were in their
Principles Calvinistical, as now they are distinguished; which Note of
Distinction has but lately arose among us, occasioned very much by the late
Growth and Discovery of Arminianism, which has now made it is open and
formidable Appearance in some of our Churches.

Our Author might perhaps offer this Flight of Reflection on so many eminent
Ministers of Jesus Christ, as supposing it to add a Grace to his Discourse, and
be the more taking with the unthinking Part of his Audience (and Readers) and
all that are prejudiced in Favor of the Errors he had advanced.

But let that be as it will, this I am sure of, If I may be allowed to depend
upon my Bible, which tells me it plainly, That without Faith it is impossible
to please God. -- If so, I hope I may be allowed to say, without being branded
with the Imputation of a Blasphemer for depreciating moral Virtue, that
whatever Pretenses are made to Religion, which are but merely moral, the most
refined Virtues, void of a saving Faith in Christ, and without his imputed
Righteousness, will be but as filthy Rags, -- and can give no more Title to
final Justification in the Sight of God, than if a Man cut off a Dog's Neck, or
offered Swines Blood in Sacrifice under the Law.

Our Author goes on in his Reflections upon these Expositors and Preachers. He
represents them not only as telling People, that all their Righteousnesses are
nothing but filthy Rags; but insinuates also, as if they were constantly
telling them in the Words following, ( Pa. 25) God is already satisfied in all
his Demands, his Law, his Honor, his rigorous relentless Justice, are all
satisfied, and there is nothing left for Man to do, but to believe this
undoubtingly, and -- to rely upon it, that he is righteous, and shall finally
be accepted as such. -- And then proceeds to say -- The Believer indeed may, if
he please, out of mere Generosity, add Works of Righteousness; but really there
is no Need of it; for his main Interest is secure without it. -- All this, our
Author insinuates, is the Language of those Preachers, that believe and preach
the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction and particular Redemption. But those that
are thus free to offer their magisterial Censures, may do well to give heed to
the Caution given, Jam. 3. 14, 15. -- Lie not against the Truth, -- This Wisdom
is not from above. -- Those Persons indeed that are prejudiced in their Minds
against the Doctrine abovementioned, and other fundamental Doctrines of
Christianity, may with this Gentleman darken the Truth -- and put Things under
very wrong and disadvantagious Representations; which cannot be helped that I
know of: but for One that wears the Character of a Minister, thus to reproach
the Doctrines of Christ, and the Professors of them, who have been and are the
Glory of this Land and of our Churches, as Assertors of the Truth as it is in
Christ Jesus, I think is hard to be accounted for; especially when delivered in
such a ludicrous Manner, tending to ^xpose them to Ridicule and Contempt. --
The Calvinists, against whom he designs his Reflections, distinguish between
the Purchase of Redemption, by the atoning Blood of Christ, and the Application
of Redemption, which is made by the sanctifying Grace of Christ: so that although
Christ has already satisfied the Law and Justice of God, by what he did in his
Estate of Humiliation; yet that nothing further remains for him to do, in his
Estate of Exaltation, is denied; nor indeed can it be supposed, that there is
nothing for Man to do, but to believe this undoubtingly: -- For, the Faith of
those our Author intends, is such as includes Consent, as well as Assent, and
is a believing with the Heart, as well as with the Head: it is not merely a
Speculative believing the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, though ever so
undoubtingly; but implies an active receiving the Atonement, and laying hold on
the Hope set before us, and committing our Souls into the Redeemer's Hand, to
be justified by his Blood, and sanctified by his Spirit, and kept by his Power
unto eternal Salvation: This they look upon to be Faith unfeigned, the Faith of
God's Elect. But do they, by all this, make void the Law through Faith? God
forbid! yea, they establish the Law. They don't think the Law cancelled by the
Blood of Christ, in Point of preceptive Force, or Obligation as a Rule of
Obedience, though they hold it to be so, in it penal Demands as a Covenant of
Works; but assert the Believer's Obligation in Point of Duty, to be diligently
following every good Work; and don't imagine this to be left to human Choice,
as a Matter of Indifferency, or mere Generosity, as our Author insinuates; and
they hold, that true Faith, wherever it is, will produce Obedience; and exhort
to Obedience, as the true Fruit of that Faith; and they exhort Christians to be
fruitful in good Works, that they may have Fruit abounding to their joyful
Account at last: Yet caution Men, not at all to depend on their own personal
Righteousness, but have their entire Dependence on Christ's Righteousness
imputed, as their only Title to Acceptance with God, and to esteem all their
own Righteousness to be but as filthy Rags, in Respect of Justification before
God, as has been said, and not trust in it as any Recommendation of them to his
pardoning and accepting Grace. -- On the whole, I think* it sufficiently
appears ^ very abusive Reflection this Author casts on those Ministers he
points at in his Discourse, where he insinuates ( Pa. 24, 25.) That according
to their Notions of " Revelation and Grace," The most glorious Dispensation of
the Gospel is conceived of only as a Scheme calculated to allow Men the
Practice of their Vices here, with Impunity herea^ter: -- That according to
their Notion of his Text, Purity of Heart and Sanctity of Manners will be of no
Service to Men; and consequently this must lead Men into an utter Contempt of
those Things that are of infinite Importance for them to esteem and practice.
Surely, says he, Men will never take much Pains for that, which will be of no
Service to them when they have got it. Here also, as in the other Parts of his
Discourse, our Author too evidently aims at amusing the World, by blackening
the Characters of faithful Ministers that pass under the Calvinistick
Denomination, and thereby prejudicing the Minds of Men against the Doctrines
they hold. For unless he or any others can prove from Scripture-Testimony or
Reason, that purity of Heart and sanctity of Manners are comprised in mere
moral Virtue, or Self-Righteousness; -- I say, unless this can be proved, the
Argument can be of no Force. -- But it is certain, that it is by Faith that the
Heart is purified, through the Operation and Influence of the holy Spirit, and
true sanctity of Manners proceeds from a Heart purified by this Faith, as the
genuine Fruit and Effect of it. Now the short of the Argument, if I understand
it, lies here -- Either moral Virtue, i. e. a Man's own Self-Righteousness,
will entitle him to Justification in the Sight of God, or it will not; and that
it will not, I suppose, is sufficiently proved by what has been already said on
this Head. Notwithstanding, true moral Virtues or good Works, are allowed by
all sober Divines that I know of, to be good and profitable to Men, as well as
honorary to God, and approved in Christ. -- They are far from saying, that the
Sanctity of regenerate Men will be of no Service to them: for Godliness is
profitable unto all Things, having Promise of the Life that now is, and of that
which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. -- And without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord, Heb. 12. 14. -- Now the Godliness and Holiness spoken of here, is wrought
in the Heart and Life of the truly Regenerate by the powerful Agency of the
Spirit of God and of Christ; which all the mere Morality in the World, in its
most ^^fi^ed Acceptance, can never reach to the least Degree of. -- But
assomething of this Kind has been spoken before, I shall proceed in the next
Place,

3. To vindicate those Expositors and others, against some further Reflections
and Misrepresentations of our Author, respecting sundry important Points of
Doctrine, which are allied to the common Notion of his Text, and which he
endeavors to expose to equal Ridicule.

It may not be amiss to premise here, that our Author has given us abundant
Occasion to think of those Observations of his, Pa. 22. -- The most rational
and divine Scheme of Religion may become despicable in the Eyes of the World,
by Misrepresentations: even Christianity itself, though capable of a rational
Defense, well attested by external Evidence, and when viewed in it is native
Purity and Simplicity, void of all corrupt Glosses and human Additions,
carrying in it the clearest internal Marks of it is divine Original; even this
Religion, I say, may be so represented, as to render it ridiculous in the
Opinion of sen^ible thinking Men. -- I am much mistaken if our Author has not
furnished us with an Example of this in his own Discourse, which carries so
much of Misrepresentation in it. I think, he has greatly misrepresented even
Christianity itself, by his corrupt Glosses; if not by human Additions, which
seem too evident, yet at least by Substractions. -- He apparently disowns same
great and important Doctrines of the Gospel, under Color of rejecting the
"Fictions of weak and disordered Brains," and because he can never be brought
to believe Things repugnant to the first Principles of Reason, and is therefore
naturally led to conclude that no Scheme can be right, no Doctrine from GOD,
that abates the Motives of Virtue, or discourages the Practice of any Duty.
Well! But what is the Scheme, what are the Doctrines, he here has his Eye upon?
This we may learn from the Instances he has given us in the Introduction to his
Discourse, Pa. 7 and 8. -- Where having spoken concerning Expositors judging of
Scripture-Doctrines from particular Scraps of Scripture, and from a mere Jingle
of Words, he then proceeds to give a Specimen in several Particulars; by which
it appears, it is the old Protestant Doctrines he strikes at, and endeavors to
render them despicable in the Eyes of the World by Misrepresentations.

This may be considered in several of his Instances; and

1. In the Doctrine of Election. His Words are "Hence (i. e. by judging of
Scripture-Doctrines from Scraps and Gingles, and for want of Attention --) it
has come to pass, that when Men read of God's choosing whole Nations to certain
Privileges, (and those in this Life only) they have rashly concluded, that
particular Persons are (...) conditionally chosen to eternal Life hereafter. --
This is a manifest Contempt designed to be cast on the Doctrine of Election,
and on all them that receive and profess it, and to harden Men's Minds against
it: -- and ther^^^re he proceeds to tax them of rashly drawing a Conclusion, in
a Matter of Faith, respecting Eternity and the Souls of Men. If the Faith,
professed by Protestants, of a personal eternal Election of Grace, were founded
on such a rash Conclusion as this Author insinuates, the World is bound to give
him Thanks for the Discovery he has made of so gross an Error; but I suppose it
will appear, that the Error is on his Side. -- For Election is a pure Act of
sovereign Grace laid in the secret and eternal Counsel of God; and is therefore
unconditional, as to Man, who then had no other being but what was in God's
Mind and Purpose, in Time to bring into being. -- But as the Design plainly is,
to fasten a Reproach on this Doctrine of Election, by insinuating, that they
that believe this, preach and teach, th^^ if we are elected we have nothing to
do, our Salvation is sure: -- But will thou know, O vain Man, that Faith
without Works is dead? He that has willed the End, wills also the Means leading
to it; and so far as Holiness may be said to be Conditional of Happiness, as a
necessary moral Disposition of the Subject, or in the Nature of a Means to the
End, they are both included in the Idea, when Men are said to be chosen to
Salvation; for Sanctification, is one Part of the Salvation they are chosen to.
-- The Reproach, which is intended against our holy Profession, we choose to
bear, rather than give heed to delusive Doctrines. We thank God, we have a more
sure Word of Prophecy, to which we shall do well to take all diligent Heed;
which will reflect greater and better Light, than is to be found in any of the
best Productions, of fallible and uninspired Writers, not excepting the
Discourse before us. -- As to the particular Point now in View, I am persuaded,
notwithstanding what this Gentleman has suggested, that every one who is in any
Measure acquainted with the printed Labors of those who (by Way of
Distinction) are called Predestinarians, knows, they do not, as our Author
insinuates, ground their Opinion of an eternal personal Election merely on
historical Passages in the Bibles relating to the Conduct of divine Providence
toward Nations, though they are Gospeliz'd and in a Covenant-State, externally;
but take their Principles from doctrinal Texts, which the Scripture abounds
with, and which will admit of no other rational and consistent Sense. They find
that the Scriptures, in setting forth the glorious Scheme of Man's Salvation by
Jesus Christ, represent the Foundation of it as laid in the eternal Purpose of
Grace, or the Counsel of God (as is before hinted) before the World was; and
accordingly that they speak of the saved of the Lord as from the Beginning
chosen to Salvation; as chosen in Christ before the Foundation of the World,
that they should be holy, (not as being chosen upon the Prevision of any Thing
of moral Virtue, in and from themselves, moving God to elect them, but from
mere free Grace, with a View that they should be holy) and as in Time called
according to his Purpose, -- called by his Grace -- according to his Purpose
which he purposed in himself. -- We are also told by the unerring Word of God,
that as many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed: and as many as
believed, are said to have believed through Grace; all which are said to be kept
by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. And we are told, The
Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows them that
are his. And these, though they are his, on the sure Foundation of his electing
Love, yet are commanded to depart from Iniquity; whether the omission of Duty,
or commission of Sin. -- For, as the Apostle states the Case, Romans 8. 29, 30.
(representing the whole in one connected View) Whom be did predestinate, them
he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. Here we have an inspired Writer drawing the
admirable Plan of Man's Redemption: Where it is observable, -- He first lays
the Basis of it in Predestination, or eternal Election; and then carries the
Execution of it through sundry Gradations in Time, and at length compleats it in
future e^erlasting Glory; when the Top-Stone shall be brought forth with the
Shoutings of Grace! Grace! -- This small Sketch of the Scripture Proof commonly
brought by Protestants, to support their Tenet respecting personal eternal
Election, is enough to show, that they are not rash in their Conclusion in the
Point of Election: but that our Author rather appears rash in charging them as
he does, in his forementioned Insinuation, as though this Doctrine of the
Election of Grace, and Faith in it, lay merely in some historical Passages of
Scripture, referring to God's choosing whole Nations to certain Privileges, and
those in this Life only. Here we find a farther Essay to prejudice People's
Minds against this Doctrine, and a Proof also of the Author's denying it,
without any Arguments to prove the contrary. So that the Rashness reflected on
others, falls necessarily on himself.

He proceeds on the like Strain of Reflection, in a following Paragraph, Pa. 8.
Some, and those not a few, are full of Hope in God; because, as they imagine,
he has from all Eternity, and that not only without any Reason, but in direct
Opposition to the very Nature and essential Constitution of his moral
Government, set his Love upon them. -- The Doctrine of the Decrees, in common
with every other Scripture-Doctrine, is liable to be abused to vile and
pernicious Purposes; and it is readily granted, if a Man can give no other
Reason of the Hope that is in him, but only that he imagines himself from all
Eternity chosen to Salvation, such a Man has just Ground to fear, that he
imagines a vain Thing, and that his Hope will make him ashamed. -- The true
Christian's hope of Election is built not upon mere Imagination, but upon
Scripture-Evidence of Sanctification, wrought in him by the Power of the Holy
Spirit, together with his own Experience, that through Grace, (and not by mere
moral Duties) he is enabled more and more to die unto Sin, and live unto
Righteousness. -- If then we may lay Stress upon Scripture-Testimony with
Respect to the Doctrine of the Decrees, and consequently, that of the Election
of Grace; the Insinuations of this Author, by way of Contempt thereon, are mere
Amusements, and tend only to darken the Counsel of God; which I shall endeavor
to prove, from plain Scripture-Evidence; and those that will not shut their
Eyes against clear Gospel Light, must, I think, own their Delusion, that plead
the contrary. Let every one then diligently apply their Minds to the Scriptures
above mentioned, and to such Texts, as I shall further produce. See Romans 5. 8,
10. God commends his Love toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners,
Christ died for us. -- When we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the
Death of his Son. -- Were they not all Sinners and Enemies, for whom Christ
died? And was it not God's Love to them that lay in the Bottom of all? Was not
this a Love existing and operating, by way of Benevolence, in the Mind and
Purpose of God, before Christ actually died for them? Yea, a Love which from
the Beginning purposed their being reconciled to God by the Death of his Son?
Are they not said to be redeemed by the precious Blood of Christ, Who verily
was foreordained before the Foundation of the World, 1 Pet. 1. 20. -- What
other Date then could there be of God's electing Love, which was the Spring of
their Salvation by Christ, but from all Eternity? Surely God has loved his
chosen People from Everlasting, -- and if we love him, it is because he first
loved us, 1 John 4. 19 -- He loved us while we were yet Enemies. So that his
first loving us was without any Reason, as there was no Motive on our Part, to
engage his Love to us; and not only so, but it was in direct Opposition to the
Letter of the Covenant of Works, that Law or Rule of Government, which God
placed Man under originally, and to the Demands of his vindictive Justice, on
his Transgression of it; yet the Wisdom of God contrived a wonderful Expedient
for the Satisfaction of his violated Law and affronted Justice, in the
Obedience and Sufferings of his own incarnate Son, who gave himself a Sacrifice
for us; so that Sinners might reap the Benefit of electing Love, in a perfect
Consistency with the Honor of his moral Government, without breaking in at all
upon it is essential Constitution, or subverting its essential Designs: CHRIST
having truly fulfilled all Righteousness, (agreeable to what we find, Ephesians. 3. 9,
-- 11.) As his People's Surety, and being the End of the Law for Righteousness
unto every one that believes. -- And all that are given to Christ by the
Father, shall come unto him. -- Who shall dare to call God's Sovereignty into
Question? It plainly appears, that it is sovereign Grace, which ordained them
that believe unto eternal Life. -- Therefore has he Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy. -- Observe how the Apostle silences all Cavils upon this Head, Romans 9.
20. Nay, but O Man, who art thou, that reply against God! -- Has not the
P^tter Power over the Clay etc. And hear what the Lord by a Voice from Heaven
answered Joh, Chap.40.2. -- Shall be that contendeth with the Almighty,
instruct him! He that reproves God (as, in any Case, upon the whole, either
acting or purposing, not only without any Reason, but in direct Opposition to
the Nature and essential Constitution of his moral Government) let him answer
it. -- Surely it well becomes us in every Case to revere and adore, rather than
to contend and reprove. The Apostle has set us an Example, Romans 11. 33, -- 36.
O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! for who has
known the Mind of the Lord? or who has been his Counselor? or who has first
given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? For of him, and through
him, and to him, are all Things: To whom be glory for ever. Amen.

I proceed now to another of our Author's Reflections.

2. Another Instance he brings, of Expositors rashly concluding -- respects the
Doctrine of original Sin. -- He thus states the Case, Pa. 7. That when they
have laid before them the Character of a very loose and abandoned People, who
by their own long practiced Wickedness have rendered themselves the Children of
Wrath, and fitted themselves for Destruction, -- they are induced to vilify
human Nature itself, with the same vicious Character. -- Here we have him
insinuating again, as if Protestant Expositors, and such as join with them in
the Point of Original Sin, had nothing to support or countenance their Opinion,
but some Passages of historical Scripture grossly misapplied. He doubtless
alludes to such Texts as these, Genesis 6. 5. Psalm. 14. 1, -- 3. Ephesians. 2. 1, -- 3.
-- Which, I suppose, our Author would have considered only as spoken in
Reference to the corrupt Condition of the Men of the old World, -- the People
of the Jews in some remarkable Season of epidemical prevailing Degeneracy, --
and the Citizens of Ephesus in their heathen State: and I suppose, he would
have these Texts interpreted as only describing them (respectively) from the
actual Wickedness of their Lives, and not at all implying any Account of what
they were by native Disposition.

But as to the first Text -- Genesis 6. 5. -- I think, this Gentleman must see his
Mistake in such a Thought, if he will only compare the abovenamed first Text
with Genesis 8. 21. -- where it is declared by God himself, who knows the Hearts
of Men, their State and Dispositions, that they were the same in the new World,
viz. after the Flood, as they were in the Old before it: for God pronounces
upon all Men indefinitely, that the Imagination of their Heart is Evil from
their Youth, and continually so, according to the natural Bent and Bias of the
Mind. Now does God by this vilify human Nature! or do Expositors by believing
what God has revealed Man to be by Nature, and teaching the Doctrine of
original Sin, induce Men to vilify human Nature? -- This Doctrine therefore is
not received rashly, but upon divine Testimony. Let our Author then solemnly
consider in the Fear of God, where his Reflection will at last terminate,
unless he can prove the Case to be otherwise than it is here represented.

And as to the next Scripture mentioned above, Psalm. 14. 1, -- 3. I desire this
Gentleman to compare it with Romans 3. 10, -- 12. where the Apostle Paul recites
much of that Psalm, and applies it to prove, in Regard of Gentiles as well as
Jews, that they are all under Sin: And what can this Author's sharp Reflection
on Expositors and others be, but a tacit Reflection on the inspired Writer
himself, who in the like Way applied Texts, even as he was moved by the Holy
Ghost? -- And now as to the last mentioned Text, Ephesians. 2. 1, -- 3. It is plain
that the Apostle did not design merely to describe a State of Heathenism; but
had in View the State of Nature, common to all Mankind. -- For in his
Description of the Ephesians, he not only speaks of their Conversation in Times
past, but also points out the Source of their actual Wickedness, the Lusts of
the Flesh, and Desires of the Mind; and accordingly declares it of them
expressly, that they were by Nature Children of Wrath, even as others, whether
Je^^ or Gentiles. -- Nay, it is worthy of Observation, the Apostle not only
mentions othe^^ indefinitely, but extends his Description universally unto all;
and comprehends even himself in this whole Description; saying, Among whom also
WE ALL had OUR Conversation, -- in the Lusts of OUR Flesh -- and were (we were)
by Nature Children of Wrath, -- even when WE were dead in Sins ( v. 5 --) --
Like as the Psalmist, when repenting of actual Sin, runs up to the
Fountainhead and Original of all, a corrupt Nature. Psalm.51. 5. Behold, I was
shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. Was this David's Case
alone? No verily; we all, the whole Race of Adam, are, were, and shall be,
conceived and shapen in like Manner. -- For this we have also the Apostle's
Testimony, though not in the same Words, but the like Meaning, in his Epistle to
the Ephesians, before noted; and in his Epistle to the Romans he does the same,
yet more remarkably: for there he not only represents Sin as Epidemical and
Native, but Hereditary; descending to Adam's Posterity throughout all
Generations in Succession; pointing out the true Origin of this universal
Corruption of human Nature, and resolving it into Adam's Fall. -- He
peremptorily and repeatedly asserts, By ONE Man's Disobedience MANY were made
Sinners. -- By ONE Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin. --
Therefore by the Offense of ONE -- Judgment came upon ALL Men to Condemnation
-- Romans 5. 12, 18, 19. -- Such Texts as these, plainly of a doctrinal Aspect,
are the principal Scripture-Proofs, relied on to support the Doctrine of
original Sin, as commonly received by Protestant Expositors. -- And now it may
be supposed, our Author will excuse the Apostle from the Imputation of Weakness
and Rashness in his Conclusions* and under his Umbrage and Authority the poor
Expositors -- will(we hope) escape the hard Censures of this Author and others
for the future, -- for vilifying human Nature it self, as is pretended.

Many Things might be offered here for the further Confirmation of this weighty
scriptural Doctrine; as, after what has been said, I may venture to call it. --
But* I shall only add, That though all have sinned, and come short of the Glory
of God, in one common Fall, yet there are some that by a wicked and profligate
Life do indeed vilify human Nature, and make themselves more the Children of
Wrath, than they were in their native State. -- And tho* some are restrained by
Grace, and others perhaps by the influence of a religious Education or
otherwise, yet naturally all have in an evil Heart the Seeds or Principles of
all that Wickedness, which is ever practiced by the vilest and most abandoned
Sinners under the Sun. So that in this Respect even Infants, in a State of
Nature, are of a vicious Character, in the Sight of a holy and Heart-searching
God; the very same Character, inKind, with that of the most dissolute and
hardened in Wickedness.

It is undoubted, that Christ is a Savior to Infants, as well as others, and
he is a Savior only to Sinners. -- Accordingly all that he died for, have this
Character expressly ascribed to them in common. Romans 5. 6, 8. -- Christ died for
the Ungodly -- While we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us. And 1 Pet. 3. 18.
Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust. -- So then,
if Infants are included in the Number of them for whom Christ died, they are
also included among those, who in the Account of Scripture sustain the
Character of Sinners, Ungodly, Unjust. -- And hence it appears, there is no
specifical (but only a gradual) Difference, between the moral Character of an
unregenerate Babe, and that of a Man long inured to Wickedness. Else, for ought
I see, the Practice of Infant Baptism must be given up. -- If our Author denies
original Sin, in the Sense I have shown, I apprehend it proper for him to join
himself to the Anabaptists, or some other such Sect, as unworthy of Fellowship
with the Churches here, or with the established Church at Home, according to
their primitive Profession and Constitution.

3. The next Instance of our Author's Reflections on these Expositors, that I
shall take Notice of, is what respects the Doctrine of Efficacious Grace. --
His Words are these* That when they hear of our being saved by Grace, they
conceive of it so as to destroy all moral Agency, and set themselves down with
this vain Thought, that nothing on their Part is necessary to Salvation, but if
they are designed for it, they shall irresistably be driven into Heaven,
whether they will, or not: And if they are ^ot, no Prayers, or Endeavors will
avail.

The manifest Tendency (if not Design) of this Author's Discourse in this
Place, and in other Parts of it, is, to render the essential Doctrines
professed in these Churches generally, as odious in the Eyes of People as
possible: And he here strikes at our Doctrine of Conversion, insinuating, that
People are lead hereby to draw corrupt Conclusions, viz. That if they are to be
saved by Grace, then in Point of Means they have nothing required of them, but
are excused from all Duties and Endeavors on their Part, and as he represents
it, If they are designed for Heaven, they shall irresistably be driven into it,
whether they will or not. We may observe, in what a scoffing and deriding
Manner he treats the holy Things of God, and how he imposes on the Ignorant.
This is the Fruit of his own Invention, however he may pretend to personate
others in it, -- and calculated exactly to the Genius of the profane and
irreligious Part of Mankind. For I suppose, this Author or any other cannot
produce any single Instance, among such as are sober, religious and intelligent
Christians (much less among learned Expositors and Preachers) holding this
Doctrine I am speaking of, that will so much as think they have nothing at all
to do: when they have so much Experience of the Remains of Corruption in them,
through the Depravity of their Natures, that needs to be mortified and subdued,
and therefore labor constantly, in the Use of God's appointed Means, to work
out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling; And know, that if ever they expect
to have an Entrance ministered to them into Heaven, they must use all Diligence
to make their Calling and Election sure, and follow Holiness with unceasing
De^ir^s and Endeavors to the last.

It is therefore but a mere Amusement and Reproach, for him to charge as he
does, the Expositors and others I am laboring to vindicate, and the Doctrines
taught by them. There are indeed many poor in considerate Souls, among the
unthinking Multitude, that are ready to apply this Doctrine to such a perverse
Purpose. -- For there are none of the Doctrines of R^vel^tion, how plain,
practical and important ^oever, but what have sometimes and by some evil
disposed Persons been wretchedly abused; nay, none of the first Principles of
Reason, but what have often been shamefully pe^verted. Yet shall these, and the
Preachers and Professors of them, be reproached on this Account! -- The Apostle
Paul in his Day complained of some, that although the Law was just and good, yet
they did not use it lawfully; and that they perverted the Gospel of Christ. --
The Apostle Peter also complains of some, that they wrested Paul's Epistles, as
also they did the other Scriptures, to their own Destruction. No wonder then,
if in our Day of evident Declension, as we plainly find, there be some who even
destroy the Faith, by their pretended rational S^hemes. There is, I think,
equal Force and Pertinence in the Apostle's Language and Arguing, Romans 6. --
What shall we say then? Shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may abound? God
forbid! -- For ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. What then? shall we
sin, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace? God forbid! It seems,
the Apostle's Doctrine of Grace was incident to the same Abuse, and probably
there were some in that Day who made just the same malignant, but impotent
Cavils against the apostolical Doctrine of Grace, as our Author has done
against the professed Calvinistical Doctrine of Grace, which is but one and the
same; pretending, that " it destroys all moral Agency." Now let this Gentleman
try how he can fairly clear the Apostle's Doctrine from this Prejudice or
Objection; which, I think, lies equally against both. -- It seems by this
Author, the Expositors or Ministers of the Word must never presume to talk of
Persons being saved by Grace, through Faith, -- le^t some perversely disposed
should construe it as a destroying all moral Agency, or a teaching Men to
neglect all Pr^^^rs and Endeavors and Concern in the Case. -- I do not think,
what this Author says in Banter on the Doctrine of Grace* worth any Notice, --
only as he appears to ridicule that Doctrine of divine Revelation in Ep^. 2. 4*
-- 9* -- Which I wish he himself, with all of the li^e Mind, may d^ly (...)
more maturely meditate on, les^ they fight against God, in denying the Truths
he has delivered to us in the s^cre^ Oracles.

None, that I know of, deny Man to have in his Nature the moral Faculty, called
Will; or deny, in every Sense, it is Freedom in acting. -- But then, we are to
distinguish between natural Liberty, and spiritual. This latter is the glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God, and peculiar to the Regenerate. -- And this is that
with which they are made free by Christ: this he refers to in those Sayings of
his, -- Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free. -- If the
Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed* Joh* 8, 32, 36. -- Otherwise,
whatever natural Freedom Sinners may be possessed of, they are in Fact but
immoral moral Agents; and whatever moral Agency may be b^asted in their Case, I
think, it is but moral Agency fal^ely so called: for indeed in the Exercise of
their natural Free Will, they go on in the Indulgence of Sin voluntarily, and
until they be saved by Grace, from the imperious Power of their own Lu^ts, they
are all the while the Servants of Sin, and are in a scriptural Sense moral
Agents, but in Con^radistinction to Bruits, that have no Understanding, or
Power of rational Choice; such therefore are termed brutish, who pervert the
Doctrine of Christ, speaking Evil of the Things they understand not, 2 Pet. 2.
12. -- But what they know naturally, as bruit Beasts, in those Things they
corrupt themselves, Jude 10. -- And it is much more lamentable, when Ministers
are thus corrupt in their Sentiments, and give themselves a Liberty to scoff at
the Doctrines of Christ, when perhaps by Reason of their unexperienced Youth,
or for want of a due Application of Thought, they are incapable of passing a
right Judgment on Things of such a sublime and spiritual Nature. -- See the
Complaint and Consequence s^mmed up together Jer. 10, 21. The Pastors are
become brutish, and have not ^ought the Lord; therefore they shall not prosper,
and all their Flocks shall be scattered. -- It is only the efficacious Grace of
God in Regeneration, that is the Spring from whence a genuine and true moral
Agency flows. This is that which turns the natural Liberty of the human Will
(which is essential to a moral Agent) into its proper Channel, directs it to
its true Object and End, and carries it out in its right Manner of Exercise. By
enlightening the Mind, and renewing the Will (in a Way not subversive of its
essential natural Liberty) Grace works such a Change, that the Man that was
before a ^ad moral Agent (as all Men are by Nature) becomes a good moral Agent.
So that the Doctrine, that teaches, Men are saved by Grace only, does neither
vilify human Nature, nor destroy all moral Agency, (as is suggested by this
Author) but refines both, and makes them subserve, in the most desirable
Manner, the Glory of God, for which End they were bestowed; and tends to keep
Men from glorying in their natural Powers, y^a even in their highest
Seize in moral Virtue. -- What faith the Scripture in this Case? See Tit.
3. 5. -- Not by Works of Righteousness which we (in a State of Nature, by any
Principle of moral Agency, or Free Will) have done, but according to his Mercy
he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. --
This Author tells us, Page 24, 25. That The Existence of God is not more
certain than this, that it must be^ the grand Design, the ultimate V^ew of God,
in all his Dispensations* to promote the moral Rectitude and Happiness of his
Creatures. -- The strong Terms in which He here delivers himself, may possibly
be Matter of Amusement to the unthinking* Part of Mankind; but I suppose, it
will make but little Impression on the Minds of such as are able in some Degree
to determine, wherein Man's moral Rectitude and Happiness consists. I have
before noted, That it is not by Works of Righteousness we have done, or can do;
that we are saved (according to the inspired Apostle) but by the renewing Work
of the Spirit of Grace; which gives a Man true moral Rectitude, both of Mind
and Action, and leads him to his highest Happiness: And hence the ultimate View
of God, in the Dispensation of temporal and spiritual Blessings to his
Creatures, is the Praise of the glory of his own Grace; and not as this Author
insinuates, as if the blessed God, in dispensing his Benefits to Men,
universally took his Measures from their moral Agency; when we are plainly
taught, the grand Rule of God's Dispensations, particularly in the Point of
converting Grace, which all saving Benefits depend upon, is according to the
good Pleasure of his Will.

Nevertheless, this Doctrine of efficacious Grace has not the least Tendency to
dispirit Men's Endeavors after Purity of Manners, nor does it administer a
just Occasion to any, as is insinuated, to "set themselves down" [i. e. in
Sloth and Security] with this vain Thought, that Nothing on their Part is
necessary to Salvation. -- By what Objections there follow, -- according to
this Author's Manner of aspersing the Doctrine of sovereign Grace, and all in
general that profess and teach it, -- and by all that is offered by this Author
under the Head we have been considering, he has only shown us, that he knows
how Ludere cum Sacris, to mock and scoff, like those who (notwithstanding their
moral Agency) will not endure ^ound Doctrine. -- However, I think, this
Gentleman's abusive Representation of the Doctrine of Grace, held by the
Expositors he aims at, and his setting it forth in such Language of Flout and
Disdain, does sufficiently prove his Contempt for the Protestant Doctrine of
Grace, though so evidently founded on Scripture, the Rule of Faith and Standard
of Orthodoxy.

4. Another of this Author's Reflections on these Expositors and others, is in
Relation to the Doctrine of the Saints final Perseverance. His Words are ( Page
7.) When they meditate on the constant unchangeable Affection God bears to good
Men, they make this groundless Inference, from his Unchangeableness, that they
are unchangeable also. -- This is but a groundless Reflection. Does their
Doctrine thus indeed deify the Creature! No verily, they are far from any such
Supposition, or Imagination, as if the Saints were unchangeable, like GOD
himself: They are far from imagining them unchangeable, absolutely, in
themselves. But what they assert, is, that according to the Tenor of divine
Revelation, the spiritual State of good Men is unalterably safe; in this
Respect, that GOD will never permit them to fall totally and finally from
Grace. They know, that in themselves they are changeable Creatures, and if left
to themselves, they should soon fall from their own Stedfastness; but they know
withal, that those whom God loves, he loves to the End. -- And though they
frequently fall into Sin, God proves his unchangeable Love, in their Recovery;
-- renewing them to Repentance, and exciting fresh Acts of unfeigned Faith in
Christ, and Trust in God's Promise, that he will never leave nor forsake them,
as in Josh. 1. 5. Nor do they dare to depend on God's Promises, without
pleading them at the Throne of Grace, with Instancy in Prayer, with Humility of
Soul, and with Endeavors to become more watchful over themselves and against
Sin for the future. -- Christ in his mediatory Prayer, Joh. 17. 24. faith,
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am.
And him the Father hears always. Joh. 11. 42. As sure then as Christ ever
lives to make Intercession for them, so sure is the final Perseverance of as
many as the Father has given him. -- In a Word, the Immutability of God's Love
and Faithfulness, who has promised everlasting Life to sincere Believers,
gives them abundant Security, that they shall not fail of the Grace of God, or
come short of the Glory of God at last. See Romans 8. latter End. -- And
Abundance more might here be offered from Scripture to the like Purpose; which
may be seen, if the Reader will give himself Leisure to turn to these Texts,
among others. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. -- Joh. 13. 1. -- Romans 11. 29. --

5. Another Reflection our Author has, respects the Doctrine of imputed
Righteousness. -- He mentions it under the Head of Delusions, in Men's judging
of their spiritual State, in these Words, ( Page 8.) Others you will find
amusing themselves with a vain and groundless (however, no Matter since it is a
strong) Persuasion, that there is no Need of their being Righteous themselves,
because they have the perfect Righteousness of CHRIST imputed to them. -- To
this I shall only say, that it appears but only a more covert Way of
disparaging the Doctrine it self, under Color of exploding a delusive
Consequence, supposed to be drawn from it. -- And I view in the same Light that
Saying of his in Page 21. Where speaking of moral Virtue, he observes, that
without it, a Man could not be so well on it in Heaven, as on Earth, though he had
the Righteousness of every other Being in the Universe imputed to him. -- Can
any one rationally suppose, that there is any other Righteousness capable to be
imputed to him, but Christ's? And does this Author no more believe Christ's
Righteousness imputed to Believers, than he does the Righteousness, in common,
of every other (or any other) Being in the Universe! -- Here this Author has,
it seems, given us his Opinion, about the Matter of our justifying
Righteousness; and it appears, that Christ's Righteousness is but of little or
no Account with him, at least in that View; but an inherent Righteousness, i.
e. moral Virtue, seems to be all in all with him. -- I may here allude to his
Way of Reasoning in Page 26. and argue upon the Doctrine of imputed
Righteousness in his Manner, with some Alteration of his Words. "The Truth of
the Case is this: Either imputed Righteousness is of some Use and Significancy
in the Affair of our Salvation, or it is not; Either it has some Connection
with and Influence on our Happiness, or it is of no real Necessity to us. If
the Latter, then there is not one Word to be said in Favor of it; but the
greatest Self-Justiciaries, yea, the most blasphemous D^riders of imputed
Righteousness, may be the best Friends to Christianity, and those that are most
righteous in their own Eyes may be the highest in the Grace of God. -- But if
the Former, then it is a sure Thing, that in Proportion to it is real Worth and
relative Advantage, arises the ^olly of those who neglect it, and the Strength
of all our Arguments to recommend it to Mankind." -- I shall only add, there is
no such Thing existent among Men as true moral Righteousness, but what owes
it is Original to the Righteousness which is of Faith; to the Righteousness of
CHRIST, as the procuring Cause, and to Faith, as the special Means, under the
Influence of the divine Sanctifier. -- For we are sanctified by Faith which is
in Christ. Acts 26. 18. And Faith in Christ eyes his Righteousness, or
Obedience to the Death, as it is special Object. Romans 3. 25. -- Chap. 10. 3, 4.
For they -- (i. e. the Isr^elites, as v. 1. and with them may be joined all
that trust to their moral Virtue for Justification; they) being ignorant* of
God's Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have
not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God. -- For Christ is the
End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes. -- To the same
Purpose is that, Phil. 3. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own
Righteousness which is of the Law, ( viz. moral Virtue) but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. --
Act. 5. 29. We ought to obey God, rather than Men: And especially such as scoff
at the Doctrines of Christ. The Apostle faith (1 John 5. 9, 10.) If we receive
the Witness of Men, the Witness of God is greater. -- He that believes not
God, has made him a Liar; because he believes not the Record that God gave of
his Son -- Who is declared to be LORD our RIGHTEOUSNESS; and by Faith in his
Righteousness we are justified, and do glory: But not in mere moral Virtue; for
to glory in this, is to glory after the Flesh, and not after the Spirit; it is
to glory in a Thing of naught.

The next Thing I shall take Notice of, is that Reflection this Gentleman casts
on the Protestant Religion, professed by faithful Expositors, and Preachers of
the Gospel, with others, from the Reformation, particularly in New England. --
He reflects in this Manner, (Page 7.) Thus stupefied and bewildered with
Sounds, without attending to the true Sense of Revelation, the pure and perfect
Religion of Jesus, -- is in many Places turned into an idle Speculation, a
mysterious Faith, a senseless Superstition, and a groundlessRecumbency: and in
short, every Thing but what in Fact it is. -- If the Case be so as is here
represented, then our FATHERS, where are they? Have they been such blind
Guides? God forbid! We hope and believe better Things of them than are here
reported, as they made the Word of God their Rule. And it were well, if some
among us had followed their Example; and if our Author particularly had done
so, for the Good of that Church and People he stands in a particular Relation
to. -- He also adds, -- The pure and perfect Religion of JESUS, (which contains
the most refined System of Morality the World was ever blessed with; --) None
(...) I know of, will deny, that the Religion of Jesus is pure and perfect, or
that it contains the most refined System of Morality, incomparably excelling
the best Pagan Philosophers Systems, and even those of the best uninspired
Jewish Doctors. -- The moral Law is delivered to us in the sacred Scriptures
with the greatest Perfection and Purity; and is there considered as of
immutable and eternal Obligation. Our Savior therefore declares, that it was
not the End of his coming (as some might vainly imagine) to destroy the Law,
but to fulfill it, Matthew. 5. 17. -- i. e. to fulfill the Law, in the Capacity
of his People's Surety, for the Ends of making Satisfaction to divine Justice,
and providing a justifying Righteousness for them, as well as to teach them the
true Meaning of the Law, and set them an Example of Obedience for their
Imitation. And though none are able to fulfill all Righteousness, as he did; yet
as many as the Father has given him, are predestined to be conformed to the
Image of the Son of God: Therefore we should be, in our Measure, in the World,
as he was in the World; and should walk, even as he walked, who was the most
illustrious Pattern of good Works, and followed exactly the Rules of true
Morality. But for any to pretend, as this Author insinuates, that Christ came
only to settle a (...) of Morality, and that this he taught principally, when
he was in the World, tends to cast great Dishonor o^ Christ, and to turn the
trueChristian Religion into a mere Scheme of Morality, which savours much more
of Paganism, than what Christ and his Apostles have taught us. -- Therefore the
Suggestion is to be rejected with Contempt and Defiance, as destructive to the
great Ends of Christ's coming, and inglorious to that wonderful Work he has
done for the Salvation of Souls: for which Saints do now, and for ever will
adore and magnify the Riches of divine free sovereign Grace through JESUS
CHRIST OUR LORD.

However, notwithstanding all this, I would by no Means be understood as
designing to shut true Morality out of the Religion of Jesus, as though it had no
proper Place there. For indeed we can never do Righteousness, without Morality;
nor can we show our Faith in Christ, as we ought, without Works; nor have we
sufficient Evidence of our vital Union to him, without a constant Care of
Conformity to him in all the Instances of moral Duty. If this be wanting, it is
a Sign, that our Faith is dead, and our Religion vain: So our own Hearts will
condemn us, and can never witness for us that we have Faith unfeigned. Nor can
others, without beholding our good Conversation in Christ, have sufficient
Grounds of a rational Charity for us, that we are sincere in the Profession of
the Religion of Jesus, and have felt the Power of it in our Souls. -- But after
all that has been, or ever can be said in Favor of Morality, this Author's
Insinuation (that the pure and perfect Religion of Jesus consists only or
principally in this refined System of Morality) is groundless, and founded on
mere. Arminian Presumption: for neither Scripture nor Reason is produced, to
prove this Assertion of his; nor indeed can be by any other: And I hope, none
are so stupidly blind, as to go away satisfied with an Ipse dixit.

Before I come to the next general Head of Remarks, I shall take a little
further Notice of this Author's Reflection on the Religion mostly professed in
these New England Churches, and by the Ministers in them, that we apprehend to
be ^ound in the Faith which is in Christ Jesus. He (...) (as was before noted)
the Religion of the Land an idle Speculation, a mysterious Faith, a senseless
Superstition, and a groundless Rec^mben^y. -- But pray, Sir, why must it be
branded with such hard and reproachful Names; as if our Faith, and the
Doctrines we profess, were not according to Scripture; but founded on mere
^^imerical delusive Imaginations? This seems to be done with a Design to turn
the Minds of People from the Truth as it is in Jesus: And if so, they must
believe a Lie. For all such as turn away from the Truth, will fall under the
Charge of Falsehood, in a less or a greater Degree. And I suppose, if our Author
had duly consulted the Rules of his so much applauded Morality, he would have
found no Room for such abusive Invectives against us, whatever deep rooted
Prejudice he may be under against the Faith we profess.

This Author insinuates, on the other Hand, that his refined System of Morality
is a Doctrine of Sobriety, Righteousness, and Piety. But, moral Piety, Sobriety
and Righteousness, are these the only Lessons to be learned of Christianity!
Are they so much as the first Principles of the Doctrine of CHRIST! Was not the
Doctrine of Plato, Socrates, Cicero, Seneca and other moral Philosophers in the
Pagan World, a Doctrine of Sobriety, Righteousness, and Piety? These Heathen
Philosophers, taught they not the very same Scheme as this, in Sum and
Substance? Only, it seems, their Ethics, or Systems of moral Philosophy, were
not so re^in'd, so pure, and perfect. Truly this Discourse of our Author's
seems to be one incessant Cry in Praise of his idolized Morality; not
altogether unlike that of the tumultuous Rout at Ephesus, "Great is Diana of
the Ephesians!"

Thus I have gone through what I proposed under the second general Head of
Remarks, and have insisted the longer from the Importance of the Points in
Debate.

The next Thing, in the order at first projected, is,

III. To consider the Danger of substituting a Righteousness of our own in the
Room of Christ's Righteousness, with Relation to the Affair of our
Justification before God; and ho^ far our Author stands justly chargeable with
(Doctrinally) substituting personal Righteousness in the Room of imputed
Righteousness.

It is evident, that the whole Tenor and Scope of this Author's Discourse we
are upon, is, to disparage, and draw in as dark Colors as possible, the
Doctrines we profess, and indeed the whole of our Religion, though founded on the
plain and unerring Authority of divine Revelation* To that End he brings it
under the Odium of an idle Speculation, -- and a groundless Recumbancy: Which
Passages have already had some Notice taken of them, and may perhaps fall under
a further Consideration in the following Remarks.

The constructive Language of his Discourse, from the Beginning to the End, is,
You have no Need at all to go beyond or without your selves for a Righteousness
to justify you before God. -- Else, whence is it, that he casts so much Obloquy
upon Expositors and others, that put a Sense on his Text different from the
Notion he has taken up of it? Why is he so cautious of speaking any Thing in
Favor of the Doctrine of imputed Righteousness? He is so far from this, that
the whole Construction of his Discourse is rather calculated in full Opposition
to this Protestant Doctrine: And numerous Passages in it, I apprehend, are most
plainly of an unfavourable Aspect. I will instance in a few, for a Specimen;
and make some Remarks upon them. Thus, in proposing the Point that he
undertakes to demonstrate (Page 11th of his Discourse) he expressly professes to
maintain, That neither All nor any of our Righteousness, when true and genuine,
sincere and universal, can possibly, consistent with Reason, Revelation, and
even so much as common Sense, deserve this odious Character of filthy Rags. --
This Gentleman here, as in the other Parts of his Discourse, seems to deliver
himself in unusual Phrases, and a Manner of Expression which carrys much of
Ambiguity in it, tending rather to amuse, than instruct People in general;
without any Explanation of his Meaning, for the most Part; and destitute of
Scripture Proof, as before hinted. However, I observe, this Author appears by
the Epit^ets he has heaped up, to aim at expressing to us, what he calls (Page
15) The most complete Character of Spotless Virtue. -- Now the Question is,
Whether there is, or ever was, such a complete Character of spotless Virtue,
existent under the Sun; unless in the Case of the Holy JESUS, and of our first
Parents before the Fall? And it is readily granted, that the Righteousnesses in
these two Cases are exempt: But among all the natural Race of apostate Adam,
where was there at any Time, or in any Instance, found a complete Character of
spotless Virtue? What faith the Scripture? There is not a just Man upon Earth,
that does good, and ^inneth not. Eccl. 7. 20. Now so far as the just Man
^inneth, he certainly stains his moral Character, and detracts from his
personal Righteousness, or Conformity to the Law of God, the Rule of
Righteousness; which, as it demands Perfection of Obedience, can never in
Reason be supposed to take up satisfied with an imperfect and spotted
Obedience. Therefore such an Obedience as is (...) with Sin, can never be
supposed available to justify us, in a due Process of Law; one Jot or Tittle of
which God will not suffer to pass away. Consequently we must conclude, that in
Relation to our being justified before God, against the Challenges of his holy
and indispensable Law, verily all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags. -- It
is a Matter worthy of strict Notice* that when we apply this diminutive
Character of filthy Rags to personal Righteousness, it is considered as viewed
existing in it is Subject, a morally imperfect Creature, and with Respect to the
grand Affair of Justification before God. In this Regard, I think, all the
Righteousnesses of the most improved Christians may be fitly compared to filthy
Rags (whatever this Author or any others may suggest to the contrary) without
the least Inconsistency, either with Reason, Revelation, or commonSense. For
(as was before shown) it is Men's moral Virtues and personal Righteousnesses
being so highly applauded, and placed in the Room of the imputed Righteousness
of Christ, that is here and by every one ought to be condemned, as erroneous
and corrupt, whatever plausible Pretensions may be insinuated, to blind Men's
Minds, and pervert their Judgments. -- It is the plain, direct, and infallible
Gospel-Rule, that the Faith of Confessors to the Truth, in this and other
Lands, is built on: And this, I pray God, we may continue to adhere to, and
defend, in Opposition to and open Defiance of all that either the Art of Man,
or Powers below, can suggest with Respect to the Virtues of Morality or a
personal Righteousness being a fit or sufficient Intitlement to Acceptance in
the Sight of God, either here in our Acts of religious Worship, or hereafter in
giving our Account at the Tribunal of Jesus Christ. The Scripture is plain, and
I think, indisputable, That without Faith it is impossible to please God. For
he that comes to God, with Acceptance, must believe. Heb. 11. 6. -- God
impute^h Righteousness without Works. See Romans 4. 6.

But again, this Author asserts, Page 15. From the Beginning of the Bible to
the End of it, you will never find any the least and most imperfect Degrees of
real Goodness branded with any such odious Character. To which I answer,
Perhaps our Author will own, that Saul when he was a Pharis^e, had some Degree
of real Goodness in him, being as touching the Righteousness which is in the
Law, blameless: Yet Paul the Apostle throws Disgrace on all his former Jewish
Religion, as comparatively but Loss and Dung, Phil. 3. 8. His moral Goodness,
which was really good in it is Kind and Degree, yet he ca^ts Contempt upon it,
in Compare with Christ's Righteousness imputed to him, that Royal Robe with
which he was then adorned. -- And if Multitudes of Protestants, Expositors and
others, have not been strangely deceived, this same Scripture furnishes me with
an undeniable Instance to my present Purpose; and may be very justly (as it
frequently has been) paralleled with our Author's Text, taken according to the
commonly received meaning. Paul, now a Christian and an Apostle, cured of his
Pharisaical Dependence on his moral Virtues, says there concerning all Things,
including his moral Seize, present, as well as past, I do count them but
Dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having my own
Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ,
the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. So we see the Apostle did not dare
to approach the Presence of his final Judge, arrayed only with the
self-pleasing Habit of his moral Virtues, the Dung-hill-Garment or filthy Rags
of his own Righteousness; but with the rich and recommending Attire of Christ's
Righteousness, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.

Agreeable to the Drift of our Author's Discourse, I find him peremptorily
asserting, Page 20. It is the Righteousness of the Saints [meaning their own
moral Righteousness, which he insists on all along] that renders them amiable
in God's Sight, that is the Condition of all his Favors to them, and the sole
Rule he will proceed by in judging them, and dispensing eternal Rewards to
them. The Scriptures (says he) join with the natural Notions of our own Minds
in all this, in the most plain and express Language imaginable. -- To which I
say, -- It is very probable, as all Men since the Fall are by Nature Men of
corrupt Minds, that the natural Notions of such Minds may concur with our
Author in all this; and strongly conceit, that their own personal Righteousness
"renders them amiable in God's Sight," and powerfully attracts his kind Regards
to them; that this is the Condition of all his Favors to them, etc.

But I think, enough has been said to confute such a dangerous Error; and
establish our Souls in the contrary weighty Truth, that it is the Righteousness
of Faith, and not our own moral Virtue, which renders us amiable in the Sight
of God, according to Scripture and sound Reason. -- That which renders
acceptable in his Sight, is the Righteousness of God our Savior, which is upon
all them that believe, i. e. with Faith unfeigned; and the Scripture calls it
precious Faith: And surely it is in God's Account so, especially as it pays
peculiar Honor to his dear Son, and is the Means by his special Appointment to
invest us with Christ's Righteousness, which covers our moral Nakedness from
the Sight of his vindictive Justice (See Rev. 3. 18.) and indeed renders us
pleasing Spectacles in the pure Eyes of his rectoral Holiness. -- Not by Works
of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by
the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, etc. Tit.3.5, --
7. Here, we may observe, God's planting the vital Principle of Holiness in us,
or purifying our Hearts by Faith (as well as his justifying us through Faith) is
represented as an Act of his sovereign Grace and Mercy; independent of any
antecedent moral Condition on our Part^; not at all respecting Works of
Righteousness which we have done, and having no other Rule to direct it but his
own Purpose and Grace, which (as it is expressed, 2 Timothy 1. 9.) was given us in
Christ Jesus before the World began. -- In short, by the whole Tenor of
Scripture Language, it appears, that Justification (as well as Sanctification)
is a present Benefit, actually existent in this Life, beginning with our very
first becoming Believers, and not delayed 'till Works of Righteousness be done
by us to procure it, much less adjourned to the Day of Judgment, as some
pretend.

What this Author offers, to support his Scheme of Salvation by moral Virtue
from Psalm. 18 23. I was upright before him -- Therefore has the Lord rewarded
me according to my Righteousness: -- This, I think, is foreign from his
Purpose, and therefore will in no Way answer the Design he is upon. For it is
probable, the Psalmist in these Passages, as well as in many other of the
Psalms he penned, speaks not of himself personally, but prophetically and
typically of the MESSIAH; who indeed acted in all that he did, in the
Perfection of Uprightness or Righteousness, and therefore has an indisputable
Right to plead the Merit of it. -- Otherwise, David must be necessarily charged
(at least) with gross Iuconsistency, or rather the Holy Spirit, by whom he
spoke; which would amount to such a Degree of Blasphemy, as this Author
doubtless is very unwilling to fall under the Imputation of, however freely he
has charged it upon Expositors and others, in a Matter of much smalle^
Consequence. To demonstrate that David spoke not this of himself, but of
CHRIST, and to clear him of Inconsistency, we need only turn our Eye to ^ Sam.
23. 2. Where he makes that Declaration, The Spirit of the Lord sp^ke by me, and
his Word was in my Tongue. Now, as he was before under the immediate Influence
of the Spirit, so here also* where (it is observable) he disclaim, pleading the
Dignity of his own Righteousness, but flies to the Covenant God had made with
him, as in v. 5. In which he must unavoid^bly have a direct Eye to, andFaith in
Christ and his Righteousness; on which, it is evident, he placed all his Hopes:
For he says, Although my House be not so with God (and as ^t follows by Way of
Repetition in the close of the Verse, Although he make it not to grow) yet he
has, made with me (...) overlasting Covenant, -- This is all my Salvation, and
all my Desire. And, as he elsewhere expresses it, on the like Occasion, What
can David say more? -- This shows us, that it was not his Uprightness, or his
own Righteousness, that he depended on, as the Ground or Reason of God's
bestowing his Rewards on him, or any other of his Saints, but he only looked
herefor for the Sake of CHRIST and his Righteousness. And in the same Manner
Paul expresses himself, -- That I may be found in Him, not having my own
Righteousness. -- The Righteousness of CHRIST, and not moral Virtue (as I have
had Occasion frequently to mention) is that whereby true Believers will at last
be found of their Judge in Peace, and be presented faultless before the Throne
of his Glory with exceeding Joy. -- Many other plain Texts might be produced to
confute this Author's wild and dangerous Assertions, and Attempts to bring the
whole of Religion and Happiness under the Head of moral Virtue, and thrust out
the Righteousness of Christ, and the Grace of the Spirit, as unnecessary in the
Scheme of our Salvation; which is evident from what he says, Page 7. Revelation
every where considers us as moral Agents, and suspends our whole Happiness upon
our personal good Behavior, and patient Continuance in Ways of well-doing. --
We have here a farther Proof of this Gentleman's Dependence on moral Virtue, as
if it were the All of Religion; there is nothing all this While in his
Discourse, so far as I have already considered it, to be found of the
Essentials of the true Gospel-Religion; not one Word of R^^^^^^ation, or the
Necessity of being born again, as our Savior has taught us, nothing of Faith
and Repentance (till near the close of his Discourse, where by a seeming mere
accident it was once thought of by him) nothing of Union to CHRIST, nor of
Communion with Christ etc. Those Things were all, as it seems, aliene to his
Purpose. But surely, these, and such li^^ Things, are by the Tenor of
Scripture-R^v^lation requisite, and leading to our final Happiness. The Case is
not as this Author asserts, that Revelation suspends the whole (...) of our
Happiness on our personal good Behavior.

This indeed is necessary in a Professor of Christianity: but to say, or
pretend, that the Scripture or Revelation every where suspends the whole of our
Happiness on our personal good Behavior, as this Author does, is a perverting
the Scripture. In Truth, the personal good Behavior, mentioned by him, appears
by the whole Tenor of this Discourse of his, from first to last, to be little
more than what the Heathen have professed and built their Hopes on: but without
Faith, these Duties of Morality reach no higher than what Persons may and do
often arrive to by the common Helps of Nature. And though when done in Faith,
they are good in their Place, and strictly to be pursued by all that profess
Christianity* is undeniable; yet when depended on, they will be found to be a
mere Delusion, if I know any Thing of the Meaning of the Scriptures, or the
Mind of God in them. In short therefore, unless the Mercy of God through a
Mediator be extended to us for our Salvation, and relied on by Faith, we must
inevitably perish with the fallen Angels, notwithstanding all our Duties,and
notwithstanding the concurrent Help of all mere created Causes. -- As to the
Scriptures considering Men as moral Agents, I suppose, it must be granted, that
the Angels which sinned, do still retain those natural Powers, which originally
constituted them moral Agents; though under an irreversible Doom, without a
Redeemer: and the like, I suppose, may be said of the Spirits in Prison, the
lost Souls of Men, passed out of a State of Trial, into a State of Retribution,
that they are still moral Agents. But to what Purpose is all this? Man's moral
Agency, as he is under the Power of Sin by Nature, through the Fall, is a moral
Agency only free to moral Evil, and not to that which is spiritually Good. --
The Spirit that is in us naturally lu^teth to Envy, and to that which is Evil.
And Paul declares that in him, that is, in his Flesh, dwelt no good Thing. Romans
7. 18. -- According to our Author's Scheme of Divinity (or rather, I think,
Heathen Morality) he tells ^s, Page 21. It is Demonstration, that the
Foundation of final Happiness must be laid in every one's own Mind, in a
personal good Turn, and rightness of Temper to relish celestial Joys. -- Truly
it is Demonstration sufficient, I think, that it is but a mere Amusement, to
tell of a personal good Turn or rightness of Temper to relish celestial Joys,
without previous Conversion, and some good Degree of a saving and experimental
Acquaintance with divine Things. 1 Cor.2. 14. But the natural Man receives not
the Things of the Spirit of God: for they are Foolishness unto him; neither can
be know them (and then certainly can have no proper Relish of them) because
they are spiritually discerned. -- Surely such as trust to a moral
Righteousness of their own, will find, as the Prophet speaks, The Bed is
shorter than that a Man can stretch himself on it, and the Covering narrower,
than that a Man can wrap himself in it; all our Righteousnesses being morally
imperfect, and stained with moral Pollutions. For as the Apostle James
observes, In many Things we all offend; -- and whosoever shall keep the whole
Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is guilty of all. Jam. 2. 10. and 3. 2.

In fine, if ever we obtain Salvation, and get to Heaven at last, we shall
there, together with all Saints, cast down our Crowns at the Feet of GOD and
the Lamb, and lie prostrate before the Throne, in Acknowledgment of our own
Unworthiness, and in Admiration of the exceeding Riches of divine Grace in the
whole of our Salvation by Christ, even from Election to Glorification. And if
it were possible that Shame could find a Place in Heaven, we should look back
with the most sensible Blushing and Self-Abhorance, on our very best Services
here in this World; freely and humbly confessing, that all our Righteousnesses
were as filthy Rags; and shall then resolve the whole of our Salvation, from
Beginning to End, into the Riches of the free Grace of God; the Grace of the
Father, in appointing us to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ; the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, in purchasing Redemption for us; and the Grace of the Holy
Spirit, in applying to us the purchased Redemption, by working in usunfeigned
Faith, and thereby uniting us to Christ in our Effectual Calling; and keeping
us by his Power through Faith unto eternal Salvation. -- We shall take none of
the Glory to our Selves; much less place the Crown on the Head of our moral
Agency and personal good Behavior, or our own Righteousness, exclusive of the
Righteousness of Faith: we shall then feel the Love of Christ constraining us
(in a most sweet and delightful Manner) to confess our selves saved by Grace
through FAITH, and that not of our selves, but by the Gift of God.

I come now, in Prosecution of what was proposed under another general Head of
Remarks,

IV. To inquire, whether there is not more of Absurdity and Blasphemy couched
in a disowning some of the main Ends of Christ's coming into the World, and so
depreciating the glorious Design of his mediatorial Undertaking, than there
possibly can be in the pretended Depreciation of moral Virtue, which our Author
so loudly complains of, and taxes many Expositors and others with.

The Body of Protestant Expositors and Preachers of the Gospel in general,
stand strongly indicted by this Author, of Blasphemy as well as Absurdity; in
that as he pretends, they depreciate moral Virtue, by the Sense they put upon
his Text, and by other commonly received Notions in near Alliance with that. On
this Account, he freely charges them with Weakness, Inattention, and Ignorance,
or more criminal Designs, as you have seen: But by what has been already
offered in Reply to these Charges, I doubt not it is sufficiently manifest to
intelligent and unbya^^ed Readers, that these reproachful Imputations want
Truth to support them, and are unjustifiable either from Reason or Revelation.
And I have before observed, that this Author has in Fact disowned or
depreciated the main Design, or some of the essential Ends of the Mediator's
glorious Undertaking. Now that he has done this, at least virtually and in
Effect, I conclude, must be apparent to every judicious and unprejudiced
Reader; if he observes, what an universal Silence there is throughout his
Discourse concerning some of the primary Ends of Christ's coming; which ought,
and might have been taken special Notice of in Page 17, 18. as well as
elsewhere. -- But it seems, his Heart and Mind was taken up to such a Degree in
Favor of his so much admired moral Virtue, and Christ's settling the Scheme,
and his Thoughts were so engrossed by this Self-pleasing Theme, as that he
over-looks the great and ultimate Design of all, GOD's being glorified in the
eternal Salvation of his Elect by Jesus Christ. -- The Name of the incarnate
Son of God was, by special Direction from Heaven, called Jesus on this Account,
because he should save his People from their Sins. Matthew. 1. 21. Luke 2. 2^. --
And this blessed Design he was to accomplish, both by Price and by Power, or by
Merit and Efficiency, by the Purchase and the Application of Redemption, in the
Execution of his mediatorial Offices. -- The Prophets therefore predict these
wonderful Ends of his Coming: but without a Word of his settling this Scheme of
Morality, spoken by them; and indeed the Scripture is a Stranger to the Phrase,
as it is not to be found there; tho according to the proper Sense and Use of
it, it is included in Christ's Commission, and Example, who fulfilled the Law,
as for other Ends, so for a Directory to us, with Respect to our moral Conduct
in the World. -- But let us see how wide our Author is from the Prophets, and
how distant in his Sentiments from theirs, in this grand Article. He tells us
after this Manner, -- That for this End he [i. e. Christ] was born, and on this
grand Design he came into the World, to set up the Christian Scheme in the
World, to propagate Truth and Virtue among Mankind: as though this was all he had
to do here! Nay, if we believe this Author's Insinuations, it was all that he
did do, in a Manner: and to prove his Assertion, he instances in our Savior's
whole Sermon on the Mount, which he insinuates consists only of Instructions
leading to Morality: though the Sermon it self contradicts this, in the beginning
of Christ's Instructions there, and in many following Paragraphs, if I mistake
not. However, as I have before sufficiently shown, there are none of the
Expositors or others, I have met with, who are by this Author so unbecomingly
reflected on, but do declare the Necessity of the Practice of moral Duties, by
all that profess themselves Christ's Followers, as the proper Fruit of a true
and saving Faith, and the best Evidence of the sanctifying Work of the holy
Spirit, witnessing for them to all that behold their good Conversation, that
they are the Children of God. -- But to return, -- as I said, Let us see how
distant this Gentleman is, in his Sentiments of the End of Christ's being born,
from what the Prophets testify concerning him, in their Predictions of him. I
shall instance but in a few of them, among the many that might be produced to
the same Purpose. The Prophets tell us, That the Messiah should bear our
Iniquities, be wounded for our Transgressions, and have the Chastisement of our
Peace laid upon him; that he should finish Transgression, make an End of Sin,
and bring in an everlasting Righteousness; that his Name should be called The
Lord our Righteousness; That in him should all the Seed of Israel be justified,
and should glory, -- saying, In him have I Righteousness and Strength; and in a
Word; That by his Knowledge should God's righteous Servant justify many. -- Now
it is evident, that Christ was born, and came into the World, for other and
higher and more glorious Ends, than this Author does allow; which will prove it
self, and discover his Weakness: If in this Case those celebrated Sayings are
duly observed, namely, That the Spirit of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets -- And they that speak not according to this Word, it is because there
is no Light in them. -- Here then the Conclusion is easily drawn from the
Premises, and it plainly appears, that there is more of Absurdity and
Blasphemy, in denying to CHRIST the Glory due to his Name, respecting the main
and essential Ends of his coming into the World, than there can be in the
pretended depreciating moral Virtue, so exclaimed against by our Antagonist.
However, this is not (...) ^or agreeable to these Prophecies abovementioned, if
we consult the Writings of the New Testament, we shall find CHRIST JESUS
represented as being sent in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin, i. e.
to be a Sin-offering; as coming to fulfill the Law, and to take away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself; as being accordingly obedient unto Death, even the Death
of the Cross; and as bearing our Sins in his own Body upon the Tree; as
shedding his Blood for many, for the Remission of Sins; as laying down his Life
a Ransom for many; as giving himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to
God, for a sweet smelling Savor; and in a Word, as being made a Curse for us,
that so the Blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ. -- These, and other Passages of Scripture of the like Import, that
might be offered, plainly show, that it is not our own personal good Behavior,
or strictest moral Virtue, on which the Scripture, in any Part, " suspends the
whole of our Happiness," -- as is pretended: but upon the Mediation and Merit
of Christ, and his Righteousness through Faith. Agreeable to which I may add, 2
Cor. 5. 21. He (i. e. Christ) was made Sin for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. -- God is represented as reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing their Trespasses; but imputing Righteousness without
Works. And they that believe on the Son of God, are said to believe on him to
Life everlasting; and consequently are delivered from the W^ath to come, from
the Law, (...) the Power of (...) and Death. Now upon this Scripture
Representation of Christ's Design (with its important Consequences) which is
emphatically the mediatorial Design, on which Christ came into the World, I
say, for any one openly to deny, or tacitly to disown, and treat with Neglect,
such a fundamental End of Christ's coming, which respects in a special Manner
his Priestly Office, wherein also all his other high and distinguishing
Characters are struck at, is in it is Nature and Consequence too nearly
approaching to Blasphemy; and full freighted with Absurdity, yea, more than so,
when done with Design, as seems to be the Case here in View, -- by representing
as if personal Righteousness were the only Thing that avails to obtain the
Favor of God, and on which our whole Happiness is suspended; so making it
properly our justifying Righteousness, and indeed our only Righteousness, in
which to appear before God with Acceptance.

Now, to set this in a true Light, I shall produce this Author's own Words.
That he might fasten Reproach on the Expositors and Preachers, who have not the
like extravagantly magnifying Thoughts of moral Virtue with himself (though they
urge it, as necessary under it is proper scriptural Limitations) and probably to
prejudice the Minds of his unwary unintelligent Readers, he thus censures their
Notion of his Text, Page 17. That it reflects Dishonor on Jesus Christ the Son
of God, and on the whole Christian Scheme, which he came to set up in the
World. Our Savior was the great Preacher of Righteousness: For this End was he
born, and on this grand Design came he into the World, to propagate Truth and
Virtue among Mankind. It is this and only this Righteousness (that some are
pleased to style Filthy Rags) which he preaches up through the whole of that
divine Sermon on the Mount; which contains the Sum and Substance of his whole
Doctrine. -- To countenance which Assertion, ^e cites Matthew. 7.24. etc. But
with what propriety, I leave to be determined by the more judicious. --

However* by what has been before offered, it is easy to judge, who it is tha^
reflects Dishonor on Jesus Christ the Son of God, and on the whole
ChristianScheme. -- Surely, if our Author had had such a tender Regard (as is
insinuated) for the Honor of Christ,and the Vitals of Christianity, he would
not have presumed, I think, to overlook some of the main and essential Ends of
Christ's coming, when enumerating them; nor to pretend, that the grandDesign
was only to settle a Scheme of Morality, as a sufficient Righteousness; and so
by a necessary Consequence ( according to Him) it follows, that they who hear
those Sayings of Christ, which he would have refer merely to Morality, and
does them, are the only wise Men in the Earth, that have built their House
upon a Rock, and are therefore in the safest and most happy State of all
Mankind. But surely, the Rock here intended, is CHRIST; as the Apostle Paul
explains it, 1 Cor. 10. 4. in Allusion to Mo^es's smiting the Rock in the
Wilderness, Number. 20. 11. And the smiting the Rock with a Rod is emblematical of
Christ's Sufferings, without which no Streams of Grace could be conveyed to us.
He is therefore said to be stricken and smitten of God, Isa. 53. 4, 5. Hence
Christ, this spiritual Rock, being smitten of the Father, is become the Rock of
our Salvation, and the Fountain of Life. From him, as the smitten Rock, flows
living Water. Joh.4. 14. And them that thirst after Righteousness, he invites
to come unto him and drink. Joh. 7. 37. -- In vain will Men hew to themselves
Cisterns of their own; they will prove as broken Cisterns, that can hold no
Water. Their Hope will make them ashamed, who place their Dependence on moral
Virtue; notwithstanding the highest possible Seize in the Virtues of
Morality, without a saving Faith in the Righteousness of Christ, which is the
one Thing (and above all Things) needful.

Besides, if we consult Matthew. 5. especially the third and sixth Verses, we
shall find our Author greatly mistaken, in asserting, that it was this and only
this moral Righteousness, which Christ preached up, in the whole of his divine
Sermon on the Mount. --

Many Arguments might be drawn from these and other Parts of that Sermon of
Christ, to evidence, that it is Faith, even such a Faith as leads the Soul out
of Self, to hunger and thirst after CHRIST and his Righteousness, under a Sense
of our own spiritual Poverty, has the Promise of being filled or satisfied.
This carries in it the Sum and Substance, the Essentials of that pure and holy
Religion of Jesus, which he has taught us in the Gospel; not excluding, but
drawing after it the Practice of moral Duties, which Christ has enjoined on all
them that profess themselves his Followers. -- Our Author proceeds to say, Page
18. In his Life and Practice he fulfilled all Righteousness, not to excuse us
from, but set us an Example of, doing likewise. Now, is that which the Son of
God though it worth his coming down from Heaven to establish on Earth, that which
is the Basis and in short the whole Superstructure of this his divine Religion:
To recommend which to Mankind, he both lived and preached it up, and sealed the
Truth of his Doctrine with his most precious Blood, shall we call this, I say,
Filthy Rags? God forbid! God forbid! such a Thought should ever enter into our
Hearts,. -- And to give us a farther Specimen of the Odium he would cast on the
Doctrine of the Expositors and Preachers, whom he aims at, he proceeds after
this Manner, -- But if ever such a Thought should enter into us, we should be
more solicitous to cast it out, than if we were possessed with seven Devils. --
However, as this appears to strain up moral Virtue to an undue and dangerous,
if not to a blasphemous Pitch, which I think enough has been said to detect and
expose, therefore I shall further, under this Head of Remarks, only offer the
following Considerations.

1. If the Errand Christ came into the World upon, was in Fact as this Author
represents it, then it appears a just Inference, That both CHRIST himself and
his Apostles (not to mention the Prophets, who testified beforehand concerning
it) must needs have been Impostors, either wilfully misrepresenting the Case,
or else greatly misunderstanding it. -- For Christ says of himself, Matthew. 18*
11. The Son of Man is come to save that which was lost. -- Was it to save Souls
from a lost perishing State in Sin? Or was it only to save Men from a blind
Pagan State, from Heathen Ignorance and Idolatry, and to bring them into the
Knowledge and Practice of Morality? According to our Author it must be the
latter, and not the former, that is intended, as the End of Christ's coming. But
certainly such a Thought would be very absurd and blasphemous. And God forbid!
that any such mean and vile Apprehension of the End of Christ's coming should
enter into our Hearts. God* forbid, that we should suppose, this was the only
or the main End of it! -- It was therefore to save Souls from Sin and Misery,
that he came; as is before proved. And Christ testifies that he came to give
his Life a Ransom for many, Matthew. 20. 28. Which he needed not to have done, if
it were only to settle a Scheme of Morality. But the Scriptures teach us better
Things concerning the Redeemer of Souls. See 1 John 3. 5. He was manifested to
take away our Sins. So Chap. 4. 9, 10. and 1 Timothy 1. 15. -- And in this View
the Baptist beheld Christ, when he said, Behold the Lamb of God! Joh. 1. 29.

2. According to this Author's Representation of the End of Christ's coming,
the Commission he gave to his Disciples, and the Errand he sent them upon, was
superior to his own; which would be an Absurdity to suppose, and Blasphemous in
a high Degree. -- Christ's Commission was prior and superior to that of his
Disciples; and it was foreto^d long before he appeared in his Humanity, Isai.
61. 1, 2, 3. Christ is there described as anointed of God, and sent, to preach
good Tidings to the Meek, to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to
the Captives, and the opening of the Prison-Doors to them that are bound; to
appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them Beauty for Ashes, etc.
-- Agreeably to this his Commission he begins his Sermon in the Mount: Though our
Author pretends it is made wholly up of moral Instruction, which does not reach
to the binding up the brokenhearted, nor does Morality set at Liberty those
that are led Captive by Sin and Satan. -- Christ himself notes, that in him was
fulfilled the Prophet's Prediction, which was concerning him, Luke 4. 18. And
how aptly he proves it, and acts up to his Commission, is worthy of our
Observation, even in the Beginning of his Sermon on the Mount. There we see, he
binds up the brokenhearted, brings good Tidings to the Meek, supports the Poor
in Spirit with the Promise of the Kingdom of Heaven, and comforts them that are
Mourners in Zion for their Sins, and opens the Prison-Doors to them that are
bound, and sets the Captives under Satan's Power at Liberty, and promises the
Benefit of his Righteousness to all that hunger and thirst after it. Christ
here, in Part, fulfills his Commission, by pronouncing a Blessing on all that
sustain these distinguishing Characters, as we find Matthew. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6. -- We
may further note it as a strong Proof and undeniable Evidence of his Mission
and Commission from the Father, as the true Messiah and Redeemer of Souls, we
find him saying in his Answer to John's Messengers, Matthew. 11. 5. and Lu^. 7.
22. The Blind see, the Lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, etc. Now, though these
Things were actually done on the Bodies of Men, yet they had a spiritual and
mystical Meaning, to prove Christ's Sufficiency and Power to minister Healing
to the Souls of all tha^ came or should come to Him, by Faith in his
Righteousness and mediatorial Fullness. -- What I have here offered is to show
the high Commission Christ came into the World invested with, as the Mediator
between God and Man; and how punctually he has fulfilled the Business of it on
the Earth; not merely by preaching up Morality, and setting up that refined
Scheme of moral Virtue, as our Author suggests, but by establishing the more
refined and excellent Scheme of Man's Recovery from his fallen State in Adam,
and from all his contracted Guilt and Misery by actual Transgression: for
which, Christ has made sufficient Provision, in coming up fully to the Terms of
his Commission, by answering both the preceptive and penal Demands of the Law.
-- And now, that Christ might still prosecute the Trust committed to him, though
advanced to the heavenly Glory, he authorizes his Disciples on Earth to carry
on the Work given them to do in subordination to him, and puts them under
Commission, as having all Power committed to him. Therefore says he to them, As
my Father sent me, even so send I you. Joh. 20. 21. -- And what they were
commanded to do, we find by Matthew. 10. 7, 8. -- They were to preach the Gospel,
to heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils, etc. A
Work subservient to what Christ came upon, must be carried on by his Disciples,
according to the extraordinary Measures of Grace, bestowed on them by Christ.
-- Indeed the Disciples preached up moral Duties, (yet under a Limitation,
different from our Author) as we find in the Acts of the Apostles, and in their
several Epistles; urging Christians to maintain good Works, in order to
maintain their Christian Character, as having believed in God our Savior, and
thereby demonstrate the Sincerity of their Faith: whose pious Example in
pressing moral Duties, has been, is, and ever will be, followed by all
Christ's faithful Ambassadors, to the End of the World. But still, neither the
Disciples, nor their Followers hinted at, ever presumed to confine their
Instructions to moral Virtue, or Duties of Morality. For to them was committed
the Word of Reconciliation, by Christ; in whom God is said to be reconciling
the World to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. They therefore preached the glad Tidings of
Peace, and the gracious Terms of Reconciliation, namely, Repentance toward God
and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 20. 21. Eminently they preached up
Faith in the Incarnate Son of God, who for our Sake was obedient unto Death,
who suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust, who was delivered for our
Offenses, and raised again for our Justification. -- These are some of the
essential Ends of Christ's coming into the World, which the primitive Preachers
insisted on. Which shows, that Christ came for higher and more excellent Ends,
than merely to set up a Scheme of (even Christian) Morality among Mankind.
Whereas if our Author's Account of Christ's coming were true (as represented in
his Discourse) then the Commission he gave to his Disciples, must be superior
even to his own; but the contrary has been proved. And I farther observe, that
in Proportion, as any deny or obscure the main Design of Christ's coming into
the World, so far (I say) as this is done by any, it must appear equally
blasphemous and absurd.

3. Aother Argument is, -- That if Christ was born and came into the World only
to settle the Scheme so highly applauded by our Author, then his Work is
already finished, and he has Nothing further to act on Man's Behalf. For having
once settled this Scheme, it seems according to our Author, Christ had Nothing
more to do. But we have a more sure Word, than this Author's Credit will reach,
in this Case. The Scriptures plainly tell us, The Man Christ Jesus is Mediator
between God and Man; and as Mediator he sustained a threefold Office when on
Earth, viz. the Office of a Prophet, and of a Priest, and of a King: which
Offices he continues still, though in Heaven, to execute in the Earth, not
personally, but by his Agents and Instruments. He still executes his pr^phetick
Office; and this he does by his Spirit enlightening us, by his Word instructing
us, and by his Ministers dispensing the Word and Ordinances. -- Christ also
still executes his Kingly Office, in common Providence, in his Church, and in
the Hearts of Believers. C^^ist by his Kingly Power restrains (as he pleases)
the Sons of Men, both Saints and Sinners, from the open as well as secret
Wickedness they are naturally inclined to. He restrains by his Power the
Persecutors of his Church and People: He makes the Wrath of Man to praise him,
and the Remainder of Wrath he restrains. He subdues by his Power the
Stubbornness of Men's Wills, and brings them into Subjection to his holy Law:
and as he has led Captivity Captive, He rescues Souls from the Power of Satan,
and translates them into his own Kingdom, the Church militant here below, by
converting Grace, renewing them in the Spirit of their Minds, sanctifying and
fiting them for triumphal Glory; so that where he is, there all that are given
to him by the Father, in the Covenant of redeeming Grace, shall be also in due
Time, in Answer to his mediatory Prayer, Joh. 17. 24. -- Thus we see, Christ
had other and higher Motives in View, when he came into the World, than to
merely settle a Scheme of Morality. -- But then by Way of Eminency, we are to
consider Christ as sustaining the Office of a Priest; wherein the Redemption of
Sinners is in a more special and primary Manner concerned: And his Priesthood
is an everlasting Priesthood. He has once offered up himself a lasting
Sacrifice, acceptable to God, for the Expiation of Sin. Therefore it is said,
With his Stripes we are healed: And that, because the Chastisement of our Peace
was upon him. Isai. 53. 5. -- Agreeable to which the Apostle Paul remarks, that
we have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins. Ephesians. 1. 7.
-- The same Thing he repeats in Col. 1. 14. -- See also Heb. 5. 7. -- And the
Apostle having proved the Insignificancy of legal Sacrifices, in Point of
spiritual Purification, or to cleanse the Soul from Sin, Heb. 9 13. he
proceeds, v. 14. to say, How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through
the eternal Spirit offered himself without Spot to God, purge your Consciences
from dead Works to serve the living God? -- Christ is therefore said to be
consecrated for evermore. Heb. 7. 28. --

Having thus hinted at some of the Ends and Designs of Christ's coming into the
World, and what he did when here below, superior to that of settling a Scheme
of moral Virtue; I proceed to show, That notwithstanding all that he did in
establishing, as well as refining this Scheme, and what he has done in his
higher and more excellent Acts relating to his glorifying God in the Work of
Man's Redemption, which was the principal Thing aimed at in the Father's
anointing and sending him, and Christ's voluntarily engaging in the great and
difficult Service of a Mediator, his Work is not wholly done (as before has
been noted with Regard to his Prophetic and Kingly Offices) but this of his
Priestly Office he continues still in the Exercise and Execution of. -- He is
said to be our Forerunner, entered into Heaven, (Heb. 6. 20.) to appear in the
Presence of God for us. (Heb. 9. 24.) -- And he appears before God as our
Advocate. (1 John 2. 1) -- And this our blessed Advocate with the Father is
able also to save even to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, seeing
he ever lives to make Intercession for them. (Heb. 7. 25.) -- It plainly
appears then, from what has been said under this Head, that neither Moses, nor
the Prophets, any of them, that testified beforehand of Christ's coming, nor
Christ himself, nor his Apostles, are Vouchers for our Author: but unite in
witnessing against his Sentiments, that the End of Christ's being born and
coming into the World was to settle a Scheme of Morality, either exclusive or
transcendent to all those wonderful Designs, I have referred to above, that
according to the Scripture Christ came for and partly effected when here on the
Earth, and is now carrying on in Heaven, by Virtue of his mediatorial
Authority, Sufficiency, and boundless Grace. -- Unhappy it is, that these great
Things concerning Christ should be (...), and as it seems, with Design, by our
Author, to magni^ie moral Virtue, whatever becomes of the Essentials of
Christianity. -- Now, what the Apostle Peter awfully speaks concerning false
Teachers, I am afraid is like to be the deplorable State of poor New England,
and the Churches here, if the Errors advanced by some among us are suffered to
prevail. See 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. There were false Prophets also among the People,
even as there shall be false Teachers among you, who -- shall bring in --
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift Destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious Ways, by Reason of
whom the Way of Truth shall be evil spoken of. Now they deny the Lord Jesus,
who deny the Divinity of his Person, and his Satisfaction; and who deny any of
the Fundamentals of the Doctrine of Christ; either the Doctrine which he
himself taught in his personal Ministry, or which his Apostles by Commission
from him, and under the Inspiration of his Spirit, t^^ght after his Ascension.
Such may well be ranked under the Character of them that are ashamed of Christ
and of his Words, or that deny the Lord which bought us, who reject the
Doctrine delivered by his Apostles in his Name, under whatever Pretense. Christ
and his Apostles harmonized in their Doctrine: And the Apostles fully agreed
among themselves. Hence they sometimes bore Testimony to one another's
Doctrine. 2 Pet. 3. 15. -- Even as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to
the Wisdom given unto him, has written unto you; as also in all his Epistles,
speaking in them of these Things: in which are some Things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures, unto their own Destruction. Now, on this Text I ground an
Argument, to prove the divine Authority of the Doctrine of Election, of
Original Sin, of imputed Righteousness, and other Doctrines contained in the
Scriptures, particularly in Paul*s Epistles, which protestant Expositors and
Preachers in general have held, and for which this Author so strongly condemns
them. The Argument for Proof of these Doctrines which Paul preached, lies here.
As Peter was one of Christ's Apostles, sent by a special and immediate
Commission, and under the special Direction and Influence of the Holy Spirit,
to preach the Gospel, to disciple all Nations, baptising them in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all Things,
whatsoever Christ had commanded them; hence in this Way of teaching and
observing all Things which Christ had commanded, that Promise was his, Lo, I am
with you always, even to the End of the World. Matthew. 28. 19, 20. -- If Paul
therefore, in any of his Epistle's, had delivered Doctrines contrary to the
Mind of Christ, which Peter had a personal and very particular Knowledge of, it
must be supposed he would in Faithfulness have corrected Paul's Error in that
Case. But Peter, we see, justifies and confirms those Doctrines Paul had
delivered in his Epistles; yea, though some of them were hard to be understood,
and so (like some of the Parables and Sayings of Christ) required a close
Application of Mind to know then Meaning. On which we may note, That it is for
Want of a mature and deliberate Consideration, and Inquiry into the Nature and
Authority, as well as Grounds of these and some other Scripture-Doctrines, that
some (...) the Apostle's Words) who are unlearned and unstable, wre^t Paul's
(...), even as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own Destruction.
-- If then, divine Inspiration and the Testimony of the Spirit, by which these
Apostles spoke, has any Weight with us, we must conclude, these Doctrines
(however contested and ridiculed by some at this Day) yet being taught in
Paul'^ Epistles, they are according to the Mind of Christ; and those that deny
his Truths, however hard to be understood, I think, may justly be said to deny
Christ, and may fear that he will deny them before his Father which is in
Heaven, according to Matthew. 10. 33.

But I have yet something farther to add on Christ's Behalf, and in
Vindication, as of the Doctrines we are here treating of, so of those that
profess them.

It is worthy of our Observation, to whom the Apostle Peter writes his
Epistles. The first of them he superscribes thus, -- To the Strangers scattered
throughout Pontus, etc. ELECT according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father. His second Epistle is thus directed, To them that have obtained like
precious Faith with us, through the Righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus
Christ. Those he wrote to, were Christians in the Apostle's Eye and Opinion,
that had been instructed in the Doctrines which Peter, and Paul, and other
Apostles preached, and had believed and professed the same. Now, if we compare
these Characters of those he wrote to, with the Apostle's Words in 2 Pet. 3.
17. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these Things before, beware lest ye
also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own
Stedfastness: What other, or stronger Evidence do we need, to confirm our Faith
in these Doctrines, taught in Paul's Epistles, and in other Parts of Scripture?
It is plain, they whom the Apostle wrote to, had known these Doctrines, had
been thoro'ly instructed in them, and were not Strangers to them: However he
cautions them, in a Day of Temptation, to beware lest they being led away with
the Error of the Wicked ( viz. whom he had before described the unlearned and
unstable, i. e. Men that were willingly ignorant of these Things, and of an
un^ound Mind, who perverted the Scriptures, to invalidate the Doctrines
contained therein, and make them, if possible, serve to promote Error) fall
from their own Stedfastness. It seems, they had been taught these, and other
Gospel-Doctrines, from their first Acquaintance with, and Profession of
Christianity, and were in some Measure established in them; yet, were not so
out of all Danger by Seducers, but that they had need be upon their Guard. --
It is beyond all Contradiction then, I presume, that the Apostles, in these and
all other Points, harmonized with their Lord and Master Jesus Christ; as by the
Power and Influence of his Spirit, and in his Name and under his Authority,
they spoke, and delivered these Things to us. And we have the Testimony even of
Devils, confirming it by one of their officious Agents, who followed Paul and
the other Ministers that accompanied him, and who contrary to her own and her
Master's Gains was constrained to cry out, and say, These Men are the Servants
of the Most High God, which show unto us the Way of Salvation. (Act. 16. 17.)
Now, the Method they took in showing Men the Way of Salvation, was, by
preaching CHRIST, and the Doctrines he had directed them to preach;
particularly, the Doctrine of a personal and eternal Election of Grace, the
Doctrine of Original Sin, of Redemption by the Blood of Christ, of
Justification by Faith, of imputed Righteousness, of efficacious Grace, etc.
which have been considered in the foregoing Part of these Remarks. They also
preached, both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; and testified to Believers the Necessity of
a holy Practice, pres^ing on them the Duties of the Christian Life, in a plain
and powerful Manner. -- It may be proper now to look a little into Paul's
Testimony concerning himself, and see what he says in his own Behalf, and in
Respect of the Doctrines he had preached. He makes that solemn Asseveration
(Act. 20. 20, 27.) I kept back nothing that was profitable to you -- For I have
not shunned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God. -- Now if these
Doctrines I have treated of, are not really a Part of God's Counsel, or are not
truly profitable to Men, Paul, and the other Apostles and Preachers of the
Gospel, in the Infant-State of Christianity, must be deemed great Impostors,
and designing to deceive the World to a monstrous Degree. But, how horrid is
this for any to imagine! Though perhaps there be some of Paul's Directors among
us, and Pretenders to correct the Scriptures, who may think it high Time to
blot some Texts out of the Bible, as they have declared for erasing these
Doctrines out of our excellent Assembly's Catechism. --

I hope, the candid Reader will excuse this long Excursion, occasioned by a
Pamphlet's coming to my Hand as I was transcribing my Papers, entitled, "A
Narrative of an unhappy Contention in the Church at Ashford in Connecticut,
etc. published by their late Pastor:" In which are sundry gross Arminian
Errors, or worse, as I apprehend, calculated to destroy the Faith, and subvert
the Religion professed in these Churches. The Gentleman referred to above, is
Mr. John Bass, late Minister of Ashford, who was discharged from his Pastoral
Office there, the Reasons whereof we have given us by himself, in his
Narrative. -- namely, His changing his Sentiments concerning several Doctrines,
profe^t in this Land, from the first Settlement of Christianity here, and
plainly revealed in Scripture, according to the united Judgment of that
venerable Consociation that dismissed him. -- As he informs us in the Beginning
of his Pamphlet, at his Settlement (Anno 1743.) he professed himself to be of
the Calvinian Class, and as such remained for several Years, yet all that Time
suspected of Arminianism, etc. And upon it he says Calvinistick Principles I
then found to be at this Day a Clergyman's main Defense, the best he can hit
upon to provide him Food and Raiment, and to fix him in the good Graces of the
Populace: Interest set this Way. -- Truly it gives just Ground of Suspicion,
that this Gentleman made a Profession of the Calvinistic Doctrine, at his
Settlement, and for some Time after, from those mercenary Views he speaks of.

It does not appear but that those zealous and critical Hearers he speaks of,
were Persons of Integrity, as well as ^ound in the Faith, and orthodox in their
Principles; and doubtless they found their Minister to be of a temporizing
Disposition and Conduct. -- They are highly to be commended, for their Care to
suppress Error, and to maintain the Faith once delivered to the Saints, which
all that profess Christianity should contend (...) for, and not to be carried
about with every Wind of Doctrine, as too many are at this Day apt to be
captivated and in^nared by* -- But, these Hearers of his, it seems, were too
critical and judicious, as well as zealous for the Truth, to be drawn to deny
the Faith they had received and professed* and with their Pa^^or to run into
Error; notwithstanding all his Artifices to hold his Station and act under
Disguise, as he had done in Years past, by his own Confession, and as is
reported, covertly, to betray that People into the like Arminian Delusions with
himself.

Now that he has fallen from, and denies some of the most important Doctrines,
contained and taught in the Gospel, is evident. -- He begins ( Page 13.) with
that of Original Sin. -- But as I have insisted on this Topic, in the
foregoing Remarks, I refer the Reader to what is there offered in Vindication
of this Doctrine, -- and shall here only observe, that this Gentleman appears
to me inconsistent with himself. For he says, Page 14. God in his Wisdom and
Righteousness saw fit, not only to turn them [i. e. Adam and Eve] out of the
Garden of Eden -- but also to sentence them to a State of weari^om Labor,
abundant Sorrow and Temptation, and after this, to return to the Ground, from
whence they were taken: This was to them a Punishment of their Sin; but the
Effects of it did not terminate here; for I find that God took Occasion for
this Sin to lay the same Sentence upon all their Posterity. -- On which I argue
thus,

It is certain, that God who is the Judge of all the Earth, must and will do
Right: But can it be possible in Reason, or consistent with Scripture, to
suppose, that the same Sentence, pronounced on Adam, should descend to his
Posterity, if he had not stood as their common Head and Representative in that
first Covenant God made with him? Or how could his Offspring share with him in
the Penalties of his Sin (as is owned by this Author) if there were not the
Communication of Sin from him, and Guilt lying on them? -- It therefore appears
to me, that by his Concessions here, he has given up the Point in Debate,
notwithstanding the Arguments he produces to the contrary; and by necessary
Consequence owns the Doctrine of Original Sin, which he would be thought to
deny.

In this Narrative the Author denies the Doctrine of Election, of which I have
also briefly treated in the foregoing Remarks; therefore shall only add here,
that to deny the Doctrine of Election, does manifestly impeach the In^inity,
absolute Sovereignty, and Unchangeableness of GOD. -- with whom is no
variableness, neither Shadow of turning. -- He is in one Mind, and who can turn
him? He performs the Thing that is appointed (or that he has appointed) for
me. -- In a Word, it is to assume God's Prerogative, and a placing Man in God's
Stead, in the Matter of our Salvation: -- Which leads to make Man the Author of
his own Salvation, and not God. -- The Doctrine also of the special Redemption
by Christ, of those given him by the Father, this Author denies: And insinuate^
the Doctrine of universal Redemption; to prove which he offers some Scriptures,
that appear to me very wrongly applied, and among others brings those Words of
our Savior, Joh. 3. 16.And by this he manifestly intends, that the Belief or
Faith Christ there speaks of, is in Man's own Power, and so the Agency of the
Holy Spirit in a Way of special Grace is superseded. -- Therefore under his
fourth Head (...) or Regeneration, he tells us, this includes an ingenuous
Sorrow, excited by a View of the Love of God and Jesus Christ. -- A^ ingenuous
Sorrow! So that according to him, Man's Regeneration or Conversion depends on
his own ingenuous Disposition, or his being of a pliable Temper, easily drawn,
and by some happy Gift of Nature led to contemplate or view the Love of God and
Jesus Christ. But this is not according to the Description the Apostle Paul
gives us, 2 Cor. 7. 10. where it is termed a Godly (and not me^rly an
ingenuous) Sorrow, that leads to and issues in evangelical Repentance, a
Repentance, not to be repented of; which Repentance is to Salvation. And if not
to be repent^d of, it must finally issue in eternal Salvation; which proves the
true Christian's Perseverance in Grace. This is also denied by the Author of
the Narrative under our Consideration here; and consequently the ^ngenuous
Sorrow he speaks of, according to any consistent Sense, can mean no other than
a mere legal Sorrow, or the Sorrow of the World, which works Death: it being
merely natural, and not of supernatural Grace. -- But if Holiness [as he
speaks, Page 20.] is the Effect of a divine Operation upon the Mind, Then
Repentance must be of the same Original, as one of the first Fruits of
Holiness, wrought in us by the Operation of God, -- a supernatural,
tran^cendant Work of the Holy Spirit, in all the Parts of it. -- What becomes
then of his ingenuous Sorrow? -- It shows us indeed, how fond some Persons are
of (...) and ambiguous Phrases, to amuse the World, and mask their Errors,
under plausible Appearances* by a double meaning in their Manner of expressing
Things of a religious Nature. From whence we may gather, that although in this
Narrative the Author has produced some particular Texts of Scripture to support
his Errors, however wrongly applied, yet his main Dependence is on Mr. Taylor's
Sentiments, to whom be often refers his Readers for a full Decision of the
Points in Deba^e: When it is well known, that the Principles that Writer has
espoused have been condemned as erroneous and contrary to Scripture-Doctrine,
by the Consent of Protestants in general: Besure by all the (...) and more
judicious Part of them, from the Beginning of the Reformation; therefore to be
justly suspected as of a poisonous Nature, destructive to vital Religion. And
it is much to be lam^nted, that any should be found among (...) in these
Churche^ of New England, and in the Ministry, levened with such a Spirit of
Opposition to the Truth as it is in Jesus.

I shall only add, in my Remarks on this Narrative, That the Consociation which
acted in Mr. Bass's Dismission, are represented by him, as proceeding in an
arbitrary Ma^^er toward him and some of the People of Ashford, tenacious of the
like Errors, and which probably he had, by his Insinuations, drawn them
ignorantly into. The pretended Complaint is, The super^eding of a Vote
previously passed in that Church, viz. That in Case of Difficulty arising, the
Matter should be decided by a Council mutually chosen by them; or to that
Purpose. -- Which Mr. Bass appears by his Account to have insisted on; but was
denied. -- For which, I think, there was good Reason.

A Council mutually chosen must have each of the contending Parties Consent;
which, as he relates the Case, could not be obtained then.

And farther I suppose, Mr. Bass was not ignorant, that the Legislative Power
in Connecticut Government, had long since passed a Law, that all Matters of the
same Kind, in Churches, that could not be decided and healed within themselves,
should be determined by a Consociation of Elders and Messengers of Churches,
within the Limits of that County, where such Difference was subsisting. --
These Gentlemen then acted a wise and laudable Part, agreeable to their own
Constitution. But to this Method of Procedure Mr. Bass objects, and labors to
evade, it is likely, to obtain a picked Number of Elders to favor his Cause,
and continue him to act with the like Disguise, as in Years pst he had done.

With Regard to the Procedure of that venerable Consociation, so much
complained of in this Narrative, I shall take the Liberty to say; It is to me a
hopeful Omen, That God has Mercy in Reserve for these Churches, and will, it is
hoped, appear to defend them against the Growth of Arminian and other corrupt
Opinions, and establish them in the Doctrines of the Gospel; when we find such
a Number of Rev. Ministers, with their Delegates, united in their Result, (
nemine contradicente) determined, from the Soundness of their Faith* and well
grounded scriptural Principles, to appear for the Truth, and suppress Error,
and as Instruments [we trust] in God's Hand to rescue that poor People of
Ashford, from the Ruin impending over them, with a threatening Aspect on their
Children after them, -- and also to convince their Pastor, if possible, and
recover him from the Errors he had unhappily fallen into. I pray God to
strengthen their Hands in the Cause of Christ, and stir up others, that they
may also appear for the Defense of the Gospel, and make a vigorous Stand
against the growing Corruptions of the present Day, both in Doctrine and
Manners. --

What I have offered by Way of Remark on some Passages of this Narrative* does
not proceed from a Disaffection to the Author's Person, -- but from an awful
Apprehension of the sinking State of these Churches, ^f the Sentiments this
Gentleman his exhibited to the World, should be suffered in Providence to
prevail. Which God in Mercy prevent!




But to return to the Point in Hand, To deny the Doctrines of Christ, is to
deny CHRIST: and to deny the great Ends of his coming into the World, as our
Author in the Discourse under Examination has done, must reflect Disgrace and
Contempt upon him: it truly reflects Dishonor upon the Son of God, and upon
the whole Scheme of Redemption by him; and so upon the Wisdom of God in a
Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom which God ordained before the World unto our
Glory. 1 Cor. 2. 7. Does it not most evidently dishonor CHRIST, to represent
him only as a Preacher and Pattern of moral Righteousness; and at the same Time
to conceal that great Gospel Truth, our being by his Obedience made Righteous?
nor so much as hinting, as if Men were naturally destitute of true moral
Virtue; when in Fact the Depravity contracted by the Fall, has spread it self
in its sorrowful Effects on all Mankind, and brought an universal Darkness and
spiritual Death on all the Faculties of humanNature; so that now Men's moral
Agency naturally leads them only to Evil, and not to that which is Good, as has
been before observed. And yet our Author reduces the Religion of JESUS to a
mere refined System of moral Virtue, or the Religion of Nature; which appears
the worse, when it is considered withal, how superlatively this natural Religion
or moral Virtue is dignified and exalted by him, in his representing it, not
only as "the new Nature of right Action, which good Men are said to put on,"
but as "the ultimate View of GOD in all his Dispensations," yea, as "the
supreme Dignity of GOD himself." -- Let every one now judge, whether there is
not a greater Appearance of Absurdity and Blasphemy in what this Author has
discoursed in undue Applause of Morality, to the Disparagement of the Mediator
and his Design, than there possibly can be in our (pretended) depreciating of
moral Virtue, or the Righteousnesses of the very best Men upon Earth; always to
be understood with the Limitations and Restrictions that have been offered, and
not in an absolute Sense, as this Author vainly insinuates, and would have the
World believe, contrary to known Fact, and without the least Color of Reason.

I come now to the last general Head of Remarks proposed, which was,

V. To resolve these two Inquiries; (1.) Whether our Author's reproachful
Description of the Religion of Protestants opposed by him, (particularly as
expressed in the 7 th and 8 th Pages of his Discourse) be not fairly applicable
(...) to his own Religion, so far as we have it exhibited in this his
Discourse? -- And then (2.) Whether the Objections which he has framed and
pretended to Answer, in Relation to his Discourse (at the Close of it) do not
really stand good, and contain a true and just Description of it, in it is
Nature, and Tendency, notwithstanding his labored Solutions?

I. The first Inquiry is, Whether the Author's Invectives, or the reproachful
Description he has given of the Religion of Protestants opposed by him, in his
Discourse ( particularly his Reflections in Page 7th and 8th) be not fairly
applicable rather to the Religion pleaded for and recommended by himself in
this his Discourse?

He represents the pure and perfect Religion of JESUS, as by Means of the
Principles which he opposes, turned in many Places into an idle Speculation, a
mysterious Faith, a senseless Superstition, and a groundless Recumbency. Now
the Question is, Whether these dark Characters do not more properly belong to
the Religion our Author pleads for, than that he inveighs against? And I shall
freely offer my Sentiments on this Point, however disagreable they may be to
him, or others: Not with a Design to prejudice the Minds of any against his
Person, or injure his Name, but to convince him (if possible) of the pernicious
Tendency of his Discourse, and to warn others against the dangerous Tenets he
there espouses and urges.

(1.) As to idle Speculation, his Discourse seems evidently to abound with it.
For such, it plainly appears (I think)the darling Sentiments of this Author
are, viz. That the grand Design of Christ's coming into the World was only to
set up the Christian Scheme; and that this in Sum and Substance is but a more
refined System of Morality, enforced by ^^me peculiar Motives: nor is his
Pretense, that our (...) Happiness is suspended on moral Virtue, (...) our
(...) good Behavior, any other than a mere idle Speculation* If we receive
these Principles of his, our (...) for Justification in the Sight of God must
be (...) Righteousness which is of God by Faith, but o^ (...) which is of the
L^w. Whereas divine Revelation assures us, that Christ is become of none (...)
unto you, (...) of you are justified by the Law; and that as many as are of the
Law, are under the Curse. Gal. 2. 10. and 5 4. -- Such therefore can obtain
only an imaginary Justification, and so no better than an imaginary Title to
Happiness. What then must these Pretenses of this Author be, more than idle
Speculations? The main Principles he holds and advances in his Discourse,
appear to me at best but idle Theory, speculative Absurdity, without any solid
Foundation in "Scripture, or Reason, or even common Sense." -- And,

2. As to mysterious Faith, which our Author adds to his idle Speculation, how
aptly (though perhaps inadvertently) has he given us a further Description of
his own Religion? Delineating to the Life, what that is by his own Confession
and public Declaration, That to set up the Christian Scheme, the most refined
System of moral Virtue that ever the World was blessed with, was the grand
Design of CHRIST'S coming into the World; and that this moral Virtue is the "
Basis, and whole Superstructure of the Christian Religion"; and that "the whole
of Man's Happiness is suspended on his personal good Behavior"; and that "this
is the Condition of all God's Favors to us," etc. Consequently, that our whole
Happiness is within the Compass of our own Power; which must imply a mighty
Opinion of our Self-Sufficiency, and the certain Validity of
Self-Righteousness. To believe all which, is to believe Things in their own
Nature incredible, contradictory to the general Current of Revelation, and
repugnant even to the Dictates of enlightened Reason and Conscience: therefore
it may justly be called a mysterious Faith indeed. But surely this is not
according to the Faith of God's Elect, and an acknowledging the Truth which is
after Godliness, in Hope of eternal Life, which God that cannot lie, promised
before the World began. (Tit. 1. 1, 2.) Such as disown the Doctrine of
Election, of the Covenant of Redemption* of Original Sin, of effi^^cious Grace,
and in a Word, of its being the grand Design of the Mediator, to atone for Sin,
and (...) in everlasting Righteousness, and justify Many; as h^ld forth in the
Scriptures, are in Danger (...) not come to that Length already) of denying the
Lord that purchased his Church with his own Blood, of renouncing the Doctrine
of the ever blessed TRINITY, and exploding what is without Controversy the
great Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh. -- The Faith that this
Author professes, in the Discourse before us, is not that Faith which the
Apostles preached, lived by, and kept unto the Death. (See Gal. 1. 23. and 2.
16, -- 20. and 2 Timothy 4. 7) The Apostle declares he had kept the Faith, the
same Faith he had preached, respecting the fundamental Doctrines of
Christianity, as set forth in his Epistles: and the same Faith has been
received and kept, in general, also by Protestant Expositors and Preachers of
the Gospel. But the Faith of our Author is a mysterious Faith, truly; not
founded in right Reason, nor taught in the Scriptures, which is the Rule and
Standard of Faith, "teaching what Man is to believe concerning God, and what
Duty God requires of Man."

This Author's Faith may rather be traced by turning our Eye to the Romish
Church; where it may be found without much Difficulty, I apprehend, if it be
not the very Essence of the Romish Faith, lying at the Bottom of that Mystery
of Iniquity, which now is and for a long Time has been working in the World.
It certainly bears so near a Resemblance to it, that it is hard to distinguish
them one from the other, or to say wherein there appears any important
Difference.

The Romish Church leads all in her Communion off from the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, from his Merits and Satisfaction, and from the supernatural
Energy of his Spirit. Though they speak of his Merits (as does our Author also)
yet they look to their own Works, their moral Agency, and place their
Dependence on their personal good Behavior, with him, or rather he with them.
They say, as he does, that personal good Behavior is that on which is
suspended the whole of our Happiness: but to say, as he does, that Revelation
or the Scripture every where thus suspends it, is to raise a false Report of
the Scripture, in my Opinion; and they that do so, are in Danger of (...) it to
their own Destruction. And though he occasionally speaks of our Forgiveness and
Acceptance through the Merits of Christ, so do they of the Romish Church, while
yet they build all upon Works. Our Author indeed once mentions Faith and
Repentance, but they are bro't in as it were accidentally, and spoken of by the
by, seemingly with an indifferent Air, as if these were Things comparatively
but of little Moment; and he lays the chief Stress on moral Virtue. Just so do
the Papists. They glory in their Ab^tinences, Pilgrimages, and Visits to the
Shrines of their canonized Saints: and to atone for former Sins, and obtain
Favor with God, they have their Works of Supererogation, which they depend on
as meritorious. What can our Author's " whole Happiness suspended on his
personal good Behavior," or " good Living" (another of his Phrases) intend
less than what I have mentioned concerning the Papists Dependence on their own
Merits, or their good Works? What do his Words imply, but that a good Life is
the antecedent Condition of Forgiveness, and that we are justified by Works of
Righteousness which we have done? or what is it better, than to believe with
the Papists, that CHRIST has merited that we may merit? Mysterious Faith indeed!

I would lead this Author to a further Parallel of his mysterious Faith,
founded on moral Virtue, or Duties of Morality, in the received Sentiments of
the Savage and Unciviliz'd Heathen, and the Dependence they have on moral
Virtue. Generally they have a Faith (such as it is) of some superintendent
Deity, and of a future State, where every one shall be happy or miserable,
according to their personal good or ill Behavior here, -- i. e. according to
the Rules of Morality among them. Such as have lived morally, are (as they
imagine) at Death to go to the Southward, and enjoy much Pleasure in a warm
Climate and temperate Air: but such as have been corrupt and immoral in Life
according to them, they assign to the Northern and frigid Parts of the World,
to be afflicted with Cold. So that their Hopes for Futurity are built on moral
Virtue; on which this Author also places such a Dependence.

I suppose now, the Reader may easily determine, by what has been said, To whom
the Charge of holding a mysterious (stupid) Faith is justly to be applied. For
though it is designed by him, to cast open Contempt on the Faith professed in
these Churches and by their Teachers in general, so plainly founded in
Scripture; yet the Reproach must lie upon this Author, whose Faith, as
professed by him in his Discourse, so nearly resembles, or is rather of the
sameCast with that of the Papists, or the Heathens, particularly in Point of
Justification by Works.. Therefore to prevent turning back again to Popery, or
Heathenism, from which we and our Fathers, and the Protestant Churches have
been so happily delivered, it concerns every one to take Heed to themselves,
that they be not carried about with a strange Wind of Doctrine, or entertain
such a Faith as the Scripture has not taught us, but is the mere Invention of
crafty Seducers, who have manifestly departed from the Truth as it is in JESUS,
and espoused such Errors, as tend to the Overthr^^ of that pure Religion, which
has thus long been the Glory and Renown of these Churches, and of the
Protestant Churches in general.

I shall dismiss this Head, which relates to our Author's mysterious Faith,
with reminding my Reader, of the Caution given to us, in the 2d Epistle of Joh.
v. 8, 9, 10, 11. Look to your selves, that we lose not those Things which we
have wrought, but that we receive a full Reward. -- Whosoever transgresses,
and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God. He that abides in the
Doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son. -- If there come any
unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your House, neither
bid him God Speed. -- For he that bids him God Speed, is partaker of his
evil Deeds. -- Only give me Leave to add one Remark here, in a Word: The
Doctrine of Christ, as abovementioned, must intend the Doctrine delivered by
Christ and his Apostles, contained in the Gospel, particularly respecting his
Person and Mediation: -- And for any one to overlook the great Work of the
Redeemer, the Satisfaction he has made for Sin, and assign it as the only End
or grand Design of our Savior's coming into the World, to settle ^ Scheme of
M^r^lity and appear in Quality of a Preacher and a Pattern of moral Virtue, --
as I think our Author has done -- This, I say, is by a just Interpretation to
deny Christ some of the essential Glories of his Mediation; -- it is in Effect
or in Part (at least) to deny his Incarnation, or coming in the Flesh, and so
far, not to confess him: and he who denies that, the Apostle tells us, in a
Deceiver.

3. Another Article of Charge, which this Author brings against Orthodox
Expositors, and Preachers, who hold the commonly received Opinions in Divinity,
is, that by their Means " the Religion of JESUS is in many Places turned into a
senseless Superstition." Which must, I think, refer either to their Doctrine of
Conviction, Terror, and Humiliation, preparatory to closing with Christ by
Faith; or to the laudable Practice among us, of keeping Days of Fasting and
Prayer, as well as public Thanksgiving (if intended in this View, it must
reflect on public Authority primarily, for those Appointments) or to the
Churches being scrupulous of admitting human Inventions into the Worship of
God; or else to our coming to God in the Name of the Mediator, depending on his
Righteousness, and not on our own moral Virtue, or personal Righteousness, for
Acceptance* with God, and obtaining his Favor; or lastly, to our being
unwilling to make Morality the whole Sum and Substance of Christianity. And
taken with this Reference, it may intend, that whatsoever any pretend to in
Religion more than only moral Virtue, or any Thing beyond a Righteousness of
their own, is but a senseless Superstition: And this is truly according to his
own declared Sentiment, by representing moral Virtue (to use his own Phrase) as
the very " Basi^ and whole Superstructure of Religion." But if so, then indeed
there needs much less Spirituality in Worship, and in the Hearts and Lives of
Christians: Then there is no Need of Regeneration, no Need of Faith in the
Blood of Christ, no Need of Humiliation and Soul-Compunction for indwelling
Sin,etc. If moral Virtue is all that we have to seek after, and if it were true
(as he says) that our whole Happiness depends on our personal good Behavior;
if this were all that God requires of us, then any Thing farther pretended to,
might be esteemed Superfluous in the Service of God. But this is disclaimed by
those that this Reproach is designed against (by the Author of it) who are
careful to profess nothing as Matter of Faith, but what God has revealed, and
nothing as Acts of Religion and the Worship of God, but what he has appointed
in his Word. -- But then, what shall be said of them that are unsound in the
Faith, to that Degree, as to teach for Doctrine the vainImaginations of their
own dark and beclouded Reason; and who act under the Influence perhaps of a
corrupted Judgment and misguided Conscience? For if Persons are unsound in the
Faith, this will lead them into Corruptions and Innovations in Worship, and
even to set aside the Scriptures as useless, which are the only true Rule and
Standard of both. -- The reproachful Charge, of a senseless Superstition, must
then fall upon this Author himself. -- I shall further here only mention the
Observation some have made, That it is impossible for such as profess
Arminianism, in it is full Latitude, to make a Prayer to God, consistent with
their own Principles. -- To this I may add, Such especially as have run the
Length of this Author, in that unhappy and dangerous Scheme, if their Devotions
are conformable to what are common among us, must needs, so far as herein they
don't conform to their avowed Principles, be guilty of senseless Superstition.

4. His last Article of Reflection or Charge, on Protestant Expositors,
Preachers, and others, is, That by Means of their Sentiments in Divinity, "the
pure and perfect Religion of JESUS is in many Places turned into a groundless
Recumbancy." Now that this groundless Recumbency, as well as his other
Instances of the bad Effects of the commonly received Protestant Doctrine, is
unjustly applied, and rather concerns himself, is my Business to show; which
when I have done, the whole Charge (I apprehend) will ^all in full Weight on
the misguided Author, as the natural Result from what he calls "The pure and
perfect Religion of JESUS," viz. a refined System of Morality. -- For any Man
to place his Hope of Happiness on that which comes within the Reach of his own
natural Ability, with the Aid of common Grace, as personal good Behavior does,
this is undoubtedly a groundless Recumbency; it will prove as a broken Staff to
him that lean^ on it, or as a Foot out of Joint. That Word of the Apostle to
the Colossians, CHRIST in you the Hope of Glory, is sufficient to show the
falseness of the unregenerate Moralist's Hope; this is built on the Sand; it
has no sure Foundation for it is Support, neither in Scripture nor right Reason.
Nothing short of the Righteousness which is of God, wrought out by Christ, and
made our's by a gracious Imputation and a believing Acceptance, is a sufficient
Ground of Justification of Life, or a proper Object of our Confidence and
Reliance. It is but a vain Confidence in the Flesh, that depends on mere moral
Virtue, and not on the Righteousness of Faith

Thus, I think, it plainly appears, that the idle Speculation, the mysterious
Faith, the senseless Superstition, and the groundless Recumbancy, which this
Author charges on others, do all lie on himself: And the whole serves to show
of what Make his Religion is, together with all others who profess moral Virtue
to be the Sum and Substance of Christianity, the Basis and whole Superstructure
of the Religion of JESUS; and accordingly suppose the whole of their Happiness
to be suspended on their personal good Behavior.

Now, is it not beyond all Account strange, and indeed Matter of Amazement,
that one under the Character of a Minister and but in his Youth, should give
himself the Liberty thus to revile and vilify our Religion, so firmly founded
on Scripture, and the many Thousand excellently pious Professors of it? And to
enforce his Reproaches, should espouse the Language of the most inveterate
Haters of every Thing that is Religious, or that carries the Appearance of it!
What can Infidels say more to prejudice the Minds of People against the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and those that profess them, many of whom have
suffered in the Defense of them? What can easily be said more in Contempt of
genuine Christianity, and the Essentials of our Religion? It is rare to find
any ^o open and bold as to ridicule our sacred Profession to the like Degree,
among profane Swea^ers, Drunkards, Sabb^th breakers, Ishmaelitish Scoffers,
and Despisers of all that is Good, or that tends to the Good of Souls!

If the Case were as he has represented it in his virulent Invective, what a
wretched Condition must our Forefathers the Planters of New England have been
in, who lived and died in the Profession of that Faith and Religion which he so
condemns and contemns?

When we reflect on the Generations past, and take an impartial View of the
many eminent Reformers Abroad, and of the many Ministers of Jesus Christ in
this Land, who were faithful and unwearied in their Day, to build up his
Kingdom, and establish Truth and Holiness in the Churches, not by Tradition
from the Fathers, but from the unerring Oracles of God, and we trust, under the
Direction and some good Degrees of the Influence of the Holy Spirit; Whose
Doctrine and Example of Life loudly testified for them; I think this a
sufficient Testimony for them in the Consciences of their Posterity, which
should constrain us to acknowledge. That God was with them of a very Truth. --
But alas! what a gloomy and dismal Scene now appears on the Stage, Tragical
indeed to behold! Some, and this Author in particular, using their utmost
Efforts to overthrow the very Foundation of these Churches, and turn their
Glory into Shame? What may we expect as the Issue of such Attempts! unless GOD
by his alwise, powerful, and gracious, overruling Providence interposes for
our Help. -- And I think it proper in this Day of Assault upon the Ark of God,
to renew that Exclamation -- Who is on the Lord's Side? Who? (with a
Reduplication) -- And may all that have the Interest of Christ at Pleart, and
that are jealous for his Sonship, for the Glory of his Mediation, and Work of
Redemption, unite with instant Prayer to God for the pouring down of his Spirit
upon us, to establish GospelTruth and Holiness in the midst of us, and to
def^^t the Counsels of all the Troublers of our Israel.

I come now to consider,

2. The second Inquiry proposed, viz. Whether the true Nature and Tendency of
this Author's Discourse is not fairly represented in the Objections, which he
himself has raised and pretended to answer, in the Conclusion of it? And so,
whether these Objections don't abide in full Force against it, notwithstanding
all his labored Solutions, and pretended Vindications of himself?

1. He says, Page 28. -- I expect by this Time, some are ready to break forth,
-- Ah! all this directly tends to build People up in their own Righteousness.
-- Truly our Author appears a Man of some Foresight, and to have a Talent at
Conjecture. For surely his Performance has very plainly that, and no other
Aspect; and every well principle'd and experienced Christian would naturally be
led to make such a Judgment upon it. He that runs may read this to be the Scope
and Drift (...), from Beginning to End. And what is the Author's Reply? a mere
Evasion* He beats the Air, and raises a Dust, to blind the Eyes of unwary
Readers, and amuse the more Intelligent: While yet, if the Case be duly
weighed, his Answer serves not to remove the Objection, but rather confirms and
strengthens it. For he acknowledges, If by his Discourse's building People up
in their own Righteousness be meant, that it recommends Hypocrisy and
counterfeit Virtue, that it places Religion in any external Duties, separate
from a corresponding good Temper within, or in short, in any Righteousness of
our own contriving and not taught of God, or in any Thing but what the Bible
makes the Substance of our present Duty and the Condition of our future
Happiness; if this be the Force of the Objection, He tells us, he has no other
Answer to make, but to leave every one to judge for himself, how groundless it
is. -- Now, if this be all the Answer he has to make, in Defense of his
Discourse, truly I think it but a mere Trifling in a Matter of such Moment; and
that the Charge in the Objection is no Ways removed, but fixed and corroborated
by this his Reply. For what can tend more to recommend Hypocrisy and
counterfeit Virtue, than to ex^or^ Men to the Practice of Righteousness,
without considering them as fallen Creatures, destitute of a vital Principle of
Holiness, and without first laying the Foundation of Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ? According to Paul's Example ( Act. 20. 21.)
who must be owned a most con^^mmate Preacher and Asserter of Truth and Virtue,
even beyond our Author himself, notwithstanding all his specious Appearances in
Behalf of moral Virtue: The Obligation whereto none of our Orthodox Expositors
or Preachers, that I know of, deny; but own it to be of Necessity in the
Christian Life. Yet to pretend, as our Author does; that it is the Basis and
whole Superstructure of Religion, is but a windy and vain Imagination. For
certainly where there is no true Contrition of Heart for Sin, nor unfeigned
Faith in the Blood of of Christ, and consequently no Love in Sincerity toward
God or Man, how can these at best be any Thing better than unregenerate
Morality, or (in our Author's Phrase) Counterfeit Virtue? And while Men attend
the Externals of divine Worship, how can there possibly be a corresponding good
Temper within, without humble Faith in the Mediator, teaching them to do all in
HIS Name, with entire Dependence on his Righteousness and Strength? But how can
there be this Faith in Christ, where Men only depend on their moral Agency
under the Aids of mere common Grace, and trust to their own Righteousness for
Acceptance with God? Alas, what spiritual Pride and Vanity is it in any, to
imagine that by their own Sufficiency they are able to do all required of them,
both toward God and toward their fellow Creatures, and to trust in their
personal good Behavior, to recommend them to the divine Mercy! -- Yet after
all, what can we conceive of this Author's corresponding good Temper within,
but that it means somewhat carrying a Correspondence with (or perhaps the very
same Thing with) what others depend much on, under the Name of The Light
within, and moral Honesty, even so as to renounce Scripture-Revelation,
especially in the Letter of it, ^s of a killing and destructive Quality? --.
And this looks the more likely, as such are Enemies to the Doctrine of Original
Sin, and of imputed Righteousness, and disown even Christ's Satisfaction or
Atonement: And in this Regard show a Temper within corresponding with that
shown in ^ut Author's Discourse.

In the Conclusion of his Answer to the present Objection, he does but still
confirm it, while he owns his Rejoicing in the least Tendency his Discourse
has, to build People up in their own Righteousness, if by this be designed, it
is any Ways calculated to encourage personal Goodness, and promote the Practice
of moral and Christian Virtue in the World. Which is to be understood,
according to the Run of his whole Performance, as intending only the Practice
of the Duties of Morality, without justifying Faith and a regenerating Change
on the Heart (...) and how dangerous it is to rest in this, every one may
easily judge.

We find him indeed confessing his greatest Concern, upon a Review of his
Discourse, That so good a Design I^ so poorly served. -- For this, I think
truly he had just Reason, since it so evidently disowns those peculiar
Doctrines of the Gospel, which under the Influence of the Spirit of Grace, have
the most powerful Efficacy to promote genuine Christian Virtue; and since it
rather explodes, than recommends that Faith in CHRIST, which is the grand
Principle of true and acceptable Obedience. For, where he once speaks of
Reliance on the Merit and Intercession of Christ, it is not in Language of
Recommendation, but rather with Marks of Depreciation, and a visible Air of
Contempt.

2. Another Objection which he mentions and pretends to Answer (Page 29.) is
this. -- Not one Word of Christ, nor the least Savor of true Gospel Soul
saving Preaching in all this Discourse. -- Upon which I must observe, it is
lamentable, that one who sustains the Character of a Minister of Christ, and a
Preacher of the Gospel, and pretends to regard the saving of Souls, should
allow himself, in stating this Objection, to use such an Air of Levity and
Banter, as is apparent here.

It may be readily granted, as to the first Part of the Objection, he might
have done himself the Justice, to reply, that he had spoken more than one Word
of Christ, in his Discourse; that he had named him, and that he had talked of
him: But then it is proper to inquire, after what Manner and to what Purpose he
has done this? To which it can only be answered, that he has named him indeed,
but under a comparatively diminutive Character, as the great Preacher of
Righteousness, who came to set up the Chrisan Scheme in the World, and by his
Doctrine and Example to propagate Truth and Virtue. -- But then not a single
Word of CHRIST, as the great High Priest of our Profession; not one Word of
CHRIST, as the Propitiation for our Sins; not a Word of CHRIST, as the Lord our
Righteousness; not a Word of CHRIST, as having purchased his Church with his
own Blood; not a Word of the Righteousness which is of God by Faith in CHRIST;
and in Effect, nothing of the main Contents of the Gospel of Peace, as such.
Nor can I discern the least Savor of true Evangelical Preaching in all this
Discourse of his.

But let us attend our Author's Answer to this Objection. The Difficulty (he
thinks) will entirely vanish, when we come to adjust our Notions of the Thing.
Which he attempts mainly in the Language and under the Countenance of one whom
he calls " a late elegant Writer"* who tells us, "To preach CHRIST is
universally acknowledged to be the Duty of every Christian Minister." -- But
what is the Ground of this Limitation? Why is the Christian Minister singled
out? For if Morality be the Sum and Substance of Christianity (as we have all
along heard) and if to preach Christ means to preach moral Virtue (as likewise
we have heard) surely then the Duty extends to the Jewish Minister, to the
Mohammedan, yea and to the Pagan, -- as well as the Christian Minister. -- But
this Writer tells us, first, what is not meant by preaching CHRIST. It is not
(says he) to use his Name as a Charm, to work up our Hearers to a warm Pitch of
Enthusiasm; without any Foundation in Reason to support it. Well, by this, I
suppose, we may learn what is one of those " Rabble-Charming Sounds" our Author
speaks of ( Page 23.) as "converting some into such fiery Bigots, that they are
ready to die in the Defense of Stupidity and Nonsense." Perhaps he looks upon
that Sermon as truly deserving no better Character than this, where the Name of
CHRIST is frequently repeated, even though the Subject naturally leads to it, as
being some Doctrine or Duty relating to Christ immediately. But verily to them
which believe, CHRIST is precious, and his Name is as Ointment poured forth.
The Apostle Paul has set us an Example, who appears far from being shy of
mentioning the Name of CHRIST; ^ay, he rather seems to delight in often
repeating it; insomuch that he names the Name of CHRIST on some Occasions, no
less than ten Times in just so many Verses (1 Cor. 1.) and no less than
seventeen or eighteen Times in one Chapter, as in Phil. 1. Where, by the Way,
the Apostle expressly speaks of preaching CHRIST, v 15, 16, 18. -- And if our
Author, or the Writer he so highly commends and takes Sanctuary under, can
reconcile what the inspired Writer says there, about preaching CHRIST, with
their Notion of it is being to preach moral Virtue, the Controversy perhaps may
soon be ended: but 'till then, let this Writer be who he will, I think it my
Duty, not to forego a Certainty for an Uncertainty, and therefore choose rather
to take my Measures from, and submit my Judgment to the Sentiments of this
inspired Writer, Paul, than to our Author's elegant Writer, or any others whose
Faith and Hope reach no farther than his seems to do, but terminate in
Morality. It is the undoubted Duty of those who are Ambassadors for CHRIST, to
make frequent mention of his Name, both in their Sermons and Prayers;
especially as it is expressly required of us, that whatever we do in Word or
Deed, we should do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving Thanks to God and
the Father by him. Col. 3. 17. -- For Ministers to omit naming the Name of
CHRIST in their Discourses, under a Pretext of Caution, left they should "
Charm their Hearers, and work them up to a warm Pitch of Enthusiasm," appears
to me a senseless Superstition indeed, of human and modern Invention, having no
Foundation in Scripture-Precept or Example, nor countenanced by the primitive
Christian Preachers. -- Certainly as our Lord Jesus observes, Out of the
Abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks; and accordingly, I cannot but think,
where Ministers have received the Love of the Truth, and have CHRIST much upon
their Hearts, he will be much in their Mouths, nor will they scruple the
explicit mentioning of his Name frequently in their Praying and Preaching; though
in this, as in all other Cases, Wisdom is profitable to direct. Nor would I be
understood to lay so much Stress on the mere naming of CHRIST; but rather on
the Purposes for which we name him, and the Representations we make of his
Person and Character, Offices and Benefits, Doctrine and Religion. -- I shall
not spend more Time at present, nor trouble my Reader any further with this
elegant Writer's Sentiments, (on which our Author, it seems, places such a
mighty Dependence,) as he has delivered himself in such ambiguous Terms, and so
exceptionably in general. Only I will take some Notice of his Manner of
Expression, when he tells us positively his own Sense of what it is to preach
CHRIST. It is, says he, to represent him as a Lawgiver, as well as a Savior,
as a Preacher of Righteousness, as one who has given us a most noble and
complete System of Morality, enforced by the most substantial and worthy
Motives. -- To what End, can we conceive, does our Author introduce this his
elegant Writer, as he styles him? The Author is here pretending to vindicate
his own Discourse, and obviate an Objection he supposes made against it: but
what does this Quotation avail to his Purpose? Unless he might imagine (as
probably he did) that this elegant Writer's Authority would bear an equal Sway
on the Judgment of others, as it did upon his own. Whereas truly all the
Service it has done him, that I can find, is only to conform the Objection; and
prove, that his Writer and Himself together are little better than Pelagian
Mora^^^^, as there is much (...) said of Faith in the Blood of Christ, nothing
of the Righteousness which is of God by Faith, nor of the other peculiar
Doctrines of Christianity; only as they are spoken of mostly in a Way of Banter
and Contempt. -- As for "the most substantial and worthy Motives," this elegant
Writer speaks of, these doubtless in his Opinion are those taken from the
intrinsic Beauty and Excellency of Virtue, it is Advantages to Society, it is
recommending us to God's Mercy, intitling us to Happiness, etc. according to
the Strain of our Author. But I think, the Virtue acquired only by such Motives
as these, however commendable it may appear in the Eyes of Men, yet in the
Sight of the Heart-searching God will never stand approved for true Christian
Virtue. While Men are destitute of the Faith of God's Elect, and without a
vital Principle of Grace in the Heart, which is absolutely needful to govern
their moral Actions, and lead them to the chief and ultimate End, they will, at
best, but make a fair Show in the Flesh, and will finally be found but as a
sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.

But possibly our Author might perceive himself under a Necessity here to
correct his elegant Writer, on a review of the Sentiments he had offered; and
finding that they no Way served his Purpose, so as to remove the Objection,
therefore he has interpolated his Quotation, by inserting the following
Parenthesis, containing perhaps the best Sentence in all his Discourse, if it
had been introduced in it is proper Time and Place. -- He thus breaks in upon
his Writer, and after the Word Motives, says (among which I may venture to
mention as one of the most powerful, The Certainty of Forgiveness of Sins, and
final Acceptance with the Father, through the Merits of the Son, upon the
Condition of Faith, Repentance and Good-living.) -- But it looks very strange,
that our Author, who had been all along in his Discourse pleading up moral
Virtue, as the Basis and whole Superstructure of Religion, and as that on which
our wh^le Happiness is suspended, etc. should now (...) last (...) in Faith and
Repentance, and crowd them in th^^, out of Place; where his (...) Business was*
if he knew (...) had raised; without doing which, doubtless he was well aware,
it would unavoidably fall under the just Censure of every judicious and
cautious Reader. But it is odd in him now, instead of defending his Discourse,
to fall to mending of it, by diverting to what seems to carry with it something
of an Evangelical Aspect. Yet it in no Wise answers his pretended Purpose; the
Objection stands in it is full Form and Force against him. And it is yet farther
evident, that the Author has no great Regard to Faith and Repentance: for, as
we find in the Close of all, he sums up the Whole or Main of our Saviour' s
Preaching in moral Virtue. Our Author's Words are, To preach up chiefly what
CHRIST himself laid the chiefest Stress upon (and whether this was not moral
Virtue, let every one judge from his Discourses) must certainly, in the Opinion
of all sober Men, be called truly and properly, and in the best Sense preaching
of CHRIST. -- The Ambiguity of Expression here may be designed, as in some
other Parts of this Author's Performance, for an Evasion. However, it shows us
the little Regard he has for Faith and Repentance, or indeed for the Honor of
CHRIST, that he has so soon lost the Impression of these evangelical Words, and
instantly returns again to his beloved Morality: and he visibly puts Contempt
on CHRIST, by representing him as laying the chiefest Stress on moral Virtue,
in his Preaching. Which I apprehend may be easily disproved. It is granted,
Christ did preach up moral Virtue, rightly understood. As he came not to
destroy, but to fulfill the Law, so he saw fit to explain and inculcate it on
his Hearers: he saw meet, for the detection of Hypocrites, and awakening of
Sinners, as well as for the Direction of his Disciples moral Conduct, to preach
the Law, or lay before them "the eternal Rules of Morality." Yet
notwithstanding* it is Fact, that he began, continued and ended his Ministry
with preaching the Gospel, and inculcating chiefly the Doctrines of Faith and
Repentance. Christ began his public Ministry on Earth with preaching up Faith
and Repentance. See Man. 1. 15. -- The great and (...) (...) by Christ, were
made (...) (...) and (...) Name. -- The miraculous Cures Christ wrought, are
not ascribed to Men's moral Virtue, but to their Faith. It was a Word often
used by Christ, Thy FAITH has saved thee: Or, Thy FAITH has made thee Whole.
-- These wonderful Works were emblematical of the Wonders of recovering and
renewing Grace wrought on the Souls of Men; brought about by Faith and
Repentance instrumentally, as the Means in Christ's Hand to effect the
spiritual Cure, without which there can be no Hope of Salvation. By Grace ye
are saved through Faith, this is the practical Language of Christ's Miracles.
Christ preached Faith, when he said, Ye believe in God, Believe also in me.
Joh. 14. 1. -- The Parables of Christ were evidently calculated chiefly to
recommend Faith: And if Christ in his Discourses laid the chief Stress on moral
Virtue, there must then be a wide Difference of Meaning between his Discourses
and his Parables; which it would be Profanity to imagine. -- Christ also
finished his personal Ministry with preaching Faith and Repentance.(Mar. 16.
16. andLuk. 24. 46, 47.) It may be added, he directed his Apostles, and in them
all his Ministers in Succession for ever, to preach up Faith and Repentance;
though not exclusively of good Works, as their proper Fruits, and the Evidences
of their Sincerity. -- It is strange therefore, with what Face this Author (or
his elegant Writer) could assert, or so much as insinuate, that CHRIST laid the
chief Stress on moral Virtue! -- How inconsistent is this Hypothesis with
Revelation, with Reason, and even with common Sense! Therefore to be detested
by every one, that so much as pretends to Religion, or to found their Belief on
the Doctrine of CHRIST in the Gospel. -- Certainly the Apostles understood the
Mind of CHRIST in this Case, better than our Author, or the Writer he so much
glories in: And if we trace the sacred Records of their Preaching, together
with their Epistles, we shall find these Holy Men, as they were moved by the
holy Ghost, preaching chiefly Faith and Repentance, and not laying Stress on
moral Virtue, otherwise than as resulting from these (...) Principles.

(...), this Gentleman has the Satisfaction to think, (...) (...) Men must
certainly approve of his Sentiments delivered in his Discourse: and possibly he
is the more strengthened in his erroneous and unscriptural Way of Writing, by
the Quotation he produces from that elegant Writer he speaks of. But I must
assure him, I have not so learned CHRIST, as to treat his Person, Name,
Offices, Miracles, and Preaching, with such dareing Marks of Contempt, or to
detract from CHRIST the Glory of his Mission, Negociations, and Instructions,
when here in the World.

Remarkable is the Confidence, with which our Author expresses his Sentiments,
concerning what must certainly be called truly and properly, and in the best
Sense Preaching of CHRIST, viz. the preaching up moral Virtue; and this to be
understood, with a common Neglect of Faith in Christ, and the Righteousness
which is of Faith: He doubtless intended this Observation as a Point of
Doctrine, enforced by his own and his elegant Writer's Authority. He must mean
it, I think, as an Instruction to others, as well as a Vindication of his
Discourse. If only to take off the Objection laid against this, was his Design,
he has strangely missed his Aim: For he has strongly confirmed it, by telling
us, That preaching up moral Virtue, is truly and properly and in the best Sense
preaching CHRIST. -- But probably he designed this for a standing Rule, to
direct Ministers how to preach CHRIST, in the Properest and best Manner: And he
might intend his Discourse to be a Model or Pattern for them to Copy after. --
However, as I trust, there are few of the Ministers in these New England
Churches, led away from the Truth, to that Degree, as to e^^ertain their
Hearers with such idle Speculations, and jejune Harangues on Morality: So I
would hope, none of the Candidates for the Pulpit will receive his Arbitrary
Dictates in his present Discourse. The moral Virtue our Author has discoursed
of, is not that true Holiness, which CHRIST commends to us in the Gospel: but
rather is like the Righteousness of the unbelieving Scribes and Pharis^es, on
which our Lord did manifestly cast Contempt, and therefore could not lay the
chiefest Stress upon it. -- Paul testified both to the Jews and Greeks,
Repentance toward God* and Faith (...) (...) Jesus Christ. It was these Graces
that Paul chiefly preached up, to which he was inspired; and moral Virtue, only
as the Fruit and Evidence of those Graces. -- Consistent with this, he
determined not to know any Thing, save Jesus Christ and him crucified.

Upon the whole, whether our Author will look upon me among the Number of sober
M^n or not, I cannot but bear my public Testimony against this unjustifiable
Discourse of his, which I have been remarking upon. And I can truly say, it is
with much Grief of Mind, and as Matter of deep Humiliation of Soul in the Sight
of God, that I find in this Author (and the Gentleman, whose Narrative I have
taken some Notice of before; with some others that have lately been set up in
the Ministry) corrupt Sentiments in Religion, and such Notions about
Gospel-Doctrines, as must, I think, appear to the generality of sober Men to be
of a really bad and dangerous Tendency, and of a Latitudinarian and
unscriptural Aspect, tending to subvert the Gospel of the Grace of God; to
destroy the Faith, once delivered to the Saints, and generally professed by
Protestants, in these and other Parts of the reformed World; to pluck up the
true Basis, and to pull down the whole Superstructure of the Religion of JESUS;
to substitute Men's moral Seize in the Room of the Righteousness of God,
by Faith in Jesus Christ. -- Indeed this Discourse I have taken thus under
Consideration, seems calculated to suit the false Relish of Deists and
Libertines, rather than to edify or gratify any truly sober sincere Christian.
And as one that is not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, I cannot but own my self
greatly ashamed and grieved, that any who bear the Character of sober Men, and
have been trained up in the Principles of our holy Religion, by their being
catechized and other Ways instructed therein, should notwithstanding be so
ignorant, as not to see, or so prejudiced and partial, as not to confess, the
Absurdity and the blasphemous Tendency of such a Discourse, as this of our
Author appears in my Eyes manifestly to be.

Accordingly my serious and hearty Wi^h for this Author and the (...) of his
Performances (this and others offered to public View, is, That God may give
them Repentance, to the acknowledgment of the Truth: even that Truth in
Doctrine and Practice I am contending for, and laboring to defend, which is
founded on the Mind of God revealed in the Scriptures of Truth; therefore not
dependent on human Reasonings, much less on the crafty Insinuations of such as
lie in wait to deceive; whose Delusions are always to be guarded against,
whether we Eye them in their Intention, or their direct Tendency and necessary
Consequences. -- And as my sincere Aims have been and are, I trust, to plead
for the Truth as it is in JESUS, and only testify against Error, I shall stand
open to Light from any, who may give me a clearer Understanding in those Things
of which I have treated, and produce better Arguments, supported by the
Scripture. But I shall slight the Scoffs and Invectives of those whose main
Talent and Genius* leads them mostly to banter and ridicule Things sacred and
spiritual, and whose Endeavors are to overthrow the pure Religion of JESUS, as
taught and professed in these Churches of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, by corrupt
Tenets, and innovated Methods of Conduct, destructive of our Holy Profession
and most valuable Privileges, and beyond Expression wounding to the South of
the rising Generation. -- And here I may subjoin, not unfitly or unseasonably,
what the Apostle Paul writes to the Church of CHRIST in Thessalonic^, (2 Epist.
3. 6, 14.) Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and
not after the Tradition ye received of us. -- And if any Man obey not our Word
by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company with him, that he may be
ashamed. -- The Application I leave.

I shall conclude this Essay with a remarkable Passage, not foreign to the
Purpose of these Remarks, out of the Reverend and famous Mr. SHEPARD's Select
Cases; which in the Contents is styled, A sound Confutation of that heretical
Arminian Tenet, That the Strength of Grace is to be got rather by
Argumentation, than inward Communication and Influence arising from Union with
Christ. -- The Passage is this; As the old sinful Nature is communicated from
Adam the first unto us, without any Argumentation: So the new Nature, which is
the Seed, Foundation, and Plot of all Grace, is diffused into us by the second
Adam, when we are united to him, without Argumentation; it is only by Divine
Operation. -- And he closes with this short, but comprehensive Prayer, The Lord
leave not me, nor any Friend I have, to a naked Arminian Illumination and
Persuasion. -- AMEN.

FINIS.

