Mr. Lord's Election Sermon, May 9. 1751.

Religion and Government subsisting together in Society, Necessary to their
Complete Happiness and Safety.

A SERMON Delivered in the Audience of the General Assembly of the Colony of
Connecticut, on their Anniversary Election at Hartford, May 9 th, 1751.

By Benjamin Lord, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Norwich.

Genesis xx.11. And Abraham said, because I Thought, Surely the Fear of God is not
in this Place; and they will slay me. -- Neh. v.15. -- But so did not I,
because of the Fear of God. Prove. xx.8. A King that sits in the Throne of
Judgment, Scatters away all Evil with his Eyes. Prove. xxix.4. The King by
Judgment Establishes the Land. Romans xiii.3.4. Rulers are not a Terror to Good
Works, but to the Evil, -- For he is the Minister of God to thee for Good.
NEW LONDON, Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the GOV.andCOMPANY,
1752.

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY Holden at Hartford, on the Second Thursday of May, Anno
Domini, 1751
ORDERED, THAT HEZEKIAH HUNTINGTON Esquire and Mr. JOSEPH TRACEY JUN. Return the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. BENJAMIN LORD, for his Sermon
Delivered on the 9th Day of May Instant, before the Assembly, and desire a Copy
thereof that it may be Printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

An Election SERMON.
PSALM CXXII.4, 5. Whither the Tribes go up, tbe Tribes of the Lord, unto the
Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord. For there are
set Thrones of Judgment: the Thrones of the House of David.
THE great Author of Nature, has formed and designed his Creature Man for
Society, both Civil and Religious; which, as it is agreeable to his very Make,
and necessary to his present State; so, is adapted to his multifarious
Advantage: Insomuch, that any manner of Conduct, which expresses a Man's mind
to live by himself, abstract from any Relation to Society; or to Worship only
by himself and not with others; or that shows a thought, as if he could be safe
and happy alone, Independent on Community; is a Contradiction to the design of
the Creator in ranking him with the humane Species, and to the Constitution and
Wants of such a kind of Creature. For, the Foundation laid in our Nature for
Society, together with the mutual Dependence we have on one another, especially
in the present fallen State, do all point out our Duty to dwell together as
Brethren in Unity, as Members of Society, compacted and cemented by all the
Bonds of Union, which fitly frame and build up Individuals into a Body politic
for the Good of the whole.

VERY evident then, it is; that Men were not designed for an Unsocial Life, and
especially with their present depraved Powers, are by no means, to remain in a
State of Nature; each one to possess by himself, and use for himself his
natural Rights and Liberties, without any borrowed Strength and Advantage from
others by Compact: i. e. without Incorporating into Society, or having any
known established Laws and Rules agreed upon, as a common Standard to govern
the whole; or any supreme Head or known acknowleged Rulers and Officers to keep
the whole in a just Decorum; and that for the general Peace and Safety of them
all. --

BUT they are rather designed by God to be, to Subsist, and Act in a State of
Community, United and Strengthened by certain Bonds, for the Preservation of the
Lives and Fortunes of each Individual; and even from all Mischievous Assaults
by their Fellows. -- And, as it is fitting; so, indeed necessary now, that
Men's natural Rights be given up to Community, whereby, those may be exercised
for the Good of every one; as they cannot be, while in the Hands of Individuals
themselves; for, the Strength of each particular Person being given up to
Society and lodged with this collective Body, for common Benefit: Every Member
may have the Strength of the whole employed for the Security of his own Life
and Property. And also rejoice in his Neighbors having the same Protection and
Advantage with himself: So that, the Privileges of Society must be vastly
greater than all the Rights of Nature separately Considered and Used. This, (it
seems) is very plain.

AND, as evident it is, that nothing Argues and Represents a People more truly
great; or, Renders them more Safe and Happy; than their firm Union in these two
Important Interests, Civil and Religious; (these always Implying the divine
Presence and Protection) these then, are the two grand things necessary to the
well being of Society, (viz.) RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT; firmly Established, duly
Exercised, and well United; as Subsisting together in the same Community;
rendering it, whether considered as Church or State: An harmonious Polity. And
happy, (I say) by virtue of this Union in what is their true and common
Interest. -- Which, was indeed the View here taken, of Jerusalem of old; when
said to be Builded as a City, that is Compact together. For, however Populous
that City, and Contiguous their Buildings; the main Excellence and Advantage of
this Union, and the chief Glory intended by it is being thus Compacted; lay in
this, that there,was the Testimony of Israel, and there, the set Thrones of
Judgment. Thus Situated near one to the other, that they might Befriend each
other: And both together serve the best Good of the Community, so Distinguished
and Dignified by them. which, was no small Motive (it seems) to invite the
People up to Jerusalem, in a collective Body at certain Seasons, that there
they might'nt only join in Social Worship according to the divine Institution;
but also, there receive the signal Benefit of a civil Administration of God's
Appointing likewise -- As it is elegantly expressed in the Text, Whither the
Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, Unto the Testimony of Israel, to give
Thanks unto the Name of the Lord, for there are set Thrones of Judgment, the
Thrones of the House of David. Which would be an Advantage to them, not only
when they were Together at Jerusalem on public Occasions; but also when
Dispersed again to their several Districts, and in their private Habitations:
As, such a Unity contributed to the common Safety and Interest of the Whole at
all Times.

Now, this whole Psalm, was Written by David, to promote the Peoples Unity in
the Worship of God, and Subjection to Government; and so to Answer the Design
of their common Good and Prosperity. And here. Observe,

1. The ancient Practice of Israel, by God's Appointment, (viz.) Their
Assembling together, at Jerusalem, three times a Year to Worship God in the
most public Manner, at these fixed Periods and appointed Solemn Feasts, which
the better part of the People greatly Rejoiced in; a delightful Token this! of
their great and beneficial Unity. V. 1 -- 3. I was glad, when they said unto
me, Let us go into the House of the Lord. Our feet shall stand within thy
Gates, O Jerusalem. Jerusalem is builded as a City that is Compact together.
And Observe,

2. The Recommendation of this Practice, and of the Excellence of Society, and
of Unity therein, etc. Carrying therein, an Invitation to all the tribes of
Israel to continue in their Assembling at Jerusalem to Worship God together,
and there, to receive the Benefit of the best civil Administration: for there,
were the set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House of David, as well as
the Testimony of Israel: which, contains Arguments to press upon the People all
that Conduct in a Community which becomes those that would be Safe and Happy:
As, their Agreeing well in their Religion and in their Regard to the Government
which God had set over them: Let all the Tribes, ( the Tribes of the Lord thus
dignified with that Character) Agree to meet one another at Jerusalem: For
there is the Testimony of Israel and the set Thrones of Judgment: How grand the
Expressions, full of Majesty, answerable to the great Ideas and Richness of
though it Expressed by them. --

-- The Testimony of Israel. i. e. God's Testimony delivered to Israel,
honorably distinguishing them from all other People who had not his Word and
his Statutes as Israel had. Because of this, were the Tribes of Israel Directed
and Encouraged to Assemble at Jerusalem: For there, was the Ark of God, wherein
was his Testimony, the Revelation of his Mind and Will to his People. And
another Argument (it seems) for their Assembling there, is that Jerusalem was
not only the Holy, but the Royal City. For there, also, are set Thrones of
Judgment. i e. an Established civil Government by a divine Constitution, and
Settled by God in the House of David, a Man after God's own Heart. And add to
all; this was the beautiful City, in that, it was so compacted and cemented in
its public Interests; the Testimony of Israel and the set Thrones of Judgment
so near together. i. e. their civil and religious Interests strongly United for
the benefit of the whole Community. For at that Time, Jerusalem was not divided
into two Cities or Towns, as when in the hands of the Jebusites, but united
(tho enlarged) as a City compact together: Especially, United in its Government
and Religion; which, (as Pool observes) were distinct and opposite before David
took the Fort of Zion from the Jebusites; but now, happily United. A goodly
Sight this (says Henry) that the Testimony of Israel and the set Thrones of
Judgment were such near and good Neighbors. i. e. Mutually Serving one
another. The Testimony of Israel directing the Thrones of Judgment, and these
protecting the Testimony of Israel. -- And thus may I observe, that the
Argument for Isreal's Assembling together, as one harmonious Body, finishes from
the Advantage of their having both Religion and Government therein; both the
means of the Edification and Salvation of their Souls; and of the Protection
and Safety of their Persons and Property. -- And how indeed, can it go right
well, with any people under Heaven where the bands of Society are burst
asunder, and those two great and important Interests are Banished; or are not
well Established and blended for the common Good of the whole, and the People
well agreed together to make the best use of them both. Agreably, the design of
all may be summed up in this general point of Doctrine to be discoursed of, on
this most public Occasion, (viz.)

That Religion and Government, subsisting together in a firm Union, are the
Glory, Safety and Happiness of a People Uniting, in their just Regard to Both.
--

Here I shall,

I. Say something, of the Religion and Government, which are so Essential to
the Good of Community.

II. Show, the Importance of their Subsisting together in Society to render it
Happy, and also wherein the firm Union of these two great Interests does
Consist.

III. That it is equally Important and Necessary, that this Community it self
be United in their just Regard to both.

IV. Discourse somewhat, of the Glory, Safety and Happiness of a People so
United in that Regard to both these, (viz) Religion and Government.

And then Conclude with some Application agreeable to the great Occasions of
this Public Anniversary. --

I. I shall say something of the Religion, and Government, which are so
Necessary to the Good of Community.

You will observe, that these two Interests are what the sacred Penman does
connect here, in the Idea, or general Notion of a happy People, comprised in
the Testimony of Israel, and the set Thrones of Judgment: It seems, he did not
speak of Israel a Body Politic, as under any Advantage to be truly a Dignified
and Happy People without Religion and Government; nor did he pretend to invite
the Tribes of Israel up to Jerusalem, to take the great Privileges of such a
collective Body, but with the views of these being there, in an eminent Manner;
and from thence, to spread their benign Influence, through all parts of that
Incorporated Community. Now then,

1. As to the Religion, which is so necessary to the Good of a Community. It Is
certainly something more than the Religion of Nature. It Is a Religion which has
the Stamp of divine Revelation upon it; the Revealed Testimony of God. The
Religion of Jesus Christ, the great Head of the Church, and Governor of the
Universe.

As for the Religion of Nature, that is not Enough to make Individuals, nor a
Community, Happy: When the Principles of it, are so much lost from Man, by the
Fall; and so constantly Corrupted by depraved Reason and the Lusts of Men. I
say then, the Religion taught by the Light of Nature and containing the
Principles of moral Virtue, considered Abstract from divine Revelation; is not
sufficient for fallen Man, nor for Society in this fallen State: Nor yet is the
Religion of Moses, i. e. the Religion taught by him however well Adapted to the
state of the Jews of Old, sufficient for us, or any Community now, in this
Christian State. But the Religion of Jesus Christ, which explains both the
Former, and Supplys what is wanting in them, is Necessary for us Christians, in
this State of Christianity, which, is the best Friend to civil Government of
any scheme of Religion at all. As it is best Calculated and Fitted to Guide us
into the way of Universal Righteousness: The Principles and Laws of it, being
most perfectly Adapted to the good Regulation of Individuals and Communities in
all things, that affect their Duty and Happiness.

IN a Word, the Religion, here Intended, as Essential to the Happiness even of
Society, is that which God has Revealed in his Word, in our Text, Expressed by
the Testimony of Israel: And now, the whole of that Revealed Religion, which
the Gospel Testimony opens, consisting in the Faith and Laws of the Gospel, and
so, in that practical Regard to Jesus Christ, which is there Taught and
Recommended.

To say then,

(1) The Religion so necessary in the present State is what consists in a right
Scriptural Faith, the Faith of the Gospel, Including both the Doctrines which
it Teaches, and our Belief of them. -- The very System of revealed Doctrines,
which Comprehend and Perfect the Scheme of Principles, designed to direct the
Faith and govern the Life of Man, which are indeed the Principles Of Virtue and
Godliness leading Men to Happiness. These are necessary for us, as Individuals
and Members of Society.

IT IS of great Consequence how Men live, both on their own Account, and the
Community's of which, they are Members; which is most likely to be according as
their Principles are; whether good or bad; for, these are wont to have a great
Influence on their Practice. And now, as the sacred Scriptures are designed to
form right Principles in the minds of Men, to govern all their moral Conduct;
so to inspire them with right generous Principles of Behavior, in Church and
State: For, who are indeed bad Men, and yet good Members of either of them? If
their Principles are formed by their Ignorance and Lusts, rather than by the
great Rule of Faith and Duty; they will of course be Irregular in Life, and
Consequently, bad Members of Society. Their Conduct in the Church or common
Wealth, will savor of their corrupt Principles, and be prejudicial to the
Health and Peace of Both. So that with Regard to Society, it is needful that Men
have a right Scriptural Faith, true Principles of Virtue and Godliness; for,
who knows not, that if Men have corrupt and loose Notions of these, they will
be Profane and Vicious, Uncharitable and Unpeaceable, and some kind of
Libertines, or other? which suits not with the good of Society. And can it be
supposed, that Men will be well Regulated in their Manners, if they are not so
in their Belief? No. If they Err concerning the Faith, i. e. Err from the Truth
in Principle, it is not probable that they will do the Truth. James 5.14 1 John
1.6.
, But, as it is said in another Case, They err in Vision, they stumble in
Judgment, and so in Conduct Isa. 28.7.
so that any Scheme of Principles, that are not well adapted to men's own moral
good Behavior, is not well calculated for the good of Society.

ARE the Errors of Popery, or the Wilds of Enthusiasm, etc. friendly to Order
and Government in Church or State? No, But forever inimical thereto. And
indeed, in whatever proportion Men's Notions of Religion and Christianity, are
false, in the same they themselves will likely transgress the Rules thereof;
and so fail of that Virtue, Self-denial, Meekness, Constancy, public
Spiritedness and Benevolence which are repeatedly Recommended in the Gospel:
And so of course, disturb the Peace and Happiness of the Community, they belong
unto. And how evident is it, that if Numbers therein, have very loose Notions
of moral Virtue, they will fail of the practice of it, and tempt one another to
transgress the Laws of it, in life; and be dishonest, deceitful, etc. and
consequently Mischievous to Society. It will be very natural to them to show a
dislike of strict Government; to be murmuring against good Laws, and faithful
Rulers, who would control their Lusts, and correct their Exorbitances: And so
they will be always inclined to abuse their Privileges, and sacrifice them unto
their own licentious Humors.

HENCE it so often happens, that when men complain of the public state of
Things, as if this, and that, was wanting to complete the Privilege of a free
People; the bottom of it is their own want of virtuous Principles of Conduct to
form them good Members of Society. Either they indulge sloth or dishonesty, or
some other evil destructive unto it; and so do not lay public Calamities to the
right Cause. Indeed it is so, that if men have Unscriptural, ill Principles;
these. will affect the public State; as they naturally make men bad Members of
it. But if they have the good Principles inculcated in the Bible; this, will
tend to make them good Members thereof; diligent in their Business, true to
their Trust, righteous in their Dealings, faithful in their Places, and some
way beneficial to Scciety, Yea, they will Study to be quiet, and to do their
own Business, without giving Molestation unto others in theirs. They will fear
God and keep his Commandments; fear God, and honor the King, which is one of
them; and for Conscience sake be subject to lawful Authority Romans 1^.5.
. Which all tends to the good of a Community.

IT will then be granted that those Principles, which best serve the design of
men's personal Duty and Happiness; do most of all contribute to the good Order,
Peace and Happiness of Society: Because the Sounder men are really, in their
Faith and settled Principles of Conduct, the more likely to live well; and the
better they Live, the better Members of Society they always are. But now, to
Talk of men's being good Members hereof, let their Principles with regard to
Religion, be what they will; or let them have Religion, or no Religion, is to
divide what God himself has put together. And how can it be expected, that
People will lead quiet and peaceable Lives, under the best modeled Government,
and the wisest Administrations thereof, if they be not influenced by Godliness
and Honesty. 1 Timothy 2.2.
Which clearly shows that right Sciptural Principles have great Influence upon
the Obedience of the Subject. No Book in the World, is a better Friend to civil
Government than the Holy Bible. No Scheme of Principles better Calculated to
serve the civil State, than those which are taught therein. And so there are no
better Members of it, than the best of Christians: to which purpose says the
Apostle, Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates; to be ready to every good Work; to speak Evil of no Man; to be no
Brawlers, but Gentle, showing all Meekness unto all Men Tit 3.1, 2.
. Hence,

(2) The Religion so necessary for us, and ever for the Health of Society,
consists in the Laws of God and Jesus Christ, made known in the Holy
Scriptures, and in our yielding Obedience unto them. Now there cannot be true
and effectual Religion without a Body of Sacred Laws to govern Men's
Consciences, and guide their Practice; Laws fitted to answer the Ends of our
Obedience, or Living to God, which is practical Religion; but must needs fail,
where men are either destitute of these Laws, or Disobedient to them. For, good
Principles and well understood Doctrinally, would not be sufficient to
constitute Religion without rules of Practice. Yea, the best of Rules laid open
to view are not Enough to make men happy, without Conformity to them, If ye
know these things happy are ye if ye do them. It is Obedience that crowns all.

NOW the Religion of Christ, is most completely adapted to answer all the
Purposes of our Duty and Happiness. Here, are the most perfect Laws suited to
the Nature of Man, as a reasonable Creature, and most proper to direct him as a
Sinner: Here, is a sufficiency of Direction for Man, in his present State, that
there needs not any new Revelation from Heaven to direct him in one Branch of
universal Righteousness, in any Capacity or Relation that he sustaineth. The
Rules given in Christ's Written Law-Book, are complete to form good Men, and
good Members of Society. -- So that, it argues a distempered Brain, if not a
worse Heart, to despise the Sacred Scriptures and be fond of other Revelations,
not given therein. If any do fancy to themselves some new divine Directions;
just, as they are forming to themselves new Principles of Action, not contained
in the Word of God; which they pretend to have immediately from Heaven: Why! as
they are deceived, and will Err in their personal Conduct, (for a deceived
heart has turned them side) so, of Course they will prove bad Members of
Church and State. Their Ignorance, Delusion, Pride and Presumption will hurry
them into Practices destructive to themselves and Society. Such Frieks of
Fancy, and delusive Dreams, which some have been governed by, must needs tend
to disturb the Community and pull down the Walls of its Defense, as fast as
such Things can do it. And Centuries back, have produced sad Examples of their
terrible Efforts; yea, very fatal Effects. Witness that famous Instance hereof
in Saxony, A. D. 1522, and prevailed more especially in Munster, where
Enthusiasm made most dreadful Work, even in the State: Destroying first the
public Peace, and then the Lives of Multitudes, as well as their Property. The
like to which has been threatened in England above a Century past, when the
like Disease had made considerable Progress. And so it might be at any Time,
here or there; when the same State-Distemper breaks forth, if God did not
sufficiently Unmask it, to restrain it before utter Ruin flooded in. But, from
what it has done in several Ages of the Church, and also from the Nature of
it, it appears to be one of the most dangerous Things to Community; yea, one of
the greatest Engines in the hands of Satan to injure Church and State, that is
at all. What Safety can there be with such a Principle that violently hurries
Men into a Conduct out of all Rule and Reason, and yet under a Notion that it
is all divine, and late from Heaven? and must neither be resisted nor disputed:
For Enthusiasm always makes men so Confident of their being right in their
Opinion and Conduct, that no room must be given for sober Examination. It has,
(says Mr. Lock) with some Men the same Authority, and is as confidently relied
upon, as either Faith or Reason, and would set up Revelation without it: But in
effect takes away both Reason and Revelation, and Substitutes in the room of
it, the ungrounded Fancies of a man's own Brain, and assumes them for a
Foundation both of Opinion and Conduct. Hence, we see that in all Ages, men, in
whom Melancholy has mixed with Devotion, or whose Conceit of themselves, has
raised them into an Opinion of greater Familiarity with God, and a nearer
Admittance to his Favor, than is afforded to others; have often flattered
themselves with a persuasion of an immediate Intercourse with the Deity, and
frequent Communications from the divine Spirit. Their minds being thus
prepared, whatever groundless Opinion comes to settle it self strongly upon
their Fancies, is with them, an Illumination from the Spirit of God, and
presently of divine Authority. And whatsoever odd Action, they find in
themselves a strong Inclination to do, that Impulse is Concluded to be a Call
and Direction from Heaven, and must be Obeyed. It Is a Commission from above and
they cannot Err in executing it. This I take (says he) to be properly
Enthusiasm, which, though founded neither on Reason, nor divine Revelation; but
rising from the Conceits of a warmed, or overweening Brain; works yet, where
it once gets footing more Powerfully on the Persuasions and Actions of Men,
than either of these two, or both together: For strong Conceit, like a new
Principle, carries all easily with it. When got above common Sense, and freed
from all restraint of Reason, or check of Reflection, it is heightened into a
divine Authority in Concurrence with their own Temper and Inclination. Thus Mr.
Lock. And if this be a right Description of Enthusiasm, as fact has often
proved it to be, then see what a dangerous thing it is in Church or State. What
will stand before it; where it prevails, and is arm`d with Power to do it is own
Pleasure? what kind of Lust or branch of Pride, will not the grand Enemy
promote the Gratification of, by this Distemper? when once the way is so
prepared, that Men think it is Religion, and what they have immediate Warrant
for from God; why then, they will be Lawless, and disobedient to lawful
Authority, under color of Obedience unto God. They will not stick at it, to be
Unholy and Profane, Murderers of Fathers and Murderers of Mothers, and
Man-slayers, and Whoremongers, as the Scripture speaks I Tim 1. 9
I trust, it will not appear any other than Duty and a proper Caution, that
People be reminded of the tremendous Instances of this Nature which have lately
happened within this Colony, (viz) at Canterbury, where it justly was supposed
that several Persons, were from such vile Principles Poisoned to Death, the
Circumstances of which, all around, with the more direct proof in the case,
would not suffer the Unprejudiced to think any thing more Favorably thereof.

And now, from this dreadful Example, as well as others of less Size, may we
not justly be alarmed with fear of the ill Consequences of Enthusiasm and
Libertine Principles, which tend to carnal and all iniquitous Practices. And
accordingly be timely and duly Awakn'd with a proper zeal against them.


. And what not that is contrary to sound Doctrine and the Rule of Duty? and all
under a Notion of Acting by immediate Warrant from God. -- Thus, they will walk
after the Flesh in the Lust of Uncleanness, and despise Government,
Presumptuous are they, Self-willed, and not afraid to speak Evil of Dignities,
2 Pet. 2.10
And in another passage of Scripture the same sort of Persons are called filthy
Dreamers, pretending to some divine Warrant, even for their defiling the Flesh,
despising Dominion and speaking evil of Dignities. Jude 8.
, They pretend God bids them condemn Magistrates and Ministers and all
religious or civil Establishments, as a trick of State, and a scheme from
beneath to abridge People of their Liberty, etc. Here now, (as if such kind of
observations must be Suffered, to be verified in Fact, to awaken our belief of
the Truth of them) very Remarkable was it, that in the time of public Service,
and just upon the delivery of this former part of the Sermon; there comes a man
into Hartford riding furiously by the meeting House, in a hostile manner and
with a loud Outcry; who, by what he said and did, appeared to be governed by
some such wild Principles and to design an insult upon public Order and
Government. One man was sorely Wounded by him, the Assembly greatly Disturbed:
diverse of the Authority and others withdrawing in Sermon time to Suppress the
disorder and secure the disorderly Person: this was a Specimen of what bad
Principles would do, had they but power of their side.
And then, what should hinder, if there be Power enough in their Hands, (and
they are permitted so to do) to put down others, and set themselves up, as was
the case in the famous Instance before mentioned in Munster? There is no degree
of this Distemper, but what is Prejudicial to Men and to Society, For, when
once Persons get off, from the only Infallible Standard of Faith and Practice,
and set up other Rules thereof, they wander, they know not where, and are
exposed to all the Delusion and Mischief Imaginable. And as they injure
themselves, they always more, or less Injure the Community.

Now, to receive and regard the Revelation of God, which he has made of Truth
and Duty, in his Word, is Religion; and tends to the Peace and Health of the
State, because it teaches and directs Men to live Well, to follow Peace with
all Men, and Holiness; and Obey the Authority which God has set over them. And
lest any should forget their Duty, after they are taught it, put them in Mind
to be Subject, says the Scripture. But to pretend unto a Revelation Immediately
from God, and to Obey that; this is not Religion: And this is inimical and
dangerous to the State, because it gives out such a Rule of Conduct, as Men
fancy to have, yea such as those would have it to be, who are governed by
their own Pride and Ungodly Lusts, so that, with them, any thing, is from God,
which they will please to have so; and this will Naturally lead them into a
manner of Conduct very baneful to Society, and show that they are worse than
unfriendly to the Health and Good thereof. -- Wherefore, I have observed, that
it is necessary, that both men's Moral and Civil Conduct be governed by certain
Rules, known Laws, steady Principles; all well Calculated to keep them in good
Decorum; within the bounds of Truth and Equity; and such are the Laws of God in
his word, Holy, Just and Good, and sitted to make Men so: They teach and urge
all Truth and Honesty, brotherly Kindness and Beneficence. And what are the
good and wholesome Laws of a civil Community, but such as are taken out of the
Scriptures, or by way of just Consequence derive thence? For, the more general
Statutes of the Bible, requiring us, to do Justly, love Mercy and walk Humbly
with God, have a kind of particular Explication in the good Laws of the civil
State, with the Stamp of civil Authority upon them, which is from God: And with
Minatory Penalties Annexed to give the more sensible Force to them, on such,
who, through their sinful Passion, do need Coercive Methods and Restraints to
make them Obedient.

AND, it is always the Duty of the civil Legislature to conform to the Word of
God, (the great Standard of Truth, and Measure of Right and Wrong) in all their
Laws, of however minute Consequence: For, still, all must be designed for, and
therefore in their Nature directed to, the good of the whole Community. And
therefore, have nothing unwise, unjust and Oppressive in them; even the Laws
which order Labor, as well as Money, for the common Good, should distribute
the same in such a proportion as agrees well with Equity. And so all Precepts
and Orders with respect to Merchandise and Trade, and the Medium thereof should
be in a strict Conformity to the fundamental Laws of Justice and Equity. This,
being the Bottom, on which only the State can safely stand. Yea, in every Act
of the Legislature, utmost Care must be had, that there be no Unrighteousness
and Oppression bor'n with, much less countenanced and encouraged by public
Authority.

Hence I proceed,

2. To say something of the Government, so necessary to the good of Community.

IN the General, it is such a civil Government, as is founded in Reason and
Scripture, and formed for the good of the People, the great End of it. It must
then be such a Government and Administration as exists by the will of God; for,
the Powers that be (which are lawful and good) are Ordained of God Romans 13.1.
And therefore, such as Secures and Defends the Rights of the People; the civil
Magistrate being the Minister of God to them for Good Romans 13. 4
for their Benefit. It was not the original Design, nor ever the true design of
civil Government to Aggrandize particular men, at the expense of the public
Good. But God Exalts some to places of public Authority that they may serve the
Community, and be Guardians to the peoples Property -- So then, an Absolute
unlimited Monarchy, or any Arbitrary Government which disposes of men's Lives,
Liberty, and Estate at pleasure without Law, or Reason cannot be the Government
here intended, for that in Nature is unsuitable to the main ends of Government.
The great Design of men's coming into Society, and making up one civil Polity,
is the preservation of their Property, which in the state of Nature, they could
not Singly, and each one by himself Defend. Now, a merely Arbitrary Government,
is contrary to this End, and tends directly to the destruction of the Body
Politic, the very Result of Tyranny, that is an Exercising of Power, beyond
Authority, which cannot point at any thing short of the Ruin of the Republic.

NEITHER, can the Government here intended, be a levelling Anarchy, which
throws the state and all things therein, into Confusion: destroying the
Distinction of Rulers, and Ruled, does of course destroy the very foundation of
the Peace and Happiness of civil Society; as it is Subversive of it is very
Being, and the great end of Government, the Preservation of Property. For, if
the distinction between some in the place of Power, and others in the place of
Subjection, be Dissolved and there be no acknowleg'd Rulers and Officers, how
shall the Laws made by consent of the Community for their common Good be
executed for that End, or the good of any one individual Member? In the
Exercise of Anarchy, Men seem to be dissolving Community it self, and going
back to the state of Nature: to do every one what is Right in his own Eyes;
which a greatly privileged People are often, but too prone unto. As if a
Government formed for Liberty, to the Subjects, gave them a License, to act for
themselves abstracted from Relation to Society and without concern for the
common Good. Verily, it is a Principle near akin to Anarchy, that prompts men in
a Community, to act, as Individuals with levelling Designs; forgetting how
sacred are the bonds of civil Society, which they have taken upon them, and
objecting against any settled form of Government at all. For, though no
particular Form of Government, or Mode of Administration, is precisely
determined by Reason or Scripture, for all particular Communities; but, this,
left rather to be variously determined by the Prudence and Policy of different
Kingdoms and civil Polities; according as best suits their particular
Circumstances and Interests: Yet, some Form or other is necessary; and in
general, It seems, that all civil Government of the right Stamp, must be
agreeable to Scripture and Reason, and so to the Nature and Ends of a civil
Community, the Preservation of the Lives, Liberties and Estates of all the
Members thereof, against the force of Rapine, Injustice and all manner of
destructive Violence.

So that, in a word, it may be observed, that in any well modeled Government,
and beneficial Administration of it; there must be known Established good Laws
for the Regulation of men's Manners and Security of their whole Property: as
well as a wise and upright Legislature, that always has these things at heart:
Also, there must be known acknowleg'd faithful Judges and Officers to put these
Laws in due Execution for the good of the Whole, that the People be kept in due
Subjection to Rule and Authority for their own Benefit. This, is the Government
so Essential to the good of Community. The like to which, is the Constitution
of our own, in this Nation, and Land, and Colony especially.

II. I am to show, the Importance of both, Religion and Government, subsisting
together in a Community, to render it Happy; as also, wherein, the firm Union
of these two great Interests, does consist and appear.

NOW, it is true, there would be the less Need of civil Government, in a
Community, in that proportion that Religion and Conscience had its due
Influence on the Members of it; because in the same degree with that, would be
restrained all those Lusts and Disorders of Men, which civil Government is
Ordained to Curb: But, considering the Corruption of humane Nature, and the
very great Prevalence thereof, (generally speaking) as, breaking through all the
restraints of Religion as it does; civil Government also, is necessary, and
must add, to all those Restraints, its own checking Reins, to keep mankind in
any tolerable Decorum, for the common Good, Peace, and Safety of Society. And
the infinitely Wise Supreme Governor of the World, foreseeing what would be
the out-breakings of the corrupt Passions of Men, not with standing all the
Force of the Religion that exists in this corrupt World, (while such vast
Numbers are so lost to a due sense of Virtue and Religion as they are) has out
of Compassion to the world influence of civil Government to check and con^^o^^
the lusts of Men, by coercive Methods; that Pride, Envy, Malice,
Unrighteousness and Oppression, etc. might not Ravage through the Earth, and
destroy all before them. And as the Authority of civil Rulers is from God, for
this very purpose, as says the Scripture by me Kings Reign and Princes decree
Justice, Jam. 4 1.
So the general Rules and Maxims of their Government in the whole
Administration thereof, are to be taken from the Bible, to answer the same
Ends, which the Laws of Religion are designed to do ( viz.) to make mankind as
they should be, Sober, Just and Good.

But yet, were the whole of this great design to be effected by dint of humane
Authority, there must of necessity be so much of coercive Means (and constantly
used) to keep the Community from being overrun with Disorder, as would render
it most Unhappy; for those very disorders supposed to be restrained by external
Force and Execution of Penalties alone; would argue it so: Wherefore (it seems)
that Religion and civil Government both, must have their Existence and
Influence together; and both (in the best State that this World is ever found
in) but little enough to render Society in any good measure Happy

AND, let what will be said of the difficulty attending civil Government, there
is nothing makes more of this, than the Corruption of Men to be governed.
Whence come Wars and Fightings, or Brawlings of all kinds of criminal
Contentions, but from the Pride and Lusts of Men? Jam 4.1.
Their unruly Passions of some kind or other, are a grand Source of all
Mischiefs in Community. As these prevail and break out, they necessarily give
Disturbance unto it. So that from hence comes the great Difficulties, which
attend the Administration of Government: Wicked Men, the unjust, the
contentious, etc. are they who disturb the State, and make Rulers their
great-Difficulty, and the more of them the worse. For, when the Wicked are
multiplied, Transgression increases, Prove. 29 16
and this always increases mischief to Society. If one Sinner destroys much
good, as says the wise Man, (...). 9 18.
many will destroy it, the more. These are the Occasion chiefly, of so much
more Business at Courts, than otherways, there could be any place for, and of
so great a Number of civil Prosecutions and immense Charges arising thence, so
Impoverishing to the Country. For, the Law is not made for a righteous Man, to
punish him; but for the Lawless and Disobedient, for the Ungodly, and for
Sinners, to punish them. 1 Timothy 1.9.
These perplex Affairs, and Embarrass Things of a public Nature; which cannot
go on smoothly, because of their rough and ungoverned Humors, so that, it is
necessary that a Community have Virtue and Religion prevailing in it as well as
Government Administered therein, to render it Happy. Indeed, where the one of
them exists, and is duly upheld, the other is the more likely to be also; for,
they are friendly to one another, in their very Nature; as the Testimony of
Israel, and the Thrones of Judgment used to be. -- And, as the better Civil
Government is, in its Constitution and Administration, the more of Religion
there is like to be: So, the more of this, the less Need of civil Laws to
Restrain Men from Sin. Thus, as both are Necessary; both do contribute to the
good of Community. They tend to make the Subject better, and so to mend the
State: For, the Happiness hereof, derives much from the Quality of its Members.
Thus, I have shown the Importance of their subsisting together in Society; that
neither is like to do alone, in the present State of the World.

THERE needs the Sword of the civil Magistrate to execute wrath upon him that
does Evil Romans 13.4.
and will not be Restrained without such a terror to evil Doers. And there
needs a good degree of Virtue and Religion, to facilitate Government, and
prevent so high a degree of coercive Methods as would keep the State in a
perpetual Convulsion. Prove. 16.6.


BUT wherein does the firm Union of this beneficial Religion and Government in
a Community consist and appear?

(1)IN their being mutually Exercised for the Vindicating and Upholding of each
other; that they may jointly Answer the general End of both, the good of the
whole Community.

THIS now, is certainly according to their Nature, which renders them Friendly
to one another; as well as to Society. They cannot justly be supposed Opposite
the one to the other, or in their Nature such jarring Interests which Clash,
and tend to destroy the public good, and it is strange that any should in their
thought, separate what God has Wisely and Mercifully connected for so great and
good a Design. Indeed, such a kind of Government, and Administration, as
Militates against Religion; and breaths out slaughter against those who
practice it; as in the case of Darius's Decree, against Daniel in a matter,
that concerned the Law of his God, Dan 6. (...)
and Readiness spirit for the Disciples of Christ at Damascus, (...) as far from
answering the general end of Government, the good of the People: And therefore
is not of God. And so, if there should be a Religion Advanced, which is
inimical to civil Authority (as if that was all Usurpation and Imposition) and
that sets People a praying against, and ^laspheming the Rulers: And that
teaches them to resist the Powers that be Ordained of God; and so to refuse
rendering either Tribate, or Honor to whom, both are due. That could not be a
Religion beneficial to Society, any more than it is Right in its self: For, the
same Religion which requires Men to render unto God the things that are God's,
does require them also, to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's (...)
. Yea, let every Soul, (says the Apostle) be subject unto the higher Powers:
and that not only for Wrath, through fear of Punishment, but for Conscience sake
Rom 13.1.5.


AND, whatever Religion any have, that does not teach men to love God and one
another, to be peaceable Members of Society, and in their several Places to be
beneficial thereto; that does not make them obedient to the Laws of God, and to
lawful Authority, which he has set over them for their Good, it has no Divine
Stamp upon it, and is not of him. Certainly there is nothing in true Religion,
to oppose civil Government. But, is the best Friend to it, of any thing at all,
it puts men upon praying Earnestly for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, Tim. 2.2.
and to render Honor, to whom Honor, and Tribute to whom Tribute is due:
Because they are God's Ministers, and attend continually on this very Thing.
Romans 63.65.


AND, Surely there should be nothing in Government, to hurt Religion: That
which God has Ordained is most friendly unto it, to keep it in Reputation, to
protect and support it. Well then, in a word, herein, does consist the Union
between Religion and Government, so beneficial to Society, that they give
Countenance to one another, and so are the more serviceable to that, than
either of them could be alone. Religion is directly helpful to Government, and
so unto Society, as it makes men walk Orderly and submit to Authority, as it
prevents Jarrs and Contentions, that are so troublesome to the State, as well
as to the Church; and Government is Instrumentally helpful to the Interest of
Religion and so unto Society, when the same is exercised under the Awe ot the
supreme Judge of Right and Wrong; under the influence of good Principles, with
a direct Design to encourage Virtue and universal Righteousness; guarding the
Sacred Truths and Precepts of God's Word, his Worship, his Sabbaths, his
Institutions, and Ministry, as well from the Criminal Neglect of the Careless,
as from the Open Contempt of Wicked Men.

(2) It is also an Influence, and one way of discovery of this Union, When the
Civil Magistrate, and Ministers of the Gospel, are mutually Engaged to
Encourage and Uphold each other, in the due Discharge of their distinct
Offices, for the good of the whole Community. Their Example may go far, in
giving both Religion and Government a Reputation with the People; as, when they
are very Exemplary in their own personal Conduct, and faithful in their several
Offices. And, therein, are Friendly to one another, to Animate one, the other;
to their duty as public Officers, for the common Benefit. It makes well for the
People, when Moses and Aaron go together in promoting God's Glory and their
Good: And it makes well for themselves; they go the Stronger, and their Work is
the Easier, and the more like to be Successful. And here let it be observed,
that God has so Ordained; that the Testimony of Israel, and the set Thrones of
Judgment, be near Neighbors, and very Friendly to each other, for the public
Good.

THEN, let the Ministers of Christ, whose business it is, to preach the Word,
and give out the Contents of God's Testimony to Israel, preach it Faithfully to
Rules, as well as others, and show them their duty revealed therein. -- Let
them also very Expressly and Earnestly pray for the Rulers, and by their own
example teach the People all obedience to them, as well as Prayerfulness for
them; yea, press it upon the People to pray for them, who would not then, be so
ready to disobey, and murmur against them, did they pray for them under a sense
of the Weight which is upon those, Entrusted with the Affairs of civil
Government. Also let them Labor to Instill into the People the very Principles
of Loyalty and Obedience.

AND, then let these Ministers of State, whom God has made Keepers and
Guardians of both Tables of the Law, and has set on the Thrones of Judgment,
especially for Good to the Church, be Friendly to the Ministers of Religion, to
Encourage their Heart and Strengthen their Hands in their Work, to Defend and
Support them in their Character and Office; and in all proper ways recommend
it, to the People, to treat them as the Ambassadors of Christ, to Improve
Respect and Maintain them as such, and for this end, see that the People do
give them the Recompense and Subsistence which the Gospel Requires. At least
that they make good their civil Contracts with them, and punctually fulfill
their Obligations to them, which must needs be as Sacred, as their Obligations
to be Just to one another, can be so. And surely the failure of Justice and
Truth to them, cannot be less Offensive to God, than not to be Just to one
another, would be so. Well, the common and everlasting Rule of Equity is, that
which is altogether just, thou shall follow. Deuteronomy. 16. 20.
And with a special Application of it, in this Case, It is Written, they that
preach the Gospel shall live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9 14.
and not be Unwritten, at our pleasure. It cannot be a light Thing then, to
Treat them, as the civil Law will not (and ought not) suffer Others to be dealt
with. And may the civil Authority quietly and justly quit their Hands of this
Matter, without doing all that is properly in their Power to afford Relief in a
cause that so much Affects the Interest of Religion among the People as this
does? For, can Ministers apply themselves most Faithfully and Studiously to
their Work without a sufficient Support from the People? if some can possibly
do it, to the injury of their Children after them: Others cannot do it even so:
But what says the Scripture to this very purpose? Who goes a Warfare at his
own Charges? And does not the Law of Nature and Nations, with the Express
Statute of Heaven,Declare that Men, orderly called to public Offices, are to be
Supported in the Duties thereof, without Charge to themselves. 1 Cor. 9 7 -- 14.
And have not the Rulers a concern in this Matter, to see that it is done,
without Exposing Ministers to Disserve their own Usefulness to get their own
Dues? Doubtless, as certainly so, as that, the set Thrones of Judgment were
placed near the Testimony of Israel for the Protection thereof.

AND, how Beautiful in all Ages of the Church, to see the Ministers of State,
and Religion mutual Helpers of one another, for the general Good of Society?
Without which, both may be the Weaker, and the less Successful.

But to proceed.

III. It is equally Important, and Necessary for the Good of a Community, that
the Members of it, be well United in their Regard both to Religion and
Government.

IT IS true, if these Subsist together in a Community, the People will be
proportionably United in their Regard to both, as the Influence thereof spreads
among them: But yet these are distinct Considerations in this Respect, viz.
that true Religion may be generally Professed in, and by a Community; as well
as a good civil Government Exist there, and both have some public Countenance
and Establishment: And, still there be great Numbers of Individuals, who pay
little, or no Regard to either of them; but are constantly Rebelling against
the Laws of God and the King. Now, where it is so, the State as well as the
Church, must of Course, be in a very unhappy Condition. So many disorderly
Members to be cured, which unavoidably Wracks the whole Body. But, when the
People are generally well United in a true practical Regard, both to the
Testimony of Israel, and the Thrones of Judgment, the prevailing Part being
under the Influence of virtuous Principles, and in good Subjection to lawful
Authority; why then, the Community is very happy, and enjoys great Safety and
Tranquillity.

So that I observe, Not only should there be a Union of these Two great
Interests, actually Subsisting by public Countenance, in a Community; but the
Members thereof should be well United in their Regard to both; then it is
indeed, as Jerusalem, a City that is compact together: Cemented with Love, and
other Social Virtues. This contributes vastly to the good of the Whole: For,
now in this Case, tho there should be some different Sentiments about the more
circumstantial Things in Religion, and Government also; yet being United in the
main essential Things, Love to God, and one another, in a benevolent and
peaceable Temper, they are happy. -- But, on the contrary, how great the
Difficulty in Church and Common Wealth, when the Members thereof, are so wide
from one another, in what they should be most of all United in; that they cannot
agree, so much as in mutual Love and Forbearance, and scarcely in the practice
of common Justice and Equity, and speaking Truth to, and every one, of his
Neighbor, what Jarrs and Confusions will then ensue and arise, and spread into
the public Affairs, wherein they, are obliged to be Concerned together? And
their Affections being Alienated from one another, Religion is in less
Reputation among them, and Government of more difficult and successless
Administrations, because their own Contentions, rather than Religion and good
Order command their Attention and Employ both their Time and Powers. How often
is it Observed that men are Prone to act in Civil, as they stand Affected in
religious Matters: i. e. Contrarily (opposite to one another) which hurts the
public Interest; but a firm United Regard to the Essentials, of both Religion
and good Order, would prevent this Mischief.

INDEED, where men's Interest does ly by themselves, as in many the affairs of
Life; there, to have different Sentiments and Modes of Acting don't affect the
Public State, don't make any Jarr in, or break upon the Community. What if
Husbandmen have different Schemes and Ways of managing their Farms, and yet are
profitable to themselves, and to the Public? Or Merchants have different
Methods of keeping their Accounts, and all bring out Truth? Why! the public
Peace, and Good of the CommonWealth is not Disturbed or Injured hereby: But not
so, in the public Affairs of Society, wherein the true Interest of the whole
Body, does ly together, and wherein the Members must be jointly Concerned, if
they are properly Concerned at all. Here, if they have very different
Principles and Schemes of Conduct; and every one is ready to set up in
Opposition to another; this, is very Subversive of the Foundations of Society
and the Common Good thereof. Here now, a great Division tends much to
Destruction, If a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdom cannot
stand. Mark 3.24.


SOME perhaps, are not sufficiently aware of this, (viz.) of the ill, and most
baneful Consequences of a Division in those Things which are the Life of a
Community; nor of the certain Duty of all the Members thereof. However they may
differ one from the other in various Matters Prudential and Political; yet must
lay utmost Weight upon it, to Agree in every Thing, necessary to the Being of
Society! and as far as possible in all Things, conducive to the well Being of
it. Wherefore, I have observed the great Importance of Peoples being well
United in their regard to Religion and Government, so necessary to the great
Ends before mentioned. Hence,

IV. I shall somewhat open the Glory, Safety and Happiness, of a People thus
Uniting in their Regard to both these.

THERE is nothing sets a People so High as this does: If they are Rich and
Prosperous, and become Grand in outward Appearance; it is nothing like Religion
and good Order, to make them truly honorable: It Is Righteousness that exalts a
Nation that makes and argues them truly great. And all Power and Policy,
without Righteousness and Piety, will fail of doing it. If they are a Sinful
Nation, a Wicked, Unrighteous, Profane and Contentious People; that will
Debase and Sink them into Contempt: For, Sin is a Reproach to any People. I
Tim. 2. 2.
There is no way that a community can be truly great and honorable without
Righteousness and good Order; and this must spread through the Whole Effectually
to Answer the Purpose. The Rulers must be just Men, ruling in the Fear of God,
2 Samuel 23 3
Men of Established Principles, of Virtue and Religion: And the same good
Principles must govern the People, Prove. 14.34 (...)
Then, and then only are they Honorable indeed. This will be their Glory above
every Thing else. For, what can so Ennoble a Person, or People, as their
Conformity to God the Foundation of Righteousness, Goodness, and all
Perfection, in Copying after Him; they have the Essentials of True Glory and
Honor. Oh! this true Virtue and Piety does Brighten and Dignify the Powers of
Man; this Inspires him with such Principles of Action, as carry him above the
mean, selfish Principles, and Views that govern Earthly and Unsanctify'd Minds,
which greatly hurt and dishonor a People. But, these other Principles of true
Goodness do make men public Spirited, set for the good of Society in all manner
of Ways, not only by their own orderly Life and discreet Management, but by
their generous Temper which Commands their Substance, and all their Powers for
the public Good, as there is Occasion, and Duty so Requires. Wherefore says the
Apostle, look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of others, let this Mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus Phil. 2.4, 5.
. This is Christ-like to be Unselfish, and full of generous Principles of
Beneficence for the public Interest; such Principles of true goodness will
dispose Rulers to act above self for God and the good of the People, the very
end of Government. It has always been so, that Rulers, are the better Rulers
for being good Men, and the civil State always the better and more honorable,
for the true Virtue and Piety displayed in their Lives, and blended with their
Administrations. How good were Isreal's Kings in their Government, when good
Men? and how bad in their Authority, when bad men? and how low did Israel Sink
then? it went well or ill with the People, according as their Kings and Rulers
were. When the Righteous are in Authority, the people rejoice, but when the
Wicked bears Rule the people Mourn, and are bro't low Prove. 29 2.
.

AND, thus as to the Safety of a People and all the Branches of their
Happiness, it is Connected with their Obedience. But forever exposed to all
manner of Judgments, is a Sinful and Disobedient People; to Wars with their
Enemies, unto Pestilence and Scarcity, etc. A Community is in Danger, or
Safety, is Happy, or Miserable, much according to their Behavior, as such; if
wickedness, very generally prevails among a People, and wink't at by their
Rulers; Especially if public Injustice and Wrong be done; this Exposes the
Public greatly. But, if all are United in their Regard to Truth, and Right;
both Rulers and People, set to please God and promote the Public Good by doing
every one the Duty of his Place; then God will make their Enemies to be at
peace with them, Prove. 16.7
Then he will take away and keep off, raging Sickness, Deuteronomy. 7.12, 15
Afford them his saving Health, with all manner of Store, Psa. 144 12
Then he will be their Defense and Salvation, Job 22 23, 25.
Let Integrity preserve me, Psalm. 25.21.
(says David the King) And this preserves the Subjects, as well as the Prince:
This preserves and upholdeth Society. God is a Refuge for his People, Deuteronomy.
35.27, 29 Psa. 46. pertotum.
And who can reach them in such an Hiding Place? He is their Rock of Defense,
Psa. 62.2.
And to what Purpose for the Enemy to Batter against such a strong Rock, an
House of Defense to Save us? Psa. 31.2.
He is their High Tower, Psa. 18 2.
And what Enemy can Scale such a Tower? If God be for us, who can be against
us? Romans 8, 31.
It Is then the greatest Policy of a People to be Honest with God and Man, and
Secure the divine Presence with them, which is their Glory, Safety, and
Happiness indeed. It is He that gives Salvation unto Kings. See Psalm. 144.10.
And Prosperity to the Subjects; as it there follows, in a Variety of Instances,
both in our Children, and in our Substance, etc. Happy is that People that is
in sucb a Case, yea, happy is that People whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 144.15.

The APPLICATION follows. And,

FIRST, By way of Inference.

Hence, Learn that one great Bane of Society is men's Ignorance of the Nature of
Society, or Unattention to the great Designs thereof.

IF Persons are Ignorant of the Distinction there is between the State of Men;
as Individuals, and as Members of Community: If they are insensible of the
Bonds of Society, and the sacred Obligations arising thence, to act with
unselfish, steady Views of the common Good: But are ready to separate their own
private Interest from that, and so practically Renounce their Relation to the
Body Politic; this hurts it greatly. If they Imagine, they may seek their own
private Good, abstracted from any Regard to the whole Community; or, as if
their own particular Interest must be the Standard by which, to measure the
public Good; and hence, frame their Schemes of Conduct to suit them, only, this
is Mischievous to Society. For now, when they come to act as Members of
Society, the great Question with them is, What is good for me? and what will
suit my Interest? Not what is good for the Community, or proper for them? And
this governs their Vote and Conduct; which is a Violation of the duty of
Members, a betraying their Trust, and breaking their solemn Bonds. For, at what
Time, any particular Members are Attached to their own Interest without Regard
to and against the Interest of the whole; they practically break off from the
Community and go back to a state of Nature; thus declaring for that, as
Preferable to any other. And now, don't this Principle Naturally tend to Ill?
For, each one acting so, (as every one might on the same Principle) would
destroy the great ends of Society, and indeed the very Being of it. And this, I
suppose upon a just Examination, will be found one great spring of the hurtful
Divisions in Church and State. This is what divides a Kingdom and any Community
against it self and so Destroys it.

BUT then further, we hence Learn another great Bane of Society is the want of
Virtue and Religion therein. Not only do men hurt Society, when in public
Affairs, they act as Individuals; but, and especially when they act as open
Transgressors of the divine Law, Indulge themselves in Sin, in Deceit,
Dishonesty, Intemperance, Litigiousness, etc. For, Sin is a great and most
awful Disorder in the Body Politic. And the more of it in particular Members,
the more in the Body, which is weakn'd by the Prevalence of it in them.

AND, from whatever Quarter do come bitter Complaints of the Times, and of the
public State of Things; this is truly the grand Source of all our Mischiefs, (
viz.) our Sin, our low Regard to Virtue and Religion, and not making Conscience
of doing Justly, living Soberly, and Frugally, and walking Humbly with God, and
Charitably with one another. It Is our casting Contempt on the Gospel and
Institutions of Jesus Christ, on his Name, Sabbaths, Ministry, etc. It Is our
Undervaluing and Abusing our precious Privileges, Civil and Religious, with our
Uncharitable Contentions, Divisions, and Murmurings under the highest Liberties
of any People upon the Face of the Earth; that so weaken, wound and destroy us:
Verily, it is these Things that expose us to Ruin: These are our Sickness, and
Threaten our Death.

AGAIN, We Learn hence how much the Attention of a whole Community, should be
Awakened to their own Recovery; to seek it in all the Ways and Things so
Essential to the good of Society, (viz.) In acting from that unselfish Love,
and noble public Spiritedness, which should for ever govern the Members of
Society in their various Capacities, and from Principles of solid Virtue in all
their Conduct. For, where there is not practical Righteousness among a People,
they will be everlastingly Unhappy. And all the Politics in the World cannot
save them: This cannot be Contrived, and Righteousness left out of the Scheme.
But, vastly great is the Advantage hereof in Society, especially when People
are United in their Regard thereunto. This, on the one Hand, will guard against
Tyranny, and arbitrary Power in the civil Magistrate; and on the other, against
Sedition and Rebellion in the Subject, and so against all those Impious and
Unpeaceable Methods of Conduct, which are so prejudicial to the Public.

IF those on the Thrones of Judgment, take their Measures of Government from
the Testimony of Israel, that will secure them from lawless Power: And if the
People take their Measures of Conduct from the Word of God also, that will
Guard them against Disobedience to lawful Authority. And so both will keep
their Place, and serve the common Good.

AGAIN, We hence Learn, what a great Blessing to Society is a good Government.
One of a happy Constitution, and wisely and faithfully Administered. It has been
though it, that Government in some Respect bad, is better than none. Hence a
Monarchy, not without some Tyranny, has been Chosen before Anarchy and
Confusion: But, a good Government, founded in Scripture and Reason, Securing to
the Subjects all the Privilege which, of Right, and in the Reason of Things,
belongs to them: How great a Blessing this? For this is a great Encouragement
to Virtue and Religion; the Soul and Life of a happy Society. And thus, it
seems to be Expressed in our Text: For, there, are set Thrones of Judgment, the
Thrones of the House of David. As much as to say, the Tribes of Israel are
justly encouraged to be Religious, to come up to Jerusalem, to the Testimony of
Israel, to the Ark of God there, and there to give Thanks to the Name of the
Lord, and Worship him according to his Word; because, there, is a good civil
Government Established and Exercised for their Protection in the Worship and
Service of God. The set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the house of David:
A Government in the Hands of one after God's own Heart, who Loves to Serve the
God of Israel Himself, and would have all Israel do so too. -- Which Naturally
leads me, to another Branch of the Improvement.

SECONDLY, By way of Address and Exhortation: And first of all to the
Honorable the Governor in Chief, and Deputy Governor; together with the
Worshipful Assistants Of this Colony.

But, before I turn my Discourse directly unto You. -- The Vacancy so lately
made in the chief Seat of Government, here, by Death; may justly call me, on
this public Occasion, to Lament the Loss, we have sustained in the Death of the
late HONORABLE GOVERNOR LAW; who, (as it has been publicly and justly said
of Him) was, a Gentleman of a critical Understanding in the Law; and tho not an
Eloquent Orator, yet he was a wise Counselor, and very Judicious, Wary, and
Steady in all his Conduct: As a Governor, he was a hearty Friend to the Rights
and Privileges of the Community, and always Steddily pursued that, which
appeared to him, to be right in itself and most conducive to the public Good.
-- Little moved by popular Noise, or party Interests, keeping in his mind, a
most clear, distinct, and steady View of the public Affairs, without Involving
himself or others into precipitant Measures. -- He Moderated with his usual
Wisdom and Steadiness in the last October Session of the General Assembly,
which Ended but the day before he was Seized with the Illness that called him
hence.

Thus, he finished his public Usefulness and Life together: As it is Written, I
have said, Ye are Gods, -- But ye shall die like Men, Psalm. 82.6, 7.


So, I leave the Dead of precious Memory, and speak unto the Living, -- You
will then, HONORED SIRS, suffer the Address agreeable to the Importance of my
Subject, and your Station. -- You are here upon these Subordinate Thrones of
Judgment, and the Government devolved on You, is of a Nature Weighty enough, to
Employ your best Attention, and Engage your utmost Fidelity to the right
Administration thereof. -- The Seats of civil Authority, are here called, set
Thrones of Judgment: You are then to fill these Seats with Judgment, with the
Displays of rightful Authority. Oh! how does the very Epithet, speak your
Obligations to do Justice and Judgment, and with the whole Legislative Body, to
use your utmost Wisdom, to Establish Judgment, Righteousness and Equity among
us. -- And who knows whether Ye are come to the Thrones of Judgment, Esther
4.14.
for such a Time as this? So Difficult and Critical as this; wherein there
needs so much Penetration and Application to Contrive and Conduct our public
Affairs for the best good of the Community. You, will ever think, that any
Thing of the Nature of Unrighteousness, which seems to have the Countenance of
Public Authority will be very Evil in its self, and Prejudicial unto us. And
though nothing of this Nature, can be designed by such a Government as this, that
we are under; yet if it so happen that things do gradually come to run in a
Channel, which unavoidably produces it in the End; this will be a wrong to the
Subject, that will be felt for a great while. For, it always wounds the State
very deeply, when its Members Suffer by its own Acts, though originally designed
and directed quite another way. Righteousness indeed Exalts a Nation, Prove.
14.34.
and never more so, than when it proceeds from the Throne Prove. 20 8.
from the set Thrones of Judgment: But Injustice and Wrong, though but Obliquely
coming from thence, has a very contrary Tendency. You, will therefore Consider
that a strict Regard to Righteousness, and a most steady Conduct in
Administration from that Princip1e, is a very Chief and Beneficial
Qualification in the civil Ruler. The King by Judgment Establishes the Land.
Prove. 29.4.
And never perhaps did our Land need it more than now when People in various
Respects, are got into such an Unquiet and Unsettled Posture.

IN a word, You, will always remember that the Thrones of Judgment, which God
has Set, i.e. Established, and Sets You on; are placed near the Testimony of
Israel: Intimating, that from thence You are to form your Measures and fetch
your Maxims of Government, and that the Testimony of Israel so nearly Situated
to the Thrones of Judgment, (Especially, under a Christian Dispensation) is to
be Defended and Protected by You in the great Interest thereof at all Times.

IN the next place, shall I turn me to the Honorable House of Representatives.

Gentlemen, who are now Chosen, into this Legislative Court. You have also, a
kind of Seat on the Subordinate Thrones of Judgment, as, you are concerned in
the Resolves, and Acts, which may go hence under the Stamp and Sanction of
public Authority. -- And now to discharge your Trusts you are to look directly
to the ends Of Government, the Honor of your great Employer, under whom; and
the good of the People for whom, you Act; and Endeavor to the utmost of your
Power that the way to this be prepared by Righteousness and Mercy; by which the
Throne it self is Upheld and Established. Prove. 16 I2
. And which is so Essential to all good Government.

IT lies very much with you, to discountenance Injustice and all Immorality
and Profaneness, Idleness and Sloth, and every way wherein, men are Injuring
themselves and the Public. -- And in so critical a Day as this, which needs the
wisest Heads to deliver us from threatened Mischiefs; let Integrity as well as
Wisdom guide you, Prove. 11.3.
I am far from Suggesting any Schemes of your Conduct, in the management of
public Affairs; but this, I may obsrve to You, that the Sacred Rules of Justice
and Truth, must be strictly Adhered to, in all You do; and no Policies to be
admitted, which Militate against a Thing so Sacred as Equity.

IF the Affair of our Paper Currency, etc. come under Your Consideration, let
nothing be Transacted by You; but what the Eternal Rules of Righteousness and
Goodness, will Vindicate You in.

Now then we have in the great divine Law-Book this Important Statute of
Heaven, Enacted, Written, and Signed as follows,

Ye shall do no Unrighteousness, in Judgment, in Mete-yard, in Weight, or in
Measure. Just Balances, just Weights -- shall ye have: I AM THE LORD YOUR GOD.

DEUS REX. Lev. 19 35, 36.


THIS is one great and infallible Rule of Your Conduct: Fix your Eyes upon it,
keep it in your View, and feel the weight of it upon your Hearts, and let the
public Resolves and Acts show the Influence thereof. Thus Solemnly is it,
Enacted, Exhibited, and Signed by GOD himself, the Lord our Lawgiver and our
King.

AND, see the Connection here, as if in one Breath the Lord Spoke to the
Judges, and the Merchants and every One, ye shall do no Unrighteousness in
Judgment, in Meteyard, in Weight, nor any other Way. But Just Balances, and
Weights; s) Just Laws, and Rules and a Just Medium shall ye have: The Lord has
decreed and said it, and who then shall not take Notice of it? And again, it is
written, that which is altogether Just shall thou follow, that thou may Live
and Inherit the Land Deuteronomy. 15.20.
These. 4 5.
. Here you see, the very Life as well as the Substance of a People, as
continued to them in Mercy, depends upon their being Just and Righteous; and
this as Sacred as what is Moral and of Eternal Obligation.

AND, how can the civil Legislature be Clear, if the public Credit, a thing so
Sacred as the Faith of a Community, be in the Course of Things most uncertain,
which must expose People to Injure, and be Injured? The Current Money with the
Merchant used to be a stable Thing, and has the Sanction of Scripture upon it
as such, Genesis 23.15, 16
that People knew what they had, and what to do with it, to answer their
Occasions without Injustice to others, or Wrong to themselves. And should not
the Current Money of a Colony be so too? If our Weights and Measures are
lessened by long use or worn away a little in Time, they should be bro't to the
Standard and made strictly Just that People may not be Wronged nor do Unjustly
in Buying and Selling. And why should not our PaperMedium that is sunk away
much, be some way bro't to Truth, that we may no longer be wronged by it? Or
can there be found no Standard of Justice in this Matter, that poor Orphans and
Others be not turned off, with one Half of their Righteous Dues? Verily the Cry
of these and other the Opressed will be heard from on High. And, Oh! Let their
Cause be heard below, and Considered well on the Thrones, and Seats of Judgment
here, before it is too late; to have all Right and Well, for a hearing at the
Bar of Judgment hereafter. It will surely be the Honor and Safety of the
Government in all Things, to do Justly and to love Mercy, that Superior
Example, as from the Thrones of Judgment may in its happy Influence spread far
and wide; that Judgment every where may run down as Waters, as freely and as
plentifully, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream that is not easily stopped.
You will also be continued Patrons to the College; and laudably Ambitious to
promote Learning so Useful in Church and State.

IN the next Place, What shall I hint to my Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry? Surely, it becomes Us, in Regard to the Nature and Design of our
Office especially, to show all just Concern for the Promotion of that Religion
and good Order so Essential to the Good of Society.

A Religion which not only Teaches, that there is A GOD whom as men, we are
capable of Knowing and Enjoying; and whom we are Everlastingly Obliged to Love
and Serve, -- And as fallen Men we have broken over the natural Obligations
unto this: And that now, there are these Corruptions in our Nature as render us
Unworthy of God, and Obnoxious to his Resentments for Ever. -- But, a Religion,
that also Teaches, that there is A SAVIOR provided for us, that JESUS CHRIST
the Son and Messenger of God is this Savior, and the only Redeemer of Man. --
A Religion that Instructs us in the Method of Salvation by Him, through his
Perfect Obedience and Propitiatory Sacrifice; the only sufficient Righteousness
for us, and completely Effectual unto the Salvation of all that Believe. -- A
Religion, that opens the Way of men's Obtaining this Faith which is Saving, by
the Testimony of God, concerning his Son, and the Influence of the Holy Spirit,
which alone Applys the Word, Especially, the Word Preached for this End. -- A
Religion, that Exhibits the Encouragement and Warrant for Faith in Christ; not
from any Thing in our selves, but from the Grace of the Gospel, the Word of a
God Inviting us to come to Christ not with standing all our Sins and
Unworthiness, that we may be Saved from our Sins, the Guilt, the Filth, the
Power and Fruits thereof. --

MOREOVER, A Religion, that Enforces all the Moral Obligations to Virtue and
Holiness with some New Sanctions, and Motives peculiar to a Gospel State, which
the Wisdom and Goodness of God has Given, in the New Testament for that End.

And, now my Brethren, to promote such a Religion, as Forms Men for God and
Society, is to serve both the Interest of the Church and the State also; for,
the more Truly and Practically Religious, men are, the more Orderly in the
State. This then let us do, and labor in, Spend and be Spent, in this Service,
for the Good of Souls and of Society. -- In the mean Time keeping well our own
Vineyard, looking well to the State of our own Souls; seeing to it, that we are
the Subjects of the Religion which we rightly Preach to others, and that we
Live and Shine in all the Exercises of it; as Examples unto others, more and
more bright and worthly of Imitation: That the latter part of our Day may be
the Brightest, and our Sun Set, not in a Cloud, but in the Dawn of Eternal Day.

TO CONCLUDE,

Let all this Assembly Know Assuredly, that they must all be Subject unto the
Laws of God, to the Religion of Jesus Christ; unto whose Tribunal We are all
Accountable, and must give Account. -- And now to the Care of our own Souls,
let us add all just Concern for the Prosperity of the Church and the State. And
Earnestly Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: For they shall prosper that Love
thee. Say we then every one of us, Peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity
within thy Palaces.

AMEN

