Mr. Appleton's SERMON At the ORDINATION OF Mr. Stephen Badger, March 27 th
1753.

How GOD wills the Salvation of all Men; and their coming to the Knowledge of
the Truth, as the Means thereof.

Illustrated in a SERMON From 1 TIMOTHY ii. 4.

Preached in Boston, March 27. 1753. at the Ordination of the Rev. Mr. STEPHEN
BADGER, as a Missionary with a special Reference to the Indians at Natick.

Published at the unanimous Desire of the ECCLESIASTICAL COUNCIL convened on
that Occasion; and of other Hearers.

By NATHANAEL APPLETON, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Cambridge.

To which are annexed, The Charge, by the Reverend Dr. SEWALL: And the Right
Hand of Fellowship, by the Reverend Mr. ABBOT.

2 Pet. iii. 9. -- Not willing that ANY should perish, but that ALL should come
to Repentance. Mark xvi. 15. -- Go ye into ALL the World, and preach the Gospel
to EVERY Creature. Rev. xxii. 17. -- WHOSOEVER will, let him take the Water of
Life freely. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND Queen Street. 1753.

GOD will have all Men to be saved.
1 TIMOTHY II. 4. Who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the
Knowledge of the Truth.
THE holy Apostle begins this Chapter with earnest Exhortations respecting the
great Duty of Prayer, an essential Part of Religion, and which every Man who
knows himself, and sees his Dependence upon God, will be in the daily Exercise
of, for himself. But here the Apostle lets his Son Timothy know, that Prayers,
and especially public Prayers, (in which he and other Ministers of Christ were
to lead, and be the Mouth of the People unto God) may not be confined unto
their own selves; but their devout Wishes, and thankful Acknowledgements,
should extend even to all Mankind in general; and to those of distinguished
Character for Power and Authority, in a particular Manner. I exhort therefore
that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks,
be made for all Men: for Kings, and all that are in Authority. v. 1, 2. And he
suggests a twofold Reason herefor. The first taken from themselves: that it
would be for their own Good; even for the Peace, Order and Welfare of Society.
He and others should pray for Kings, and all in Authority, that they might rule
so in the fear of God, and with such Wisdom, justice and Clemency, as that the
People might love and honor them; and under their wise and just
Administration, lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty,
v. 2. -- The other Argument is taken from its being good, and right, and proper
in it self, and pleasing to God: For this is good and acceptable in the Sight
of God our Savior, v. 3.

And this Argument is further illustrated and confirmed by the following Words,
which I have chosen for my Text: Who will have all Men to be saved, and to come
to the Knowledge of the Truth. As much as to say, You may depend upon it, that
Prayers and Intercessions for all Men, are good and acceptable in the Sight of
God our Savior: For he would have all Men to be saved: And if he would have
all Men to be saved; it must needs be good and acceptable to him, that we
should earnestly pray for them: And it affords abundant Encouragement to be
much in Prayer for them. Surely, since God is willing that they should all be
saved; we ought to express our good Will and Wishes in our Prayers for them,
that they might be saved. Since God will have all Men to be saved; let it be
our Hearts Desire and Prayer to God, not only for Israel, that they may be
saved; but that God's saving Health might be made known to all Nations; and
that all Flesh might see the Salvation of God.

But what I propose on this Occasion, is to consider my Text by itself, as
setting forth the universal Benevolence, and good Will, that God bears to
Mankind; which is expressed in two Things, viz.

1. In his Willing their Salvation: Who will have all Men to be saved. 2. In
willing them the Means by which they may be saved, viz. The Knowledge of the
Truth: Who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the
Truth.
Accordingly the two Points which our Text presents to our Meditation at this
Time, are these, viz.

I. That God may be said in some Sense to will the Salvation of all Men. II. As
the Way and Means of their Salvation, be wills that they should come to the
Knowledge of the Truth.
To each of these I shall speak with all convenient Brevity; and then make such
an Application as may lead you to see the Pertinency of the Subject to the
solemn Occasion now before us.

I. The great God may be said in some Sense to will the Salvation of all Men.

So says my Text, Who will have all Men to be saved. -- The Word (...), here
used for Will, is that which is commonly used in the new Testament for willing
any Thing, or for expressing the Will of God. Sometimes it signifies an
efficacious Willing, whereby God does certainly effect the Thing that he wills;
as when Christ said, Matthew. 8. 9. I WILL, be thou clean; and immediately his
Leprosy was cleansed. So Joh. 5. 21. The Son quickneth whom He WILL. --
Sometimes it signifies a willing, wishing, or desiring in God, that is not
always efficacious. As Matthew. 23. 37. How often WOULD I have gathered thy
Children together etc. and ye WOULD NOT.

And now the Question that naturally occurs here, is, How and in what Sense it
may be said, that God WILLS the Salvation of all Men; or WILL have all Men to
be saved?

To which I would answer and say,

1. It cannot be allowed to be with a decretive and efficacious Will.

Not with an absolute Purpose, and fixed Determination of his Will: For if so,
then all Men would be saved; and yet by observing the general Tenor of many
Men's Lives, and comparing the same with the Tenor of the Gospel Covenant, the
contrary is sadly evident. If by the Will of God, in my Text, the divine Decree
or Purpose or fixed Resolution of his Will was intended; then all Men would
certainly and infallibly be saved: For all the Purposes of the divine Will
shall come to pass. The Counsel of the Lord that shall stand, and the Thoughts
of his Heart to all Generations, Psalm. 33. 4. So Prove. 19. 21. There are many
Devices in a Man's Heart, nevertheless the Counsel of the Lord that shall
stand. And there is nothing can defeat or disappoint God in any of his
Purposes: For as the same inspired Preacher tells us, Prove. 21. 30. There is no
Wisdom nor Understanding nor Counsel against the Lord. For the Lord of Hosts
has sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as
I have purposed, it shall stand. Isai 14. 24. And therefore, instead of its
being the absolute Purpose and Decree of God that all Men should be saved; it
must be said, that in the Upshot of Things with Respect to the whole World of
Mankind, and when instead of their being all saved, the Wicked are all sent
away into everlasting Punishment, and only the Righteous enter into Life
eternal; this is all according to the Purpose and Will of God; even according
to the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God; as the Scripture
expresses it concerning Christ being delivered to Death, Acts 2. 23.

But now, notwithstanding all this, there is a Sense in which God is willing
that all Men should be saved. But this leads us into an Abyss: a Mystery that
is unfathomable by us. -- The natural Notions we have of the divine Being, as
well as Scripture Revelation, teach us, that known unto God are all his Works
from the Beginning of the World, Act. 15. 18. And that such an infinitely wise
Being must needs have a Plan of Operation drawn in his own infinite Mind, from
the Days of Eternity. And none can or dare say, that the Scheme drawn in the
infinite Mind of God, shall be broken in upon; but that all will come to pass
according to the divine Determinations. -- However, the natural Notions we have
of the divine Goodness, and other Perfections; together with what we find in
Scripture, plainly teach us, that God in some Sense or other wills the
Salvation of all Men.

But now to form adequate Conceptions of the eternal Purposes of God; and of
that Willingness he has for the Salvation of all Men; so as to reconcile them
in our own Minds, is quite beyond the limited and feeble Faculties of Man. And
therefore it rather becomes us with humble Reverence to receive them both as
Truths concerning God, than to deny either, or too curiously to pry into them:
For it must be acknowledged, that this is a Case in which we know not how to
order our Speech by Reason of Darkness. We are told, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. That secret
Things belong to God. And surely there is nothing more secret to us than the
divine Decrees, which he keeps within his own Breast. It is utterly a Secret to
us, not only what God has purposed, and decreed, before it be revealed in his
Word, or come to pass in his Providence: But we cannot so much as conceive what
these Purpo^^^ (...) or how they lie or operate in the divine Mind; or what
Influence they have upon natural Causes, or upon moral Agents, or how far they
take away their free Agency, or necessitate Things as to their final Event. --
But as we are told in the Verse before quoted, That Things revealed belong to
us and to our Children; so then it is the revealed Will of God, that we have to
do with, and that belongs to us to consider. Accordingly I proceed to answer
positively,

2. God may be said to will the Salvation of all Men, as he in his Word
manifests such a Willingness, and gives us many ample Tokens thereof in the
Dispensations of his Grace to the Children of Men.

When we read of God's willing the Salvation of all Men, we are to consider it
as spoken after the Manner of Men, and in Accommodation to our Capacities: And
we are to understand it after the same Manner as when we read of God's being
angry, or vexed, or grieved, or that he repented of the Evil he thought to do;
which Affections of Mind we may not attribute to God just in the same Manner as
we do to our selves; because they would be inconsistent with an infinitely
perfect Being; and interrupt the perfect Tranquillity that forever possesses
the divine Mind. So God's willing the Salvation of all Men, is not such a
willing, as will give any Interruption to the divine Happiness, though it be not
accomplished: For although they be not all saved, yet he is God blessed for ever.

And therefore when it is said, God will have all Men to be saved, it is to be
understood, that the Declarations he has made of himself in his Word, and the
Dispensation of Grace he has put us under, are evident Tokens of such a
Willingness in God. Accordingly, this may be considered as the declarative Will
of God; as such a Willingness for the Salvation of all Men is declared in his
Word: as in our Text, Who will have all Men to be saved; which is expressed
without any Exception or Reservation; agreeable to which, and further to set
forth the Universality of the divine Benevolence to Mankind, says the Apostle
Peter, 2 Epist. 3. 9. Not willing that any should perish, but that ALL should
come to Repentance.

Moreover, it may be considered as the Preceptive Will of God. He wills, that
is, he commands, that all Men should be saved; and this he does, as he
commands, those Things universally that accompany Salvation, yea and in which
Salvation does very much consist. -- The Preceptive Will of God is universal;
what he says to one, he says to all who come within hearing of it. And now God
may be said to will the Salvation of all Men, as truly and as really as he
wills they should keep his Commandments. As he wills that all Men should obey
him, so he wills that they should all be saved; because there is an inseparable
Connection between Obedience and Salvation, and the one implies the other. Thus
we are told, Act. 17. 30. That God commands all Men every where to repent.
Well, just so he wills that all Men every where should be saved: For that
Repentance which he wills, is unto Salvation: Nay true Repentance is Salvation;
Salvation begun in the Soul: And it seems by the Apostle as if Repentance and
Salvation were synonimous or convertible Terms, in the forementioned 2 Pet. 3.
9. Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance.
Where perishing and Repentance are put in Opposition, plainly signifying that
Repentance is the same with Salvation, which is the contrary or opposite to
perishing. So again, it is the Will of God that all Men should honor the Son
even as they honor the Father, Joh. 5. 23. Well, this is as much as to will
the Salvation of all Men: For this is Life eternal, to know and honor the true
God and Jesus Christ whom he (...) sent, Joh. 17. 3. Again, who is there but
what will acknowledge that God wills Men to forsake their Sins, turn to him,
and lead holy Lives? For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification. And
if he wills that all Men should flee from Sin and follow Holiness, he wills
that all Men should be saved, for Holiness and Freedom from Sin, is that in
which a great Part of our Happiness consists. Finally here, since the Grace of
God which has appeared unto all Men, bringing Salvation, teaches us to deny all
Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, and righteously, and godly
in this present World, (Tit. 2. 11, 12.) it must be allowed to be the Will of
God that we should all thus live; and this is to will the Salvation of all: For
it is in this Way that the Grace of God brings Salvation unto us.

Now therefore, if there be any Persons who doubt whether God is really willing
that all Men should be saved, let them consider whether God be really willing
that all should repent, that all should believe, that all should forsake their
Sins, and obey the Gospel; and consider whether all such do not contradict and
oppose the Will of God, who do not repent of their Sins, and live as the Gospel
teaches them.

And now, would it not be very shocking to you, for any to say, that God was
not willing that all Men should repent, that he was not willing they should all
turn from their Sins, and was not willing they should all obey his Commands?
Why, it is really as shocking for any to say, that God is not willing that all
should be saved: Because Repentance, and Faith, and Obedience, and Salvation,
are so interwoven together, that the one necessarily implies the other.

But then, I would go on further to say, that God wills the Salvation of all
Men, as he has done and is doing those Things which indicate such a
Willingness, or are outward, open, and manifest Tokens of his Willingness that
all Men should be saved. As particularly,

1. In the all sufficient Savior he provided for sinful Man.

God did not provide a Savior who was able only to save a few of the fallen
Race; but One who was able to save every Son and Daughter of Adam. I am not now
considering the Extent of Christ's Redemption, as to the divine Intention and
Design, or as to the real Event of it; for this is a secret Thing, and belongs
not to us, but to God. But what I am now considering, is the Extent of his
Merits, and of his Power; and considered in this Respect, it is universal. Of
such infinite Virtue are the Merits of Christ's Blood, that it is sufficient to
take away the Sin of the whole World. If every Man in the whole World should be
saved, there would not need any other Sacrifice than Christ has already made of
himself; and therefore with Respect to the Sufficiency of Atonement, Christ may
be said to have died for all; to have tasted Death for every Man; and to be the
Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole
World. Moreover there is not only such a Sufficiency of Merit in Christ, but a
Sufficiency of Power: For all Power is given to him in Heaven, and in Earth:
That as his Blood was sufficient to wash away the Guilt of the whole World; so
his Power is sufficient to subdue the strongest Habits of Sin, and bring us
over to a willing Subjection to him, and to his Gospel. So that there is every
Thing in him necessary to render him a complete All-sufficient Savior to the
whole World of Mankind: Surely He is able to save to the uttermost. And now
this may be considered as a Token of God's Willingness that all Men should be
saved: For when God has provided a Savior able to save the whole World; what
are we led to argue from thence, but that God is willing that all should be
saved? Who can think that God is unwilling to have the Malady healed, for which
he has been at infinite Cost to provide a sovereign Remedy? And that when he
has spread a Plaster large enough for the whole Sore, he should be unwilling
to have it applied?

2. His Willingness that all Men should be saved, appears in the extensive
Commission and Charge that Christ gave to his Disciples, when he sent them
forth to preach the Gospel of Salvation.

Thus when our blessed Lord took Leave of his Disciples, he left this in solemn
Charge to them, saying Matthew. 28. 18. 19. All Power is given to me in Heaven
and in Earth; Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them etc. or as
Mark gives it to us, Mar. 16 15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature; he that believes shall be saved etc. So that the
offers of Salvation upon Gospel Terms were to be made to every Creature, that
is, to every Man throughout the whole World, without Exception. And who dare say,
that when the offers of Salvation are ordered to be made to all, but that God
is willing all should accept and be saved?

3. Another Token of God's Willingness that all should be saved, is the
Extensiveness of the Proclamation of Grace, and the very general Terms he makes
use of in inviting us to Pardon and Salvation.

Isai. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters etc. v. 7.
Let the Wicked, let him be who he will, and how wicked soever, and how many
soever; there is such an unlimited Latitude in the Words, as may extend to
every wicked Man and Woman in the World: Let him forsake his Way, and turn unto
the Lord, and he will have Mercy on him, and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon. So Joh. 7. 37. Jesus stood and cried, If any Man thirst; any Man, or
every Man if he thirsts, let him come to me and drink. So Rev. 22. 17. The
Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that is athirst say, Come, and
whosoever will let him take of the Waters of Life freely. Now who can read such
general and gracious Invitations as these in the Word of God, and doubt his
Willingness that they should be saved?

To these let us add,

4. The solemn Declarations that God makes of his Unwillingness, that any
should perish; and his Desires that all should come (...) Repentance and be
saved.

Ezekiel. 18. 23. Have I any Pleasure at all that the Wicked should die, says the
Lord God: and not that he should turn from his Way and live? v. 32. For I have
no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says the Lord God; wherefore turn
your selves, and live ye. And to convince People of the Truth hereof, and not
leave the least Room for doubting in this Matter, He swears by himself, by his
own Life, because he could swear by no greater, Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, says
the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked; but that the
Wicked turn from his Way and live; turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways, for
why will ye die, O House of Israel? And agreeable to this, says the Apostle
Peter in the forementioned 2 Pet. 3. 9. God is Long-suffering to usward, not
willing that any should perish, but that ALL should come to Repentance. Add to
this,

5. With what Reluctance and Backwardness God's giving up any to Destruction is
represented; and how much he is grieved when any by their Obstinacy and final
Impenitency, make it necessary for him as a righteous Judge to deliver them
over to Destruction.

Thus we see the Workings of the divine Compassion toward Sinners, Hos. 11. 8.
How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel etc. Mine
Heart is turned within (...) my Repentings are kindled together. And when our
blessed Lord saw how Jerusalem had sinned away their Day of Grace, and were
just giving the finishing Stroke as to the filling up the Measure of their
Sins: how did his Bowels of Compassion yearn toward them? Luke 19. 41, 42. And
when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If thou
had known, even thou, at least in this thy Day, the Things which belong unto
thy Peace; but now they are hidden from thine Eyes.

Now, laying all these Things together, it appears most evident, that there is
in God a Willingness that all Men should be saved. So that whatever be the
eternal Purposes of God, which are held in his own Breast, and entirely hid
from us; yet they are not such, but God does in some Sense will the Salvation
of all Men. Indeed he don't so will their Salvation as to break in upon the
grand Scheme of Things drawn in his own infinite Mind; nor so as actually to
effect it. But then, there is a Sense wherein he wills the Salvation of all
Men; in so much that with Respect to those who finally perish, it cannot be
said that they perish, because God was not willing they should be saved, but
because they would not accept of Salvation upon the Terms that it was offered
to them. Not because Christ was not able or willing to save them; but because
they would not come unto him that they might have Life. -- I am sensible, this
is a very nice Point, and the Solution of Difficulties, and answering
Objections that have been started, has puzzled and perplexed the Minds of Men:
And therefore to pretend to go to the Depth of these Things, will show our
Curiosity and Conceit, rather than our Wisdom.

Let us therefore proceed to say,

II. As the Way and Means of Men's Salvation, God wills that they should COME
TO THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUTH.

Who will have all Men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth:
That is, as the Way and Means of their being saved. As he wills them to be
saved, so he wills them the Means of Salvation, even the Knowledge of the Truth.

And now, if any of you ask with Pilate, What is Truth?

I answer in general, It is Christ himself, and the Gospel concerning him

Christ himself is the Truth: The only begotten of the Father was full of Grace
and Truth, Joh. 1. 14. Yea, He is the Truth, and the Life, that is, the true
and living Way unto the Father. For no Man comes to the Father but by him,
Joh. 14. 6. And as Jesus Christ himself is the Truth, so is the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, for it declares the Truth concerning him. The Gospel contains the true
and faithful Sayings of God; even all the Account that God has seen Cause to
give us concerning his Son Jesus Christ, and the Way to Salvation by him. The
Gospel may be called the Truth, as it was written by Inspiration of God, even
of the Spirit of Truth, which Christ promised to send to his Disciples to lead
them into all Truth, that is, all necessary Truth. So then the Gospel is the
Truth, as it contains a true Account of Christ, of his Person, and his Offices,
of his Incarnation and Life, of his Doctrines and Miracles, of his Death and
Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven: Of the Salvation that he has
purchased for poor Sinners: and the Terms upon which the same is offered unto
us. And so in short the Gospel is the Truth, as it contains every Truth,
necessary to be known, believed and practiced, in order to our being saved: For
it is able to make us wise unto Salvation, through Faith in Jesus Christ.

According, I shall here say two Things, 1. The appointed Means of Men's
Salvation is the Knowledge of the Truth. And therefore, 2. God wills that all
Men should come to the Knowledge of the Truth in order to their being saved.


1. The appointed Way and Means of Men's Salvation is the Knowledge of the
Truth.

That is, the Knowledge of Christ, and of what the Gospel reveals concerning
him, is the only Way that we know of, for any to come to that Faith, that
Repentance, that new Obedience, as shall be unto Salvation. What God can do, or
may have done in special Cases, by an Act of his sovereign Power and Grace, in
communicating Light and Grace to their Souls, who have not had the Light of the
Gospel, is not for us to say. But this we must say, that the ordinary Way of
Salvation is by the Knowledge of Gospel Truths. Such in general as the Fall of
Man by Sin, and the Redemption wro't out by Jesus Christ, and the Repentance
toward God, and the Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Gospel
Obedience, which is the Way of Salvation. And although a distinct and particular
Knowledge of every Point of Christian Divinity be not absolutely necessary to
Salvation: And although there are many Truths contained in the Word of God, that
are not essential Truths: And although there be many Truths that some Men lay
great Stress upon, yet are not necessary fundamental Articles of our Creed; yet
there is a Knowledge of Gospel Truths necessary, according to the ordinary
Method of Salvation. Thus,

As true Repentance is necessary to Salvation; so in order to this, there must
be a Conviction of Sin: But now, there is no coming to the Knowledge of Sin,
but by the Knowledge of the Law and Gospel, that Sin is the Transgression of.
Moreover, Faith in Jesus Christ is the Gospel-Way of Salvation: But now, as the
Apostle argues, Romans 10. 14, 15. How shall they believe in him, of whom they
have not heard? And how shall they hear, without a Preacher? And how shall they
preach, except they be sent? So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God. v. 17. -- Furthermore, Christ is declared to be the Author of
eternal Salvation to all that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. But how can they obey him,
unless they have the Will of Christ made known to them, and the Rule of
Christian Obedience set before them; which is done only in the Gospel? In
short, for the Heart of Man to be without Knowledge, Gospel-Knowledge, is not
good, or safe for him. Multitudes, Multitudes perish for lack of this Vision.
And many of God's professing People, who live in a Land of Light, and even in
the Valley of Vision; are destroyed for lack of Knowledge: Whereas to know the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, is Life eternal, Joh. 17. 3.

Therefore,

2. God wills that all Men should come to the Knowledge of the Truth, as the
Way to their being saved.

And now, God's willing that Men should come to the Knowledge of the Truth,
appears in the Methods he has taken for spreading the Gospel among Mankind. As,

1. God has delivered his Word, containing all necessary and saving Truths, in
Writing to us.

He has written to us the great Things of his Law, and of his Gospel. Hos. 8.
12. Now by this the Record of divine Truths is preserved, to which Men may
repair, as to a Standard of Truth for Instruction, Admonition or Counsel. And
being written (...) gives Opportunity for its being transcribed or printed; and
for its being translated into all Languages, and so transmitted to all Nations,
as well as to all Ages and Generations of Men. The Word of God being written, I
say, is capable of being thus extensively useful to Mankind.

2. God's Willingness that all Men should come to the Knowledge of the Truth,
appears by the solemn Charge Christ gave his Apostles about Preaching the
Gospel in all Parts of the World.

So far was Christ from confining them to the lost Sheep of the House of
Israel, or to any particular People, that he charges them to go and teach all
Nations; yea, to go into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature, Mar. 16 19. Which plainly shows, that it was the declared preceptive
Will of God, that every Man and Woman upon Earth should have the Gospel of
Salvation brought to them, without any Exception. Again,

3. The pouring out of the holy Ghost in the miraculous Gift of Tongues, was a
further Evidence that it was the Will of God, that all People should come to
the Knowledge of the Truth.

For being enabled all at once to speak all Manner of Languages, they were
fitted to go immediately to any People or Nation or Language under the whole
Heavens; and by that very Gift of Tongues they were enabled not only to teach
every Nation, but as it was a miraculous Gift, it served to confirm their
Mission at the same Time: For in that very Gift of Tongues, they not only
carried a Capacity to teach People of every Language, but a Power to confirm to
such a People, that they were sent of God unto them; for these very Gifts of
Tongues, together with other miraculous Gifts, were the Credentials and
Testimonials of the divine Mission. So that if we should suppose the Apostles,
when Christ ordered them to go and teach all Nations, had objected, saying
within themselves, How can we go to People of a strange Language, and whose
Words we cannot understand, nor they understand ours, who can only speak our
Mother Tongue? I say, supposing the Apostles had thus objected within
themselves; yet on the Day of Pentecost, all those Objections were entirely
removed; for the holy Ghost no sooner appeared in cloven Tongues like as of
Fire, and sat upon each of them, but they found themselves immediately
qualified to go as their Master had commanded them, into all the World, and to
preach the Gospel to every Creature: and had this comforting and encouraging
Word from Christ to animate them to such a Service, Lo, I am with you always,
even unto the End of the World, Matthew. 28. 20. Intimating, that it was his Will
that his Apostles should go into all the World preaching the Gospel of Truth
unto them, and that the Knowledge of Gospel Truths, should be preserved among
them by a constant Succession of Gospel Ministers, with whom Christ would be,
by his Power and Grace, though in a more ordinary Way, from Age to Age, even to
the End of the World. All which plainly shows it to be the Will of God, that
all Men should come to the Knowledge of the Truth, as the Means of Salvation.

I proceed now to the

APPLICATION.
1. Here we see the infinite Love, and good Will of God to Man, that he is
willing that all Men should be saved, and has given such abundant Tokens of his
Willingness.

Surely God in the Gospel has given a most glorious Display of his infinite
Goodness, and of his universal Benevolence, triumphing over all our sinful
Unworthiness; that notwithstanding the infinite Provocation we have all offered
to him by Sin, so that the whole World is become guilty before God, yet he has
a Love of Benevolence, and Compassion to all Mankind; in so much that we may
all unite and sing with the Multitude of the heavenly Host upon the Birth of
the great Savior, Glory to God in the highest, Peace on Earth, and GOOD WILL
TOWARD MEN, Luke 2. 14.

2. Hence the final Destruction of Sinners will lie at their own Doors.

They will not be able to plead, that God was not willing they should be saved:
for God wills that all Men should be saved. Sinners will not be able to
plead, that they were willing; but God was not willing they should be saved.
But on the contrary, it will be charged on Gospel-Sinners, that God would have
gathered them as a Hen does her Chickens under her Wings, but they would not:
That when Christ invited them, they would not come unto him, that they might
have Life: That when he called, they refused; when he stretched out his Hand,
they would not regard it. And therefore instead of charging their Destruction
upon God's not being willing they should be saved; their own Consciences will
everlastingly upbraid them, as in Prove. 5. 12. How have I hated Instruction,
and mine Heart despised Reproof?

3. What infinite Obligations are we under to the Lord Jesus Christ, in and by
whom alone it is, that God is willing that all Men should be saved?

The dearly beloved Son of God has by his Obedience and Death, paid a Price
sufficient for the Sins of the whole World; so that if every Sinner upon Earth
was to be saved, there would need no more Sacrifice for Sin: For by that one
Offering of Christ, such Satisfaction is made to divine Justice, respecting our
Breaches of the divine Law, that upon the Terms of Gospel-Faith and Repentance,
God is reconcilable to every Sinner upon Earth. With what Love and Gratitude
then should we be filled to this great Redeemer: And how should our Souls
magnify the Lord, and our Spirits rejoice in God our Savior?

4. What Encouragement is here for all Sinners, let them be who they will, to
come and be saved?

Are you never so poor, and mean and despicable? Nay, are you never such great
and vile Sinners? Yet depend upon it, God is willing to be reconciled to you,
if you will but return unto him. We have a Warrant from the Gospel to say to
any, and to every Sinner upon Earth, that God is willing to pardon and save
him, if he will but repent, and turn, and lay hold on the Hope that is set
before him. If Sinners have gone to the greatest Length of Sinning; yet even
then it may be said, that God is willing to pardon and save them, if they will
but accept of Salvation as offered in the Gospel: It will not be God's
Unwillingness to save, but Sinners Unwillingness to be saved in the Way of the
Gospel, that will be their eternal Destruction: For him that comes unto me,
says Christ, I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37.

5. Since the Way and Means of Salvation is by the Knowledge of the Truth, as
it is in Jesus, and in his Gospel; what an unspeakable Privilege is it, to
enjoy that Gospel which reveals this Truth unto us?

This is one of the greatest Blessings we can enjoy on this Side Heaven;
because it is the appointed Means of bringing us to Heaven at last. Let the
Light of the glorious Gospel be compared with mere natural Light; and
especially if we compare it with heathenish Ignorance and Darkness, or with
Mohammedan Impostures, or with Romish Antichristian Errors, and Delusions; we
shall see how much they have the Advantage above all the rest of Mankind, to
whom are committed, and by whom are freely enjoyed the Oracles of God: It is by
the Instrumentality of this Word of Truth, that Men are turned from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God. How then should we and all
Protestants who have the free Enjoyment of this Gospel, acknowledge this
distinguishing Favor, and bless the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has thus blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly Things in
Christ Jesus?

6. How aggravated will the Guilt and Condemnation of all such be, who have the
Advantage of coming to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved; and yet perish
at last?

Surely these of all Men will receive the heaviest Doom. They will have no
Cloak for their Sin; but will be utterly left without Excuse. They will not be
able to plead, that God was unwilling to save them; nor will they be able to
plead want of Means, while they live under the clear Light of Gospel Truths:
For they refuse or neglect the very Means of Salvation, that God has provided;
and so all the Blame will lie upon themselves. And this will be their
Condemnation (and none so heavy as this) that Light is come into the World, and
shone round about them; but they have chosen Darkness rather than Light,
because their Deeds were Evil.

7. Since the Gospel contains the Knowledge of the Truth by which we may be
saved; of what Importance is it, that this Gospel should be sent into all
Nations of the Earth?

This is the Way for them to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, so as to be
saved; and it is the very Means of Salvation that God has appointed. Surely
then, there is nothing of equal Importance with this, to Mankind in general.
The Nations who are destitute of this Gospel, are perishing in Ignorance and
Error: whereas this Gospel is able to make them wise unto Salvation through Faith
in Jesus Christ. Wherefore of as much Importance as is the eternal Salvation of
precious Souls, of so much Importance is it, that they should have the Gospel
sent unto them. We cannot wish a greater Blessing to the dark benighted and
bewildred World, than the Light of the Gospel. And it is impossible for
Christians to do a greater Kindness to the ignorant Heathen, than to send the
Gospel to them. Blessed are the People who know the joyful Sound.

8. From what we have heard we may learn, at whose Door it lies, as the faulty
Cause, that so great a Part of Mankind are at this Day destitute of the
Knowledge of the Truth.

Surely we may not lay it at God's Door: For he has not only manifested his
Willingness that all Men should be saved, but has published the Gospel of
Salvation, and gave express Orders to his Apostles to go into all the World,
and preach this Gospel to every Creature; and they attended to his Charge, and
went forth into all Parts of the known World, preaching the Gospel to all
Nations of the Earth. Accordingly the Apostle observes, Romans 10. 18. Yes
verily, their Sound went into all the Earth: and their Words unto the Ends of
the World. And as it was the Command of Christ, that his Gospel should reach
the Ends of the Earth; so we may conclude, that it is agreeable to his Will,
that when any Part of the World is destitute of the Gospel, it should be sent
unto them. Surely he is willing that all should come to the Knowledge of the
Truth; and has done so much in order to it, as abundantly to show his
Willingness: And therefore that so great a Part of the World at this Day lies
in Ignorance, is not to be attributed to God's Unwillingness that they should
receive the Gospel; but it is to be attributed to the Opposition, the
Backwardness, the Negligence and Sloth of some or other of the Children of Men,
as the faulty Cause hereof.

Indeed, it must be acknowledged, that the further Interpositions of divine
Providence, and the Influences of the Spirit, are absolutely necessary to the
further Spreading the Gospel in the World. It depends upon God, who has the
Hearts of all in his own Hands, to raise up, qualify for, and spirit Men unto
such a difficult and self denying Service. It is with God also to enlarge the
Hearts of the Rich and Great, to support such Missionaries, who shall carry the
Gospel to dark and distant Regions. And it likewise depends upon the divine
Influence, to open a Door of Entrance for the Gospel among such who naturally
oppose the Principles and Precepts thereof; and to render it finally
successful: For although Paul planteth, and Apollos waters, yet God gives the
Increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. And yet it must not be attributed to God, but to Man, as
the faulty Cause, that so great a Part of the World still lies in Ignorance.

Here then let me say,

1. It is to be attributed partly to a People's not receiving and embracing the
Gospel when brought unto them.

Thus when the Apostles brought the Gospel to some Places, it was generally
disbelieved, and despised, and so rejected by them; They believed not the
Report of the Gospel, but treated it with Reproach and Contempt; as the
Athenians did, when the Apostle brought the Gospel to them: For although some few
believed, yet the Generality of them mocked, Act. 17. 32. calling him a Babbler,
and a setter forth of strange Gods, v. 18. So if the Gospel was treated with
such Contempt at Athens, and with cruel Outrage at some other Places, it was
not of God, but of themselves, and their own Fault, if they continued in their
heathenish Ignorance.

Moreover,

2. It has been from People's not retaining the Gospel, but suffering it by
their Indifferency and Neglect to die away among them.

This has been long ago the sad Case of many Places, where the Gospel was
preached, and at first embraced, and Gospel Churches founded, and in a
flourishing State for a while; but by sinking away into Laodicean Lukewarmness,
and Indifference about the Gospel, Christian Knowledge, as well as Holiness,
languished and died away. The seven Golden Candlesticks, or famous Churches of
Asia, have been awful Instances hereof, as well as many other Places; in that
Part of the World especially: For there, where Christianity first began, and
flourished in the primitive Ages of it, they by their Negligence, Sloth, and
want of Zeal for the Gospel, have so lost it, that there are scarcely the
Footsteps of Christianity left among them; but they are overspread and
swallowed up with Mohammedan Impostures. And many other Places which have had
the Gospel once among them, have let it drop by Degrees, and returned to
heathenish Ignorance and Error.

3. The present Ignorance and Darkness of so great a Part of the World is owing
to the shameful Backwardness of Christians to carry the Gospel to them.

Christians have not such a Zeal for Spreading the Gospel as the Importance of
the Thing calls for. Those who might be proper Persons to carry the Everlasting
Gospel to the poor perishing Heathen, choose rather to sit down in Ease at
Home, than to engage in such difficult and self-denying Service, as to carry
the Gospel to the dark and distant Regions of the Earth. There is such a
general Backwardness to go forth upon such Errands, that when God does as it
were inquire, as in Isai. 6. 8. Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? It
is a rare Thing to find one so touched as with a live Coal from off the Altar;
so fired with a Zeal for the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Souls, as to
answer with the Prophet, Here am I, send me. But they seem all with one Consent
to make Excuse. Verily, if they who are qualified for the Gospel Ministry, had
such a Love to Christ, and such a Concern for his Honor, and the Enlargement
of his Kingdom as they ought to have; so great a Part of the World would not
lie in Ignorance and Darkness, as now it does. The Gospel would at least be
carried to them, and they would have Gospel Light and Grace offered to them,
whether they received, or rejected it.

4. It is very much owing to the Backwardness of professing Christians to
expend of their Substance for the Support and Encouragement of those who have
been inclined to go forth upon such difficult Service.

Although many gracious and generous Souls in Great Britain, and in other
Christian Nations, have given liberally out of their Estates for propagating
the Gospel in heathenish and ignorant Parts of the World; yet it must be said,
that in general there has been a narrow stingy Spirit, among professing
Christians upon this Account, whereby the Cause has been very much starved; and
Persons discouraged and disheartened in the Undertaking. This is the unhappy
Case, People choose rather to lay out their Wealth to indulge their Luxury, and
gratify their Pride, than to propagate the Gospel, and spread the Knowledge of
the Truth.

5. It is very much owing to the unexemplary, unbecoming Carriage of Christian
Professors.

Christians have not recommended the Gospel by their Example, as they should
have done. Paganism, Mahometism, or Antichristianism, would not have kept their
Ground, or prevailed as they have done, if Christians had in any good Measure
lived up to their Character: But the loose and sinful Behavior of some who
wear the Name of Christians, have prejudiced Multitudes against Christianity:
For they judging the Christian Religion by the Lives of some who profess it,
could not but have an ill Opinion of it. Whereas, if Christians, whenever they
went Abroad, and among Strangers, were careful to live up to Christian Precepts
and Principles, they would greatly recommend it to others: Hence our Savior so
earnestly inculcates an exemplary Life, on all his Disciples, as the Way to
bring others to receive and embrace Christianity. Matthew. 5. 16. Let your Light
so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father
which is in Heaven.

Wherefore,

9. Let Christians all be humble, that there has been so little done by them
for Spreading the Gospel; and be exhorted to bestir themselves more vigorously
than ever, that the poor ignorant beathen might come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, and be saved.

And there are many Things may be offered to Consideration, that may serve to
humble Christians for their Neglects, and move them to do their Duty in this
Matter. Thus,

1. First of all, the Argument of our Text is a very cogent one.

Would God have all Men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, as
the Means of their Salvation? We may then very certainly conclude, it is
agreeable to the Will of God, that Christians should do all they can, to spread
the Gospel of Salvation among Mankind. Shall the great God, who has been so
affronted by our Sins, be willing notwithstanding, that all Men should be
saved? And shall we feel a Backwardness, or Indifferency about their Salvation?
Shall God be willing for the Salvation of all Men; and shall we be concerned
only for our own Salvation, and the Salvation of our Friends and Neighbors?
Surely, true Grace is a more generous Principle than this.

2. The Example of our dear Savior, is a most powerful Argument why we should
encounter the greatest Difficulties to promote the Salvation of Men.

He denied himself to make Way for our Salvation: and so ought every one, as he
would approve himself a true Disciple of Christ. If any Man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me, Math 16. 24. Did
Christ the Son of God, to bring about our Salvation, leave the Bosom of the
Father, and the Realms of Light and Glory above, and come down to this our
Earth? And shall such who are qualified for it, make such a Difficulty in
leaving their Father's House, or their native Land, to carry the Gospel of
Salvation to other People? Did Christ submit to be a Man of Sorrows, and to be
acquainted with Grief; yea did he submit to the cursed and cruel Death of the
Cross, to purchase Salvation for us; what a Shame then, that Christians should
be so backward to undertake any hard and difficult Service for bringing about
the Salvation of Men? Moreover, do we see the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that although he was Rich, yet for our Sakes he became Poor, that we through his
Poverty might be made rich? What a Shame then, that Christians should be
backward of giving out of their Abundance, for Spreading the Knowledge of the
Truth, the appointed Means of Salvation? I am persuaded, there are many
professing Christians, who have not duly considered, what they shall answer, if
Christ should thus expostulate the Matter with them.

3. Again, Consider that a diligent Endeavor to spread the Gospel of
Salvation, is but a grateful Return to God our Savior.

Has Christ at so dear a Rate purchased Salvation for us; and has he favored
us with the Gospel, that shows us the Path of Life? Surely, Gratitude to Christ
obliges us to do what we can, for the Spreading the Gospel: whereby Christ's
Interest may increase, his Kingdom enlarge; and so his Glory be advanced.

4. Again, This will be but to love our Neighbor as our selves. Which is the
Sum and Substance of the second Table of the moral Law; and what the Gospel of
God our Savior (which we enjoy,) indispensably obliges unto. For who is there
that loves his Neighbor as himself, that is not ready to do what in him lies,
that his Fellow. Men may enjoy the same Means of Salvation, that he himself is
favored with.

5. Again, Let it be considered that our diligent and vigorous promoting the
Salvation of others, will turn to our own good Account in the Conclusion.

They who go forth upon such a Service, shall have an abundant Reward, if they
have been faithful, even although they should fail of the desired Success: But if
they be the happy Means of Spreading Salvation, and of turning many to
Righteousness; they shall shine as the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and
ever, Dan. 12. 3. And as for those who expend of their Substance in this Way,
from a true Christian Charity; they will find it laid out to the best
Advantage. It will be in a Sort transmitting their Goods to Heaven beforehand;
and there laid up in Store as a good Foundation against the Time to come. This,
This, my Brethren, is the Way to make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness; that when ye fail, will receive you to everlasting
Habitations, Luke 16. 9.

6. Again, Consider with what Faith, or indeed with what Face. Christians can
pray for the Conversion and Salvation of the Heathen, without bestirring
themselves in some Way or other for their coming to the Knowledge of the Truth?

Prayers must be accompanied with Endeavors, so far as it lays in the Way of
Christians. And they who pray for the Salvation of the Heathen; and yet have no
Heart to bestir themselves in any Way to promote the same; how can they think
their Prayers will find any Acceptance with God?

7. Finally, Consider in what Way we can expect the ignorant Heathen World,
should come to the Knowledge of the Truth, but by Persons being sent forth, and
supported in that Service?

We don't except any new Revelation to be made to the World; or to have this
Gospel Revelation carried by Angels to the ignorant Heathen. This Treasure of
the Gospel has hitherto been in, and conveyed by such earthen Vessels from
Place to Place. And we have no Reason to think it will be otherwise: But that
when the Knowledge of the Truth shall spread, and fill the Earth, as the Waters
do the Seas; it will be carried to them by Men subject to like Passions with
our selves. And therefore Christians do but fall in with the divine Methods,
that have hitherto been, and we have Reason to think will be, in sending forth
and supporting well qualified Persons to carry the Gospel Light to the People
that sit in Darkness? And we have no Reason to expect the Knowledge of
Gospel Truth to spread in the World any other Way.

It must indeed be acknowledged that in this Way there are many Difficulties
and Discouragements. As particularly, that they are of different Languages,
that we cannot understand one another: And that we have not the extraordinary
and miraculous Gift of Tongues, as the Apostles had. But to this it may be
said, that there is no Language, but what by Patience and Diligence may be
learnt: And many People for the Sake of Trade; yea, and merely for the Sake of
appearing polite in the World, will take pains to learn a foreign Language. And
why should they not be as willing to learn a strange Language, for the
spreading Religion, and for the promoting the Salvation of Souls?

And although ordinary Ministers have not Power to confirm their divine Mission
with diverse Signs and Miracles, as the primitive Ministers of Christ had; yet
if Ministers would now go forth with sincere fervent Desires to promote the
Kingdom of Christ; They may hope for his Presence to support, assist and
prosper them; and so to concur with the Influences of his Spirit, as that the
Word they preach shall come with convincing Power upon the Hearts of Hearers.

But if others should go on to object by Way of Discouragement, the
Unsuccessfulness of such Missions in Times past: It may be answered, that ought
not to discourage Christians from going on in such pious and charitable
Attempts. It should lead us indeed to consider by what Means former Attempts
have failed of the desired Success; and to correct such Mistakes as appear to
have been in them: But we must go on still in further Attempts, waiting upon
God to set in with his almighty Spirit and Grace, to open a wide and effectual
Door to such faithful Missionaries. Former Disappointments should by no Means
hinder us from further Endeavors; for if God has not as yet in all Respects
answered our Expectations; yet we know not how soon he may. Eccl. 11. 6. In the
Morning sow thy Seed; in the Evening keep not back; for thou know not which
shall prosper, this or that.

10. How is God to be acknowledged; and the Memory of such to be esteemed and
honored, who have in their Lifetime, or at their Death, given out of their
Estates, for the Support and Encouragement of those who shall carry the
Knowledge of the Truth into the dark Corners of the Earth.

In all pious and charitable Benefactions, God is thankfully to be
acknowledged: By whose Providence and Grace it is, that Persons are stirred up,
and have their Hearts enlarged to give of their worldly Goods for the
Encouragement and Support of those who go forth to preach the Gospel in dark
and distant Lands. But although God is to be acknowledged, and Glory given to him
in the first Place; yet great Respect and Honor is due to such whom God
enables, in larges, and inclines to give to such pious Uses.

And here I would observe, that under God, it is owing to such pious and
charitable Christians in Great Britain, that the honorable Commissioners, and
Corporation of the College, are enabled to send forth several Missionaries
among the Indians, and carry the Knowledge of Gospel Truths, and so the
appointed Means of Salvation to them. And although there has not been at all
Times the desired, and the hoped for Success; yet it must be acknowledged to
the Glory of divine Grace, that the faithful Labors of these Missionaries,
have not been in vain. For many have been brought to the Knowledge of the
Truth; yea, Tokens of Grace, and Things that accompany Salvation, have been
found upon good Numbers of them. vid. The Rev. Mr. Mayhew's printed Account of
Indian Converts at Martha's Vineyard, wherein he gives a particular Account of
a Number of Indian Ministers, and other Men, Women, and Children among them,
eminent for their Faith and Piety.


And it is out of the Fund laid by our pious and charitable Friends in England,
that the Person here standing Candidate for the Gospel Ministry, is in a great
Measure to be supported in his Mission.

And therefore without any further Delay, to you, Dear Sir, would I now apply
my self.

The Indian Plantation to which you are now to be sent, was in former Days, a
very considerable one; and had in the very early Times of New England, the
Gospel of Salvation brought to them: And many of them brought to the Knowledge,
yea, it is reasonably believed, to the saving Knowledge of the Truth, by the
indefatigable Labors of the late aged and venerable Mr. ELIOT, who for his
abundant Labors among the Indians in their several Plantations about in the
Country, has been styled the New England Apostle. After whose Death the Indians
at Natick were occasionally instructed by some Neighboring Ministers: till at
Length for the Space of about thirty Years past, the Gospel has been preached
to them in a more stated Way by their late worthy and faithful Pastor, who has
by his Death ceased from his Labors, and we trust, gone to receive the Reward
of them. The Rev. Mr. Oliver Peabody.


And although the Indians have been in a declining State for many Years, as to
their Numbers; yet still there is a Remnant, and we hope a Remnant according to
the Election of divine Grace; which together with a small Number of English
Inhabitants, are this Day to be committed to your Charge.

And now, since it is the Will of God that all Men should be saved, and come to
the Knowledge of the Truth as the Means thereof; it is the just Expectation of
God and Man, that you faithfully endeavor that they may all come to, and be
preserved in the Knowledge of divine, Gospel Truth. -- We trust and hope you
have felt the Power of these divine Truths upon your own Soul; and have a due
Sense of the Worth, the Importance, and the Necessity of them: And that you
will endeavor that every Member of your Charge may come to the saving
experimental Knowledge of the same.

It is but a little Flock that you will have under your immediate Care: But
they are such as will require a great deal of Pains to be taken with them, and
who will need not only your public, but more private Instructions, even from
House to House. Most of them are but as Children in Knowledge; and so will
require, Line upon Line; Precept upon Precept; here a little, and there a
little. Let not the Smallness of your Flock tempt you to Slackness in your
Business; but put you upon taking a more special Care of every Individual.

You will bear it always upon your Mind, that the Truth you are to instruct
them in, and inculcate upon them, is Gospel Truth; and that it will be of
little Service to insist upon nice Speculations, or Matters of doubtful
Disputation with them; but the grand essential Points of Doctrine, and the
practical Truths of the Gospel, will be more to the Purpose.

And here for your quickening to Diligence and Faithfulness, I would have you
consider, that although but a few Souls will be committed to your immediate Care;
yet they are Souls precious, and immortal Souls, and will deserve your utmost
Care: And you must be faithful in a few Things, if you would have the blessed
Euge at last, and be made Ruler over many Things.

Furthermore, I would observe to you, that as it is the Indian Interest, you
are more especially to be concerned in; and will be chiefly supported by Moneys
given for promoting the Knowledge of Christ among that poor and seemingly
forsaken People; so it will very well become you to exercise your Thoughts and
Cares, not merely for the Indians at Natick; but that you have at Heart the
Interest of Religion among the Indians in all Parts of the Land; and endeavor
as you have Opportunity to promote and encourage the Spreading the Gospel among
those distant Tribes, which do still lie in Ignorance.

And Oh! may the happy Times come, when Persons shall be raised up, qualified
for, and spirited to carry the Everlasting Gospel of Truth, to all the dark
Corners of our Land: That so the poor ignorant Tribes of Indians, may be turned
from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God!

As for the Eastern Tribes, to the Shame of Protestants it must be spoken; That
the Romish Priests were more early, and more earnest in spreading their
Principles among them, than we Protestants have been. By which Means they have
gained such Prepossessions, and stirred up such Prejudices in them, that it is
become exceeding difficult to persuade them now to strip their Religion of
those Antichristian Errors and Delusions that have been imposed upon them, and
to embrace the plain and simple Truth as it is in Jesus.

And as for the Western Tribes, they have been hitherto, most shamefully
neglected: And would to God, that the English Government which lies nearest to
them, would seriously consider how they will answer it, another Day; that they
have done so little to propagate Christian Knowledge among them: But that
instead thereof so many Blocks and Discouragements have been laid in the Way to
hinder others from undertaking and engaging in so good a Work.

And I think it highly becomes This, and all the Neighboring Governments, to
exert themselves with Speed and Vigor in this Matter; that those poor People,
who have for unknown Ages sat in Darkness, in the Region, and Shadow of Death,
might at Length have the great and glorious Light of the Gospel spring up among
them. I say, we ought to be speedy as well as vigorous in our Endeavors in
this Matter; before our French Neighbors shall spread Antichristian Errors and
Prejuices among them; which we understand they are at this Day earnestly
striving for.

O let us not be more backward to spread Truth, the glorious Truths of the
Gospel; than they are to spread dangerous Errors: But let us out of an hearty
Regard for the Honor and Interest of Jesus Christ, and out of a Love to the
poor and perishing Souls of these Indians, take some effectual Methods to send
the Gospel in its Purity among them* And by this Means we shall be in the Way
not only of doing unspeakable Benefit to them; but of reaping great Advantage
to our selves thereby: This being the most likely Method to secure Peace, and
maintain a friendly Correspondence with them. But although this political
Argument may very properly be thought of by us, and have considerable Weight
with us; yet the other Arguments, such as the Honor of Christ, and the saving
Good of their Souls, are the higher and more generous Motives, and ought to
have the principal Sway with us. And indeed, if true Christian, gracious and
generous Love, did but glow with a sacred Ardor in the Breasts of Christians,
these poor Indians would not lie neglected; but some pious Candidates for the
Gospel Ministry, would generously offer themselves, saying, one and another of
them, Here am I, send me. And others would readily contribute of their Estates
to the laying some generous Fund, for the Support of such Missionaries and
Schoolmasters, as shall thus offer themselves.

Oh! that such a Love to Christ and to our Fellow-Men, might be shed Abroad in
the Souls of the People of this, and the Neighboring Governments, as well as
in the British Realms: And that some effectual Methods, under the divine
Conduct and Blessing, might be come into, for sending the Gospel to all the
Aboriginal Natives of the Land.

And may such a Zeal for the Glory of God, and the Good of Mankind, be so
stirred up through all Christendom, as to put them upon endeavoring with their
Might, that the saving Truths of the Gospel, may be sent to all the Heathen
Nation upon the Earth. Wherefore with our vigorous Endeavors in our several
Places, let us join our earnest Prayers, with the devout Wishes of the
Psalmist, for enlarging the Church and Kingdom of God in the World, Psalm. 67.
1,2,3. God be merciful to us, and bless us, and cause his Face to shine upon
us: That thy Way may be known upon Earth, and thy saving Health among all
Nations! Let the People praise thee, O God! Let ALL the People Praise Thee.

AMEN
The Charge given to the Rev. Mr. STEPHEN BADGER, at his Ordination in Boston,
March 27. 1753.
By the Reverend Dr. SEWALL.
Mr. Stephen Badger,
WHEREAS you on whom we now lay our Hands, have received a Call to the Work of
the Ministry, and to the pastoral Office in the Church lately gathered at
Natick; and have accepted the same: We do in the Name of Christ, and by His
Authority, Ordain you to be a Minister of the Everlasting Gospel, and a Pastor
to the said Flock.

And we Charge you before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
Quick and the Dead at his Appearing and his Kingdom, that you fulfill the
Ministry which you have received of the Lord.

Take heed to thy self, and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost makes
you an Overseer; to feed the Church of God, which He has purchased with his
own Blood.

For this End, give thy self continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the
Word.

Pray for all Men, for Kings, and for all in Authority; that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty.

And when you go to the Throne of Grace, let the People of God, and
particularly this Flock, lie near your Heart; and cease not to make mention of
them in your Prayers.

Preach the Word: Be instant in Season, out of Season; Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort,
with all Long-suffering and Doctrine. Study to show thy self approved unto God,
a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth.
In Doctrine show Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech that cannot be
condemned. Teach God's People to observe all Things whatsoever Christ has
commanded.

Bless the Flock in the Name of the Lord our God, who is the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Ghost: And thus put his Name upon them, that he may bless
them.

Administer the Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
to the qualified Subjects, according to Christ's Appointment, as a faithful and
good Steward of the Mysteries of God

Dispense the Discipline of the Church of Christ, according to his Word, making
a Difference between the holy and profane. Them that sin, rebuke before all,
that others also may fear. Observe these Things without preferring one before
another, doing nothing by Partiality.

Use your best Endeavors to know the State of the Flock. And whereas they
consist of English and Indians, let you-watchful Care, and tender Regards be
expressed to both impartially, giving to each their Portion in due Season; and
according to their various Circumstances. Feed Christ's Sheep, feed his Lambs.
Be ready to Counsel and Pray with the Sick, and to speak a Word in Season to
them that are weary.

And that you may be furnished to every good Work; Give Attendance to Reading:
-- Neglect not the Gift of God that is in thee. Meditate on these Things, and
give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear unto all.

Let no Man despise thy Youth; but be thou an Example of the Believers, in
Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. Be blameless
as the Steward of God, not self-willed, not soon angry, -- sober, just, holy,
temperate.

In all Things show thy self a Pattern of good Works. Flee also youthful Lusts;
and be clothed with Humility.

And the Things which thou have heard of us among many Witnesses, the same
commit thou to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also. Lay Hands
suddenly on no Man; neither be Partaker of other Men's Sins: Keep thy self pure.

Endure Hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. And that you may be able to
bear the Burden of that weighty Charge which our Lord lays upon you; Look unto
Him while you run the Race set before you. Be strong in the Grace which is in
Christ Jesus: Live by the Faith of the Son of God; that he may make his
Strength perfect in your Weakness, and his Grace sufficient for you. Who is
sufficient for these Things? All our Sufficiency is of God.

And now, we again say unto you; Feed the Flock of God; taking the Oversight
thereof, not by Constraint, but (...) Lucre, but of a ready Mind: Neither (...)
but being an Example to (...) chief Shepherd shall appear, you (...) receive a
(...) of Glory, that fades not away.

The Right Hand of Fellowship, as given at the Ordination of the Rev. Mr.
STEPHEN BADGER.
By the Reverend Mr. ABBOT.
Men, Brethren and Fathers -- hearken!
FORASMUCH, as it has been the Practice of the Churches of Christ in
New England, from their Foundation, to give the Right Hand of Fellowship by
their Elders, to a Pastor newly separated to the Work of the Gospel Ministry;
and this in Conformity to the Pattern of the primitive Church, relative to
which we are informed, in the sacred RECORDS of the New Testament, that when
James, Cephas and John (who were Pillars in it) perceived the Grace, that was
given to Paul and Barnabas, in their Call to the Apostleship; they gave them
the Right Hand of Fellowship, in Token of their Acceptance of them, and of
their Equality and Communion with them therein.

It is therefore the Desire of the Reverend Elders, and honored Delegates, of
the several Churches convened in Council, on this joyful Occasion; that That
significant Symbol, should with a like Intention, be given at this Time unto
the Reverend Person, whom we have all seen solemnly separated ( by Prayer and
the laying on of the Hands of the 'Presbytery) to the Work of the Ministry; and
to the pastoral Care of the new-gathered Church of Christ in Natick in
particular; and more especially of the Christianiz'd Indians among them; to
which important Service he is peculiarly designed and devoted.

And having enjoined it upon me, to perform this Act of Brotherly Communion,
and publicly to tender the Social Hand in their Name; I do accordingly in the
Face of this large Assembly, -- Now turn my self to you, dear Sir, and
affectionately give you the Right Hand of our Fellowship -- Thereby to declare
our Satisfaction in what has been done by the Church of Christ, who has called
you; and by your Self in your Acceptance of it, and in your religious
Dedication to the Service of Christ and of Souls in it. -- More particularly,
to acknowledge you, a Minister of Jesus Christ, regularly introduced into the
sacred Office, and having equal Authority with our selves, to discharge the
several Duties belonging to it. -- To embrace and receive you as a Brother and
Fellow-Helper in the Kingdom of God; and to bid you Welcome into the Lord's
Vineyard, as a Partner in the Labors of it. -- Engaging also hereby, to you,
and to the Church of Christ ( of which the Holy Ghost has now made you an
Overseer) all that Advice and Assistance for the Purposes of Religion, that we
are able to give: expecting and desiring the same on your Part, in Behalf of
our Selves, and of the Churches of Christ, to which we stand related, as
Occasion may require. -- And finally, to express our earnest Desires that you
may have the promised Presence of our ascended LORD and SAVIOR, on which he
has caused both you and us to hope; and the abundant unceasing Supply of the
Spirit of Wisdom and Grace to furnish you yet more and more and more! for the
discharge of the difficult Work and Service, that you have now entered upon,
before many Witnesses: That so you may be enabled to fulfill this Ministry,
which you have received of the Lord; and obtain Mercy of him to be faithful in
it: And that your faithful Labors may be crowned with glorious Success; so
that the Blessings of many Souls ready to Perish, may come upon you.

-- And verily, Sir, if you keep this CHARGE, the glorious Jehovah Himself will
hereafter give you a Place among those that stand by, I mean the Holy Angels,
those heavenly Messengers, who doubtless are Spectators of this Assembly: When
they that are wise Teachers, shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament,
and they that have turned many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever! --

And now, may it be the pious Wish and fervent Prayer of every Soul before the
Lord, that the Kingdom of Christ may be established, and built up with greater
Power and Success in all Parts of the Land, both among the English and the
Indians. -- And that That happy happy! Day may be hastened, when it shall know
no Bounds, but extend it self to all Nations and Kindreds and People and
Tongues: till the WHOLE EARTH be filled with the Knowledge and Glory of the
Lord.

And let all the Congregation say, AMEN!

HALLELUJAH!

FINIS.

