The Servant's actual Readiness for the Coming of his Lord, Described, and
Recommended.

In Two DISCOURSES Preached at Lexington, December 17th. 1752. Being the Lord's
Day after the Funeral of their late venerable and aged Pastor, the Reverend Mr.
JOHN HANCOCK, who going to Bed as well as usual the Night after the 5th of
December, and awaking some time after Midnight with a great Pain in his
Stomach, died in a few Minutes. In the 82d Year of his Age, and 54th of his
Ministry.

By NATHANAEL APPLETON, A.M. Pastor of the first Church in Cambridge.

Published at the Request of the People of Lexington.

Mark vii.35, 36, 37. Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of
the House comes, at Even, or at Midnight, or at the Cock crowing, or in the
Morning.

Least coming suddenly he find you sleeping.

And what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch.

BOSTON: Printed by S. Kneeland, 1753.

The Servant ready and waiting for the Coming of his LORD.
LUKE XII.35, 36, 37. Let your Loins be girded about, and your Lights burning:
and ye your selves like unto Men, that wait for their Lord, when he will return
from the Wedding; that when he comes and knocks they may open to him
immediately. Blessed are those Servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall
find watching.


WATCHFULNESS is the great Duty which our Lord is here pressing upon his
Disciples; that they might be in actual Readiness for his Coming, at what Time
soever it shall be, whether sooner or later; at the second or third Watch of
the Night,. 38. And here our Savior considers them as Servants, and from
thence argues their Obligation to Watchfulness, and a constant Readiness for
his Coming. And he takes the Argument from the Custom of Servants (that is
faithful Servants) watching and waiting for the coming home of their Masters,
when gone Abroad, especially to a Wedding, when it was very uncertain at what
Hour of the Night they would come Home. Now in such Cases, the Master required,
and expected, and the good Servant would, accordingly be in Readiness to open
to his Master and let him in, whenever he knocked at the Door. The good Servant
instead of being asleep, and all in the Dark, when his Master came home, though
late at Night; would be awake, with his loose Garment girt about his Loins,
that it might not be in the Way to hinder or retard him in running and opening
to his Master immediately. But then, it being in the Night, Lights would be
necessary for the Reception of his Master: Accordingly the watchful servant
will take Care not only to have Candles or Lamps, with Oil, in the Room, but to
have them lighted, and actually burning; that he might not have the least Thing
to hinder him; but so soon as ever he heard his Master's Knock he might open to
him immediately, and his Master find every Thing in readiness.

And now from this Custom our Savior takes Occasion to recommend the same
Watchfulness, and actual Readiness to his Disciples for his Coming, how soon or
sudden soever it shall be. Let your Loins be girded about, and your Lights
burning, and ye your selves like unto Men that wait for their Lord etc. And so
our Savior explains himself,. 40. Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of
Man comes in an Hour when ye think not. If Christ's Coming here, has a primary
Reference to his coming to judge the Jews in the Destruction of Jerusalem, and
Dissolution of the Jewish State; yet it may refer to his coming to particular
Persons at Death; and his coming to judge the World at the last Day: of which
the Destruction of Jerusalem may be considered as an eminent Type, or lively
Emblem. And if we consider his coming at Death, or at the Judgment; they are
both utterly uncertain as to the Time. We know neither the Day, and much less
the Hour, when the Son of Man shall come. As to his coming by Death, we know in
general, that it cannot be far off: But whether he will come early in the
Evening, or in the second Watch, or in the third Watch of the Night, even to
advanced old Age, who can say, before it comes to pass? --

And now, as I have already observed, that these Words have an Eye to the
Manner of a faithful Servant, who expecting his Master to come Home: But not
knowing at what Hour, endeavors to have every Thing in actual Readiness; that
whether he comes sooner or later, he may open to him immediately: So I shall
carry on this Similitude through my Discourse, as what may afford many
instructive Thoughts to us.

Accordingly, what I propose is, 1. To consider this Direction of our blessed
Lord, to have our Loins girded about. 2. What it is to have our Lights burning.
3. Agreeable hereto, I shall describe the Man, the Christian, who is thus
waiting for the Coming of his Lord. 4. I shall then consider the Blessedness of
all who are in such a watching, waiting Frame. 5. And then make some
Application suitable to the Occasion.


1. Let us consider this Direction of our blessed Lord: Let your Loins be
girded about.

Now this, as I hinted, has Reference to the Manner of those Nations, who were
wont to wear long and loose Garments, which they were obliged to gird or tuck
up, when they engaged in any Business, that they might not be in their Way to
fetter, entangle or hinder them. And thus Servants to be ready to wait upon
their Masters at their coming home, girded their Garments about their Loins:
And would not have so much as this to do, when their Master knocked: And would
be thus girded up all the Evening; and to the second, and third, and fourth
Watch of the Night, if their Masters tarried so long.

Quest. And now, What Instruction does this afford to Christians: what would
Christ have his Servants do, corresponding with this?

Ans. 1. It is a Call to Christians to shake off all their Sleep and
Drowsiness, and be in a wakeful Frame.

The Servant's girding up his Loins to be ready for his Master's coming,
supposes him to be awake, and ready for Business. So when Christ says to his
Disciples, Gird up your Loins; it is as much as to say, Christians must shake
off all their Dullness, Drowsiness, and Sloth, and get and keep in a wakeful
watchful Frame. -- As for Sinners, they are in a Sleep, in a Sort of dead
Sleep, and the Call of the Gospel to such is that, in Ephesians. v.14. Awake thou
that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Life. And as
for real Christians, they are exceeding apt to be drowsy and sleepy in the
Business of Religion, and Service of Christ. The Things of Time and Sense lull
them asleep. In the Parable of the Virgins, the wise are represented as
slumbring as well as the foolish, Matthew. 25.5. While the Bridegroom tarried,
they all slumbred and slept. But now, when Christ says to Christians, Let your
Loins be girded about; it is as much as to say, Awake out of all your Slumbers,
rowse up and bestir your selves in the Service of Christ and of your Souls. --
And surely considering we know not when our Lord will come, it concerns us to
shake off all our Drowsiness, lest coming he find us sleeping. And this is to
have all our Powers awake; and we ready to every Duty and Service God calls us
unto. -- It is astonishing to think, what dull drowsy and slothful Frames
Christians fall into, considering we know not but the Lord is at Hand, that He
the Judge is before the Door; and may knock by the Messenger of Death this very
Night. Wherefore when Christ says in the Text, Let your Loins be girded about;
you must consider him speaking to them, as in Romans 13.11. And that knowing the
Time, that it is high Time to awake out of Sleep; for now is your Salvation
nearer than when you at first believed. And in 1 These. v.6. Therefore let us
not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober.

Ans. 2. It intends the laying aside every Thing that would fetter, clogg or
hinder us in any of the Duty and Service that Christ our Lord calls us unto.

The Servant was to gird his Garment about his Loins, that it might not hang in
his Way, when he was waiting upon his Master. And the good and watchful Servant
who expected his Master to knock at the Door, instead of having his Garment
hang loose, girded it about him, that he might run without any Delay to open
unto him. And besides, he knew not what his Master might have for him to do
when he came in: and therefore would have his Garment girded about him, so as
to be no Obstruction to him. Accordingly, when Christ calls upon us Christians
to have our Loins girded about; it intends that we should as much as possible
get every Thing out of the Way, that would hinder us in our Christian Course,
or keep us in an unsuitable Frame for the Coming of Christ at Death. It intends
that we lay aside every Thing that would put us into an unfit Posture for Death
to meet us in.

Here then, as Sin and Corruption working in our Hearts, would be very
unsuitable, and very much indispose and hinder us from a due Attendance upon
Christ at Death; so to gird our Loins, is to get rid as much as possible of the
Workings of Sin and Corruption within us. While Lusts of any Kind prevail, a
Man is as unprepared for the Coming of Christ by Death, as the Servant is to
run and wait upon his Master, with all his Garments hanging loose about him. So
that to gird up your Loins, and be in a waiting Posture for your Lord, is to be
getting rid of every vicious Habit, with all your Might, striving against
corrupt Nature, and all the out-breakings of it: calling in the Aids of the
divine Spirit to subdue it for you. Whatever Lust you find begins to work
within you, it must be opposed with all your Might, considering how unsuitable
it will be for you to be entangled with any Lust, when Christ the Lord shall
knock at the Door by the Messenger of Death. -- And therefore, when Pride, or
Passion, or Coveteousness, or Carnality, begin to work in your Hearts; then
consider with your selves, and say, Is this a proper Posture for Death to find
me in? Is this a fit Frame for a dying Man? If Christ my Lord should now come
and call for me, is this a fit Temper to meet him in? Now such like Reflections
would put us upon girding up our Loins. And Oh! what Strength would it give us
to resist and repel a Temptation to Sin, to consider and say within our selves,
that for aught we know, Christ our Lord and Master may be at the Door ready to
call for us; and how shall we, while under the Power of Sin and Corruption, be
ready to meet him, or even to look him in the Face?

Ans. 3. But then this girding up the Loins may more especially intend the
laying aside the Sin that most easily besets us; and which we are most liable
to fall into.

The Sins which Christians are more particularly addicted to, are like long
loose Garments that are always in the Way, hindering from many good Things, that
otherwise might be done by us. There is nothing that so much comes in the Way,
and hinders a Man in running the Christian Race, and from preparing for the
Coming of Christ by Death and Judgment, as his own particular Sin, his
Constitution Sin, or the Sin he has been long accustomed to; or that to which
he is peculiarly exposed, by his Calling, by his Place, and Station in the
World, by the Company he is in the Way of, and the Examples and Enticements of
Sinners, that he is unavoidably exposed unto. These, I say, are the Sins that
fetter us, and hinder us from being in a due Preparation for the Coming of
Christ. Accordingly, the Apostle lets the Christian Hebrews know, that as ever
they would run the Christian Race set before them, they must lay aside the Sin
that easily besets them, Heb. xii.1. The Sin that encompasses, that clasps, or
clings round about them; as their long Garments did, to which the Apostle seems
to refer. And therefore, as those Garments were to be laid aside, or girded up
before they were fit for Business; so those Sins that clasp, and cling round
about us, so as to fetter and entangle us in running the Christian Race, must
be put out of the Way. Whether our particular Sin be Pride, or Passionateness,
or Envy, or Malice: whether it be Unbelief, or Distrust, or Discontent: Whether
it be Worldly-mindedness, or Carnality: Whether it be Idleness, or Sloth, or
Voluptuousness, or Intemperance. I say, whatever it be, we must with all our
Might labor to get rid of it, as ever we would be ready to meet Christ at his
Coming. -- For consider, I beseech you, how unfit you will be for the Coming of
the Son of Man, while you are entangled with any of these Lusts? Who can think
himself in a fit Posture to meet Christ at Death, and at the Judgment, with his
Mind puffed up with Pride and Vanity? or his Spirit broiling with angry
Passions, and breathing out Threatenings and Revenges? or who has his Heart
swallowed up with worldly Cares, and earthly Affections; or is wallowing in
sinful Pleasures? Surely this, to keep to the Similitude before us, would be as
improper, and as unbecoming, as it would be for a Servant who is ordered to
wait for his Master's coming home, to have all his Clothes hanging so about
him, and be so entangled with them, that he could not so much as arise and open
the Door to him. -- And this may suffice to show what our Savior means, when
he calls upon his Disciples to have their Loins girded about. -- It is to rouse
up out of all our Sleepiness and Dullness, and exert our selves with Life,
Spirit and Activity, in the Service of Christ; and to lay aside every Sin, and
especially every Sin that does most easily beset us, as what will hinder us
from being in a suitable Readiness for the Coming of our Lord.

II. I proceed now to consider the next Word of Advice, viz. And your Lights
burning. --

And this I said, refers also to the Manner of Servants waiting for their
Master's coming home in the Night, let it be what Hour of the Night it would;
whether early or late, the Servant took Care not only to have Candles or Lamps,
and Oil in them, ready to light: but had his Lamps actually lighted, and
burning, that when the Master knocked at the Door, he might not then have the
Lamps to light up; but being already lighted, might go immediately, and open to
him, and light him into the Room, where the Lights were burning, and all Things
ready to receive him.

Quest. And now, What are we to understand by our Savior's calling upon his
Servants, thus to have their Lights burning?

Answ. in General, It intends, that Christians should see to it, that they have
all Things in actual Readiness for the Coming of the Son of Man at Death.

The Servant must have not only some Lamps and Appearance of what afforded
Light; but there must be Oil in the Lamps; and not only Oil in the Lamps, but
they must be actually lighted up, and burning. Agreeable to this, there must be
in Christians, not only an outward Show and Appearance of Readiness; but there
must be a real habitual Readiness: and not only so, but an actual Readiness for
the Coming of Christ. -- So then, to keep to the Similitude of my Text, let me
say --

1. If you would be in Readiness for the Coming of the Son of Man, you must
have at least a Lamp of outward Profession.

A Lamp is the Emblem of an outward Profession. So our Savior is understood in
his Parable of the ten Virgins, Matthew. xxv.1. The Kingdom of Heaven is likened
unto ten Virgins who took their Lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom..
3. They that were foolish took their Lamps; but took no Oil with them. Which is
universally interpreted of the Profession which they made. And a Lamp is a fit
Emblem of an outward Profession; as might easily be shown. And now, it is the
Duty of all under the Gospel to have a Lamp of a fair Profession. That Servant
who has not so much as a Lamp, is not in any Readiness for his Master's coming
home in the Night: No more are Persons under the Gospel prepared for the Coming
of Christ, without a free, fair, and open Profession of him. The Servant was to
have his Lamps, the Form and Appearance of Light; so you must have the Form and
Appearance of Religion. Not that this will by any Means answer the End of it
self, any more than an empty Lamp would answer the End to give Light: But as a
Lamp is necessary to contain that which affords the Light; so a Profession of
Christ is necessary to our being Christians. Although many Professors will be
disowned and rejected of Christ hereafter; yet if we don't profess him to be
our Lord, and freely acknowledge him before Men, he will finally disown and
reject us. Matthew. x.32.33. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before Men, him
will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me
before Men, him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven. So that the
denying Christ, or neglecting and refusing to own him (which is a Sort of
denying him) is not so light a Thing as some People imagine; but it is highly
requisite to our being ready for the Coming of the Son of Man, that we make an
open Profession of him.

That Servant would be looked upon as very far from being ready for his
Master's coming home in the Night, who had not so much as a Lamp or Candle in
the House. And let me tell you, that if you have not so much as the Lamp of a
Christian Profession, you are as far from being prepared for the Coming of
Christ at Death or the Judgment.

Indeed there are Degrees of Profession; but we should labor to stand complete
in our Christian Profession, and to walk in all the Commandments, and come up
to all the Ordinances of the Lord. And as for such, who through Carelessness or
indulged Sloth, or Bashfulness, neglect to make a full Profession of Christ, or
to come up to his holy Ordinances; they are in a very poor Readiness for Death
or Judgment. For supposing that Christ the Master should knock at your Door by
the Messenger of Death; and after that, you should be called to Judgment, what
Excuse could you make to the Master, that you had not so much as owned him, or
openly professed him to be your Lord?

Wherefore let all such who are unbaptized; or being come to Years of
Discretion, neglect to renew their baptismal Covenant, and to take the Bonds
thereof upon themselves, or to seal the same at the holy Sacrament of the
Supper: And when the Neglect hereof is through Carelessness and a Spirit of
Indifferency, or through Bashfulness, and a being ashamed to make such a public
Appearance, consider those awful, and very awakening Words of our Savior,
Matthew. viii.38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my Words in
this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed when he comes in the Glory of the Father with his holy Angels.

2. If we would be in Readiness for the Coming of Christ, we must have not only
the Lamp of a fair Profession; but the Oil of true Grace in the Heart.

The Servant who waits for the coming home of his Master, don't content himself
with having a Number of empty Lamps hanging about in the Room, or in the Entry;
but he sees that there be Oil in them, that will burn and afford Light unto his
Master. -- So what Christ requires of us as absolutely necessary to our being
in Readiness for his Comng, is the Oil of true Grace in the Heart. There is no
Man is or can be in Readiness for the Coming of the Son of Man, without this.
For although, a public Profession of Christ, and of his holy Religion, be our
indispensible Duty; yet a bare empty Profession will not answer the End, any
more than empty Lamps will serve to give Light in the Room. A Soul empty of
true Grace, is like an empty Lamp, and is utterly unprepared for the Coming of
Christ by Death, or to the Judgment. -- There must be a gracious Change wrought
in Men's Hearts by the Spirit of God: There must be the Seeds and Principles of
every Grace, and so that which is called the Habit of Grace: And if Christ
should come to any by Death before they are thus endowed with the Grace of God,
alas for such poor Souls! they will be lost and undone for ever. There must be
the Habit of Faith, true Faith; for without Faith it is impossible to please
God; and he who believes not shall be damned. Mar. xvi.16. There must be the
Grace of true Repentance toward God, as well as Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ: For unless we repent, we shall all likewise perish, Luke xiii.3. There
must be a Principle of Holiness in the Heart, and the Practice of it in the
Life: For without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. xii.14. And the same
may be said as to the Love of God, and as to the Love of our Neighbor, and to
Humility, and Patience, Self-denial, and every other Grace. For this Habit of
Grace in the Soul, is the very Thing that prepares for the Coming, and Presence
of Christ. Let a Man have every Thing else; yet if this one Thing be lacking,
he cannot be ready for the Coming of Christ. Let a Man make never so high a
Profession, and appear never so religious, and be never so confident about
himself, and his own Readiness for Death and Judgment: Let him say never so
much of his waiting and longing for his Dissolution and Departure, in the
confident Expectation or Assurance of his going to be with Christ; yet if the
Habit of true Grace be wanting, he is by no Means fit for that awful Change:
And if Christ should come to him while in such a graceless State, all his
confident Boasts, and high Expectations will only expose him to a greater
Disappointment. "For what is the Hope of the Hypocrite, though he has gained,
when God takes away his Soul?" The deplorable Case of such is represented by
the foolish Virgins in the Parable, who had Lamps, but no Oil to keep them
burning: and while they were running about seeking and begging for Oil, Behold
the Bridegroom came, and they that were ready went in with him to the Marriage;
and the Door was shut: And when they came and cried, saying, Lord, Lord, open
unto us; He answered and said, Verily, I know you not, Matthew. xxv. at the
Beginning.

3. If we would be in all due Readiness for the Coming of Christ by Death, we
must have not only the Lamp of a fair Profession, and the Oil of true Grace in
the Heart; but the Lamp must be lighted, and actually burning; i. e. this true
Grace must be in lively Exercise: -- And your Lights burning, is the Direction
of the Text. The Servant who waited for the coming of his Master, kept his
Lights burning all the Evening, even to the third or fourth Watch of the Night,
if his Master did not come before. And this Advice to the Christian, is to have
his Graces in lively and vigorous Exercise. What Christ here recommends to his
Disciples, is not only an habitual, but an actual Readiness for his Coming; and
in Order to it, recommends not only the Habit, but the lively Exercise of
Grace. -- As for the Habit of Grace, it belongs to every true Christian; for it
is the gracious Habit that makes the true Christian. But this Habit, when it is
not in lively Exercise, is like Oil in the Lamp, but not lighted up, or only so
lighted as that it scarce affords any Light at all, and is so dim, that it can
hardly be discerned: or so poor a Light, that it seems to be just going out.
But now, the Direction of our Lord is to have our Lights burning; that is,
burning bright and strong; which is to have Grace in lively Exercise, as the
best Preparative for his certain and sudden Coming by Death and Judgment.

Thus we may not content our selves with a supposed Principle of Faith or of
Repentance: But there must be the Exercise, the lively Exercise of Repentance
toward God, and of Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. And as there must be the
Principle or Habit of Love to God, so there must be the Exercise of it: The
Heart must be filled with the highest Esteem of him, and carried out in most
ardent Desires after him, and in the highest Delight and Satisfaction in him,
which must sweetly but powerfully carry us on in a Course of sincere and
cheerful Obedience to him: For this is the Love of God that we keep his
Commandments; and his Commandments are not grievous. -- So again, there must be
not only the Habit of true Love and Charity to our Neighbor; but the Soul must
be actually going forth in sincere Wishes and servent Prayers for their
Welfare; and we must be much in Acts of real Goodness and Kindness to them, as
we have Ability and Opportunity for it. So again, there must be not only the
Principle of Humility; but we must be clothed with Humility; and we must walk
humbly with our God: and there must be a condescending to Men, even to Men of
low Degree. Again, as there must be the Habit of Patience, so this must be put
forth in a patient bearing every Evil we meet withal. And then there must be
not only a self-denying Spirit; but there must be an actual denying our selves:
there must be a denying our Self-Will, our Self-Humour, or Self-Honour, or
Self-Ease, or Self-Interest, as the Cause of God, and the real Good of others,
calls for it. And now to have Grace thus in Exercise, is to have our Lights
burning.

And here I would further say, that for Persons to imagine they have the
Principle of Grace in their Hearts; and yet not to Exercise it in their Lives,
is a sad Sign that they are ignorant of themselves, and think themselves
something, when indeed they are nothing; for Grace in the Heart will some how
or other manifest itself in the Life, Matthew. xii.35. A good Man out of the good
Treasure of his Heart brings forth good Things.

I don't say, that wherever there is a Principle of Grace, there is always the
discernable Exercise of it; for by some Means or other; especially by Means of
remaining Corruption; and some present powerful Temptation; the gracious
Principle may be obstructed in its Operation; and so may be buried up for the
present as it were like Fire covered over with Ashes, as not to be discerned.
And as to some particular Graces or Virtues, there may not be at all Times
Occasion for the Exercise of them. But unless there be a prevailing Inclination
to exercise every Grace and Virtue, as there is Occasion: And if there be not
some Exercise thereof generally as Occasions call for it, there is Reason to
fear, that the Principle it self is wanting: -- for, to keep to the Similitude
of the Text; should we not be ready to conclude there was no Oil, or no good
Oil in a Lamp, when upon no Occasion we could light it, and set it a burning? A
Principle of true Grace is powerful, and active: and therefore wherever it is
found, it will have a general Influence upon Men's Lives: And therefore when we
see no such gracious Influence upon Men's Lives, it is justly to be feared the
Habit it self is wanting.

I insist the more upon this Point, to stave People off from that
Self-Flattering, and Deceiving, that is common among Men, whereby they fancy
they have true Grace in their Hearts, when there appears nothing of it in their
Lives; and so vainly conclude they are ready for Death, and for the Coming of
the Son of Man: when alas, they have nothing in Readiness for such an awful
Change; and would be put to as great a Plunge, and meet with the same dreadful
Disappointment as the foolish Virgins.

I would not therefore have any of you think, that you are prepared, much less
that you are waiting for the Coming of our Lord, from a vain Conceit, that
there is the Principle of Grace within, when there is no Exercise of it. What
does it profit my Brethren, if a Man say he has Faith, and has not Works? Can
Faith save him? Jam. ii.14. It is not the saying, We have Faith, that will save
us: nor will the having such a Faith, as is without Works; yea, though it should
swell up into a presumptuous Confidence or Assurance, prepare for the Coming of
Christ. So then, to finish this Head, and to conclude at present: To have our
Lights burning, is not to have Grace only operating in the Soul, in the hidden
Man of the Heart, that is seen only to God: but it is that which operates also
in the Life and Conversation, and in all our Concerns with Men; so as to appear
to Men. Accordingly, our Savior directs us in Matthew. v.16. Let your Lights
shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father
which is in Heaven. And truly Grace in lively vigorous Exercise cannot be hid
long; but it will break forth as the Light. True Grace is true Wisdom, and that
will make a Man's Face to shine, Eccl. viii.1. Yea, as the same inspired
Preacher tells us, Prove. iv.18. and with which I now conclude; The Path of the
Just is as the shining Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day.

SERMON II.
III. I Now proceed, as I proposed, more particularly to describe the gracious
Saint, that is thus waiting for the Coming of his Lord: Who has his Loins
girded about, his Lights burning, and so is like unto them who wait for their
Lord, when he shall return from the Wedding.

And here,

1. He is strong in the Faith as to his Lord's Coming, at Death, and the
Judgment.

As for the Dissolution of Nature by Death, all Men, whether good or bad,
believe they shall come to it. The Living know that they shall die, because
they see People dying continually; and all the past Generations gone off the
Stage. But then, the true Saint not only believes that it is appointed for all
Men once to die; but that after Death is the Judgment: A Day in which God has
appointed to judge the World in Righteousness by that Man Christ Jesus whom he
has ordained; whereof he has given Assurance to all Men, in that he has
raised him from the Dead, Act. xvii.31. And now the watching waiting Christian,
not only gives his general Assent to these Things, that he shall die, and that
there will be a Resurrection and a Judgment to come, when he, and all Mankind,
must give an Account of themselves to God; but he has a realizing Sense of
these Things. He sees these Things in their Reality, and in their Nearness. As
the watchful Servant, who is waiting for the Coming of his Lord, with his Loins
girt and his Lights burning, has not only a general distant Thought, that his
Lord may come some Time or other; but he has realizing Apprehensions, that he
will certainly come, and knows not, but that he may this very Minute knock at
the Door. -- Thus the true Christian, who has his Grace in lively Exercise, not
only realizes Death, as what will most certainly come; but as what is hastening
on apace to him. He always endeavors to keep up a lively Sense of the utter
uncertainty of the Time when his Lord shall come by Death, whether at Evening,
or at Cock-crowing, or in the Morning. -- Is the watchful Christian in his
Youth, he don't set Death at forty or fifty Years distance; for he is sensible
that youthful Vigor, is no Security against the Arrests of Death, because
Multitudes die in Youth, while their Breasts are full of Milk, and their Bones
moistened with Marrow: They come forth like Flowers, and are cut down. And as
he sees some dying in every Age, he looks upon himself liable every Day and
Hour of his Life to the fatal Stroke. And if God spares his Life from Year to
Year, even till old Age; yet the watchful Christian all that while looks upon
himself in this State of utter Uncertainty as to the Time when his Lord shall
call for him; and accordingly passes the whole Time of his sojourning here in
the lively realizing Apprehension of this, that for aught he knows, Death may
be at the Door. The watchful waiting Christian, in the midst of Health and
Vigor will not boast so much as of a Tomorrow, because he knows not what a Day
may bring forth. -- In short, the Christian who is in a waiting Posture, keeps
Death and Judgment always in his View, as what are certain, as what are near,
and for aught he knows, at the very Door: And if he in his Mind stretches Life
to the longest Period, and thinks of arriving to a great old Age; yet even then
he considers with what swift Wings Time passes away; and that his Years spend
as fast as Days and Nights can roll over: and that even fourscore Years, are
but as a Tale that is told, they are soon cut off, and he flees away. And the
Thought hereof greatly affects him, and has a powerful and happy Influence upon
him. For,

2. The waiting Christian is above all concerned to be prepared for the Coming
of his Lord.

He views Death and Judgment in their infinite Importance, as well as great
Reality. His Heart is deeply affected with the Thoughts of dying, and of
appearing before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to give Account of all Things
done in the Body. Death and Judgment appear awful to him. Every Time he thinks
of them (which is very frequent) it gives a Solemnity of Spirit; and fills him
with Concern, that he may be prepared for such an awful Hour as that, when he
shall pass out of Time into Eternity, and appear before his Judge, and have his
eternal State determined. He is so far from making light of Death, that he ever
thinks and speaks of it with Seriousness. He considers it as the grand decisive
Hour, which fixes his State for Eternity, either in Happiness or Misery. The
great Concern therefore of his whole Life, is to prepare for Death: and he
looks upon his Life spent to good Purpose, only when it is in Preparation for
Death and Judgment. His Heart is very sensibly affected with the Thought of
dying in his Sins* in as much as then there will be no Hope, or Help for him:
that then the Day of Grace will be over, and the Door of Mercy will be shut;
and there will remain, nothing but a fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation to devour him: The Thought of which fills him with Amazement.

On the other Hand, he has the most pleasing View of the Happiness of all those
who are well prepared for their great Change. And Oh! what a pleasing Sensation
has he of those Words! Rev. xiv.13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying to
me, write, Blessed are the Dead who die in the Lord, from henceforth; Yea,
says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do
follow them. Accordingly, the Desire of his Soul is, that he may die in the
Lord; that he may die the Death of the Righteous. But then, he don't content
himself with the bare Desire of this, like Balaam of old; but his Concern is
such, as puts him upon giving all Diligence, that he may be prepared for the
awful Change; and that he may be found of his Judge in Peace.

Accordingly,

3. He who is waiting for the Coming of his Lord, is above all concerned that
he may be found in him, and interested in the Redemption he has wrought out for
us.

He has a lively Sense of his own Sin and Corruption; and plainly sees, that if
God should strictly mark his Iniquity against him, he should not be able to
stand in the Judgment; and that if he was to answer personally at the Bar of
God, for his own Defects and Failings, and for his grosser Sins, he must be
condemned: And that if he be found only with his own imperfect Righteousness,
he could never be justified. Considering therefore that Death is hastening, and
that Judgment follows upon it; the great Concern of his Soul is, that he may be
found in Christ; because there is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ
Jesus. His Concern is to receive him as he is offered to him in the Gospel; so
as to be interested in him, and in his meritorious Obedience and Death, to be
clothed with the white Raiment of his Righteousness, that the Shame of his own
Nakedness may not appear. His Concern is with the Apostle, that he may at that
Day be found in Christ; not having on his own Righteousness which is of the
Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith, Phil. iii.9. He has too great a Sense of his own Sins and
Failings, to expect a legal Justification before God; and therefore he is
concerned to obtain it in the Way of the Gospel, even by Faith in Jesus Christ;
a Faith that is made perfect by Works. Accordingly he looks to Christ for
Righteousness and Strength, trusting to be assisted, pardoned, and accepted
only for his Sake* building all his Hopes of Heaven and Happiness, upon the
Covenant of Grace, that is established in his Blood.

4. He watches, prays, and strives against every Thing that would render him
unfit to meet his Lord.

Having a constant realizing Sense of his Lord's Coming, he is very much
concerned least he should come and find him unprepared. And he is sensible that
Sin is the Thing that most of all disqualifies him for meeting Christ at Death
or Judgment. This is therefore what the watchful Christian is most afraid of;
and what he is above all concerned to be delivered from. The workings of Sin
within him, and the out-breakings of it, in his Words and Actions, are the
Burden of his Soul, and what he groans to be delivered from; for he finds how
they break in upon him, and discompose and ruffle, and so unfit him for the
Coming of Christ. Whenever therefore he feels corrupt Nature rising, and he
himself giving Way to Pride or Passion, or Envy, or Discontent, or
Worldly-mindedness, or Filthiness, he rouzes himself out of such a Frame, with
the Thought, that the Master is coming, and how shall I look him in the Face
with such filthy Lusts as these upon me! He therefore resists and opposes them;
and* calling in the Help of the divine Spirit, gets the Mastery of them: so as
to put off the old Man which is corrupt according to deceitful Lusts; and to be
dying to Sin every Day.

5. The waiting Christian diligently attends every Duty God calls him unto,
doing whatever his Hands find to do with his Might, considering there is no
Work nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom, in the Grave whither he is going.

The Servant who would be ready for his Lord's Coming, considers what his Lord
has given him to do, before he comes and calls him to an Account: and this he
sets himself about immediately, and without any Delay, least his Lord should
come before it be done. He don't leave Things to be done next Year or next
Month, or so much as till to Morrow, that can as well be done to Day: For, for
aught he knows his Soul may be this Night required of him. He is ambitious of
being able to say at the Coming of his Lord, in some good Measure as Christ
himself did, when he was about to leave the World, Joh. xvii.4. I have
glorified thee on Earth, and finished the Work which thou gave me to do.
Accordingly, he considers what Work God has given him to do, in and by which he
might serve and glorify him. That is, he considers his general and his
particular Calling, and the Duties that result therefrom; and attends the same
with all Diligence.

Thus the watching waiting Christian attends diligently the Duty of his general
Calling. -- That is, at he is called to be a Saint, to be a Christian, he
endeavors to be such an one. He endeavors, that the Life he lives here in the
Flesh, be by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved us and gave himself for us;
and is concerned to live in all Things as the Grace of God teaches him; which
is to live soberly and righteously and godly in the present World: And the Way
he takes to make his Calling and Election sure, is to give Diligence to grow in
all the Graces and Virtues of the Christian Life, adding to Faith, Virtue, to
Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly-kindness, and
Charity.

But then, the Christian who would be ready for his Lord's Coming, diligently
attends the Business of his particular Calling. -- He is not carried away with
such a mistaken Notion, that he must lay aside his worldly Business and
Concerns to prepare for Death and Eternity: but rather endeavors to do it
after such a Manner, that may forward rather than obstruct his Preparations for
the same. Accordingly, he will be diligent in his worldly business; but will
take Care not to be too much cumbred therewith. Although he sees he must have his
Head and his Hands in the World, the one to project, and the other to perform
the Business thereof; yet he endeavors as much as possible to keep his Heart
out of it. He endeavors to do the Business of his Calling, not from an
inordinate Love of the World; but from a Sense of Duty, and in Subordination to
his spiritual Interest, and in such a godly Sort, as to be ready for his Lord's
Coming, even although he should be found in his Shop, or in his Field, or in any
lawful Business whatsoever.

Moreover, the Christian who would be always ready and even waiting for the
Coming of his Lord, will consider the several Stations and Relations he stands
in to his Fellow Creatures, and the various Duties that result therefrom; and
is concerned to be constantly and faithfully discharging the same.

Thus, if he be a Ruler, he rules in the Fear of God, considering he himself,
is subject and accountable to the great Ruler of the Universe. If he be among
the ruled, he submits to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake, leading a
quiet and peceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty. -- Is he a Minister of
the Gospel, and the Pastor of a Flock? out of Love to Christ, and out of Love
to precious Souls, he feeds the Sheep, and feeds the Lambs, with Knowledge and
Understanding, with all Diligence and Faithfulness, as One who must give an
Account. -- Or does he belong to the Flock? he will esteem his faithful
Minister very highly in Love for his Works Sake; will duly attend his
Ministrations, and hearken to the Counsels of God that shall be brought to him.
And while his Minister freely sows to him spiritual Things, he will not think
it a great Thing if he shall reap or receive of his carnal Things. -- Again, is
he an Householder? he will walk in his House wisely and in a perfect Way,
maintaining Religion, good Order and Government in his Family, resolving with
Joshua, and taking Care, that as for him and his House they will serve the
Lord. Is he a Parent? he is careful to instruct his Children, and bring them up
in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Is he a Child? he honors his Father
and his Mother -- Is he a Master? he renders to his Servants that which is just
and equal, knowing that he also has a Master in Heaven, that he expects will
quickly call for him. -- Is he a Servant? he obeys his Master in all lawful
Things; not with Eye-service as Men pleasers, but in Singleness of Heart
fearing God, and doing all as unto Christ.

Again, is the waiting Christian rich in this World? he don't trust in these
uncertain Riches, but in the living God; and is rich in good Works; laying up
in Store a good Foundation against the Time to come. -- Is he Poor? he is
content, trusting in God, and casting all his Cares upon him; endeavoring that
he may be rich in Faith, and so an Heir of the Kingdom.

Finally, under this Head; Is there any Thing to be said, testified, or done by
him, necessary for perpetuating the Memory of Things, or for the Preservation
of Peace among Brethren, and Neighbors, or for the preventing any Injustice
after his Decease? he will take effectual Care to have it done without Delay.
And be sure the Christian that is in a proper waiting Posture will set his own
House, and all his outward Affairs in Order, making such Distributions and
Settlements of his worldly Goods, as he sees necessary to do Justice to his
Family and Friends, and to all with whom he is concerned: And will not leave such
an important Affair as that of making his Will, to be done, even when his Lord
actually knocks at the Door, and calls him away immediately. -- Thus the
watching waiting Christian, is for having every Thing done, that his Lord
expects or requires should be done against his Coming.

6. The waiting Christian sets more and more loose from the World, and all
Things in it; which he expects speedily to take an everlasting Farewell of.

The realizing Views of Death, Judgment and the World to come, give the
Christian a lively Sense of the Vanity of the World, and of all earthly
Enjoyments, and begets an holy Indifferency in the Soul to all Things here
below. -- He considers, that whenever the Master shall knock by his Messenger
Death, he must leave all behind him; and the Places which now know him, shall
know him no more: And that he must go as naked out of the World, as he came
into it. And therefore as the Christian is in certain Expectation of this in a
little Time, his Affections all cool to the World, and the Things which are in
it. If Riches increase, he don't set his Heart upon them; because he considers
they are uncertain at best; and that in a little Time he must certainly leave
them. And on the other Hand, if he meets with Poverty, Disappointments and
Afflictions in the World, he bears them with Patience, and Contentment,
considering the Time is short, and that his Redemption draws near. -- In
short, the waiting Christian so realizes the Brevity and Uncertainty of humane
Life, that he looks upon himself but as in a sojourning State, traveling through
this World as fast as the Wings of Time can carry him; and looks upon his House
not as his Home, but only as an Inn, for a Wayfaring Man to lodge in, as it
were for a Night: And what Conveniences, and Comforts he finds, he accepts them
thankfully at the Hands of a kind Providence. And whatever Inconveniences or
Troubles he meets with, he submits quietly to them; hoping in a little Time to
get to his Journey's End, to his heavenly Father's House, where he shall meet
with all, that he can desire.

7. Accordingly the waiting Christian has his Affections more and more set upon
God and Christ, and Things above. --

His Treasure is in Heaven, and his Heart is there also: yea, his Conversation
is in Heaven, from whence he looks for the Savior, which is Christ Jesus the
Lord. He considers Christ is coming: And this draws forth his Soul in longing
Desires after him; saying with the Psalmist, Psalm. xl.2. My Soul thirsts for
God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before him? Moreover, he
thinks of Heaven, and this puts him into an heavenly Frame. He loves to
contemplate the Glories of Heaven, and he loves to speak of Heaven, where he
hopes to be in a little Time, with all the Saints that are gone before: And
this puts him upon laboring more and more after the heavenly Temper. Having
the Promises, and so the realizing Views of this blessed and glorious State, he
is for cleansing himself yet more and more from all Filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God. And the nearer he draws to the
heavenly World, the more of Holiness, Humility, Love and Charity, appear in
him, so that Heaven seems to be begun in his Soul, and some Rays of the
heavenly Light and Glory begin to dawn upon him.

Thus I have given you some Description of the Saint who has his Loins girded,
his Lights burning; and is as a Man that waits for the Coming of his Lord.

IV. I now proceed, as I proposed, briefly to set forth the Blessedness of that
Servant who is in such a watching waiting Frame for the Coming of his Lord.

Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find watching. And
surely of all the Men in the World, these are the blessed Men: And to set forth
the Blessedness of such, let me say, --

1. Such are in high Favor with God.

These are the blessed Ones, whose Transgressions are forgiven, and whose Sins
are done away in the Blood of Christ; so that they are justified freely by
God's Grace, through the Redemption there is in him: And they are accepted in the
dearly beloved Son of God. God the Father is their Friend and Father: Jesus
Christ is their Redeemer and Savior: and the Holy Ghost is their Sanctifier,
Guide and Comforter. But then, as I am speaking, not only of true Christians in
general (of which this is their happy State) but of first-rate Christians more
especially, even of such, who instead of slumbring and sleeping, as even the
wise Virgins did; are watching and waiting for their Lord's Coming: So these,
we may consider as entitled to some distinguishing Marks of Favor. These are
the Servants of the most high God, that he delights to honor. These are his
Jewels, and his Treasure: These are the Saints in the Earth and the excellent
Ones, in whom is his Delight. And God oftentimes confers many Marks of his
special Favor upon them in this Life, if not always in Temporals, yet in
spiritual Blessings: They have Life, spiritual Life: yea, they have it more
abundantly, Joh. x.10.

2. Blessed are such watching waiting Christians, as they are in the most
desirable Frame to live in, let it be never so long.

It may seem a Paradox to some, to tell them it is a blessed Thing to be always
tho'tful of Death, and a blessed State, and to be constantly looking and
waiting for that great Change. Some Persons are so far from thinking it a
blessed State, that they look upon it as a very uneasy Posture to be in, and
strive all they can, by Company, Diversions, or Business, to crowd such gloomy
melancholy Thoughts out of their Minds. And as to some, it is a constant Burden
upon their Spirits; and the servile Fear hereof takes away all the Comforts of
Life. Hence we read, Heb. ii.15. of those, who through Fear of Death, were all
their Lifetime subject to Bondage. But he who will seriously consider of the
Matter, will find that the Thoughts of Death, and being in a wachful Frame,
getting ready for the Coming of Christ, is the most blessed Frame we can be in,
during the whole Course of Life, stretched out to the longest Period. If a Man
should live Threescore Years and ten, yea, if by Reason of Strength, he should
attain to Fourscore Years; yet the most desirable Way of Living for that Man
from his Youth-up, would be to have his Loins girded, and his Lights burning,
and he as one waiting for the Coming of his Lord; and to be in Readiness for
him, as if he was actually at the Door. Never does a Man live to so good
Purpose. as when he is in actual as well as habitual Readiness for the Coming
of Christ. And Oh! what a blessed Frame would People be in, did they live
always in the near Views of Death, Judgment, and Eternity! And he who lives in
the nearest and most realizing Views hereof, is the most blessed Man, as he is
in the most blessed Way of living. For,

1. He lives most to the Glory of God.

He walks the closest with God, and lives the nearest to him. He has the most
tender Concern for his Honor, and the Interest of Christ, and is most careful
to live up to his Christian Character. Such Men who are in a watching waiting
Posture, are the Men whose Consciences are tender, and are very fearful of
every Thing that is offensive to God, or would bring Dishonor to his Name:
They live the most remote from Sin of any; and most careful to observe the
divine Precepts; yea, and to abound in the Fruits of Righteousness and
Holiness, which are by Jesus Christ to the Praise and Glory of God.

2. Such Men live more to the Good and Benefit of others.

According to the near and realizing Views Men have of the Coming of Christ,
will their Tempers toward one another be corrected. How does Pride and Envy,
Wrath and Hatred subside, and Clamor and Evil-speaking grow silent, when
Christ our Lord by the Messenger of Death appears to be at the Door? And how
does Love and Good Will to all Men begin to rise and glow in the Hearts of
Saints, when they by some evident Tokens see Death hastening upon them? And what
a forgiving, and asking Forgiveness? And what a Care to repair every Injury
they have done, and to give all Christian Satisfaction, where they have given
Offense; when in the near Views of Death and Judgment? Which shows, that if
Christians were always in such a waiting Posture, they would live more up to
the Christian Law of Love to one another. Then Christians would have a stricter
Regard to Truth and Justice in all their Concerns one with another, and abound
in all Acts of Kindness and Charity to the proper Objects thereof; and
endeavor to be of all the Benefit to Mankind they can, by their Counsels and
Instructions, and Prayers, and every kind Office. And in short, will at such a
Time exhibit a bright Example of all Christian Graces and Virtues; and set
forth the Beauties and Glories of Religion, so as to recommend the same to the
Esteem and Choice of others. When does Religion appear so amiable and
excellent, as in a Servant waiting for the Coming of his Lord, full of Faith,
full of Love to God, and Charity to Men, and with an Heart emptied of the
World; but full of God and Christ, full of Heaven, and heavenly Conversation:
And at the same Time acting with Diligence, Care and Fidelity in every Station
and Relation of Life? Insomuch that if it was not for the horrible Corruptions
and Prejudices of Men's Hearts against the true Religion of Christ, every one
would be enamoured by his Example. Christians in a truly watching and waiting
Frame, will so cause their Light to shine before Men, that others seeing their
good Works, will be strongly induced to glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

3. Such a watching waiting Frame is much for their own Peace and Comfort.

The Loins girded about, and the Lights burning, what is it, but Grace in the
several Branches of it, in lively Exercise? And surely there is nothing that
affords such true Peace, such real Pleasure, and solid Satisfaction to the
Soul, as this. Her Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace.
She is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one
that retains her, Prove. iii.17, 18. Whatever the vain, carnal, thoughtless
World may think of it; yet it is certain, that no Men do so effectually consult
their own Peace and Comfort in this World, as they who are in a watching
waiting Frame for the Coming of Christ, and have every Thing ready for his most
sudden Appearance. When does the Man live so near to God; when does he live so
like to God, or enjoy such Communion with him, as when Faith, and Hope, and
Charity, are drawn forth into lively Exercise? Moreover in such a Way, the
Christian is most likely to see God's reconciled Face, and to enjoy the
Evidences of his Love; Yea, and to walk up and down in the Light of his
Countenance, which puts more Gladness in the Heart, than when Corn and Wine and
Oil are increased. Psalm. iv.6, 7.

3. Such watching waiting Servants are blessed as they are in the Way to a
peaceable and quiet, and sometimes to a joyful Death.

The Saint by realizing Death, by bringing it near and preparing for it; gets
at length reconciled to it: so that the Terror of it vanishes: for as to all
such, the Sting of Death, which is Sin, is taken away; and being thus disarmed,
it ceases to terrify them. These watching Christians are the perfect, and the
Upright in the Earth: and mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the
End of that Man is Peace, Psalm. xxxvii.37. Christians, who are waiting and in
actual Readiness for the Coming of Christ, when he knocks at the Door, they
will not be surprised, nor put into any hurrying Confusion; but will with all
Calmness receive the Message. Such are willing to wait all the Days of their
appointed Time till their Change shall come: But when it actually comes, they
are ready to say with good Simeon of old, Now, Lord, let thou thy Servant
depart in Peace, according to thy Word, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation,
Luke xxix.29, 30. Accordingly, such are enabled with an holy Serenity, as well
as Stedfastness of Faith, to commend their Spirits into the Hands of God who
gave them; and into the Hands of Christ, who redeems and saves them, saying
with holy Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Yea, sometimes at the near
Approach of Death, they are filled with Joy, and are enabled in holy Triumph to
say, with the Apostle, 1 (...) 55, 56, 57. O Death, where is thy Sting! O
Grave, where is thy Victory! the Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin
is the Law; but Thanks be to God that gives us the Victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

4. Such are blessed as they are in the Way not only of being received to
Heaven; but of receiving distinguishing Marks of Honor from their Lord.

Blessed are those Servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching:
Verily, I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them set down at
Meat and will come forth and serve them. As my Text goes on. What a wonderful,
and even ashonishing Representation is this of the condescending Favor of
Christ, and of the very distinguishing Honor he will do to such watchful
waiting Christians! How surprising would it be to a faithful humble Servant, to
see his Master upon his coming home, so pleased with the Faithfulness and Care
of his Servant, in having all Things in such Readiness against his coming; as
to gird himself, his Clothes about him, and cause his Servant to sit down to
Meat, and he the Master, to come forth and serve him, and wait upon him? And
yet, by such a Similitude, our blessed Lord is pleased to represent the
distinguishing Favor he will show to such Servants, such Christians, as are in
all Readiness for his Coming. All true Christians shall be distinguished from
the rest of the World at Death: For their Souls shall no sooner leave their
Bodies* than they shall be conducted by Angels to Abraham's Bosom, to the
Paradise of God. And although their Bodies, like the Bodies of other Men, shall
lie down in the Grave and see Corruption; yet here is the blessed Difference,
that while others shall rise to Shame and everlasting Contempt, these shall
rise to Life, glorious and immortal: their Bodies fashioned like unto Christ's
glorious Body. And how blessed will they be at the Judgment, when Christ their
Lord and Judge shall place them at his Right Hand, and then pronounce the
blessed Euge, Well done, good and faithful Servant, upon each of them, saying,
Thou have been faithful in a few Things, I will make thee Ruler over many
Things, enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, Matthew. xxv.21. Observe, it is not
said, the Joy of thy Lord enter into you, but enter ye into the Joy. The Joy is
too great to enter into them, and therefore they are to enter into that, so as
to be even swallowed up in an Ocean of Joy. Accordingly, they shall ascend with
Christ to Heaven, and be received to the blessed Mansions he has there prepared
for them: In whose Presence is fullness of Joys, and at whose Right Hand are
Pleasures for evermore.

But as I am speaking more especially of first Rate Christians, who are eminent
for their Watchfulness, and Readiness for the Coming of Christ; so we may
consider such, as receiving higher Marks of Favor than other Saints. They
shall be not only barely admitted into Heaven: but shall have an Entrance
ministered to them abundantly into the Everlasting Kingdom. They shall not
squeeze through the Gates into the Celestial City; but they shall have an open
Entrance, and this ministered to them abundantly: And they, instead of some of
the lower Seats, shall be advanced to the higher Mansions. Such Distinction
will be made among the Saints: For as one Star differs from another in Glory,
so also is the Resurrection, and Glorification of the Saints, 1 Cor. xv.41, 42.
And then Christ their Lord, will as it were make them to sit down to Meat, and
serve them: for he will make most free and full Communications of himself, and
of the Tokens of his Love unto them, far beyond all that we can describe. "For
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it so much as entered into the
Heart of Man to conceive, what glorious Things are prepared and laid up for
such:" And so I forbear. And what has been said, is abundantly sufficient to
set forth the Blessedness of every watching and waiting Christian.

And thus I have finished the several Things I proposed to consider in the
Text. I have told you, what it is to have your Loins girded, and your Lights
burning; and described the Servant who is thus waiting for the Coming of his
Lord: And have hinted something at the Blessedness of such Servants. I say,
hinted at it, because it is beyond us to give an adequate Description thereof.

And now, although the Subject affords many useful Heads by Way of Application;
yet the Time and Season will not allow it: But Oh! may the divine Spirit apply
what has been said to your Hearts and mine: That we may be found among those
blessed Servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find thus watching. And
therefore waving all other Heads of Improvement, I shall only apply it to the
special Occasion that has brought me hither this Day.

APPLICATION.
GOD in his holy Providence has at length come and knocked, and called for his
Servant, your venerable and aged Pastor, whom, we trust, had his Loins girded,
and his Lights burning, and was in Readiness for the Coming of his Lord. It was
late in the Night naturally and literally, as well as siguratively speaking,
that our Lord came to him, and all on a sudden: But, we trust, he found him
watching; and has received him among his blessed and (...) Servants.

The great Former and Father of Spirits, formed and fitted him for the People
of this Place, and then bestowed him upon you; and continued him for many
Years, even to a great old Age, as an eminent Blessing to you. His natural
Capacities, his acquired Accomplishments, and his gracious Endowments; not only
rendered him a pleasant and agreeable Companion; but gained him a general Esteem
and Respect, and rendered him eminently, and extensively useful in a great
variety of Ways, relating both to the temporal and the spiritual Interests of
this People, and of both Ministers and People in Neighboring Towns and
Churches. He was eminently fitted for this Place, in its Infant State, and when
you were few in Number; as was your Case when he came first among you: when you
needed a Man of such Wisdom and Prudence to advise and assist you in your
outward and civil, as well as spiritual Concerns. And I believe it will be
allowed, that but few People have had so great Help, Benefit, and Comfort of a
Minister, in all Respects, as this People have had in Mr. HANCOCK.

He had an uncommon vivacity of Spirit, that made him diligent, active and
cheerful, and ready to every good Work, that God called him unto. -- He was
early in the Morning, and early in the Week, at his Studies, and in his
Preparations for the Sabbath; in which he made it appear that he gave
Attendance to Reading, and Meditation, by the sound Doctrines, the wise
Counsels, and the moving Exhortations, with which he entertained you, from
Sabbath to Sabbath: In which, he showed himself a ready Scribe, well instructed
to the Kingdom of Heaven, bringing out of his Treasure, like the good
Householder, Things new and old.

And by his diligent and early Application to his Studies, he redeemed Time for
many other useful Services, both of a private and public Nature. You your
selves, and your Fathers, who are dead and gone, if they were here, could
testify how much Time he has employed, how much Evil he has prevented, and how
much Good he has done, by his seasonable, cautious, and wise Counsels, in your
Town Affairs; and in your Domestic and Family Concerns.

You must be sensible he was a great Lover of Peace, and a wise Counselor of
Peace: and having an uncommon Sagacity and Penetration, saw when the Cloud of
Contentions first began to arise, even although it was no bigger than a Man's
Hand; and by his wise pacifick and seasonable Interpositions, would disperse
the same.

Few Ministers who have been so much concerned in the various Affairs of their
People, as he was in yours; and yet I never heard him taxed of being in the
least Measure a faulty busy Body in other Men's Matters; for you your selves
were so sensible of his Wisdom and Goodness, of his Capacity and Readiness to
direct and advise you that, as I have understood, you seldom or never engaged
in any important or difficult Affair, without consulting him upon it.

And Oh! what a happy Talent had he to prevent Quarrels and Differences among
you: to reconcile Differences when begun; and to root out the Seeds of Discord
when sown among Brethren and Neighbors!

That facetious Temper, and Turn of Wit, which was natural to him, and which
although some People of a different Make, might think at some Times, abounded;
yet, this must be said, that he made a very good Use of it in general; and that
it served for many valuable Purposes. How did it serve to scatter the Clouds of
Melancholy that hung upon People's Spirits, and stir up a pleasant Cheerfulness
in them? How did he hereby soften Men's Tempers, and correct their ill Humors,
and bring the Fretful, the Angry, and the Revengeful, into a calm, peaceable
and forgiving Frame?

And as you have had the Character of a peaceable People, I believe you will
readily grant, that it has been very much owing to the pleasant, prudent, and
pacifick Counsels of your deceased Pastor: And if you should now fall into
unhappy Contentions, you will abundantly confirm the same: But I pray God you
may show your selves to be still under the happy Influence of his Counsels, and
Example, by continuing in Peace, and preserving your Character.

But then, the very useful Talents of this deceased Servant of the Lord, were
not confined to the Church and Town of Lexington; for many Towns and Churches
under their Difficulties, have been well instructed, greatly assisted, and
comforted by him. Great Resort has been to him for Counsel and Assistance; so
that the Care of the Neighboring Churches in a Manner came upon him. But few
Ministers have been so much employed in Ecclesiastical Councils as he was; and
especially in Ordination Councils: For having been the Senior Minister of this
County for near thirty Years, he has been even as a Bishop among us; and
presided in most of the Ordination Councils for a great Number of Years. Upon
how many he has laid his Hands in the solemn Separation of them to the Work of
the Ministry, I know not; but I understand, that he himself, a few Days before
his Death, observed, that he had given the solemn Charge to twenty one
Ministers; which I believe no Minister in this Country besides has been able to
say.

And he was greatly beloved and honored by his Brethren, and Sons in the
Ministry; being a Lover of Hospitality, and a Lover of good Men, there was
great Resort to his House, by People of various Characters; where they met with
hearty Welcomes: and scarce ever went away without some instructive, as well as
exhilerating Observations; so that Ministers of every Age loved his Company,
and sought to him for Advice. -- And such was the Goodness of God to him, and
to his Family, as well as unto you, that although he lived to a great Age; yet he
did not outlive his Usefulness: For he retained his Spirits, and the Powers of
his Mind, with uncommon Vivacity and Vigor, even to the last.

In less than a Fortnight before his Death, he gave the solemn Charge to a
young Minister in a Neighboring Town, The Rev. Mr. Jacob Cushing, of Waltham,
ordained Nov. 22. 1752.
with the same Solemnity, and Fervency of Spirit, with which he was wont to
perform such Services, and with a Vigor that was uncommon for such Years. And
you your selves are Witnesses, with what Zeal and fervor of Spirit he
addressed you the Lord's Day before his Death, when he would have you wist, or
be sensible, that he was about his heavenly Father's Business, and was for
doing it with all his Might; considering, that he, as well as others, by Reason
of the Sin of Adam, was subjected to Death, when his laboring Time would all
be over, there being no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom, in the
Grave, whether he saw himself a going. One of the Texts Mr. Hancock preached
upon the Sabbath before his Death, was in Luke ii.49. Wist ye not that I must
be about my Father's Business. The other Romans v.12. Wherefore as by one Man Sin
entered into the World, and Death by Sin, etc.
Although the Spriteliness of his Temper, continued in a great Measure; yet he by
bodily Infirmities had frequent Monitions of his approaching Dissolution. He
expected his Lord would quickly knock at the Door; and therefore when called to
public Services of late Years; he would frequently express his Apprehensions
of its being the last of that Kind of Service he should ever perform. And
although the Harbingers of Death took him in his bodily Sleep; and he was little
more than waked out of that Sleep by Extremity of Pain, before the Sleep of
Death came upon him; yet we trust he was ready for such a sudden Call; and is
gone to receieve the Reward of a faithful Servant; I heard a Voice from Heaven,
saying unto me, write, Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and
their Works do follow them, Rev. xiv.13.

And now, may the bereaved Family be supported by the believing realizing View
of this. May they be thankful that God has continued him to such an advanced
Age, so great a Comfort and Blessing to them: and may they be comforted with
this Thought, that his Departure, and Absence from them, is to be present with
the Lord.

May the Handmaid of the Lord, who is left desolate and afflicted in her
declining Days, be in a particular Manner supported under a Sense of the
distinguishing Favor of God, that she, and her now deceased Husband, were
continued so many Years, as Heirs together of the Grace of Life. And now, since
they are parted by Death, may she find her Maker, and her Redeemer is her
Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name. -- And may the Grace and Goodness which
was so eminent in her godly Ancestors, and which we are persuaded is in her
also, be made very conspicuous in this Day of Visitation; and let her be a
Follower of them, of her deceased Husband, and of her gracious Sons, She had
two amiable and worthy Sons in the Ministry, one in Braintree, the other
settled a Colleague with his Father: both of them died some Years before their
Father.
deceased, wherein they followed Christ; and of all those who through Faith and
Patience do inherit the Promises. May she be in daily Expectation of, and
Preparation for, the Coming of the Son of Man; that whenever he knocks, she may
open to him immediately In the mean Time, may she be supported under the Pains
and Infirmities of Age; have great comfort in her loving and dutiful Children
that survive: And may this People continue to show the Kindness of God unto her.

And may the Children of the Deceased, be thankful to God for so good a Father;
for all his wise Counsels, his constant Cares, and good Example, and daily
Prayers for them. And may they know the God of their Fathers, and serve him
with a perfect Heart: And may the Blessings of the everlasting Covenant, be
entailed upon them and upon theirs after them. Oh! what Support and Comfort do
the Words of the Psalmist afford to the godly Children of godly Parents, Psalm.
ciii.15, 18. As for Man his Days are as Grass, as the Flower of the Field, so
he flourishes; for the Wind passes over it and it is gone; and the Place
thereof shall know it no more: But the Mercy of the Lord is from Everlasting to
Everlasting upon them that fear him, and his Righteousness unto CHILDRENS
CHILDREN, to such as keep his Covenant and his Testimonies, and that remember
his Commandments to do them.

And may the only surviving Son of this Family, Thomas Hancock, Esquire Merchant in
Boston.
be distinguished as much by the Riches of divine Grace, as he is by the
Bounties of divine Providence; and abound in spiritual, as he does in temporal
Blessings. As he is rich in this World, may he be rich in Faith, rich in good
Works: May he be directed and assisted in all his Acts of Piety, Charity, and
Christian Liberality; and so make to himself Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, that when he shall fail, they may receive him to everlasting
Habitations: And may he be led to erect such lasting Monuments of true
Christian Piety and Charity, as may procure to him a Name better than that of
Sons or Daughters; even an everlasting Name, that shall not be blotted out.

And now, may this Church and Congregation of the Lord be suitably affected
with this holy Providence. May you be thankful, that God bestowed such a
precious Gift upon you, and that he continued him so many Years, ministering to
your Souls in the Strength of the Lord God; and that being planted in the House
of the Lord, he flourished in the Courts of the Lord, and brought forth Fruit
in old Age. And that when God made such a sorrowful Breach upon you, in the
premature Death of his amiable and excellent Son, that was settled as a
Colleague with him; The Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Hancock, who died of the
Throat-Distemper, January 28, 1740. after he had been settled in the Ministry
with his Father about six Years; whose Ingenuity and Piety greatly recommended
him to all, especially to his own People.
instead of sinking in such a Day of Adversity, or having his gray Hairs
brought with Sorrow to the Ground; the Spirit of the aged Father revived, his
Health returned, and his Strength was so far confirmed, that he has for near
thirteen Years since, carried on the Work of the Ministry among you, with as
much or more Zeal and fervency of Spirit, than ever.

But at length the Time came that he must die; so that now ye shall see his
Face, and hear his Voice, no more. Well, remember how you have received and
heard, and hold fast, and repent! Oh! remember the many faithful Counsels, and
pathetick Exhortations, which he has delivered to you in the Name of the Lord
from this Desk; as well as in a more private Manner. And may the Thought of his
sudden Death, and that he can call upon you no more, serve to bring many Things
to your Minds, which he has said to you, and impress them more deeply upon your
Hearts than ever: by which Means, though he be dead, it may be said, that he
still speaks unto you.

And now, since God has made such a Breach upon you, you will be ready to say,
What shall we do? and how shall the Breach be repaired? Why, you must remember,
that he who has made this Breach upon you, is styled, the Repairer of Breaches,
the Restorer of Paths to dwell in, Isai. lviii.12. And with him is the Residue
of the Spirit. Oh, my Hearers, though we your Ministers are not suffered to
continue by Reason of Death; yet Christ our Redeemer lives to take Care of his
Churches, and to provide for them. Well then, you must commit yourselves to
him, as to the great Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls. -- When John the
Baptist was dead, his Disciples came and took up his Body and buried it, and
went and told Jesus, Mat. xiv.12. Well, you have taken up the Body of your
deceased Pastor, and buried it: and the next Thing is, to go and tell Jesus;
tell him, that your Pastor is dead, and that you are as Sheep without a
Shepherd; and beg of him to take the Pastoral Care of you, and guide you in
every Step toward a future Settlement; and that he would preserve you in
Peace, and not suffer you to fall out by the Way.

And here, let me tell you; that hearkening to the Advice of the Text will
wonderfully serve to prevent the out-breakings of a contentious Spirit, and
preserve you in Peace. If your Loins be girded, and your Lights burning, and
you waiting for the Coming of your Lord, Oh! how would every Thing that is
Contentious or Unpeaceable in your Tempers, subside! Surely, he who considers
the Lord is at Hand, will be peaceable and quiet, and exercise a Moderation
that shall be known unto all Men.

So that the Advice of the Text is the best for you: And as it was what Christ
gave to his Disciples then; so he gives to you, and to all of us, now. What I
say unto you, I say, unto all, Watch, Matthew. xiii.37. And as it is the Voice of
Christ's Word, so is it of his Providence. The Voice of your deceased Pastor's
sudden Death, to you is, Be ye also ready, for in such an Hour as ye think not,
the Son of Man comes, Matthew. 24.44.

This then is the Exhortation that speaks to every Age: To those who are
Young, or in the middle of their Days: But it speaks most loudly to those who
are advanced in Years; to have your Loins girded, your Lights burning, and you
all to be in a waiting Posture for the Coming of your Lord.

The faithful Servant, who is waiting for his Master to come Home; the later it
is at Night, the more strongly does he look for him, and the more careful is he
to be in actual Readiness for his Coming; that nothing might be lacking, that
is necessary for the due Reception of his Master, whom he expects every Minute
to knock at the Door. Well, Decays of Nature, Infirmities of Age, as well as
daily Observation, tell you, that your Time is short, and that Christ by his
Messenger Death, is just at Hand. How then does it concern you to be ready, and
even waiting for his Coming. And you should now see that Nothing be left undone
any longer, that is necessary to be done by you before his Coming. If you have
any worldly Concerns unsettled, delay them no longer. But above all, see that
you settle all Affairs so far as possible between God, and your own Souls.
Examine your selves afresh, whether ye be in the Faith; prove and try your
selves, over and over again: and cry mightily to God, to search and try you.
And Oh! ye elderly People! see that your Lights be burning. Labor to shine
bright in Faith, in Humility, in Meekness, in Peaceableness, in Love and
Charity. Let an heavenly Temper, in a heavenly Conversation, shine brighter in
you than ever! which may give the best Evidence to your selves, and to others,
that you are really going to that blessed Place.

And now, to move Young and Old, and People of every Age, to be thus really,
habitually, and actually ready for the Coming, the sudden Coming of Christ, I
think I have said enough: And I will only add by Way of Recollection.

That our Lord will certainly come sooner or later, to every one of us; and it
is of infinite Importance to be ready for his Coming, our eternal Salvation
depends upon it. If we be ready when Christ comes, we shall enter with him into
the Marriage Chamber, and shall be forever with the Lord: But if not ready at
that Time, we are undone to all Eternity. When once the Master of the House is
risen up, and has shut to the Door, and ye begin to stand without and to knock
at the Door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us: he shall answer and say unto
you, I know you not whence ye are, Luke xiii.25. Well, none of us can tell how
soon or suddenly he may come to us. But if he should tarry never so long, let
me tell you, that we can never live to so good Purpose, as when in actual
Readiness for the Coming of the Son of Man. It is then, my Brethren, that we
live most to the Glory of God, to the Honor of Christ, to the Interest of
Religion, and to the Safety, Peace, and Comfort of our own Souls. -- Moreover,
this is the Way to prevent our being surprised at the Approach of Death; and is
the most likely Way to enjoy a blessed Calm, yea, and an holy Joy in that awful
Hour.

Finally, This is the Way to be commended, and abundantly rewarded by our Lord
and Master, when he comes. I conclude all, with his own gracious Words, Matthew.
xxiv.46. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so
doing. And. 38. of the Context. And if he shall come in the second Watch; or
come in the third Watch, and find them so, blessed are those Servants.

AMEN.

