Mr. GAY's SERMON At the Reverend Mr. Jonathan Dorby's ORDINATION.

November 13. 1751.

THE Mystery of the Seven Stars in Christ 's right Hand: Opened and Applied IN
A SERMON Preached at the ORDINATION Of the REVEREND Mr. JONATHAN DORBY, TO THE
Pastoral Care of the Second Church IN SITUATE: NOVEMBER 13. 1751.

By EBENEZER GAY, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in Hingham.

Isai. 60. 1, 2. Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee. For behold, the Darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross
Darkness the People: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his Glory shall be
seen upon thee. Rev. 2. 1. -- He that holds the Seven Stars in his right
Hand; who walks in the midst of the Seven Golden Candlesticks. BOSTON: N. E.
Printed and Sold by J. DRAPER, in Cornhill. 1752.

THE MYSTERY of the Seven STARS IN CHRIST's Right Hand.
REVEL. I. 16. AND he had in his right Hand Seven Stars. --

THE Disciple whom Jesus loved had, in a prophetic Vision, more than St.
Austin's Wish of seeing Christ in the Flesh; which was greater and more
desirable, than to have seen Paul in the Pulpit, or Rome in it is Glory. He saw
in the midst of seven golden Candlesticks one like unto the Son of Man -- Our
Lord Jesus Christ in an Appearance of human Shape as a Man. Which was a
Representation, as the SCHECHINAH of old, of his divine Presence in the
Churches. The Appearance was very bright and majestic. A Person clothed with
a Garment down to the Foot, and girt about the Paps with a golden Girdle. --
Not less glorious in his Apparel, as the High Priest of our Profession, than he
was, as a mighty Conqueror, when the Prophet saw him coming from Edom, with
dyed Garments from Bozrah. -- His Head and his Hair were white like Wool, as
white as Snow -- denoting his perfect Purity. -- And his Goings forth from of
old, from everlasting -- "His hoary Head was no Sign of decay; but it was
indeed a Crown of Glory," being always found in the Way of Righteousness. --
And his Eyes were as a Flame of Fire -- An Emblem of his quick and all-piercing
Sight, who searches the Reins and Hearts. -- And his Feet like unto fine
Brass, as if they burned in a Furnace: -- He proceeding in his Work with
irresistible Strength, will tread down all his Enemies. -- And his Voice as the
Sound of many Waters: -- loud, and full of Majesty, and of Terror unto the
Wicked, when he speaks to them in his Wrath! -- And he had in his right Hand
seven Stars: -- figurative Representations of the Gifts he has received for
Men. -- And out of his Mouth went a sharp two-edged Sword: -- for the Word of
God is quick, and powerful, sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to
the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a
Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart. -- And his Countenance was
as the Sun shines in his Strength: -- equalling, if not exceeding, the
Brightness of the Sun at Noonday. Christ's Face did shine as the Sun in it is
full Luster, not only when he was transfigured before John and two other
Disciples on Mount Tabor, but also when he was represented to him in the midst
of seven golden Candlesticks. -- A very magnificent Description is this of our
blessed Savior. Each Particular of it might well arrest our Attention, and
long employ our Thoughts: But we must at this Time, content ourselves with a
transient View of the several Glories of Christ here exhibited, and fix our
Minds upon One of 'em, which will abundantly furnish us with Matter suitable
for our present Meditation. -- He had in his right Hand Seven Stars.

We are to enquire into the Mystery of the Seven Stars; and the Meaning of
Christ's having them in his right Hand.

1. The Subject of our first Inquiry is, The Mystery of the Seven Stars: What
we are to understand thereby. And this is plainly declared by him that had them
in his Hand, v. 20. of this Chapter. The Seven Stars are the Angels of the
Seven Churches; and the Seven Candlesticks are the Seven Churches, i. e. of
Asia, which are particularly above named. The Seven Stars mystically
represented the Angels, i. e. Pastors of those Churches. -- Ministers of the
Gospel, though Men of like Passions with others by Nature, are Angels by Office.
-- The Messengers of the Lord, sent forth to minister unto those who shall be
Heirs of Salvation. And as the Angels of Heaven are called Stars, Job. 38.7. so
likewise are the Angels of the Churches: And that fitly; --

1st. In regard of the Eminence of their Place. Behold the Height of the Stars,
how high they are? Job 22 12.
It is a high Place which Ministers have in the Firmament of the Church: An
Office of special Dignity which they are raised to. Their Plate is between God
and the People. They are taken nearer to Him, in a peculiar Relation, and
superior Employment. They are the Servants of the Lord, so styled by way of
excellency; his more immediate Attendants; do approach his Person in religious
Addresses, and are the People's Mouth to God by Prayer, as well as God's Mouth
to them by Preaching. They are Ambassadors for Christ, to manage his
Concernments, and in a manner represent his Person; do speak and act in his
Stead 2 Cor. 5.20.
. Their Ministry is therefore a Preferment; their Calling high and heavenly.
This Honor have not all the Saints; and no Man should take it to himself, but
he that is called of God, as was Aaron Heb. 5.4.
. Divinity is the Queen of Sciences: A Profession in itself, and in the
Estimation of all that are wise, the most noble: However Men pour Contempt upon
it, and count those as the Filth of the World, and the Dirt under their Feet,
whom God has ordained Stars. They are indeed as Men, formed out of the Clay,
and in as low a State as others; but as Ministers of God, are raised above them
in some Endowments and Prerogatives. And to deny or despise this Advancement,
in the Order of the Gospel, argues gross Ignorance, or profane Haughtiness of
Mind: While to assert it, may seem Pride and Vanity in the priviledg'd Subjects
of it. But they may and should magnify their Office, without vaunting and
exalting themselves. In their high Station Ministers are to be very humble and
condescensive. The Stars in their Height show a thousand times less than really
they be. An Affectation of Grandeur; an Ostentation of Gifts and Graces, and
Performances, is very unbecoming the Ministers of Christ, who says to them, He
that is greatest among you, shall be your Servant. And People should not envy
the Eminence of the ministerial Order, and say as Corah and Company did to
Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.3. Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them; wherefore
then lift you up yourselves above the Congregation of the Lord? None would be
proud of, nor envious at, such a Place in the Church, did they rightly
apprehend the Danger of it proportionable to the Dignity of it: And if by
Transgression any with Judas, fall from it, 'twill be into the greater Contempt
and Misery. Woe to any of us, that shall incur Capernaum's Doom, and after we
have been lifted up to Heaven, be cast down to Hell; and be there upbraided and
insulted in such Language as that of the Prophet, Isai. 14.12. How art thou
fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the Morning?

2dly. In regard of the Light of their Doctrine, Ministers are Stars. The Stars
are the brighter Parts of the etherial Heaven, and do shine even unto the
Earth. True Ministers of the Gospel excel in Knowledge, and shine in Doctrine,
importing the Light of divine Truth unto others, for the Illumination of their
Minds, and the Direction of their Practice. Ye are the Light of the World Mat.
5.14.
, said Christ to the first Preachers of his Gospel: And all who succeed them,
are in their measure so. Their Office is to teach: to show unto Men the Way of
Salvation: -- to open the Scriptures clearly, and expound the Way of God
perfectly to them. Every good Minister of Jesus Christ is, in a Degree, as his
Forerunner was, a burning and a shining Light, to give Knowledge of Salvation
unto his People, by the Remission of their Sins, through the tender Mercy of
our God, whereby the Dayspring from on high has visited us, to give Light to
them that sit in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, to guide our Feet in the
Way of Peace Luke 1.77.
.

The bright Morning Star, and all the other Planets, shine but with a borrowed
Light: They only reflect on us the Light which the Sun casts on them. -- All
the Light of heavenly Truth, of spiritual and divine Knowledge, that Ministers
impart to others is received by them from Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, and
Fountain of Light, 1 Cor. 11.13. I have received of the Lord that which I also
delivered unto you. -- The Lord gives the Sun for a Light by Day, and the
Ordinances of the Moon and of the Stars for a Light by Night Jer. 31.35.
. The Stars shine only in the Night. It is only in this dark and benighted
World, that Ministers are of use, and do serve to the enlightening of Souls:
Though in respect of the Glory, which, if they are wife and faithful, they shall
attain to, they will shine as the Stars forever in the heavenly World; yet in
respect of the Benefit of their Light, which is here so much wanted, they shall
there cease to shine, for the celestial City, which has no need of the Sun,
nor of the Moon, certainly has not of these Stars to shine in it; for the
Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. The Light of
these Stars will be absorpt in that World, where the Sun of Righteousness
shines in all his Glory. In comparison of the Light which the Church shall
enjoy in Heaven, it is Night with it on Earth. It is no more than Starlight,
-- a little glimmering Light: We see darkly, and know but in part. That is
applicable to the Gospel, and the present Ministry of it, which the Apostle
says, in 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do
well, that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark Place, until
the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts. The Gospel, ministered by
Men, is a Light that shines in this dark World. We should take heed to it,
walk in it, and act by it. The Dayspring from on high has visited us, by
Christ's coming in the Flesh, and finishing the Revelation of God to Men: The
Day Star begins to arise in our Souls, when he savingly visits them with his
Light and Grace. But then is a perfect Day of heavenly and eternal Light of
which that is the early Dawning, or Forerunner: a glorious Day, which the
Gospel, and the Ministry of it, are appointed to usher in.

3dly, In respect of the Influence of their Authority and Example, Ministers
are Stars. The Stars are supposed to shed down their Influences, as well as
reflect Light on the Earth. Those are secret and invisible. Their Light is
seen, but their Operations (whatever they be) are not perceived by us. God
speaks of these among his wonderful, unsearchable Works, Job 38.31. Can thou
bind the sweet Influences of Pleiades? or loose the Bands of Orion? Can thou
bring forth Mazaroth in his Season? or can thou guide Arcturus with his Sons?
Know thou the Ordinances of Heaven? Can thou set the Dominion thereof on
the Earth. So far was Job from being able to order and direct, to restrain or
cause the Influences of the Stars, that he could not tell what, or how great,
they were. Nor may all the Improvements of Science, since his Time, show us the
Nature and Manner; the Extent and Degree of 'em. Though Philosophy has not
described the Rule which the Stars have over terrestrial Bodies, yet the Gospel
has settled the Government of Christ's Ministers in his Churches, -- ordained
them to have a spiritual, pastoral Rule over the People; and enjoined the
People's Obedience and Submission to them in the Lord. What their Authority is,
and how they are to exercise it, may be learned from Christ's Words to Peter,
in Mat. 16.19. I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever
thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. They are constituted
Stewards of God's House, to open the Door of Entrance thereinto unto the duly
qualified, and to shut it against the unworthy and profane. They have Power to
bind on Earth, not by imposing any Thing as Duty upon Men, which the
evangelical Law does not Command, but by declaring what that obliges them to,
and calling them in the Name of Christ to perform it. They have Power to loose,
not such as the romish High Priest claims of granting Dispensations, but to
assert and maintain our Christian Liberty. They are to bind by retaining, and
loose by remitting, of Sins. Joh. 20.23. Whose soever Sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them; and whose soever Sins Ye retain, they are retained. They
remit and retain Sins, by declaring and applying the Promises and Threatenings
of the Word; the former to the Penitent, and the latter to the Impenitent: And
by administering the Sacraments and Censures of the Gospel. -- They have
Authority from Christ to do such Things for the Edification of his Churches;
and the due Exercise of it, has a great Influence into the well-being and
flourishing of them. Ministerial Authority is not to be despised as an empty
Name, an insignificant Power, a Shadow without Substance, because there is no
external Force to abet it, or to avenge Disobedience to it. The Influences of
the Pleiades are not sweeter or more powerful, than those of the mild and
gentle Administration of Elders that rule well and wisely: Nor are the Bands of
Orion stronger, than those with which they bind contumacious Offenders, so as
not to be easily loosed therefrom. Great also is the Influence of Minister's
Example upon the Minds and Consciences and Actions of Men: And unless it be
good, their Doctrine, how true and clear soever, will not lighten them to
Heaven. Their vicious Practice will be of more force to lead People astray,
than all their persuasive Preaching to bring them into the Way of Life. -- The
Summer-fruitfulness, or Winter-barrenness of the Church; it is peaceful, or
troubled, it is healthful or sickly State, may depend as much on the Lives of
Ministers, as the various Seasons of the Year, and Circumstances of Men, do on
the Starry-Heaven, whose Dominion God has set in the Earth.

4thly, In respect of the regular and constant Course of their Ministrations,
the Angels of the Churches are Stars. There is exquisite Order among the Stars:
They keep in their proper Orbs, move in their proper Spheres, accomplish their
appointed Courses, perform their constant Revolutions with the greatest
Certainty and Exactness. This is such a clear and incontestible Proof of One
original Being, the divine Architect and Ruler of the Universe, as made the
Roman Philosopher with good Reason conclude, That whoever thinks, that the
wonderful Order, and incredible Constancy of the heavenly Bodies, and their
Motions (whereupon the Preservation and Welfare of all Things depend) is not
governed by an intelligent Being, Himself is to be accounted void of
Understanding. The orderly Behavior of wise and faithful Ministers in the
House of God, which is the Church of the living God; their regular and steady
proceeding in, and finishing their appointed Courses, may be fitly compared to
the Regularity and Constancy of the Motions of the Stars, without any deviation
or confusion: And it is, in like manner, necessary and useful. If the Stars did
not keep in their Orbs, but wander up and down uncertainly, how could
Passengers by Sea, or Land, be directed by them? If Ministers are wandering
Stars Jude Ver. 13.
, wild and rambling in their Discourses, unstable in all their Ways, excentrick
and retrogade, how shall People, in their difficult Passage to Heaven, take any
sure and safe Direction from them? If the Stars should cross one another's
Motions and justle one against another, what Confusion would the heavenly
Systems be thrown into? -- Such as the Churches are, when the Pastors are
envious toward, and do counter-work one another. -- These imperfect Hints may
show us the Resemblance betwixt Ministers and Stars. -- We proceed,

II. To enquire into the Meaning of Christ's having these Stars in his right
Hand.

1st. It signifies that they are some of his most valuable Gifts to the
Churches. As the Purchase of his Death, and in Consequence of his Ascension,
our Lord received a rich Variety of Gifts, -- Gifts of all Sorts and Degrees,
for Men, yea, for the Rebellious. But in the Apostle's Enumeration of 'em, he
mentions only the Ministerial, as being of principal Worth and Use, Ephesians. 4.11.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. Pastors and Teachers are as
truly the Gifts of Christ, as Apostles and Prophets; and are in his right Hand,
as being of special Worth and Advantage: -- more excellent and precious Gifts,
than many other good Things which he bestows. They have the precedence in his
right Hand: As Length of Days is in Wisdom's right Hand; and in her left are
Riches and Honor, Prove. 3. 16. Joseph presumed that Manasseh, his firstborn,
would have the Pre-eminence in the Blessing of his Father Jacob; and therefore
brought him to his right Hand. But the good Patriarch, though blind, foreseeing
by the Spirit of Prophecy, that the Younger of the Lads would be greater, be
more favored and blessed of God than the Elder, to signify this, stretched out
his right Hand, and laid it on Ephraim's Head, Genesis 48. 14. The Hands which
Jesus lifts up to bless us Luke 24.50.
, are full of Blessings; Blessings of all kinds, which he has to confer upon
his People: And in his right Hand are Pastors and Teachers. These are some of
his choicest Gifts to them. The Lord is spoken of as being very gracious to his
People in the vouchsafement of such spiritual Gifts to them, while he does
withold those which are temporal and bodily: Isa. 30.20. Though the Lord give you
the Bread of Adversity, and the Water of Affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers
be removed into a Corner any more, but thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers?

2dly, It imports their being absolutely in his Power, entirely at his
Disposal, and under his Direction: As any Thing is which a Man has in his
Hand; especially in his right Hand, which is usually the stronger, and by which
he has the greater Command of what he takes into it, and more easily does what
he pleases. Christ, who is Head over all Things to the Church, has the Stars
in his right Hand, being the Ruler of them. They are all his Servants. -- He
tells the Number of them, and calls them all by their Names. He assigns
them their proper Place in the Heaven of his Church, according as it is various
Needs require, and their different Qualifications Suit: 1 Cor. 12. 28. He has
set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers.
These Stars rise and set at his Command; shed forth their Light and Influence
when, and where, and in what measure, he orders them. He seals up these
Stars, looks to them, and they shine not, and binds their sweet Influences,
at his Pleasure.

3dly. It denotes his honoring of them. The right Hand excelling in Strength,
is more honorable than the left: It Is a Mark of Respect to be placed at it, and
held in it. Christ himself has God exalted with his right Hand, a Prince and
Savior to give Repentance to Israel, and Forgiveness of Sins; and his
Ministers does Christ exalt with his right Hand, to preach Repentance and
Forgiveness of Sins in his Name. As Christ's Advancement it expressed by his
being at the right Hand of God, so is their's signified by their being in the
right Hand of Christ. People are sometimes for having them under their Feet.
St. Paul, speaking of the Treatment which he and his fellow- Apostles met with,
says, We are made as the Filth of the World, and the Offscouring of all
Things unto this Day 1 Cor. 4.13.
. The two Words setting forth the contemptuous Usage of Christ's Ministers, are
of the same Import, and both emphatical, denoting that which is most vile, and
trodden under Feet by all Men. But however Men despise and degrade, with how
much Contempt soever they trample on the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, yet
Christ honors them with his right Hand. Though their Brethren may cast them
out as evil, and the unworthiest of all Creatures, yet their Lord holds them
in his right Hand, as a Man does that which is peculiarly dear unto him. The
Lord has graven Zion on the Palms of his Hands Isa. 49. 16.
These precious Sons of Zion on the Palm of his right Hand.

4thly. It implies Christ's upholding, strengthening, protecting, and
prospering them. The right Hand, often attributed to God in Scripture,
signifies his divine Power exerted for such Purposes. -- This Christ employs
for the sustaining, strengthening, defending, and succeeding of his faithful
Ministers: They are in that right Hand which upholds all Things, and is able to
keep them from falling; -- In that right Hand which can do every Thing; make
their Bow abide in Strength, and the Arms of their Hands to be strong: -- In
that Hand out of which none can pluck them. -- That Hand that wieldeth and
moderateth all Things, and will overruled all to their Safety and Salvation. --
In that right Hand which does great Things by them, as Instruments in it:
gets the Victory over Christ's Enemies, and makes his People willing in the
Day of his Power. -- The Hand of the Lord, which when it was with the primitive
Preachers of the Gospel, a great Number believed, and turned unto the Lord.
Acts 11.21.
--

-- Thus much is suggested to our Thoughts, by Christ's having the Stars in his
right Hand. --

And now, this Part of John's Vision being made so plain, that he may run, that
reads it, it may be profitable, if we apply it,

1. To our Instruction in the Work of the Ministry; the whole Duty of those who
are employed in it.

As Stars, they are to shine in their Doctrine, to the enlightening of the
Minds, and directing the Ways of Men. In order to which, they need themselves
be irradiated with the Light of spiritual and divine Knowledge; for how shall
they impart this to others if they have not received it themselves? An ignorant
Teacher is as great a Solecism, and as useless a Thing in the Church, as a dark
Star would be in the Sky. Ministers ought to have a good Degree of Knowledge
above the common Sort, who are to be taught by them. Mal. 2.7. The Priests Lips
should keep Knowledge. -- He should be a kind of Repository or Treasury of it,
and have wherewith to supply the Wants of others. -- And they should seek the
Law at his Mouth: have recourse to him for Instruction in their Duty. Our
divine Teacher has excellently expounded that Text, in Mat. 13.52. Every
Scribe that is instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, -- i. e. who is prepared
to preach the Gospel -- is like a Man that is an Householder, which brings
forth out of his Treasure Things new and old. He must have a good Store of
Learning, human and divine, ancient and modern, laid in by preparatory Study,
who would be as a Householder that treasureth up all Sorts of Provisions for the
Maintenance of his Family, and the Entertainment of his Guests: Ministers
Preaching should be illuminating, and give Light to them that are in Darkness.
It Is vain, if it be obscure and unintelligible, as to the Matter and Manner of
it. If they be themselves clouded with Ignorance, and are unable and unapt to
teach, they should not have the Place, for they cannot perform the Office of
Stars. In vain do they move the Passions, and heat the Imaginations of Men,
without informing their Judgments. Their Doctrine should resemble the Light in
Purity, as well as Perspicuity; be free from all heterogeneous Mixture, -- the
Truth they preach be like the God of it, who is Light, and in whom is no
Darkness at all. To this end they are obliged to take heed to their Doctrine,
that there be nothing in it but what is agreeable to the Nature and Reason of
Things, and the Oracles of God, whatever there should happen to be contrary to
human Schemes, and commonly received Opinions. They may not teach for Doctrine
the Commandments of Men, who are called Masters; nor speak as pleasing those
who are apt to be offended at the Light, which discovers them to be wrong in
their Sentiments and Actions. Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony; if
they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.
And it is pity any Man, at his Entrance into the Ministry, should, in his
Ordination-Vows, get a Snare to his Soul, by subscribing, or any ways engaging
to preach according to another Rule of Faith, Creed or Confession, which is
merely of human Prescription and Imposition.

As Stars, Ministers should with the sweet Influence of their Authority and
Example, incite and attract People to their Duty. The Authority given them is
for Edification, and not for Destruction: and the Exercise of it should
resemble the Dominion of propitious Stars, which is not by way of violent
Impression, but of gentle and wholesome Influence. They are not allowed to lord
it over God's Heritage, but to rule with Equity and Clemency, in meek and
gentle Ways, directly influential on the Mind and Conscience (Ways of rational
Conviction, Persuasion, Exhortation, Admonition, Reproof,) using only the Sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, in revenging all Disobedience, and
cutting off a Member from the Body of Christ.

The Light of their good Works must shine before Men, to render that of their
Doctrine incentive, as well as directive, of all christian good Practice; and
to support their Authority, and procure them the double Honor, of which the
Elders that rule well are to be counted worthy. That they may light others to
Heaven, they need go before them in the Way to it. If the Guides go astray,
they cause the People to err. If their Lives be spotted with any scandalous
Sin, or Immorality, the Light that is in them is Darkness, and how great is
that Darkness? "A Priest (says one) that is not clothed with Righteousness,
though otherwise richly adorned with all the Ornaments of human and divine
Literature, and this gilded over with the Rays of Seraphic Prudence and
Sagacity, is yet but a naked and despicable Creature, of no Authority, no
Interest, no Use, or Service in the Church of God."

As Stars, Ministers are to proceed in their Work orderly, steadily,
constantly, till they have finished their Course; never withholding their
Light and Influence from any, as the Stars do not their's, even from the Dogs
that bark at them, and Men that curse them -- Never going out of their Line,
and crossing others Spheres, obstructing others Usefulness, and disturbing the
Harmony of the Church's Peace. Wandering Stars have been looked upon as ominous
Appearances, and to portend ill.

2. People should hence learn, how to value and improve the Blessing of a
Gospel Ministry -- to esteem it such a Blessing to them, as the Stars are to
the World; and make use of it for their spiritual Illumination, and sure
Direction, in their Passage to Heaven. What a Relief does it afford us against
the Darkness which has covered the Earth, and the gross Darkness upon most
People! If the Light of natural Reason be in itself sufficient to guide Men in
the Way of their Duty to a State of future Happiness, yet it is so universally
obscured by the Prevalence of moral Corruption, that those Places may well be
called Regions of Darkness, where the Light of the glorious Gospel does not
shine. What a sad Condition were the Mariners and Passengers with Paul in, when
neither Sun nor Stars in many Days appeared, and no small Tempest lay on them,
all hope that they should be saved was taken away Acts 27.20.
. In a very dangerous, if not as desperate a Case are they, who are without the
Light of the Gospel, which the spiritual Stars give in the troubled Sea of this
World, where the Storms of Passion and Winds of Temptation threaten the eternal
Shipwreck of Souls. Let them be pitied, and prayed for by us, that the Light
may shine unto them, that GOD's Way and saving Health be known among all
Nations. And how thankful should they be who are visited with the Dayspring
from on high, according to the tender Mercy and distinguishing Grace of God?
Mat. 4.15, 16. "The Land of Zebulon, and the Land of Nepthalim, by the Way of
the Sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles: The People which sat in
Darkness saw great Light: And to them which sat in the Region and Shadow of
Death, Light is sprung up." "We have more Reason to bless God for the Gospel of
Christ, and the Knowledge of the Way of Salvation thereby, than for the
Luminaries of Heaven: If these were this Hour put out, and the Heavens passed
away as a Scroll, this would not be an equal Loss to any Child of God, as for
him to have missed of the Dispensation of the Gospel: That were only present
Death to the Body, this eternal Death to the Soul." God's Covenant with
Believers, is more than all the Ordinances of Heaven: These are but a Shadow of
the Stability of that. -- But then, People must take heed that they deprive not
themselves of the Benefit of the Stars, which shed forth so comfortable Light
and Influence. And this they do, when they are blinded with Prejudice, and
besotted with stupid Ignorance, and that is verefied in them which we read in
the Gospel, The Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it
not. -- This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men
loved Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds were evil. For every one
that does evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds
should be reproved. Prepossessions, Pride, Worldliness, and the like, bar the
Entrance of Light into Men's Understandings, and obstruct the Influence of it
upon their Hearts and Lives: And hereby they may provoke a holy and jealous God
to say unto his Messengers, Go, shut the Eyes of this People, -- lest they see
with their Eyes, and be converted: Or to execute upon them that Threatening in
Is. 13.10. The Stars of Heaven, and the Constellations thereof shall not give
their Light. -- And in Ezekiel. 32.7, 8. I will cover the Heaven, and make the
Stars thereof dark: -- All the bright Lights of Heaven will I make dark over
thee, and set Darkness upon thy Land, says the Lord God. -- May it never be
the Case of his People in this Land, that their Ingratitude for and Misusage of
a learned and faithful Ministry, should be punished with One that by pernicious
Errors in Doctrine and Disorders in Practice shall have a most malignant
Influence upon them; like that of the great Star which John 'saw fall from
Heaven, burning as it were a Lamp, and it fell upon a third Part of the Rivers,
and upon the Fountains of Waters; and the Name of the Star is called Wormwood:
and a third Part of the Waters became Wormwood; and many died of the Waters,
because they were made bitter.' Rev. 8.10.
The Heresy of the Gnostic's who taught such as is most damnable, even that of
a bad Life, is (as good Interpreters suppose) called a Root of Bitterness, in
Heb. 12.15. And Christians are admonished to look diligently lest any such
springing up, trouble them, and thereby many be defiled.

3. Behold the Greatness and Glory of Christ, represented by his having the
Stars in his right Hand. How glorious was the Lord, when he came from Sinai,
and rose up from Seir, and shone forth from Mount Paran, and he came with ten
thousands of Saints: from his right Hand went a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. A more
glorious Gospel proceeds from his right Hand in which John saw the seven
Stars: The Interpretation of which exhibits a greater Glory to the admiring
View of a spiritual Understanding, than that in which the SCHECHINAH of old
appeared.

Christ says of himself, I am the bright and Morning Star. That is the
brightest in our Hemisphere. For it is Luster the Heathens named it The Goddess
of Beauty. Jesus Christ excels all in Beauty and Brightness; -- is fairer than
the Children of Men; higher than the Angels of God, those Morning Stars of the
Empyrean Heaven. The most glittering Star is but a faint Resemblance of him.
The Stars of the greatest Magnitude, how little are they in Comparison of him?
and how dim is their Light, if it be not lost, in his? His right Hand spanneth
the Heavens, and has in it all the Stars thereof. He made, and he rules them:
It Is with the Rays of his Light they shine, and by his Power that they are of
such benign Influence. All the Benefit received from Christ's Ministers, is by
virtue of his Grace in them, and with them. 2 Cor. 8.23. They are the
Messengers of the Churches, and the Glory of Christ.

4. Let Ministers here see, and be very sensible of, their Dependence on
Christ. Are they called Stars; yea, Angels? Does not the Holy Ghost judge these
Names too great and honorable for Dust and Ashes, -- for Men that dwell in
Houses of Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust: Yet let them not be exalted
above Measure. How heavenly and angelical soever they may be in their sparkling
Light, kindly Influences, and spiritual Ministrations; yet it is Christ's right
Hand that has raised, and does uphold them. Did it not so, how soon would they
fall from Heaven, as Lucifer, Son of the Morning? And how great and dreadful
their Fall from the mystical Heaven into a real Hell; and the lowest and
darkest Pit of it! Did not Christ's unerring Hand guide them, they would prove
Wandering Stars to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness forever. It is
only Christ's right Hand that is able to keep the best of them from falling
into those Errors and Sins, which would very much darken them, and destroy
their Usefulness in the World. Rev. 12. 3, 4. There appeared another Wonder in
Heaven, and behold a great red Dragon, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and
seven Crowns upon his Heads. And his Tail drew a third Part of the Stars of
Heaven, and did cast them to the Earth. The Devil's Enmity against the Church
makes him especially and most industriously to seek the Downfall of it is
Pastors, to cast them from the Orbs in which they are set, and do shine, and
cover them with Obscurity in the Earth; to cause them to fall from their high
Station, and heavenly Profession, into the Dirt of Earthly-mindedness, and an
abject carnal Course of Life, which may render them vile and useless. And many
are the base Arts and Instruments he uses to this Purpose: And he always would
be successful therein, did not the Lord Jesus hold the Stars in his right Hand.
Psalm. 17. 7^ "Show thy mavelous Loving Kindness, O thou that savest by thy
right Hand them that put their Trust in thee, from them that rise up against
them."

5. Has Christ the Stars (who are the Angels of the Churches) in his right
Hand? then ought People to hold them in Reputation. They are not to be
worshipped, as the literal Stars have been by ignorant and idolatrous People;
nor their Persons to be had in Admiration; yet are they to be highly esteemed
in Love, for their Works sake; since the Lord Jesus Christ puts such Honor
upon, manifests such Respect, and affords such Protection to them, as to hold
them in his right Hand. They are the Church's Crown. Rev. 12. 1. There appeared
a great Wonder in Heaven, a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her
Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars. The twelve Apostles, with
their Successors, are as so many Jewels in the Crown of the Christian Church,
here represented in the midst of a Glory far surpassing the Dress of any of the
Heathen Virtues, or Deities, -- a Glory made by the Beams of the Sun, and upon
the Moon, as above the low Condition of this sublunary World, shining round
(...) (as Mr. Mede expounds it) by the Faith of Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, treading under-foot the Rudiments of the World, whether Jewish
Shadows, or Gentile Superstitions, and glorious with the Ensigns of the
apostolical Offspring. The Contempt of the Clergy then is a Violation of the
Church's Crown, and spoiling a principal Ornament on her Head. And it is pity
but that her Children did more honor her. If Ministers are of a sordid and
grovelling Spirit, ignorant and vicious, they are very despicable Creatures
indeed, but if they behave themselves worthy of their eminent Place, and act up
to their illustrious Character, it is a discredit and hurt to Religion, to
depress them into low Life, and cover them with Disgrace. Let no Man despise
those whom the King of Kings delights to honor. -- Such a Caution will be
ill taken by none, but those who need it.

6. Has Christ the Stars in his right Hand? Then from him the Benefit of their
Light and Influence must be sought; and to him the Praise of it returned. He is
the true Light, that lights every Man that comes into the World. The Stars
in his Hand shine with a vicarious Light; with borrowed Rays from him, which he
can withold from them, as he pleases; and how clearly soever they reflect the
same upon others, yet none will be savingly illuminated thereby, unless he open
their Understandings, and shine in their Hearts, giving them the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. The ablest Ministers
of the New Testament are only Instruments in his Hand of doing this for his
People. And if they look not to his right Hand for the Accomplishment of this
glorious Work in them, justly may he seal up the Stars which are therein, and
bind their sweet and salutary Influences. When he uses them for the effectual
enlightening and guiding Souls in the Way to Heaven, not unto them, but to him,
is the Praise due. The Success of the preached Gospel is not to be ascribed to
Men, how learned, pious and faithful soever, but to the saving Strength of
Christ's right Hand.

7. Are the Stars in Christ's right Hand? Then let them shine to his Glory: --
Not to be themselves gazed at by the simple Multitude, -- (Act. 3. 12. Why look
ye so earnestly on us?) -- But to direct all to Christ, that they may believe
in, worship and serve him: As the Star which was a Guide to the wise Men of the
East, to come and pay their due Homage to him newly incarnate. Mat. 2. It Is
conjectured, that the Prophecy of Balaam, one of the Children of the East,
concerning a Star that should rise out of Jacob, was kept upon Record among the
oriental Archives, and gave Occasion to the Magi, upon the Discovery of an
unusual Star over the Land of Judea, to go and make Enquiry after him that was
born King of the Jews. That Star gave Notice to the neighboring Nations of the
Birth of Jesus, and by the Light of it those Sages found him. Happy is it when
Ministers are like that Star, which was a Guide to those Travelers, going
before them, till it came and pointed them to the very Place where the Savior
CHRIST was. -- If the Stars in the Firmament of the Church do glitter and
sparkle, only to draw Observance to themselves; to gain the poor Advantage of
Admirers and Followers of themselves, Christ will not hold them in his right
Hand; he will cast them out of his Care and Protection; yea, will put them
under his Feet of Brass, and stamp them down to the Bottom of Hell. -- But if
they shine to the Glory of Christ, seek not their own, but the Things of Jesus
Christ, and faithfully guide Souls to him and Heaven, they shall always be in
his right Hand, -- eternally loved, and honored, and saved of him. Dan. 12. 3.
They that be wise, shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and they
that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.

Having now opened and applied the Vision of the Stars in the right Hand of Him
whom John saw amidst the Golden Candlesticks: What shall I say further to
assist and encourage a beloved Brother, in the solemn Dedication he is this Day
making of himself to the Service of the Sanctuary?

These Things ( Dear Sir) had undoubtedly been set before you in a stronger
Light, if your Choice of One to be your Monitor on this Occasion had been
guided more by Judgment, than immerited Affection. But, as they are proposed,
and the Vision brings 'em in View, it fills your whole Soul with Admiration at
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, to see the Dignity of the Office in his
Church, the Eminence of the Place, to which he is advancing You: -- That of an
Earthen Vessel, he should make a Lamp of Heaven! -- Should take a Piece of
Clay, such as Man is formed out of, and convert it into a luminous Star! When,
with the devout Astronomer in Ps. 8. You consider the Heavens -- the Stars
which God has ordained, and to which Ministers are compared; Your Heart feels
David's Transport of Wonder and Gratitude, and your Tongue is ready to break
forth into his rapturous Language; Lord, what is Man, that thou art mindful of
him? -- Raising him to such Honor -- making him (in so high a State and
Employment) a little lower than the Angels? I thank Christ Jesus our Lord (said
the great Apostle Paul) who enabled me, for that he counted me faithful,
putting me into the Ministry. -- And again, Unto me, who am less than the least
of all Saints, is this Grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable Riches of Christ.

The Representation made to your Mind of the Work of the Ministry, in it is
various Branches, peculiar Difficulties, and awful Consequences, excites your
anxious Concern, and makes you enter upon it with Fear and Trembling, lest you
should fail of imparting that Light and Influence, and proceeding so regularly
and constantly in the Sphere of your Duty, as may be, in some good Measure,
answerable to the important Character of a celestial Luminary. You cannot
without Horror think of one Soul's being finally lost in Error and Sin, through
your Want of Knowledge or Faithfulness, in showing unto Men the Way of
Salvation: Nor do you apprehend the Case, as to yourself, will be much less sad
and dreadful, if, after your instructive Preaching has lighted others into the
Kingdom of Heaven, you should be cast into outer Darkness.

But it relieves your affrighted Spirit, to behold the Stars in the right Hand
of Christ; and to hope in his Goodness, which he expressed to his beloved
Servant John, struck by his majestic Appearance with great Awe, and fallen at
his Feet as dead: -- He laid his right Hand upon him, saying, Fear not; I am
the first and the last: I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold, I am
alive for evermore, Amen; and have the Keys of Hell and of Death. Context, v.
17, 18.
So may he put Strength into you, and encourage you with the Assurance of his
redeeming you by his Death; and of his living to protect, and guide, and save
you with his right Hand. We trust (though you must strictly examine whether it be
so) that the Love of Christ constrains you to be a Minister of his Gospel.
There is (as the Times are) no Inducement from this World thereto; and though the
Reward of the next, for him that is faithful, be a weighty Motive, yet the
great Difficulty and Hazard of attaining it, would preponderate in every
thoughtful Mind, that is not touched with the Love of CHRIST. As this inclines
you to undertake the sacred and tremendous Office, so let it be the animating
Principle of all that you do in the Execution of it. Then may you be sure of
the constant Aid of Christ's right Hand. -- Little ( Sir) can be expected by
you from the Right Hand of our Fellowship, which we are ready with all our
Hearts to give unto you: -- Look to, and always depend on, the right Hand of
Christ's Strength, which is sufficient to uphold, to direct, to defend, to
assist and succeed you. Be strong, my Son, in the Grace that is in Christ
Jesus. "The Lord send thee Help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of
Zion. -- The Lord fulfill all thy Petition. -- He will hear thee from his holy
Heaven with the saving Strength of his right Hand."

I now turn my self and Speech unto the Church of Christ, of which this rising
Star is the Angel elect;

Dearly Beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ;

It is not long since you took up those Lamentations of the afflicted Church of
old, How bath the Lord covered the Daughter of Zion with a Cloud in his Anger!
-- He has brought me into Darkness Lam. 2. 1. -- 3. 2.
This was done, when that radiant and benevolent Star, which of late shone so
brightly, and shed such benign Influences upon you, in a Course of faithful
ministerial Instruction, Government and good Example, did set in the Grave: Or,
as I might rather say, was advanced by him that has the keys of Death and
HADES, into a higher ORB, and placed among the Morning Stars of the upper
World. The Reverend Mr. NATHANIEL EILLES, died suddenly August 25. 1750. Aet.
73.


"One Star differs from another Star in Glory": That, with the comfortable
and enlivening Rays of which ye were favored for the Space of Forty-six Years,
was of distinguished Luster; and it is Influences, how sweet and extensive? The
neighboring Churches, yea, the Land, rejoiced with You in the Light thereof.
There never was in this Country, if in the Christian World, a Minister so
frequently sought to as your late deceased Pastor, when the Churches wanted
Light and Peace: And his coming to their Help, in the way of Ecclesiastical
Counsel, wherein he, for the most part, moderated, might seem as the welcome
Approach of Mazaroth in his Season, or the kindly Aspect of a benevolent Planet
with his Satellites. To be sure, the calm and pleasant Weather, and
Summer-fruitfulness, which this Church has enjoyed, were by Means of his wise,
steady, and gentle Ministrations: Ye are Witnesses, and God also, how holily,
and justly, and unblameably he behaved himself among you: As ye know how he
exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you, as a Father does his
Children? -- But, alas! that burning and shining Light, little dimmed or
diminished by Age, was suddenly extinguished from your Eyes. -- And O, the
mournful Darkness which then overspread this Place! -- But lo; He that is in
the midst of the Churches, has another Star in his right Hand, which he this
Day gives you: And he can make it to equal, yea, exceed the former in
Brightness, and benign Influences. Receive with all Thankfulness such a Gift
from the Father of Lights, coming to you through the Hand of a blessed Mediator;
and be exhorted to make an advantageous Use of it. -- I can, from intimate
Acquaintance, bear this young Man witness, (and I do it before this great
Assembly, to provoke unto Emulation the Candidates for the Evangelical
Ministry) that he has taken laudable Pains to be thoroughly furnished unto the
good, but arduous, Work he designed for; and by the Blessing of God on his
preparatory Studies, has acquired those desirable Qualifications, which have
justly recommended him to your well-advis'd Choice of him for a Pastor, to feed
you with Knowledge and Understanding. And I may, with little Variation, say to
you of him, as Paul did to the Phillppians concerning his Son Timothy, I know
no Man like-minded, who will naturally care for your State. -- "See that he be
with you without Fear, for he works the Work of God." Let not his Light be
obscured by Poverty, or Reproach, that he shall suffer from you; nor his
Influence obstructed by the Hardness of your Hearts; nor his Progress in the
Course of his Ministry hindered by unreasonable Opposition. Let not your Minds
be so blinded by the God of this World, or with the Mist of Prejudices, or the
Dust of perverse Disputings, as that the Darkness of 'em should be impenetrable
by the Rays of GospelLight. Open your Eyes to the Light, and yield to the
Evidence of Truth, and receive the Impression of it; and walk in the Light. The
brightest Star is not ordained in the Firmament of the Church merely for People
to gaze upon, to observe it is Motions, and admire it is Glitterings; much less
to boast of it is out-shining others, but to travel by, as the wise Men did by
that which they saw, in the Way to Christ and Heaven. In vain will your Minds
be irradiated with the clearest Knowledge, by that which shall shine here,
unless your Feet be guided into the Way of Peace, of Righteousness, and
Holiness. Let your Minister's faithful Directions, and good Example, for the
Practice of pure and undefiled Religion, be carefully observed and practiced by
you; and so ye also will shine as Lights in the World, holding forth the Word
of Life; that he may rejoice in the Day of Christ, that he has not run in
vain, neither labored in vain. -- Forget not to pray daily to God for him the
Prayer of the Church, in Psalm. 80. 17. Let thy Hand be upon the Man of thy
right Hand, upon the Son of Man whom thou have made strong for thy self. -- Be
willing to rejoice in his Light, not for a Season only, in it is first
Appearance, but in it is Continuance and Increase, till he shall have finished
his Course with Joy. Let the Sight of him, going before you as a Guide to
Christ and Glory, always affect you, as did that of Christ's Star the wise Men,
who followed it from Arabia to Bethlehem, Mat. 2. 9, 10. Lo, the Star which
they saw in the East, went before them, till it came and stood over where the
young Child was. -- When they saw the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding great
Joy. -- So may He be your Light and Joy, and ye his Crown of Rejoicing. -- O
the mutual Congratulations with which he and you shall meet another Day, at the
right Hand of Christ, who will give to both Places among them that stand by, as
Witnesses of this joyous Solemnity, -- the Angels of Light, -- those
Morning-Stars, which did, when the Foundations of the Earth were laid, and
shall much more at the Consummation of all Things, sing together; and shout for
Joy.

And let the whole Assembly of Ministers and People here be incited to rejoice
this Day in Christ Jesus, who walks in the midst of the golden Candlesticks,
and holds the Stars in his right Hand. God is the Lord, which has showed us
Light; bind the Sacrifice with Cords, even unto the Horns of the Altar. --
Praise ye the Lord; praise God in his Sanctuary: Praise him in the Firmament of
his Power: Praise him, all ye Stars of Light. --

Now unto the Father of Lights, from whom comes down every good and perfect
Gift, and with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning, -- Unto Him
be Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without End.
AMEN.

FINIS.

