The Divine Government over all considered, AND The necessity of Gratitude, for
Benefits conferred, (by it,) Represented, in two SERMONS, Preached June the
7th. 1752. in the Presbyterian CHURCH lately erected in Arch-Street, in the
City of PHILADELHIA. ON OCCASION Of the first CELEBRATION of religious WORSHIP
there.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Exodus xx. 24. In all Places where I record my Name, I will come unto thee and
I will bless thee.

Psalm lxxxvii. 2. The Lord loves the Gates of Zion, more than all the
Dwellings of Jacob.

Psalm cxxxii. 7, 8, 9, 13, 14. We will go into his Tabernacles, we will
worship at his Footstool. Arise O Lord into thy rest, thou and the Ark of thy
Strength. Let thy Priests be clothed with Righteousness; and let thy Saints
shout for Joy; for the Lord has chosen Zion: He has desired it for his
Habitation: This is my rest forever: Here will I dwell, for I have desired it.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM BRADFORD in Second Street.

SERMON I.
1 Chronicles. 29 chap. from the 10 to 15. Verse Wherefore David blessed the Lord
before all the Congregation: And David said, blessed be thou Lord God of Israel
our Father for ever and ever: Thine O Lord is the Greatness, and Power, and the
Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty; for all that is in the Heaven and the
Earth is thine; thine is the Kingdom O Lord, and thou art exalted as Head above
all. Both Riches and Honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all; and in
thine Hand is Power and Might, and in thine Hand it is to make great and to
give Strength unto all. Now therefore, our God, we thank thee and praise thy
glorious Name: But who am I, and what is my People, that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this Sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine
own have we given thee.


THE Context informs us, that King David excited the Princes and People of
Israel, to contribute toward the Building and furnishing of the Temple, by a
beautiful and moving Address; the principal Arguments of which were drawn from
the Greatness of the Work to be done, the Glory of its Object, and his own
Affection and Example; the Work is great, says he, and therefore all should
assist in it, and the Palace is not for Man, but for the Lord God, and
therefore we should exert our utmost in erecting and adorning it; that hereby
we may testify our Affection to his Majesty, and our honorable Sentiments of
his Glory; which the Beauty, the Grandeur, and Magnificence of the sacred
Structure are best adapted to represent: If it was for Man, a Worm, a Moth, no
matter how mean it be; but seeing it is for God, the great and glorious God, it
should be stately and magnificent: He proceeds to speak of his own Affection
and Example, in these Words; I have prepared with all my Might for the House of
my God; moreover, because I have set my Affection to the House of my God, I
have of mine own proper good, Gold and Silver, given to the House of my God.
This pious Prince loved the Habitation of Jehovahs-House, the Place where his
Honor dwells, with great Intenseness, as the Repetition of his Words
concerning it, but now mentioned, do plainly import; and he evidenced the
Sincerity, and vehemence of his love, by the largeness of his generous and
noble Donations!

But to bring the Matter to a Point, the King of Israel, one of the greatest
Monarchs of his Time in the World, put on the humble Form of a Petitioner, to
his own People, his Inferiors, and Subjects, and accosts them in these
affecting Terms; and who then is willing to consecrate his Service this Day to
the Lord; as if he had said, I beg not for Man that is a Worm, or the Son of
Man that is a Worm, but for God, whose ye are, and to whom ye owe your all;
what you give toward the Temple, is consecrated, or religiously dedicated to
his Service and Glory: This amiable Condescension of the Prince, did more
Honor to himself, then to the Cause he served by it: So great and honorable a
President, should me thinks either screene from invective, rudeness, and
insult, Persons of inferior Figure who make the like commendable attempt for
God, or support them under such unmanly and unchristian Treatment!

But to proceed, the King's Petition and Address, was immediately crowned with
desired Success; the Chief of the Fathers, the Princes of the Tribes of Israel,
the Captains of Hundreds and of Thousands, with others, offered willingly large
Donations; which occasioned great and universal Gladness, in that vast, grand,
and august Assembly; the People rejoiced, for they offered willingly and with a
perfect Heart; i. e. freely and sincerely, with a view to the Glory of God; in
Testimony hereof, the Prince appeals to the Almighty in this solemn Manner; I
know also my God, that thou triest the Heart, and have Pleasure in Uprightness,
as for me says he, in the Uprightness of my Heart, I have willingly offered
these things. -- It is a great Comfort to those that honestly seek and serve
God, to consider, that he perfectly knows the secret Spring, and ultimate Scope
of their Actions; and that he is pleased with Uprightness: Consciousness of
Integrity is a vast support, under the unkind and ungenerous invectives, of a
giddy instable World, that is unhappily divided into various Parties, and on
that Account biased by various Prejudices against each other; and truly those
who most excel in Sincerity themselves, are least inclined to question and
censure the Conduct of their Brethren. David being certain of his own
Uprightness, Candor and Charity, which thinks no Evil, inclined him to judge
favorably of others; The People rejoiced, because with perfect Heart, they
offered willingly to the Lord; and David the King also rejoiced, with great
Joy; they were glad of the Opportunity and Privilege of honoring the Lord in
this Manner with their Substance, and pleased with the Prospect of bringing
that important Work to an honorable and comfortable Period, which they had set
their Hearts so much upon: They were glad that they had something to give to
God, and that they had a Heart to give it freely, without grudging, and
uprightly without base and by Ends. Matters being bro't to this comfortable
crisis, the King on this Occasion, solemnly addressed God in the Words of our
Text, wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the Congregation of Israel
and said, blessed be the Lord God of Israel our Father, for ever and ever; He
gave to God the Glory of that Gladness, he felt on this agreeable Occasion; and
adored him with Reverence and Affection, by acknowledging his infinite and
transcendant Eminence; thine O Lord is the Greatness and the Power, and the
Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty; they are thine originally, thine
essentially, thine independantly, thine invariably, thine eternally: Thou have
them in and of thy self, and art the source and center of them. Gods Greatness
is immense and incomprehensible, his Power absolute and irresistible, to him
belong Glory and Victory. Seeing God is the Author of all, it is but reasonable
that his Honor and Glory should be the End of all; all things are of him, and
through him and to him, says the Apostle, all Victory and Success, in every
noble and arduous Enterprise, is owing to the efficacious Influence of that
great, powerful and glorious Being, who subdues all Things to himself, and is
clothed with Majesty as with a Robe, with Light as with a Garment: With God is
terrible Majesty, (As Elihu observes.) he is possessed of such transcendant
Perfection, as cannot but strike an awe upon all his attendants, and a Terror
upon all his adversaries; so overcoming and refulgent is the Majesty of God,
that the Angels vail their Faces with their Wings before it, the Saints in
their embodied State, faint under the glimses of it; at this the Devils
tremble, at this the Earths Foundations shake, from this incensed the Heavens
flee away! The Psalmist farther aknowledges in the Words of our Text, Gods
absolute Right to all Things as Creator, for all that is in the Heaven and in
the Earth is thine, every Thing is more Gods, than any Thing is ours. His claim
of Right is original, absolute and perpetual, because by his Almightiness he
made all Things; but our Right is only secondary, derived and dependant,
because we have borrowed our Beings and all the Benefits we possess from him.

He likewise asserts God's Sovereign Dominion over all, as a Ruler and
Governor; thine is the Kingdom O Lord, and thou art exalted as Head above all.
That right to govern which is founded in absolute Property, is certainly the
strongest, most equitable and permanent, and such is God's; and hence we are
told even by a Pagan Prince, that his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
that his Dominion is from Generation to Generation.

To these the Psalmist adds an explicit Confession of God's universal influence
by his Providence, in the Conduct of human Affairs; succeeding Enterprises, and
distributing Donations among Men, according to his own Sovereign Pleasure; Both
Riches and Honor come of thee, and in thine Hand is Power and Might; thou
reignest over all, and in thy Hand it is to make great, and to give strength
unto all.

Under this Consideration, he, in the Name of the whole Assembly,
affectionately Thanks God for his Goodness in inclining and enabling them to
contribute so cheerfully toward the building of the Temple; now therefore our
God we Thank thee and Praise thy glorious Name. It Is God, my Brethren, that
works in us both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure: Without his
preventing influence, we are naturally averse to every Thing that is great,
good, noble and generous: We are apt to frame all the plausible Pretexts we can
to conceal our ill Nature and Avarice; we must therefore ascribe the glory of
all the good that is done by ourselves or others to God, avoiding with equal
care and caution, the unreasonable and perilous Evils of sacrificing to our own
Net, and dependence on our own Righteousness. The whole Assembly signified
their cordial concurrence with the aforesaid solemn Celebration of the divine
Praise, by a gesture of Adoration and Reverence, they bowed down their Heads,
and worshipped the Lord and the King. The Gesture was alike, but the Intention
of the Mind was different Grotius.
They offered a religious Worship to God, and a civil Reverence to the Prince.
The Dutch Version.


And here it deserves our particular Attentention, that while the Psalmist
highly honors God on Account of his own and his Peoples Donations, (to his
Service) he speaks very humbly both of himself and them; but who am I, and what
is my People, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For
all Things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. King David, and
his Princes and People, were certainly the most honorable Persons in the World
at that Time, and yet behold and admire, with what deep and truly amiable
abasement he spoke of himself and them, who am I, and what is my People? how
mean, how sinful, how frail, how despicable? Creatures! who are but of
Yesterday, and have no abiding; that the great God should take such kind
Cognizance of us, and put such immerited Honor upon us, as to incline and
enable us, freely to dedicate to his Glory and Service, a little of what he
graciously gave us, by his all ruling Providence, and which was indeed, and
ever remains, his own, originally and absolutely, by the strongest claims of
right.

The Text which I have read and explained, opens too large a field of Matter to
be fully discussed in the small compass of two Discourses, I shall therefore
confine my Meditations to these few important Points, which I take to be the
Substance and Scope of the whole, viz, the GOVERNMENT of GOD by his Providence
over all; and that GRATITUDE and PRAISE, which is due to him on Account of
Mercies communicated by it, particularly of a public and religious Kind.

Government, my Brethren, in its nature implies, Right, Power, and the Exercise
thereof in the disposal of Things.

Rule without Right, is Usurpation; but the Almighty is the fountain and
original of all rightful Authority, in the Family, the State, the Church; as it
is all derived from him and dependant on him, so it should be all subordinate
to him, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: On this Account the
Apostle urges Subjection to the higher Powers, because there is no Power but of
God, and the Powers that be, are ordained of God. But besides a Right to Rule,
which is Properly called Authority, Power or Strength is likewise necessary to
manage the Reigns of Government, and keep the ruled in Subjection; without
which Government is but an empty Name; and hence when it is mentioned in
Scripture, the Word Power is generally annexed to it, as particularly in these
Passages, (of the Psalmist and the Apostle John) he rules by his Power for
ever. The Lord God Omnipotent reigns. Our Text is likewise very full to this
Purpose; nay so necessary is Power to all Government, that it is even called by
that Name, to show that they are inseparable, there is no Power but of God: In
a word, all Pretense to Government, without Power, is a mere Farce, which
deserves rather to be derided than obeyed.

Farther, in Government there is an Exercise of Authority and Power in ordering
Things so as to make them serve the Governors Design; and hence the Apostle
informs us, that God Works all Things after the Council of his own Will; and
our Savior assures us, that his Father works hitherto, and that he works.

The blessed God, my Brethren, never acts without Design, and his Designs are
ever worthy of himself, and bear the Characters of his Attributes. Whatever
Honor might be reflected on the Divine Wisdom and Power by the first
Production of Things, it would be soon eclipsed by their consequent
irregularities, without the interposure of his Providence.

As it is absurd to suppose, that an infinitely wise Being should make
Creatures for no End at all; so it is equally absurd to imagine, that he does
not conduct them to the End designed by his Providence.

Now it is only creating Wisdom that perfectly understands universal Nature,
that perfectly spys every spring of Motion, and therefore can correct the
Errors of the Universe. It Is only an infinite Mind, in concurrence with
Almightiness, that can take thorough Cognizance and proper Care of that grand
System of Beings, the spacious Theater of Nature contains; that can allot to
every Creature its Portion, and adjust the Interests of Kingdoms and States;
and forasmuch as no mere Creature possesses these Perfections of infinite
Wisdom and Power, the World must needs be governed by him that made it.

And indeed if we consider his Nature and Attributes, we may soon perceive that
he is not only qualified for, but in some Measure necessitated to, take upon
him the Government of the Universe: For does not the End and Perfection of his
Attributes consist in their exercise? Certainly the End of Wisdom is Design,
the End of Power is Action, and the End of Goodness doing Good: To say that
these Perfections are not exercised upon proper Objects and Occasions, is to
represent them as insignificant. Of what use would the Wisdom of Jehovah be, if
he had nothing to design or direct; to what purpose his Almightiness, if all
Things were done without him, and of what avail his Goodness, if he ever lest
the innocent as a prey to misfortunes; there must therefore be a Providence
that governs over all.

The Almighty has implanted in most Creatures, a natural Care of their
Offspring, and represents it as an Argument of the want of Understanding in the
Ostrich, that she leaves her Eggs in the Earth, forgeteth that the foot may
crush them, and is hardened against her young ones as though they were not hers.
Now can we, without Inconsistency and Blasphemy, impute such a careless
Character to God, respecting the Offspring of his Power, as he condemns in the
Ostrich? Can we suppose that when almost every Creature is tender of its Young,
every pious Parent solicitous for the Protection and support of his
descendants, that there should be no Bowels of Compassion in the blessed God,
who is love and goodness itself, to incline him to provide for that numerous
Family that have their continual dependence on him? No surely! His love
infinitely exceeds the Tenderness of the most indulgent Relations: A Woman may
forget her sucking Child, but God's People are graven on the Palms of his
Hands, ever in View, ever in Memory. Is it natural to a Mother to nourish and
embrace her Infant-Offspring with the fondest Care and tenderest Caresses; does
the Sun rejoice to bless the benighted World with its Light and Influence, and
does a Fountain murmur till it is delivered of its Streams, which refresh the
parched Earth; and is it no delight to the Father of Mercies to diffuse
Kindness and Benignity to the miserable?

Another Argument of God's providential Government, my Brethren, arises from
the Nature of Man* considered either in a single, social or religious
Character. If we consider Man in a private Capacity, the necessity of a
Providence to guide and guard him, is very apparent: The many Dangers and
Accidents to which Life is exposed in all the Stages of it, and especially in
its early Infant dawn, render it impracticable, to escape with safety, if a
particular Providence, however indiscernable in its Operations, did not
interpose to protect us, and ward off the falling Blow.

Nor is the Argument of a divine Government, less conclusive, when we consider
Man in a social Capacity: The Degeneracy of human Nature is great in all, and
some in particular, so arrogant and overbearing; some so covetous and
designing, some so furious and malignant, that all Order and Security would be
spedily unhinged, the Bands of Society dissolved, and the whole World become a
melancholy and terrible Theater of the most calamitous Evils and destructive
Tragidies, were it not for the interposure of a divine Providence, which bounds
the arrogance, avarice and cruelty of Mankind, as the threatening Surges of the
enraged Ocean, and protects the Just.

And if Man be considered in a religious Character, the Necessity of a divine
Government is equaly conspicious, most of the Acts of religious Worship respect
God not merely as a universal Cause, but as our particular Protector, and
therefore unless we are persuaded that he takes an immediate Care of all his
Creatures, and particularly of those who revere and serve him, in the
Government of every event, why should we fear his Resentments, or confide in
his Promises, why should we implore him for Protection in Dangers, and a
supply of our Wants, or praise him for any Benefit we possess, seeing according
to the aforesaid Hypothesis, they do not come by his Interposure and Direction!
The Roman Orator speaks with great justness of Sentiment, and beauty of Diction
upon this Head in the following Manner; If the Gods (says he) do not extend
their Care and Inspection to the Affairs of human Life, what Piety, what
Holiness, what Religion will there be in the World; if the Gods cannot or will
not concern themselves with our Necessities, to aid and Succor us, if they
take no Cognizance of our Actions, what Advantage is it, to Honor them, to
build Temples and to pray unto them. And if we take all Religion out of the
World, what will become of unhappy miserable Mankind, nothing will be left but
a Scene of Confusion and Calamity of every Kind and Form, all Integrity, all
Solace, all Safty, and consequently all Society will be at one dismal Stoke
banished from the Earth! Another Evidence of Gods Government over all, is the
Continuance of all Things, in the same comely order in which they were at first
created: It Is a delightful Entertainment to the Mind, to take a survey of all
the surprising Wonders in Nature; to observe with what Art and Contrivance
particular Creatures are formed and how the several Parts of the whole are,
with the greatest exactness, adapted and proportioned to each other, so as to
make one great regular and uniform System; and to preceive how all the various
Ranks of Creatures within the Scale of existance, are as it were by the most
curious mechanism, fitted to the purpose of their several Natures, and have a
mutual Dependence and Connection, like the several Wheels of a Clock: How
manifold are thy Works O Lord, in Wisdom has thou made them all! Now if the
Beauty, Usefullness, and wise Projection of the Works of Nature, plainly prove
that they were formed by an infinitely wise and Almighty Being, then certainly
the Continuance and Preservation of them in the same State, the regular Motions
of the Heavens, and the uniform Productions of the Earth, equally Evidence
their being guided and governed by the same Cause, who, as the Prophet justly
observes, is wonderful in Council, and excellent in working.

Though the Elements of which the World is composed, have different, yea contrary
Qualities, yet this repugnancy is so tempered and restrained, that they do not
mutually destroy each other, agreeable to their natural Tendencies, but keep
within their proper Bounds, and therein serve the good of the whole System.

And as the constant Preservation of the World, so the strange and wonderful
Ocurrencies that sometimes happen in it, are another Argument of a Divine
all-governing Providence. The Nature of Matter and Motion is such, that they
cannot serve the designs of their Creator without his Assistance and Influence,
which he generally gives according to a certain Tenor, which he was pleased to
prescribe to himself in the Government of the World at the Time of its
Production; excepting on some extraordinary and important Occasions, when to
render conspicuous his Mercy or Justice, he controuls the fixed Laws of Nature:
thus fiery Showers were sent upon the sensual Cities of the Plain, Sodom,
Gomorha, Zeboim and Admah; thus all the Hebrew Tribes were fed with Bread
immediately from Heaven, without their Care or Culture; thus our blessed Lord
by a Sovereign Empire over Nature, spoke the Dead into Life, the Sick into
Health, and the clamorous Winds and Seas into sudden and obsequious Silence!
Miracles are God's wonderful Works, when he interposes in an extraordinary
Manner, and alters the common course of Things. Now we must either deny all
human Testimony, and condemn the Records of every Age, or acknowledge there
have been sundry Miracles wrought in the World; and if among all that have been
so well attested, there is one true and genuine, that one is a pregnant
Evidence of a divine Providence; for it is not conceivable how any natural
Cause that has no Will of its own to move and determine it, should either stop
its own Motion, or deviate from its stated Course and then return again into
its former Place and Order, which is the Case of Miracles, if it were not under
the Conduct of some superior Being, that guides and controuls it according to
his own sovereign Pleasure: And here I may add, that it is not agreeable to the
moral Excellency's of the blessed God, to suppose, that he would permit
infernal Spirits to usurp the broad Seal of Heaven, and palm an imposture upon
knowing, impartial and inquisitive Persons, by wondrous Works, without leaving
some plain Notices to detect the Fraud.

Nor can we easily account for the discreet Conduct of many Creatures, who are
destitute of the Direction of Reason, without acknowledging a Providence: The
Course of their Operations so far transcends their Capacities, that there is a
necessity of a divine Agency in what they do; particularly the Prudence and
Economy of the Ant and Be, respecting their support, equally deserve our
Wonder and Imitation. If every Thing happens by Accident, and there is no
divine Government over the World, why does Conscience tremble at the thoughts
of Sin, with the fears of a future Judgment? which can be by no Art or Opiate
entirely extinguished and effaced! What would these uneasinesses signify, if
the Almighty had abandoned the Care of the Universe, and made no Distinction
between the goodness and badness of Men? If every event be entirely accidental,
then how is it that sometimes, even in ordinary Occurrences, the Signatures of
a providential Government may be plainly discerned? For whatever savours of
deep Council and Design, and is of great consequence to Mankind, and yet is
brought about without any human foresight or contrivance, not only besides but
contrary to the Intentions of the visible Agents, ought, in Reason and Justice,
to be ascribed to an invisible Wisdom and Power: When therefore great and
wonderful Things are done by an unexpected concourse of many casual and
fortuitous Events, when the greatest Politicians are outwitted, their Councils
confused, their Measures broken, and their Designs baffled, without any visible
Wisdom or Strength to oppose them; when the Hearts of Princes are turned like
the Rivers of Waters, and such a surprising coincidence of Things and train of
Events, serve some important Purposes; when many of contrary Parties and
Interests, without consulting one another, without settling their private
Prejudices, unexpectedly conspire in the same Thing, intending to serve their
different and contrary Ends by it -- In such Instances, the Hand of God is
visible; his all governing Providence is apparent and conspicuous to every
intelligent and attentive observer.

But what is it that Jehovah governs over? Our Text resolves this Question, by
declaring that he reigns over all, and that he is exalted as Head above all.
But more particularly, the glorious GOD governs over all the PARTS of created
NATURE, and every BEING they contain, together with all ACTIONS and EVENTS.

The Heavens and the Earth are subject to his Rule and Management; the former
is his Throne, and the latter his Footstool; the boisterous Deep submits to his
Government, he binds it with a Girdle of Sand within its Bars and Doors; his
omnipotent Word proclaims, hitherto shall thou come, but no farther, and here
shall thy proud Waves be stayed. When he speaks, its Surges suddenly subside
without murmur or reluctance: He stills, (says the Psalmist) the Noise of the
Seas, the Noise of their Waves, and the Tumult of the People.

The Angels in Heaven, these principalities and Powers, though Creatures of the
highest Order, think it not beneath their Dignity to attend his Throne as
ministering Spirits, (with winged haste) to execute the Errands of his
Providence.

The greatest Monarchs on Earth are obliged to yield to his Regimen.
Nebuchadnezer, one of the most grand, potent and insolent of their Order, was
forced to acknowledge this eternal Truth, that the most high God rules in the
Kingdoms of Men.

Yea the Devils themselves are kept in perpetual Subjection to the divine
Government, by being limited as to the Exercise of their Power and Malice, and
by being exposed to Punishment for their Rebellion. The sacred Scriptures
assure us, that without leave they could not distress Job in his Person or
Estate, nor even so much as take Possession of a Swine, and that they are kept
in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the great Day.

But not only Creatures of the highest, but of the lowest class, are under the
Cognizance and Control of his Providence; the Lillies and Sparrows are taken
Care of, fed and clothed without their Care, by the Father of the Universe; and
the very Hairs of our Head numbered. The Notion of the Pagan Sages, that the
Gods take Care of great Things, but neglect small Dii magna cur^nt parva
negligunt.
is contrary to the Dictates of Reason, and Doctrines of Christianity; there is
not any Thing that God has made, that is beneath his Notice.

But not only all the Parts of the Universe, with the Creatures they contain,
are under the divine Government, but every Action likewise, for in him we live
and move and have our Being: All the Wheels of Nature are formed by his Power,
and managed by his Providence according to his Pleasure; nor do any of them
move without at least his Permission and Support.

Moreover the divine Government reaches all Events: This is the Reason that
sometimes the best concerted Schemes, and most promising Attempts, fail of
Success, while the most unlikely are surprizingly crowned with it: And hence it
is truly said, that the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong,
(that is constantly) and this prudent Caution added, let not him that girdeth
on his Harness boast as he that puts it off, because Time and Chance
happens to all. Almighty God disposes of Events as he pleases, and not always
according to the appearances and tendencies of Things.

Nor is it unworthy of our Notice, that the Almighty Governs over not only the
Substance, but the very Circumstances of Events: Thus the Decree of Augustus
for taxing the World, was proclaimed when the blessed Virgin was pregnant, and
ready to be delivered.

When God intends to favor his People with Plenty, he directs to, and blesses
Means for that End. The Prophet Hosea confirms this Truth by these beautiful
and memorable Lines, and it shall come to pass in that Day, I will hear says
the Lord, I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth
shall hear the Corn and Wine and Oil, and they shall hear Jesreel. The Heavens
had been before as Brass, and the Earth as Iron, but now the former yields its
Dews, and the latter its Fruit. There is a Connection between second Causes, as
between the several Links of a Chain, and all of them have a constant
Dependence on, and entire subordination to the first, unless this puts them in
Motion, as the main Spring of a Clock the Wheels dependant on it, they are
either motionless, or their Motion is irregular.

And though the State of Things appears sometimes dark and confused, yet does
divine Providence preside over them, and by its amazing and incomprehensible
Agency, extract Light and Order from them; a pregnant Instance of this we have
in the case of Joseph's sufferings by his Brethren, and after Advancement to
the Dominion of Egypt: Here divine Providence molded a dark confused Chaos into
a beautiful form: Here the orient Colors laid on, derive a luster from the
blackness of the Ground; and a contrast of Characters, and Designs, in the
Cases and Agents that compose the Piece, the Scene! What they thought for Evil,
the Almighty meant for good; he sometimes serves the Purposes of his Providence
by the Agency of Creatures, not only besides, but even contrary to their
Intention. Senacherib the Asyrian Monarch, was used by the Hand of Providence
as a rod to correct the People of Israel, and as an Instrument to bring them to
Repentance, howbeit he meant not so, neither did his Heart think so: No!
Nothing was more remote from his Design, than being of any Service to Israel,
he only thought of gratifying his Ambition, his Cruelty and Avarice! The
Almighty often makes the sinful Passions and Projects of Men subservient to his
great and good Designs; he extracts Good out of Evil, and turns the shadow of
Death into the Morning, so that that out of the Eater-comes forth Meat, and out
of the Strong Sweetness. His omnipotent Council so over rules Events, and
directs the Chain of them, that that which in its own Nature tends to his
dishonor and his Peoples detriment, does nevertheless issue in his Praise and
their Benefit. The Crucifixion of Christ pours Light and Evidence on this
laboring Point; from this, which considered in itself, the greatest Evil, his
Name derives the greatest Glory, and Men the greatest Good!

But to proceed, Things natural, necessary and accidental, are likewise under
the divine Government. Almighty God is the Father of the Rain, and begets by
his Providence, the gentle Drops of the Dew; he brings the Snow and Hail out of
his Treasures, he holds the Winds in his Fists, and makes the Thunder and
Lightning to fulfill his Word: He fixes the Course of Nature, so that it
generally acts in a uniform way. The Luminaries of Heaven perform their usual
Revolutions with the greatest steadiness and exactness, though inanimate and
devoid of Council; and the Sea observes its stated Ebbs and Flows; but when the
great Lord of all, signifies his Pleasure to the Contrary, the Sun stands still
in the midst of Heaven, the Fire forgets to burn, and Jordan is driven back!

Nor are Things to us the most Contingent, excluded the Notice and Rule of his
Providence: No! Though the Lot be cast into the Lap, yet the disposal of it is of
God. In one Word, all the Springs of Nature are in his Hand, and thereby turned
according to his Purpose and Pleasure.

But how does the Almighty govern all? I Answer, with unerring WISDOM,
irresistible POWER, unspotted PURITY, and infinite EASE. Wisdom bears the same
Relation to the Acts of the Mind, as the Eye to the Motions of the Body. Wisdom
and Knowledge are necessary to choose a valuable End, to direct to proper Means
to attain it, and to discover Hindrances that tend to obstruct the attainment
of it. Now because the Wisdom and Knowledge of God are infinite, we may
certainly conclude, that he ever proposes the best End, and the wisest Means:
But being infinite, and we finite, it is no wonder that his Judgments are
unsearchable and his Ways past finding out! And especially when the great
Sovereign is pleased to cover with Darkness his Pavilion, and to hide the Face
of his Throne! All Things are ever naked and open to the divine View, whether
past, present or to come, his Eye with one glance pervades all Nature, and
peirces to the very Center of the Universe: He certainly declares the End from
the Beginning, and perfectly descerns every Let that might mar the Prosecution
of it; he knows our Thoughts afar off, even before they are formed; he
compasses all our Paths, and therefore detects the most disguised Designs; the
Darkness hides not from him, but the Night shines as the Day. The Psalmist
confesses with much Affection, that such Knowledge was too wonderful for him,
and so high that he could not attain to it, whither, says he, shall I go from
thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy Presence; if I ascend up into
Heaven, thou art there; if I make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there; if I
take the Wings of the Morning and dwell in the uttermost Parts of the Sea, even
there shall thy Hand lead me, and thy right Hand shall hold me. He justly
inferrs God's Omniscience from his Omnipresence, and clothes his devout.
Thoughts with sublime and noble Language, with poetical Fire and Fines! Though by
reason of our Ignorance we cannot penetrate into some Instances of God's
Government, yet they are all wise and worthy of himself; though there is
sometimes a Wheel within a Wheel, yet the Spirit of the living Creatures is in
them, and they are ever full of Eyes, so that there cannot be any Error or
Mistake in the divine Government. Non cec^ impetu volvuntur rote.
The Expostulation of God himself with Job, respecting his Ignorance of the
Works of Nature and Providence, is very striking and abasing! The Sentiments
and Language are enriched with inimitable Beauty and Energy, where wast thou
when I laid the Foundations of the Earth, who has laid the Measures thereof,
or shut up the Sea with Doors; where is the way were Light dwells, and as for
Darkness, where is the Place thereof? Have thou entered into the Treasures of
the Snow, has the Rain a Father, or who has begotten the Drops of the Dew?

Nor is the POWER of God less exerted then his Wisdom, in the Government of the
universe; He is wise in Heart and mighty in Strength, who has hardened himself
against God and prospered? The Thunder of his Power, who is able to withstand?
he does what he pleases in the Armies of Heaven and among the Inhabitants of
the Earth, and who can say to God what do thou? Other Governors are
reasonably limited by Laws, but none can give Law to God, he has no other
Bounds but his Nature and Will, which give Laws to Heaven and Earth, and all
the Creatures they contain; Gods Power is infinite, incomprehensible, Eternal;
he spoke when Time commenced, and lo the Heavens and Earth existed, it was but
a Word and behold a World! This divine Power shakes the Earth out of its Place,
and makes its Pillars tremble, this makes the Sun forget to shine, and seals
up the Stars.

But the unstained Purity of the divine Nature, appears no less conspicious in
the Government of the World, then his Wisdom and Power (as Moses observes,) He
is a Rock his Ways are perfect, a God of Truth and without iniquity, just and
right is He. Tho the Almighty governs rational Creatures in their Actions
certainly, yet in perfect consistency with human Liberty; on the one Hand a
Certainty of Events (some how) in Relation to God, appears to be a sure
Consequent of his certain Foreknowledge of all Things, considered in Connection
with his Wisdom, Independancy Immutability and Happiness. This Foreknowledge is
strongly supported both by Reason and Revelation, not only by just Deductions
from the Infinity and Simplicity of the divine Nature and other Attributes; but
likewise by possitive scriptural Predictions of future contingent Events: But
on the other Hand, it is equally certain, that we are not mere Machines,
otherwise we would not deserve the Name of Agents; but are only on that
Supposition, passive Instruments of another Action, and consequently neither
liable to guilt, when we violate the divine Laws, nor capable of Rewards and
Punishments; but this cannot be true, for we our selves are conscious of our
Freedom of acting, and of our Guilt when we transgress the Precepts of God, and
therefore it is certain we act freely; but how the aforesaid Certainty and this
Liberty do consist together, is too great a Depth for a Human Understanding to
fathom: This learned Bail heartily acknowledges in his Character of Jansenius,
his memorable Words are these, The whole in fine is reducable to this, did Adam
sin freely? if you answer yes, then his Fall it will be replied, was not
foreseen; but if you answer no, then it will be said, he is not guilty. You may
write a Hundred Books against either of these consequencies, and at last you
must be forced, to own, either that the infalliable foreseeing of a contingent
Event, is a Mystery which it is impossible to conceive, or that the Manner how
a Creature who acts without Liberty, and sins nevertheless, is quite
incomprehensible; I desire no more, for to what Purpose is it to write so many
Books, since you must be forced to own at last one of these two
incomprehensible Mysteries! Vide Bayles, famous Historical Dictionary, which is
equally instructive and delightful!


Great and excellent Mr. How, speaks nobly thus, The Notion of the Goodness and
Righteousness of God, methinks should stick so close to our Minds, and create
such a Sense in our Souls, as should be infinitely dearer to us then all our
Senses and Powers; and that we should chose rather to loose our sight, hearing
and motive Power, torn away from us, then suffer our selves to be disputed into
a Belief, that the holy and good God, should irresistably determine the Wills
of Men to, and punish the same thing. Vid. Howes reconcilableness of the divine
prescience with the Sins of Men.
As to good Actions, the blessed God no doubt graciously inclines the Wills of
Men: As to evil, he only supports the Powers of Action he has given to his
Creatures, and suffers them to sin, but no way excites to it; for if so, he
would be the Author of it; but this is impossible. The blessed Jehovah is of
inviolable Purity, and inflexible Equity, he essentialy hates Sin, and
therefore cannot incline Men to it; let no Man therefore say, when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with Evil neither
tempts he any Man, but every Man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own
Lust and enticed.

Moreover the divine Majesty governs all easily and at once, his Word and Will
was enough to make all, and it is enough to Rule all; as a Father of the Church
observes, God is not weary with ordering the universe, nor is all the Work of
the World too much for him. Athanasius.
Men cannot do two Things at once, but the Almighty governs all the Affairs of
the World at once, in the same instant, the same Moment he manages Millions of
different Matters! neither is the Multiplicity of them any more a Distraction
to him, being infinite, then if he had but one thing to mind; nor will there be
any End to his Government: No! it is continual and eternal; if he withheld his
Hand one Moment, all the Wheels of Nature would stand still, or fall to Pieces.

But it is objected, if God govern the World, why are not Rewards and
Punishments dispensed, why are the wicked prosperous and the pious oppressed?

To this we may reply, that there are Examples in every Age of God's rewarding
the good, and punishing the bad; but this is not general or universal, because
this World is a state of Trial and not of Recompense: There will be a future
Judgment, when Rewards and Punishments shall be universally and exactly
distributed; in order to which the present Life is but a Probation. Now it is
unreasonable to expect the Judgment before the Trial, the Crown before the
Combat. Punishments are sometimes inflicted to put Men in Remembrance of God's
Government, but not always, least a future Judgment should be prevented.
Augustine.
in the mean Time the allwise God has in a Measure interwoven Rewards and
Punishments in the Nature of things; to sin he has anexed Disquiet and Distress
and hence the Way of Transgressors is truly said to be hard; and to Virtue and
Goodness he has anexed the natural Rewards of Peace and Satifaction; on which
Account it is justly said, that the little that a righteous Man has is better
then the Riches of the Wicked.

If outward Prosperity be not good for bad Men, then the Force of the Objection
vanishes, but the Case is realy thus; Prosperity is so far from being good to
them, that it is the very reverse, it is like a sick Patients using such strong
Diet as tends to make his disease incurable; Prosperity flatters their Pride,
and is fuel to their Luxury; by it they are fattened for the Day of Slaughter;
we ought not to Lament, Isidore.
those who smart when they offend, but those who go on in sin unpunished.

And on the other Hand seeing good Men are corrupt, Afflictions are necessary
for their Cure, as Physic for the Sick, a real Benefit; they are likewise but
of short contindance, and they are supported under them by the divine Power,
and have them sweetened to them by the divine Love, and will be graciously
recompensed for their Patient enduring of them with a distinguished degree of
future Blessedness; with which as the Apostle observes they are not worthy to
be compared. Whom God Loves he chastneth. To the same purpose speaks a Pagan
Master, Seneca.
in these Words; When you see righteous Men strugle with Adversity, and on the
contrary wicked Wretches pass their Days, in Ease and Affluence, call to Mind
that we our selves are willing that our Children should be modest and sober,
whereas we give License to our Slaves; pass then the same Judgment on God: The
Regard he has for the righteous Man, suffers him not to live in Pleasure, he
brings him to Trial and inure him to Hardships, and so prepares him for himself!

From what has been said of God's Government, we may learn the Unreasonableness
and Danger of provoking by Sin, the angry Resentments of such an Almighty
Being; which are as impossible to be avoided as they are intolerable to be
endured: a Being that can in a Moment turn all our Comforts into the most
exquisite Miseries, and make every Creature of the Creation an Executioner of
his Vengeance.

And seeing the Almighty governs over all, he should with our Consent govern
over us, we should yield a ready Obedience to his Laws, and a cheerful
Submission to his Providence; considering he has the most equitable Right
thereto, as our Creator, Redeemer and Benefactor, and that our eternal all
depends upon our Compliance.

If we are under Afflictions, we should look on them as coming by the Direction
of that God, who is Wisdom and Love it self, who does not afflict us willingly,
nor grieve the Children of Men, but corrects in Measure and in Mercy for our
Profit, that he may make us partakers of his Holiness: He knows best what is
best for us, and will by his Power and Providence, make all Things work
together for the Advantage of such as fear and serve him. We should therefore
be contented with our Lot, and cheerfully commit our all to his Management;
humbly confiding in him, who can with the utmost ease, and strongest Certainty,
supply all our Wants, and protect us in the midst of the greatest Dangers.
Omnipotence can make our worst Enemies our best Friends, can make our Expenses
for his Cause and Servants to increase our Estate like the Widow of Serepta's
Oil given to the Prophet Elijah. Surely the Munition of Rocks is the Defense of
his People, he is their Shield and Buckler, he covers them with his Wings, and
under his Feathers they may safely trust.

And especially we should express Gratitude, for all the Benefits we receive by
his Providence; it is for a Lamentation, that many Labor to fill up their
Lives by a continued Circle of Pleasures, to the Neglect of God and Religion,
they take up the Tymbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the Sound of the Organ, but
regard not the Work of the Lord, nor consider the Operation of his Hands. They
pore so much on second Causes, as entirely to overlook the First, (the primum
Mobile,) and consequently rob God of the Honor, and themselves of the Comfort
and Benefit which would naturaly issue from a deliberate Recollection of his
Kindnesses by Providence; and sincere GRATITUDE for them; but the Time being
elapsed, I must refer the Discussion of this important Point to the Afternoon,
and conclude at present, praying that what has been said, may be blessed to the
Hearers Benefit, and ascribing all Honor, and Glory, Majesty, and Dominion, to
God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Amen.

SERMON II.
1 Chronicles. 29 chap. from the 10 to 15. Verse Wherefore David blessed the Lord
before all the Congregation: And David said, blessed be thou Lord God of Israel
our Father for ever and ever: Thine O Lord is the Greatness, and Power, and the
Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty; for all that is in the Heaven and the
Earth is thine; thine is the Kingdom O Lord, and thou art exalted as Head above
all. Both Riches and Honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all; and in
thine Hand is Power and Might, and in thine Hand it is to make great and to
give Strength unto all. Now therefore, our God, we thank thee and praise thy
glorious Name: But who am I, and what is my People, that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this Sort? For all Things come of thee, and of thine
own have we given thee.


HAving spoken in the preceding Discourse, of the Government of God by his
Providence, I would now proceed to speak upon that THANKSGIVING and PRAISE
which is due to him on Account of Mercies communicated by it, (to us)
particularly of a public and religious Nature; preparatory to which let it be
observed, that though Praise and Thanksgiving considered strictly and critically,
may be distinguished, yet I apprehend, that in our Text (by the Figure
Hendiadis,) they are but two Words designed to signify the same Thing, viz.
that Gratitude in Sentiment, Speech and Behavior, which we owe to God for all
his Mercies toward us. The Psalmist being impressed with a deep Sense of the
Divine Goodness, enlarges upon the GRATITUDE due for it, in a variety of
Expressions of the same Tendency. In this View I shall consider them in the
following Discourse, and proceed to observe, that they necessarily suppose a
full Persuasion of God's Government over all, and import a careful Attention
to the Blessings we receive by it with our Minds; a just value for them in our
Judgments; a sincere Regard to their Author in our Hearts; a faithful Retention
of them in our Memories; an open Celebration of them by our Lips, and a
grateful Return for them by our Lives.

Without a full and strong Persuasion of God's absolute Empire over all Events,
we will not look on the Benefits we receive, as coming by his Direction, and
consequently decline to express the Gratitude which is due for them: It is
therefore extremely necessary to endeavor in the Use of all proper Means, to
get this Sentiment deeply fixed in our Souls. And having laid this noble
Foundation, we should carefully attend with our Minds to the various and
important Blessings we derive from the divine Government, who is wise and will
observe these Things, even they shall understand the loving Kindness of the
Lord. The Prophet justly reproved the ungrateful Israelites for this, that they
regarded not the Work of the Lord, nor considered the Operation of his Hands.
Without a close Attention to, and serious Consideration upon the Benefits we
receive, our Minds are not like to be fired with Gratitude for them.

Nor is it less necessary to value highly in our Judgment, the Mercies we
receive, how excellent is thy loving Kindness O God, (says the Psalmist) how
precious are thy Thoughts unto me, O how great is the Sum of them; if I should
count them, they are more in Number than the Sand. A cheerful acceptance of
Benefits, and complacence in them, is the very Form and Spirit of Gratitude,
and that which truly noble Benefactors have principally in View; no Sacrifice
or Holocaust is so acceptable to the blessed God, as a just value for his
Goodness: The Almighty not only loves a cheerful giver, but a cheerful
receiver; he would have us to gust and relish his Benefits.

As a due Attention to the Mercies of God, naturally tends to excite our value
for them, so this value as naturally tends to inflame us with a sincere Regard
to their Author in our Hearts. The Psalmist assures us, that he loved the Lord
because he heard the Voice of his Supplication. Nothing so much endears God to
the Soul, as a View and Sense of his immerited Goodness; we love him (says the
Apostle) because he first loved us. The Truth is, we never love him with
Freedom, Vehemence, and Transport, until we are first fired with a Sense of his
Love and Goodness, (to us) His love apprehended, like a Magnet attracts the
most passionate and grateful Emotions, and vigorous Sallies of our Souls
toward him, as the Source of our Benefits, and Center of our Rest.

Farther, a faithful Retention of God's Mercies toward us, in our Memories, is
necessary to constitute that Gratitude that God requires. Seneca justly
observes, That he who falsely denies the Reception of a Benefit, and he that
dissembles it, and he that does not repay it, is ungrateful; but most
ungrateful of all is he that forgets it. When Benefits are not remembered, it
is a sign they made no suitable Impression on the Mind at first, otherwise some
discernable Traces of them would have remained there; and as there was no deep
Impression, so probably no Thought of a grateful Return. The Almighty
frequently complains of the ingratitude of the People of Israel, in forgetting
his Works, and the Wonders that he had showed them. But the Psalmist, whose
vigilant Gratitude it is our Duty and Interest to imitate, determined to
remember God's Wonders of old, and meditate on all his Works. It is a
lamentable Evidence of the deep Degeneracy of human Nature, that our Memories
are so tenacious of Injuries, and so forgetful of Benefits. Aristotle being
asked, what grows the soonest Old? gave this Laconick Answer. Thanks! A severe,
but alas, too just a censure upon the generality of Mankind. A censure which
every Thing that is great and honorable, should conspire to incite us to guard
our Conduct from. A Succession of new Benefits, should not supplant and efface
the Memory of ancient Mercies, but rather render them more desirable and
amiable, like Liquours whose Value is increased by Age. The Memoirs of
important Deliverances, should be inscribed on our Minds with indelible
Characters, as that of Israel from Amaleck on the Altar, with a JEHOVAH NISI,
the Lord is my Banner!

Another ingredient in real Gratitude, is an express open acknowledgement of
the Kindness of Heaven (toward us) by our Lips, and our great Obligations to
God, on Account of them; an explicit Declaration of the Value and Moment of his
Benefits, as well as our unworthiness of them, our inability to requite them,
and of the Beauty of the divine Attributes opened in their Donation and
Conveyance!

When grateful Love inspires the Heart, it cannot but perspire through the Lips,
and make them move in Praise; as when the main Spring of a Clock is well set,
the Wheels naturally move, and the Bell will not forget to proclaim the
Numbers. Real Gratitude is of a diffusive, social Genius; it wants others to
share its sweets, to witness its tender Sentiments, and to assist its feeble
Attempts in celebrating the divine Praise. Gratitude is innocently and nobly
fond of Light, of Liberty and Society; the Instrument of which is Speech, which
is never so much our Glory as when employed in glorifying our God for his
Goodness toward us.

But that which crowns the Scene, is a grateful return for Benefits received,
by our Lives. Sincere Gratitude earnestly pants after a requital, it wants to
testify (some how) its high Esteem and dear Regard to its Benefactor, and to do
him some Service, yea equal Service if possible to the Benefits received. Its
^^^uine Language is that of the Psalmist, what shall I render to the Lord for
all his Benefits toward me? The grateful Person is not only led by a View of
the divine Goodness, to mourn heartily over his Sins, as committed against such
a gracious Benefactor, and earnestly to long after the Prosperity of his
Kingdom, but likewise to labor honestly for Holiness in himself and Usefulness
to others, agreeable to his Station and Talents. It is true our great
Benefactor is self-sufficient, he neither needs, nor can receive, any Advantage
from us, (immediately) In this respect our Goodness does not extend to him,
neither is it any Gain to God, that we are righteous; yet in amazing
Condescension to prevent our Ruin and promote our Benefit, he who is all
Fullness, will rather himself be seemingly indigent, then permit us to be
ungrateful, knowing that our Performance of the Duty of Generosity is becoming
the Dignity of our rational Nature, and conducive to our personal Comfort, and
social Happiness; he clothes himself with his Peoples Wants and Miseries to
invite our Beneficence, and graciously accepts what is done to them as done to
himself; he accounts it a suitable Retaliation of his Kindnesses, yea such a
Favor as puts the great, the blessed God in Debt, which he who is Truth
itself, promises to discharge: He that has Pity on the Poor lends to the
Lord, and that, which he has given, he will pay him again; God is not
unrighteous to forget your Work and Labor of Love, which ye have ministered to
the Saints, and do minister, for with such Sacrifices, he is well pleased. And
when this Beneficence to our indigent Brethren, is designed to assist them in
the necessary and noble Attempt of erecting a House, not for Man, but for the
Lord God; for his Glory and Worship, and in Subordination thereto, the best
Interests of Mankind: This is a Charity of the most sublime and excellent
Nature, not only because it is extended to Man for God's Sake but because it is
a Kind of Charity even to God himself; being devoted to his immediate Honor
and Service, and therefore will not fail of a suitable Retribution! Good Words
without Action, where there is Opportunity and Capacity, are like a sounding
Brass and tinkling Symbal, empty Sounds of no Use, but to proclaim our
Insincerity, and to insult those we should relive.

But to proceed, the primary and principal Object of Praise and Gratitude, is
the glorious God: Now therefore, our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious
Name. Although we should express all due Esteem and Honor in regard of our
generous Benefactors, who have been Instruments in the Hand of God, of
communicating Benefits to us, and put a just Value upon their brotherly
Kindness and Benignity, yet seeing it is God the supreme Disposer of all
Events, who excites and directs the Compassion and Generosity of his Creatures,
who guides their Councils with Light, and Crowns their Essays with Success;
without whose Concurrence the best projected Measures, and most vigorous
Efforts are rendered ineffectual; therefore to him we must ascribe the ^upream
Honor of all our Benefits; We should therefore enter into his Gates with
Thanksgiving, and into his Courts with Praise, be thankful unto him, and bless
his Name; because the Lord is God, his Mercy is Everlasting, and his Truth
endures to all Generations.

Now tho it is our Duty to be thankful to God for every Benefit we receive, of
whatever Kind it be, yet those of a public and religious Nature, which respect
the Honor and Worship of the Divine Majesty, which affect a Community and its
Descendants in their most important Interests, to late Posterity; demand our
peculiar and most affectionate Acknowledgments! For as much, as the reasonable
Soul excells the Carcass, which it inhabits, in the Dignity of its Nature, and
Purity of its Essence, as much as spiritual Ravishments, excel the low
Gratifications of Sense, as much as the vast Abyss of Eternity, exceeds the
shallow Surface of a contracted Span, so much our Desires after, our
Complacence in, and Gratitude for spiritual Benefits in their Nature, (or
Relation;) should surpass the Affections we exercise toward those, that are
merely temporal and corporal.

As many of us are Members in a larger or stricter Sense of religious
Societies, we should be pleased with, and grateful for any favorable aspect of
divine Providence upon them, or any one of them, seeing all Societies, who
profess Christianity, and retain the Foundation Principles thereof,
notwithstanding their different Denominations and Diversity of Sentiments in
smaller Things, are in Reality, but One Church of Christ, but several Branches
(more or less pure in minuter Points) of one visible Kingdom of the Mesiah;
whose Honor and Interest rightly understood, is one and the same: They should
therefore rejoice in the public Prosperity of Zyon, and praise God's glorious
Name with Ardor and Emotion, by whose Guidance and Concurrence it is in any
Degree attained.

It is a just and general Maxim, that the more extensive and durable any good
is, the more noble it is, and consequently, the more worthy incentive of our
Gratitude and Praise. And indeed if we consult History, either Sacred or
Profane, we may easily perceive, that it contains scarce any thing else
considerable, but the earnest Endeavors of good Men to promote the public
Benefit, and their affectionate Gratitude to God for it. Moses, Nehemiah, Paul,
yea and all the goodly Train of Prophets and Apostles are Instances of this
memorable Verity. But, dear Brethren! besides the Ties of Social Union, and
common Interest; pure disinterested Piety and Humanity, should incline us to
rejoice with those that rejoice, and consequently to thank God for his Favor
toward them: And indeed were we endowed as we ought with this amiable and
divine Quality, we need not envy the Splendour of the greatest Potentates, the
Sagacity of the wisest Statesmen, the Bravery of the boldest Heroes, the
Learning of the accutest Doctors, the Wealth of the richest Cressus, nay nor
the highest Seize in Goodness or Happiness of Men or Angles! for the
Comfort and Benefit thereof would be ours: What Comfort or Benefit can any Man
have in a happy State but this, to rejoice in it and thank God for it, and if
we do so likewise, shall we not partake of their Happiness without lessning it,
without weary Labors for it, yea partake of it, whether they will or not? By
this Means, a Man becomes the Center of all Felicity, honored in the
Promotion, enriched with the Wealth, and delighted with the Pleasures of all
Mankind; what a Heaven upon Earth, is this Godlike generous Temper of Mind? But
what a Hell upon Earth is its contrary viz. ENVY? ENVY a diabolical Evil! the
very Picture of God's great Adversary, and his dark abode! this thinks itself
eclipsed by another just Commendation, grows poor in his Prosperity, pines in
his Pleasure, and grows sick on account of his Health! this hateful iniquity!
one of the greatest Monsters in Nature! is a just Punishment to itself, in this
Life, and shall meet with a dreadful Recompense in the Life to come! There is
no Principle, Sirs, more deeply fixed in human Nature then a grateful Sense of
Benefits; the very worst of Men, who are not quite dispoiled of all the Remains
of Humanity, have some Respect for their Benefactors, this experience teaches,
and this our Savior confirms, by assuring us, that even Sinners and Publicans
did so!

Nor is there any Duty more just and equitable then Gratitude for Benefits
received, we are indebted for what is freely given us, as well as for what is
lent to us; for the Freeness of the Giver in not exacting Security, nor
expressing Conditions of Return, instead of deminishing, increases the Debt:
This generosity to us, and Confidence in us, lays us under the noble
Obligations of Ingenuity, which whoever violates, counteracts his Reason, and
betrays his Trust! Gratitude, my Brethren, is the smallest homage we can offer
to our glorious Benefactor for all his Goodness, which it is as unjust as
unreasonable to neglect!

I may add, that this Duty is also delightful. Praise the Lord, says the
Psalmist, for he is good, sing Praises to his Name, for it is pleasant, and
Praise is comely: As this Duty proceeds from a cheerful Mind, so it tends to
preserve and increase it; other Duties have something Labourous and disgustful
(to Sense) in them. Prayer sets the Scene of our Wants and Sins before us, but
Praise only opens the Memory of divine Mercies; this is the Fruit of Love in
the Possession of its Object; this is the constant Employment of the
Inhabitants of Heaven, and therefore the nearest emblem of it, of any Duty of
Religion, and the most delightful Entertainment upon the Earth.

This Duty of all enjoined, is the most acceptable to God, and the most
profitable to us. Gratitude for past Mercies, opens the Way for future
Benefits, by inclining God I use the Word incline in a figurative Sense, to
represent with greater Light and Energy, the agreeableness of Gratitude to the
divine approving Pleasure; and the Encouragement we have from God's promises in
this Way, to expect his kind and gracious Returns.
to vouchafe them, and preparing us to receive them; and this indeed facilitates
the Practice of other Duties, by animating our Fortitude and increasing our
Love, from which they easily and naturaly flow, through a Sense of divine Goodness
and our Obligations by it.

The Words of Epictotus on this Head deserve to be mentioned, if we understood
our selves, says he, what other thing should we do, either publicly or
privately, then sing Hymns to, and speak well of God; were I indeed a
Nightingale, I would do what belongs to a Nightingale, if a Swan what becomes a
Swan, but since now I am endowed with Reason, I ought to praise God, this is my
Duty and Concernment, and so I do, neither will I desert this Employment while
it is in my Power.

But if the Admonitions, the Precepts and Presidents of Princes, Prophets, and
Philosopers, should not have due Influence upon you, yet methinks the Example
of the inanimate Creation, should not fail to excite you to the Performance of
this Duty; The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
Handwork: Upon which Chrisostom thus glosseth, it were an ugly thing, says he,
that Man endowed with Reason, and the most honorable of all Things visible,
should in rendering Thanks and Praise be exceeded by other Creatures; neither is
it only base, but absurd, for how can it be otherwise, since other Creatures
every Day and Hour send a Doxology to their Lord and Maker!

And not only the Heavens, my Brethren, but the Earth manifests a kind of
Gratitude, the Rivers with great eagerness, and haste return to the Sea the
Waters they borrow from it by indiscernable Conduits; and the Ground by a
fruitful increase repays the Culture bestowed upon it; and with Pleasure
expresses its Thanks for the Rain and Dews received by it; the little Hills
rejoice on every Side, they shout for Joy, they also sing!

Yea diverse Beasts show a sort of Gratitude. The Ox knows its owner, and the
Ass its Masters Crib. Not only the Tame and Gentle, but those of the most
Savage kind, such as the Lion, the Tiger, the Bear, as some Historians inform
us, have showed Kindness to their Benefactors: How monstrous then must
ingratitude be?

The Subject I have been discoursing of, viz. the Government of GOD over all by
his Providence, and that Gratitude and Praise which is due to him on Account of
Mercies communicated by it, particularly of a public and religious Nature,
easily applies itself to the present Occasion. It Is Providence, it is the
all-governing, all-powerful Providence of the most high God, my Brethren, that
has begun and conducted this important Enterprise of erecting a CHURCH for his
Honor and Service, to this comfortable and creditable Period, which we now
behold and justly admire!

Divine Providence prepared the Way for it, by a train of surprising incidents,
long before any Thought of such an Event entered into any of our Hearts. The
Designs of Heaven are deep and impenetrable, until divine Providence, the
Executor of them, discovers them, and brings them to pass; there are many
Devices in Man's Heart, but the Council of the Lord that shall stand, and he
will do all his Pleasure. Every Event with which his Purpose is pregnant, how
improbable soever, will be brought to the Birth by Providence in its appointed
Season.

The Truth is, divine Providence has appeared surprizingly in the Course and
Series of this Transaction, in Instances two many now to enumerate; of which
give me leave to mention the few following hints: We were brought at first
under a sudden, unexpected and urgent necessity of endeavoring to get a House
for ourselves to worship God in; the issue of which, because of the difficulty
of the Enterprise, and the low State of the generality of our Society, appeared
not only very doubtful and precarious, but without Assistance from others,
entirely impracticable; this of course affected the Minds of some, who were
concerned for its Preservation, with fear and solicitude concerning the Event;
but it has pleased a gracious God by his Providence, in a great Degree to
dissipate our Fears, and to turn that which seemed to threaten our total
Dissolution, into a probable Mean of establishing the Society for a long while
to come!

I must confess, my Brethren, I have never seen more of the glorious
Sovereignty of divine Providence in any Case, than in this: The Almighty in
some Instances mercifully disconcerted the Measures we had formed with a
friendly Intention, in order to bring about for us a good we knew not: One
Example of this kind, which I think it not improper to mention, is the fixing
of the Place where the CHURCH now stands; a Situation which in respect of free
Air in the Summer, warmth in the Winter, and open prospect, is perhaps not
inferior to any in the City; through a mistaken view of things, we would have
fixed it in a more expensive and less convenient Place, but divine Providence
would not suffer it!

Nor should we pass over in Silence the Kindness of a gracious Providence, in
directing and inclining us to begin this important Work in a proper Season, a
suitable Juncture, and in disposing to diligence and firmness in the
Prosecution of it, in the midst of many Objections and Discouragements to the
Contrary. Had it been deferred a little longer, the Stagnation of Trade, and
its Consequents which soon ensued, would have rendered the Attempt abortive!

The Almighty frequently disappointed us, as to our fond Expectations of the
Liberality of foam, and graciously raised up others in their Place, of whom we
had little or no Thought or Expectation!

A kind Providence has mercifully appeared in inclining the Hearts of a
considerable Number of our own People, to contribute generously (their
Circumstances considered) to erect a House for God.

And still divine Goodness has been more conspicuous, in inclining many worthy
Gentlemen of other Societies, more especially in this City, to befriend and
assist us with their generous Donations! Gentlemen of large and noble Souls,
who are happily freed from the slavish Shakles of sordid Bigottry; whose
genuine Charity is not confined to the mean Business of a Party, but like the
Sun diffuses its Brightness and Benificence on all around them, who are in
necessitous Circumstances! without such, the Comfort of civil Society would
quite expire, and every noble and difficult Enterprise, of a religious kind,
where Assistance is needed, fail of Success! Blessed be God that there are yet
such Men upon the Earth! And that all, under religious pretexts, are not sour'd
into that unmerciful Severity which is directly contrary to the Spirit, the
End, the Genius of all that deserves the Name of Religion! Blessed be God that
all are not swallowed up by that ignorant, hateful and merciless Monster of
Bigotry, to the petty Business of Parties, and their comparatively little
peculiars, These things in which all wise and good Christians in all Age and
Places are agreed are generally and justly reckoned essential and necessary;
that is not Philosophy, says one of the Ancients, which is peculiar to this or
that Sect. but whatever of Truth is to be found in any of them, and the same
may be said of Christianity, as Mr. How excellently observes, it is not that
which is appropriated to this or that Party, but whatsoever of Sincere Religion
is common to them all. It would be happy for the Churches, if that Ancient and
excellent Maxim were universally observed, in necessariis unita sin non
necessariis Libertas, in utrisque Charitas; i. e. in nesscesary things unity,
in Circumstantial Liberty, and in both Charity.
to the overthrow of Humility, which is the Ornament of Humanity, and the
Beauty of Goodness; to the overthrow of Charity, which (considered in its full
extent) is the End of Perfection, the Sum of the Law, the Scope of the Gospel,
and the Glory of Christianity!

I may say, with the Psalmist, that I have been sensibly affected with
beholding diverse of our own People offer willingly their several important
Donations, to the Service of God's Sanctuary! But the Generosity of others, is
more surprising, more affecting, as it was less expected, and is less
interested! Certainly, my Brethren, the noble Principle of Ingenuity invites
us, to do just Honor to our kind Benefactors, to express our affectionate
Gratitude to them, and to God for them!

Beneificence unconfined to Parties, directed by Reason, and issuing from Love,
is a God like Virtue, an Index of a great and noble Soul, an Argument of
undisguised Goodness, and necessarily commands Reverence from every
intelligent, impartial Observer; but from such as feel its benign Influence,
under the Gloom of Adversity, it as a Magnet attracts the strongest Tendencies,
the warmest Emotions of grateful Love; like the Light of the Eye of Heaven,
which though it appears amiable to all beholders, yet particularly affects those
who are under its direct Rays, with its inimitable Beauty and friendly warmth!

I do therefore gladly embrace this public Opportunity, to Thank in the most
respectful Manner, in the Name and Behalf of this Society, His Honor the
GOVERNOR, the Honorable the CHIEF JUSTICE, and the Secretary of this Province,
and the Worshipful the Mayor, and Recorder of this City, and all the honored
Gentlemen of the Council, and Assembly, and of every other Station and
Character in Life, that have contributed to the Building of this CHURCH,
wherein we are now conveened. And I heartily wish and earnestly pray, that the
most high God may graciously Reward their kind and generous Benefactions, with
every needful Blessing in Time and Eternity. Permit me to add, that it gives us
great Pleasure, that through the gracious interposure of divine Providence, the
Projection and Execution of the Model of this Structure, sacred to Devotion, I
see no ground to believe that there is any such ceremonial Sanctity in Places
under the Gospel Dispensation, as obtained under the Legal, viz. that religious
Worship should be more acceptable in one Place than another. The Temple was not
only the Place, but the medium of Worship, so that the Prayers made in or
toward that House, had a special Promise of Acceptance, (2 Chronicles. vi. 21.) And
hence it is said, that the Altar sanctified the Gift, ( Mat. xxiii. 19.) The
worship there performed, was more acceptable, more available than elsewhere, as
being the only Place where the Almighty would accept those ceremonial Services,
and likewise to signify that there is no Acceptance but in CHRIST, who was
thereby typified; but the Antitype being come, that ceremonial and typical
Worship must needs expire, and therefore of consequence that ceremonial
Sanctity of Places dependant on it.

No doubt Places, or Houses may be separated from a common and dedicated to a
religious Use; and this is all the Holiness that they are now capable of. With
whatever religious rites, Places of public worship be consecrated, of which the
new Testament is entirely silent, they cannot be called Holy in the same Sense,
that the Jewish Temple and Tabernacle were; unless we can prove a Shekinah or
sensible display of the Divinity in them; and therefore we find that Places of
Worship under the Gospel, were chosen by Human Pleasure and Discetion, on
account of their convenience, without Distinction, without any immediate divine
Direction, or pretense of Holiness. Outram observes, that there is a twofold
Holiness viz. of the Place and Thing: As to the former, that the Dedication of
it to the Worship of God makes it Holy, but as to the latter, only some eminent
or extraordinary Appearances of the divine Presence The peculiar respect which
Places bore to God, and his immediate Service by his express appointment
rendered them Holy under the Mosaic Economy; but the Institution of CHRIST
has left no mark of such Holiness in one Place more than another; and hence our
Lord observes, that neither in this Mountain, nor in Jerusalem shall Men
worship the Father; the Subjects of Jesus being a kingdom of Priests, wherever
a number of them worship they constitute a CHURCH, such as worship in Spirit
and in Truth, may assuredly depend on Gods gracious Presence and Blessing, for
such the Father seeks to worship him, and this gracious Presence and Blessing
of the most high, vouchaf'd generally in a greater degree, together with the
clearer discovery of Gods Mercy and Goodness in a Reedeemer, and spiritual
Ordinances of easly observance under the Gospel Dispensation, supply the want
of the Shekinah which obtained under the Legal; in the mean time me thinks,
common Prudence and natural Decency, require, that Structures appropriated or
set apart for the stated Worship of God, should not be applied to other uses,
without some apparent necessity, or great convenience. It appears unseemly and
improper to transact any seculiar affairs of commerce in such Places and much
more any thing that is mean and ludicrous, for such uses tend to bring the
Place and Worship therein celebrated as well as Worshipers into contempt: Our
Lords driving of the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, ( Math. 21, 12.13.)
confirms, as I conceive at has been now observed.


give general Satisfaction to our kind Benefactors, and likewise to others.
Gentlemen, your Pleasure sensibly affects us, and we count ourselves happy in
having the Honor of your Approbation!

But God, the glorious God my Brethren, is the principal Object of our
Gratitude and Praise; he it is that governs the vast Universe with the wisest
Council, and most absolute control; he it is that turns the Hearts of his
Creatures as Streams of Water in the South, so as to answer his own Designs!
Let us set up our Ebenezer and say, hitherto has our God helped us: Let us with
Sentiments of the deepest Reverence, and most affectionate Gratitude, adore and
magnify the very venerable Name of Jehovah, in the beautiful and pertinent
Language, the just and noble Doxology of the Pious Hebrew Prince, and People,
upon a parallel Occasion. Wherefore David blessed the Lord, before all the
Congregation and said; blessed be thou Lord God of Israel our Father, for ever
and ever: Thine O Lord is the Greatness; and the Power, and the Glory, and the
Majesty, for all that is in the Heaven and in the Earth is thine; thine is the
Kingdom O Lord; and thou art exalted as Head above all; both riches and Honor
come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine Hand is Power and Might,
and in thine Hand it is to make great and to give Strength unto all; now
therefore our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name; but what is my
People, that we should be able to offer thus willingly, after this Sort, for
all things are of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. With what pious
Passion, does the Man after God's own Heart, celebrate the divine Praise! As
appears by his Plenoasms and Ingeminations, his variety of Expressions to the
same Purpose, and Repetition of the same Words? See the cordial Complacence!
Behold the devout Transports of the best of Kings, the Princes and the whole
Congregation of Israel, upon this solemn, amiable and august Occasion! And no
wonder, for the Palace, the Rich, the Honorable and Magnificent Structure was
not for Man, but for the Lord God; and therefore it touched to the very Soul
all the pious and generous Israelites; fired their warmest Zeal, struck every
Spring of Passion, and awoke their most tender Sentiments of Honor, Reverence,
and Gratitude; which Impatient of restraint, expressed with Ardor, Elevation,
and Pleasure, the noblest Images, the highest Encomiums, of the divine
Attributes, that their enlivened Minds in their sublimest flights could form!

And should we, my Brethren, should we, be less concerned for the Honor and
Worship of the most high God, then the Jewish Church, we that enjoy greater
Light and Liberty, we that enjoy a more comfortable and glorious Dispensation?
God forbid! Surely we are under greater Obligations of Gratitude then they, and
shall our Returns be less? This would contradict the clearest dictates of
Reason, the plainest Maxims of Justice, the noblest Sentiments of Ingenuity,
and be a Scandal and Reproach to the Gospel of the dear Redeemer!

That pretense to spirituality and Humility, which is only a covert to
Covetousness, Indifference or Party-Prejudice, in the Matters of Religion, is a
mean and monstrous Evil, that should be abhorred by all Mankind! Those severe
Zealots, who censure all Ornaments in Churches, though they do not neglect them
in their Dress and private Houses; and condemn the pious Zeal and noble
Generosity of their Brethren in that Respect; as Evidences of Pride and
Arrogance should consider, that the Ornaments of Dress and private Houses, are
much more apt to excite our Arrogance, because, they are ours, then what
respects God, and the public Good, in which individuals, considered
separately, have but a small share; Why do you assume the divine Prerogative,
why do you judge and set at naught your Brethren? Surely you herein act a very
inconsistent Part, and consequentially, not only condemn the whole Body of the
Jewish Church, but even pass Sentence upon God himself, who appointed Ornaments
in his House by his Sovereign Authority, and complained by his Prophet of those
coveteous Misers, who had ceiled, (finely furnished and adorned) Houses of
their own, but left his House Desolate, i. e. naked, and bereaved of proper
Ornaments: The Ornaments of their private Houses, were curious and costly, not
so much for use as Pleasure, as Jerome, Drusius, and Pool observe upon the
Passage, of Scripture now mentioned.

If any in their misguided Zeal, and specious but coveteous Humility, will
presume to censure God himself, we need not wonder that they condemn us!

Ingenius and pious Mr. Harvey, after viewing a Church in Cornwall, speaks with
his usual Eloquence and justness of Sentiment, on that Occasion, in the
following memorable Words; The whole, says he, magnificently plain, a row of
regular Pillars supported the Roof, with Simplicity and Dignity!

O! how amiable is Gratitude, especialy when it has the supreme Benefactor for
its Object. I have always looked upon Gratitude, as the most exalted Principle,
that can actuate the Heart of Man. It has something noble, disinterested, and
(if I may be allowed the Term) generously devout. Repentance indicates our
Nature fallen, and Prayer turns chiefly upon a Regard to one's self. But the
Exercise of Gratitude subsisted in Paradise, when there was no Fault to
deplore; and will be perpetuated in Heaven when GOD shall be All in all.

THE Language of this sweet Temper is I am unspeakably obliged: What return
shall I make? -- And, surely, it is no improper Expression of an unfeigned
Thankfulness, to decorate our Creator's Courts, and beautify, the Place where
his Honor dwells. Of old the Habitation of his Feet was glorious: Let it not,
now, be sordid or contemptible. It must grieve an ingenuous Mind, and be a
Reproach to any People, to have their own Houses wainscoted with Cedar, and
painted with Vermillion; while the Temple of the LORD of Hosts is destitute of
every decent Ornament.

Such Objectors as I but now mentioned, would do well, for their own sakes, to
enquire, whether their censorious invectives, do not proceed from gross
ignorance of the Scriptures, or from low avarice to save their Pence, or from
such wild Enthusiasm respecting Ornaments, as opposes common Sense; or from
Jealousy and Envy respecting their Neighbors Comfort, or from want of that
Charity, which hops all things, which suffers long and is kind, is not
easily provoked, and seeks not her own things? I forbear to mention the Case
of that unhappy Man, who begrudged a small Expense of Ornament upon our
Saviors Body, and yet artfully masked his Coveteousness, with the pious and
plausible pretext of Charity to the Poor; I say I choose to pass by this
melancholy Instance, least I should cast too dark a Shade upon the Beauty of
this Solemnity!

If it be said, that it is an inconsistent Vanity, that any Part of what is got
by begging, for thus Addresses to Mankind in behalf of God and his Worship have
been termed by some, probably in disdain and contempt, it may be replied, that
few or none of those who are so kind and generous as to contribute any thing
considerable to religious Purposes, are of the Number of such peevish
Objectors: Now when those, who have contributed are generally pleased with the
Application of their Donations, others, who have given nothing (or what is next
to nothing) have no shadow of Reason to complain or deride; unless they are
determined to expose their Ill Nature, and Glory in their Shame! Such as are
most inclined to severe censures on others Conduct, are ever least inclined to
Beneficence themselves; it would be a Prodigy, to behold a Bigott, an
Enthusiast, a needlessly scrupulous Learned Bail in his Historical and
Critical Dictionary, cites from the Writer of the Life of the famous Henry
Alting, the following Paragraph respecting his peaceable Temper and behavior,
Alienus a Jurgiis et vitilitjgiis C^minisectorum, abiis Distinc^iunculis et
inep^^is Sophistarum, quibus mysteria Salutis potius ^mplicantur, quam
explicantur Scrupositattibus Precisistarum, qui Nodum querunt in Scirpo, colant
col^cem camelum Deglutiantes. -- He avoided all Quarrels and Disputes about
triffles, together with the idle Distinctions of the Sophists, by which the
Mysteries of Salvation, are rather darkened then explaind; likewise the
scrupulous Behavior of the (Precisians or) Fanatics, who (industriously seek
for a Knott in a rush, or in other Words) carry Religion into Superstition,
strain at a Gnatt and swallow a Camel.
a sour, a censorious Person Liberal! especially in promoting the religious
Interests of any Society, besides their own; to which they, as unreasonably as
cruelly confine even Christianity itself! The severe censures of such, as well
as the rude Scoffs of the profane Herd, while we Essay what is in itself noble
and virtuous, instead of sugesting Matter of Reproach and Scandal, do contrary
to their Intentions, reflect Honor upon our Characters, and tacitly furnish a
valuable Panegyric! And seeing asking help when it is needed on such
Occasions, is the general Practice; it is an Argument of great Partiality, and
meaness of Spirit, to labor to fix an Odium on any one on that account; while
others equally Criminal in attempts to do public Service; are passed by in
deep Silence, without any Compliment, without any Invective!

Seeing that Men's fancies are as various as their Faces, it is therefore
highly improbable, if not impossible, from the nature and common course of
Things, that where many are concerned, every ones Notion should be gratified in
every minute Particular in the Model, and Execution of large Structures; and
therefore it is the vainest Vanity to expect it, or complain for the want of it.

I confess, my Brethren, it appears to me reasonable in itself, and creditable
to Societies, that in Cities where there is a greater Resort of Persons of
Honor, Distinction, and polite Taste; the Structures of a religious kind,
shoud be adorned with greater Beauty and exactness, then in obscurer Places;
and this is what the Prudence of Mankind directs them to observe generally in a
greater or lesser Degree; and to this their Practice is conformed in Matters of
a civil Nature without a Scruple!

It Is true, if any under great Necessity; should ask Donations for their own
absolute Support, and then apply what they obtain this Way, to superfluous
Ornaments of Dress, the Objection would conclude; but when Persons ask
Donations of others not for themselves, but the Honor and Worship of the most
high God, and then apply but a small Part of them to such sober and moderate
Ornaments, as are approved of by the Trustees of the Society, for whom the
Donations are given, who are by them appointed to regulate the Model of the
Structure designed, the Objection is impertinent; pray must the Trustees wait
for the Approbation of every Donor, nay of every Spectator, respecting all the
Parts and Appendages of the Work? then it would be like weaving Penelopes Web,
never finished, for what one would approve, the other would condemn, and
demolish!

Its very true Soundness of Doctrine, Purity of Worship, and the Power and
Presence of God are infinitely more necessary and valuable, then external
Ornaments, but what then; they are subordinate thereto, and therefore no
Hindrance of them; otherwise God himself was mistaken in their Appointment.

Was not one of the richest and grandest Structures of a religious Kind, or of
any Kind that ever the Sun saw, built principally by Contributions or
Donations, procured as some are pleased to term it sarcastically by Begging; by
the Begging of one of the most pious Princes that ever lived, and one of the
most Potent then in the World; and was not a good Part of the Donations
procured as aforesaid, applied by the Direction of the wisest of Men, yea by
the Direction of the allwise God to Ornaments in that sacred Structure? I would
therefore enquire, whether treating this Prince's pious and commendable Essay
to promote the Honor of the Divine Majesty, and the public Good, with
contempt, and representing it as Criminal, is any Argument of Candor, or Regard
either to Virtue or to Mankind? and whether it is any Evidence of superior
Wisdom, examplary modesty or eminent Piety, to expose and burlesque the
Sentiments and Practice of the wisest and best of Men, in any Instances wherein
they are approved of even by God himself; or to charge Vanity on infinite
Wisdom, and unstained Purity? As Moses had a Pattern or Model of the Tabernacle,
from the most high God; so had David of the Temple; and it may be here
observed, that though the Tabernacle was, as it were, but an ambulatory Church,
of obscurer Figure, erected in, the infancy of Israel, while they were in a low
State, encompassed with Dangers and Enemies, before their Entrance into the
promissed Canaan; yet it had diverse rich Ornaments, to which a considerable
Part of the Contributions of the People, were applied by God's own Order!

If it be said, that a few of our own Society who have hitherto given little
(or nothing) toward this Structure; have notwithstanding grumbled at all, or
most of the Ornaments of it; I think it may reasonably Silence such, when we
truly assert, that their Purses did not procure them; certainly in this
Instance, they have acted a very unnatural and indiscreet Part; and shown as
little Judgment of things, as of Gratitude to God and Man! Have they not
hereby imitated the Unkindness of the murmuring Israelites to Moses, after all
his painful and unwearied labors to promote their Benefit; which so affected
that meek Man of God, that he speak unadvisedly with his Lips; and no wonder,
for Ingratitude in Return for important Benefits, is one of the most detestable
Monsters in Nature, equally abhorent to all the Principles and Maxims of
Reason, of Justice, of Ingenuity and Honor! Would it not be better for such to
thank Jehovah for his unexpected and immeritted Goodness toward them, then
grieve and break the Hearts of their Benefactors, by their ungrateful
Reflections and murmurings? But Charity enclines me to hope, that if any among
us have unhappily blundered as aforesaid, it is owing to their neglect of
suitable Reflection, which when they come to exert, will either yield them
Satisfaction, or at least constrain them to be silent.

For my own Part, I freely and openly declare; that in my Opinion, there is not
one Ornament more then is proper in this Structure; the Building is manly and
plain, its chief Beauty is the Simplicity of the whole, and the just Proportion
of its several Parts, which are enlivned by the exactness of the Workmanship,
and a few Ornaments interspersed, which are well devised, well executed, and
well placed; without, which so large an Edifice, would appear flat, dead, and
disagreeable; being destitute of its proper Decency and Dignity; and I have the
Pleasure to observe that this is the general Opinion of better Judges of
Architecture, that have seen it, and are free from the Bias of Prejudice; but:

If any through a misguided Zeal, or wrong Taste, are conscientiously fond of
Flatness, and meaness, in the Form of religious Houses; I will not contend with
them; I am neither inclined to censure the Goodness of their Aim, or Envy the
Ease of their Sentiment; I only ask Liberty to think for myself, and act
accordingly. Tra^it ^^a q^^mque voluptas.


But the Temple was Typical; well what then? is it therefore unlawful to have a
House of Worship under the Gospel, and to worship God in it? If so, then of
Consequence, we have done with Religion altogether. It is true, some Parts of
the Temple were Types of Christ, and some Ceremonies therein celebrated, which
of their own accord expired at the Messiahs approach; but did ever the Almighty
make any thing in it self Criminal, a Type of Christ? If so then infinite
Purity approved Iniquity, which is both ridiculous and blasphemous to imagine!
If not, then why should great Zeal be exerted against what is in itself inocent
and lawful! Is not this a Zeal without Knowledge; a Zeal disproportioned in
Degree to the Weight of Things? And consequently instead of being serviceable,
is realy as prejudicial to the Interests of Religion, as it is dishonorable to
these that are under its unhappy Influence. But are Order and Decency in the
House of God typical too, then why are we enjoined to observe them under the
Gospel of Christ?

Notwithstanding of any unkind Censures that have been, or may be passed, it
may be safely said, that a sincere Regard to the Honor of the divine Majesty,
the Credit of our Profession in general, and the best Interests of this Society
in particular, and their Descendants in present and future Times, was the true
Spring of the Pains that have been taken in the Prosecution of this necessary
and noble, but difficult Enterprise!

I earnestly beseech the most high Jehovah, for the Sake of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that the several Branches of the Religion of Nature, and especially the
Grand peculiars of revealed, may be faithfully and successfully preached in
this Church, The Ancient Christians called the first Day of the Week Kuriake,
dies dominica, that is the Lords Day, and their Places of Worship Kuriaka, the
Lords Houses: And this according to Fuller, is the true import of our Englih
word CHURCH Templum Christianum, CHURCH, (aspirate) dicimus pro Kiirk: Kiirk
vero per Syncopen, 'pro Kuriak, atque Haud Scio an aptius ullum fere alliud
reper^atur nomen, vid, Fuller misc^el ^acra. A CHURCH is a Place peculiarly
devoted to the Honor of GOD, or a House for GOD and his Service by way of
eminence or distinction: So that any Structure that is set apart for this
purpose may in Truth. Reason and Justice, be called a CHURCH, and he that
sincerely and statedly Worships GOD in such a Pace, and adorns his Profession
with a holy, humble and peaceable Behavior, is a good CHURCHMAN! The word
CHURCH Eclesia, in the new Testament, generally signifies a number of religious
People conveend for Public Worship, yet in some places particularly in (1 Cor.
1^.18.) it seems to signify the House or stated Place, in which they met for
the aforesaid purpose. Now as it would be uncharitable to confine the Church
Personal, which as the Episcopal Divines justly observe,' is the Congregation
of the faithful,' to any particular Branches of Christ's visible Kingdom, to
any particular Parts of his Body Mystical: So it is unreasonable to restrict
and monopolize the name CHURCH, to the Houses of Worship of any particular
communities or Bodies of Christians, which of right equally belongs to all; nor
is it proper to use the aforesaid word as a term of Distinction between Houses
of Worship, without the addition of some Epithet, which descovers the
particular denomination of Christians, to which they belong; because it is a
distinction without a Difference; seeing the term Meeting House, is applicable
to Conventions of a Civil nature, it seems not so proper for Houses of Worship,
as the name CHURCH, and hence the Presbyterians or reformed Protestants, in
Scotland, Holland, Switzerland, and Germany, universaly use this name (or what
in their different Languages is of the same import) in Common with the
Episcopal, and Lutheren CHURCHES.
in the present and future Generations; may the Holy Spirit of God descend upon
the Administration of his Word and Ordinances in this House; in all the
Successions of Time; for the Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, and the
Consolation and Edification of Saints; that they may be hereby excited to
rejoice in God their Savior and to speak in the Seraphick strains of the Pious
Patriarch, this is no other than the House of God, and this is the Gate of
Heaven: May the Name of this Church, from henceforth be called Jehovah Shammah,
the Lord is there.

If any one should enquire, what I apprehend to be the Grand Peculiars of
revealed Religion, I answer these following viz. The Doctrine of the Trinity,
three Persons consubstantial, coequal, coeternal and one God; or in other
Words three Persons, the same in Substance, equal in Power and Glory. Original
Sin, both imputed and inherent, or the Guilt of Adams Sin in violating the
Covenant of Works, as the Representative and Covenant Head of his Posterity,
reckoned to them, and in Consequence of this, their being born in a State of
Corruption.

The Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction to the Justice of God, for the Sins of
Men, by his Sufferings and Obedience. The Doctrine of Justification by the
Righteousness of Christ imputed, and received by Faith alone. The Doctrine of
Regeneration by the Holy Ghost, Repentance from dead Works, and the Practice of
evangelical universal Holiness. If these important Principles are not
propogated, little good in my Opinion is to be expected. If the Doctrine of the
Trinity be denied, the Foundation of the Gospel-plan of Salvation, by a
Mediators Righteousness seems to be overset; for if there be but one Person how
can he be supposed, without absurdity, to satisfy himself? If Christ be not
truly and properly God, how can he be worshipped without Idolatry, or be
reasonably supposed to make an infinite Satisfaction? And if Men be not
acquainted with the Knowledge of their Decease viz. Sin, original and actual,
and the Remedy provided for the Cure of it, viz. Christ's Righteousness; and the
Method prescribed by the Almighty for the Application of that Remedy, viz.
Faith; and the Necessity of building the Superstructure of universal Holiness
upon that Foundation; I say if these Things be not inculcated, I cannot but
think that vital Religion will languish and expire and a dead Form, if so much,
succeed in its Place; the blessed Lord Jesus is the Foundation, the Kernel, the
Soul, the Center of Piety, if he is gone nothing remains but a proud, selfish,
empty Husk, a carcass without a Soul to animate it. O may the good God of his
infinite Mercy preserve the aforesaid Truths in the Churches in general, and in
this in particular, to the End of Time!

A humble hope of the Benefits but now implored, has been an affecting
Excitement, to persist in the Labors that were necessary to carry on this
Undertaking, and to endure the many Hardships that were cast in the Way of it;
which it would not suit the agreeable Occasion of this Convention to enumerate!

The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthian Church, informs and assures
them, that in the midst of the Oppositions, Sorrows and Sufferings, they were
exposed too, and at some Seasons much pressed with on a religious Account; the
Witness of their own Minds, respecting the Integrity of their Conduct, was a
great Support, a great Allay: Our rejoicing is this (says he) the Testimony of
our Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly
Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World, and
more abundantly to you wards. But its Time to hasten toward the Conclusion of
this Discourse, and therefore I exhort you Dear Brethren! To Thank and Praise
the glorious Name of God, in Thought Speech, and Practice, for his imerited,
unexpected, and important Goodness toward us; in asisting us to carry on his
Work thus far, viz. to erect and almost finish a House for his stated Worship
and Service. Surely we should speak on this Account in the Churches Language,
occasioned by her sudden Deliverance from a Bondage-State: When the Lord turned
again the Captivity of Zyon, we were like them that dream; then was our Mouth
filled with Laughter, and our Tongue with singing, the Lord has done great
Things for us, whereof we are glad; if he had not built the House, the Builders
would have labored in vain!

In particular, Sirs, we should manifest our Gratitude for the divine Goodness,
in asisting us to erect a House for God, by a Conscientious and constant
Attendance upon the several Parts of Worship therein celebrated, to which we
may be excited by considering, that this is by divine Appointement, the Method
of obtaining the Favor of God; for when in the Wisdom of God, the World by
Wisdom knew not God; it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
those that believe: i. e. by that plain Method of Address, respecting the grand
Peculiars of Christianity, which is reckoned by the ignorant and selfconceited
to be Foolishness. We are elsewhere informed, that Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God, and that we cannot hear without a Preacher. The
same Apostle likewise in his Epistle to the Ephesians assures us, that the
design of Christ's giving public Officers and consequently public Ordinances
to the Church, is her Edification, Knowledge, Unity, Stability, and Growth in
all Goodness: He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we come all in the Unity
of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto
the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ, that we henceforth be no
more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine,
by the Slight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive; but speaking the Truth in Love, may grow up into him in all Things,
which is the Head even Christ, and hence we are enjoined not to neglect the
assembling of our selves together, as the Manner of some is. And the enquiring
Spouse is directed to feed her Kids besides the Shepherds Tents.

Tho some are pleased to cast an unreasonable and ungrateful Contempt upon
public Worship, by a repeated neglect of the Opportunities of this kind, which
a gracious Providence presents, thereby showing, that they Love Darkness rather
then Light, because their Deeds are evil: Yet the infinitely wise God puts a
high Value upon them, and prefers them to private Worship, though necessary in
its Place, and enjoined by his Authority: Jehovah loves the Gates of Zyon, more
than all the dwellings of Jacob; and no wonder, seeing he is there more
glorified by the public and united Adorations of his People; in his Temple,
every one Speaks of his Glory.

And certainly to all such as are truly Devout and well informed, the
Tabernacles of God are amiable, and they love the Place where his Honor
dwells: A Day to them in his Courts is better than a Thousand elsewhere; yea
they would rather be admitted to the humblest Office in his Sanctuary than
dwell in Tents of Wickedness, into which indeed private Houses are turned when
the public Worship of God is wilfully neglected by their Owners. The Psalmist
rejoiced when any Opportunity presented of going to the House of God, and in
his mournful solitude, envied the Happiness of the Swallows that had access
there.

Methinks, my Brethren, the gracious Promises which God has made to a due
Attendance upon public Worship, should effectually incite our observance of
his Precept respecting it; he that is Truth itself has said, in all Places
where I record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee. Now
wherever the Word is truly preached, Prayers sincerely offered, and the Seals
of the Covenant administered agreeable to the divine Appointment, there God's
Name is Recorded, and there the Almighty will certainly vouchsafe his gracious
Presence and Blessing. The Prophet speaking of Gospel Times says, the Lord
will create upon mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies, a Cloud and Smoke by Day,
and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night, for upon all the Glory shall be a
Defense. Blessed is the Man (says Solomon) that hears the Voice of Wisdom,
that watches at her Gates, and waits at the Posts of her Doors. What
gracious Encouragement do these sacred Passages afford to public Worship? But
to these, let me add the Promise of our Savior, that where two or three are
gathered together in his Name, he will be in the midst of them. He assures us
in the strongest Terms, of his constant Presence with the Church in Acts of
public Worship in every Age, till Time shall be no more; Do I am with you
allways even unto the End of the World; with you to authorize, succeed and
bless you: If two of you, says our Lord, shall agree on Earth touching any
Thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them by my Father which is in
Heaven. The dear Redeemer stills walks in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks.
As Jehovah formerly dwelt between the Cherubims in the Tabernacle and Temple,
so does our Lord in the midst of the Churches. As the Sun in the Center,
influences all the Planets with Light and Heat, so does the Sun of
Righteousness, all the Assemblies of his People, with gracious Communications!
How great, dear Sirs, is the stoop of divine Goodness in this, that he who is
the high and lofty one, who inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy; that he to
whom all the Inhabitants of the Earth, are but as Grasshoppers, yea the Earth
and Sea themselves, but as a drop of Water in a Bucket, or a little Dust in the
Balance; that he who weighs the Mountains in Scales, should come to such mean,
vile and miserable Creatures, as any of the Children of Men are, and bless
them! Surely the Almighty does not require any earthly Temple, as though he
wanted a Place of Rest, for the Heavens are his Throne, and the Earth his
Footstool. With this View of the divine Immensity, Solomon being deeply
affected, speaks in the following excellent Language, but will God in very deed
dwell among Men on the Earth? The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, how
much less this House which I have built!

In the mean Time we should take heed, my Brethren, how we hear; and be doers
as well as hearers of the Word, otherwise we shall but deceive ourselves. As
sincere Supplication to Almighty God, for his gracious Presence in Houses of
public Worship, together with a devout Attendance upon the Ordinances therein
dispensed, followed with a Life of Love and universal Goodness, is the best
Expression of our Gratitude for the Kindness of Heaven, in assisting us to
erect them, so it is the only proper evangelical Dedication or Separation of
them to the divine Service, and the best Expedient to secure to the present and
future Generations, the promised Presence and Blessing of God, which infinitely
exceeds all other Enjoyments.

A LIFE of HUMILITY and HOLINESS, and increase in that Wisdom which is from
above, which is first Pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
full of Mercy and good Fruits, without partiality and without Hypocrisy, is the
most substantial, satisfactory and excellent Evidence, of our grateful
Sentiments of the divine Goodness. This, this, particularly and eminently
reflects Honor, upon the Name, Ways and People of God, and is the most
pleasing Sacrifice to him: This best promotes his Kingdom among Men, by
exciteing them to glorify our heavenly Father: This introduces such a serenity
into our Minds, as much surpasses all the Sweets of Life, and is indeed the
best Support under its Frowns: This rationally Evidences our Title to future
Blessedness, to a House not made with Hands eternal in the Heavens, whose
builder and maker is God, and to a distinguished Mansion there!

And now give me leave, my dear Friends and Brethren, to conclude this
Discourse in the Words of King David in our Context, and of King Solomon at the
Dedication of the Temple. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, our Fathers,
keep this forever in the Imagination of the Thoughts of the Heart of thy
People, and prepare their Hearts unto thee. Now therefore arise O Lord God into
thy resting Place, thou and the Ark of thy Strength. Let thy Priests be clothed
with Salvation, and let thy Saints rejoice in Goodness: The Lord our God be
with us, as he was with our Fathers, let him not leave us or forsake us, that
he may incline our Hearts unto him, to walk in all his Ways, to hear his
Commandments and Statutes. Amen and Amen.

Perhaps it may not be disagreeable to observe, that the Psalms sung on the
aforesaid Occasion, were as follows, viz. In the Forenoon,

Psalm. cxxxii from the 1st to the 10th ver. cxxii. from the 1st to the End.
In the Afternoon.
Psalm cxviii. from the 20th ver. to the End. cxxxii. 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15.
verses.
CORRIGENDA.
FOR furnishing page 3. line 5. read finishing. for shall p. 21. l. 10. read
shall, for govenrs p. 32. l. 1. read governs, for at p. 57. the last line in
the Note read what, for misccel p. 69. in the note read miscel, for pace p. 70.
l. 2. in the note read place.


