Elementa Philosophica: Containing chiefly, NOETICA, Or THINGS relating to the
Mind or Understanding: AND ETHICA, Or THINGS relating to the MORAL BEHAVIOR.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the New-Printing-Office,
near the Market. 1752.

NOETICA: OR THE First PRINCIPLES of KNOWLEDGE, AND THE Progress of the Human
Mind Toward its HIGHEST PERFECTION.

NOETICA: Or the First PRINCIPLES of Human Knowledge.

BEING A LOGIC, Including both METAPHYSICS and DIALECTIC, Or the ART of
REASONING. With a brief PATHOLOGY, and an Account of the gradual Progress of
the HUMAN MIND, from the first Dawnings of Sense to the highest Perfection,
both Intellectual and Moral, of which it is capable. To which is prefixed, A
Short INTRODUCTION To the STUDY of the SCIENCES.

O Vitae Philosophia Dux! O Virtutum Indagatrix, Expultrixque Vitiorum! Unus
Dies been, and ex Praeceptis tuis actus, peccanti Immortalitati est
anteponendus.

CIC. TUSC. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
New-Printing-Office, near the Market. 1752.

To the Right REVEREND Father in GOD, GEORGE, Lord Bishop of CLOYNE, IN IRELAND;
THE following Essay, from the deepest Sense of Gratitude, is most humbly
inscribed,

By his Lordship's most dutiful and obedient Son, and most obliged humble
Servant, SAMUEL JOHNSON.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS I am of the Opinion, that little Manuals of the Sciences, if they could be
well done, would be of good Use to young Beginners; what I aim at in this
little Tract, is to be as useful to them as I can, in the Studies of
Metaphysics and Logicks, and this in order to the more particular Studies of
Nature and Morals, by giving as clear Definitions as I am able in few Words, of
the principal Matters and Terms whereof those Studies consist; which I have
endeavored to do, in an Order of Thoughts, gradually arising one after
another, in a Manner as instructive as could well be, in so short a Compass. I
have also proposed to show how these Studies, taking their Rise from the first
Beginnings of Sense, proceed on through the other Studies, to raise the Mind
gradually to its highest Perfection and Happiness.

THOUGH I would not be too much attached to any one Author or System, exclusive
of any others; yet whoever is versed in the Writings of Bishop Berkeley, will
be sensible that I am in a particular Manner beholden to that excellent
Philosopher for several Thoughts that occur in the following Tract. And I
cannot but recommend it to any one that would think with Exactness on these
Subjects, to peruse all the Works of that great and good Gentleman (as well as
those of Lock, Norris, or Malbranch and Cambray) if it were for no other
Reason, at least for this, that they will, in the best Manner lead him to think
closely, and to think for himself. And I was the rather willing to publish this
Logic, because I think Metaphysics a necessary Part of that Science, and that
I apprehend it a great Damage to the Sciences that the old Metaphysics are so
much neglected, and that they might be rendered the more pleasant and useful by
joining with them some Improvements of the Moderns.

THIS little Tract I have introduced with a short General View of the whole
System of Learning, wherein young Students may at once behold, as it were in
Miniature, the Objects, Boundaries, Ends and Uses of each of the Sciences;
their Foundation in the Nature of Things; the natural Order wherein they lie,
and their several Relations and Connections, both with Respect to one another,
and to the general End, viz. our Happiness, pursued through them all.

THIS seems to me as useful in the Instruction of young Beginners in the
Sciences, as it is in teaching Geography to exhibit, first of all, a general
Map of the whole terraqueous Globe, in order to a more particular Description
of the several Countries and Kingdoms in the following Maps; or in teaching
Astronomy, to give first a general Delineation of the whole System of the
World, in order to account for the Phenomenon in the several particular Planets
in the following Schemes. For, as in the natural World, one cannot have a just
Notion of any particular Country, without considering its Situation in relation
to the whole Globe, nor of any particular Globe, without considering its
Situation with respect to the whole System; so in the intellectual World (if I
may so call it) neither can one have a just Notion of any particular Science,
without considering it as it stands related to the whole Circle of Learning,
and the general End pursued through the Whole. And such a short Draught may
also be of some Use to Students, to direct and methodize their Thoughts, and
enlarge their Minds, and at the same time engage their Application and Industry
in the Pursuit of their Studies.

ERRATA: Which the Reader is desired to correct with his Pen, before he
proceeds to read these Tracts.
In the NOETICA.
PAGE ix. read, LEARNING (which the Grecians called Cyclopaedia) implies, etc.

Page 17. for ON, read, ON, and (...).

Page 24. Line ult. for sina, read sine.

Page 30. l. 24, read, on Account of which

Page 36. l. 3, put a (,) after is, -- and l, 13, read, as a Substance.

Page 40. l. 17, for Ideas, read Idea.

Page 62. l. 19, put (;) after universal; -- and l. 21. put (:) after
Affirmative:

Page 77. Margin, read, learning Connexions, without the (,)

Page 87. l. 4, read Globes, a considerable Notion, etc.

Page 90. l. 9, after Elasticity, insert Electricity; -- and l. 17, read
Contrivance.

In the ETHICA.
Title Page, for noctis, read noctes.

Page 3. l. 19, read, of a rational, etc.

Page 6. in the Margin, read Hutcheson.

Page 8. l. 28, for enjoying, read enjoining.

Page 9. l. 9. read, many other Laws may be added, etc.

Page 11. l. 30, for Who, read What am I?

Page 17. l. 7, for cannot, read can, not only, etc.

Page 25. l. 24, read (...), etc.

Page 57. l. 15, after Him, insert (P. I. Chapter II. 19.)

Page 68. l. 7, read, of my Existence, etc.

Page 88. l. 20, read, there is, on the Side of Virtue, the truest, etc.

Page 95, l. 19, read, had ever been known before.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY of PHILOSOPHY. Exhibiting a general View of all
the Parts of LEARNING.
Quod si cuique scientiae provincia sua tribuatur, limits assignentur,
principia and objecta accurate distinguantur, quae ad singulas pertinent,
tractare licuerit, majore, tum facilitate, tum perspicuitate.

D. BERK. DE MOT.
1. LEARNING implies the Knowledge of every Thing useful to our Well-being and
true Happiness in this Life, or our supreme Happiness in the Life to come. And
as our Happiness consists in the Enjoyment of Truth and Good, by the right
Exercise of our Understandings, Affections, Wills and active Powers, it must
take in every Thing that relates both to Theory and Practice, i. e. both to
Science and Art; for Science is the Knowledge of Truth considered
speculatively, and Art is the Knowledge of Truth considered as directive of our
Practice for the attaining our true Good or Happiness. And all the various
Parts of Learning may be reduced to these two, Philology, or the Study of Words
and other Signs, and Philosophy, or the Study of the Things signified by them.
And,

2. (I.) AS the Understandings of young Persons, for the first fifteen or
sixteen Years of their Life, are not ripe enough to enter into the sublimer
Studies of Philosophy, it is necessary that during this Stage they should be
chiefly employed in the Study of Philology, or the Languages, to which should
be added the first Things in the Mathematics, both which are most level to
their juvenile Capacities, as they chiefly depend on the Imagination and
Memory, which in Youth are most vigorous and tenacious.

3. (1.) WITH regard to Language, they must be early initiated in the Rudiments
of Grammar, or the Rules of Speech, relating both to the Accidents and
Connection of Words, and this both in their Mother Tongue, and other Languages,
especially the French, Latin, Greek and Hebrew, in which let them go as far as
may be in this first Stage of Life.

4. (2.) AS soon as they have got a good Notion of pure Speech by the Study of
Grammar, let them learn the Nature of figurative Speech in Rhetoric: And from
thence, as they go on to read the Classicks, let them learn the Use of the
various Tropes and Figures in Oratory, which is the Art of true Eloquence, and
explains the Topics of Invention, the Rules of Disposition or Order, and of
Elocution or Delivery. And,

5. (3.) AS they go on to read the ancient Historians, let them apply
themselves to the Study of History, considered as the Art of an elegant and
just Narration of true Matters of Fact for the Benefit of Posterity. And that
they may understand the Ancients the better, they should read the best modern
Writers of History, which that they may read with Advantage, they ought to have
some easy Instruction in Geography and Chronology, and make use of the best
ancient and modern Maps of those Places, and Tables of those Times, to which
their Books relate, which will render what they read the more intelligible, and
take the deeper Impression on their Memories. Vide Magazine for October, 1748.
"History is a large Field, in which they will see the wonderful Series of
Providence; strange Turns of Fortune, surprising Occurrences, and an amazing
Variety of Accidents; foolish Mortals laboring for Trifles, contending eagerly
for Things they would be much happier without; some cursed in having their
Wishes, raised to the utmost Height of Power and Grandeur, only to be thrown
down thence with the greater Obloquy and Contempt; others pleasing themselves
with their Obscurity, and laughing at the Noise and Bustle that surrounds
them." All which tend to give the Youth a good Insight into human Nature, and
lead them to true Wisdom in their own Conduct.

6. (4.) AS they go on to read the Poets, they should get some Knowledge of
Poetry, considered as an Art, being a just and lively Description of Things or
Persons, either real or imaginary, with an Elevation and Dignity of Thought,
and with the Advantages of Numbers and Harmony, and every Kind of Ornament that
Language is capable of, which will qualify them the better to entertain
themselves with those great Masters of Wit and Eloquence. "There is something
charming in Verse; something that strikes the Ear, moves the Soul, rouses the
Passions, and engages the Affections," while it fills the Soul with the most
useful Instructions, attended with the most exquisite Delight. "It seems to
have been the first Way of Writing, and in some Countries even older than
Letters, and consequently to have been the Voice of infant Nature in her early
Bloom and native Sweetness. In it the Ancients explained their Sentiments,
conveyed their Laws, and delivered their Precepts of Morality in Fable; the
People liked the Instructions which came to them attended with Delight; and as
they heard them with Pleasure, so they retained them with Ease." To this Head
of Language belongs the Art of Criticism, which teaches the true Force of Words
and Phrases, the Nature of Style, and a true Taste, so as to make a right
Judgment of the Beauties and Excellencies of any Performance in either of these
Kinds of Writings.

7. WHILE Youth are acquainting themselves with the Rudiments of Eloquence,
History and Poetry, they should also be learning the first and easiest Things
in the Mathematics (which indeed, as well as Words, do in some Measure belong
to the Doctrine of Signs) especially Things that relate to Practice, both in
Arithmetic and Geometry, which will very much tend to engage and strengthen
their Attention, enlarge their Capacities, and ripen their Minds. And something
of natural History, with the Arts of Drawing and Music, if they have a Taste
for it, will be very pleasant and useful Amusements. And these Studies which
they have begun in this first Period, and (it is to be hoped) made a
considerable Progress in, must be afterward continued and carried to further
Perfection, and made their Diversion at Turns, while they

8. (II.) PROCEED, secondly, to the further Improvement of their Understandings
and active Powers, in the sublimer Studies of Philosophy, which is the Study of
Truth and Wisdom, or the Knowledge of Things, as being what they really are,
together with a Conduct correspondent thereunto, in the Pursuit of true
Happiness; to which they must go on when they are sixteen or seventeen Years
old. "And what concerns us in these more exalted Studies is, that we be very
exact and careful to attend more to Things than Words, and endeavor to make
such Things our own as will prove real Accomplishments to our Minds, and duly
regulate both our Tempers and Manners; and such are the Knowledge of GOD and
ourselves, for Philosophia est Rerum Divinarum Humanarumque Scientia, as Tully
defines it, and comprehends every Thing, both speculative and practical, upon
these large and comprehensive Subjects.

9. THE first, which relates to GOD, takes in the whole Creation; the full
Extent of Being; for by the Contemplation of the Effects we arise to the Cause.
"And as by considering that wonderful and amazing Power, that All-comprehending
Wisdom, that inimitable Beauty, that surprising Harmony, that immutable Order,
which abundantly discover themselves in the Formation and Government of the
Universe, we are led to their divine Original, who is the inexhausted Source,
the glorious Fountain of all Perfection;" so by making due Reflections on the
Operations of our own Minds, and the large Extent of our intellectual Faculties
and their Objects; their several distinct Exertions, and their Subserviency to
each other; the free Activity of our Souls, and the various Passions that put
them on Action for attaining our several Ends; and the various Ways wherein
they exert themselves, and exercise their Dominion over our Bodies; we may
attain, in some good Measure, the Knowledge of ourselves, as well as of GOD,
our chief Good, and the certain Means we must use, and the Method we must take
to secure our true Happiness in the Enjoyment of Him, ourselves, and one
another. In order to the raising our Minds to these sublime Speculations, and
to regulate our Actions in these noble Pursuits, it is necessary that we be
able to form to ourselves clear Ideas and Conceptions of those Beings or Things
on which we contemplate, whether Bodies or Spirits: To the Attainment of which,

10. (1.) LOGIC, or the Art of Reasoning, is very requisite, the Foundation of
which is Metaphysics, or the Philosophia prima, which, by some, has been
called Ontology, and is the noblest and most elevated Part of Science. It
begins with sensible Objects, and from them takes its Rise to Things purely
intellectual, and treats of Being abstracted from every particular Nature,
whether Body or Spirit, and of all the general Distinctions, Connections and
Relations of Things, whether sensible or intellectual, and so lays a Foundation
for clear and just Reasoning, while we proceed upon stable and unerring
Principles. Which Foundation being laid, Logic teaches us the Rules of
thinking regularly, and reasoning justly, whereby we learn to distinguish Truth
from Falsehood, and proceed from Things simple to Things compound, and from
Things precarious and contingent to Things necessary, stable and eternal, which
therefore will result in the clearest and justest Views, both of all other
Things, and of the adorable Excellencies of the divine Nature, that our little
Minds are capable of.

11. (2.) FROM these general Principles and Laws of Reasoning, we proceed to
the Application of them, first in the Study of Quantity in general, whether
Number or Magnitude, in the sublimer Mathematics, or the Arts of Computation.
And here again opens a noble Scene of eternal Truth, in the Demonstration of a
vast Number of Theorems and Problems, both Arithmetical and Geometrical, to
which Algebra is wonderfully subservient, in the Contemplation both of Lines,
Surfaces and Solids, in all their endless Varieties and Proportions; which will
enable us to proceed with the greater Advantage in the Study of Nature, and
without which we cannot read with Understanding the best Things that have been
written on that Subject. This Sort of Study has likewise a direct Tendency to
lead us to an admiring Sense of the Deity, in whose infinite Treasures of
eternal Truth, we behold these Connections and Demonstrations, who has made
all Things in Number, Measure and Weight. To this Head belong, Trigonometry,
Geodaesia, Stereometry, the Doctrine of the Sphere and Cylinder, and of Conic
Sections and Fluxions.

12. (3.) FROM the Contemplation of Quantity in the Abstract, we go on next to
the Consideration of it in Concrete, or in the Objects of Sense, i. e. as
blended with the other sensible Qualities, in the endlesly various Bodies that
compose this mighty Frame of Heaven and Earth, and the Principles and Laws of
Motion, on which their Phenomenon depend, which are the Subjects of Physics or
natural Philosophy: The Foundation of which is Mechanics, which explain the
Nature of Bodies in general, and the Forces by which they move; and demonstrate
the various Laws of their Motion. To which belong Staticks, Hydrostaticks and
Pneumaticks. Upon which we proceed in Geology, or Physics, strictly so called,
to contemplate this Globe of Earth, in all its Parts and Furniture; the
Elements, Fire, Air, Water and Earth; the Stones, Mines, Minerals, Meteors,
Plants, and Animals, and particularly the wonderful Structure of our own
Bodies. Here therefore belong, Optics, is Music, Geography, Navigation and
Commerce; Lithology, Metallology and Meteorology, Agriculture, Chemistry and
Botanics, Anatomy, Surgery and Medici^^ and every Thing useful in Life. And,
lastly, from the Earth we launch forth into the vast and unmeasurable Ether,
and in Astronomy we contemplate the Heavens and Stars, both fixed and erratick;
and particularly our Sun, with his splendid Chorus of Planets and Comets, with
their Orbits, Magnitudes and Densities, and the Laws of their Motions in the
Tides of their Fluids, and their diurnal and annual Revolutions: To which
belong Chronology and Dialling. And the Facts in all Nature are related in
Natural History. "All which open upon us an amazing Scene, in which Nature
displays her surprising Phenomenon, and invites us heedfully to consider her
wonderful Productions, and trace out infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness, through
the immense Spaces, from the Heights above to the Depths below, from the
glorious Orbs which roll over our Heads, to the minutest Insects that crawl
under our Feet, and even Things either vastly minute or distant that escape the
Ken of our naked Eye. From all which we are led to behold, acknowledge, admire
and adore the great Author of all Things." And this prepares us,

13. (4.) TO proceed a Step higher, and from the Sensible or Natural World, to
go on to the Contemplation of the Intelligent or Moral World; from the World of
Bodies, to the World of Spirits, which, as such, being intelligent and moral
Agents, are the great Subject of Ethics, or moral Philosophy. The Foundation of
which is Pneumatology, or the Doctrine of Spirits; in which, we begin with our
own Souls, their Powers and Operations, both perceptive and active; and thence
proceed to other Orders of Intelligences, and so gradually rise to the more
particular Contemplation of the DEITY, the great Father of Spirits, and the
supreme Lord and Governor of the whole Creation, which is called Theology. And
when we have learned just Notions of Him and ourselves, we from thence
demonstratively deduce the great Principles of that Duty which we owe to Him,
ourselves and one another (which opens another glorious Scene of eternal Truth)
the Performance of which, does, in the Nature of it, tend to our highest
Perfection and Happiness. All which great Branches of Duty are the Subject of
Ethics (strictly so called) which is the Art of living happily by the universal
Practice of Virtue. But these Things will be best learned from the Sacred
Volumes, the Design and Business of which is to explain and enforce the great
Principles of Theology and Morality by Divine Revelation; particularly "our
blessed Savior has exalted Ethics to the sublimest Pitch, and his admirable
Sermon in the Mount is the noblest and exactest Model of Perfection."

14. (5.) Ethics explain the Laws of our Duty as we are Men in general, and
which indeed are the eternal and immutable Laws of Right that equally bind all
intelligent Creatures. But as we cannot well subsist without being combined
into particular Societies: And as Societies are of two Kinds; the one founded
in Nature, viz. Families, the other in Compact, viz. Civil Governments: Hence
spring two other Branches of Moral Philosophy, viz. Oeconomics, which relate to
the Regulation of Families; and Politics, which treat of the Constitution and
good Government of Cities, Kingdoms and Republics. And as good Policy provides
for every Thing that may contribute to the public Good and Happiness of
Mankind, it does, in Effect, comprehend and sum up the whole of Philosophy.
And, lastly, as it provides for the Happiness of Men, both Temporal and
Spiritual, both with Regard to this Life, and that which is to come, it must
consist of two great Branches, viz. Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity. And the
Facts in the Moral World are related in Biography, and in Civil and
Ecclesiastical History. The whole may be seen in one View in the following
Table.

The TABLE.
LEARNING is the Knowledge of every Thing that may contribute to our true
Happiness, both in Theory and Practice, and consists of two Parts.

I. Philology, or the Study of Words and other Signs, and is, 1. General or
common to all Kinds of Speaking, in 1. Grammar, of pure Language. 2. Rhetoric,
of figurative Speech.
2. Special, or of particular Kinds of Speaking or Writing, as, 1. Oratory,
which treats of true Eloquence. 2. History, which relates real Facts. 3.
Poetry, which describes Things, either real or imaginary. To all which belongs
the Art of Criticism.

II. Philosophy, or the Study of the Things signified by them, whether Bodies
or Spirits, or any Thing relating to them, and is, 1. General or common to all
Kinds of Beings, and is, 1. Rational, in Metaphysics and Logic, which
cultivate our rational Powers. 2. Mathematical, which teach us to reason on
abstract Quantity, Number and Magnitude, in Arithmetic and Geometry, the Arts
of Numbering and Measuring.
2. Special, or peculiar to each Kind of Beings, and is, 1. Natural, which
teaches the Knowledge of the natural World, or of Bodies, in Mechanics,
Physics and Astronomy, which explain the Phenomenon both in Heaven and Earth.
2. Moral, which teaches the Knowledge of the moral World or Spirits, and is 1.
Speculative in Pneumatology and Theology, of Spiritual Beings, and especially
GOD the Father of all. 2. Practical, in 1. Ethics, of Behavior in general. 2.
OEconomics, of the Conduct of Families. And 3. Politics, of the Government of
States, Civil and Ecclesiastical.



THE CONTENTS Of the following TRACT.
CHAP I. Of the Mind in general, its Objects and Operations.
1. THE Design Page 1 2. The Definition of the Mind Page 2 3. Of the Union of
Body and Mind Page 3 4. The Definition of Idea, Notion, etc. ibid. 5. The
Original of our Ideas Page 4 6. Of the Senses Page 5 7. In which we are passive
Page 6 8. Ideas of Sense not Pictures, but the real Things ib. 9. Instanced in
Things visible and tangible Page 7 10. Of Archetypes Page 8 11. Of
Consciousness, Imagination and Memory Page 9 12. Of the pure Intellect and its
Acts Page 10 13. Of intellectual Light, or intuitive Evidence Page 11 14.
Whence it is derived. Page 12
CHAP II. Of the Mind simply apprehending, and of its Objects more particularly.
1. OF simple Apprehension, and its Objects Page 14 2. Of Being in general Page
15 3. Of the first Being, and eternal Truth Page 16 4. Of Causes and Effects
Page 18 5. Of real and apparent Causes Page 19 6. Of necessary and voluntary
Causes Page 20 7. Of final Causes Page 21 8. Of Matter and Form Page 22 9. Of
Essence and Existence Page 23 10. Of Principles Page 25 11. Of Things necessary
and contingent ib. 12. Of Things finite and infinite Page 27 13. Of Things
possible and impossible Page 28 14. Of Things perfect and imperfect ib. 15. Of
Truth and Good Page 30 16. Of Beauty and Harmony Page 31 17. Of Substances and
Accidents, and Subjects and Adjuncts Page 33 18. Of Time and Place, Space and
Duration Page 34 19. Of Whole and Parts Page 36 20. Of Unity and Multiplicity,
Number and Order Page 37 21. Of Identity and Diversity Page 38 22. Of Things
agreeing and opposite Page 40 23. Of Things equal and unequal ib. 24. Of Things
like and unlike Page 41 25. Of Denomination and Definition Page 42 26. Of
Abstraction, and of Individuals, Sorts and Kinds Page 44 27. Particularly of
Bodies and Spirits Page 46 29. Of Signs, Metaphor and Analogy Page 47
CHAP. III. Of the Mind, judging, affirming, denying, assenting, etc.
1. OF Judgments and Propositions Page 50 2. Of Propositions, universal,
particular and singular Page 51 3. Of Propositions simple and compound Page 52
4. Of Propositions true and false Page 53 5. Of Propositions necessary and
contingent Page 54 6. Of Propositions self-evident and demonstrable Page 55 7.
Of Propositions doubtful and probable Page 56 8. Of Opinion and Faith, and
Rules of Assent Page 57
CHAP. IV Of the Mind reasoning and methodizing its Thoughts.
1. OF Reason in general Page 59 2. Of the right Exercise of Reason Page 60 3.
Of the Nature of Syllogisms Page 61 4. Of the three Figures of categoric
Syllogisms Page 62 5. Of the hypothetic Syllogism Page 63 6. Of the disjunctive
Syllogism ib. 7. Of irregular Syllogism Page 64 8. Of Sophisms Page 66 9. Of
Method Page 67 10. Of the disinterested Love of Truth Page 68
CHAP. V. Of the Mind, affecting, willing and acting.
1. OF the Passions in general Page 69 2. Of the Passions more particularly
Page 70 3. Of the End and Use of them. Page 72 4. Of the due Government of them
Page 73 5. Of Will, Activity and Liberty Page 74 6. Of the right Government of
our Activity and our highest moral Perfection Page 75
CHAP. VI. Of the Progress of the Mind, toward its highest Perfection.
1. THE Progress of the Mind, from its first Notices. Page 76 2. Its Learning,
Connections and Languages Page 77 3. Of the Capacity of Children, and the
Regard due to them Page 78 4. Of their Notions of Persons, Relations and Duties
Page 80 5. Of their Notions of Praise and Blame, Shame and Guilt, etc. Page 81
6. How they should he treated, and taught a Notion of the Deity, and their Duty
to Him Page 82 7. Of moral and political Connections and Duties Page 83 8. Of
moderating their Appetites and Passions Page 84 9. Of Reading and Writing Page
85 10. Of Music, Numbers, Figures, Maps, Globes, etc. Page 86 11. Of Grammar,
Languages, Oratory, History, Poetry, etc. Page 87 12. Of Metaphysics, Logic
and Criticism Page 88 13. Of Mathematics, and the fine Arts, Sculpture,
Painting and Architecture Page 89 14. Of Physics and Astronomy ib. 15. Of
Theology and Morals Page 91 16. Of Economy and Politics Page 93 17. Of the
Intent and Usefulness of Revelation, in improving and advancing us to our
highest Perfection and Happiness Page 94
NOETICA: OR The first PRINCIPLES of METAPHYSICS and LOGIC. Together with The
Progress of the Human Mind toward its Perfection.
CHAP. I. Of the Mind in general, its Objects and Operations.
1. IT is my Design in the following Essay, to trace out, The Design.
in as short a Compass as I can, the several Steps of the Mind of Man, from the
first Impressions of Sense, through the several Improvements it gradually
makes, till it arrives to that Perfection and Enjoyment of itself, which is the
great End of its Being. -- In order to which, it will first be expedient to
define what we mean by the Human Mind, and to give some Account of its various
Objects, Powers and Operations, and the Principles and Rules by which they are
to be conducted in attaining to the Knowledge of Truth, which is the Business
of that Science which is called LOGIC, or The Art of Thinking or Reasoning; the
Foundation of which is the Philosophia prima, which is also called Metaphysics
and Ontology, or the Doctrine of the general Notion of Being, with its various
Properties and Affections, and those applied in general both to Body and
Spirit. And as Truth and Good are nearly allied, being in effect but the same
Thing under different Considerations; this will pave the Way toward the
Attainment of that supreme Good, in the Choice and Enjoyment of which consists
our highest Happiness; the particular Consideration of which is the Business of
Ethics, or Moral Philosophy, which is the Art of pursuing our highest Happiness
by the universal Practice of Virtue.

2. THE Word Mind or Spirit, in general, signifies any intelligent active
Being; The Definition of Mind.
which Notion we take from what we are conscious of in ourselves, who know that
we have within us a Principle of conscious Perception, Intelligence, Activity
and Self-exertion; or rather, that each of us is a conscious, perceptive,
intelligent, active and Self-exerting Being: And by Reasoning and Analogy from
ourselves we apply it to all other Minds or Intelligences besides, or superior
to us; and (removing all Limitations and Imperfections) we apply it even to
that Great Supreme Intelligence, who is the universal Parent of all created
Spirits, and (as far as our Words and Conceptions can go) may be defined, an
infinite Mind or Spirit, or a Being infinitely intelligent and active. But by
the Human Mind, we mean that Principle of Sense, Intelligence and free
Activity, which we feel within ourselves, or rather feel ourselves to be,
furnished with those Objects and Powers, and under those Confinements and
Limitations, under which it has pleased our great Creator to place us in this
present State.

3. WE are, at present, Spirits or Minds connected with gross, tangible Bodies,
Of the Union of Body and Mind.
in such a Manner, that as our Bodies, can perceive and act nothing but by our
Minds, so, on the other Hand, our Minds perceive and act by Means of our bodily
Organs. Such is the present Law of our Nature, which I conceive to be no other
than a mere arbitrary Constitution or Establishment of Him that has made us to
be what we are. -- And accordingly I apprehend that the Union between our Souls
and Bodies, during our present State, consists in nothing else but this Law of
our Nature, which is the Will and perpetual Fiat of that infinite Parent Mind,
who made, and holds our Souls in Life, and in whom we live, and move, and have
our Being, viz. That our Bodies should be thus acted by our Minds, and that our
Minds should thus perceive and act by the Organs of our Bodies, and under such
Limitations as in fact we find ourselves to be attended with.

4. THE immediate Object of these our Perceptions and Actions we call Ideas; as
this Word has been commonly defined and used by the Moderns, Definition of
Idea, Notion, etc.
with whom it signifies any immediate Object of the Mind in Thinking, whether
sensible or intellectual, and so is, in Effect, synonymous with the Word
Thought, which comprehends both. -- Plato, indeed, by the Word Idea, understood
the original Exemplar of Things, whether sensible or intellectual, in the
eternal Mind, conformable to which all Things exist; or the abstract Essences
of Things, as being Originals or Archetypes in that infinite Intellect, of
which our Ideas or Conceptions are a Kind of Copies. -- But perhaps, for the
more distinct understanding ourselves upon this Subject, it may be best to
confine the Word Idea to the immediate Objects of Sense and Imagination, which
was the original Meaning of it; and to use the Word Notion or Conception, to
signify the Objects of Consciousness and pure Intellect, though both of them may
be expressed by the general Term Thought; for these are so entirely, and toto
Coelo different and distinct one from the other, that it may be apt to breed
Confusion in our Thoughts and Language, to use the same Word promiscuously for
them both; though we are indeed generally obliged to substitute sensible Images
and the Words annexed to them, to represent Things purely intellectual; such,
for Instance, are the Words, Spirit, Reflect, Conceive, Discourse, and the like.

5. OUR Minds may be said to be created mere Tabulae rasae; i. e. They have no
Notices of any Objects of any Kind properly created in them, The Original of
our Ideas.
or concreated with them: Yet I apprehend, that in all the Notices they have of
any Kind of Objects, they have an immediate Dependence upon the Deity, as
really as they depend upon Him for their Existence; i. e. They are no more
Authors to themselves of the Objects of their Perceptions, or the Light by
which they perceive them, than of the Power of Perceiving itself; but that they
perceive them by a perpetual Intercourse with that great Parent Mind, to whose
incessant Agency they are entirely passive, both in all the Perceptions of
Sense, and in all that intellectual Light by which they perceive the Objects of
the pure Intellect. -- Notwithstanding which, it is plain from Experience, that
in Consequence of these Perceptions they are entirely at Liberty to act, or not
to act, and all their Actions flow from a Principle of Self-exertion. -- But in
order the better to understand these Things, I must more particularly define
these Terms. -- And, as all the Notices we have in our Minds derive to them
originally from (or rather by Means of) these two Fountains, Sense and
Consciousness, it is necessary to begin with them.

6. BY Sense, we mean, those Perceptions we have of Objects ab extra, Of the
Senses;
or by Means of the several Organs of our Bodies. -- Thus, by Feeling or Touch,
we perceive an endless Variety of tangible Objects, Resistance, Extension,
Figure, Motion, Hard, Soft, Heat, Cold, etc. By Sight we perceive Light and
Colors, with all their endlesly various Modifications, Red, Blue, Green, etc.
-- By Hearing, we perceive Sounds: -- By Tasting, Sapors: -- By Smelling,
Odours, etc. -- These are called Simple Ideas. -- And of these, sorted out into
a vast Variety of fixed Combinations, or Compound Ideas, distinct from each
other, and in which they are always found to co-exist, consists every Sort and
individual Body in Nature, such as we call Man, Horse, Tree, Stone, Apple,
Cherry, etc. -- And of all these various distinct Combinations or Compounds,
connected together in such a Manner as to constitute one most beautiful, useful
and harmonious Whole, consists what we call Universal Nature, or the entire
sensible or natural World.

7. IN the Perception of these Ideas or Objects of Sense, In which we are
passive.
we find our Minds are merely passive, it not being in our Power (supposing our
Organs rightly disposed and situated) whether we will see Light and Colors,
hear Sounds, etc. We are not Causes to ourselves of these Perceptions, nor can
they be produced in our Minds without a Cause; or (which is the same Thing) by
any imagined unintelligent, inert, or unactive Cause (which indeed is a
Contradiction in Terms) from whence it is Demonstration that they must derive
to us from an Almighty, intelligent active Cause, exhibiting them to us,
impressing our Minds with them, or producing them in us; and consequently (as I
intimated) it must be by a perpetual Intercourse of our Minds with the DEITY,
the great Author of our Beings, or by His perpetual Influence or Activity upon
them, that they are possessed of all these Objects of Sense, and the Light by
which we perceive them.

8. THESE Ideas or Objects of Sense are commonly supposed to be Pictures or
Representations of Things without us, Ideas of Sense not Pictures, but the real
Things.
and indeed external to any Mind, even that of the Deity himself, and the Truth
or Reality of them is conceived to consist in their being exact Pictures of
Things or Objects without us, which are supposed to be the real Things. -- But
as it is impossible for us to know what is without our Minds, and consequently,
what those supposed Originals are, and whether these Ideas of ours are just
Resemblances of them or not; I am afraid this Notion of them will lead us into
an inextricable Skepticism. I am therefore apt to think that these Ideas, or
immediate Objects of Sense, are the real Things, at least all that we are
concerned with, I mean, of the sensible Kind; and that the Reality of them
consists in their Stability and Consistence, or their being, in a stable
Manner, exhibited to our Minds, or produced in them, and in a steady Connection
with each other, conformable to certain fixed Laws of Nature, which the great
Father of Spirits has established to Himself, according to which He constantly
operates and affects our Minds, and from which He will not vary, unless upon
extraordinary Occasions, as in the Case of Miracles.

9. THUS, for Instance, there is a fixed stable Connection between Things
tangible and Things visible, Instanced in Things visible and tangible.
or the immediate Objects of Touch and Sight, depending, as I conceive,
immediately upon the permanent, most wise and Almighty Will and Fiat of the
great Creator and Preserver of the World. By which, neither can it be meant,
that visible Objects are Pictures of tangible Objects (which yet is all the
Sense that can be made of our Ideas of Sense being Images of real Things
without us) for they are entirely different and distinct Things; as different
as the sound Triangle, and the Figure signified by it; so different, that a Man
born blind, and made to see, could have no more Notion that a visible Globe
has any Connection with a tangible Globe, by mere Sight, without being taught,
than a Frenchman that should come into England, and hear the Word Man, could
imagine, without being taught, that it signified the same Thing with the Word
Homme, in his Language. -- All that can be meant by it, therefore, is, That, as
tangible Things are the Things immediately capable of producing (or rather,
being attended with) sensible Pleasure or Pain in us, according to the present
Laws of our Nature, on Account of which they are conceived of as being properly
the real Things; so the immediate Objects of Sight or visible Things, are
always, by the same stable Law of our Nature, connected with them, as Signs of
them, and ever correspondent and proportioned to them; Visible Extension,
Figure, Motion, etc. with those of the tangible Kind, which go by the same
Names; and so in the Compounds or Combinations of them; the visible Man, Horse,
Tree, Stone, etc. with those of the tangible Kind, signified by the same Names.
See Bp. Berkeley's Theories of Vision, Principles of Human Knowledge, and Three
Dialogues.


10. NOT that it is to be doubted but that there are Archetypes of these
sensible Ideas existing, Of Archetypes.
external to our Minds; but then they must exist in some other Mind, and be
Ideas also as well as ours; because an Idea can resemble nothing but an Idea;
and an Idea ever implies in the very Nature of it, Relation to a Mind
perceiving it, or in which it exists. But then those Archetypes or Originals,
and the Manner of their Existence in that eternal Mind, must be entirely
different from that of their Existence in our Minds; as different, as the
Manner of His Existence is from that of ours: In Him they must exist, as in
original Intellect; in us, only by Way of Sense and Imagination; and in Him, as
Originals; in us, only as faint Copies; such as he thinks fit to communicate to
us, according to such Laws and Limitations as he has established, and such as
are sufficient to all the Purposes relating to our Well-being, in which only we
are concerned. Our Ideas, therefore, can no otherwise be said to be Images or
Copies of the Archetypes in the eternal Mind, than as our Souls are said to be
Images of Him, or as we are said to be made after his Image. See on this Head,
Norris's Ideal World. Part 1.


11. THUS much for Sense. -- By Consciousness is meant, Of Consciousness,
Imagination and Memory.
our Perception of Object ab intra, or from reflecting or turning the Eye of
our Mind inward, and observing what passes within itself; whereby we know that
we perceive all those sensible Objects and their Connections, and all the
Pleasures and Pains attending them, and all the Powers or Faculties of our
Minds employed about them. Thus I am conscious that I perceive Light and
Colors, Sounds, Odours, Sapors, and tangible Qualities, with all the various
Combinations of them; and that of these, some give me, or rather are attended
with Pain or Uneasiness, others with Pleasure or Ease, and the comfortable
Enjoyment of myself. I find, moreover, that when I have had any Perception or
Impression of Sense, I retain a faint Image of it in my Mind afterward, or
have a Kind of internal Sense or Remembrance of it; as having seen the Sun, a
Flower, a Horse, or a Man, I retain the Image of their Figure, Shape, Color,
etc. afterward. Thus I have now a faint Idea of the Sun at Midnight, and of a
Rose in Winter: I know how such a Tree, such a Horse, or such a Man looks, though
I have neither of them before my Eyes. This Power of the Mind is called
Imagination and Memory, which implies a Consciousness of the original
Impression (though indeed the Word Memory may imply the Recollection of
intellectual as well as sensible Objects, but chiefly those by Means of these,
which is also called Reminiscence) and these Ideas of the Imagination may be
truly said to be Images or Pictures of the Ideas or immediate Objects of Sense.
We are moreover conscious of a Power whereby we can, not only imagine Things as
being what they really are in Nature, but can also join such Parts and
Properties of Things together, as never co-existed in Nature, but are mere
Creatures of our Minds, or Chimeras; as the Head of a Man with the Body of an
Horse, etc. which must also be referred to the Imagination, but as influenced
by the Will.

12. BUT besides these Powers of Sense and Imagination, Of the pure Intellect,
and its Acts.
we are conscious of what is called the pure Intellect, or the Power of
conceiving of abstracted or spiritual Objects, and the Relations between our
several Ideas and Conceptions, and the various Dispositions, Exertions and
Actions of our Minds, and the complex Notions resulting from all these; of all
which we cannot be properly said to have Ideas, they being entirely of a
different Kind from the Objects of Sense and Imagination, on which Account I
would rather call them Notions or Conceptions. And they are either simple, such
as Perception, Consciousness, Volition, Affection, Action, etc. or complex, as
Spirit, Soul, God, Cause, Effect, Proportion, Justice, Charity, etc. And of all
these, and what relates to them, consists the entire spiritual or moral World.
But in order the better to understand or conceive of these, it is necessary
more particularly to pursue and explain these intellectual and active Powers,
whereof we are conscious within ourselves; such as, 1. The simple Apprehension
of Objects, and their several Relations, Conections and Dependencies, arising
from our comparing our Ideas and Conceptions one with another. 2. Judging of
true or false, according as Things appear to agree or disagree, to be connected
or not connected one with another; and 3. Reasoning or inferring one Thing from
another, and methodizing them according to their Connections and Order: All
which are the Subject of Logics. To which succeed, 1. Affecting or Disaffecting
them according as they appear good or bad, agreeable or disagreeable to us, i.
e. attended with Pleasure or Uneasiness. 2. Willing or Nilling, Choosing or
Refusing according as we affect or disaffect them. 3. Liberty of Acting, or
forbearing to act in Consequence of the Judgment and Choice we have made of
them: All which are the Subject of Ethics. It is necessary to define all these
Terms, and give some Account of these several Acts and Exertions of our Minds
(which, as well as those of Sense, Consciousness, Imagination and Memory
abovementioned, are only so many Modifications of them) in order to what is
next to follow.

13. BUT before I proceed, I would, in order thereunto, first observe, That no
sooner does any Object strike the Senses, Of intellectual Light or intuitive
Evidence.
or is received in our Imagination, or apprehended by our Understanding, but we
are immediately conscious of a Kind of intellectual Light within us (if I may
so call it) whereby we not only know that we perceive the Object, but directly
apply ourselves to the Consideration of it, both in itself, its Properties and
Powers, and as it stands related to all other Things. And we find that as we
are enabled by this intellectual Light to perceive these Objects and their
various Relations, in like Manner as by sensible Light we are enabled to
perceive the Objects of Sense and their various Situations; This (...)
Plato's's Doctrine, in his Epinomis, etc.
so our Minds are as passive to this intellectual Light, as they are to
sensible Light, and can no more withstand the Evidence of it, than they can
withstand the Evidence of Sense. Thus I am under the same Necessity to assent
to this, That I am or have a Being, and that I perceive and freely exert
myself, as I am of assenting to this, That I see Colors or hear Sounds. I am
as perfectly sure that 2+2=4, or that the Whole is equal to all its Parts, as
that I feel Heat or Cold, or that I see the Sun when I look full on it in the
Meridian in a clear Day; i. e. I am intuitively certain of both. -- This
intellectual Light I conceive of as it were a Medium of Knowledge, as sensible
Light is of Sight: -- In both there is the Power of perceiving, and the Object
perceived; and this is the Medium by which I am enabled to know it. -- And this
Light is one, and common to all intelligent Beings, and enlighteneth alike,
every Man that comes into the World, a Chinese, or Japonese, as well as an
European or American, and an Angel as well as a Man: By which they all at once
see the same Thing to be true or right in all Places at the same Time, and
alike invariably in all Times, past, present, and to come.

14. NOW if it be asked, Whence does this Light derive, whereby all created
Minds at once perceive, as by a common Standard, the same Things alike to be
true and right? -- I answer, I have no other Way to conceive how I come to be
affected with this intuitive intellectual Light, Whence it is derived.
whereof I am conscious, than by deriving it from the universal Presence and
Action of the DEITY, or a perpetual Communication with the great Father of
Lights, See the Archbishop of Cambray, on this Subject, in his Demonstration of
the Existence of God. And Norris or Malbranch.
or rather his eternal Word and Spirit. -- For I know I am not the Author of it
to myself, being passive and not active with regard to it, though I am active in
Consequence of it. -- Therefore, though I cannot explain the Manner how I am
impressed with it (as neither can I that of Sense) I do humbly conceive that
God does as truly and immediately enlighten my Mind internally to know these
intellectual Objects, as he does by the Light of the Sun (his sensible
Representative) enable me to perceive sensible Objects. So that those
Expressions are indeed no less Philosophical than Devout, that GOD is Light,
and in his Light we see Light. -- And this intuitive Knowledge, as far as it
goes, must be the first Principles, from which the Mind takes its Rise, and
upon which it proceeds in all its subsequent Improvements in Reasoning, and
discovering both Truth in Speculation, and Right in Action; so that this
intellectual Light must be primarily and carefully attended to, if we would
avoid and be secure from either Error or Vice. -- Nor must this Manner of
Thinking be suspected to savor of Enthusiasm, it being the settled Course or
Law of Nature, according to which the great Parent Mind enlighteneth us; and
that in Things, in their own Nature capable of clear Evidence; whereas
Enthusiasm implies an imaginary, as Revelation is a real and well-attested
adventitious Light, above and beyond the settled Law or Course of Nature,
discovering Truths not otherwise knowable, and giving Directions, or enjoining
Rules of Action in Things arbitrary, or Matters of mere Institution. -- And
from this intuitive intellectual Light it is (as I conceive) that we derive
what we call Taste and Judgment, and, with respect to Morals, what some call
the moral Sense or the Conscience, which are only a Sort of quick intuitive
Sense or Apprehension of the Decent and Amiable, of Beauty and Deformity, of
True and False, and of Right and Wrong, or Duty and Sin: And it is the chief
Business of Culture, Art and Instruction, to awaken and turn our Attention to
it, and assist us in making Deductions from it.

CHAP. II. Of the Mind fimply apprehending, and of its Objects more
particularly.
1. LET us therefore proceed to define the several Acts and Objects of the pure
Intellect thus enlightened: And first, Of the simple Apprehension of Objects or
Beings, Of simple Apprehension and its Objects.
and the various Conceptions arising to our View from the Consideration of
their Natures and Affections, and their several Relations, Connections and
Dependencies, such as Cause and Effect, Essence and Existence, Things necessary
and contingent, Finite and Infinite, Possible and Impossible, Perfect and
Imperfect, Truth and Good, Beauty and Harmony, Substances and Accidents,
Subjects and Adjuncts, Time and Place, Whole and Parts, Unity and Multiplicity,
Number and Order, Identity and Diversity, Things Agreeing and Opposite, Equal
and Unequal, Like and Unlike, Denomination and Definition, Individuals and
Abstraction, Kinds and Sorts, Bodies and Spirits; and lastly, of Metaphor and
Analogy from Things sensible to Things spiritual, and from Things human to
Things divine. -- Of all which I shall treat in the Order as they are here
enumerated.

2. AS soon as the Mind is possessed of any Variety of Objects, Of Being in
general.
being assisted with that inward intellectual Light abovementioned, deriving,
and, as it were, perpetually beaming forth from the great Fountain of all
Light, both sensible and intellectual, it immediately falls to contemplating
its Ideas and Conceptions, and comparing them one with another. -- And here,
the first Thing it is enlightened to know or be conscious of, is, its own
Existence from the Existence of its Perceptions and Exertions and their
Objects, which it conceives of as real Beings or Things, whence it gets the
Notion of Being in general. -- But even this first Object of its Knowledge it
is made to know from that first Principle of intellectual Light, flowing from
the Parent Mind, That Perception and Action, and being perceived or acted upon,
implies Existence, of which Principle it has an inward intuitive Sense and
Certainty. Hence it immediately infers, I perceive and act, therefore I am: I
perceive such an Object, therefore it is, etc. Not that its Existence depends
on my Mind, but on that Mind by whom I am enabled to perceive it. And as
perceiving and acting, and being perceived and acted upon, implies Existence or
Being, so it is a Contradiction for the same Thing to be and not to be at the
same Time, for that would be to perceive and not perceive, to act and not to
act, and to be perceived and not perceived, and acted upon and not acted upon,
at one and the same Time: And from these Definitions arise that first great
Distinction of Being into Spirit and Body, whereof the Existence of the first
consists in perceiving and acting, and that of the other in being passively
perceived and acted. -- And here, to perceive or to act is called the Power,
and what is perceived or acted upon, is called the Object. -- So that by Being,
is meant, what really IS or exists, in Opposition to what is merely fictitious
or imaginary; a Creature of our own Minds, and not of him that made and enables
us to perceive and act.

3. NOW of every Thing that IS, it must be said, Of the first Being and eternal
Truth.
either, That it always was, or, that it began to be. -- If it always was, or
never derived from the Power of any other Being, it must be independent of
every other Being whatsoever, and consequently must exist absolutely by the
intrinsic Necessity of its own Nature, or be a necessarily existent Being, and
all other Beings must depend on its Will and Power, otherwise they could never
have been, or continue to be; and Itself, being derived from no other Being,
and dependent on none, it must be out of the Power of any other Being to limit
or control it, and consequently it must be infinite and eternal; i. e. must
have all Reality, Perfection and Fullness of Being, without any regard to Time
or Place: For that must be infinite, that has, and can have no possible Bounds
or Limitations; and that must be eternal, that is, and always was, and will be,
and cannot but be; and such a Being must be All in All; all Reality and
Excellency. -- Nor can there be more than One such Being, who is Being itself,
because it is a manifest Contradiction that two or more Beings should, each
have in it, or consist of, all possible Reality and Perfection. He must
therefore be a perfect Unity, the TO E''N, and the TO 'ON, and the (...), as
the Ancients called Him, which is the true Import of the original sacred Names
JAH and JEHOVAH. And He is also called Truth and Good: -- Truth itself, as He
is all Reality; and Good itself, as He is all Perfection and Excellency. -- And
He is Truth as He is infinitely intelligible, and Good as He is infinitely
eligible, containing within and of Himself, all that can contribute to render
Himself happy, as well as all other perceptive, conscious, active Beings,
dependent on Him. -- In this necessarily existent and eternal Being or Mind
must originally exist all those necessary and eternal Truths with which our
Minds are furnished, either by Intuition or Demonstration; such as these, That
Perception and Action imply Existence: -- That what begins to be, must have a
Cause: -- That the Whole is equal to all its Parts: -- That all the Rays of a
Circle are equal: -- That what is right or wrong in another toward me, must be
equally right or wrong in me toward him, etc. -- We know that these and the
like eternal Truths do not depend on our Minds, or the actual Existence of
Things, but must have an eternal and necessary Existence, antecedent to our
Knowledge of them, and independent of it, or of any particular Existence. --
And as we can have no Notion of Truth without a Mind perceiving it, their
necessary and eternal Existence must infer the necessary Existence of an
eternal Mind; and consequently, it must be in that eternal Mind that we behold
them, or rather by our Communication with Him that we are enlightened with the
Knowledge of them. -- In Him they must exist as one archetypal and eternal
Light of Truth; but as they are from Him reflected on the various Objects in
our finite Minds, they appear various and manifold, as sensible Light is one in
the Sun, though it becomes various Colors and other sensible Qualities in
different Objects.

4. ON the contrary, Whatever Being began to be, Of Causes and Effects.
must have had a Cause, and depend on some other Being for its Existence. -- By
the Word Cause, we mean, that Being by whose Design and Activity, Force or
Exertion, another Being exists: And that Being which exists by the Design,
Force, Action, or Exertion of another, is called an Effect; what is called an
Effect therefore must be supposed not to have existed, and consequently to have
had a Beginning of Existence, or at least a dependent Existence, and must
therefore have had a Cause, by the Force or Activity of which it came into
Existence, and without which it would not have been. -- And this must be the
Case of every Thing that is, till you come to a first Cause, i. e. to a Being
that never had a Beginning, or any dependent Existence, but exists by the
absolute Necessity of its own Nature, having an original perfect Fullness of
Being in and of itself, without depending on any other Being, and deals out
Being and Perfection to all other Beings, in various Measures and Degrees as
pleases him. -- And such a Being there must be, otherwise nothing could ever
have been, unless you suppose a Thing to be its own Cause, i. e. To act before
it is, which is impossible; or unless you suppose an infinite Succession of
Causes and Effects, which in effect would be an infinite Effect without any
Cause at all: See Wollaston's Rel. of Not. p. 65, etc.
But an Effect without a Cause, is a Contradiction in Terms; for, by the
Definition, to every Thing that is produced, there must be a correspondent
Power adequate to the Production of it, or an active Force, sufficient to
produce it. -- And here, the Thing existing is said to be a Thing in Act; and
as the Force producing adequate to the Effect, is called the Power, so the
Effect not yet produced, is said to be in Power, or in fieri, and the Being
which exerts that Power, we call an Agent and Active, and that on or in which
the Force terminates, we call a Patient and Passive.

5. THERE are indeed many Things that occur to our Senses and Thoughts, Of real
and apparent Causes.
that appear at first Sight to be Agents or Causes, which, strictly speaking,
are not so, as we find upon a more exact Scrutiny, though they are vulgarly so
called. Thus we say, The Sun moves, rises and sets, when yet upon a more
thorough Enquiry we find, it is not the Action of the Sun, but these
Appearances are occasioned by the Motion of the Earth, and that they are only
mere passive Appearances in our Minds. So we say, the Fire burns; the Sun
warms, enlivens, ripens the Fruits, etc. and we call the Parent the Cause of
his Offspring; whereas, upon a more strict Enquiry, we find that he is by no
Means the adequate Cause; and that the Sun, and (what we call) other natural
Causes, are in themselves but mere passive inert Beings, connected one with
another, according to the established Laws of Nature; so that being Things
merely passive and inert, they cannot, properly speaking, be the Causes of the
Effects vulgarly ascribed to them; they must therefore be called only Signs,
Occasions, Means, or Instruments, and we must look for some other Being in whom
resides, and by whom must be exerted, that adequate Power or Force by which the
Effect is truly produced, which therefore is the true and real Cause; and the
other can only be called the apparent Causes, having no real Efficiency or
Activity in the Production of the Effect.

6. MOREOVER we find from what we experience in ourselves, Of necessary and
voluntary Causes.
that we breathe and our Blood circulates without any Design or Activity of
ours; and the Course of Nature without us, goes on whether we will or not, and
even though we should exert our utmost Force to withstand it. These, with regard
to us, may be called necessary Effects, as not depending on our Will and Power;
though with regard to the true Author of Nature, they are free and voluntary
Effects. -- On the other Hand, we walk, speak, write, etc. from a Principle of
conscious designed Self-exertion, and voluntary Activity; these therefore are
called free or voluntary Effects with regard to us, which we produce or not, as
we please; in doing which we are voluntary Causes. Hence we learn to make the
Distinction between necessary and voluntary, or free Causes and Effects. So
that by voluntary Effects, we mean, such as are produced by a free voluntary
Cause acting from a Principle of conscious Design and Self-exertion, exciting a
Force of its own, or from within itself, which it chooses to exert, and might
do otherwise; and this is properly called a Cause, an efficient Cause or Agent.
And as to those natural Effects abovementioned, of which the apparent is not
the real Cause, having neither Design nor Force in itself (as the Water in
turning a Mill) but is rather acted than acts; however necessary they are with
regard to us, yet from the most wise Design and Contrivance manifestly
appearing in the Effects themselves, we evidently discern that the Being who is
their true and adequate Cause, must be furnished with Wisdom and Power equal or
sufficient for the Production of them, and must act from a Principle of free
Self-exertion, and with a Design or View at some certain End proposed to
himself in acting, and therefore be a free intelligent and voluntary Cause, for
nothing can give what it has not.

7. WHENCE it appears, that only intelligent active Beings or Spirits, Of final
Causes.
can be truly efficient Causes, which alone are properly called Causes, and
that when we speak of natural Causes, it is only in Accommodation to vulgar
Apprehensions, since they are merely passive, and act, or rather are acted,
without any Design or Exertion of their own. -- And as to what are commonly
called final Causes, they are only the Views or Motives, determining the Design
or Purpose of the efficient Cause, but have properly no Causality or Activity
in themselves. We are conscious, when we produce any Effect, that we act with
some End, View, or Design, which determines us, or rather, properly speaking,
upon the View of which we determine ourselves, to act so rather than otherwise,
and to choose and make use of such and such Means, rather than others, as being
most fit and useful in order to accomplish our End; and therefore we say, He
that wills the End, must will the Means conducing to the Attainment of it; the
Effect to be produced being the ultimate End, and the Means the subordinate
Ends which we have in View. -- And herein consists the proper Notion of Wisdom,
viz. In the right Judgment and Choice of Ends and Means; the best Ends and the
fittest Means; and in a vigorous Activity in the Application of the Means in
order to attain the End. -- Thus it is in human Affairs; and from what we
observe in the Course of Nature, in which there is an evident Subordination of
Ends and Means, we unavoidably infer that there must be something analogous to
this in the Author of it, not because He needs Means for Himself, but that He
may make the Series or Course of Nature the more intelligible and instructive
to us. -- Hence the best Part of the Study of Nature must consist in the
Discovery, as far as we are able, of what are called final Causes; i. e. of the
plain Signatures of Design and Contrivance, and the Dependence and Connection
of Ends and Means.

8. IN artificial Effects, or those produced by Man, Of Matter and Form.
as in Building, etc. by reason of our Impotence we need Matter to work upon,
and a Form or Model to work by, according to which the Effect, being framed or
formed out of the pre-existent Materials, is said to consist of Matter and
Form, which have also been reckoned among the Causes, and they may each be
called Causa fine qua non, as the Schoolmen used to speak; but they cannot be
properly called Causes, as having no Force or Design in producing the Effect;
we may, however, from hence, by Analogy, in speaking of other Things,
advantageously make use of what is called, the Ratio Materialis, and Formalis
of Things in Nature, and even of Things purely intellectual. -- And because we
need Matter and Form in producing artificial Effects, we are apt to think, or
at least to speak as though we thought, this the Method of the Almighty in
producing natural Effects, but this is owing to our Weakness, whereby we are
apt to measure Him by ourselves. Indeed he may be said to have a Form, Idea, or
Archetype in his infinite, all-comprehending Mind, conformable to which he
acts; but this can mean no more than that all Things which he produces are
always present with Him, and perfectly known to Him, with all their Relations
and Connections, antecedent to their Production, and that He produces them
conformable to His own Knowledge, Design and Contrivance, being the Plan which
he has formed. -- And that Existence of Things in the divine eternal Mind (if
it may be so called) as being perfectly known to Him, antecedent to their
Production, is called their Archetypal State; and their Existence in Rerum
Natura, as being actually produced by His Will and Power, and thereby perceived
and known to us, is called their Ectypal State.

9. TO this Head therefore belongs the Distinction between the Essence of
Things, Of Essence, and Existence.
and their Existence. -- By their Essence, we mean those constituent
Principles, Properties and Powers in them, which are necessary to their Nature,
as being what they are, whether considered only as conceived in the Mind of an
intelligent Being, or existing in Rerum Natura. Thus the Essence of Gold
consists in its Color, Weight, Fixedness, Ductility, Solubility in Aqua Regia,
or whatever Properties are always found to co-exist in that Sort of Body which
we call Gold, and no other: So the Essence of a Rose consists in such a
particular Figure, Odor, etc. -- of a Man, in an intelligent active Power,
joined with an animal Body, of such a particular Shape, and Configuration of
Parts: -- of a Triangle, in three Sides, joining at three Angles: -- of
Justice, in rendering to every one his Due, etc. -- In short, whatsoever goes
to the Definition of a Thing, so as to give it a clear and necessary
Discrimination from all other Things, we call the Essence of it, whether in
fact it exist or not. Thus we have as clear an Idea of a Rose in Winter, as in
June, when it is before our Eyes, and under our Noses; and as fixed and stable
a Notion of a Triangle, Circle, Justice, or Charity, even upon Supposition that
the Figures and Actions which go by those Names, do not exist in Nature or
Fact, as if they did. Whereas by Existence, we generally mean a Thing's being
actually in Fact and Nature, as well as in Idea or Conception, as a Rose in
June, the Sun in the Firmament, a Man actually doing a just or kind Thing, etc.
-- Hence Existence always implies Essence, though Essence does not necessarily
imply Existence, except in that of the necessarily existent Being, in whom
Necessity of Existence is implied in His very Essence, and accordingly His
original Name JEHOVAH, given by Himself, does literally signify, The Essence
existing, as Mr. Hutchinson shows in Mos. Sina Princip. Chapter 2.

10. IN Pursuance of this Distinction between the Essence and Existence of
Things, Of Principles.
which is necessary in order the better to conceive of them, it is here also
needful to explain what we mean by the Word Principle, which originally
signifies the Beginning of a Thing, or that from whence any Thing takes its
Beginning, Origin, or Derivation; and in this Sense it is nearly allied to the
Word Cause. Thus God may be said to be the Principle or Origin of all Things.
-- And as the essential Constituents whereof any Thing consists, have been
ranked among the Causes, they are also called the Principles of which it
consists, and into which it may, at least in Conception, be resolved; as Man of
Soul and Body, Bodies of the four Elements, a Triangle of its three Sides and
Angles, etc. -- And as the Properties and Powers of Things have been supposed
to flow from their Essence; hence That in any Thing which is supposed to be the
Foundation or Original from whence its Properties, Powers or Actions derive, is
called the Principle of them; as Equality with two Right Angles from the Nature
of a Triangle; Perception and Self-exertion from the Nature of the Soul, etc.
And lastly, as the Knowledge of Things consists in understanding the Foundation
of their Existence, the Causes from whence they are derived, the Essentials
whereof they consist, and the Origin of their Properties and Powers; hence the
Propositions expressive of this Knowledge, are called the Principles of any
Science.

11. UNDER this Head of Causes and Effects, Of Things necessary and contingent.
it is necessary more particularly to explain the Distinction of Beings into
Things necessary and contingent. -- By Things contingent, we mean, such as
depend on the free Exertion of the Wills and Powers of intelligent active
Beings, and which therefore might not have been, had they so pleased, and
consequently their Existence is precarious and dependent. -- Thus, That I sit
here, and whether I shall sit here an Hour longer, or not, is contingent, as
depending on the Freedom of my own Will to do so, or not, as I please: Whether
the Sun will rise Tomorrow, is contingent, as depending on the free Exertion
of the Will of the Deity, who may, if he pleases, this Moment put an End to
the whole Course of Nature. And thus the Existence of the whole Creation is
contingent and precarious, as deriving from, and dependent on, the mere Will
and Power of GOD, who if He pleased, might not have commanded Things into
Being, and may cease to Will their Continuance when He pleases. Whereas by
Things necessary, we mean such as cannot but be, which must be understood either
with regard to our Power, or that of the Deity. Thus, with regard to our Power,
it cannot but be that Things are as they are, and as He has made them, and that
the Course of Nature proceeds as it does, and as He has ordered it, which
therefore, though not so in itself, to us is necessary and Fate. But that only is
absolutely necessary in itself, the Nonexistence of which would imply an
Absurdity and Contradiction; and nothing else is thus absolutely necessary
besides the Deity Himself, the necessarily existent Being, without whom nothing
could ever have existed; and eternal Truths which are founded in the Perfection
of his Nature, independent of any other Mind whatsoever; as, that the Whole is
bigger than either of its Parts: That all the Rays of every Circle are equal:
That we ought to do as we would be done by. -- These, and the like, being
absolutely and unalterably necessary, antecedent to the Will, and independent
of the Power of the Deity Himself, as well as His own Existence and
Perfections, must unavoidably be Emanations of that necessarily existent Being.

12. TO this Head also belongs the Distinction of Beings into Finite and
Infinite. Of Things finite and infinite.
That is said to be Finite, which has certain Limits or Bounds to its
Existence or Powers, as are all determinate Lines, and the Surfaces and Figures
of Bodies, or the Powers of created Minds; in short, all Kinds of Effects or
Productions, which are limited to such a Degree or Measure of Being, as their
Cause is pleased to bestow: For the Will and Power of the Cause that gives them
Being, limits them to such a Measure of Being, Extent and Power, as he thinks
fit to impart; which, in many Instances, may be said to be Indefinite, as
extending vastly beyond our Comprehension. But that Being only is Infinite
which comprehends all that truly is, without any Bounds or Limits, and whose
Knowledge and Power extends to all that is, or is possible. Hence, Vide Cambray
on this Subject, in his Demonstration.
though the Word Infinite, in grammatical Construction is a negative Term, used
in Accommodation to our weak Capacities, yet what it expresses is truly
positive, as implying all that absolutely is; and the Word Finite, is truly the
Negative, as implying but a limited Part of that which truly is; the Infinite
being the absolute independent Being, or Being by way of Eminency, and without
the Power of any other; Being to limit or control it; and the Finite, entirely
dependent on the Will and Power of another to be and continue what it is, and
so exists only conditionally.

13. TO this Head of Causes and Effects, belongs also the Distinction of Things
possible and impossible. Of Things possible and impossible.
We say a Thing is possible, when there is a Power sufficient to produce it,
and impossible, when there is no Power adequate to the Production of it: -- Of
which some Things are impossible in their own Nature, as implying a
Contradiction in themselves, as that there should be a Mountain without
Declivity, or a Triangle consisting only of two Sides, which are impossible to
GOD himself, not for want of Power in Him, but because they imply a Repugnancy
in themselves, or a Contradiction to some necessary and eternal Truth, which
GOD himself cannot alter. And of Things possible in their own Nature; some are
possible to an unlimited Power, which yet are impossible to a Power that is
limited: A Man can build a House, though he cannot create a World. And of limited
Powers there is an endless Variety, so that what is possible to one may be
impossible to another: Here therefore the Maxim is, That what is Fact is
possible, but, it does not therefore follow, that if it be possible it is Fact.

14. AND lastly: To this Head of Causes and Effects does also belong the
Distinction of Things perfect and imperfect: Of Things perfect and imperfect.
An Effect is said to be perfect, when it is finished according to the Plan or
Design of it, and fitted to answer the End proposed, from whence we arise to
the general Notion of Perfection. And we say, a Being or Thing is perfect, when
it has all the Parts, Properties or Powers, that a Thing of that Nature ought
to have in order to constitute it in that Kind of Being, and to render it
capable of answering the End of its being: As a Man is said to be perfect, that
has all the Parts and Powers that a Man, as such, ought to have, so as to
answer the general End of his Being; i. e. some good Degree of Happiness: -- He
is then said to be perfect in his Kind, though some of the same Kind may have
their Properties and Powers in a greater Degree of Perfection than others, and
so be perfecter in Degree, though not in Kind, and consequently capable of
answering some nobler Ends, with regard both to themselves and others, as
enjoying or communicating certain higher Degrees of Happiness. On the other
Hand, we say a Thing is imperfect, when it is destitute of certain Parts or
Properties that a Thing of that Kind ought to have; as a Man with but one Hand,
or one Eye, or an Idiot, etc. who consequently cannot so well be useful to
others, or enjoy himself. But if any Creature has all the Parts and Properties
that a Creature of that Kind ought to have, though it is said to be perfect in
its Kind, yet it is said to be but comparatively perfect with respect to other
Kinds of Beings of greater Perfection and Excellency, as being made for higher
Ends; i. e. to enjoy or communicate greater Degrees of Happiness; but what
Degrees of Being or Perfection any Thing has, it receives from the free Will
and Pleasure of its Cause. And that Being only is said to be absolutely
perfect, who has an entire absolute Fullness of Being, Perfection and
Excellency, and consequently enjoys the highest Happiness, having in and of
Himself all Being, all that truly is, and therefore an All Sufficiency, even
every Thing that can contribute to render both Himself and all his Creatures
completely happy.

15. TO this Head of Perfection therefore belong the Notions of Truth and Good.
Of Truth and Good.
A Thing is said to be true with respect to the original Archetype, Plan or
Design of it, or so much of Being or Perfection as it was designed to partake
of, and Good with respect to the End of it, which it was designed to answer: So
that its Truth consists in its Conformity to its Plan or Archetype, which is
its Standard; and its Goodness is its Fitness to answer its End. And as the
Plan is formed with a View at the End to be answered, they are in effect only
the same Thing under diverse Considerations; and a Thing is True, considered as
intelligible, and Good as eligible. Thus a House is said to be True, as it
answers its Archetype or Model, as conceived or understood in the Mind of the
Architect; and Good, as it is fitted to answer the End he designed in it, viz.
the Convenience and Pleasure of its Inhabitant, on which it is delightful or
eligible. So the Truth of each Creature, and of the whole World, consists in
its Conformity to its original Design, Archetype or Standard, conceived in the
infinite Mind of the great divine Architect, and as such, intelligible to Him,
and in some Measure to any other Mind; and its Goodness consists in its Fitness
to answer His Ends in giving it Being, and particulary the Happiness of His
rational Creatures, on account of which, it is pleasing and eligible to Him, or
any other intelligent Being, that feels or discerns that Fitness. Hence
Goodness being in effect the same with Perfection, must have the same
Distinctions of Kind and Degree, Comparative and Absolute as above. And the
infinite Mind of the Deity is the Standard of all Things that exist, He is the
Truth itself absolutely and by way of Eminence, comprehending in Himself all
that is and can be; all Reality and Perfection, considered as intelligible and
variously imitable in and by his Creatures: And as He is the Pattern and Author
of all Fitness and Proportion to any End, and the Fountain of all that is
pleasant and beatifying, or the Original of all that is Good in the whole
Creation, He is Goodness itself, and therefore infinitely eligible, and to be
chosen and loved above all Things. Thus we are led from the Type to the
Archetype; from all the Emanations of Truth and Good in the Creature, variously
portioned out as pleased Him, to that Being who is the great Principle and
Original of all; the Truth itself, even all Truth; and Good itself, the chief
Good, the TO 'AGATHO'N; infinite Truth, and infinite Good, all that can beatify
both Intellect, Will and Affection.

16. TO this Head of Perfection or Excellency we may also refer the
Consideration of Beauty and Harmony, Of Beauty and Harmony.
which have a manifest Relation to some End which any Thing is designed for. By
Beauty, we vulgarly mean, such an Assemblage of visible Ideas as pleases and
charms the Eye; and by Harmony, such an Assemblage of Sounds as pleases and
charms the Ear. But, more strictly speaking, it is the Mind or Intellect that
is charmed on these Occasions, by Means of the Objects of Sight and Hearing.
What is it then that is Beauty and Harmony to the interior intellectual Sense
of the Mind? And if it be duly considered, it will be always found that it is
Fitness and Proportion, either real or apparent, in relation to some End or
Use, in those Objects that please and charm us. Thus in Beauty; an Assemblage
of various Ideas, all fitted and proportioned to each other, and, in the Whole,
to one uniform Design and End, subservient to the Advantage and Pleasure of an
intelligent Mind, or of a social System of intelligent Beings; this is what
pleases and charms under the Notion of Beauty, as might be exemplified in the
Beauty of a Person, an Animal, or a Building, etc. And from sensible Things it
is figuratively and by Analogy transferred to Affections, Actions and
Behavior; the Beauty whereof consists in their uniform Fitness and Tendency
to the Order, Peace and Happiness of each individual Mind, and, in the Whole,
of any social System: So as to Harmony; it is an Assemblage of various Sounds,
all fitted and proportioned to each other, and in the whole Composition, to an
uniform Design and End, expressive of what may please and delight the Mind: And
from Music it is transferred to signify Things fitted and proportioned to each
other, and to the whole System, and thence pleasing and delightful, whether it
be in the natural or moral World. Hence we speak of the Harmony and Order of
all Nature, and of the Harmony and Order of Society. So that both in Beauty and
Harmony, the Fitness and Proportion of Things, Affections and Actions to each
other, and in the Whole, to the Pleasure, Peace and Happiness of intelligent
Beings, is always understood. And from thence we arise to the Apprehension of
the first original Beauty, the TO KALON, the Pattern and Source of all Fitness
and Proportion in the absolute Perfection of the divine Intellect and Conduct,
and the Harmony of the divine Attributes and Operations, and all the Happiness,
both divine, human and angelical, resulting therefrom.

17. NEXT to the Consideration of a Being or Thing as existing from its Causes,
Of Substances and Accidents, Subjects and Adjuncts.
we consider it as a Substance with regard to its Accidents, and a Subject with
respect to its Adjuncts. The primary Notion we have of Substance is taken from
Body, as being something that is hard or solid, and resists the Touch, as Gold,
Wood, etc. and observing a Number of other Ideas or sensible Qualities always
attending it, or connected with it, we call them its Accidents, as long, broad,
thick, square, round, red, blue, yellow, etc. Of these, we observe some
essential to all Bodies, as Length, Breadth, Thickness; others we observe to be
various in different Bodies, as square, round, white, black, etc. Those
Qualities that are essential to any Thing, we call Properties; and the others
are more properly called Accidents, Modes or Modifications. Now that so^^^
extended, figured Thing, which resists the Touch, being the first Idea or
Combination of Ideas, to which we give the Name Substance, we are apt to
consider that as the Foundation or Substratum to the rest, and the other
Qualities as subsisting in it, or depending on it, though, strictly speaking,
they are rather only co-existent and connected with it by the Law of Nature,
which is the mere Fiat of the Almighty. This is our original and proper Notion
of Substance in Bodies, and from thence we analogically apply it to Minds or
Spirits, though they are Beings of an entirely different Kind, and have nothing
common to them but mere Being or Existence, so that great Care must be taken
that we do not imagine any Thing like a solid Substratum in Spirits as such.
But if we must apply the Word Substance indifferently to both, it may be
defined to mean any distinct Being considered as consisting of its essential
Properties. Thus a Body we call a Substance, as consisting of solid Length,
Breadth and Thickness, or solid Extension, which are its essential Properties,
without which it cannot be conceived as being what it is: So we call a Spirit
or Mind, a Substance, as being a Power or Principle of conscious Perception and
Activity, which are Properties essential to it as being what it is. Thus we may
say, a Tree, a Horse, a Man, an Angel, etc. (and by Analogy, even the Deity
Himself) are Substances. And those Qualities that are not essential to it, may,
as I said, be called its Modes or Accidents; as in a Man, to be tall or short,
white or black, fat or lean, learned or ignorant, virtuous or vicious, etc.
which have also, sometimes, been called Adjuncts: But this Term is more
properly applied to external App^^^^ges or Circumstances, as Clothes, Riches,
etc. with respect to which the Being is called a Subject; and any of them,
whether Properties, Modes or Adjuncts, in speaking of it, are called
Attributes; and a succinct lively Enumeration of any or all of these, in any
Subject, discriminating it from any other Thing, is called a Description of it.

Of Time and Place, Space and Duration.
18. EVERY Body or sensible Thing that is, must necessarily have some Time and
Place, in which it exists, which are reckoned among its principal Modes; and by
its Time, is usually meant, that Portion of Duration; and by its Place is
meant, that Portion of Space, in which it exists. But then by Space, we must
mean the whole Extent of sensible Things, the Place of each particular Thing,
being that Part of the whole Extent which it occupies, in its proper Situation
relative to the rest: And by Duration, must be meant, the whole Continuance of
the Existence of the entire sensible World, measured out by the Revolutions of
the Sun; and the Time of any particular sensible Thing, means, its continuing
to exist during so many Parts, or such a Number of his Revolutions. But Time,
considered as a Conception in the Mind, is nothing else but the Succession of
its Ideas, of which the Succession of some principal Ones, as the Revolution of
Years, Days, etc. being settled and stable according to the established Course
of Nature, are considered as Standards or Measures to the rest. Such are Time
and Place, Space and Duration, literally with regard to the sensible World, to
which they properly belong, and they are only figuratively, and by Analogy,
ascribed to Spirits or intelligent active Beings, concerning which the Term
Ubi, where, and when, by some have been preferred. For, as their Existence is
entirely of another Kind from that of Bodies, so must their Space and Duration
be: As their Existence consists in conscious, active Intelligence, so their
Space must mean only the Extent or Reach of their intelligent active Powers,
and their Duration only their Continuance to exert those Powers: But, strictly
speaking, they are so far from existing in Space and Time, that, on the other
Hand, Space and Time do truly exist in them. And accordingly the infinite
eternal Mind is so far from existing in infinite Space and Duration that He
comprehends all Space and Duration, and every Thing that is, within His
boundless Intellect, and is present to all Times and Places, not after the
Manner of being co-extended with them, but as an infinitely active,
all-comprehending Intellect, to whom all Things, all Times and Places, are at
once present, without Succession or Limitation; i. e. they are at once known to
His infinite Mind, and subjected to, and dependent upon, His unlimited Will and
Power.

19. NEXT to the Consideration of a Being or Thing, Of Whole and Parts.
as Substance with regard to its Accidents, and a Subject with regard to its
Adjuncts, we consider it as a Whole with regard to the Parts whereof it
consists: As a Man consists of Soul and Body; and his Body, of his Head, Trunk
and Limbs, each of which may be yet further sub-divided. On the other Hand, we
call that a Part, which is considered as being not an entire Thing of itself,
but as it goes, in Conjunction with other Parts, to the Constitution of a Whole
or entire Being, as a Leg or an Arm, with respect to the Human Body: Such is
any individual Thing with respect to the Parts whereof it consists, which
therefore may be called an Individual Whole, as not being divisible into more
of the same Kind, or Quantity, and the Parts of which are not of themselves
entire Beings. But besides this, there is, what is called an aggregate Whole,
the Parts of which, are each a distinct entire Being, though it has a Relation to
other distinct Beings, with which it is connected as Parts of another Whole;
and the Parts are either of the same, or of different Kinds: Such, of the first
Sort, is an Army, consisting of the many distinct individual Men whereof it is
constituted, each of which, is an entire Being of himself, and all of the same
Kind. -- And such, of the other Sort, is the whole World with regard to all the
various distinct Beings whereof it consists, but those of different Kinds, as
Bodies, Spirits, Men, Beasts, Trees, Stones, etc. So that the same Thing may be
a Whole with regard to the Parts whereof it consists, and a Part, as it goes to
the Constitution of another Whole: And the Maxim here is, that The Whole is
greater than either of its Parts, and equal to them all taken together, which
is the Foundation of all mathematical Demonstrations. This Notion of Whole and
Parts, is originally taken from Bodies, and is properly and literally to be
understood of them and their Dimensions, but may analogically and improperly be
applied also to Spirits; in which Sense we may say, The Soul is a Whole, and
the Understanding, Will, Affections and Exertions of it may be considered as
Parts of it, they bearing the like Analogy to the Soul, as the Members and
Organs do to the Body.

20. UNDER this Head of Whole and Parts, we may consider the Notions of Unity
and Multiplicity, Number and Order. Of Unity and Multiplicity, Number and Order.
A Whole or entire Being, considered as being simple or indivisible into more
of the same Kind or Quantity, we call a Unit or One entire individual Being, as
one Shilling, one Tree, one Ox, one Man, one Angel: Thence it is applied also
to an aggregate Whole, as one Army, one World. And the Parts of which any Whole
is compounded or consists, are said to be manifold. And by how much the less of
Composition there is in any Being, by so much the perfecter it is, as being so
much the more One: Hence Spirit being compounded only of Power and Act, is more
perfect than Body, which is compounded of many Parts and Dimensions. And as
Power and Act in the Deity entirely coincide, He is the most perfect Being, as
being the most simple and entirely One, and therefore is called pure Act,
without any Variety or Multiplicity; a most perfect Unit, consisting of all
Reality and Perfection. Now from the Multiplicity of Individuals with regard to
an aggregate Whole, and of Parts with Regard to each individual Whole, we have
the Conception of Number, the Parts being numerous or consisting of a Number of
Units, as many Members in the same Body, many Men, many Beasts, many Trees,
etc. to which in Computation, we give the Denominations of One, Two, Three,
Four, etc. And these Parts we consider as subsisting in some Order, according
to their several Relations and Situations, with regard to each other, and to
the Whole: Of which we say, one is prior, the other posterior to the other,
either in Nature, Time, Place, Dignity or Knowledge, as a Father to his Son,
etc. And this Order of Things which we express by the Terms, first, second,
third, fourth, etc. we find to be founded in some Establishment which we
observe to be made in the Course of Nature, which therefore, in all our
Divisions and Sub-divisions, Conceptions and Reasonings, we should make our
Standard, and endeavor to follow it as exactly as ever we can.

21. MOREOVER, to this Head of Unity and Multiplicity, Of Identity and
Diversity.
belong the Notions of Identity and Diversity. A Thing is said to be one and
the same, when it appears to have all the essential individuating Properties at
one Time that it had at another, though it may differ in some Things accidental
or circumstantial, as a Man at 5 and at 50: But if Things differ in any Thing
essential, we say, they are Diverse, being not the same, but the one a
different and distinct Being from the other; as an Apple and an Oyster. But
Identity is of very different Consideration in Bodies and in Spirits, as they
are Beings of an entirely different Kind. In Bodies, we call that one and the
same, which, however it may differ in some Things not essential to it, yet in
Things peculiar to it, it affects our Senses in the same Manner at one Time as
at another, or consists of the same sensible Qualities, Figure, Color, etc.
essential to it; as a Mountain now, and twenty Years ago: And those are diverse
or distinct Bodies one from another, that consist of different sensible
Qualities essential to each, as Gold and Lead; or that in Bodies is the same or
different, which appears to consist of the same or different individuating
sensible Qualities. But as by a Spirit, which is also called a Person, we mean
a distinct, conscious, intelligent Agent, so his Identity consists in being
conscious of a Series of Perceptions and Actions that he knows to be his own
and not another's, by which therefore he knows he is the same Person now with
himself twenty or fifty Years ago, which continued Consciousness is his
distinct individuating Property. Whereas Peter is not the same with Paul, but
another Person, each having distinct individuating Properties, the one being
conscious of a different and distinct Series of Perceptions and Actions from
the other: And another appears to me the same with himself at different Times,
or to be a different Person, according as from his Words and Actions, he
appears to be conscious or not conscious of the same Perceptions and Actions.
This is the usual and common Sense of the Word Person, which, however, is
sometimes used to signify not a distinct Being, but a distinct Capacity: In
which Sense the same Intelligence may sustain diverse Persons, by acting in so
many different Characters or Capacities. I need say nothing here of the Sense
of this Word, as used in Divinis.

22. FURTHERMORE, some Things are said to agree, Of Things agreeing or opposite.
others to differ, and be opposite to each other: And those Things that agree
in a third Thing, are said to agree between themselves; and the Idea or
Conception of the one, in some respect, includes or implies the Ideas or
Conception of the the other, and vice versa. Thus Things are said to agree in
their Causes, Effects, Properties, Subjects, Adjuncts, Time, Place, Quantity,
Quality, etc. As two Sons have one common Parent, two Men are contemporary, or
are Countrymen, or have the same Occupation, etc. But Things are said to
disagree or differ in relation to these Things, as two Men to be of different
Countries or Occupations, etc. And to be opposite, when they are contrary the
one to the other, and the Idea or Notion of the one excludes that of the other,
as Light and Darkness, Heat and Cold, Extension and Thought, True and False,
Right and Wrong, etc. and any Thing and its Privation or Negation, as Sight and
Blindness, etc.

Of Things equal or unequal.
23. IN the next Place, we say, Things are equal, when they have the same
Quantity, whether discreet or continued; i. e. Number or Magnitude, as 2+2=4
and any two Right Angles are equal to each other, having the same, or an equal
Number of Parts or Degrees. On the contrary, we say Things are Unequal, when
one is Greater, and the other Less, as 3 is more than 2, a Right Angle is
greater than an Acute, and less than an Obtuse, etc. And here the
Mathematicians have several Maxims which are the Foundations of their
Demonstrations; as, Equals added to Equals, make the Whole equal; and Equals
taken from Equals, leave the Remainder equal: So of Unequals, etc. And from
Bodies and their Dimensions, this is by Analogy transferred to Spirits or
Minds, which are compared in their Powers and Faculties, as Bodies, etc. in
their Quantities: Thus we say, one Man or Angel has an equal, greater or less
Degree of Understanding, Force or Activity, than another, and those of the
Deity are infinite, and beyond all Comparison. To this Head belong the
Arguments, a majore ad minus affirmando, and a minore ad majus negando; as, if
one Man can lift such a Weight, much more two; and if two cannot lift it, much
less one.

24. AND lastly, we say, Things are like one another, when the one resembles
the other in some Quality, Of Things like and unlike.
Power or Faculty; and of all other Analogies, those between the natural and
moral World are the most pleasant and useful; GOD having designed the one as an
Emblem of the other, whereby we may be best instructed from our Senses in what
most concerns us: As Knowledge is like Light, or Benevolence like Attraction;
i. e. Knowledge is to the Mind, what Light is to the Eye, in the Discovery of
Truth. In like Manner, Benevolence is to Society what Attraction is to Nature,
as the one preserves Order and Harmony in the natural World; so the other
preserves Peace and Happiness in the moral World. This is what is called
Analogy or Proportion; and is either continued or disjunct. -- Continued when
the first Term is to the second, as the second is to the third, as, The Parent
is to the Child, as the Child is to the Grandchild. Disjunct, when the first is
to the second, as the third to the fourth; as, Virtue is to the Soul, as Health
is to the Body, in regard to Ease and Tranquillity. -- To this Head belong the
Mathematicians Doctrine of Proportions, or the Similitude of Ratio's, as, 2448.
and 241612. -- Here likewise belong moral Proportions, or the Fitness of
Affections and Actions to Characters with regard to Happiness. Hence that
reciprocal Proportion expressing the grand Foundation Principle of Morals, That
such Affections and Actions as are right or wrong in another toward me, as
tending to promote my Happiness or Misery in the Whole, must for the same
Reason be right or wrong in me toward him, supposing an, Exchange of
Characters. -- Thus of Similitude. On the other Hand, we say, Things are
Unlike, when they have different Qualities and Powers; as John is not like
Thomas, the one being a good Genius, the other a Dunce.

25. WHATEVER Being or Thing, or whatever Power, Of Denomination and Definition.
Effect, Property, Adjunct or Part, Quantity or Quality of any Thing be the
Object of our Consideration; in order the better to think of it by ourselves,
and especially in order to converse with one another about it, it is necessary
to give it a Name, or annex some Sound or other Sign, agreed upon to be
steadily significative of it, whether it be an Object of the Sense and
Imagination, or of the pure Intellect and Reason; and that Sound or Sign so
established, becomes a Kind of Vehicle to the Idea or Conception, whether
Simple, Compound or Complex. Thus we give the Names White, Black, Red, etc. to
the Colors so called, Hard, Soft, Hot, Cold, etc. to the tangible Qualities so
called; and Consciousness, Perception, Self-exertion, etc. to the simple
Conceptions so called. -- Thus to instance in the Compounds; we give the Name
Gold to a certain yellow Metal that is the heaviest and most ductile of all
others, and the Name Cherry to the Fruit of such a Tree, and of such a
particular Figure, Consistence and Taste; and so the Name Justice, to an Action
of an intelligent Agent, designing to render to every one what he apprehends to
be his Due, etc. This is called Denomination, or giving Names to Things: And
the great Rule to be observed in this Affair, is, That we constantly annex such
an Idea or Conception or such a precise Collection or Combination of either
sensible Ideas or intellectual Notions, to such a Name or Word, and always use
it in the same Sense. And the true Notion of a Definition, whether in Things
sensible or intellectual, consists in explaining what are the precise Ideas or
Conceptions, which are combined and annexed to such a Name. Thus the Word Gold
means a yellow fusible Body, of the greatest Weight and Ductility of any other,
and soluble in Aqua Regia. So the Word Spirit, means a conscious, intelligent,
active, self-exerting Being. Thus we define compound Ideas, or complex
Conceptions; but as for those that are simple, they cannot be defined otherwise
than by some synonymous Term, because they can be known only by Experience.

26. ANY one entire Being that cannot be divided into more of the same Kind, Of
Abstraction, and of Individuals, Sorts and Kinds.
we call an Individual, whether it be a Body, or a Spirit, and in order the
better to think and speak of it, we give it a proper Name, as, to this Man the
Name of John, to that, Peter; to this Horse, the Name Bucephalus, to that Dog,
the Name Argus, etc. And if there be no Occasion for a proper Name, we say this
Tree, that Stone, that Piece of Gold, etc. And observing that there are a great
Number of Individuals that agree in certain essential Properties that
discriminate them from all other Things, we call all the Beings of that Sort, a
Species, and agree upon a common Name that shall indifferently stand for every
Individual of that Sort: This is what is meant by Abstraction. Thus observing
all the Individuals of Men to agree in a certain Figure, Shape and Structure,
and in certain Powers of Reason, Speech and Activity, we call the whole Species
by the general Name, Man, in which we do, in effect, substitute some individual
Idea to represent the whole Species, and annex to it a general Name common to
all the Individuals. And comparing this Set of Beings, which we call Mankind,
with another Set which we call Beasts, we find there are some Properties in
which they all agree, as Life, Sense and spontaneous Motion, etc. to these we
give a more general Name or Genus, that shall stand for them all, as the Word
Animal. And ascending higher, we observe that each Tribe of Animals agree with
another Set of Beings called Plants, in vegetable Life, and so constitute a
yet more general Name to stand for them all, as the Word Animate. And finding
all these agree still with a vastly greater Number of other Things, Elements,
Stones, Metals, etc. in the three Dimensions, Length, Breadth and Thickness, we
agree on the yet more general Name Body to comprehend them all. And lastly,
Spirits are yet another Set of Beings, entirely and toto Coelo different from
Bodies of any Sort, whose Essence consists in conscious Perception and
Activity, and have nothing common with them but bare Existence; so that we
comprehend them all, both Bodies and Spirits, both Things perceiving, and
Things perceived, Things active, and Things passive, under the most general
Name Being, or Thing; i. e. what is, or exists. This is the highest Genus of
all, which, with the subordinate Genera or Kinds, have been considered as
another Kind of Whole, called Totum Genericum (to distinguish it from the other
Whole, explained above, 19. which is properly so called, but for
Distinction-sake is also termed Totum Integrale) and its Parts are called
Species (the Parts of the other being called its Members.) -- And the Division
of the Genus into its Species may more fitly be called Distribution, and that
of the Integrum into its Members, Partition. Thus in the Instance before us, we
distribute Beings into Bodies and Spirits; Bodies into Inanimate and Animate;
Animate into Plants and Animals; and Animals into Men and Beasts. And lastly,
these lowest Species can be distributed only into the several Individuals: But
the Individuals, though they cannot be distributed into Sorts, they may be
distinguished by their Causes, Effects, Subjects or Adjuncts, etc. as, by their
Families, Places, or Countries, by their Colors, Sects or Occupations, and
other accidental Circumstances.

27. IT is of great Importance, in order to think clearly and justly,
Particularly of Bodies and Spirits.
to take Care that we have as exact a Notion as possible of all those
Properties in every Kind of Being, that do essentially distinguish one from
another, that we may make our Definitions and Divisions just, and avoid as far
as possible, that Perplexity of Thought and Expression which arises from
confounding one Thing with another. But this is more especially necessary in
that first great Division of Beings into Bodies and Spirits; because we take
our first Rise to Knowledge from sensible Things or Bodies, and by that Means
are so prepossessed with a Notion of their Reality and Importance, that it is
with much Difficulty that we rise to the Notion of Spirits and what relates to
them; or, when we do, to have any strong Apprehension of their Reality and
Importance, or to conceive of them but under corporeal Images. We should
therefore labor much in the Business of Reflection, and Abstraction from
sensible to intellectual Things, and disengage ourselves from Sense and
Imagination as much as possible; and consider, that though our Notion of Spirits
is entirely of a different Nature and Original, from that of Bodies, it is
neither less real and substantial, nor indeed less clear and certain. These we
have from Sense and Imagination, and those from Consciousness and Reasoning;
but as these are Faculties of as much Reality and Certainty, as those (nay
more) we are not less certain of the Existence of Spirits than of Bodies, nor
have we a less clear Notion of the one than the other. I am as intuitively
certain of my own Existence by Consciousness, as of the Existence of Bodies by
Sense, and am as demonstratively sure of the Existence of other Spirits, and
especially of the eternal Parent Mind, as I am of any Thing imaginable,
whatsoever: Nay (as I said) upon due Consideration, it will appear that the
Evidence and Reality here has much the Advantage. And I do as clearly and
perfectly know what I mean, when I say I or myself, as when I say my Body; and
have as clear a Notion of the Meaning or Conceptions annexed to the Words,
Sense, Imagination, Consciousness, Understanding, Reason, Pleasure, Aversion,
Activity, Self-exertion, etc. as of the Meaning or Ideas annexed to the Words,
Extension, Figure, Solidity, Motion, Color, Sound, Heat, Cold, Sweet, Bitter,
etc. I as perfectly know the one as the other. So that I must consider Spirits,
as being as much real and intelligible Beings as Bodies, though of entirely a
different Kind; and indeed as much more real, as they are a more perfect Kind
of Beings; as Perception and Action are Things of greater Reality and
Perfection, than being perceived and acted; Activity than Passivity: And they
must be of as much more Importance, as one's Self and the Enjoyment of one's
Self is of more Importance to us, than any outward sensible Objects.

28. INDEED there is a Difficulty in being duly disengaged from Things
sensible, Of Signs, Metaphor and Analogy.
in order the better to conceive of Things intelligible, spiritual and divine,
and we are obliged to make use of those as a Means and Step to these, using
sensible Signs, Metaphors and Analogies, to represent and shadow forth those
more noble, abstract Objects of Intellect, Reason and Faith: For (to use the
Words of the great Author of the Minute Philosopher, Dial. VII. 16.) As the
Mind is better acquainted with some Sort of Objects which are earlier suggested
to it, strike it more sensibly, or are more easily comprehended than others, it
is naturally led to substitute these Objects for such as are more subtle,
fleeting or difficult to conceive. Nothing, I say, is more natural than to make
the Things we know, a Step to those we do not know; and to represent and
explain Things less familiar, by others that are more so. Now it is certain we
imagine before we reflect, and we perceive by Sense before we imagine, and of
all our Senses, the Sight is the most clear, distinct, various, agreeable and
comprehensive. Hence it is natural to assist the Intellect by Imagination, the
Imagination by Sense, and the other Senses by Sight. Hence Figures, Metaphors
and Types. We illustrate spiritual Things by corporeal; we substitute Sounds
for Thoughts, and written Letters for Sounds; Emblems, Symbols and
Hieroglyphics, for Things too obscure to strike, and too various or too
fleeting to be retained: We substitute Things imaginable for Things
intelligible; sensible Things for imaginable; smaller Things for those too
great to comprehend easily, and greater Things for such as are too small to be
discerned distinctly; present Things for absent; permanent for perishing; and
visible for invisible. Hence the Use of Diagrams: Hence Right Lines are
substituted for Time, Velocity and other Things of very different Natures.
Hence we speak of Spirits in a figurative Style, expressing the Operations of
the Mind by Allusions and Terms borrowed from sensible Things, such as,
apprehend, conceive, reflect, discourse, and the like. And hence those
Allegories which illustrate Things intellectual by Visions exhibited to the
Fancy. -- Hence also it is that we conceive and speak of God Almighty by
Analogy from the greatest Perfections in ourselves, such as Knowledge, Wisdom,
Power, Justice, Goodness, etc. which we substitute to represent his infinite
Perfections, removing all Limitation and Imperfection. -- And hence it is that
in the Revelation which God has made of himself, and his Dispensations toward
Mankind, he clothes himself with human Parts and Passions, in order to render
himself in some Measure intelligible to us, and moreover, teaches us, what (to
all practical Purposes, which are chiefly aimed at) it concerns us to know of
him and his Dealings with us, by Things and Relations familiar among our
selves, such as, the Sun, Light and Life, Father, Son and Spirit, Mediator,
Redeemer, Priest, Propitiation, King, Kingdom, etc. All which gracious
Accommodations to our low Capacities, we must always so understand and explain
as to imply nothing contradictious or unworthy of his infinite Excellency,
implied in either his natural or moral Perfections. -- Thus much of the Mind's
simple Apprehension of its Objects, and their Relations, arising from our
comparing them one with another, and the Manner of our conceiving and
expressing them.

CHAP. III. Of the Mind judging, affirming, denying, assenting, etc.
1. I PROCEED now in the second Place to the Consideration of that Act of the
Mind, which is called Judgment, i. e. which affirms or denies one Thing of
another, Of Judgments and Propositions.
and judges of True and False. -- Accordingly I observe further: That no sooner
has the Mind compared its Ideas or Conceptions one with another, but,
perceiving, or apprehending that it perceives their Connections and
Repugnances, or the Agreement or Disagreement between them, it passes some
Judgment affirming or denying the one of the other, according as it apprehends
the one is or is not included or implied in the other or connected with it.
Thus observing the Ideas we call Roundness or Brightness agree with, or are
included in the Idea to which we give the Name Sun, we affirm the Sun is Round
or Bright. -- And finding the Idea we call a Square is not comprehended in that
of the Sun, we deny that the Sun is Square. -- So with Regard to intellectual
Notions; we affirm Virtue is preferable to Gold, and deny that Riches are of so
much Worth as Learning; where Excellency beyond that of Gold is included in the
Notion of Virtue, and an Excellency equal to that of Learning is not included
in that of Riches. -- These Judgments of the Mind expressed in Words, we call
Propositions: And the Idea or Conception of which we affirm or deny any Thing,
is called the Subject of the Proposition; and that which is affirmed or denied
of, it is called the Attribute or Predicate, and what joins them is the Verb;
and what separates them is the negative Particle; as, the Sun is the Center,
or, is not the Center of the World.

2. IN all Propositions the Subject is either a General or an Individual Idea
or Conception. Of Propositions universal, particular and singular.
-- If the Subject be a general Term, then it is either a universal or
particular Proposition. -- It is a universal Proposition when the Attribute or
Predicate is understood to be affirmed or denied of all the Individuals
contained under the Subject; as, Man is a rational Creature, Man is not
immortal; and is generally expressed by some Term of Universality, all or none.
-- All is a universal Affirmative, as, all Men are mortal; and it is denied by
denying the Term of Universality; as, not all Men are mortal; or by a
particular Negative, as, some Men are not mortal. -- None is a universal
Negative, as, no Vice is to be indulged; which is denied by a particular
Affirmative, as, some Vice is to be indulged. -- On the other Hand, a
Proposition is particular, when the Predicate is understood to be affirmed or
denied of only some of the Individuals contained under the Subject; as, some
Men are wise, some Men are not rich: And a particular Affirmative is denied by
a universal Negative; as, no Men are wise; and a particular Negative is denied
by a universal Affirmative; as, all Men are rich. -- But if the Subject be an
Individual, the Proposition is called singular, as John is wise, or is not
rich, which are denied, the One, by saying, he is not wise; the other by
affirming he is rich.

3. ANOTHER Division of Propositions is into such as are simple and such as are
compound. Of Propositions simple and compound.
-- If a Proposition expresses but one Judgment of the Mind, and cannot be
properly resolved into more Propositions, or the full Sense of it may be
expressed in one Proposition in which there is but one Attribute predicated on
but one Subject, it is called a simple Proposition; as, God is good: And these
are either absolute, when the Predicate is expressive of something essential to
the Subject, or directly predicated of it, and no Condition is either expressed
or understood, as, The Sun is bright; or conditional, when there is some
Condition annexed to the Subject, upon the Supposition of which, the Predicate
is affirmed or denied of it; as, If God be good, he cannot delight in the
Misery of his Creatures. These conditional Propositions have, by some, been
reckoned among the Compounds; but ought not, by the Definition above given,
though they have that Appearance; they being reducible to one Proposition, as in
this Example; it is only as much as to say, God being good cannot delight in
Misery. -- On the contrary, a compound Proposition is expressive of several
Judgments of the Mind, and may be resolved into two or more Propositions, there
being two or more Subjects, or two or more Predicates, connected by
Conjunctions; as, The Sun is bright and round; Both Wisdom and Riches are
desirable. -- And these compound Propositions are either Copulatives or
Disjunctives, according as the Parts are connected by copulative or disjunctive
Conjunctions; as, Both Peter and Paul were Apostles and Martyrs. -- The World
exists either of itself, or from a most wise and powerful Cause.

4. BUT the most important Distinction of Propositions is, into such as are
True or False. -- If we join or separate, Of Propositions True and False.
i. e. affirm or deny Things as being what they really are, the Proposition is
True; as, Gold is heavier than Silver, or Silver is not so ductile as Gold. --
But if we affirm or deny Things otherwise than they really are, the Proposition
is False; as, Money is better than Virtue, or Learning is not so good as
Riches. -- And here it may be remarked, that the proper original Notion of
Truth (as was above observed, Chap. II. 15.) is, that it consists in the
Agreement of any Thing with its Standard. -- GOD's infinite Intellect,
comprehending all that is, is the original Standard. He himself is said to be
infinite Truth, or the Truth itself, as being infinitely intelligible and
perfectly known to his own infinite Intellect, and conformable to it in all
that he is and does; and all Things that exist, are what they are originally in
his eternal archetypal Idea, or as they are known to him, whether they be
Things necessary or contingent. -- And the Truth of Things created consists in
their Conformity to their Archetype, as they actually exist in Nature and Fact,
partaking of so much Truth and Reality as the great Author of them thought fit
to assign them. This is, what is called, Metaphysical Truth, as above
explained. -- And now, this Existence of Things as they really are, whether in
the eternal Mind, if they are Things necessary, or in the Nature and Fact, if
they are Things contingent, must be the Standard to our Minds, and our
Knowledge or Judgment of them is then Truth, when we conceive and affirm of
them as being what they really are. -- This is called Logical or Mental Truth.
-- And, lastly, our Thoughts and Judgments of Things must be the Standard to
our Words and Expressions concerning them; which are then Truth, when they
agree with the real Sense and Apprehension of our Minds. -- This is called
Verbal Truth; and when we design nothing but to speak as we think, it is called
Moral Truth. -- Since therefore Truth is inflexible, and Things are what they
are whatever we think of them, and no Imagination or Opinion of ours can, in
the least, alter them; it concerns us above all Things to think and speak of
them, as well as to affect and act with regard to them, exactly as being what
they really are.

5. AS all Things are in their own Nature either necessary or contingent (as
was shown above, Of Propositions necessary and contingent.
Chap. II. 11.) so are the Propositions expressive of them. -- Here therefore
it is needful to explain this Distinction of Propositions. -- Accordingly,
those Propositions we call necessary, which assert Things or Relations which
are in their own Nature necessary, immutable and eternal, and which (as was
above explained) being founded in the infinite Perfection of the divine Nature,
are independent on the divine Will, and therefore cannot be altered by the
Power of God himself, because it would involve some Absurdity or Contradiction;
as, Some Being must have always existed; -- no Being can begin to be without a
Cause; -- Triangles of the same Base and Height are equal; -- Benefits deserve
Gratitude, etc. -- And those necessary Propositions, whose Evidence is
intuitive, are called Axioms or Maxims. These Truths, with all their necessary
Consequences, are, as it were, so many Rays of that divine intellectual Light
above asserted (Chap. I. 13. 4. and Chap. II. 3.) which incessantly flow from
the great Fountain of Light, and shine alike into all created Minds. -- Of this
Kind are a Multitude of metaphysical, mathematical and moral Truths, which, it
is evident, must be of a divine Original, since, like the Deity, they are every
where present to all Minds, immutable and eternal, and cannot derive from any
created Light, or the actual Existence of the Creatures, which is evidently
precarious and contingent, though they are subservient to lead us up to those
Truths that are necessary and eternal. -- On the other Hand, those Propositions
are contingent, which assert Things and Relations that are contingent, as
depending on the Wills and Powers of free Agents, and consequently might not
have been had they so pleased, and the nonexistence of them implies no
Absurdity, as, The Sun shines; -- John runs. -- And of this Kind are all
physical Truths which relate to created Natures, and which depend on the free
arbitrary Will of the Deity, and Matters of mere Institution; and all political
and historical Truths, which depend on the free Exertion of human Wills.

6. NOW the Truth or Falsehood of some Propositions is self evident, which we
are said to know by Intuition; Of Propositions self evident and demonstrable.
either by Sense, as when I actually perceive Light, Colors, etc. or by
Consciousness and pure Intellect; as, when I say, I know that I am, and that
nothing can produce itself, and that the Whole is equal to all its Parts, etc.
-- The Reason of this intuitive Evidence is, that the Attribute appears at
first Sight to be included in the Subject, or connected with it. -- But if the
Connection between the Subject and Attribute does not appear at first Sight, the
Terms being duly explained, we must make use of a third Idea or Notion called a
Reason or Argument, which may serve as a common Measure or Standard whereby to
judge of the Connection between them; which, if it evidently appears to agree
with each of the Terms of the Proposition, it demonstrates their Agreement
between themselves, and if with but one of them, it demonstrates their
Disagreement; as, since I know I began to be, and nothing can begin to be
without a Cause, this demonstratively proves that I must have had a Cause of my
Existence. -- And as Knowledge implies a clear Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement between the Subject and Predicate, we are said in both these Cases
to have Knowledge, Certainty and Evidence: In the former, to have intuitive
Certainty, or Knowledge by Intuition; and in the latter to have demonstrative
Certainty, or Knowledge by Demonstration; and the Certainty of Demonstration is
always ultimately resolved into the Certainty of Intuition. -- And in all
Cases, the Criterion or Test of Evidence and Certainty, is, that it is not in
our Power to withold our Assent or Acquiescence. -- This is called Science,
which Term is however, by some, restrained to those Truths which are necessary
and immutable.

7. On the other Hand, we find it, many Times, Of Propositions doubtful and
probable.
in our Power, and even that, in some Cases, we are obliged to withhold our
Assent for want of perfect Evidence, or a high Probability, there being some
good Reasons to doubt. -- Now if the Reasons against the Truth of any
Proposition rather preponderate when duly compared with the Reasons for it, it
is called doubtful. -- On the contrary, if the Reasons for it manifestly appear
to prevail over those against it, it is said to be probable: Thus we say, it is
doubtful, whether the Comets are inhabited, because they seem to be in an
irregular chaotic State: But it is probable that the Planets are inhabited,
because they appear to be vast Globes in a settled regular Condition, analogous
to our Earth, and no other good End can be assigned them. Yet it is only
probable, because we do not know enough of them to be perfectly sure that no
other good End can be answered by them, and it is possible to be otherwise. --
And of these Doubts and Probabilities there are endlessly various Degrees,
according to the various Numbers and Weight of the Reasons for or against them;
and they also variously appear more or less probable or doubtful to different
Persons, according as they have more or less Capacity or Opportunity to examine
them, and according as they give their Attention more or less to the
Consideration of them. And when any Proposition is supported with all the
Reasons it is, in the Nature of it, capable of, and there remains no sufficient
Reason to doubt of the Truth of it, we are then said to have a moral Certainty,
and our Assent to it is called a Persuasion, which implies a settled
Acquiescence of the Mind in the Truth of it.

8. Of Opinion and Faith, and Rules of Assent.
If the Reasons for the Probability or moral Certainty of any Proposition are
taken from the Nature of the Things considered in themselves, our Assent to it
is called Opinion; as when I say, I am of Opinion that the Planets are
inhabited, from the Reasons that are taken from the Nature of them, so far as
we can come to the Knowledge of it; which Term also is, by some, used to
signify our Assent to all contingent Propositions, however so certain. -- But
if the Reasons of our Assent are taken only or chiefly from the Testimony of
others (as suppose we were told by credible Persons that came from the Planets,
that they are inhabited) it is called Faith, which will be stronger or weaker
according to the Credibility of the Thing in itself, and the Number and
Credibility of the Persons attesting it; -- who, if they be Men, one or more,
it is called Human Faith; such as that whereby I believe there is such a Place
as Constantinople, and that there were such Men as Alexander and Julius Caesar,
etc. And when any Fact of our Times is asserted by the concurrent Testimony of
all Men, or any ancient Fact is attested by the universal Suffrage of all
Antiquity, uninterruptedly handed down to us from Age to Age, we have the
highest moral Certainty, which scarce leaves Room for possible Doubt. -- But if
any Proposition be attested by God himself, our Assent, or Acquiescence in the
Truth of it, is called divine Faith, such as that whereby I believe there will
be a Resurrection, and a future Judgment, etc. -- And this Faith must entirely
exclude all Doubt, if we are morally sure that the Proposition comes from God,
and that we rightly understand it, because we are demonstratively certain, that
he can neither deceive nor be deceived, so that Faith is at the Bottom grounded
upon Reason. -- And in all Cases, if the Subject be not capable of clear
Evidence, we must be content with such Proof as the Nature of it will admit of;
having also a due Regard to the Importance of it; and always be determined by
the greatest Probability; and if that cannot be had, and we are obliged to act,
we must be determined by the greatest Safety and Advantage.

CHAP. IV. Of the Mind reasoning and methodizing its Thoughts. --
1. NOW, Thirdly, that Act of the Mind which seeks Reasons or Arguments to
prove the Truth or Falsehood of any Proposition, Of Reason in general.
and makes use of them to that Purpose is called Reason. -- In order to the
right Exercise of which, it is necessary, -- First, That we carefully consider
the Words of the Proposition to be proved or inquired into, which is now called
the Question, and all the Words and Terms we make use of in our Argumentations
upon it; and mark well what Ideas or Conceptions we annex to them, and always
use the same Word in the same Sense, that we may industriously avoid all
Ambiguity. -- And, Secondly, That we consider exactly the Ideas or Notions
themselves signified by them, as much as possible, divested of the Words, and
recount and consider the Parts and Properties whereof they consist, that we may
see how far our intuitive Knowledge goes, i. e. what Attributes do, at first
Sight, appear to be included in the Subject, or related to it, and what kind of
Relation they bear; that, by this Means, carefully sifting and canvassing the
Matter, and separating what is clear from what is doubtful, we may first be
sure where the Doubt lies, and wherein the Merits of the Cause do really
consist.

2. THESE Things being first duly observed, the right Exercise of Reason
properly consists, Of the right Exercise of Reason.
-- First, In taking a careful Survey of all the Relations which the Subject or
Pr^^icate of the Question, or disputed Proposition, bear to any other Ideas or
Notions, and thereby searching out and discovering some third Idea or
Conception related to one or other, or both of them, which is called the Reason
or Argument, and, as I said, may be considered as a common Measure by which to
judge of the Relation between them; the Foundation of which is that grand Maxim
above mentioned (Chap. II. 22.) That those Things which agree or differ in a
Third, must agree or differ between themselves; this is called Sagacity. -- To
which Purpose it is necessary that we endeavor to consider the Whole of
Things, and as far as we can, make ourselves Masters of our Subject; and in
many Cases it may be of good Use to have Recourse to the several Topics above
explained in the second Chapter, Causes, Effects, etc. -- And as all our
Reasoning takes its Rise from self-evident Propositions, we must see to it,
that the Connection between them and those we would prove, be made as clear and
evident as possible before we proceed to a Conclusion. And, Secondly, When we
have found an Argument, and duly considered its Relation to the Terms of the
Question, the Act of Reason consists in inferring, from the Agreement or
Disagreement of the Subject and Attribute of the Question with this
intermediate Idea or Conception, their Agreement or Repugnancy between
themselves: This is called Illation. -- Thus, suppose the Question were,
Whether Virtue be more valuable than Riches? -- I first consider the Nature of
Virtue and Riches in all their Properties and Relations; I compare them with
each other, and particularly with regard to our Happiness, which alone can
render any Thing more or less valuable to us; and then, from that general
self-evident Proposition, That, what most contributes to our Happiness is most
valuable, I infer, That, since Virtue conduces vastly more to our Happiness
than Riches, it must upon that Account, be vastly more valuable.

3. THE Method of Reasoning in the Schools is called Syllogism, Of the Nature
of Syllogism.
which consists in comparing the intermediate Idea or Argument, First, With the
Predicate of the Question, which is called the Major Term, as being generally
the most extensive; for which Reason the first Proposition is called the Major;
Secondly, With the Subject of it, which is called the Minor Term, and therefore
this second Proposition is called the Minor, and these two are called the
Premises: And then, Thirdly, In making the Conclusion according as it is found
to agree or disagree with both, or either of them. If it is found to agree with
both, it is affirmative; if with but one, it is negative. -- As, suppose the
Question were, Whether Justice ought always to be practiced? -- The Argument
shall be the Advantageousness of it. -- Then the Major Proposition will be,
What is advantageous in the whole is always to be practiced: The Minor, That
Justice is ever advantageous in the whole: -- Then the Conclusion will be, That
Justice is always to be practiced. -- Or, what is mischievous to Society ought
not to be practiced; Lying is mischievous to Society; -- therefore Lying ought
not to be practiced. -- The Ground of which Method of Reasoning is this Maxim:
That whatever can truly be universally affirmed or denied of any Subject, may
truly be affirmed or denied of all or any of the Particulars or Individuals
comprehended under that Subject. -- And if either of the Premises be yet
doubtful, being denied, it must be proved after the same Manner as before, till
we arrive at two Premises, neither of which can reasonably admit of any Doubt.

4. SYLLOGISMS of this Kind are called the Categorick Forms, as being expressed
absolutely, Of the three Figures of Categorick Syllogisms.
and always consist of only simple Propositions. -- In which the most usual and
useful are those, wherein the intermediate Idea or Argument precedes, as being
the Subject in the Major Proposition, which is always universal, and follows,
being the Predicate in the Minor, which is always affirmative: and this is
called the first Figure: As, An infinitely wise and good Being cannot delight
in the Misery of his Creatures: -- God is an infinitely wise and good Being; --
therefore, God cannot delight in the Misery of his Creatures. But in some Cases
it may be most convenient to make the middle Term the Predicate of both the
Premises, one of which is always negative, and the Major universal; this is
called the second Figure, as All Virtue is amiable; Avarice is not amiable;
therefore, Avarice is not a Virtue. And lastly, sometimes it may be most
convenient to make the middle Term the Subject of both the Premises; which is
called the third Figure; in which the Minor must be affirmative, and the
Conclusion is always particular; as, Solomon did not always act wisely: But
Solomon was a wise Man; therefore, some wise Man does not always act wisely,
or, which is the same, All wise Men do not always act wisely. Much is here said
by Logicians of the Modes of Syllogisms under each of these Figures, which is
rather Matter of Curiosity than Use; but if any one desires to gratify his
Curiosity, he may see a most complete and accurate Account of them in the
Port Royal Art of Thinking.

5. BUT the same Arguments may be disposed more familiarly in what is called
the Hypothetick Form, Of the Hypothetick Syllogism.
the Major of which is a conditional Proposition, as in the former Example: If
virtue is, in the whole, more conducive to our Happiness than Riches, it is
more valuable: But it is in the whole more conducive to our Happiness:
Therefore it is more valuable. So in a later Instance: If Lying be mischievous
to Society, it ought not to be practiced: But it is mischievous, etc. therefore
ought not to be practiced. Here the major Proposition consists of two Parts,
which are called the Antecedent and the Consequent, and the Argument proceeds
from the affirming or Position of the Antecedent to the Position of the
Consequent. But there is another Form of it which proceeds from taking away of
the Consequent to taking away of the Antecedent, as, If I had said such a
Thing, I should have thought of it; But I never thought of it, therefore I
never said it.

6. Of the Disjunctive Syllogism.
THERE is likewise another Form of Syllogism which is called the Disjunctive
Form, in which the Parts must be Opposites, so that the Position of the first
must infer the taking away of the other, or of all the rest, if there be more
than two; or the taking away of the latter, or all the rest, if more than two,
must infer the Position of the former; as, Every Man serves either God or
Mammon: Peter serves God, therefore he cannot serve Mammon: or, Judas serves
Mammon, therefore cannot be a Servant of God. And to give an Instance where
there are more than two, Every Action is either good, bad or indifferent; but
to relieve a poor Man is a good Action; therefore it is neither bad nor
indifferent; or, it is neither bad nor indifferent; therefore it is a good
Action.

7. These are the chief Forms of Reasoning to which all others, that are of any
Consequence, Of irregular Syllogisms.
may be reduced. It may not however be amiss to say something of those which
are called irregular Syllogisms. Of which, some are redundant, as consisting of
more than three Propositions, of which Number only regular Syllogisms consist:
In which Case, a Reason is added to support either the Major or Minor, or both,
before we proceed to the Conclusion. Others are deficient, as when the Major is
left out or suppressed in the Mind, being understood, though not expressed; as,
Virtue conduces more to our Happiness than Riches, therefore it is more
excellent; such are called Enthymems. But the most noted of these irregular
Syllogisms are the Dilemma and the Sorites. In a Dilemma, the major Proposition
is a Conditional, whose Consequent contains all the several Suppositions upon
which the Antecedent can take Place, which being removed in the Minor, it is
apparent the Antecedent must also be taken away; as, If God did not create the
World, it must either have been self-existent, or have derived from mere
Chance; but it could neither be self-existent nor derive from Chance; therefore
it must have been created by God. Sorites is a Method of arguing in a Series of
Propositions, so connected together, that the Predicate of the first becomes
the Subject of the second, and so on, till we come to a Conclusion, in which
the Predicate of the last Proposition appears from those intermediate
Propositions to be connected with the Subject of the first. For an Example of
the Sorites, we may set down the following Way of Reasoning, to prove the
natural Immortality of the Soul.

1. The Soul is a conscious, intelligent, active, self-exerting Being.

2. A conscious, intelligent, active, self-exerting Being, as such, is entirely
of an opposite and different Nature and Kind from that of Bodies, and therefore
can have nothing common with them but bare Existence.

3. A Being that, as such, is entirely of a different Nature from Bodies, and
has nothing besides Existence common with them, can have no corporeal
Properties and Affections, such as solid Extension, Continuity of Parts, and
Divisibility or Discerpibility.

4. A Being that, having no corporeal Properties, and so does not consist of
solid extended Parts, divisible or discerpible, cannot be naturally liable to a
Dissolution.

5. What is not, in the Nature of it, liable to a Dissolution, must be
naturally immortal. Ergo,

6. The Soul is naturally immortal. And here these intermediate Propositions
may be reduced to so many categorick Syllogisms, beginning with the last, and
ending with the first.

8. THOUGH the Rules given above, if duly attended to, Of Sophisms.
would effectually prevent all sophistical Reasoning; yet it may not be amiss
to add a few Words concerning what are called Sophisms or false Reasonings;
among which, the chief are, 1. That which is called Ignoratio Elenchi, which
is, when the Dispute proceeds upon a Mistake, occasioned by not attending to
the true Meaning or State of the Question. 2. Petitio principii, which is, when
in pretending to argue, the Thing is taken for granted which was to be proved;
this we call Begging the Question. 3. Fallacia quatuor terminorum, which is,
when the intermediate Term bears a different Sense in the Minor, from the Sense
in which it was used in the Major. 4. Non Causa pro Causa, which is, when that
is, by Mistake, taken for a Cause, which was not the Cause; as, when a Person
receives his Health consequent to the using such a Medicine, and ascribes it to
that, when perhaps it might really be owing to a Medicine which he had used
before. And 5thly, the last I shall mention, is that which arises from what is
called the Association of Ideas, where because such Ideas are connected merely
by Custom, we are apt to conceit they are connected in Nature, as Terrors with
Darkness. On which Account it is of great Importance in Education, to take Care
that no Ideas become associated by Habit or Custom but those that are connected
in Nature; and on the other Hand, that those Ideas that are really connected in
Nature be associated by Habit or Custom, that a Sense of their Connection may
operate with the greater Force in the Conduct of Life. And thus much for
Syllogism.

9. THE last Thing in Logic, is that Course of Reasoning which is called
Method, Of Method.
which is only a regular Proceeding in connecting a large Series of Reasonings
or Instructions on any Subject, and therefore truly belongs to this Part of
Logic which treats of Reasoning. For in delineating a whole Science, or
treating on any large Subject, it is necessary to pursue it through a long Chain
of Reasoning, or a whole Series of Propositions mutually related; in which it
is of great Importance, both for the clearer understanding it, and the better
remembering it, that we carefully observe the Order that Nature itself points
out to us; so as to begin with what is plain and simple, and thence to proceed
gradually to what is more compounded and obscure; so ordering and ranging
Things through the whole Process, that what goes before may continually reflect
Light upon what is to follow, and pave the Way to it; and taking the utmost
Care to preserve Evidence, or at least the highest possible Degree of
Probability in every Step, till we arrive at the highest Truth and Good, or the
Conclusion we aim at. -- In order to which, the best Thing we can do, is to
observe diligently the Manner in which the best Writers proceed, in treating on
any Subject they propose to handle, and particularly, the Mathematicians, and
Moralists. -- Now, I say, such a Series of Reasonings we call Method; which, if
it begin with Effects, and arises to the Discovery of Causes, or with
particular Facts, Parts or Properties, and arises gradually to the Whole, and
to general Principles, and Conclusions, it is called the Analytical Method. --
But if it begin with Causes already discovered, and descend to Effects, or with
general Principles, and descend, by the Application of them, to the
Illustration or Proof of Particulars or Facts, it is called the Synthetical
Method. -- The first is used in searching and discovering Truth; the second
chiefly in teaching it in the most compendious Manner, when it is discovered.

10. BUT in order to succeed well in the right Use of our Reason, Of the
disinterested Love of Truth.
be the Form or Method what it will, whether in Thinking or Reasoning by
ourselves, or in a joint Searching after Truth, in our Conversation with
others, which should be our only View in what is called Disputation, it is of
the greatest Importance that we observe some such Rules as these; 1. That we
habitually consider the Knowledge of Truth, as being the highest Perfection and
Happiness of our Minds, which therefore should be our grand Pursuit, separate
from every other Consideration. 2. That accordingly we possess ourselves of an
ardent and disinterested Love of Truth, for its own intrinsic Excellency; and
of the utmost Aversion to all Falsehood and Deceit, or being any ways misled or
imposed upon by false Colors, and delusive Appearances. 3. That in order to
this, we honestly endeavor as much as possible to divest ourselves of all
sinister Views and Prejudices, in favor of any vulgar Opinions, pre-conceived
Schemes, or worldly Interests, and guard ourselves against every untoward
Appetite or Passion, that may darken or bias our Minds, and so keep them as
calm as possible, and open and ready to the Impressions of the naked Truth. 4.
In order the better to come at Truth, we must endeavor to consider, with the
utmost Attention, the Things themselves, with all their various Relations and
Connections, divested of the Delusions and Ambiguities of Words, which are many
times apt to mislead us. 5. And lastly, we must enlarge our Views as much as
possible, so as to take the Whole of Things into our Consideration, without
which we cannot make any tolerable Judgment of what relates to Particulars. If
we would faithfully observe these and the like Rules for the Conduct of our
Understandings, and at the same time, be, above all Things, concerned to do our
Duty, and to know the Truth, with this honest View, to be governed by it in
Heart and Life, with all Humility, and without Partiality or Hypocrisy, we
should not be in Danger of being misled into any great or dangerous Mistakes,
but should attain to know the Truth, and the Truth would make us free. -- And
thus much for the several Objects and Operations of the Understanding, which
are the Subject of Logicks.

CHAP. V. Of the Mind affecting, willing and acting.
1. HAVING thus given some Account of the Subject of Logicks, Of the Passions
in general.
which relate to the Conduct of the Intellect, in its various Exertions, I now
go on to give a short Sketch of the Subject of Ethics, which relate to the
Conduct of our Affections and Behavior; of which no more is here intended,
than what is just necessary, in order to the Business of the next Chapter. --
Here therefore, according to what was observed above (Chap. I. 12.) we are to
treat, 1. Of our affecting or disaffecting Things, according as they appear
good or bad. 2. Of our choosing or refusing, willing, or nilling them, according
as we affect or disaffect them. And, 3. Of our freely acting, or forbearing to
act, according to the Judgment and Choice we have made. First then, we are to
consider the Affections or Passions, of which we are conscious, and which next
occur to be observed in the Frame of our rational Nature, the Doctrine or
Explication of which is called Pathology; for no sooner does any Object come
under the Mind's Consideration, but it appears agreeable or disagreeable,
according as it is, by the established Law of our Nature, attended with
Pleasure or Pain, or, at least, with some Degree of Satisfaction or Uneasiness,
or the Apprehension of it. -- Now, by the Passions, we mean in general, such
Affections or Disaffections, Inclinations or Aversions, as we experience in
ourselves, upon feeling or expecting that Pleasure or Uneasiness with which any
Object is attended. -- And such is the Law of Union between our Souls and
Bodies, that upon our being affected or disaffected toward any-Object, we are
sensible of certain Commotions and Perturbations in our Blood and Spirits,
corresponding and in Proportion to those pleasing or displeasing Apprehensions.

2. NOW the leading Passion, and which seems in some Degree to be at the Bottom
in all our Passions, Of the Passions more particularly.
is what we call Admiration or Wonder, which, in a high Degree, is called
Astonishment, and is that Sentiment which we feel on the Perception of any
Thing that is new, or great, or what we are unaccustomed to, or from which we
have strong Apprehensions of Pleasure or Uneasiness. -- And more particularly,
when we are delighted in any Thing, as being attended with Pleasure, we are
said to love it; and if we actually possess the Pleasure, it is attended with
Joy. -- If the Object of our Affection be a Person, our Love may be called
Esteem; and if the Person be in Misery, it is called Pity or Compassion: And if
the Object be absent or future, it has the Name of Desire or Hope. -- On the
other Hand, when we are disaffected toward any Object, apprehending it to be
attended with Pain or Uneasiness, we are said to hate it; and the actual
Sufferance of that Pain or Uneasiness is called Grief; and Shame, if it arise
from the Consciousness of our own Misconduct; and if the Object be a mean and
despicable Character, the Passion is called Contempt; and if the Evil be future
and impending, it is Terror, or Fear. -- If the Object from which we feel or
apprehend Pleasure, be procured, or occur to us by Means of any Person or free
Agent, designing Good to us, we call our Sentiment on that Occasion,
Benevolence, Complacence and Gratitude, attended with a Desire to reward it;
and with Joy at any Good, or Grief at any Ill that occurs to our Friend or
Benefactor: And this Temper, if it arise to a settled Habit of mutual Good Will
and good Offices, we call Friendship. But, on the other Hand, if the Object
from whence we feel or apprehend Pain or Uneasiness be procured or occur to us
by Means of any free Agent, designing any Evil or Mischief to us, we call our
Sentiment on that Occasion, Malevolence, Anger, or Resentment, which is apt to
be attended with a Desire to revenge it; and with Joy at any Evil that befalls
our Enemy, or Grief at any Good that may occur to him, which is called Envy.
And if this Temper grows to a settled Habit of Ill Will toward the supposed
injurious Person, it acquireth the Name of Malice.

3. THESE Passions are natural to us, and, as such, Of the End and Use of them.
must be considered as Part of the Frame of our Natures, and consequently as
being implanted in us by the Author of our Nature, for answering very wise and
good Ends, relating to our Happiness; and therefore are so far from being evil
in themselves, that they have the Nature of Good, as well as all our other
Faculties, and so, like the rest, become morally Good or Evil, according to the
good or ill Use we make of them. Now as God has so framed us, that our
Happiness should depend on a vigorous Activity in the Use of the Powers and
Faculties he has given us, his Design in planting these Passions in us, was,
that they might be, as it were, Spurs and Incentives in us, to put us upon such
a vigorous Activity, in avoiding those Things that are mischievous either to
ourselves or others, and pursuing those Things in which our Happiness or that
of others consists. For the Passions are, as it were, the Wings of the Soul, by
which it is carried on with Vehemence and Impetuosity in its several Pursuits;
and, as it were, its Springs, by which it is animated and invigorated in all
its Exertions. Thus Love, Desire and Hope, vigorously animate and spur us on to
the Pursuit of those Things that we love, desire and hope for, as being
connected with our Well-being and Happiness; and Hatred, Abhorrence and Fear,
engage us with the utmost Vehemence to fly from, and guard against, those
Things that we abhor and dread, as tending to our Misery. And as Benevolence,
Compassion and Gratitude, inspire us with a Delight in all those good Offices
in which both our personal and social Happiness consists; so Malevolence,
Aversion and Anger, are useful to inspire us with Indignation and Zeal, in
opposing all those impious and injurious Practices that tend to the Mischief
and Misery of Society in general, as well as each particular Person.

4. SO that the Passions are designed to be, and are, in their Nature, Of the
due Government of them.
capable of being subservient to a Multitude of excellent Purposes; and all
that is necessary to render them so, is, that there be a right Judgment made,
what Objects we ought to affect or disaffect, as being really connected with
our Happiness or Misery, either personal or social; and that they be duly
balanced one with another, and rightly governed and moderated in Proportion to
the real Value and Importance of their respective Objects. And for this Purpose
were we furnished with the Powers of Reason and Conscience, that they might
preside oyer our Passions, and make a right Judgment of their several Objects,
and thence prescribe Laws to them, and restrain them from all Exorbitancies and
Irregularities; that we might know what we ought to love or hate, to hope for
or fear, to be pleased or displeased with, and in what Proportion, and not to
suffer them to exceed the real Value and Importance of Things with regard to
our true Happiness. Since, therefore, the great Author of our Nature aims at
our Happiness, and has given us our Passions to be subservient to it, and
furnished us with Reason, to govern and regulate them in such a Manner as to
render them useful to that End, it must be his Will and Law, and the Law of our
Nature, that we should duly exercise our Reason in the right Government of
them, so as not to suffer them to hurry us on into such Actions as our Reason
and Conscience disallow, as being contrary to the eternal Laws of Justice and
Benevolence: And one of the chief Concerns in Culture and Education is, to
discipline and moderate the Passions, and to inure them to a ready Submission
to the Dictates of Reason and Conscience.

5. AND lastly, in consequence of any Object's appearing agreeable or
disagreeable to our Minds, Of Will, Activity and Liberty.
as tending to our Pleasure or Uneasiness, and being accordingly affected or
disaffected, the last Things I mentioned, of which we are conscious in
ourselves, and which I shall here briefly take together, are the Powers of
choosing the one, and refusing the other, and our Wills to act, or not to act,
with a Power of free Activity, whereby we are able spontaneously to exert
ourselves for obtaining the one, and avoiding the other. Now, as our true
Happiness consists in being secure from all Pain or Uneasiness, which is called
natural Evil, and in being possessed of such Pleasures and Satisfactions as are
suitable to our Nature in the Whole of it, which are called natural Good; so
our highest natural Perfection consists in being capable of rightly judging and
choosing for ourselves, and of a free and vigorous Activity, conformable to our
best Judgment and Choice, for avoiding the one, and attaining the other. And as
our Reason was plainly given us, to enable us to make a right Judgment what we
ought to choose and avoid, and to do and forbear, in order to our true
Happiness, in the Whole of our Nature and Duration; and our Will consists in
freely resolving and determining ourselves to the one or the other, as they
shall appear to our Judgment; so our highest moral Perfection consists in
actually making a right Judgment, what we ought to affect or disaffect, and to
do and forbear; and in freely and habitually exerting ourselves in choosing and
doing the one, and rejecting and forbearing the other, conformable thereunto. I
say freely; for Freedom or Liberty consists in having a Power to act, or not
to act, as we please, and consequently to suspend judging or acting, till we
have taken Opportunity to make as deliberate and exact a Judgment as ever we
can, what is best for us in the Whole, to do or forbear; as Necessity, on the
other Hand, considered as opposed to Liberty, implies, that it is out of our
Power to suspend acting, or to do otherwise than we do, in which Case there can
be neither Praise nor Blame.

6. I SAY our highest moral Perfection consists in freely doing what we know
tends to make us entirely happy in the Whole of our Nature and Duration: Of the
right governing our Activity and our highest moral Perfection.
But then it must be considered, that, as GOD is our chief Good, our great
Creator, Preserver and Governor, on whom we do entirely depend for our Being,
and for all our Happiness, and all our Hopes; and as he wills our Happiness, as
his End in giving and continuing our Beings, and consequently every Thing as a
Means, that is conducive to it; so it must be supposed to be implied in our
highest moral Perfection, that we be entirely devoted to Him, and do every
Thing conducive to our Happiness, in Relation to Him, ourselves, and one
another, in a designed Conformity to Him as our great Original and Pattern, and
in Compliance with his Will, and from a Sense of Duty to Him as our supreme
moral Governor. And consequently, that, as by Reason of our great Ignorance and
Weakness, we stand in much Need of his Instruction and Assistance, in order to
judge what is truly conducive to our Happiness, and to put it in Practice; it
must imply a most grateful and ready Submission to his Instructions and
Injunctions, and Dependence upon his Aids and Assistances to render all our
Endeavors successful, in the Pursuit of our true and everlasting Happiness.
But the more particular Prosecution of these Subjects will be the Business of
Ethics or Moral Philosophy, especially as it is improved by Christianity.

CHAP. VI. Of the Progress of the Mind, from its first Notices, toward its
utmost Perfection.
1. MEAN time, I would, in Pursuance of my first Design, make a few
Observations, Of the Mind's Progress, from its first Notices.
agreeable to the Sketch here laid down, on the gradual Progress of the human
Mind, from the first Notices of Sense and Intellect, to its highest Perfection
and Happiness. And as to its first Notices, they are doubtless those of Sense,
but directly joined with a Consciousness of its Perceptions. -- Warmth and
Hunger, and probably some Pains, are, perhaps, all the Sensations it has
before its Birth; and when it comes into the Light of this World, it is
directly impressed with the Sense of Light and Colors, as well as Sounds,
Tastes, Odours, and frequent uneasy and painful Sensations, etc. all which
still more and more awaken its Consciousness; and every fresh Notice of Sense
and Consciousness, still goes on to excite its Admiration, and engage its
Attention. And being a perfect Stranger to every Thing about it, it has every
Thing to learn; to which it diligently applies itself, as its Consciousness
more and more awakens, upon the Repetition, every Moment, of fresh Impressions
of Sense; till, by Degrees, having a great Number of Feelings, Tastes, Odours,
Sounds, and visible Objects, frequently repeating their several Impressions,
its conscious Memory still enlarging, it begins, by Means of the intellectual
Light, with which it finds its Consciousness attended, gradually to collect and
recollect the several Relations and Connections it observes to obtain among its
various Ideas: And at length, when it is in Ease, it discovers a wonderful
Curiosity and Delight in observing these Connections, as well as being
impressed with new Ideas.

2. IT has been made very evident both by Reasoning and Experiment, Of its
Learning, Connexions and Languages.
By Bishop Berkley in his Theory of Vision; and Philosophical Transactions, No.
402.
"That the Objects of Sight and Touch are entirely different and distinct
Things; that there is no necessary Connection between them; that Things visible
are only arbitrary Signs of Things tangible; that the one has the Nature of a
Language with Regard to the other, and that the Connection between them is to
be learned only by Experience, as that between Words and the Things signified
by them:" And particularly, that as all visible Objects or Ideas are only in
the Mind; so a Man born blind, and made to see, which must also be the Case of
Infants, can have at first no Notion of Distance, nor of any Connection between
Things visible and tangible, and consequently, that both Distance and that
Connection must be learned by long Trial and Experience. It must, therefore, be
a Matter of great Exercise of Thought in an infant Mind to learn this
Connection, and particularly, to learn the Notion of the various Distances and
Situations of Things tangible, by its Observations on the various Degrees of
Strength or Weakness, of Vividness or Faintness of the Light reflected from
them, in the Things visible constantly connected with them. And, at the same
time that it has these Things to learn, which must be a laborious Work, as
being the same Thing with learning a Language, it is also learning the Names of
Things, and the Connection and Use of Words, which is another Language. And, as
if all these were not Task enough, it has all this While, to be learning how
to use its Limbs; its Hands in handling, its Tongue, and other Organs of
Speech, in making and imitating Sounds, and its whole Body in all its
Exertions, and particularly, at length, the Poize of its Center of Gravity, and
the Use of its Feet in walking.

3. ALL these Things require a great deal of earnest Application, and the
Exercise of much Thought and Experience: So that it seems evident that those
little Creatures, from the Beginning, do consider, reflect and think a
prodigious deal more than we are commonly apt to imagine; Of the Capacity of
Children, and the Regard due to them.
and I do not see how we can avoid admitting that the Soul's Capacity is as
great from the first Moment as ever it is. For it is plain, from what has been
said, that they learn two distinct Languages within the two first Years of
their Life to a good Degree of Perfection; I mean the Connection between
tangible and visible Objects, and between both of them and Words, and besides
this, a considerable Degree of Dexterity in the Use of their Limbs, which is,
doubtless, a great deal more than they ever learn in so much Time afterward.
And consequently the Reason why there appear so many little, low, weak and
childish Things in them, which we are apt to despise and think them beneath our
Notice, is not for want of good Sense and Capacity, but merely for want of
Experience and Opportunity for intellectual Improvements. Hence also it
appears, that we ought to think little Children to be Persons of much more
Importance than we usually apprehend them to be; and how indulgent we should be
to their inquisitive Curiosity as being Strangers; with how much Candor,
Patience and Care, we ought to bear with them and instruct them; with how much
Decency, Honor and Integrity, we ought to treat them; and how careful it
concerns us to be, not to say or do any Thing to them, or before them, that
savours of Falsehood or Deceit, or that is in any Kind indecent or vicious.
Pueris maxima debetur Reverentia, is a good trite old Saying.

4. FOR it is to be observed, in the next Place, Of their Knowledge of Persons,
Relations and Duties.
that while Children are acquiring a general Knowledge of the sensible World
about them, they are at the same time learning the Knowledge of the Persons
with whom they converse; their Dependence on them, and the Relations they stand
in to them; and a Notion of meum and tuum, and thence a very quick Sense of
Justice and Injury, as well as of good Usage, Benevolence and Gratitude; all
which appear obvious to them from Consciousness and Reflection, and Attention
to that inward, intuitive, intellectual Light, which as I have observed (Chap.
I. 13. 14.) perpetually shines in upon their little Minds, from the DEITY, the
Father of Lights, and the Father of their Spirits. Hence they soon apprehend
the Relations of Causes and Effects, of Whole and Parts, of Things equal,
greater or less, of Things like and unlike, of the same and Things different
and contrary, of general Names and Notions, and Analogies from Things sensible
to Things spiritual and moral, of Actions necessary and voluntary, and of
Things done with Design and by Accident, etc. And by Reflection and Observation
they judge of others by themselves: So that in three or four Years, they do,
with a litttle Teaching, begin to have a Notion of Persons, as being an
entirely different and distinct Sort of Beings from mere Objects of Sense. They
soon know that a Stone in falling, the Water in running, the Wind in blowing,
and the Fire in burning, etc. knows not what it does, and neither acts
voluntarily, nor with Design: Whereas a Man or a Boy, they apprehend, if he
does what is either pleasing or displeasing, beneficial or injurious to them,
he knows what he does, and designs to do it, and might, if he would, do
otherwise. From whence, as I said, they have a quick Sense of good or ill
Usage, and consequently, of Right and Wrong, and of Gratitude or Resentment,
according as they take themselves to be well, or ill treated.

5. HENCE, with regard to what they do themselves, they, by Reflection, Of
their Notions of Praise and Blame, Shame and Guilt, etc.
soon acquire the Notions of Free-Agency, and of Praise or Blame, according as
they are conscious of their doing well or ill; i. e. according as they are
sensible they act a fit and a reasonable Part on the one Hand, or an
unreasonable and injurious Part on the other. Thence they soon learn to have a
Sense of Shame and Guilt upon their Consciousness of having done amiss, and of
Satisfaction and Self-applause, when they think they have done well. And hence
they quickly learn the Notions of Law, Conscience, Sin and Duty, especially if
they have had the Rules explained, and been duly chastized or applauded when
they have done ill or well, by those on whom they know they have a Dependence,
and to whom they find themselves accountable; and to whom to account, as being
both their Benefactors and Governors, they are conscious it is fit and
reasonable, as they know they stand in much Need of their Help and Conduct in
order to their own Well-being. All these Things are obvious in Children of
four, five and six Years old, and manifestly derive from that intellectual
Light, of which I have often been speaking: And the great Concern of Culture,
and a right Education, is to awaken their Attention to this inward intuitive
Sense of True and False, Good and Bad, Right and Wrong; and to fix their
Attachment to the one, and their Aversion to the other, by steadily affecting
them with Applause or Blame, Pleasure or Pain, Joy or Grief, according as they
affect or do the one or the other.

6. AND as the Intellect and Reason of Children thus manifestly appears to dawn
and improve, How they should be treated, and taught the Notion of the Deity,
and their Duty to him.
it ought to be continually encouraged and assisted by those that are about
them, and especially those that have the Conduct of them. As they are got into
a World wherein every Thing is new and strange to them, and for want of
Knowledge and Experience, they are liable to many Mistakes in their
Apprehensions, and to make a thousand Blunders in their Actions and Conduct;
and yet in their original Simplicity and Well-meaning, are ordinarily very
inquisitive, and willing to be taught and conducted; it is mightily incumbent
on those to whose Care they are by Providence committed, whether Parents,
Nurses, Guardians, Masters or Tutors, to consider them, with great Candor, as
Strangers that need to be conducted and assisted; to be ready to answer their
little Questions, and to teach them to reason by heartily reasoning with them;
and to apply themselves with great Tenderness, Patience and Assiduity, to guide
and instruct them. And as they grow capable of considering the Connections of
Causes and Effects, etc. they should open their Minds, and turn their Attention
to the Survey of all Nature, and lead them to observe the Contrivance, Beauty
and Usefulness of every Thing before their Eyes, and especially those Things
they find most necessary, useful and pleasing to themselves, and on which their
own Subsistence and Comfort more immediately depend; and thence conduct them to
the Apprehension, and some just Conceptions, of the true Cause of every Thing
in all Nature, who is truly their Father and Author, and upholdeth their Souls
in Life, and replenisheth them with his Loving Kindness and tender Mercies; and
who is the great common Father and Lord of all Things, both in Heaven and
Earth: And from these Apprehensions, it will be easy to teach them to deduce
their Duty and Obligations to Him, of Love, Gratitude, Trust, Resignation and
Obedience, and to be as like Him as ever they are able, pure as He is pure,
righteous as He is righteous, and kind and merciful as He is; and to praise Him
daily for every Thing they enjoy, and pray to Him for whatsoever they want, and
to live under an habitual Sense of their Dependence upon Him, and Obligations
to His infinite Goodness: To which Purposes, let them not only be taught to
live in the daily Exercise of Devotion by themselves, but also steadily attend
on the public Worship, both in the Family, and at the Church, where the Sight
and Example of others, will mightily contribute to awaken and keep alive in
their Minds a Sense of these Things, which will be apt strongly to influence
the Conduct of their whole Lives.

7. Of moral and political Connections and Duties.
AND as they begin to grow acquainted with the Family and Neighborhood, and
their Connections with these and those that are about them, and to see how
their own Comfort and Well-being depends on the Esteem, Love and good Offices
of others, and that these depend on their own good Conduct, and good Offices
toward them; they should have it inculcated upon them, that as they would be
secure from all Injuries, and the ill Treatment of others, so they must avoid
every Thing that is injurious and abusive toward them; and as they would
expect the Benevolence and good Offices of others, they must be full of
Good Will, and ready to every good Office toward them; and consequently,
delight in every honest, faithful, kind and obliging Thing, whereby they may
recommend themselves to the Confidence, Esteem and Good Will of all Mankind
with whom they have to do. And as they go on to enlarge their Acquaintance with
the World about them, and to have a Notion of their Connections with the Town
in which they live, and the Government and Kingdom to which they belong, and,
in general, with the whole Species; they should be led on to a Sense of Order
and public Virtue, and the Love of their Country, and finally of the whole
human Kind, and to look for their own Weal in that of the whole Community, and
even of the whole moral System, and to a Conduct corresponding thereunto.

8. AND, as from their early Acquaintance with the Objects of their Appetites,
Of moderating their Appetites and Passions.
from whence they derive a very exquisite Pleasure, they contract a violent
Attachment to them, and an Impatience of whatever may interrupt or control
their Gratification; and as this Impetuosity is, in many Instances, utterly
inconsistent with their Duty and true Interest, both with regard to God and
Man, and a strong Temptation to the Violation of it; they should, from the
Beginning, be taught and inured to the Practice of Self-denial, and the
Moderation and Restraint of their Appetites and Passions, and, as far as they
are capable, be shown the Reasonableness and Necessity of their so doing, in
order to their own truest Interest. In order to which, the widely different
Natures and Interests of Soul and Body, and of Time and Eternity, should be
explained to them, with the Evidences of a future State; and consequently, of
how much Importance it is to them to be, in a good Measure, disengaged from the
Body and Time, so short and uncertain; and to cultivate the Soul, and improve
it in Knowledge and Virtue, of which they can never be dispossessed, not even
by Death itself, they being Treasures which they can carry with them into
another State, and that will last for ever. And as our real Well-being depends
on Order, and as this depends on Law and Rule, of the Fitness of which, they
are not yet competent Judges; though they are to be led to reason and judge for
themselves, as fast as their Capacity will admit of it; in the mean time, they
should be taught and inured to Humility, and Obedience to Government, and even
to an implicit Obedience, till they are able to judge for themselves, and be
kept, as much as possible, from all bad Company, which will be extremely apt to
mislead them.

9. AND as it is to be supposed, that Children have all along, Of Reading and
Writing.
from their first Capacity for it, been taught to read and write, it concerns
those who have the Conduct of them, to put them upon the Practice of Reading
and Writing, particularly with a View at enlarging and improving their Minds,
by directing them to read the most instructive and engaging Things in History,
Poetry, and Morality, and especially the most instructive and useful Things in
the Holy Scriptures; at the same time awakening their Attention to them, and a
right Understanding of them: To which Purpose, putting them upon writing out
the most striking Passages would be very conducive; as by this Means their
Attention would be the more engaged, and they would have a little Treasure of
their own of the wisest and most useful Things, and would put the greater Value
upon them, under the Notion of their being a Treasure of their own. And, by the
Way, Care should be taken, as far as can consist with good Government, to
contrive to put and keep them always in a good Humor, which will make every
Thing take the better Effect.

10. BY this Time they may begin to be led to a Sense of the Charms of Music,
Of Music, Numbers, Figures, Globes, etc.
and the Mysteries of Numbers and geometrical Figures, and the Reasonings and
Operations relating to them, as far as their Capacities will admit, which are
of the greatest Use, as they tend to ripen their Minds, by inuring them to
strong Application, and a close Way of thinking. But Care should be taken that
these Exercises do not consist of mere Abstractions, and barren and useless
Speculations, but be turned as much as possible to Facts, and Things practical
and useful in Life. And by the Time they are ten or twelve Years old, they may
be taught from Maps, a general Notion of the Earth, the Situation of the
several Countries and Kingdoms upon it, and considerable of the History of the
several Nations inhabiting it; and at the same time, from Schemes and Globes,
considerable Notion of the Heavens, and the System of the World in general, as
well as this Globe of the Earth in particular: All which, would vastly tend to
enlarge their Minds, and give them a great and generous Way of Thinking.

11. AND now if they are designed for a public Education, Of Grammar,
Languages, Oratory, History, Poetry, etc.
they are to be taught the Principles of Grammar and Language, in which they
should, indeed, begin to be initiated by six or seven Years old; and the
Connection between their own and other Languages, should be carefully
explained, by instructing them in an English, Latin and French Grammar, at the
same time: So that by Twelve or Fourteen, they may become pretty well versed in
the Construction of Speech, both Latin and French, as well as English; and in
Two or Three more, of Greek and Hebrew, that they may be able to read the holy
Scriptures in those venerable and noble Languages of Antiquity, in which they
were at first written, and other excellent Pieces of Oratory, History, Poetry,
and Morality, which were the greatest Works of Genius, and have stood the Test
of Time, and been handed down to us through the several Ages of Mankind: All
which are of great Use to refine and polish the Mind, and give it a noble Taste
for the sublimest Beauties, as well as the justest Sentiments, and the finest
Maxims of true Wisdom; which, therefore should be carefully pointed out, and
illustrated to them, relating both to Things human and divine: Particularly
some good Rhetoric and Poetry, with the Mythology of the Ancients, should now
be explained, and they should begin to be well versed in the History of the
World, both sacred and profane, and with it, the Knowledge both of the Times
and Places of the several Facts, from Geography and Chronology, both ancient
and modern. I would have them carried as far as may be in these Things by the
Time they arrive at the Age of Sixteen or Eighteen.

12. AND now it will be time for them to have their Minds closely turned inward
upon themselves, Of Metaphysics, Logic and Criticism.
to take an exact View of their intellectual Powers, and the Objects of them,
by the Studies of Metaphysics and Logicks, in which they are taught the great
Principles of first Self-evident Truth, and how to make Deductions from them; a
thorough Knowledge of the Operations and Procedure of the Mind, and a just
Notion of right Reasoning, and of ranging and methodizing their Thoughts, from
the several Relations and Connections of Things. And upon this should at the
same time be built a more critical Knowledge of Language, and its Procedure
from literal, to just figurative Expressions of the Sense of the Mind; and from
the true Art of Reasoning, which addresseth the Understanding, to the right Art
of Persuading, in Address to the Passions; which should be taught in such a
Manner, as to be so far from clouding, dazzling and misguiding the
Understanding, as to be rather subservient to it, by giving it a clearer
Apprehension of its Objects, and more strongly engaging its Attention to the
Truth, and Right of the Case, as well as a Love to it, and Delight in it. To
which Purpose, the various Styles in just Writing, corresponding to the various
Subjects and Purposes, should be critically understood, and every Thing in
Thinking and Speaking be reduced to the Standard of Truth and Nature, without
any Sophistry, Disguise or false Coloring.

13. AND then, from the Doctrine of just Reasoning and exact Speaking, Of
Mathematics, and the fine Arts.
it will be proper, in the next Place, to lead the Mind on to the sublime
Mathematics (the first and easiest Things of this Kind, being supposed to be
already known.) And here there opens a spacious Field of Certainty and
Demonstration, highly raising and improving the Mind in a vast Scene of eternal
Truths, in the Doctrine of Numbers and Magnitudes, and their various
Proportions; and that wonderful Engine of Mathematical Reasoning Algebra, by
the Help of which, the Mind works itself into the Discovery and Understanding
of the sublimest Truths, and traverseth the whole visible Creation of God, in
which all Things are found to be done conformable to those sublime Principles.
And as the Mind is supposed to have been already conversant in Eloquence,
Poetry and Music, so it should now be led into a Taste of the other fine Arts,
Painting, Sculpture and Architecture, which do in some Measure depend on the
Knowledge of mathematical Proportions.

14. I COULD wish the Minds of Children, as I observed above, Of Physics and
Astronomy.
were early initiated in the Study of Nature, by being led into the easiest and
most delightful Things in Natural History, and a general Survey of the mighty
Works of God, both in Heaven and Earth; to which, as they further ripen, their
Attention should be now more strongly turned by a Variety of Experiments. And
when they are furnished with a considerable Apparatus in the Skill of
mathematical Reasoning, they should next be taught to apply it in Physics, or
the Study of Nature, the Laws of Motion, Gravitation, Elasticity, Light,
Colors, Sounds and other sensible Qualities; and from thence proceed to the
Knowledge of every Thing that can be discovered in the Elements, Earth, Water,
Air and Fire, and in all the various Tribes of Creatures in this terraqueous
Globe, both Mineral, Vegetable and Animal; in all which they must be led to
take Notice of the wonderful Art, Connections, Design and Contrivances that
manifestly appear in them all, and of every Thing that is useful for the
Comfort and Elegance of Life, while we continue in this present State. And in
consequence of these Things, they should be further led on to observe and
understand the Connection of this Globe itself, and all the Creatures in it,
with the Sun, the Fountain of all Light and Life to the whole System of the
Planets and Comets belonging to him, and depending on him, and the prodigious
Host of Stars analogous to him, on whom the like Systems may be supposed to
depend, which are the Subjects of Astronomy. And here, the Contemplation of
that World of Things extremely little beneath us, as well as Things vastly
great, distant and remote from us, alike beyond the Ken of the naked Eye, and
discovered only by the Help of Optic Glasses, equally demand their Attention,
prodigiously enlarge their Imaginations and Understandings, and, at the same
time, lead them to the most grand and august Apprehensions of the DEITY, and of
his most extensive Benevolence to all his whole Family, in Heaven and Earth.
And from a Sense of the Beauty, Harmony, Order and Usefulness appearing in the
whole System of Nature, they are led to a Sense of the like Beauty, Harmony and
Order, which ought to obtain in the moral System, and the Happiness resulting
from it, which now should be the Subject of their most intense Study, according
to that excellent Saying of Tully; Homo ortus est ad mundum contemplandum and
imitandum.

15. FOR as the Mind, from the first Dawning of Intellect and Reason, has been
supposed, from the Contemplation of itself, Of Theology and Morals.
and the sensible World surrounding it, and the Instruction of those about it,
to be convinced of the Existence of the DEITY, the Author of all Things, and
gradually attaining just Notions of Him who is the great Father of Spirits; so
now it must be led on further, in Moral Philosophy, Theology, Ethics, etc. to
the Contemplation of Him, and that World of Spirits derived from Him, dependent
on Him, and subjected to his supreme Dominion and Government, in which he seeks
to lead them gradually on through a Course of Discipline, to their highest
Perfection and Happiness in their Knowledge of Him, Conformity to Him, and
Enjoyment of Him, their sovereign Good, as the great End of their Existence,
and all his Dispensations toward them. Here then opens another vast Scene of
necessary and eternal Truths. In order to which, the first Study is to gain a
right Knowledge of ourselves, our own intellectual and active Powers, our
various Affections and Exertions, by Conciousness and Reflection; and thence to
form a Notion, not only of other created Spirits, but especially of GOD the
great Parent Spirit, by substituting the greatest both natural and moral
Perfections we find in ourselves wherewith to conceive of Him and his
Dispensations toward us, removing from them all Limitation and Imperfection.
And by the intellectual Light wherewith he perpetually irradiateth our Minds,
we not only see his absolute Independance and necessary Existence, but also our
own entire Dependence on Him, and our Relation and Obligations to Him; from
whence evidently resulteth the Fitness, Decency and Duty of all those
Affections, and that Behavior which we manifestly owe to Him, and are
comprehended under the general Names of Piety and Adoration. And by the same
Light attending our looking inward on ourselves, and considering our own
Nature, and our Relations and Connections one with another, we, in like Manner,
evidently discern what Affections and Behavior are fit, decent and due from us
to ourselves, and to each other, implied in the Terms Moderation, Probity and
Benevolence; and also that Happiness and Self-enjoyment which resulteth from
being conscious of our affecting and behaving accordingly, as well as the
Remorse and Misery arising from our affecting and acting otherwise. Thus our
Perception of eternal Truth, and Love of Order, in Conformity to it, leads
the Mind to its Union with the eternal God, and the Happiness of his
everlasting Kingdom, in the Conduct and Government of the World, which
consists in the universal Order, Harmony and Happiness of all intelligent
active Beings that are qualified for it.

16. BUT as we are by the Condition of our Natures or Circumstances, Of
Economy and Politics.
especially the human Species, cantoned out into various particular Societies,
it is necessary, in order to our Perfection, that we be trained up to act a
good Part, under the Discipline of these Societies in our Progress toward it.
The first is that of the Family to which we belong. This leads us to the Study
of Economy, which provideth for the Weal of these first Rudiments of Society
founded in Nature, in which we are to be carried through the first Stage of Life,
and fitted to act a good Part in making a further Progress toward our
Perfection, under the Discipline of the civil Community to which we belong,
which is founded in Compact, either explicit or tacit, being a voluntary
Combination of a great Number of Individuals to promote their Welfare in the
common Good of the whole Community; in which, each one is to seek his own Weal
and Happiness, both temporal and spiritual. Hence arises Polity, or the Art of
good Government, both Civil and Ecclesiastical; which consists in the
Communities agreeing on certain Rules and Laws founded in the common Interest,
and enforced by proper Sanctions, in Conformity to which, every Individual is
to resign to the public or prevailing Sense (at least as far as his Duty to
God will permit) as being the safest and most rational Method he can take, in
order to secure his own best Interest and Happiness. To which, therefore, it
will much conduce, that every one be trained up in this Spirit of Resignation
to the public Sense, as far as possible, and in an ardent Love of the public
Good of his Country and public Order; in an exact Knowledge of it, and the
Laws founded in it, joined with a faithful Conformity to them. And lastly, in
an earnest Zeal and Activity in whatever may tend to promote the public
Interest; being constantly taught the Glory of public Virtue and Usefulness,
and deserving well of Mankind.

17. BUT as we are attended with innumerable Impressions of Sense, Of the
Intent and Usefulness of Revelation, in improving and advancing us to our
highest Perfection.
and Solicitations of Imagination and Appetite, continually diverting our
Attention and Affections from these Reflections, and the inward Light attending
them, and strongly tempting us to the Violation of Order and Law, both moral
and political: It must be observed, lastly, that God has from the Beginning,
in great Compassion to Mankind, instructed us more perfectly in the Knowledge
of these most important Things by Revelation, wherein He has used a Variety of
Means to engage our Attention to them, and to reclaim us to Order, and restore
us to his Favor, upon our Deviation from them, in order to our true Happiness.
And to these Purposes, He has condescended to accommodate himself to the low
Capacities of the general Rate of Mankind, by using various Types and Emblems,
and a most beautiful and instructive Language taken from what is familiar among
us, wherewith to represent and shadow forth his Perfections and Dispensations,
which are vastly above our Comprehension; the Nature and Intent of which
Language should be critically considered, and well understood; and the
beautiful Analogies drawn from Things sensible and imaginable, to Things
intelligible, spiritual and moral. Particularly, in the Dispensation of his
Grace, for our Recovery from the Power and Guilt of Sin, to his Image and
Favor, by the Mediation, of his Son, and the Influence of his Spirit. It is
not his Design to teach us precise Philosophical Notions and Verities, as
Matters of mere Speculation, but rather chiefly by as exact Conceptions as we
are at present capable of, borrowed from Things common and familiar to us, to
promote in us pure and holy Affections, and all Manner of virtuous Dispositions
and Practices; to wean and disengage us from fleeting and sensible Things, and
low animal Pursuits and Gratificacations, which we are shortly to leave; and to
awaken and engage our Attention to spiritual, eternal and immutable Things, the
Objects of Reason and Faith; that we may not look at the Things that are seen,
which are temporal, but may look through them to the Things that are not seen,
which are eternal; and that we may learn to love and delight in Him, who is all
in all, our chief and sovereign Good, and to advance ourselves to as near a
Resemblance to Him as our Natures will admit of; that by our Conformity to Him,
and the Imitation of Him, we may, through the great Mediator, his blessed Son,
and by the Help of his holy Spirit, be entirely secure of his Favor, and for
ever happy in Him, ourselves and one another. Here then we arrive at our
perfect Consummation and Bliss; our highest Perfection and Happiness, both
intellectual and moral, in the clearest Knowledge of Him and ourselves, that
our Minds can admit of, and the entire Union of our Wills, Affections and
Behavior to his Will, and the Purity and Holiness of his Nature, and the
blessed Designs of his Kingdom. So that it is by this holy Discipline of
Christianity that we are daily to inure ourselves to a due Disengagedness from
this uncertain sensible Scene, and to improve ourselves in the Knowledge and
Love of Things unchangeable and eternal, and in the Exercise of Devotion
toward GOD, and the Imitation of Him, till we are qualified to quit this our
present Station, and enter upon that eternal Life of Contemplation and
Devotion, and of universal Purity, Probity and Benevolence, which is to be our
highest Perfection and everlasting Happiness in the future State of our
Existence.

FINIS.
A BEAUTIFUL SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF UNIVERSAL NATURE, By Bishop BERKELEY, in
reasoning against the Skeptics, near the Beginning of the Second of his Three
Dialogues.
LOOK! Are not the Fields covered with a delightful Verdure? Is there not
something in the Woods and Groves, in the Rivers and clear Springs, that
sooths, that softens, that transports the Soul? At the Prospect of the wide and
deep Ocean, or some huge Mountain, whose Top is lost in the Clouds, or of an
old gloomy Forest, are not our Minds filled with a pleasing Horror? Even in the
Rocks and Deserts, is there not an agreeable Wildness? How sincere a Pleasure
is it to behold the natural Beauties of the Earth! To preserve and renew our
Relish for them, is not the Veil of Night alternately drawn over her Face, and
does she not change her Dress with the Seasons? How aptly are the Elements
disposed? What Variety and Use in Stones and Metals, and even in the meanest
Productions of Nature? What Delicacy, what Beauty, what Contrivance in
vegetable and animal Bodies? How exquisitely are all Things suited as well to
their particular Ends, as to constitute apposite Parts of the Whole? And while
they mutually aid and support, do they not also set off and illustrate each
other? Raise now your Thoughts from this Ball of Earth, to all those wondrous
Luminaries that adorn the high Arch of Heaven. What an insupportably splendid
and glorious Body is the Sun, the Center of this our System, and the
inexhaustible Fountain of that vast aetherial Fluid, which is the Light and
Life of this whole Creation? The Motion and Situation of the Planets, are they
not admirable for Use and Order? Were those (miscalled Erratic) Globes ever
known to stray in their repeated Journeys through the pathless Void? Do they
not measure Areas round the Sun, ever proportioned to the Times? So fixed, so
immutable are the Laws by which the unseen Author of Nature actuates the
Universe! How vivid and radiant is the Luster of the fixed Stars? How
magnificent and rich that negligent Profusion, with which they appear to be
scattered throughout the whole azure Vault? Yet if you take the Telescope, it
brings into your Sight a new Host of Stars that escape the naked Eye. Here they
seem contiguous and minute, but to a nearer View, immense Orbs of Light, at
various Distances, far sunk in the Abyss of Space! Now you must call
Imagination to your Aid. The feeble narrow Sense cannot descry innumerable
Worlds revolving round the central Fires; and in those Worlds the Energy of an
All-perfect Mind displayed in endless Forms! But neither Sense nor Imagination
are big enough to comprehend the boundless Extent, with all its glittering
Furniture! Though the laboring Mind exert and strain each Power to its utmost
Reach, there still stands out ungrasped a Surplusage immeasurable! Yet all the
vast Bodies that compose this mighty Frame, how distant and remote soever, are
by some secret Mechanism, some divine Art and Force, linked in a mutual
Dependence and Intercourse with each other; even with this Earth, which was
almost slipped from my Thoughts, and lost in the Crowd of Worlds! Is not the
whole System immense, beautiful, glorious, beyond Expression, and beyond
Thought? What Treatment then do those Philosophers deserve, who would deprive
these noble and delightful Scenes of all Reality? How should those Principles
be entertained, that lead us to think all the visible Beauty of the Creation a
false imaginary Glare?

A PHILOSOPHICAL MEDITATION, OR PRAYER, Of the late Archbishop of CAMBRAY: In
his Demonstration of the Existence of GOD, as it is expressed (nearly) by
Bishop BERKELEY, in the Guardian, No. 69.
O My GOD, if the greater Number of Mankind do not discover Thee in that
glorious Show of Nature which thou have placed before our Eyes, it is not
because thou art far from every one of us, for it is in Thee that we live, and
move, and have our Being: Thou art present to us more than any Object which we
touch with our Hands, but our Senses and the Passions which they produce in us,
turn our Attention from Thee. Thy Light shines in the midst of Darkness, but
the Darkness comprehends it not. Thou, O Lord, do every where display
thyself: Thou shinest forth in all thy Works, but art not regarded by heedless
and unthinking Man. The whole Creation talks aloud of Thee, and echoes with the
Repetition of Thy holy Name: But such is our Insensibility, that we are deaf to
the great and universal Voice of Nature. Thou art every where about us, and
within us, but we wander from ourselves, become Strangers to our own Souls, and
do not apprehend Thy Presence. O Thou, who art the eternal Fountain of Light
and Beauty; who art the Ancient of Days, without Beginning, and without End: O
Thou, who art the Life of all that truly live, those can never fail to find
Thee who seek for Thee within themselves. But alas! the very Gifts which Thou
bestowest upon us do so employ our Thoughts, that they divert us from
perceiving the Hand that conveys them to us. We live in Thee, and by Thee, and
yet we live without thinking of Thee: But, O Lord, what is Life in the
Ignorance of Thee? A dead inactive Piece of Matter, a Flower that withers, a
River that glides away, a Palace that hastens to its Ruin, a Picture made up of
fading Colors, a Mass of shining Ore; these, and such Things as these, strike
our Imaginations, and make us sensible of their Existence, we regard them as
Objects capable of giving us Pleasure, not considering that Thou conveyest to
us, through them, all the Pleasure which we imagine they give us. Such empty
Objects of Sense as are only the Shadows of Being, take up and engage our low
and grovelling Thoughts, while that Beauty which Thou have poured out on Thy
Creation is as a Veil that hides Thee from our Eyes. As Thou art a Being too
pure and exalted to pass through our Senses, Thou art not regarded by Men who
have debased their Nature, and made themselves like the Beasts that perish. So
infatuated are they, that notwithstanding they know what is Truth and Good,
Wisdom and Virtue, Law and Order, which (though the most real and stable Things)
have neither Figure, nor Color, nor Sound, nor Taste, nor Smell, nor any other
sensible Quality, yet they can doubt of Thy Existence, because Thou art not
apprehended by the grosser Organs of Sense. Wretches that we are! we consider
Shadows as Realities, and Truth as a Phantom: That which is nothing is all to
us, and that which is all appears to us as nothing. But what do we see in all
Nature but Thee, O my God? Thou and only Thou appearest in every Thing. When I
consider Thee, O Lord, I am swallowed up, and lost in the Contemplation of
Thee. Every Thing besides Thee, even my own Existence, vanishes and disappears
in Contemplation of Thee: I am astonished and fall into nothing when I think of
Thee! The Man who does not see Thee has beheld nothing: He who does not taste
Thee has a Relish of nothing; his Being is vain, and his Life but a Dream. How
unhappy is that Soul who without the Sense of Thee has no God, no Hope, no
Comfort to support him? On the contrary, how happy is the Man that searches,
sighs and thirsts after Thee? But he only is fully happy, on whom thou liftest
up the Light of Thy Countenance, and who, being conformed to Thee, enjoys in
Thy loving Kindness the Completion of all his Desires. Thou therefore, O my
God, art the God of my Life, my Joy and my Hope: Thou will guide me with Thy
Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory: Thou will show me the Path of Life;
in thy Presence is Fullness of Joy, and at thy right Hand there are Pleasures
for evermore. Whom then have I in Heaven but Thee? And there is nothing in
Earth that I will desire in Comparison of thee. My Flesh and my Heart fails:
But Thou, O my GOD, art the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever.

The END.
A more accurate TABLE, for the Partition of the Sciences, than that, Page xix.
CYCLOPAEDIA, is the whole Circle of Learning, or the Knowledge of every Thing
that may contribute to our Happiness, both in Theory and Practice, and consists
of two Parts.

I. Philology, or the Study of Language or Signs, called also Humanity, and the
Belles Lettres, and is, 1. General, or common to all Kinds of Speaking, in 1.
Grammar, of pure Language. 2. Rhetoric, of figurative Speech.
2. Special, of particular Kinds of Speaking or Writing, as 1. Oratory, which
treats of Eloquence. 2. History, which relates real Facts. 3. Poetry, which
describes Things in an elevated Manner, whether real or imaginary; and to all
these belongs the Art of Criticism.

II. Philosophy, or the Study of Wisdom, being the Knowledge of Things,
together with Practice correspondent thereto, in both which consists our
Happiness. All Things or Beings are, 1. Bodies, or sensible Things, which
constitute the natural World, the Knowledge of which is, in a large Sense,
called Physics, or Natural Philosophy, and is, 1. General, of the common
Affections of Bodies, Number and Magnitude, in Mathematics, including
Arithmetic and Geometry. 2. Special, of all particular Things in the natural
World: Particularly, 1. Natural History, which gives an Account of Facts in all
Nature. 2. Mechanics, of the Laws of Motion. 3. Geology, of this terraqueous
Globe, and all Things in it, inanimate and animate. And, 4. Astronomy, of the
Heavens and Stars, and the whole Mundane System. Under each of which Heads
there are many practical Matters.

Or, 2. Spirits, or intelligent moral Beings, which constitute the intelligent
or moral World, the Knowledge of which, in a large Sense of the Words, may be
called Metaphysics, and Moral Philosophy, and is, First, Speculative, or what
relates to the Knowledge of intellectual Beings. 1. In General, the Noetics or
Logic, including both Ontology and Dialectic of the Conduct of the Mind in
Thinking or Reasoning. 2. In Special, Pneumatology, of the several Kinds of
created Intelligences. 3. Theology, of the DEITY, the Father and Lord of them
all.
Second, Practical, or what relates to Life and Conduct, in our several
Capacities, personal and social. 1. Ethics, of the Conduct of our Temper and
Behavior in general, in order to Happiness. 2. OEconomics, of the Conduct of
Families. And, 3. Politics, of the Government of States, Civil and
Ecclesiastical; to which relate Biography, and Civil and Ecclesiastical History.



A SHORT SYSTEM OF MORALS.

ETHICA: Or the First PRINCIPLES of Moral Philosophy; And especially that Part
which is called ETHICS. In a CHAIN of necessary CONSEQUENCES from certain FACTS.

Remember this, and show yourselves Men.

ISAIAH xlvi. 8. This is your reasonable Service.

St. PAUL, ROMANS xii. 1. Haec tractanti animo, and noctis and dies cogitanti,
existit illa a Deo Delphis praecepta cognitio, ut Ipsa se men's agnoscat,
conjunctamque cum Mente Divina se sentiat; ex quo. insatiabili Gaudio completur.

CIC. TUSC. DISP. Discite, O miseri! Et causas cognoscite rerum,
Quid sumus? Et quidnam victuri gignimur? Ordo
Quis datus? -- Quem Te Deus esse
Jussit? Et humana qua part locatus es in Re?
PERS. SAT. 3. The SECOND EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the New-Printing-Office,
near the Market. 1752.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHAT is here attempted, is a short System of Ethics or Morals (chiefly for the
Use of young Beginners) which have, of late, been called The Religion of
Nature; by which I would not be understood to mean a System of Truths and
Duties which mere natural Reason would ever, of itself, have discovered, in the
present Condition of Mankind, without the Assistance of Revelation or
Instruction; for it is but a very little of GOD and Religion, or of Truth and
Duty, that Man, in his present State, utterly uninstructed, is able to discover
by his mere natural Powers, as the Fact has abundantly demonstrated, where the
ancient Instructions were lost. Nor can it, indeed, be imagined, from the
Goodness of GOD, that when he first brought Man into Being, a Stranger to every
Thing about him, that he would leave him to grope out every Thing that was
necessary, or even expedient, in order to answer the End of his Being, his true
Happiness, without Instruction, even in Language and Nature, as well as
Religion and Morals; or, that when he had been surprised by a Temptation, and
fallen into Sin, that he would leave him to perish without giving him further
Instructions, to be handed down to his Posterity, how he and they should return
to their Duty, and regain His Favor. And that the Fact was accordingly, we are
assured from the most ancient Accounts of the first Condition of Mankind. What
I would therefore be understood to mean by Ethics, or the Religion of Nature,
is, That System of Truths and Duties, which, though they are not obvious to our
weak Reason, without Revelation or Instruction, yet when discovered, whether by
the one or the other, do evidently appear, upon due Consideration, to be
founded in the first Principles of Reason and Nature; in the Nature of GOD and
Man, and the various Relations that subsist between them; and from thence to be
capable even of strict Demonstration.

WE know there are a great Number of Truths in Mathematics and Natural
Philosophy, which not One in Ten Thousand of the Bulk of Mankind would ever
have thought of, if it had not been for such great Men as Euclid, Apollonius,
Archimedes and Sir Isaac Newton, etc. which yet may, safely, and with great
Advantage, be received upon, their Authority, and be accordingly practiced
upon, by those who have not Leisure or Ability to attend to the Reasons of
them: And now they have led the Way, it is not very difficult for those, who
are capable of thinking closely, to enter into the Demonstrations of them: The
Case is much the same as to moral Truths and Duties, with regard to the
Authority of Prophets and Lawgivers. It is the Part of the Prophet or
Lawgiver, as such, to discover Truths, and enjoin Laws, as Rules of Behavior
to the People, who are to receive them upon their Authority, as having but
little Leisure or Capacity to exercise their Reason about them, and therefore
act rationally in so doing; And it is the Part of the Philosopher, as such, as
far as it is practicable, to enter into the Reasons and Demonstrations, on
which those Truths and Duties are originally founded.

SUCH a short Delineation of Morals, may, perhaps, be of some Use, especially
in these Times, wherein there is a Sect arisen, or rather revived, that is
continually decrying Morality, as though it were only carnal Reason, and no Part
of Christianity, nor scarce consistent with it: This, it may be presumed, they
would scarcely do, if they duly considered what Morality truly is. And, on the
other Hand, as one Extreme is apt to beget another, it is to be feared there
may be another Sect arising, or gaining Ground, who from too just an
Indignation at those absurd Notions of Christianity, are in Danger, for want of
due Consideration, of not only setting light by that, but even of losing all
serious Sense of the true Extent and Obligations of Morality itself. It is
therefore the Design of the following Pages, to endeavor to give a just Notion
of it, and the Reasons on which it is founded, and to show its Extent and vast
Importance, and what Connection there is between it and Christianity.

I would only advertise this one Thing further; That no Speculation or
Demonstration whatsoever, is of any further real Use to us, than so far forth
as it directs or engages us in Life and Practice, on which our Happiness all
depends. And, as our Reason in these Things, is, at best, but very dark and
weak, it is of the greatest Importance to us, that we diligently study the holy
Oracles, in which we have the sublimest and most advantageous Instructions and
Incentives to Practice, with regard to these Matters, which are of the utmost
Importance to our true and everlasting Happiness. However, as we are reasonable
Creatures, and obliged, as such, to yield unto GOD, the Author of our Beings, a
reasonable Service, it may be of very good Use for us, as far as it will go,
with an implicit Submission to Him for the rest, to exercise our Reason upon
these great and important Subjects.

THE CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION.
OF the Nature of Ethics, or Moral Philosophy ( which is called the Religion of
Nature) in general, Page 1
PART I. The Speculative Part of MORAL PHILOSOPHY.
Chap. I. Of the Nature of Man, his Excellencies and Imperfections, 13 Chap.
II. Of the Author of our Nature, His Perfections and Operations, 22 Chap. III.
Of the End of our Being, and of our future State, 40
PART II. The Practical Part of MORAL PHILOSOPHY.
Chap. I. Of the Duties in general resulting from the foregoing Truths, 56
Chap. II. Of the Duties which we owe to ourselves, 63 Chap. III. Of the Duties
which we owe to GOD, 69 Chap. IV. Of the Duties which we owe to our Neighbors,
etc. 74 Chap. V. Of subordinate Duties or Means, etc. 81 Chap. VI. Of the
Connection between the Religion of Nature and Christianity, 90
N. B. There are several Principles of Reasoning supposed in the following
Tract, as having been known from the Noetica: However, as this may fall into
some Hands that have not that Tract, I hope I may be excused, if there be in
this some Repetitions.

ETHICS: OR Moral Philosophy.
THE INTRODUCTION. Of the Nature of Ethics, or Moral Philosophy, in general.
1. AS Natural Philosophy is the Knowledge of the natural World, or the World
of Bodies, and the general Laws of the corporeal Nature, together with all
those practical Matters thereon depending, that promote our comfortable
Subsistence and Well-being in this present State; so Moral Philosophy is the
Knowledge of the moral World; the World of Spirits, or intelligent free Agents,
and the general Laws of the moral Nature; together with all that practical
Conduct and Behavior thereon depending, that is necessary to promote our true
Happiness, both in our present and future State. And as the NOETICA imply all
those Instructions and Means, that relate to the Improvement and Conduct of our
Understandings in Pursuit of the Knowledge of Truth: So the ETHICA imply all
those Instructions and Means that relate to the Regulation and Conduct of our
Affections, Actions and Behavior, in Pursuit of the Enjoyment of our true and
chief Good.

2. THE World of intelligent free Agents, indeed, comprehends the whole System
of created Spirits, both Angels and Men, and whatever other Species there may
be, considered as being derived from, and under the Conduct and Government of
Almighty GOD, the Author, the Father and Lord of all. But what I mean chiefly
to insist upon, is, the Knowledge of ourselves, as we are Men, or a moral
System of rational Animals, in all the Relations wherein we stand, both with
regard to GOD, ourselves, and one another, with a Behavior suitable thereunto
(without considering us particularly either in our oeconomical or political
Capacities) which is the Foundation of all the rest, and is usually termed
Ethics.

3. ETHICS is the Art of living happily, by the right Knowledge of ourselves,
and the Practice of Virtue: Our Happiness being the End, and Knowledge and
Virtue, the Means to that End.

4. WE are said to live happily when we enjoy ourselves, and all that is really
good for us, in the whole of our Nature and Duration; i. e. considered, not
only as sensitive, but as reasonable, free, active, social and immortal
Creatures. For Happiness means that Pleasure which arises in us from our
Enjoyment of ourselves, and all that is really good for us, or suitable to our
Natures, and conducive to our Happiness in the whole.

5. THE Enjoyment of ourselves, and all that is truly good, depends on a good
Habit, or State of the Soul, united with, and delighting in its proper Objects,
which are Truth and Good; the first being the Object of the Understanding, and
the other of the Will and Affections: And this good Habit is the same Thing
with Virtue.

6. VIRTUE consists in that Integrity, Firmness and Stability of the Soul,
whereby we do honestly and steadfastly persist, in spite of all Temptations to
the contrary, in the Love and Practice of moral Good, and the Hatred and
Forbearance of moral Evil: Vice is the contrary.

7. MORAL Good consists in freely choosing and doing whatsoever Truth and right
Reason dictate as necessary to be chosen and done, in order to our true
Happiness: Moral Evil the contrary; for moral Good must mean, the Good of a
moral Agent; i. e. of rational, conscious, free, self-exerting and
self-determining Agent.

8. THERE are two Things necessary to be considered, with respect to the Nature
of moral Good: viz. The Criterion, or Test, by which, in the right Use of our
Reason, we determine what we ought to do, or forbear; and the Obligations we
thereupon find ourselves under to the Practice of it.

9. (I.) THE Criterion or Test, whereby we determine what we ought to do or
forbear, or what those Actions and Forbearances are, which are to be chosen and
done, is the natural Good of them, or that Pleasure and Happiness in the whole
of our Nature and Duration, which naturally attends them: For we find by
Experience, that some Things, Affections and Actions, are, in the very Nature
of them, attended with Pleasure or Happiness, either to the Mind, as perceptive
of Truth, or to the Will and Affections, as desirous of Good; and others with
Pain or Misery, in respect to the one or the other. In some we have a quick
Sense of the Decent and Amiable, which delight the Mind; and in others, of the
Deformed and Odious, which displease it: In some we perceive the Advantage, in
others the Mischief attending them, to ourselves or others; and accordingly,
the former are attended with inward Tranquillity, Acquiescence, and
Self-approbation, and the latter with Anxiety, Remorse, and Self-reproach. And
as Ease, Pleasure or Happiness, is what we call natural Good; so Uneasiness,
Pain or Misery, we call natural Evil.

10. BUT in order to make a right Judgment of natural Good and Evil, as being
the Test of moral, we must (as I said) take into the Account, the whole of our
Nature and Duration, as being sensitive and rational, social and immortal
Creatures. It must therefore be the Good and Happiness of the whole human
Nature, and the whole moral System, in Time, and to all Eternity. Hence the
Good of the animal Body, or the Pleasure of Sense, is but imaginary, and
cease to be Good, and has even the Nature of Evil, so far forth as it is
inconsistent with the Good and Happiness of the Soul: Which is also the Case of
private Good, so far forth as it is inconsistent with the Good of the Public;
and temporal Good, so far forth as it is inconsistent with that which is
eternal.

11. AND this our Good and Happiness in the whole, does necessarily coincide
with, and even result from, the Truth and Nature of Things, or Things,
Affections and Actions, considered as being what they really are; Vide Clarke,
and Wollaston.
for thus to consider them, is the same Thing with considering them as being
fit, and tending, in the Nature of them, to render our rational, social and
immortal Nature, in the whole ultimately happy: And such Affections and
Actions, correspondent to such Natures and Characters, must be necessarily and
eternally fit; it being impossible to conceive of such Natures and Relations,
but such moral Affections and Actions will result as fit and right, and the
contrary, as unfit and wrong. So that the general Good of the whole, the Nature
and Fitness of Things, and the Truth of Things, or Things considered as being
what they are, are, as I apprehend, really coincident, and do, in Effect, come
to the same Thing, in settling the Criterion of Right and Wrong, or the Test
whereby we must determine what we are to choose or avoid, and to do or forbear.

12. MORAL Good must therefore consist in freely choosing and acting conformable
to the Truth and Nature of Things; or to Things, Affections and Actions,
considered as being what they really are, i. e. as tending, or not tending to
our true Happiness, as being what we really are: Or (which is the same Thing)
in choosing and acting according to the Fitness of Things, or to Things,
Affections and Actions, considered as fit or subservient, in their own Nature,
to promote our best Good and Happiness in the whole. And this again is the same
Thing with acting according to right Reason (which has been sometimes called
the Criterion) it being by the right Use of our Reason that we apprehend.
Things as being what they really are, and discover which those Things,
Affections and Actions are, that do, in the Nature of them, tend to our true
Happiness in the whole; and thereby judge what we must do and avoid, and form
Rules by which we must act in all our Conduct and Behavior, so as to be truly
happy.

13. (II.) THE Obligation we are under, as moral Agents, to practice
accordingly, implies some Law, binding us, under certain Penalties, to such
Actions as are morally Good, and to forbear the contrary; and this constitutes
the Notions of Duty and Sin, and is twofold, Natural and Internal, or External
and Moral.

14. (I.) THE natural and internal Obligation to the Practice of moral Virtue
arises from the Law of our Nature, or that Law which GOD has established
within our own Breasts, and in the Frame of our Nature. And this is the Law of
Reason and Conscience, together with the Law of Self-love, and
Self-preservation, and the Law of Benevolence.

15. (1.) THE Law of Reason and Conscience is, I think, the same Thing which
some have called the moral Sense, Vide Shaftsbury, Hutch^^on, and Preceptor* or
Turnbull.
being a kind of quick and almost intuitive Sense of Right and Wrong, deriving,
as I conceive, from the perpetual Presence and Irradiation of the Deity in our
Minds, and dictating with a strong and commanding Force what is reasonable,
fair and decent, and so fit and right to be done, and giving us Applause and
Satisfaction when we conform to it, and blaming and reproaching us, and filling
us with Uneasiness and Remorse, when we act contrary to its Dictates: It being
the Law of our Nature, that we should always affect and act conformable to the
inward Sense of our own Minds and Consciences. And those consequent pleasing or
uneasy Sentiments, considering it as a Law, are its Sanctions.

16. (2.) THE Law of Self-love and Self-preservation, which makes us solicitous
for the Continuance of our Existence, and the Enjoyment of ourselves, and
arises from the Consciousness of our Existence, and of Pleasure or Pain,
naturally attending, certain Conditions in which we are, or maybe, or the
contrary; which therefore are its Sanctions. For it is manifest that we are, by
the Author of our Nature, laid under a Necessity of valuing ourselves and our
own Interest, and of seeking and pursuing our own Preservation and Well-being
or Happiness, and whatever we find tends to it, or is connected with it; and
consequently that of the Society to which we belong, with which we find our own
is, in the Nature of Things, necessarily connected.

17. FROM whence arises (thirdly) the Law of Benevolence, or that Disposition
we find also implanted in us toward the Good of others, arising from
Reflection, whereby we are led to put ourselves in each other's Stead, and to
have a secret Pleasure or Uneasiness in the good or ill Condition of others,
from a Consciousness of our own, in the like Situation; which Sentiments
therefore are its Sanctions. This Principle makes us desirous of each other's
Esteem and Good Will, and puts us upon doing what we know may be pleasing and
advantageous to each other, and to the whole; so that self and social Good
cannot be considered in themselves, as at all interfering, but as being
entirely coincident and subservient to each other.

18. BUT while we rest here, and act upon no other Views or Motives than these
Laws of our Nature suggest, without considering them as being the Laws or the
GOD (or the Author) of Nature; though what we do, may be said, according to the
common Acceptance, to be merely morally good or evil, and virtuous or vicious;
yet there will be nothing in it (however firm and stable our Conduct be) that
can properly be called Religion, which must ever enter into the just and
complete Notion of Morality; for this must be understood to comprehend every
Thing that can either direct or influence our moral Behavior, and consequently
must consider us in all the Relations wherein we stand, not only to ourselves
and one another, but, above all, to the great Author of our Being, on whom we
do entirely depend, and to whom we are therefore, in all Reason, accountable.

19. (II.) The external and moral Obligation we are under to those Actions and
Forbearances abovementioned, arises from moral Government, or the
Consideration that they are the Will and Law of a Superior who aims at our
Happiness in enjoying them, to whom we are therefore accountable for our
Behavior, and by whom we shall be rewarded or punished; i. e. made to feel
Pleasure or Pain, according as we behave well or ill (which are its Sanctions:)
So that this Obligation takes its Force from the former, and this is twofold,
political and religious.

20. (1.) THE political Obligation to the Practice of these moral Actions and
Forbearances, is the Consideration that they are the public Will, or the Will
and Law of the Society or Government we live under, and to which we are
accountable (whether indeed it be a Family or a State) enforced by the
Sanctions of temporal Rewards and Punishments. In this View moral Laws become
political Laws, and moral Good, political Good, to which many others might be
added, for promoting of the public Weal.

21. BUT here again, though GOD is the Founder of Government, both oeconomical
and political, yet while we rest on this Foot, and act merely under these
political Views, and with a Regard only to our Interest in this World, though we
may be said to be mere moral Men (as that Expression is commonly used) or good
Citizens, and good Common-wealthsmen, we cannot be said to be religious, no,
not even in those Actions that relate to GOD himself. But,

22. (2.) THE religious Obligation we are under to those Actions and
Forbearances that are necessary to our Happiness in the whole, is the
Consideration that they are the Will and Law of GOD, our Creator, Preserver,
and supreme moral Governor, the great Author, Head and Lord of the whole social
System, enforced by the Sanctions of eternal Rewards and Punishments, to whom
we are justly accountable for all our Behavior, and by whom we must expect to
be treated well or ill, according as that shall be found to be good or bad.

23. FOR it will appear hereafter, that they must be the Will and Law of GOD
concerning us, because He being perfectly happy, and Self-sufficient to his own
Happiness, cannot aim at any Advantage to himself, in giving us Being, or in
any of his Dispensations toward us; and consequently, that his great End must
be our Happiness; and that this he will consider as his Interest, his Delight
and Glory, that his rational Creatures be in the whole, a happy System, by
doing what is fit and right upon all Occasions. It being therefore his Aim that
we be happy, whatsoever does, in the Nature of it, and according to the
Constitution which he has made, tend to his Honor and our true Happiness, as
being therefore fit and right, must be his Will and Law concerning us, and
consequently our Duty, and what is contrary thereto, must be Sin.

24. THAT, therefore, which constitutes the Nature of Religion, and denominates
our Actions and Behavior religious, and makes Religion and Morality, in the
complete Notion of it, coincident, is, That we forbear whatsoever tends to our
Misery, and do every Thing that tends to our Happiness in the whole, in
Obedience to the Will of GOD, and from a Sense of Duty to Him, and in View of
his All-seeing Eye, and the Account we are to give of ourselves to Him.

25. SO that upon the whole it appears, That Morality, in the just Extent of
it, is the same Thing with the Religion of Nature, or that Religion which is
founded in the Nature of Things; and that it may be defined, the Pursuit of our
true Happiness by Thinking, Affecting and Acting, according to the Laws of
Truth and right Reason, under a Sense of the Duty that we owe to Almighty GOD,
and the Account we must expect to give of ourselves to Him. Vide Crousaz's Art
of Thinking, Page 60. Vol. 1.
Since therefore Truth and Duty are thus necessarily connected, it must be our
Business in this Essay, to search out all the Truths that relate both to
ourselves, to GOD, and our Fellow Creatures, and thence to deduce the several
Duties that do necessarily result from them.

26. NOW these may be all reduced to that grand ancient Principle of true
Wisdom, Know thyself; which must imply, not merely the Knowledge of ourselves,
singly considered, but also in all the Relations wherein we stand; for this is
the Knowledge of ourselves in the whole: And because we are active as well as
intelligent Creatures, and our Happiness depends on Action as well as Thinking,
it must therefore be understood to mean a practical Knowledge. I shall
accordingly explain this Enquiry under these six following Heads, which, in
order the better to bring them down into Life and Action, I choose to express
them generally in the first Person, or in the Manner of a Conversation with
ourselves; which Method may, perhaps, be most useful, in order to teach young
People how to reason with themselves upon these great and important Subjects to
the best Advantage.

27. LET therefore every one, in order to the right Knowledge of himself, and
his Duty and Happiness, and that he may the more effectually be engaged in
Practice, thus seriously reflect and enquire concerning himself. I. What am I?
II. How come I to be what I am? III. For what End was I made and have my Being?
IV. What ought I immediately to do, and be, in order to answer the End of my
Being? V. Whether I am what I ought to be? -- If not, VI. What ought I to do,
as a Means, in order to be and do what I ought, and in order finally to answer
the End of my Being? The three first of these Enquiries will discover the
Truths; and the three last, the Duties, that we are concerned to know and do in
order to our true Happiness: And the Truths are the speculative, and the Duties
are the practical Part of Moral Philosophy.

PART I. The Speculative PART of MORAL PHILOSOPHY.
CHAP I. Of the Nature of Man, his Excellencies and Imperfections.
1. (I.) IT is first necessary that we consider the Truths contained in the
Speculative Part of this Science, relating to GOD and ourselves: And as we take
our Rise to the Knowledge of GOD and his Conduct toward us, from the Knowledge
of ourselves, and our Intercourse one with another; we must therefore begin
with this, and in order hereunto, let every one seriously ask himself this
Question; I. What am I? A Question that I doubt few seriously think of, or much
concern themselves about, and so live and die great Strangers to themselves,
however near and dear that Self of ours is to us! And that he may duly answer
this Enquiry, let him thus consider and reason with himself.

2. AS I am certain from the Perceptions and Operations of my own Mind, that I
am, or have a Being; so I know that I am not a Stock, a Stone, or a Tree; for
they have manifestly no Sense or Activity: Whereas I am conscious that I can
see, hear, taste, smell and feel, and enjoy Pleasure, and suffer Pain, and can
spontaneously exert myself, and act and move from Place to Place, in Pursuance
of the one, which I love and delight in, and for avoiding of the other, which I
hate and dread. All which are much nobler Powers and Faculties than those
inanimate Beings are furnished with.

3. NOR yet am I a Beast, a Horse, a Dog, or an Ox, etc. for though they appear
to see, hear, etc. and to feel Pleasure and Pain as I do, and can move
themselves spontaneously from Place to Place; yet they have but low, grovelling
Sensations, Exertions and Enjoyments. They appear to have no Notion of any
Thing but the Objects of Sense, can conceive nothing of Duty and Sin, and seem
capable of no Enjoyment of any Thing but Meat and Drink, and the Means of
continuing their Species, and defending themselves; and these only are the
Things to which their Exertions and Activity tend.

4. WITH Regard to these, they have, indeed, a wonderful Sagacity, and what
looks like Reasoning, Design and Contrivance, and a social Tendency; but these
do not seem to be any Thing of their own, because they have them originally,
and do not acquire them by Teaching, Trial and Industry. This Sagacity
therefore seems to be what we call an Instinct; by which Word, nothing else can
be meant, but that they are rather passively acted and conducted by some other
Being; some governing Mind on whom they depend, according to certain Laws of
Nature which He has established, than that they act from any Principle of
Deliberation and Design within themselves.

5. THESE Sensations, Appetites and Exertions, indeed, I find I have in common
with them; but then I am conscious of vastly nobler Powers and Faculties than
these. For I find I can reflect and look into my own Mind, and consider myself
and my own Powers and Actions, and their Objects: I can attend to the Light of
the pure Intellect, and compare one Thing with another, and observe their
several Relations, and abstract and give general Names. I can judge of True and
False, and of Right and Wrong, and deliberate and weigh Things, and reason and
infer one Thing from another, and reduce them into Method and Order, according
to their various Connections and Dependences. I can excite Imaginations and
Conceptions of Things past or absent, and recollect them in my Mind at
Pleasure, and reject or keep them under my Consideration as I please, at least
in a good Measure, and am at Liberty to suspend judging till I have carefully
examined them, and to act, or not to act, in Consequence of my Deliberations,
as I think fit. In the Impressions of Sense indeed, and the Perceptions of
Evidence, I am passive, but in all these I am evidently active, and can choose
or refuse, will or nill, act or forbear, from a Principle of Self-exertion;
which are all truly great and noble Powers.

6. I CAN, moreover, in Consequence of these Abilities, contrive and project
Ends and Means, and Reasons of acting, and Rules to act by, and foresee much of
the Events of my Conduct. I can give Laws, and propose Motives to myself or
others, and exact an Account of myself or them, and give an Account to myself
or others, whether I or they do, or do not act according to those Laws. And I
find, that as I love or hate Things according as they are agreeable or
disagreeable to me; so I have Hopes or Fears, Joys or Griefs, according as I
feel, or have in View, Pleasures or Pains, and am conscious of having done well
or ill, and that my own Conscience will not fail to justify and applaud, or
accuse and condemn me accordingly; and as I feel great Joy and Satisfaction in
having done what I apprehend to be right, so I feel no less Shame, Horror, and
Remorse, when I have done what is wrong.

7. FROM hence I not only know that I have a Being, but also that when I am in
tolerable Circumstances, and do well, I have a great Enjoyment of that Being;
that it is very dear to me, and that I am, above all Things, concerned to
preserve and continue it, and to make it as comfortable and happy as ever I
can; and am therefore desirous to acquire and enjoy all the Means and
Accommodations, the Goods of the Mind, Body or Fortune, that are necessary and
convenient for that Purpose; which I have also a great Value for, in Proportion
to their Subserviency to that End, and am very fearful of being deprived, and
very apt to be displeased or feel Resentment at any One that would deprive me
of them, and grateful to any One that does any Thing toward furnishing me with
them, or securing them to me. And all these Desires and Affections of the
private Kind, are evidently planted in our Nature to be subservient to our
personal Subsistence and Well-being.

8. AND as I can look back and remember what I have been knowing to in my Time;
so I can imagine a Time when I was not, and conceive a Notion of a great Number
of Ages and Transactions before me, and of an endless Succession of Ages and
Transactions to come. And I cannot only conceive that I may, but cannot refrain
from being earnestly desirous, in some Condition or other, to bear a Part in
them, and to enjoy myself happily through all imaginable Periods of Duration:
So that though I know there must have been a Time when I began to be, yet I am
solicitous that I may never cease to be, and to enjoy myself; and cannot avoid
having Hopes of this, even after Death, since this Life turns to but little
Account. All these are so many Facts, and I am conscious and intuitively
certain of them, if I look carefully within myself. And such are the Properties
of my Soul or Spirit, which is properly myself, my reasonable and active Nature.

9. BUT besides these Things which relate to my Soul (myself, or spiritual
Nature) I find that I have a wonderfully contrived, and admirably useful
Engine, my Body, which I constantly carry about me, and animate throughout
(being tied and confined to it by the present Laws of my Nature) consisting of
a vast Number and Variety of Parts and Organs, exquisitely framed and fitted to
each other, and to all the Functions, Powers and Operations of my Soul; my Eyes
to see, my Ears to hear, my Tongue to speak, my Hands to handle, and my Feet to
walk, etc. not to mention a thousand Instances of the most wise Design and
Contrivance, in all the inward Parts throughout, for all the Purposes of the
Animal Economy, which are not immediately subject to my own Will and
Activity.) Upon the Account of which, as well as the abovementioned Powers of
my Soul, I must confess that, however I came to be, I am indeed fearfully and
wonderfully made.

10. I also find, upon looking about me, an endless Variety of sensible
Objects; a glorious Heaven above me, and a spacious Earth beneath me, furnished
with a surprising Variety of Inhabitants, all connected (together with my own
Body, one of the most curious Machines of them all) in a most wonderful Manner
one with another. So that it is manifest from their Dependence and
Subserviency, that they are contrived and designed to constitute, as in Fact
they do, one harmonious, beautiful and useful System; one complete and entire
Whole; in which I find every Thing fitted, in the best Manner, to my own
Conveniences and Pleasures, both for the comfortable Subsistence of my Body,
and the Entertainment and Delight of my Soul; but so, that it was, at the same
time, the manifest Design of them to excite, engage, direct and employ my
Activity, without which I find I cannot comfortably enjoy either myself or them.

11. I CAN moreover carry my Thoughts and Imaginations throughout the vast
Spaces of Heaven and Earth, and have a mighty Curiosity to pry and search out
the Secrets and Laws of Nature, and discover and conceive, as much as I can, of
the great Author of it, and what Sort of Behavior and Conduct is suitable to
my Nature, and the Relation I stand in to Him and my Fellow Creatures, as
tending to make me and them happy, and as such, must be amiable, and cannot
fail of approving itself, not only to my own Reason and Conscience, but also to
Him and all reasonable Beings, whose Esteem and good Will I am, from a Tendency
founded in Nature itself, very solicitous to obtain. ( Introd. 15. 16. 17.)

12. Of which, as I know there are a great Number of my own Kind, so I cannot
reasonably doubt but there are others of various Orders above me, which may
probably have other and nobler Senses than those five narrow Inlets that I am
acquainted with, and confined to, and far greater and nobler Abilities, both of
Understanding and Activity, than I am furnished with. Such I can easily
conceive to be possible; and, from the various Gradations in Perfection of
Being, in the several Tribes below me, it is very probable there may be the
like Gradations in several Tribes of Beings above me.

13. As to those of my own Species (from which by Analogy I may form some
Notion of them) I find we were evidently made for Society, being furnished with
the Power of Speech as well as Reason, whereby we are capable of entering into
the Understanding of each other's Minds and Sentiments, and of holding mutual
Intercourse and Conversation one with another, and jointly conspiring to
promote our common Well-being; to which we are naturally led by a Principle of
Benevolence, and social Dispositions and Affections, sounded in the Frame and
Condition of our Nature, which not only places us in the various Relations of
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, and other Relatives; but also lays us
under a Necessity of mutual Dependence one upon another, which obliges us to
enter into Compacts for our Defense and Safety, and for maintaining both
private Right and public Order, and promoting the common Good of our Species,
in the several Communities to which we belong. And as I have a quick Sense of
what is right in others toward me as being what I am, and of my own Ease and
Comfort, so I cannot divest myself of a Sense of what must, for the same
Reason, be right in me toward others, and a Sense of Tenderness and Compassion
for those that are in Misery, whereby I am strongly prompted to relieve them:
And these Tendencies and Affections of the social Kind, are evidently planted
in us for promoting our social Happiness. And finally; as I cannot long enjoy
myself in a State of Solitude, and have a strong Passion for Society; so I
find, in Fact, that my true Interest and Enjoyment of myself, depends on the
general Interest and good Order of the Community, and this, in Addition to
those social Dispositions, strongly prompts me to the Love of my Country, and
to be forward and active in whatever may promote the public Weal. Such are my
Abilities and Advantages, and such my Condition, Circumstances and Tendencies,
and those of the Kind to which I stand related.

14. But then, if I consider myself a little further, I find, after all, that
at best I am attended with very great Limitations and Imperfections. I cannot
subsist myself a Moment in Ease or Existence, nor add one Power or Faculty to
those I have: And there are certain Bounds (small compared with what I can
easily imagine) beyond which I cannot at all extend or exert them. My Sight and
Hearing are very scanty; my Understanding is but small; my Conceptions are very
feeble; my Memory is very brittle; my Attention is very weak; my Knowledge is
very confused; my Will is very irresolute; my Power is very infirm, and my
Activity can extend but to a very small Compass.

15. BUT, which is worse, I find (which is the general Complaint of every one
more or less) that we are troubled with some unhappy Tendency or other, which
seems to be founded in the Frame of our Nature; some idle, sensual Disposition;
some importunate Appetite, or some untoward Passion, which it is very difficult
to keep within reasonable Bounds, and in Indulgence to which, it is much if we
have not contracted some ill Habit or other, or, at least, been guilty of many
grievous Miscarriages, for which our Reason and Consciences have sadly
reproached us, and given us very great Uneasiness, and sometimes terrible
Apprehensions and Forebodings of Vengeance to come, unless we repent and
reform. And Multitudes, I observe, are miserable Slaves to these perverse
Dispositions and Habits: Hence the sad Complaints of the Prevalence of Lust,
Passion, Prejudice, Pride, Deceit, Oppression, etc. much obtaining in the
World, corrupting and byassing the Minds, perverting the Judgments and
Resolutions of Mankind, and leading them into many Errors and Vices, to the
great Mischief and Confusion of Society, as well as the Ruin of particular
Persons.

16. AT the same time we find, by sad Experience, that we are daily liable to
many Infirmities and Diseases, Pains and Miseries, Losses and Disappointments,
and perpetual Uncertainty, with respect to Life and Health, and every Thing
about us, and must expect, in a little Time to quit our present State of Being,
and resign to the common Fate of a Dissolution, which is called Death, that
King of Terrors, who is incessantly making his Approaches toward us in one
Shape or other. Such a strange Mixture is human Nature! Such a various Creature
is Man! Such his noble Abilities and Excellencies on the one Hand, and such his
Imperfections and Wretchedness on the other.

CHAP II. Of the Author of our Nature, Quid prius dicam solitis parentis,
Laudibus, qui res hominum ac Deorum,
Qui mare and terras, variisque mundum,
Temperat h^ris?
HOR.
His Perfections and Operations.
1. (II.) I PROCEED now to the next Enquiry. Let every One then, in the second
Place, seriously ask himself this Question, How came I to be, and to be such an
imperfect and sinful Being as I am? For we cannot have a right Knowledge of
ourselves, without considering, not only what we are in ourselves, but also how
we stand variously related, and particularly, without looking to the Cause of
our present Being and Limitations ( Introd. 26.) and in order to answer this
Question, let us consider and reason with ourselves in the following Manner.

2. I KNOW that I have a Being, because I perceive and act, and that I must
have had a Beginning of Existence, because there must have been a Time when I
did not perceive or act, and I can have no Notion of the Existence of an
intelligent active Being, without conscious Perception and Activity. And if I
began to be, I must have been made. It is certain I could not come into Being
by mere Chance, for that is nothing but an empty Name, which we vulgarly use
only as a Cover to our Ignorance or Inadvertence. I also know I did not make
myself, for that is impossible, and would imply, to be, and not to be, at the
same Time; nor have I Power to continue myself in Being so much as one Moment;
nor can I a Moment secure my Health, or any of my Enjoyments (Part I. Chap. I.
14.) so that I find I am wholly a limited and dependent Being.

3. IT is therefore certain, that I must have had a Cause; for an Effect, or
Thing made, without a Cause, is a Contradiction, and can have no Meaning: There
must then be some other Being on whom I depend. And since there cannot be an
Effect without a Cause, it is evident that the Cause of my Being must have
Powers capable of producing such an Effect; otherwise there would still be an
Effect without a Cause, than which nothing can be more absurd. It is evident
that my Parents could not be the adequate Causes; they could, at most, be only
the Occasions or Instruments of my Being; for it never was in their Power that
I should be at all, or being, that I should be such as I am; nor could they
continue me a Moment in Being, Health or Ease. It is therefore plain that I
must look higher for an adequate Cause, both of my Existence and Subsistence.

4. IT is moreover manifest, that no Cause can give what it has not, or, which
is the same Thing, produce an Effect more noble, or of greater Powers or
Perfections than itself; for then again, there would be an Effect without a
Cause, or Something produced by Nothing, which is impossible. Hence, therefore,
it is plain, that what is destitute of Perception, Consciousness and
Intelligence, cannot produce a perceptive, conscious, intelligent Being: What
is void of any Principle of Deliberation, Liberty and Activity, cannot produce
a considerate, free, active Being, etc. It is consequently evident, that the
Being who brought me into Being, must himself be possessed of Powers or
Perfections analogous to those I experience in myself.

5. SINCE, therefore, I know I have some considerable Degrees of Understanding,
Knowledge, Will, Force and Activity, with Freedom of Deliberation, Choice and
Design, and the Powers of Self-exertion, and Self-determination, together with
some Sense of Benevolence, and of Right and Wrong, or Equity and Iniquity, and
some Disposition to do the one, and avoid the other (Chap. I. 5, 6.) It is from
hence evident, that the Almighty Being, who made me, and whom I call GOD, being
the genuine and adequate Cause, from whom I derived, and on whom I depend, must
Himself have Understanding, Knowledge, Will, Force, and Activity; must have
Liberty, Choice, Deliberation, Self-exertion, and Self-determination; and must
be a Being of Equity, Justice and Goodness, and all other moral Perfections,
which are implied in these, and which are comprehended under the Terms Holiness
and Rectitude. And as I am thus truly made by Him, and in some Measure to
resemble Him, He must therefore be strictly and properly my Parent, or the
Father of my Spirit.

6. NOW what I thus argue from myself to the Cause of my Existence, must be
equally true of every other intelligent active Being, that knows he must have
had a Beginning of Existence, and is limited and dependent, however so perfect,
as well as of me. From whence it is evident, that this universal Cause must be
possessed of the highest Perfections and Powers that are conceivable, or do at
all obtain, and that he must hold them entirely independent of any other Being
whatsoever: And, being independent of any other Being, it is evident, that He
cannot be under the Power of any other Being to limit or control Him, and that
all other Beings must be entirely dependent upon Him, and consequently must
have derived from his Will and Power, and therefore be limited to various
Degrees of Being and Perfection, as pleases Him. So that He must hold, possess
and enjoy all possible Perfection in and of Himself, without any possible
Limitation or Imperfection, and must be the universal Father of Spirits, and
was accordingly by the wisest of the Ancients, styled, The Father of the
Universe. Vide Clarke's and Burnet's Boyle's Lectures.
(...), etc. Arat. in St. Paul, Acts xvii. 28.

7. SINCE, therefore, he thus exists, independent of all other Beings, and
they, by the Necessity of their Nature, derive from Him, and depend on Him, it
is plain that he must exist originally by the absolute Necessity of his Nature
without any Cause, and consequently be All in All, All that truly is, All
Perfection and Fullness of Being, or Being and Perfection, by way of Eminency,
and so He alone must be the necessarily existent Being, or that Being, to whom
it is peculiar that Existence is necessarily implied in his very Essence. Hence
He was, by the wisest of the Ancients, called the TO ON, and the (...), or the
Being who truly exists; and hence the Name JEHOVAH, by which He thought fit,
from the Beginning, to be called, in Contradistinction to all precarious and
dependent Beings, signifies, The Essence existing, or the Being whose Essence
implies Existence, and whose Existence is ever present, without any Limitation
to Time or Place. Vide Hutchinson's Moses Sine Principio.


8. NOR can there be more than One such Being, because it is thus evident that
He alone can necessarily exist, and that all possible Perfections are united in
Him, or One in Him; it being a Contradiction, that two or more Beings should
each have all possible Perfection. And since He must thus have such an absolute
Fullness of Being, He is on that Account said to be Truth and Good, by way of
Eminency: He is Truth, as in Him there is all Reality, and Good, as in Him
there is all Excellency, even every Thing that can contribute to render both
Himself and all His Creatures entirely happy; and He is called Truth, as He is
intelligible; and Good, as He is eligible. He must therefore be the Source of
all Happiness, both with regard to the Intellect, Will, Affections and Activity.

9. IN this Method of Reasoning it is evident, that the great Cause or Author
of my Being and Powers, and those of all other Spirits, or intelligent active
Beings, must necessarily be Infinite, Eternal and Unchangeable. For if He be
out of the Power of every other Being to limit or control Him, his Knowledge,
Power and Activity, cannot be confined to any particular Object, in any Point
of Space or Duration, since all Being, Time and Place, depend on Him, nor can
He be liable to any Change from any Power whatsoever, since all Powers derive
from Him. So that, as there never was a Time when He could have begun to be, so
it is impossible he should ever cease to be, or be altered from what he is. And
for the same Reason that he cannot but be present here or there, or to every
particular Person or Thing, in any assignable Place or Point of Space, he
cannot but be every where else, or Omnipresent, since all Existence perpetually
depends on Him. And hence it is plain, that all Things past, present, or to
come, in all Parts of the Universe, must at once be present to Him, as being
perfectly known to Him, and subject to Him, as being entirely dependent on his
Almighty Will and Power.

10. NOR can I doubt of the Existence of such a necessary and eternal Being,
from the Existence of necessary and eternal Truth. There are a great Number of
evident Truths that come within our Reach, which I find exist necessarily and
eternally independent of my Mind, or any other created Mind whatsoever, by the
Light and Evidence of many of which (to which I find my Mind is passive) I am
enabled to judge of True and False, and of Right and Wrong, in every particular
Case: Such as these, Action implies Existence; an Effect must suppose a Cause;
the Whole is bigger than either of its Parts; Things equal to another are equal
among themselves; what is Right or Wrong in another toward me, must be equally
Right or Wrong in me toward him, etc. Now, these and the like Truths imply the
necessary Habitudes of certain Essences that do not depend on any particular
Existences in Nature, and must therefore have an antecedent mental or
intellectual Existence; and there can be no Conception of Truth without a Mind
perceiving it, or in which it exists. Since, therefore, there are eternal
Truths necessarily existing, independent of any created Mind, or any Thing
existing in Nature, it is evident there must be an eternal, necessarily
existing, independent Mind, in which they originally exist, as one eternal
Light of Truth, and by whom they are exhibited to all other Minds in various
Measures, according to their several Capacities and Application, enabling them
to judge of every particular Thing that comes within their Notice. Vide
Norris's Ideal World and Miscellanies, and Cambray's Demonstration.
He is therefore the great Parent Mind, from whom derives all Light and
Knowledge to every created Intelligence, being, as it were, the intellectual
Sun enlightening our Minds, as the sensible Sun, by his incessant Activity,
enlighteneth our Eyes.

11. WHAT I have thus argued from my own Existence, Powers and Faculties, and
those of every other intelligent and active Creature, and from the Existence of
eternal Truth, may be also demonstrated from the Existence of every sensible
Thing that I see, hear and feel, from without me. I know that I am not the
Cause of any of those Impressions that are made upon my Senses; Light, Colors,
Sounds, tangible Qualities, etc. I am sure they do not depend upon my Will and
Activity; for I am entirely passive in the Reception of them. Nor can they be
without a Cause, nor yet from any senseless, inert or unactive Cause, for that
is a Contradiction in Terms. They must therefore be the constant Effects of an
intelligent Cause, intimately present with me, and incessantly active upon me,
who continually produces all these Sensations in my Mind, correspondent to the
Archetypes in his all-comprehending Intellect, according to certain stable
Laws, or fixed Rules, which He has established to Himself, and which are
commonly called the Laws of Nature. When therefore I consider the whole System
of these sensible, as well as the intelligible, Objects that surround me, and
under the Impression of which I continually live, I must conclude, that I live,
and move, and have my Being, in Him, who is the perpetual and Almighty Author
of them. Vide Bishop Berkeley's Dialogues, Pages 78, 79, etc.


12. I FIND these sensible Objects are all firmly connected together, Things
visible with Things tangible, and all the various Combinations of them one with
another, so as to constitute one most beautiful and useful Whole, which we call
the natural World; in all which I do manifestly discern the most wise Design,
and the most exquisite Contrivance and Adjustment of Ends and Means (Chap. I.
10.) from whence I gather, that they must be the Effects of a most wise and
designing Cause. And I do evidently experience that they are all contrived in
the best Manner to render them subservient to all the Purposes of my
Subsistence and Well-being, and that of the whole rational and moral System,
which we call the Moral World; from whence I must conclude the glorious Author
of them to be, not only an infinitely wise and powerful, but moreover an
infinitely kind and benevolent Being.

13. I DO not, indeed, find, upon a close Examination, that there is any
necessary Connection between them; for Instance, between the Objects of Sight
and Feeling; the one appears to have only the Nature of a Sign with Regard to
the other, being all alike, mere passive Perceptions in our Minds, between
which there can be no Relation of Causality: So that the Connection between
them, though stable, is entirely arbitrary; as is that between the Sound, Man,
and the Thing signified by it: From whence I gather, that I must unavoidably
consider the one with regard to the other, to have the Nature of a wonderful
Language, Vide Minute Philosopher, Dial. 4.
whereby the great Author of Nature appears to be continually present with me,
discovering his Mind and Will to me (and that in a stable and invariable
Manner, which I find I can always depend upon) and, as it were, speaking to me,
and directing me how to act, and conduct myself in all the Affairs of Life;
whereby he manifestly discovers a constant watchful Providence over me in all
my Ways. From whence it is evident, not only that He is, but that He must be,
both a Being of infinite Goodness, Wisdom and Power, and of the most stable
Truth, and invariable Integrity.

14. I DO moreover see and feel a vast Variety of Motions, on the Laws of
which, most wisely contrived, depends the whole Order, Harmony and Usefulness
of the natural World. But it is certain that nothing corporeal can move itself,
being, as such, merely passive and inert; and yet it is no less evident, that
Motion implies Force and Activity in the Mover; Men's agitat molem. VIRG.
and since nothing can act where it is not, it manifestly follows, that in all
the wisely contrived Motions of Nature, as well as all other Objects of Sense,
both in the Heavens above, and in the Earth below, we constantly see and feel
the universal Presence of that most wisely designing, and most powerfully
active, all-comprehending Mind, who both begins and continues Motion, and is
therefore the Almighty Author and Preserver of all Things.

15. I SAY, we both see and feel his universal Presence; for it is manifest,
that He may as truly be said to be an Object of Sense as any human Person; for,
What do I see when I behold a King? Not the Spirit or Soul, which is properly
the Person, and which, in the Nature of it, cannot be an Object of Sense; I see
only the Shape and Color of a Man, clothed with gorgeous Robes. In like
Manner, I cannot see GOD, as He is a Spirit, and, as such, is invisible; but I
as truly see Him, as I see a Man like myself; nay, indeed, more manifestly than
I can behold any mortal Man; for I see Him in every visible Shape and Form in
all Nature; I behold Him in all the infinitely various Modifications of Light
and Colors throughout the whole Creation; in ail which, He is every where
present, being, as it were, clothed with Light, as with a Garment; which
Expression is rightly observed to be of like Import with that Saying of the
ancient Eastern Sages, That GOD has Light for his Body, and Truth for his
Soul. Vide Minute Philosopher, Dial. 4. 5, and 15.
In the same Manner, I may truly say, I feel Him in the Heat and Wind, and in
every tangible Figure and Motion, etc. I hear Him in every Sound, and taste Him
in every Morsel, etc. In a Word, I must again say, it is He who is All in All.

16. FURTHERMORE (not to descend to that infinite World of minute Creatures,
which the Microscope opens to our View, and which gives us surprising
Apprehensions of the DEITY) as I observe all these sensible Objects about me,
are connected together, in a wonderful Manner, into one most beautiful and
useful System, and made subservient to my Subsistence and Well-being, and those
of my Species, in this Mansion allotted to us; so I observe this Globe, on
which we live, to be no less wonderfully connected with the Sun and other
Planets, with us surrounding and depending on him, so that they all make one
entire System; the other Globes being probably designed for Uses analagous to
this of ours. And as the prodigious Number of fixed Stars seem to be of the
same Nature, so it is probable they are designed for the like Purposes with
those for which I find our Sun, the great Source of Light and Life to us, is
manifestly fitted and designed, and consequently may have Globes like ours,
depending on them. If so, as this gives me a stupendous Idea of the vast Extent
and Variety of the mighty Works of GOD, so it must give me astonishing
Apprehensions of His excellent Greatness, Majesty and Glory, who must be
equally present with them all, and does alike display his infinite Wisdom,
Power and Goodness in them, to all the admiring Beholders; having His whole
vast Family of Heaven and Earth, alike depending upon Him, and deriving their
All from Him, in all Places of His Dominion.

17. WHAT is thus evident to me from the Frame and Constitution of the natural
World, is no less evident from the Constitution of the moral World. For, as I
see all the Order, Harmony and Usefulness of Nature depends on the Laws of
(what is called) Attraction, by which the vast Globes keep their Situations,
and proceed incessantly in their perpetual Rounds, and all the Parts and
Appendages of each Globe are firmly kept together; and also on the surprising
Instincts by which the several Tribes of Animals are led to provide for their
Subsistence, and the Continuance of their Species, which can no otherwise be
accounted for, than from the mere passive Impressions of the great Almighty
Mind, that subsists and governs the World in the best and wisest Manner: So I
observe all the Order, Harmony and Happiness of the moral World, depends on the
Laws of Benevolence (Chap. I. 13.) which taking its Rise in the natural
Affection between the Sexes, Parents, Children, and other Relatives, spreads
through the whole Species, strongly attaching them to social Life; which strong
Tendency of Benevolence in the moral World, is plainly analogous to Attraction
and Instincts in the natural, and must accordingly be a like passive Impression
of the same great Parent-governing Mind, who plainly designs hereby to keep the
moral World together, and in order; and by Him also it is manifest, that all
created Minds are passively enlightened, to have a quick Sense, and intuitive
Evidence of the Fit, the Fair, and Decent in Behavior ( Introd. 15. And Chap.
II. 10.) and thence, the Laws by which this Principle of Benevolence must be
regulated, in order to their universal Harmony and Happiness. From hence,
therefore, also evidently appears, not only His Existence, Onmipresence, and
infinite Wisdom and Power, but also his infinite Benevolence and Equity.
befitting the Character of Him, who is the great Father and Lord of the
Universe.

18. NOW it being evident from all that has been said, that this glorious
Being, whom I call my GOD, must be a Being of all possible Perfection; it is
plain that He must have an entire and absolute Sufficiency in and of Himself to
His own Happiness, and therefore cannot need any of His Creatures, or any Thing
they can do to make Him happy, nor can any Thing they can do, make Him
otherwise. And from His absolute Independency, and their continual and entire
Dependence upon His Will and Power ( 6.) I must conclude, that He is not only
the Almighty Creator and most high Possessor of Heaven and Earth, and of every
Creature therein; but, moreover, that He is the continual Preserver of all His
Creatures, and consequently, that the Moment He should cease to will the
Continuance of their Existence, they must unavoidably cease, and drop into
nothing.

19. NOR can it, I think, be conceived, that the infinitely wise, powerful,
just and good Author of my Being, and of all other intelligent active
Creatures, would neglect us, and take no further Care of us. I cannot imagine,
from His Attributes above demonstrated, but that He must look after each of His
Creatures, and see what use we make of the Being, Powers and Advantages He has
given us, and take Care to instruct and conduct us to the End He designed, and
that in a Manner suitable to the Nature and Powers which He has given us
(Chap. I. 2, 5.) It cannot therefore be, but that, as he evidently governs the
natural World, in a passive Manner, suitable to its passive Nature, by the Laws
which He has established to Himself (being Himself, properly speaking, the
sole Agent) so He must much more govern the moral World (as being in itself of
vastly the greatest Worth, and the End of the other) in a Manner suitable to
its rational and moral Nature, to whom He has given to be a System of
intelligent, conscious, free Agents, and consequently capable of moral
Government, by Laws and Motives, suggested to their Reason and Consciences, and
to their Hopes and Fears: And consequently I cannot doubt but I am subject to
His Conduct and Government, and that he will thus govern me as a reasonable and
moral Agent; and that, in Consequence of this, He will call me to an Account,
and see how I shall have conducted myself in this State of Probation, in the
Use of the Abilities and Talents which he has committed to my Trust, and judge
whether I have endeavored to answer the End of my Being, in Conformity to the
Laws of that reasonable and Self-active Nature, which he has given me, and
make me fare well or ill, according as my Behavior shall be found to have been
good or bad. That this is fit and reasonable to be expected, my own Conscience
strongly suggests (Chap. I. 11, 15.) and that Happiness or Misery, will be the
Effect of Virtue or Vice, the Nature of the Things themselves loudly proclaims
(it being a no less evident Law of Nature in Morals, than in Naturals, That
whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also reap. Vide Turnbull, Vol. ^.
) Nor can it be doubted but that He, who is Holiness and Righteousness itself,
cannot but love those Qualities wherever He beholds them, and must therefore be
engaged to make them happy; nor can His Justice fail to make the contrary
miserable. So that as sure as He is just and good, so sure He will reward the
one, and punish the other. And what is thus reasonable to think with regard to
myself, must be equally true with regard to all other intelligent Creatures.
GOD must therefore be, not only the Almighty Creator and Preserver, but also
the supreme Ruler, and moral Governor of the World; the great King, Lord and
Judge of the whole Universe, which therefore is His Kingdom, in which He most
wisely and uncontroulably presides, and orders all Things for the Good of the
Whole, in a Manner suitable to the best Interest of each Nature. I cannot
therefore doubt but that He will in the Whole and Result of Things, bring Good
out of Evil, and make Evil itself subservient to Good, and even overruled the
Sins and Follies of His Creatures, so as finally to answer the best Ends.

20. IF now it be enquired, How I came to be such an imperfect, frail, sinful
Being, as I am? Or how it could be, that the wise and good GOD that made me,
who is Himself the most perfect and best of Beings, should make me such an
imperfect, sinful and miserable Creature, as I find myself to be? (Chap. I.
15.) To this I must answer in the following Manner: That GOD should make me
such an imperfect (or less perfect) Creature as I am, compared with others, or
with what I can easily imagine, I see no Reason to doubt; inasmuch as my Being
itself, and every Perfection of it, and Advantage attending it, must be His
sovereign free Gift, and what He was in no wise obliged to bestow. He is the
sovereign Lord of His Favors, and must therefore be entirely at Liberty to
bestow such Degrees of Being and Perfection, and such Advantages, greater or
less, as He thinks fit; and it appears that He has delighted in a boundless
Variety in all His Works.

21. INDEED that He should, without any known voluntary Fault of mine, put me
into a Condition that is, in the Whole, worse than not to be; or that He
should, in giving me my Being, lay me under an absolute Necessity of being
finally sinful and miserable; this would be a very hard Case indeed: But this I
must think utterly impossible, as being what I cannot think consistent with His
Wisdom, Holiness, Justice and Goodness, above demonstrated. Vide Wollast. R. N.
Page 200.
But so long as I have such a Being as is desirable, though attended with great
Frailties, Limitations and Imperfections, and am put into such a Condition as
renders me capable of further Improvements, and of attaining to some good
Degree of Happiness, if I am not wanting to myself, and since I shall not be
obliged to account for any more than I have received; I cannot reasonably
complain, but ought to be very thankful for it, though I see others have much
greater Advantages than I, from whom, in all Reason, a proportionably greater
Account will be expected.

22. AND as to my being so sinful a Creature as I must confess I am, this I
cannot ascribe to GOD; for since the formal Notion of Sin consists in the
voluntary Opposition of our Wills to the known Will of GOD, or the Constitution
which He has made, it must be the Fault of my Will, and not of His; and
accordingly my own Conscience tells me, whenever I do amiss, that I myself (and
not He) am the Cause, and true Author of all the Wickedness I commit. If,
therefore, instead of being obedient to the Author of my Being, and making a
good Use of my Liberty, and of the Powers and Advantages He has given me, and
thereby further improving them, and qualifying myself for the Happiness He
designs for me in so doing, I make a bad Use of them, by voluntarily acting
contrary to His known Will, and thereby sink myself into a worse Condition;
nay, though it were into a worse Condition than not to be, it is wholly owing to
myself, and not to Him that made me.

23. IF now I should ask, Why has GOD made me at all peccable, or capable of
Sin? This would be the same as to ask, Why has He made me capable of Duty? Or,
why has He made me a free Agent? But this would be a strange Question; for
without Liberty I should be destitute of one of the chief Excellencies of my
rational Nature, and should not be capable of either Duty or Sin, properly
speaking; for as Sin consists in a free and voluntary Disobedience, so Duty
consists in a free and willing Obedience to the known Will of GOD. So that
without a Power of Liberty or free Agency, there could have been no such Thing
as either Virtue or Vice, Praise or Blame; nor can either the one or the other
obtain, but in Proportion to the Knowledge we have, or may have, of what we
ought to do, and the Powers we are furnished with, either to do or forbear.
Vide Wollast. R. N. Page 62.


24. AND, lastly, as to the many Pains, Calamities and Dissolution, to which I
am liable (Chap. I. 16.) I must think, that as I am a Sinner, I need a Course
of Discipline: That it is fit natural Evil should attend moral Evil, as the
best Means for the Cure of it: And that therefore GOD, having it in View that
we would abuse our Liberty, not only justly, but wisely and kindly ordered
these Calamities, as being the fittest Means that could have been used to bring
us to Repentance and Reformation, and to discipline us to Virtue, by mortifying
our Lusts, and disengaging us from those Objects that are most apt to ensnare
and mislead us; and, at the same time, they give us Occasion and Opportunity
for the Exercise of several Virtues of very great Use toward the perfecting
our reasonable and active Nature, which otherwise could have had no Place; and
since we cannot, as Things now are, be completely happy here, they lead us to
the Hopes of a better State hereafter.

25. THUS it appears to me, that, without any Imputation upon either the
Wisdom, Power, Justice or Goodness of GOD, we may sufficiently account for all
the Sin and Calamity that obtain in the World. But if, after all, there should
be some untoward Appearances in the Conduct of Providence that we cannot
clearly account for, they ought not to be admitted as any just Objections
against what has been antecedently demonstrated; especially since we should be
very vain indeed, to think ourselves qualified to be competent Judges of the
deep Things of GOD. We see but a small Part, a very short Scene of the vast
Drama, and therefore are not able to make any tolerable Judgment of the Whole:
So that what to us may have the Appearance of Evil, may, in the whole, have the
Nature of Good; and it becomes us, for that Reason, to have an implicit Faith
in the infinite Wisdom, Power, Justice and Goodness of the Deity, above
demonstrated, that it will prove so in the Whole and Result of Things. And that
this Expectation may appear the more reasonable, I proceed now to the next
Enquiry.

CHAP III. Of the End of our Being, and of our future State.
1. (III.) LET every one then, in the third Place, seriously consider further,
and enquire with Himself, For what End was I thus brought into Being, and am
thus continually subsisted by Almighty GOD? And for the Resolution of this
Question, let him thus think and reason with himself, or to this Effect.

2. THAT I was not made at all Adventures, without any Contrivance and Design,
but must have been made for some End or other, I cannot doubt, since I have
evidently found, that He who gave me my Being, must Himself be a Being of all
possible Perfections, and consequently must be a most kind, wise and designing
Cause; especially since I do also evidently find in Fact, so many, and such
manifest Tokens of the wisest and most benevolent Design and Contrivance in my
whole Frame, and in every Thing about me (Chap. I. 2, 9, 10.)

3. BEING therefore made by a most wise and good Cause, I must necessarily have
been made for some wise and good End. And having demonstrated that the Being
who made me, has an infinite Sufficiency within Himself for His own Happiness,
independent of any other Being (Chap. II. 18.) it is manifest that whatever
good End He had in giving me my Being, it could not be to serve Himself of me,
or to promote any Advantage to Himself by me: This were a Thought infinitely
too mean to entertain of Him, who is GOD, All-sufficient, that it could be
possible for Him to stand in need of me, or of any Thing I could do or suffer,
in order to His own Happiness.

4. MOREOVER, since it has been evidently discovered that the Author of my
Being is infinitely perfect, and consequently perfectly just and good;
perfectly equitable and benevolent (Chap. II. 6, 17.) it is evident that He
could not give me my Being with any malevolent Design, or with a Design that I
should be absolutely and unavoidably miserable in the Whole; nor could He (as I
humbly conceive) design Misery for me, or any of His Creatures, but in
Consequence of their personal, voluntary Demerit, by persisting in wilful
Rebellion against Him, or the general Interest of the Constitution which He
has made; for this would be so far from consisting with Equity and
Benevolence, that it would imply the very Notion of Cruelty. A Thought which we
should remove at an infinite Distance from that most perfect and best of Beings.

5. INDEED, in case of wilful Rebellion, finally persisted in, it is fit and
right, and even necessary for the Good of the Whole (being the most effectual
Means to cure Rebellion, and secure the Obedience of GOD's Creatures, which is
necessary for their general Good and Happiness) that Punishment should be
inflicted upon those that rebel, and obstinately oppose their Wills to the
Constitution He has made, and the Ends of His Government, in Proportion to
their several Crimes and Misdemeanors (Chap. II. 19.) And indeed Mischief and
Misery do, in the Nature of Things, necessarily result from Sin and Vice. But
it cannot be therefore supposed that their Misery could be His primary Design,
or that He should intend their Rebellion, or lay them under a Necessity of
Sinning, that they might be finally miserable; for this would, in Effect, be
absolutely to design their Misery, and delight in it as such, which to Him must
be infinitely impossible.

6. ON the contrary, since GOD is evidently a most kind and benevolent Being,
and could therefore have no other than kind and benevolent Ends, in giving
Being to His rational Creatures, it is plain that His primary Intention must
have been so far from that of making them to be miserable, that He did
undoubtedly make them with a Design that they might be, in some good Degree,
happy, in the Participation and Enjoyment of His Goodness, in Proportion to
their several Capacities and Qualifications. And that this was, in Fact, His
End, is also manifest from the Frame and Structure of the Nature which He has
given them; for He has given them Consciousness, whereby they are capable of
Self-enjoyment; Intelligence, whereby they are able to consider and judge of
what is fit and needful to the Enjoyment of themselves; Passions, whereby they
are prompted to desire and endeavor what contributes to their Well-being, and
to guard and defend themselves against what may be hurtful to them; and a
Principle of Activity, to procure the one, and avoid the other; and of Liberty,
whereby they are able to suspend Judging and Acting, till they can duly
balance their Passions, and act with Advantage. And besides these Powers,
which are Means to their personal Happiness, He has also inspired them with
social Affections, which render them capable of social Happiness: Having
therefore given them the Means, it is plain He must have designed the End.
(Chap. I. 5, 7, 13.)

7. THIS then being the Frame of that Nature, which GOD has given us, it must
plainly be His Design that we should seek our Happiness, in affecting and
acting conformable to it; otherwise, if we act inconsistent with ourselves, and
so do a Violence to our own Nature; in this Case, we can neither enjoy
ourselves, nor any Thing else, and so must be unavoidably miserable. Inasmuch
therefore as GOD has made us to be intelligent, free, active Creatures; and
since our Happiness must immediately depend upon the right Use of these Powers,
and must consist in the free and vigorous Exertion of them, in Conformity to
the great Law of our Nature, which is the inward Sense of our own Reason and
Consciences; it must accordingly be His Design, not only that we should be
happy, but that we should be so by Means of our own Activity, and by our always
freely acting reasonably, and consequently that we should cultivate and improve
our Reason in the best Manner we can, under the Circumstances in which He has
placed us, in order to make a right Judgment how we ought to affect and act,
and conduct ourselves to the best Advantage for our own Happiness.

8. IT may, indeed, be truly said, that GOD made all Things for His own Glory,
if it be rightly understood. But wherein then does His Glory consist? It is
plain, it cannot consist in the Disorder, Confusion and Misery, of His
Creatures; nor can it consist merely in being applauded by them. It is, indeed,
fit and right in itself, and for our Good, as well as His Honor, and therefore
He requires it, that we should daily acknowledge Him to be what He is, our
Creator, Preserver and Benefactor; and all that is fit and right, fair and
decent, true and good, must, as such, be His Glory, as being in itself
conformable to His infinitely perfect Intellect and Will, as well as beatifying
to His Creatures* and accordingly nothing can be of greater Use and Advantage
to us, than that we live under a deep and habitual Sense of this. But it would
be a most unworthy Thought of Him, to imagine that he made us for the Sake of
being applauded, or that He requires even these just Acknowledgments for His
own Sake, as though we, or our Services, could be any Advantage to Him. This
would be to make Him a most selfish Being indeed; especially if we should
imagine that He could aim at Applause or Glory, at the Expense of our
unavoidable and endless Misery: This would be a most dishonorable and shocking
Thought.

9. SO far from this, that I must conceive it to be the Glory of GOD to
communicate His Perfections in various Degrees, so far as they are
communicable, and to display His Goodness to His Creatures, and make them happy
in the Participation of it, in Proportion to their several Capacities, and this
in Consequence of their acting in Obedience to Him, and in Conformity to His
Law, which is the Law of their Natures. For since He was pleased to give them
their Being, it cannot be but that, as the tender Father of His own Offspring,
He will account it His Interest and Glory to see them as happy as may be,
consistent with the Interest of the whole Family (to which it is fit every
Individual should resign) and take Pleasure in every Thing that contributes to
their Happiness, and abhor whatsoever is destructive to it, and inconsistent
with it, as His greatest Dishonor.

10. FOR since He that wills the End, must will the Means necessary to that
End, it is plain that since GOD wills our Happiness in the Whole, as our End,
and his Glory, it must be his Will and Law concerning us, that we avoid every
Thing that does, in the Nature of it, tend to make us miserable, and that we do
every Thing that does, in the Nature of it, tend to make us happy ( Introd.
23.) So that the Glory of GOD, and our Happiness, with the Means necessary to
it, and his Dishonor, and our Misery, with the Means which tend to that, must
necessarily be coincident, and come in Effect to one and the same Thing.

11. AND since it is evident, from Experience, that Sin and Vice does, in the
Nature of it, tend to make us miserable; being contrary to to all that is
reasonable and right; contrary to the Attributes and Will of GOD; contrary to
the clear Sense of our own Minds, and to all the Interests of Society; and must
therefore do a perpetual Violence to our reasonable and social Nature; and
consequently be most odious in the Sight of GOD, and all intelligent Beings, as
being unavoidably attended with Horror and Confusion, both personal and social:
And since, on the other Hand, it is no less evident, that a virtuous and
dutiful Temper and Behavior, does, in the Nature of it, tend to our Happiness,
because it consists in doing all that is reasonable and right, all that is
agreeable to the Attributes and Will of GOD, to the Sense of our own Minds, and
to all the Interests of Society, and therefore must necessarily approve itself,
as most beautiful and amiable in the Sight of GOD, and all reasonable Beings,
as being attended with universal Harmony, Peace and Joy, both within and
without, with regard both to GOD and Man; it is hence evident, that GOD's Glory
must consist in our pursuing our own Happiness, by avoiding the one, and doing
the other.

12. BUT now to return: Since I am convinced, from the above Method of
Reasoning, that my Well-being and Happiness must have been GOD's End in giving
me my Being, and that it must be a Happiness suitable to that Nature which He
has given me, in the Whole of it; I must be persuaded, that since, besides an
animal and sensitive, He has moreover given me a rational, active and social
Nature, as my superior and peculiar Character (Chap. I. 5.) it is plain He must
have designed men not merely for a sensual and animal, but chiefly for a
rational, active and social Happiness.

13. IT cannot therefore be supposed an End worthy of GOD, and agreeable to the
Nature He has given me, in the Whole of it, that I should have been brought
into Being, only to eat and drink, and sleep, and enjoy the empty
Gratifications of the animal Life, and that my Reason, and other superior
Powers, should be designed only to be subservient to these inferior Pleasures
(and in Effect only to render me more a Beast than I should have been without
them) and that after a few Days spent in these low, grovelling Pursuits and
Enjoyments, I should then be utterly extinct, cease, and be no more. These
short lived animal Enjoyments are indeed Ends suitable to the Nature of a mere
Beast, and for which he is better qualified than I am: But if these could be
supposed all the Ends that I was made for, the noble Powers of Reason,
Reflection, Self-exertion and Self-determination, must have been given me in
vain; nay, indeed to the worst Purposes, as they only serve to make me more
exquisitely sensual, and, at the same time, sensible of my Wretchedness.

14. AT least this is certain, that these noble Powers render me capable of a
vastly higher End, and nobler Happiness, and which cannot attain to its
Perfection here: For when I consider the wretched Circumstances of my Condition
in this Life, it is plain that such a Happiness can be but a little While, and
but very imperfectly enjoyed, in this present, short, uncertain and uneasy
State, amidst so many Sins and Follies, Embarrasments and Perplexities, as I
am, at best, unavoidably attended with, while in this Body. Since therefore I
am evidently made for such an Happiness, and that it cannot attain to any
tolerable Degree of Perfection here, I must conclude that my Existence shall
undoubtedly reach beyond this short and uncertain Life, and extend forward to
endless Ages. Without this Conclusion, I cannot see how I shall ever attain to
any End worthy of the Wisdom and Goodness of the GOD that made me, and suitable
to the superior Nature and Powers which he has given me, and the superior
Happiness I am evidently capable of.

15. AND that I may live on, notwithstanding what is vulgarly called Death, and
am of a Nature capable of proceeding on to a nobler and more perfect Kind of
Life, I cannot doubt, when I consider the vastly different Natures of Spirit
and Body, of which I consist (the one in itself perceptive, conscious and
Self-active, the other of itself merely senseless, inert and passive) so
entirely different, that I cannot conceive of any Thing common to them, besides
bare Existence, or of any natural or necessary Connection between them: I can
conceive of no other than a mere arbitrary Connection, depending only on the
Laws of their Union, which, in Natures so different, can, I think, be no other
than the mere arbitrary Will of the Deity, and His perpetual Fiat. The Soul,
therefore, being of a Nature entirely different from that of the Body, cannot
be capable of any corporeal Laws and Affections, and consequently cannot be
liable to any such Change or Dissolution as Bodies are; i. e. being a
perceptive, active, simple, unextended, indivisible Substance, it must be
naturally indiscerpible, and consequently incorruptible. I cannot therefore
imagine how the Dissolution of the Body should affect the Existence of the
Soul, any more than the putting off an old Garment, to put on a new One, should
affect the Existence of the Body. So that I cannot consider my Body as being
myself, or, indeed, as being properly any Part of myself; my Soul or Mind, that
intelligent active Principle, and that only, being properly myself; and my Body
I can only consider as a Machine to which I am at present confined, and an
Engine or Organ which I am obliged to make use of, in my various Perceptions
and Exertions, ad extra. (Chap. I. 8, 9.) (...), Vide Hierocles in Pyth. Car.
Au. (...) ^at. in Plato de (...)


16. INASMUCH, therefore, as I am a Spirit of an incorruptible Nature, and know
that I have Powers capable of the sublime and noble Pleasures of Contemplation
and Virtue, which yet cannot, in any Measure, attain to their Perfection here,
I must believe, that, if I am not wanting to myself, they shall attain to it
hereafter. I can, indeed, with much Labor and Struggle, make some little
Proficiency in them in my present State: But when I have done so, and am
capable and earnestly desirous of proceeding further, must I cease, and be no
more? Can it be thought that the tender Father of my Spirit, would, after all
my Pains, drop me into Nothing, and at once fustrate all my Hopes and Labors?
Can there, in this Case, any wise and good Reasons be conceived for putting an
End to my Being and my Hopes together? On the contrary, would not this seem
extremely hard and unreasonable, and consequently utterly inconsistent, and not
of a Piece, with the Conduct of Him, who must be a Being perfectly reasonable
and equitable.

17. I DO moreover find within myself a Fore-boding of something to come after
this Life, which I cannot get rid of, and an eager Appetite and earnest
Aspiration after Immortality, that I may be capable of an endless Enjoyment of
those noble and immortal Pleasures, which I cannot disengage myself from; nor
can I think any One, capable of serious Consideration, can be disengaged from
these Views, at least till he has contracted so much Guilt as to wish he may go
out of Being, and is so immersed in Sensuality, as to have lost Sight of them,
and be totally disaffected to them, so as to become a mere Brute of the worst
Sort, a Kind of rational Brute, and so a Monster. Now I do not find any natural
Appetite, as this evidently is (Chap. I. 8.) no, not of the meanest Kind, nor
in the most despicable Creature, but that GOD has provided a suitable Object
correspondent to it; can it then be imagined that he would create such a noble
Appetite in so noble a Creature as Man, and have provided no Object suitable
and correspondent to that? It cannot be.

18. THIS Reasoning is abundantly confirmed to be right, when I consider
further, See this Argument finished in the best Manner by Mr. Wollaston, in
Rel. N. Pages 200, 210.
that in my present Situation, a long and laborious Course of steadfast
Persisting in the Cause of Truth and Virtue, in spite of the strongest
Solicitations to the contrary, is in this World many Times contemned,
disregarded, derided, and even barbarously treated and oppressed, without any
Redress, and persecuted even to Death itself, and sometimes to the most
barbarous Deaths; and that as long a Course of unrestrained Indulgence to the
vilest and most mischievous Vices, is frequently attended with uninterrupted
Prosperity to the very last; I cannot therefore doubt, from the Wisdom, Power,
Holiness, Justice and Goodness of GOD, but that the Time must come, when He
will bring Good out of all this Evil, and these crooked Things shall be made
straight; and that He who cannot but love Virtue, as being His own Likeness,
will reward it, and make it, in the Whole, eventually happy, even above and
beyond its natural Tendency: And that He who cannot but hate Vice, as being
contrary to His Nature, will eventually punish it with due Severity, and make
it very miserable; which indeed it cannot but be in the Nature of the Thing
itself. (Chap. II. 19.)

19. THE chief Difficulty that lies in the Way of this Persuasion of a future
State, is the Inconceivableness of it: But this, I think, can be no reasonable
Objection against it: For who, that had never seen any Thing but the universal
Desolation and Death of a severe Winter, could conceive any Thing of the
exquisite Beauties and admirable Productions of a fine Spring and Summer?
Indeed I can no more conceive how my Soul is now united to my Body, and
perceives and acts by Means of it, and by a mere Thought can move its unweildy
Limbs at Pleasure, than I can conceive how it can exist, perceive and act,
after what we call Death, without this gross tangible Machine, to which it is
at present confined. I can, however, a little assist my Imagination in forming
some glimmering Notion of that future State, from this easy Supposition of a
Man born blind and deaf, who, at the same time, has the Senses of Feeling,
Tasting and Smelling. Guardian, No. 27.
Now, to this Man, the tangible World, with the various Objects of Taste and
Smell, is all the World that he can have any Notion of, any more than I can
conceive of those Things which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor have they
entered into the Heart of Man to conceive. I, who have the visible World about
me, and the Perception of various Sounds, am to this Man, what I may suppose
Angels and other Spirits are to me: He can no more conceive of the visible
World that I converse with, than I can conceive of the spiritual World, or the
future State of my Being. Now, let me only conceive this Man to be deprived of
the Senses of Feeling, Tasting and Smelling, and he is dead, entirely dead, to
all the World that he had ever any Notion of. But then imagine his Eyes and
Ears to be opened, and to have this glorious Show of visible Objects, Light and
Colors, with all their various Modifications, set before him, with a no less
wonderful Variety of harmonious Sounds; I must conceive him to have entirely a
new World open upon him, to which he was before an utter Stranger. He is indeed
dead to the dark tangible World, but he has exchanged it for a new visible
World. Such a Change is very conceiveable; but it cannot be imagined that what
we call Death can be a greater; nor can I believe it will be so great a Change,
it being highly probable that Seeing, Hearing, and some necessary Instances of
Feeling, are common to both our present and future State, and a Fund to begin
with (together with our intellectual and moral Accomplishments) when we enter
upon that new Condition, wherein I can conceive that other and more exquisite
Senses may be added to these, and not only these Senses, but also our
Understandings, Memory and Activity, may be advanced to a much greater
Perfection than they had before. And inasmuch as our Happiness must imply
Society and Intercourse with each other, and with the external World about us,
it cannot be imagined but that we shall go off, and be always attended and
connected with fine sensible Vehicles, Vide Wollaston, R. N. Page 197, and
Hierocles, etc.
as Means to render us sensible to each other, and capable of mutual
Communication, and of Intercourse with the sensible World around us, wherein
the Deity so gloriously displays his infinite Perfections.

20. FURTHERMORE, to add another Resemblance: I see here a Multitude of
despicable Worms, confined to a slow Motion, and to a few low grovelling
Sensations and Enjoyments, which, after a short Period of seeming Death, by a
wonderful Transformation, turn into beautiful winged Animals, and waft
themselves at Pleasure through the Air, and enjoy Pleasures they were before
incapable of. Now may it not be reasonably thought, that these Creatures were
designed to be Emblems of my own Case? I am here, like them, confined to a
little Compass of Ground, and a few slow Motions, feeble Exertions, and low,
and comparatively mean Enjoyments. For other Analogies, see Bishop Butler.
But if I shall have acted my Part well, in Proportion to what Powers and
Advantages I now enjoy, may I not reasonably hope, after my seeming Death, to
pass into a new and glorious State, compared with which, my present Enjoyments
are, in a Manner, contemptible, and my present Life little better than a Dream?
May I not hope, that when I am freed from this gross unweildy Body, and from my
present Limitations and Confinements, and from all my Diseases, Sins and
Temptations, to have my Powers greatly enlarged, and to be furnished with a
pure aetherial Vehicle; and in that Capacity to shift the Scene at pleasure,
and traverse through the vast Fields of Ether, Part tamen meliore mei super
alta perennis
Astra ferar.
OVID.
and in Company with Vide Tull. de Senect.
other pure Spirits, enjoy Pleasures inexpressible, in the Contemplation of
GOD, and all His wondrous Works of Nature, Providence and Grace, entirely
devoted to the Obedience of His most righteous and reasonable Laws, and
unspeakably happy in His Image and Favor.

21. UPON the Whole, therefore, as I cannot conceive how the true End of my
Being, especially of that superior Nature, which is the peculiar Character of
our Species, can be answered merely by living this wretched, short and
uncertain Life, that is allotted to me here; so I must be persuaded, that I am
designed for some other and nobler Condition of Being hereafter, and cannot
avoid having Hopes full of Immortality. So that the only consistent Notion I
can frame of this Life must be this, That as it is the first Stage of my Being,
so it is designed only for a State of Childhood, Discipline and Probation, in
order to another, and a better State, hereafter, which, in the Result, is to be
a State of perfect Manhood and Retribution. And consequently, that in order to
qualify myself for that happy Condition, it must be my greatest Care, and the
most important Business of my Life, while I continue here, to acquire, and
improve myself in, all those Accomplishments, both of Knowledge and Virtue, and
that both personal and social, wherein the Perfection and Happiness of my
superior rational and immortal Nature consists; which alone I can carry with me
into that future State; and which alone can enable me to enjoy myself, and my
Friends, and, above all, my GOD, who is my supreme and sovereign Good, in whose
Favor, with these Accomplishments, I cannot fail of being, in some good
Degree, happy even here, and finally secure from all Evil, and in the Enjoyment
of a vast, an unspeakable, and an endless Felicity! Thus it appears, that the
true and ultimate End of my Being, can be nothing short of this; that I may be
as happy as my Condition will admit of here, and eternally and completely happy
in the future State of my Existence, in the Enjoyment of GOD, and all that is
good, and in the Perfection of Knowledge and Virtue, which alone can render me
capable thereof.

PART II. The Practical PART of MORAL PHILOSOPHY.
CHAP. I. Of the Duties in general, resulting from the foregoing Truths.
1. (II.) HAVING thus considered the Nature of my Being, and of that glorious
Cause, from whom I derive, and on whom I depend, and observed, from the
Structure of my Nature, and His Attributes, what I must suppose to have been
the great End of that Being and Nature which He has given me; I proceed now,
from the Truths I have found in the first or speculative Part of this Essay, to
deduce the Duties that result from them, which constitute the second or
practical Part of it.

2. AND, in general, from the Nature and End of my Being, which I have
considered, I must conclude, that it is my Duty, in Faithfulness to myself, i.
e. to that Nature and those Powers which are given me, as being a reasonable,
active and immortal Creature, and in Faithfulness to that glorious Being, who
is the Author and Preserver of them, to be freely engaged and active myself, in
endeavoring to answer His End in the Bestowment of them, which, from the
Nature of my Being, I find is to be accomplished by Means of my own Activity
(Part I. Chap. I. 10. And Chap. III. 7.) And since I am accountable to Him, for
all the Powers and Talents He has bestowed upon me, and must expect He will
call me to Account for them, and see what Regard I have had to His End, in the
Bestowment of them; it is necessary that I be, above all Things, concerned to
act and conduct myself in such a Manner, as to be able to give a good Account
of myself to Him. And in order thereunto, I proceed to the

3. (IV.) FOURTH Enquiry, and ask myself further, What I ought to be? Or, which
is the same Thing, What I ought to do, in order to answer the End of my Being?
Or, what are the necessary Means which do, in the Nature of Things, directly
tend to the Accomplishment of it? And for the Resolution of this Enquiry, it
will be needful to consider a little more particularly the End itself, which is
GOD's End, and, for the same Reason, must be mine; for, from the Nature of the
End, we may, in some good Measure, discover what are those Means, whether more
immediate or remote, that do naturally tend to the Attainment of it. Quoties
quid, fugiendum fit, aut quid petendum voles scire, ad summum bonum and
propositum totius vitae respice. Sen. Ep. 71.
To this Purpose therefore, I must reason in the following Manner.

4. THE great End of my Being, is, that my rational and immortal Nature may be
completely and endlesly happy. The Happiness of my rational Nature consists in
that Pleasure and Satisfaction that naturally attends its being conscious to
itself of its Union with its proper Objects. The proper Object of the Intellect
is Truth, and that of the Will and Affections is Good (Introd. 5. And Part I.
Chap. I. 5, 6.) so that the highest Happiness of our Nature must consist in
that Pleasure that attends our Knowledge of Truth, and our choosing and
delighting in Good; and consequently the Pursuit of these, must, in general, be
the great Duty of my Life.

5. GOD is Truth and Good itself, and the great Source of all that Truth and
Good that is every where to be found in all His Works (Part I. Chap. II. 6, 7,
8, 10.) Therefore GOD Himself, with all the Truth and Good that is contained or
implied in Him, and derived from Him, so far forth as I can attain to the
practical Knowledge of it, must necessarily be the proper Object of my rational
and active Powers, or the Powers of my reasonable and immortal Nature; and
consequently He must be my chief Good, objectively considered. And accordingly,
in Correspondence to the Object, my Duty and Happiness (which is my chief Good
formally considered) must consist in knowing, choosing, loving, and acquiescing
in Him, and in resembling or being like Him, as far as ever I am able: In a
Word, in the Contemplation and Love of Him, and all that Truth and Good which
flows from Him; and in forming the Temper of my Heart, and the Conduct of my
Life, conformable thereunto. And this being my true Perfection and Happiness,
must most certainly be His Will and Law, who wills my Happiness as His End in
giving me my Being, and in all His Dispensations toward me. (Part I. Chap III.
6, 7, 10.)

6. FROM hence it follows, that my Duty and Happiness must, in general,
consist in the Union of my Will with His; in sincerely choosing what He chooses,
and delighting in whatsoever He delights in; in submitting to whatever
Instructions He shall think fit to give, or whatever Laws He shall think fit to
enjoin, either by Nature or Revelation; and in resigning to the whole System or
Constitution which He has established, both natural and moral: And
consequently, in patiently bearing whatever He is pleased to allot, and in
conducting toward every Person and Thing, as being what it really is, and what
He has made it, as He Himself does, and in governing myself in my whole Temper
and Behavior, by all those Rules which promote the general Weal of the whole
System, as GOD does Himself; always avoiding what is wrong or hurtful, as being
contrary thereunto; and doing what is right or beneficial, as being agreeable
to it, on all Occasions as they offer. And all this I must do with a hearty
Well-meaning, in a designed Compliance with His Will, and from a Sense of Duty
and Gratitude to Him, as the great Creator and Governor of the World, and the
Father and Friend of Mankind (Part I. Chap. II. 19.) and steadfastly persevere
in such a Conduct, in spite of all Temptations to the contrary ( Introd. 6.)
This is what is implied in the general Duties of Sincerity and Integrity.

7. I MUST, therefore, in order hereunto, duly exercise my Understanding, in
acquainting myself with the whole Constitution of Things, and in making from
thence a just Estimate among the several Kinds and Degrees of Good and Evil;
and always prefer a greater Good before a less, and a lesser Evil before a
greater. And, because the Soul is by far more excellent than the Body; the
Interest of the whole Community much greater than that of any one Individual;
and Eternity of vastly more importance than Time; I must, therefore, willingly
suffer bodily Evils, to avoid spiritual; private, to prevent public; and
temporal, in order to secure against those that are Eternal. And I must resign
the Goods of the Body, or the animal Nature, to those of the Soul; private
Goods, to those of the Public; and the Goods of Time, to those of Eternity.
(Introd. 10.)

8. THE Divine Law, which is immutable Truth, is, in itself, the Rule or
Standard, conformable to which we are to form our Judgments, and to choose and
act with regard to these several Goods: But the immediate Rule as to us, can be
no other than the inward Sense of our own Reason and Conscience duly informed,
which is that Judgment we make of our Tempers and Actions, according to what
Sense or Apprehension we have of Right and Wrong, or what we take to be
conformable or contrary to that Law. And this Judgment must antecedently
determine what we ought to do and avoid, and will consequently give Sentence,
whether we have done well or ill. ( Introd. 15, 22. And Part I. Chap. I. 6.)
Hence arises the Distinction of our Actions, into such as are either
materially or formally good or evil. If our Actions are such as are really
agreeable to the Rule, and productive of Happiness, they are said to be
materially good, even though we have no Sense of Duty, or good Intention in what
we do: But in order that an Action be formally Good, it is necessary, not only
that it be conformable to the Rule, but that it be done from a Sense of Duty,
and with an Intention to do what is right and well pleasing to GOD; Evil the
contrary. It is therefore a Matter of the highest Importance, that I faithfully
endeavor to inform my Conscience, what it is my Duty to do and avoid, as being
agreeable or contrary to the divine Law; that in doubtful Cases, I suspend
Acting till I have used all the Means in my Power, and duly endeavored to
inform myself; and that having so done, I do religiously and steadfastly
endeavor to act up to the Dictates of my own Conscience thus informed, and
this from a Sense of Duty to that GOD on whom I depend, and to whom I am
accountable (Part I. Chap. II. 19.) If after all my best Care, in the
Circumstances in which He has placed me, I have made a Mistake, I may hope in
His Goodness, that He will excuse me, and accept of my Sincerity; but this I
can in no wise expect, if my Mistake was occasioned either by supine
Negligence, or any criminal Passion.

9. AND that my Conscience may be thoroughly and universally informed in all
the Branches of my Duty; and in as much as my Happiness depends on my
conducting right in the Whole, as I stand variously situated and related, I
must descend to Particulars, and duly consider myself in all the Relations
wherein I stand, that I may affect and behave myself suitably to them, and so
be happy in each of them. And they may all be reduced to these three general
Heads, viz. To myself, my GOD, and my Neighbor; correspondent to which are the
general Duties of Temperance, Piety and Benevolence. Particularly, I. My first
Relation is to myself, which obliges me, in Faithfulness to myself, to behave
suitably to that rational, active and immortal Nature, which GOD has given me,
that I may be happy in that; and this is called Human Virtue, Vide Dr. Scott,
Part I.
or Virtue due to that Human Nature whereof I consist, and may be expressed by
the general Term Temperance. II. My second Relation is to GOD, my Maker,
Preserver and Governor, which obliges me, in Faithfulness to Him, as well as
to myself, to behave myself suitably to the Character of such a glorious Being
as He is on whom I depend, that I may be happy in Him: And this is Divine
Virtue, or Virtue due to the DEITY, and may be expressed by the general Term
Piety. III. My third Relation is to my Fellow Creatures, and especially those
of my own Species, of the same rational, social and immortal Nature with
myself, which obliges me, both in Faithfulness to myself and others, to behave
suitably to the social Character, or in such a Manner as is fit, decent and
right, toward such a System of Beings as they are, that I may be happy in
them, and they in me; and this is called Social Virtue, or Virtue due to
Society, and may be expressed by the general Term Benevolence. So that every
Branch of Virtue is, in Effect, an Instance of Justice or Righteousness, which
implies, in the general Notion of it, rendering what is due, or treating every
Person and Thing as being what it really is.

10. THESE Relations, and the Duties correspondent to them, are said to be, in
the general Nature of them, of eternal and immutable Obligation; because if I
or other Creatures had never existed, or should be no more, and so the Fact
should cease; yet it is, and always was, and ever will be, impossible to
conceive of such a Being as I am, and so situated, to myself, my Maker, and my
Fellow Creatures, but that these Obligations will immutably take hold of me; it
being necessarily implied in the very Notion of such a Creature in such a
Situation, that he should be obliged to such a Conduct ( Introd. 11.) And as
the general Notion of Sincerity or Probity implies the Performance of these
Duties, as well in the inward Temper and Disposition of our Hearts, as in the
outward Actions or Behavior of our Lives, I must accordingly consider it as my
first Care, to lay a good Foundation within, and to aim at nothing but the
Truth and Right of the Case upon all Occasions, in Opposition to all Hypocrisy,
since, in the right Performance of these Duties, consists the highest
Perfection and Happiness of my rational, social and immortal Nature. (Part. I.
Chap. III. 11. 12.)

CHAP. II. Of the Duties which we owe to ourselves.
1. (I.) IT is therefore necessary, in order to answer the End of my Being, by
being what I ought to be, that I first begin at home, and consider seriously
what the Duties are that I owe to myself, which are called Human Virtues, and
may be comprehended under the general Term, Temperance, or a right Government
of all my Powers, Appetites and Passions, being due to that human, active and
immortal Nature, which GOD has given me, as being necessary to its Happiness
within itself. And I the rather begin with these, as being necessary in order
to both the other Branches. And,

2. (1.) FROM what has been said, it is plain, That the first Duty incumbent
upon me, as a reasonable active Creature, in order to answer the End of my
Being, is, to cultivate and improve the Reason and Understanding which GOD has
given me, to be the governing Principle and great Law of my Nature (Part I.
Chap. III. 7.) to search and know the Truth, and find out wherein my true
Happiness consists, and the Means necessary to it, and from thence the Measures
of Right and Wrong, and to discipline and regulate my Will, Affections,
Appetites and Passions, according to Reason and Truth, that I may freely and
readily embrace the one, and reject the other, in order that I may be truly
happy. This general Virtue is called Moral Wisdom or Prudence, and stands in
Opposition to Indiscretion and Incogitancy. And, to descend to Particulars,

3. (2.) Because Pride consists in a miserable Delusion, in thinking of
Things otherwise than as being what they really are, and particularly in having
too great an Opinion of ourselves, which is a Temper utterly destructive of all
Improvement and Proficiency either in Knowledge or Virtue, and odious in the
Sight both of GOD and Man; and since I am nothing of myself, and am entirely
dependent on GOD for all that I am, and have, and hope for; and am at the same
time conscious of so many Sins and Infirmities, and other humbling
Considerations, with respect both to my Body and Mind, and every Thing about me
(Part I. Chap. I. 14, 15, 16.) It is in the next Place incumbent upon me, to
consider seriously and know myself, and not to think of myself more highly than
I ought to think, but to think soberly, according to what I really am. And this
Virtue is called Humility, which is the true Foundation of all others, as it
makes us very cautious of our own Conduct, and lays us prostrate before the
DEITY, and disposes us to treat others with great Temper, Tenderness and
Affability; and stands in Opposition to every Degree of Pride, Arrogance, and
Self-sufficiency. And,

4 (3.) AS our Reason and Consideration is manifestly given us to make a just
Estimate of Things, and to preside over our inferior Powers, and to proportion
our several Appetites and Passions, to the real Nature, and intrinsic Value of
their respective Objects (Part I. Chap. III. 7.) so as not to love or hate,
hope or fear, joy or grieve, be pleased or displeased at any Thing, beyond the
real Importance of it to our Happiness or Misery, in the Whole of our Nature
and Duration; it must therefore be my Duty to keep a due Balance among them,
to keep them within their proper Bounds, and to take Care that they do not
exceed or fall short of the real Nature and Measure of their several Objects;
and especially so as not to suffer them to tempt or hurry me on to trespass
upon any of the Duties that I owe either to GOD or Man. This is the Office of
that Virtue which is called Moderation or Equanimity, and stands in Opposition
to all ungoverned Lusts and Passions. More particularly,

5. (4.) BECAUSE animal Appetites, and fleshly Lusts (I mean the Appetites to
Meat and Drink, and other carnal Pleasures, and whatsoever else is of the
concupiscible Kind) do war against the Soul, and an immoderate Indulgence to
them does sensualize and enervate, and, by Consequence, miserably debase and
weaken its superior and noble Powers, and alienate them from their proper
Objects, and at the same time extremely hurt the Temperature and Health of the
Body, and may be very mischievous to others as well as myself, and utterly
disqualify me for the Service, Enjoyment and Favor of GOD (Part I. Chap. I.
15.) it must therefore be my Duty to maintain a perpetual War with them, to
curb and restrain them, to keep them under, and bring them into Subjection, and
regulate them by the Ends designed by GOD and Nature, in planting them in us;
which is the Office of the Virtues called Temperance (strictly so called) or
Sobriety and Chastity, which stand in Opposition to all Intemperance and
Debauchery. And,

6. (5.) WHEREAS the turbulent Passions of Anger, Grief and Fear (i. e.
Displeasure and Uneasiness at what we already feel or imagine, and anxious
Apprehensions of what may seem impending, or whatever else is of the Irascible
Kind) are apt to warp and bias our Minds, and disable us for a right Judgment
and Conduct; to destroy the Peace and Tranquillity of our Minds, and create a
wretched Tumult within our own Breasts, and frequently prompt us to injurious
Words and Actions on the one Hand, or mean Compliances on the other (Ibid.) it
must therefore be my Duty to keep them also, as far as may be, under the due
Government of my Reason, and not to suffer them much to ruffle and discompose
me, much less to tyrannize over me, or any ways disable me for any Duty I owe
either to GOD or Man, or tempt me to any Thing injurious to others, or
mischievous to Society: Which is the Office of those Virtues that are called
Meekness, Patience and Fortitude, which stand in Opposition to Wrath, Hatred,
Impatience and Pusillanimity.

7. (6.) FORASMUCH as I am placed by GOD in the Station I am in, whatever it
be, and He expects I should faithfully discharge the Duties of it, in
Proportion to the Powers and Abilities He has given me; and has made my own
Diligence and Activity in the Use of them, the natural Means of my Well-being
and Usefulness, exclusive of immoderate Cares and Desires (Part I. Chap. I. 10.
And Chap. II. 19, 20.) it must therefore be my Duty to resign to His
Dispositions, and to acquiesce in His Allotments, to keep my Station, and rest
satisfied with the Condition in which He has placed me, and contentedly and
cheerfully discharge the Duties of it; and be active and industrious in the Use
of the Powers and Talents He has furnished me with, both for my own Advantage,
and the Good of others; for the Benefit of the Public as well as myself; for
my comfortable Subsistence in this Life, and my everlasting Happiness in the
Life to come; all which are the Business of those Virtues which are called
Contentment, Frugality and Industry, in Opposition to Discontent, Envy,
Avarice, Ambition and Idleness.

8. (7.) AND lastly: Inasmuch as I am to continue in my present State but for a
short and uncertain Time, and am surrounded with many Troubles and
Difficulties, and am placed in a State of Probation here, for an eternal State
of Retribution hereafter; and since that future State of Existence is,
consequently, of the vastest Importance to me, and will be more or less happy
or miserable, according as I behave myself while I continue here (Part I. Chap.
II. 19. And Chap. III. 21.) it must therefore be the most important Duty of my
Life, while I continue in this present Condition, to be, in a good Measure,
disengaged from this World, and from my Body and Time, and to provide in the
best Manner I can, for the endless State which is before me; and, in order
hereunto, to be daily improving my Soul in Knowledge and Virtue (especially the
following Virtues, both divine and social) and to be disciplining and training
up myself in all those Accomplishments and Qualifications, which alone can be
of any Use to me when I am called off this present Stage, and which will
prepare me to be inconceivably and everlastingly happy in the Life to come.
This Duty is called, the Care of the Soul, in Opposition to the excessive Love
of the World, and the Body. And thus much for the Duties we owe to ourselves.

CHAP. III. Of the Duties we owe to GOD.
1. (II.) I PROCEED now, in the second Place, to the Consideration of the
Relation we stand in to Almighty GOD. In Pursuance of which, it is necessary
that I seriously consider what is due to the Character of such a glorious
Being, as resulting from that Relation I stand in to Him, in order that I may
be happy in Him; or what those Duties are which I owe to that All-wise,
Almighty and most just and benevolent Being, from whom I derive, and on whom I
depend; which are called the Divine Virtues, and are comprehended under the
general Name Piety; without the faithful Performance of which, I shall rob Him
of His just Due, in not conducting toward Him, as being what He is, and at the
same time rob myself of the greatest Happiness, as He is my chief Good. And,

2. (1.) INASMUCH as GOD is a Being of all possible Perfection and Excellency,
the great Creator, Preserver and Governor of the World, on whom I do entirely
depend for my Being, and all my Enjoyments here, and all my Hopes to all
Eternity, and to whom I am accountable for all that I think, speak and do (Part
I. Chap. II. 19.) it is therefore my indispensible Duty in general, to own and
acknowledge Him, and to live under a deep, serious and habitual Sense of Him as
such, and to believe in Him, and faithfully endeavor to obey and please Him in
all my Behavior. This Duty is called the Knowledge or Acknowledgment of GOD,
and Faith or Faithfulness to Him; and stands in Opposition to the Ignorance of
Him, and Atheism and Unbelief, and to a Neglect of Him, and Disregard to His
Authority and Government. And,

3. (2.) BECAUSE GOD is a Being of infinite Perfection and Excellency, and
therefore infinitely amiable in Himself, and is also the great Parent Mind, and
universal Father of Spirits, and the Source of all Beauty, Order and Happiness,
and is accordingly, as a tender Parent, unspeakably kind and benevolent to me,
and to all the World, and continually doing Good, and providing every Thing
needful for my Subsistence and Well being; and by what He is, and has done for
me hitherto, has given me all the Reason imaginable to believe, that if I
faithfully endeavor to resemble and please Him, He will not fail to make me
for ever as happy as my Capacity will admit of ( Ibid. And Chap. III. 16, 17,
20.) it must therefore be my Duty to love and delight in Him, as my chief Good,
gratefully to acknowledge His Bounty and Beneficence, to prefer Him and His
Service before all Things, and to be wholly devoted to Him, both in the sincere
Intentions of my Heart, and the whole Conduct of my Life. This Duty is called
Love and Gratitude to GOD, in Opposition to all Ingratitude and Hatred or
Aversion to Him and His Service. And,

4. (3.) SINCE GOD is infinitely sufficient to all the Purposes of my
Happiness; has infinite Wisdom to direct Him, Power to enable Him, and Goodness
to incline Him to assist me, in the Discharge of all my Duties, to support me
under all Difficulties, to keep me from whatsoever may hinder or interrupt my
Well-being, and to secure to me every Thing that is requisite to my Happiness
(Ibid.) it must therefore be my Duty to confide in Him entirely, in the Way of
Well-doing, with a secure Acquiescence in His All-wise and All-powerful
Goodness, which, in one Word, is His All Sufficiency. This Duty is called
Trust, or Confidence in GOD, in Opposition to all Distrust and Diffidence. And,

5. (4.) FORASMUCH as GOD is thus infinitely benevolent, wise and powerful, and
cannot but know what is best for me, infinitely better than I do myself, and
cannot be misled or controuled in any Dispositions He is pleased to make
concerning me, and will not fail to bring Good out of Evil, and to make Evil
subservient to Good, and to bring about the best Ends by the fittest Means; nor
can He fail to consult the best Good in the Whole, in all His Commands and
Dispensations, in every Thing He requires me to do or suffer ( Ibid. And Chap.
II. 24, 25.) it must therefore be my Duty to be entirely resigned to Him, to
submit to His Orders and Allotments, and to have my Will always, as far as
possible, united with His. This is the Duty of Submission and Resignation to
GOD, in Opposition to all Murmuring, Untowardness and Rebellion. And,

6. (5.) BECAUSE GOD is the incomprehensibly great and tremendous moral
Governor of the World; as there is nothing that I may not hope for from His
Goodness, that is really subservient to my best Good, if I faithfully endeavor
to obey and please Him; so, on the other Hand, from His Displeasure and
Justice, I cannot not but expect the severest Punishments, if I live in
Opposition to His Will, who is constantly present with me, and sees all the
Tempers of my Heart, and Actions of my Life, and will, in a little Time, call
me to Account for them (Part I. Chap. II. 19.) it must therefore be my Duty
always to stand in Awe of Him, and to think and speak of Him in the most
reverend Manner; to set Him ever before me, as a Witness and Spectator of all
my Behavior, and to be above all Things concerned not to displease Him, and
solicitously careful, to approve myself to Him in all that I do. This Duty is
called Reverence, or the Fear of GOD, in Opposition to all Irreverence and
Disregard toward Him. And,

7. (6.) SINCE GOD is Himself infinitely Holy, True, Just and Good, and
consequently the great Pattern and Standard of all moral Perfection, and since
it is evident, from the intelligent, free, active Nature, that He has given
me, that I am capable of some good Degree of Resemblance or Likeness to Him,
and since by how much the more I resemble Him, by so much the more perfect and
happy I shall certainly be (Part I. Chap. II. 5.) I must therefore think it my
Duty to be as like Him as ever I can, in all my Tempers and Deportment; Holy as
He is Holy, Righteous as He is Righteous, True and Faithful, Kind and Merciful
as He is. This Duty is called the Imitation of GOD, in Opposition to
Unholiness, or being unlike to Him.

8. (7.) AND lastly, since GOD is that Being from whom we receive all that we
enjoy, and on whom we depend for all that we want both for Time and Eternity
(Part I. Chap. II. 6. and Chap. III. 16.) and since it is fit and right in
itself that we own him to be what he is, and of great Advantage to us that we
live under a deep and habitual Sense of this our Dependence upon him, and our
Obligations to him; and that Gratitude requires our just Acknowledgments; it
must therefore be our bounden Duty, to all these good Purposes, and for the
improving in us every Kind of Virtue, that we do, every Day that we live, most
gratefully praise him for every Thing we receive, and pray to him for all that
we want; and we live a most unnatural and brutish Life, if we neglect so to do.
And because we cannot do this with any Meaning, without that Love, Trust,
Resignation, Reverence and Imitation, which I have demonstrated to be our
Duties toward him; therefore these Tempers and Dispositions must ever be
supposed to attend all our Prayers and Praises, which are comprehended under
the general Name of Devotion, or the Worship of GOD, in Opposition to all
Profaneness, Irreligion, Superstition and Idolatry.

9. AND inasmuch as Mankind do thus depend upon GOD, and receive innumerable
Favors from Him, not only in their single, but also in their social Capacity;
and as there is a peculiar Fitness in it, as we are all Children of the same
common Parent, the great Father of Spirits, that we should, not only severally,
but jointly, as Brethren, pay our common Homage, and testify our grateful Sense
of our common Dependence and Obligations; and as our joint Performance of this
Duty does open Honor to Him in the World, and has, at the same time, a
natural Tendency, the more ardently to affect our Hearts with Devotion to Him,
as well as to unite us the more strongly in mutual Benevolence one toward
another: It is therefore fit, right, and our bounden Duty, to worship GOD, not
only severally, but also jointly, in our Families, and in public Communities,
upon such stated Seasons, and in such Forms, Gestures and other Circumstances,
as are generally agreed upon to be most expressive of Reverence, Duty and
Devotion to him. This is the great Duty of public Worship; to the honorable
Support of which, we ought, therefore, both for GOD's Sake and our own, jointly
and liberally to contribute. And thus much for our Duty toward GOD.

CHAP. IV. Of the Duties which we owe to our Fellow Creatures, or to those of
our own Species and Society in general, and to our Relatives in particular.
1. (III.) I PROCEED now, in the third Place, to the Consideration of the
Relation we stand in one to another: In Pursuance of which, it is necessary
that I seriously consider what is due to the social Character as resulting from
that Relation; or what those Duties are which I owe to my Fellow Creatures,
especially those of my own Species, which are called Social Virtues, and are
comprehended under the general Term, Benevolence, of which they are so many
Branches; and they consist in general, in treating or behaving toward them as
being what they and I are, that I may be happy in them, and they in me. And as
to these,

2. (1.) SINCE, as I have above observed, being furnished with Reason and
Speech, and social Affections, we are evidently made for Society (Part I. Chap.
I.. 13.) and since we are placed, by the Condition of our Nature, not only in a
State of Dependence on Almighty GOD, our common Heavenly Parent, but also in a
State of mutual Dependence on each other for our Well-being and Happiness (for
that in many Cases we cannot well subsist without each others Help, and by the
good or ill Use of our Powers, we are capable of being either very useful, or
very mischievous to each other) and since, by the Powers of Reflection and
Reasoning, we are enabled to place ourselves in each other's Stead, and to make
a Judgment from what we feel in ourselves, how we should wish to be used by
others, and to discover what is best in the Whole, for our common Safety and
mutual Advantage ( Introd. 17.) it is from these Considerations manifest, that,
in general, it must be our Duty to consider ourselves as such, and so situated
and related, as in Fact we are, and to cultivate a hearty good Will one toward
another as Brethren; to do nothing hurtful, and all that is beneficial to each
other, as far as we may or can, and to enter into Combinations and Compacts for
promoting our common Interest and Safety; to resign every one his own private
Advantage to that of the Community, in which his own is best secured, and to
make the common Good the Standard by which to judge of his own Duty and
Interest, and be inflexibly governed by it. Such, in general, is the
Disposition of Benevolence, which, taking its Rise in the first Connections of
the Individuals, spreads through the whole social System, and issues in, and
strongly prompts to public Virtue, and the Love of our Country, and our
Species, in Opposition to every Thing that implies Malevolence, Selfishness and
private Spiritedness. But to be particular in its several Branches rising from
the lowest to the highest:

3. (2.) INASMUCH as I have several Things which I call my own, to which I have
a Right, being possessed of them either by the free Gift of God, or by my own
Activity and Industry, with his Blessing, and find they are greatly useful to
my Comfort and Well-being, and feel a great Pleasure in the unmolested
Enjoyment of them, and Trouble in being deprived of them: And when I am
molested or deprived by any One, without having justly forfeited them by my own
Misconduct, I feel a strong Sense of Injury, and must therefore by Reflection
conclude, that every other Person has the same Sense of Injury in the like
Case as I have; it must therefore be my Duty, and the first Dictate of
Benevolence, not to do Injury to others in any Respect, whether it relates to
their Souls, Bodies, Names or Estates, etc. and the rather, as I would wish to
suffer no Injury from them in any of these Respects. (Part I. Chap. I. 7.) This
Disposition is called Innocence and Inoffensiveness, in Opposition to
Injuriousness and Mischievousness.

4. (3.) PARTICULARLY; since I know that I cannot endure to be hurt in my
Person, either in Soul or Body; to be robbed of my Liberty, Estate, Wife or
Children; to be belied or misrepresented in my Name or Reputation, and to be
deceived and imposed upon, or any wise oppressed in my Dealings, etc. as I must
conclude it to be wrong to treat others ill in any of these, or the like
Instances; so, on the other Hand, for the same Reason that I think it right,
that, in Subordination to the public Sense and Interest ( i. e. supposing no
Forfeiture) every One should allow me the quiet and peaceable Enjoyment of my
own, my Innocence, Life, Limbs, Liberty, Estate, Wife, Children, etc. and speak
nothing but the Truth to me, and of me, and deal equitaby, fairly and
faithfully with me, and in every Thing treat me as being what I am and have,
(Ibid.) I must think it right, and my Duty accordingly, from the same
Principle, to treat others with Equity in all these Respects, as I would wish
to be treated by them in the like Circumstances. And this Duty is called
Justice, in the strict Sense of it, which comprehends Examplariness, Equity,
Truth and Faithfulness, in Opposition to all Instances of Injustice; such as,
tempting to Sin, Murder, Maiming, Adultery, Fornication, Stealth, Robbery,
Oppression, Lying, Defamation, Unfaithfulness to Engagements, Cheating, and all
Deceitfulness.

5. (4.) FOR the like Reasons; since I feel a great Delight in being well
respected, duly esteemed, well spoken of, and kindly treated by others (Part I.
Chap. I. 13.) I must think it my Duty, from the same benevolent Principle, to
treat others with all such Dispositions, Acts and Instances of Kindness and
good Usage, as I should, in my Turn, reasonably expect, and take Pleasure in
receiving; to be ready to all good Offices in my Power to others, whether
Neighbors or Strangers, whether to their Souls or Bodies; to say the best of
them, and put the kindest and most favorable Construction I can upon what they
say or do; and to conduct toward them with Humanity, Candor, Affability and
Courtesy. And as I find a great Solace under Pain and Distress in the Pity and
Assistance of others; so I must think it my Duty to have the like Sentiments of
Compassion and Tenderness toward them in the like Circumstances, whether of
Mind, Body or Estate, and should think I acted unnaturally, if I did not
contribute all I could, consistent with other Obligations, to their Comfort and
Relief. Thus by reflecting and conceiving ourselves in each other's
Circumstances (Part I. Chap. I. 5.) our Love to ourselves becomes the
Foundation of our Love to others, and causes us to take Pleasure in their
Enjoyments, and in communicating Pleasure to them; to delight in good Offices,
and in speaking kindly to them, and of them; and to sympathize with them in
their Calamities, and be ready to relieve them. All which are implied in the
general Duty of Charity, which therefore comprehends Candor, Affability,
Hospitality, Mercy, Tenderness and Beneficence, in Opposition to all Instances
of Uncharitableness, such as Censoriousness, Moroseness, Envy, Ill Nature,
Cruelty and Hardheartedness.

6. (5.) INASMUCH as it is manifest, from what was observed above, under the
first general Head of the Duty we owe to Society, that it is incumbent upon us
to do all we can to promote the Weal of our Fellow Creatures, and to have a
principal Zeal for the general Good, on which our own Welfare does very much
depend (Part I. Chap. I. 13. And Part II. Chap. I. 6.) and since there may be
several Things in our Power, above and beyond what mere Justice and Humanity
require, wherein we may be useful to others, and to the Public; I must think
it my Duty, from the same Principle, to be of a free and generous Spirit as far
as I am able; to be forward and ready to every good Work, and to delight in
doing Good, as GOD himself does, whereinsoever I may be useful in promoting his
Honor, and the Good of Mankind; and this from a Sense of Gratitude to him for
all I enjoy. This Virtue is called Liberality, Generosity and Magnificence, in
Opposition to Covetousness and Niggardliness, or a grudging, narrow and
contracted Spirit. And for any Benefits received either of GOD or Man,
Gratitude is due to the Benefactor, in Opposition to a stupid ungrateful
Spirit, which is extremely base and odious.

7. (6.) SINCE the Peace and Quietness of Society, which are indispensably
necessary to its Happiness, depend not only on our avoiding every Thing that is
injurious, and doing all that is just, kind and generous, but also upon every
One's being contented in his own Station, and faithfully endeavoring to
discharge the Duties of it, without intermeddling in Affairs that do not belong
to his Province; and upon every One's being of a Peacemaking and forgiving
Spirit, (Part II. Chap. II. 6.) I must therefore think it my Duty to keep
within my own Sphere, and mind my own Business, and do the Duty that belongs to
my own Station; and if I have done any Wrong, to repair the Injury, and make
Restitution, and ask Forgiveness, as well as to be of a forgiving Spirit
toward others, as I would hope GOD to be so toward me; and in a Word, to do
all that is in my Power for promoting and preserving Friendship, good
Neighborhood, and the Public Tranquillity. These Duties are called Quietness,
Peaceableness, Friendliness, and Forgiveness, in Opposition to Ambition,
Contention, Unfriendliness, and Irreconcileableness.

8. (7.) AND lastly, since, according to the present Condition of our Nature,
it cannot be but various Relations and Connections must obtain, as being
necessary for the Subsistence and Well-being of our Species, both in Mind, Body
and Estate; such as Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and
Servants, Magistrates and Subjects, Teachers and Learners, etc. (Part I. Chap.
I. 13.) it must be my Duty, which soever of these Conditions I am placed in, to
behave myself suitably to it. If I am a Husband or Wife, I must be tenderly
loving, faithful and helpful: If I am a Parent. I must be tender of my helpless
Offspring, and do all I can to instruct and form both their Minds and Manners
to the best Advantage, and provide for them in the best Manner I am able,
consistent with every other Duty: And if I am a Child, I must be grateful, and
tenderly helpful, dutiful and obedient to my Parents, from whom I derived, and
on whom I do or have depended, when unable to help myself; and have a peculiar
Tenderness and Friendship for my Brethren and Sisters, and other Relatives: If
I am a Master, I must be just and kind to my Servant; and if I am a Servant, I
must be dutiful, obedient and faithful to my Master: If I am a Magistrate, I
must be zealous for the public Good, and upright, faithful and impartial in my
Administration: And if I am Subject, I must be submissive and orderly, in
Obedience to Law and Authority: If I am a Teacher, I must be ready and faithful
to guide and instruct: And if I am a Learner, I must be willing to be guided,
and ready to follow the Instructions that are given me, and to reward the
Labors of such as have the Care of me. In a Word, if I am in any superior
Station of Life, I must be treatable and condescending; and if in an inferior
Condition, I must be modest, respectful and decent in all my Deportment; and
whatsoever Situation of Life it is, wherein I am placed, I must take Care to
act up to my Character, whatever it be; both in those lesser Societies founded
in Nature, which are called Families, and those larger Societies founded in
Compact, whether tacit or explicit, called Civil Governments; to which all
Honor, Submission and Obedience, is due in all Things lawful and honest, in
Opposition to all Instances of Turbulence, Faction and Rebellion. All which
relative Duties, in Conjunction with the rest, are indispensibly necessary to
the moral Order, and the public Peace and Happiness of Mankind, and terminate
in that noblest of all social Passions, the Love of our Country, joined with an
ardent Zeal for every Thing that concerns its Weal. And thus much for our
Duties toward Society.

CHAP. V. Of the Subordinate Duties, or Means for the more ready and faithful
Discharge of the Duties above explained.
1. HAVING thus deduced, from the great Principles of Truth above demonstrated,
the principal Branches of moral Duty founded on them, both toward GOD,
ourselves, and our Neighbors; I proceed now to enumerate the chief of those
subordinate Duties, which are to be performed as Means of Culture, for
begetting, improving and perfecting in us those moral Virtues. And this will be
done in answer to the two last of those great Enquiries ( Introd. 27.) viz. V.
Whether I am what I ought to be? And if not, VI. What I ought to do, as a Means
in order to be and do what I ought, and so in order finally to answer the End
of my Being?

2. THE first of those two last Enquiries will put us upon the great Duty of
Self-examination, which is a Duty of very great Importance to us; for if we do
not examine and truly know ourselves, and what is our real State, how shall we
be able to rectify what is amiss, that we may be in a Condition to give a good
Account of ourselves at last? And as Seneca says, Illi mors gravis incubat, --
qui nimis notus omnibus, -- ignotus moritur sibi. He dies a grievous Death
indeed, -- who too much known to others, dies -- a Stranger to himself!

3. (1.) LET this then be the first Rule in order to answer the Demands of
these last Questions, and the first Means in order to become what I ought to
be, viz. To inure myself to a Habit of serious Consideration; to suspend
Acting, till I have well weighed the Importance of Things (Part I. Chap. I. 5.)
that I may be under Advantage to make a wise Choice; and, according to
Pythagoras's Advice to his Disciples Carm. Aur. Vide Hierocles.
, to enter frequently into my own Heart, and take a daily and exact Survey of
my Life and Conduct; to deal faithfully with myself, and to endeavor to think
of my Temper and Behavior, as being what it really is, without Partiality, and
without Hypocrisy.

4. (2.) AND as the Knowledge of myself is of so great Importance, let it be
the next Rule, that I entertain and cultivate within myself a due Sense of the
Dignity of my reasonable, active and immortal Nature, as exhibiting a small
Image of the Divinity (Part I. Chap. I. 6, 7, 8. And Chap. II. 5.) and have a
great Reverence for it as such: This would make me always careful to do nothing
unworthy, indecent or misbecoming it; on the contrary, I should be concerned,
on all Occasions, to act the decent Part in Life, or what duly becomes it in
all its Relations. Let me especially have a great Reverence for the Sense of my
own Conscience, as being the Divine Light irradiating me within, and the Voice
of the Deity Himself, that I may take the utmost Care, not to live in any
Course whatsoever for which my own Reason and Conscience shall reproach me; for
as One's Conscience is properly One's Self, it is the greatest Madness in the
World, for a Man to live at a perpetual Variance with himself, and the first
Point of Wisdom, always to keep Friends with himself.

5. (3.) SINCE I depend wholly on GOD, and He is ever present with me, a
constant Spectator of all my Behavior, in the inward Temper and Thoughts of my
Heart, as well as in all the outward Actions of my Life, and since I must
expect to give an Account of myself to Him (Part I. Chap. II. 9. and 19.) it
must be my next Rule, by the frequent Practice of Meditation and Devotion, to
possess myself habitually of a most great and reverend Sense of His universal
Presence, All Sufficiency and Purity, as well as a most abasing Sense of my own
Dependence, Guilt and Impotence, that I may be awfully careful to do nothing
unworthy of His Presence and Inspection, and the Relation I stand in to Him,
and seriously endeavor, in a humble Dependence upon His gracious Assistance,
so to guard and discipline my Thoughts and Affections, as well as my Words and
Actions, that they may not be displeasing to His All-seeing Eye, but may obtain
His Favor and Approbation, in whose moral Character is contained all that is
perfectly right and amiable in itself, and on whose Approbation and Friendship
my Happiness all depends.

6. (4.) IT will also be of very good Use to promote in me every Sort of
Virtue, and especially those of the social Kind, to entertain a great Sense and
Value of the Opinion and Estimation of Mankind, who, even the most corrupt of
them, and much more the best (whose Esteem is highly to be valued) cannot but
entertain a high Opinion of Virtue, and a Reverence and Esteem for the virtuous
Character, as well as a Contempt of the Vicious (Part I. Chap. I. 11.) so that
if I have any Desire of either doing any Good to them, or enjoying any Good
from them, it must deeply concern me to endeavor to recommend myself to their
good Opinion, and this can no otherwise be done, than by always acting the
sober, honest, faithful, generous and benevolent Part, in all my Intercourse
with them, which cannot fail of engaging an Interest in their Good Will, Esteem
and Confidence, and must therefore be the wisest Course I can take to answer
all my most important Purposes, with Regard to my comfortable Subsistence in
this present Life, as well as to qualify me for a better.

7. (5.) IF upon a due Survey of my Temper and Behavior, I find I have acted
an unreasonable and vicious Part, as my own Conscience will not fail to
reproach me for it, so I cannot avoid feeling a great Deal of Uneasiness and
Remorse upon reflecting on my Misconduct (Part I. Chap. I. 6. And Chap. III.
11.) Now whenever I feel any Remorse or Misgivings, I should do wisely to be so
far from stifling, that I should rather indulge those Sentiments, and let them
have their Course, and improve them into a truly contrite Grief. And if I am
sorry for what is amiss in my Conduct, as I ought to be, I shall utterly hate
and abhor every Vice, as being contrary to GOD, and all that is right and
reasonable, and never be easy till I reform and return to my Duty, and be
governed by my Reason and Conscience, and a Sense of Duty to GOD, and every
wise and good Consideration, for the Time to come. And herein consists the
Nature of true Repentance and Reformation. And,

8. (6.) IF I truly repent of my past Misconduct, I shall be very watchful
against all those Temptations that I find myself exposed to, either from my own
Lusts and Passions within, or from the Solicitations of a corrupt and
degenerate World without me (Part I. Chap. I. 15.) As I must consider Virtue to
be my greatest Interest, being my true Perfection and Happiness, I shall
therefore avoid all ill Places and bad Company, where I am most liable to
Danger, and consider every Person and Thing as an Enemy that has a Tendency to
rob me of my Innocence, and mislead me from a steadfast Course of virtuous
Behavior; and, by Consequence, I shall account those my best Friends that most
promote Virtue by their good Advice, Example, etc. and therefore shall be
ambitious of keeping the best Company, and following the best Examples.

9. (7.) I SHALL carefully observe what is my ruling Passion, and endeavor to
make an Advantage of it to promote the Interest of Virtue, and against all the
Tendencies of Vice, and be more especially upon my Guard against those
particular Failings, that I find my own Constitution is peculiarly incident to,
whether of the concupiscible or irascible Kind; whether those of Self-conceit,
Lust, Covetousness, Intemperance, etc. on the one Hand, or those of Resentment,
Anger, Impatience, Envy, Revenge, etc. on the other; there being, perhaps,
scarce a Person to be found, but has some particular Tendency toward some one
Vice more than another, founded in the very Frame of his Nature, which
administers Matter and Occasion for particular Humiliation and continual
Discipline. (Part I. Chap. I. 15.)

10. (8.) IF I find I have any such particular Tendency, and have contracted
any vicious Habit by my Indulgence to it, I must inure myself to Self-denial
and Mortification, till I have got the Ascendant of it! I must consider Slavery
as a most wretched and abject Condition, and therefore never content myself,
till I have gained and maintain the Mastery of myself, so as to be at Liberty
readily to follow the Dictates of my Reason and Conscience, and act up to the
Dignity of my rational active Nature, and the several Connections founded in my
Relation to GOD and my Fellow Creatures, and so become what I ought to be.
(Part I. Chap. III. 11.)

11. (9.) IN order that I may discipline myself to a Readiness in denying
myself in Things unlawful, and the more effectually tame and subdue my untoward
Lusts and Passions, and keep them under a due Regimen; it may be very fit and
useful that I frequently practice Self-denial in Things lawful and indifferent;
for if I always accustom myself to go to the utmost Bounds of my lawful
Liberty, it is a Million to One but I shall be frequently trespassing upon
them; for which Reason I should do well, by frequent Fasting, to deny myself
such Measures or Kinds of Food and Drink, etc. as might otherwise be lawfully
indulged; and particularly such as have a peculiar Tendency to inflame my Lusts
and Passions (Part II. Chap. II. 4.)

12. (10.) I MUST, from a Sense both of the Glory and Dignity of Virtue, and my
Duty to Almighty GOD, resolutely go into every virtuous Practice, however so
much against the Grain, in which I shall act the truly heroic and manly Part;
nor must I content myself in any certain Pitch of Virtue to which I imagine
myself to have attained, but must press forward, and persevere in a continual
Struggle, and perpetual Warfare, throughout my whole Life, and be daily
endeavoring to make all possible Proficiency in Virtue, till I gain the utmost
Facility and Readiness in every virtuous Practice that the Frailty of my Nature
will admit of (Part I, Chap. III. 21.)

13. (11.) IN order to this, I should do well to consider seriously the vast
Importance of that inestimable Talent, Time, of which I must expect to give an
Account to the Author and Preserver of my Being, as well as of all my other
Talents. Let therefore an habitual Sense of the Shortness, at the utmost, and
of the extreme Uncertainty of my Life, be ever present and uppermost in my
Thoughts, that I may husband every Moment to the best Advantage for the doing
what good I can, and acquiring of true Wisdom and Virtue, which are Treasures
of the most inestimable Value, as being those only which can make me truly
useful and happy here, and which alone I can carry with me into the future
State of my Existence, and which will make me for ever and completely happy,
when Time shall be no more (Part I. Chap. III. 21.)

14. (12.) AND, lastly, in order to my being the more effectually engaged to
the faithful Discharge of my Duty, in conforming to all the Laws of Virtue, I
must endeavor to keep up in my Mind an habitual Sense of their most weighty
Sanctions, viz. The Happiness or Misery unavoidably attending my Obedience or
Disobedience, both in this and the future State. In this present Life there is
the truest Enjoyment of all reasonable Pleasures, without that Remorse and
Terror which attends those that are unreasonable and vicious; Health of Body,
and Peace of Mind; the Love, Esteem and Confidence of Men, and the Approbation,
Favor and Blessing of GOD; true Joy and Satisfaction in Prosperity, and solid
Comfort and Calmness in Adversity; the most reasonable Prospect of Success in
our Affairs here, and a most comfortable Prospect of Happiness hereafter; so
that if there was to be no Life after this, a Course of Virtue would be
infinitely preferable to that of Vice, which is unavoidably attended with
endless Mischiefs and Perplexities: The Wicked are like the troubled Sea, and
seldom live out Half their Days; whereas, the Ways of Wisdom and Virtue are
Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace; Length of Days is in her
Right Hand, and in her Left Hand Riches and Honor. Sup. 6, and Part I. Chap.
III. 11.

15. BUT then if we look forward to the Life to come, there opens a most
glorious Prospect for eternal Ages. As on the one Hand there are most
tremendous Punishments attending our Disobedience, there being unavoidable Pain
and exquisite Misery necessarily connected with every Vice, arising from the
Remorse and Reproaches of our own Minds, and the fearful Apprehensions and
dismal Effects of the divine Displeasure: So, on the other Hand, there are as
certain and most glorious Rewards attending a Course of Obedience, there being
unspeakable Pleasure and exquisite Happiness necessarily connected with the
Practice of every Virtue, arising both from the natural Fruits and Effects
thereof, and from the Approbation and Applauses of our own Minds; from all the
Delights of a happy Society, and from the Favor and Friendship of Almighty
GOD, to the endless Ages of Eternity (Part I. Chap. III. 11. and II. 19.)

16. IF I diligently attend to these Things, and live in the constant Practice
of them, together with the daily Offices of true Devotion, having thereby a
frequent Intercourse with the great Father of Spirits, and Pattern of all
Perfection, which vastly tends to the Proficiency of Virtue, I shall, at
length, be so inured to the Love and Practice of every Virtue, humane, divine
and social, in the Perfection of which consists the highest Happiness of my
reasonable and immortal Nature, that I shall at length be prepared to quit this
present Stage, and to give a good Account of myself to GOD, being in some good
Measure qualified for that perfect State of Virtue and consummate Happiness,
which is to be expected in the future State of my Existence; according to that
excellent Saying of the wise King; The Path of the Just is like the shining
Light, which shines more and more unto the perfect Day.

CHAP. VI. Of the Connection between the Law or Religion of Nature and
Christianity.
1. HAVING thus given a short Sketch of the first great Principles of Moral
Philosophy, or what is called the Religion or Law of Nature, as being founded
in the Nature of GOD and Man, and the Relation between Him and us, and our
Relation one to another, in Conformity to which consists the highest
Perfection and Happiness of human Nature, and may therefore be called the
Religion of the End Dr. Scott, P. I.
, and also the Chief of those subordinate Duties subservient thereunto, which
may be called the Religion of the Means: I shall now conclude, by giving a very
short Summary of revealed Religion, and show the Connection between them and
CHRISTIANITY, or the Religion of the Mediator, which is to be considered as the
great infallible Means of our Instruction and Reformation, for begetting,
improving and perfecting in us all the Virtues of an honest Heart, and a good
Life, and for ascertaining to us the Favor of GOD, and a blessed Immortality;
to which it is so admirably subservient, that it should seem the greatest
Inconsistency imaginable for a Man to be a real Friend to what is called
Natural Religion or Morality, and at the same time not to adhere firmly to the
Christian System.

2. FOR although these great Truths and Duties, appear thus evident and
demonstrable, in the Nature of Things, to any serious, thinking and considerate
Person, who has had Means of Information, and Leisure to give a proper
Attention to them; and many wise Men in the Heathen World (doubtless much
assisted in these Enquiries, by Instructions handed down to them by Tradition,
from the first Parents and intermediate Ancestors of Mankind) have made very
great Proficiency in these Speculations; yet it must be allowed, that so many
are the Cares and Businesses, and the Pleasures and Amusements of this Life,
which do unavoidably engage the Attention of the general Rate and Bulk of
Mankind, that it cannot be expected they should ever attain to the distinct
practical Knowledge of them, in their present Condition, without Instruction
from above. So that an express Revelation is highly expedient, and indeed
extremely necessary, as a Means in order to render Men in any tolerable Measure
capable of answering the End of their Being; especially if it be considered,
that no Philosopher or Teacher, without a sufficiently attested Commission from
GOD, even if he could discover all these Laws of Nature, could have Authority
to enjoin them, as being what indeed they are, the Laws of GOD, without which
they would make but a small Impression on them; and that this would be the most
direct and compendious Method of answering this Purpose Vide Lactant. L. III.
C. 26, 27.
.

3. AND indeed, considering that the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of the DEITY
are such, as could not fail to enable and dispose Him to do all that was fit
and necessary to conduct the Creatures which He had made (and would not desert)
to that Happiness which was the End of their Being; I cannot doubt but that
even the first Parents of Mankind, upon their first coming into Being, and in
their State of Innocence, being then perfect Strangers to every Thing about
them, and having every Thing to learn that related to their Well-being, must,
in some Manner or other, have been taught by GOD himself, many Things relating
to Food, Language, the Origin of Things, Philosophy and Religion, etc. (at
least so much as was necessary for them to begin with) in order to their
Well-being and Happiness. And when they had sinned against him, and fallen into
a State of Mortality and Misery, it is natural to conclude, from the same
Goodness and Compassion of the Father of Mercies, that he would take Pity of
them, and teach, them (what they could no otherwise know) in what Method, and
upon what Terms, they should be pardoned and restored to his Favor, and how
they should conduct for the Future, so as to be accepted with him, and restored
to that Immortality which they had lost. All this is also very agreeable to the
most ancient authentic Account we have of the Origin of Mankind.

4. FROM which Account rightly understood Vide Mr. Hutchinson's Works, or Lord
Chief Justice Forbes's Thoughts concerning Religion, which deserve to be well
considered.
, it appears, that as GOD had, very probably before the Fall, made the Garden
of Eden an Emblem and Means of Instruction, both in Philosophy and Religion,
and explained his necessary Existence and Personality in a coessential Trinity,
signified by the divine Names, and represented by the Sun as an Emblem, in his
threefold Condition of Fire, Light and Spirit (He being to the intellectual
World analogous to what the Sun is to the Sensible) so it is no less probable
that he set up the Cherubims with the Flame and Sword as Hieroglyphics or
Emblems of the Gospel, to teach Man, after the Fall, how to obtain Pardon, and
regain the Immortality he had lost, which was represented by the Tree of Life;
by instructing Him, not only in the Knowledge of the Trinity, Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, but also of the Incarnation, Sacrifice, Satisfaction and
Intercession of the Son of GOD, in the Fullness of Time to appear as the
Instructor, Redeemer, Lord and Judge of Mankind, and of the Presence and
Assistance of the Spirit of GOD for our Renovation and Sanctification. At least
this is certain, that Sacrifice must have been then instituted as an
emblematical Means of Reconciliation, and Hopes were given of a glorious
Person, who should recover them from the Mischief into which the Tempter had
seduced them Vide Bishop Sherlock on Prophecy, and Shuckford's Connection.
; all which were doubtless much more particularly explained to them, than is
accounted for in the very short History of the Fall; and no Account can be
given how human Sacrifices, Polytheism and Idolatry could have obtained among
Mankind, but upon Supposition of their being so many Corruptions of these
original Emblems and Instructions, as Popery is of Christianity. And as the Law
of Moses was* doubtless, a Revival of these original Symbols and Instructions,
with Laws to guard against those Corruptions; so GOD, by the Spirit of
Prophecy, explained more and more in the following Ages the spiritual Meaning
of those Types, and the great Design He had in View, and had in some Measure
discovered: And there manifestly appears, in the Whole, to have been one
uniform consistent Scheme carried on, from the Beginning downward, aiming all
along at one End, viz. The Instruction and Reformation of Mankind; their
Restoration to the divine Favor, and a sincere and persevering Obedience to
the original Law of their Nature, finally to issue in their entire Perfection
and Happiness Vide Bishop Butler's Analogy.
.

5. ACCORDINGLY (1.) we have abundant Evidence, both from Prophecy and
Miracles, and undoubted Tradition ever since, That GOD (after such a Series of
introductory Instructions, Revelations and Institutions from the Beginning) did
at length send a glorious Person into our Nature, whom He declared to be His
own SON, and who, being truly GOD of GOD, had inexpressible Glory with Him,
even from Eternity, before the World was, being the Brightness of His Glory,
and the express Image of His Person, and by whom He visibly displayed and
exerted His Almighty Wisdom and Authority, in the Creation and Government of
the World, and in whom dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead bodily in His incarnate
State: This glorious Person GOD sent among us, to act as a Mediator between Him
and us: For as we are Sinners, it was very fit He should treat with us by a
Mediator; and as we are Men, it was no less proper, that He should do it by one
that should appear in our own Nature, and converse familiarly among us, that he
might the better instruct us by his Example as well as his Precepts.

6. AND (2.) as this was fit in itself, so accordingly the Fact was, That in
His incarnate State, He abundantly proved by his Miracles, that He was indeed a
Teacher come from GOD; and, being clothed with divine Authority, He taught us
all the great Principles of moral Truth and Duty, above demonstrated, much more
clearly than they had been generally known before, together with others merely
depending on Revelation and Institution, relating to His Mediation and the New
Covenant; and that in a Manner and Language, admirably suited to make the
strongest Impressions upon the Minds of Men, not only of the more thinking, but
even of the general Rate and lower Sort of the human Kind; and enjoined them
upon us, under the most weighty Sanctions, and affecting Considerations, as the
Will and Law of GOD concerning us; and at the same time set us a most amiable
Example, that we should follow His Steps.

7. AND (3.) as it was very necessary, that we should be strongly affected with
a Sense of the Heinousness of Sin, as the most effectual Means to bring us to
Repentance, and at the same time have sufficient Security for Pardon, upon our
Repentance, it pleased GOD to appoint that His blessed SON incarnate (freely
submitting to it) should die for both these Purposes; that He should die for
us, a Sacrifice for the Atonement of our Sins, and to set before us an Emblem
of the Greatness of our Guilt, and the Heinousness of our Sins, in order the
more effectually to induce us to repent of them, and forsake them; and to
purchase and ascertain to us Pardon and Acceptance, upon our Repentance and
Reformation; which merciful Purpose and Intention He had exhibited from the
Beginning by the Institution of Sacrifices. Accordingly the blessed JESUS was
graciously pleased to submit to a most painful and ignominious Death for our
Sakes, making His Soul an Offering for our Sins, as the true Antitype of all
the ancient Sacrifices (in which He had been exhibited, as the Lamb slain from
the Foundation of the World.) And thereupon, in Virtue of the Right thereby
acquired, He did, in GOD's Name, promise and ascertain, through His Merits and
Mediation, Pardon to our sincere Repentance and Faith in Him, and the
Acceptance of our faithful, though very weak Endeavors, to yield a constant and
persevering Obedience to all His holy Laws for the Time to come.

8. AND (4.) because of our great Weakness and Inability to repent, believe and
obey, without GOD's Help, amid so many Temptations to the contrary; He has
also, for CHRIST's Sake, sent His Holy SPIRIT (by whom He has always
immediately exerted His Almighty Will and Power, in the Creation, Preservation
and Government of the World) and promised His gracious Assistance to our
earnest Prayers and Endeavors, to enable us to withstand the Temptations that
lie in our Way, to mortify our Lusts and vicious Habits, and to comply with all
the Duties incumbent upon us: Who, accordingly, is ever ready to assist us in
all our honest and faithful Endeavors, and to render them effectual for the
Renovation of our Souls, and to enable us to bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance, even all the Fruits of a sincere, universal and persevering
Obedience to the Gospel.

9. And (5.) SINCE as Things now stand, we cannot have much else in View here,
besides a short and uncertain Life, attended with many Calamities, and issuing
in the Death or Dissolution of our Bodies; and should otherwise have been
generally attended with much Darkness and Uncertainty about a future Life;
CHRIST has moreover, by his Sufferings and Death in our Behalf, taken away the
Curse and Sting of our Calamities and Dissolution, and turned them into a
Blessing, and made them a Means of promoting our greatest Good; and has by his
triumphant Resurrection and Ascension, opened to us the glorious Views of a
blessed Immortality both in Body and Soul, and ascertained to us an eternal
Life of unspeakable Happiness to be bestowed upon us, in Consequence of our
final Perseverance in Well-doing conformable to his Instructions.

10. AND (6.) in the mean Time, and in order to qualify us therefore; as we
could not, without Instruction from above, be well assured what Worship and
Service would be acceptable to GOD, it was very needful that CHRIST should
teach us how to worship and adore him acceptably, even in Spirit and in Truth.
For as GOD has been pleased to derive down all his Blessings and Favors to us
through the Mediation of his blessed Son, and by the Influence of his Holy
Spirit, so (as these Relations demand correspondent Duties) it is fit, as he
has taught us, that all our Worship and Service, our Prayers and Praises, and
all our Hopes of Acceptance, should be offered up to Him, in Dependence on the
Influence and Assistance of his Holy Spirit, and through the Merits and
Mediation of his dear Son, who is the very Truth (the Way, the Truth and the
Life) as the Condition of their obtaining Favor and Acceptance with him.

11. AND (7, and lustly) as every Thing that concerns the Weal of Mankind is
best promoted by social Combinations; so GOD has by his Son JESUS CHRIST, the
great Messenger of his Covenant, appointed that we should jointly combine and
unite together in promoting our Happiness, which is the great End of our Being,
and particularly that we should live in the constant Exercise of social
Religion for that Purpose. He has therefore instituted Baptism, as a Rite of
our Admission into this Society, to represent and oblige us to all Purity and
Holiness in Heart and Life, and to seal to us the great and precious Promises
of the Covenant of Grace, and the holy Eucharist, as a further Means to ratify
and confirm them, and to keep up in our Minds a lively Sense of His Sufferings
and Death, and of the mighty Obligations we are under, from His dying Love to
us, to be faithful to Him who died for us, and arose again, and who is the
great Author and Finisher of our Faith; and moreover to persevere in Love and
Unity, as Brethren and Fellow Members of that holy Community of all good Men
and Angels, whereof he is the Head and Lord. And as he would have us live in
the constant Use of these Means for the promoting in us all the Virtues of a
holy Life, which contribute to our final Happiness, he has appointed an Order
of Men to administer these sacred Rites, and to preside in the Exercise of this
social Religion and Worship, and to explain and inculcate the Divine Philosophy
which he has taught us, in order to qualify and prepare us for that eternal
Happiness which he has provided and ascertained to us; so that we are to
consider the Church and public Worship as the School of CHRIST, wherein
immortal Spirits clothed with Flesh, are to be trained and bred up as
Candidates for eternal Glory.

12. NOW therefore, all those who do firmly believe all the great Truths of
this holy Religion, whether natural or revealed, i. e. whether founded in
Nature, or merely depending on Revelation; and who under the Influence of them,
do by Faith look for Assistance and Acceptance, only through his Mediation, and
in the Method which he has prescribed; and who, conformable to this holy
Discipline of Christianity, do heartily repent and forsake their Sins, and
return to their Duty, and faithfully live and act in all their Behavior, both
toward GOD and Man, from a Sense of Duty and Gratitude to GOD, their great
Creator and Benefactor, and to JESUS CHRIST, their great Mediator, Lawgiver
and Judge, and persevere in their Obedience, faithful to the Death. All these
are said to be true Christians; and, even while they continue here, they belong
to that heavenly Community which is called His Kingdom, whereof He is the Head,
Lord and King, the great Vicegerent of GOD the Father, and shall, through His
Merits and Mediation, be accepted in Him, and be inconceivably happy with Him,
in His glorious Kingdom in the Life to come.

FINIS.
Mr. WOLLASTON'S PRAYER, R. N. Page 120. SOMEWHAT ENLARGED.
1. O THOU Almighty BEING, on whom depends the Existence of the World, and
every Creature therein, and by whom all Things are governed and conducted to
the several Ends of their Being, according to the various Natures which Thou
have given them: By whose good Providence I have been brought into Being, and
most kindly preserved and provided for, from the Beginning of my Life to this
Moment, and enjoyed many undeserved Advantages and Favors, with regard both to
my Well-being in this Life, and my everlasting Happiness in the Life to come;
and especially the inestimable Advantages of Thy Holy Gospel, made known to us
in Thy Name, by Thy blessed Son JESUS CHRIST, and all that He has taught, and
done, and suffered for us; I beseech Thee graciously to accept of my most
grateful Sense and Acknowledgment of all Thy Bounty and Beneficence toward me.
Bless JEHOVAH, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless His holy Name: Bless
JEHOVAH, O my Soul, and forget not all His Benefits: Who forgiveth all thine
Iniquities, and heals all thine Infirmities: Who redeemeth thy Life from
Destruction, and crowns thee with loving Kindness and tender Mercies! Bless
JEHOVAH, O my Soul!

2. AND whereas, notwithstanding the mighty Obligations of Thy Goodness, I
have, in many Instances, ungratefully and perversely sinned against Thy most
righteous and reasonable Laws, in neglecting to do what Thou have commanded,
and in doing what Thou have forbidden; I humbly profess before Thee, my utter
Abhorrence of all my Perverseness, and my serious Resolution, by Thy Grace, to
be more watchful against all Temptations, and to amend my Conduct for the Time
to come. And I do most earnestly beg the Forgiveness of my many Offenses,
through Thy infinite Mercies in Thy Son JESUS CHRIST, and that Thou will for
His Sake, deliver me from the evil Consequences of all my Transgressions and
Follies. And I humbly beseech the Assistance of Thy Holy Spirit, to endue me
with such Dispositions and Powers, as may carry me innocently and safely
through all future Trials; and to enable me upon all Occasions, from a Sense of
Duty to Thee, my GOD, to behave myself conformable to Thy most holy Laws, which
are indeed the Laws of Reason and Nature, in all Wisdom, Probity and Virtue,
and in the faithful Discharge of all the Duties of Temperance, Piety and
Benevolence, with a humble Dependence upon thy infinite Wisdom, Power and
Goodness, and under a lively and habitual Sense of thy All-seeing Eye, and the
Account I am to give of myself to Thee.

3. I HUMBLY beg Leave to commend both myself and mine to Thy most gracious
Protection and Conduct, this Day, and at all Times: Suffer none of thy
Creatures to injure us, no Misfortune to befall us, nor us to hurt ourselves or
others, by any Error or Misconduct of our own. And vouchsafe us clear and
distinct Apprehensions, and a right Judgment in all Things, together with all
virtuous Tempers and Dispositions, and so much Health and Prosperity as may be
truly good for us in this our present State of Probation. Grant that I may, at
least, pass my Time in Peace, with Contentment and Tranquillity of Mind; and,
that having faithfully discharged my Duty to Thee, my GOD, to my Family and
Friends, and to my Country and all Mankind, and endeavored to improve myself
in all virtuous Habits, and useful Knowledge, and done all the Good I could,
throughout the whole Course of my Continuance in this World, I may, at last,
calmly and decently take my Departure from this present Stage, and then happily
find myself in a better State; even a State of unmixed and endless Happiness in
the Life to come.

ALL which, and whatsoever else Thou see needful for me and my Friends, and
all Thy People, and for all Orders and Conditions of Mankind, and especially
the Afflicted, I humbly beg, through the Merits and Mediation of Thy blessed Son
JESUS CHRIST, comprehending them with myself, in that most excellent Form of
Prayer which He has taught us; Our Father, etc.

The END.

