Mr. Cotton's Election SERMON. MAY 30, 1753.

Wisdom, Knowledge, and the Fear of God recommended to Rulers and People.

A SERMON Preached in the Audience of His Honor SPENCER PHIPS, Esquire
Lieutenant-Governour and Commander in Chief, THE HONORABLE His MAJESTY's
COUNCIL, AND House of REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, IN NEW ENGLAND. May 30th. 1753. Being the Day For the
Election of His MAJESTY's COUNCIL for the PROVINCE.

By JOHN COTTON, A.M. Pastor of the Church in Newtown.

BOSTON: N.E. Printed by JOHN DRAPER, Printer to His Honor the
Lieutenant-Governour and Council. 1753.

In COUNCIL, May 31. 1753.
ORDERED, THAT Jacob Wendell and Samuel Watts, Esqrs give the Thanks of this
Board to the Reverend Mr. John Cotton, for his Sermon preached Yesterday before
the GENERAL COURT, being the Anniversary for the Election of COUNSELORS, and
desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

S. PHIPS. Copy examined, per THO. CLARKE, Dep.Secr.
AN ELECTION SERMON.
ISAIAH XXXIII.6. AND Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the Stability of thy Times,
and Strength of Salvation: The Fear of the Lord is his Treasure.
IN our Context we have an Account of the great Distress and Danger Judah and
Jerusalem should be brought into for their Impiety and Injustice, Behold their
valiant Ones shall cry without; through Grief and Fear because of their invading
Enemies; -- and the Ambassadors of Peace shall weep bitterly; probably, because
of their great Degeneracy and Backslidings from the holy Truths and Ways of God.

The holy Prophet also speaks of the great Consternation the Sinners of Zion
should be bro't into, and how the Saints and Servants of the Lord should pray
to God for them, in such a Day of Distress, in that Language, v. 2. O Lord be
gracious to us, we have waited for thee, be thou their Arm every Morning, our
Salvation also in the Time of Trouble.

And then we have an Account of the holy Security, they should enjoy in the
midst of this Trouble, v. 15th and 16th. He that walks righteously, and
speaks uprightly, he that despises the Gain of Oppressions, that shakes his
Hand from holding of Bribes, that stops his Ears from hearing of Blood, and
shuts his Eyes from seeing Evil, he shall dwell on high, his Place of
Defense shall be the Munition of Rocks.

The Prophet further speaks of the Destruction of their Enemies, and God's
appearing on the Behalf of his People, in which he would be greatly glorified,
v. 5th. The Lord is exalted, for he dwells on high; he has filled Zion with
Judgment and Righteousness; and v. 10th. Now will I rise, says the Lord, now
will I be exalted; and then speaks of the happy Settlement of Jerusalem, and
the Jewish State upon this. Religion should revive, and their civil State
flourish.

This is evidently intimated in the Words of my Text, together with the
following Context.

Their pious King Hezekiah and his People were hereby encouraged with an
Assurance, that the blessed God should be their Savior and Refuge, in every
Day of Trouble.

Here Is

1st. A gracious Promise of God for them to stay themselves upon; Wisdom and
Knowledge shall be the Stability of thy Times, and Strength of Salvation.

Here Is a desirable End proposed, says an Expositor Mr. Henry.
on this Place, and that is the Stability of the Times; that Things be not
disturbed and unhinged at Home; and the Strength of Salvation; Deliverance and
Success against Enemies abroad.

And here is the Way and Means for obtaining this End; Wisdom and Knowledge; not
only Piety, but Prudence.

And this it is which by the Blessing of God will be the Stability of our
Times, and the Strength of Salvation; that Wisdom which is first pure, then
peaceable, and which sacrifices private Interest to the public Good. Such
Prudence as this will establish Truth and Peace, and fortify the Bulwarks in
Defense of them.

Here Is

2dly. A pious Maxim of State, for the King and his People to govern themselves
by, The Fear of the Lord is his Treasure -- God's Treasure in the World, from
which he receives his Tribute, or rather, it is the Prince's Treasure. A good
Prince accounts it so, that Wisdom is better than Gold, and he shall find it so.

And then observes, that true Religion is the best Treasure of any Prince, or
People; it denominates them rich.

Be sure, those Places that have wise and good Rulers, able and faithful
Ministers, serious and pious People, increasing among them, are really rich,
and it contributes to that which makes a Nation rich in this World. It is
therefore most certainly the Interest of a People to encourage and support
Religion among them, and to take heed of every Thing that threatens to hinder
it.

The Words I have read may be looked upon as a remarkable gracious Prophecy,
concerning the Peace and Prosperity of the Church and People of God, not only
under the happy Reign and Government of this excellent King, but in future
succeeding Ages, with respect both to their civil and religious Interest: And
if it might be fulfilled in the Age and Day in which we live, we shall
certainly see better Times than we have done in the Times and Years wherein we
have seen so much Evil, for which the Ambassadors of Peace, and many faithful
Servants of the Lord, have had cause to weep bitterly.

In speaking to these Words, I shall enquire,

I. What may be more particularly meant by the several Phrases, or Expressions,
in the Text?

And then,

II. Show of what Advantage it would be to the Church and People of God, to
have these Words fulfilled in our Times.

And then make some Application of the Subject.

I am,

1. To show what may be more particularly meant or implied in the several
Phrases or Expressions in the Text.

And,

First, What by Wisdom and Knowledge?

It may mean Knowledge and Wisdom both humane and divine; and that comes from
above, from the Father of Lights, the inexhaustible Fountain of Wisdom and
Understanding, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. That
Wisdom that dwells with Prudence, and that shall be profitable to direct in all
Matters of Importance, with respect to outward and temporal, civil or
ecclesiastical Affairs, in which the public Welfare is concerned; and more
especially with respect to that Knowledge and Wisdom that is divine and
heavenly, which makes Men of all Orders, and in every Station, Wise for their
spiritual and eternal Interests; so that they know God and Jesus Christ, whom
to know is Life eternal.

An infinitely wise and gracious God is pleased to accompany with his Blessing
the Means of a religious and learned Education, for the qualifying and
accomplishing Men for the Service of God, and their Generation, in various
Offices and Stations, in which they may be instrumental of promoting the
public Good, in a greater or lesser Sphere, as God in his Providence shall
call, incline, and dispose them to it.

And all these Talents, Advantages and Qualifications shall be bro't under a
solemn Consecration to the God of all their Powers, and sovereign Lord and
Ruler of Heaven and Earth, who gives Wisdom to the Wise, and Knowledge to them
that know Understanding.

I proceed to show in the next Place, What may be meant by Wisdom and Knowledge
being the Stability of the Times. And now; This may imply in it, a People's
being distinguishingly favored of God, under the Reign of a King whose Throne
shall be established on the sure Foundations of Wisdom and Justice; and under
the Administration of wise and good Rulers, in subordinate Places of Authority,
both in Church and State, who shall improve their Wisdom and Knowledge for the
Advancement of the Honor and Glory of God, and the best Good of their People,
that they may serve the Lord and their Generation, according to the Will of God
in their several Places and Stations.

More particularly;

That Magistrates and Rulers are Men knowing in the Times; Men of Political
Wisdom; Men of Knowledge and Prudence, able to discern Time and Judgment; wise
Men and Understanding, and known among their Tribes, and Men of extensive
Knowledge, and capable of judging what may be most conducive to promote the
public Weal in all Respects; are Men of a Genius for Government, and able to
judge what Laws may be best enacted for promoting the civil and religious
Interests of their People, and for suppressing all Sin and Wickedness, that
threatens the Ruin of a People in all their Interests; are Men of Wisdom to
search into Matters to be considered by them, that they may judge on which side
Truth and Justice lies, and have a Discretion and Aptness to apply the
Knowledge they have to Ends of Government, and to the Nature and Circumstances
of those Things that are brought under their Consideration.

And are Men of Courage and Resolution, not afraid of the Faces of Men; and are
just and upright, impartially distributing Justice to others, and have a steady
constant Care and Zeal to promote Justice and Righteousness among Men; and are
a Terror to evil doers, and a Praise to such as do well, and exemplary for
every Thing that is virtuous and Praiseworthy.

And are indeed truly pious and godly, which introduces a divine Blessing on
other Qualifications, and adds a Luster and Beauty to them all; for the purest
Politics (as an able excellent Ruler and Divine of our own says) are but
insipid Trash, unless they have this Seasoning. It is this that influences and
actuates the Principles of moral Honesty and Justice. It is this that must
strengthen the Hearts, and rouse the Courage of Rulers, against the most daring
Transgressors. It was therefore excellent Counsel of Jethro to Moses, Exodus
18.21.
Thou shall provide out of all the People able Men, such as fear God, and place
such over them to be Rulers.

Such was godly King Hezekiah, and a singular Pattern he was of a tender
Concern for Religion, and the Ministers of it, to the Honor of whose Memory it
is recorded, that he spoke comfortably to all the Levites, that taught the good
Knowledge of the Lord, 2 Chr. 30.22. and Chapter 31.4
and took effectual Care that the Portion of Maintenance assigned them by the
Law of God, should be rendered to them, that they might be encouraged in the
Work of the Lord.

And those who follow his Example, will in their Day contribute to the
Stability of the Times.

Again;

That the Ministers of the everlasting Gospel, are Men of Knowledge and
Understanding; Pastors after God's own Heart; to whom God gives the Tongue of
the learned, to know how to speak a Word in Season to them that are weary, are
Scribes well instructed in the Doctrines and Duties of pure and undefiled
Religion, and wise to win Souls, are endowed with proper Gifts and
Qualifications for the Discharge of the great Trust reposed in them, and have
brought them under a sacred Dedication to the Service of their Lord and Master,
and are willing to spend and be spent in the Service of Christ and precious
Souls, especially those committed to their more immediate Inspection and
Charge, though the more abundantly they love them, the less they should be loved.

They will faithfully declare the whole Counsel of the Lord, whether Men will
hear, or whether they will forbear; will cry aloud, and not spare, but lift up
their Voice like a Trumpet, to show to the People their Transgression, and the
House of Jacob their Sins.

They will plainly show to Men the Way of Salvation prescribed in the Gospel,
and in Meekness instruct those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them Repentance, to acknowledging of the Truth, and that they way recover
themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who have been taken Captive by him at
his Will. They will give no just Cause of Offense in any Thing that the
Ministry may not be blamed on their Account. And if they should be reviled,
they will revile not again, if they should suffer, they will threaten not, but
commit themselves to that God that judges righteoustly; and endure all
Afflictions and Trials as good Soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ, as knowing
that if they are faithful to the Death, they shall receive the Crown of Life.

Again;

That the common People are well instruted, and evidently under the good
Impressions of a religious Education, and desirous of living quiet and
peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty; that they may obey the Laws of
God, and the Laws of their Rulers, if not repugnant to the Laws of God.

That they are, in a Word, a reformed, righteous and godly People, steadfastly
adhereing to the holy Truths and Ways of God, and are adding to their Faith,
Virtue, to Virtue, Knowledge, to Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness,
Brotherly-kindness and Charity. And being wise and endued with Knowledge, do
show out of a good Conversation their Works with Meekness of Wisdom; and do
nothing through Strife or vain Glory, but every Thing in lowliness of Mind,
esteeming others better than themselves, and will let their Moderation be known
to all Men; and all Bitterness and Wrath, Anger, Clamor and Evil-speaking
shall be put far away; and they will put on as becomes the Elect of God, Bowels
of Mercies, Kindness, humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, Forbearance
and Forgiveness toward others; if they have a Quarrel against any, and follow
after the Things that make for Love and Peace, and Things wherewith they may
edify, strengthen and comfort one another, that they may live in Love and
Peace. And though they may have a Diversity of Opinion and Judgment in Matters
not essential and fundamental, are notwithstanding resolved, by the Help of
God, to maintain the Unity of the Spirit in the Bonds of Peace, and to guard
against all Alienations of Heart one from another, and be ever willing to do
all kind and good Offices for one another, as they have Ability and Opportunity
for it.

And having thus shown what may be meant by Wisdom and Knowledge being the
Stability of the Times; I pass to consider the next Expression, of Wisdom and
Knowledge being the Strength of Salvation.

It may imply in it, That this will lay a happy Foundation for obtaining from
an infinitely wise and gracious God, all that Mercy and Salvation we may stand
in need of as a People.

That the Lord will ride upon the Heavens for our Help, and in his Excellency
upon the Skies; That he will stir up his Strength and come and save us: that he
will scatter all impending, dark and threatening Clouds, by the Light of his
Countenance; that Salvation shall be nigh to us, and Glory yet dwell in the
Land.

That he will pour out his Spirit on our Rulers, Ministers and Churches, and
revive his Work in the midst of the Years, and in Wrath remember Mercy.

That our Times shall be Times of a more general, thoro' Repentance, and
Reformation of all God-provoking Evils; and God will then save us from our
Sins, and desolating Judgments, and yet delight to build and to plant us, and
not to pluck us up, and pull us down.

That though he may give us the Bread of Adversity and the Water of Affliction,
our Eyes shall yet see our Teachers, that they shall not be removed into
Corners, nor our Candlesticks be removed out of their Places, and we shall not
be in vain wishing for the Days of the Son of Man.

It may imply in it, That the Name of the Lord is our strong Tower, and that we
shall flee to it and be safe; that we may put our Trust in God, as the Hope of
his Israel, and their Savior and Strength in every Day of Trouble; and that we
shall be hid under the Shadow of his Wings until these Calamities shall be
over-past, and shall finally obtain Salvation with eternal Glory in the coming
World.

I proceed to consider briefly, the other and last Expression, of the Fear of
the Lord being his Treasure.

It may, in a Word, mean the Lord's giving to Kings and Rulers a Heart to fear
him: And their chief Treasure and Delight, as an Expositor says on this Place,
is, and shall be in promoting the Fear and Worship of God, which shall be a
great Honor and Safeguard to themselves and People.

It may mean, That the Lord has wro't in their Hearts, a reverential holy Fear
of Him, so that they set the Lord always before them, and stand in awe of him,
as the supreme, almighty Ruler and Governor among the Nations, and as one
continually looking down from Heaven upon them, to see how they seek and serve
him, and discharge the various Duties incumbent on them, in their several
Places and Stations; and hence are sollicitous to keep a Conscience void of
Offense toward God and Men, in all their Administrations, and to have the
Testimony of their Consciences for them, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity
they have their Conversation in the World.

And this is an inexpressible Support and Consolation to them, in their various
Offices and Stations.

No worldly Treasure is so near and dear as this; they prefer their Interest in
the Approbation and Favor of God, to all the Honors, Riches and Pleasures of
this World.

They esteem it much better to get Wisdom than Gold, and to get Understanding,
rather to be chosen than Silver. They love the Commandments of God above Gold;
and make the Word of God the Man of their Counsel, a Light to their Feet, and a
Lamp to their Paths. And all their Tempers and Behaviors in every Station and
Condition of Life, are under the Government of this holy Principle, ruling in
their Hearts.

And now I proceed to the second general Head of my Discourse.

II. To show of what Advantage it would be to the Church and People of God, to
see the Accomplishment of this Prophecy in our Times?

It Is certain nothing could conduce more to keep off wasting Judgments, and to
promote the public Weal and Tranquillity of a People, both in their civil and
religious Interests, than to be endowed with this Wisdom, Knowledge, and the
Fear of God. This would bring on that Stability of the Times, and Strength of
Salvation, we so much need at this Days.

And here I shall only say,

1. It would be a happy Means of averting threatened Judgments.

And,

2. Of procuring all needed Mercies and Blessings.

1. It would be a happy Means of averting threatened Judgments.

It is the want of this Wisdom, Knowledge, and Fear of the Lord that provokes a
holy and righteous God to send down his Judgments on us. So it was with his
professing People of old, who were called on Hosea, Chapter 4th.
to hear the Word of the Lord, who had a Controversy with the Inhabitants of
the Land, because there was no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God; but
Swearing, and Lying, and Stealing, and committing Adultery, and other
scandalous Iniquities abounding in the midst of them; and therefore the Prophet
says, The Land shall mourn, and every One that dwells therein shall languish;
and Destruction be bro't upon them for lack of Knowledge. Because they had
rejected Knowledge, God would also reject them. They had forgotten the Law of
their God, and he would also forget their Children: And because they sinned
against him, as they were increased, therefore he would change their Glory into
Shame; punish them for their Ways, and reward them their Doings.

The Prophet Isaiah says concerning this People, Chap. 59th.
None calls for Justice, nor any pleads for Truth, they conceive Mischief,
and bring forth Iniquity, and there is no Judgment in their Goings, they had
made them crooked Paths, and by going therein should not know Peace; and
therefore Judgment would be far from them, neither should Justice overtake
them; they waited for Light, but behold Obscurity, for Brightness, but they
walked in Darkness: Though they looked for Judgment there was none, and for
Salvation, but it was far from them.

And what now was the Cause of all this? -- Their Transgressions were
multiplied, and their Iniquities testified against them, in transgressing and
lying against the Lord, and departing away from their God, speaking Oppression
and Revolt, conceiving and uttering from the Heart, Words of Falsehood; and
Judgment was turned away backward, and Justice stood afar off; Truth was fallen
in the Street, and Equity could not enter; and the Lord saw it, and it
displeased him that there was no Judgment, and so the Wrath of God came down
upon them. God has expressly declared in his Word, that if his People will not
be reformed, but walk contrary to him, he will walk contrary unto them, and
punish them yet seven Times more for their Sins.

But what Encouragement have we to fear the Lord, and obey his Voice; and that
upon our Repentance, and returning to the Lord, he will have Mercy on us, and
not bring threatened distressing Calamities upon us; that we shall be delivered
from Earthquakes and Wars, Famine and Pestilence, and every other desolating
Judgment, and the Lord would repent him of what further Evil he had thought to
do unto us.

Again,

2. It would be a happy Means of procuring all needed Mercies and Blessings.

God has in his Word abundantly encouraged the Bestowment of such Blessings, if
we become a righteous and godly People.

We might then hope for God's gracious Presence with his People; that his Eye
would be on them for good continually; that he would appoint Salvation for
Walls and Bulwarks, as he did about Zion; and command Deliverance and Salvation
for them in Times of Fear and Danger, and blast the Attempts of their invading
Enemies, by mavelous Interpositions of Providence, as in Times past.

And when their Ways please the Lord, will cause their Enemies to be at Peace
with them, and their Peace should be as a River, and their Righteousness, as
the Waves of the Sea.

And the Throne shall be established by Righteousness, and that Righteousness
abound, that shall exalt his People; and we shall feel the happy Influence of
it, in all Orders and Societies of Men.

Our Civil Rulers would be then Ministers of God for Good; Fearers of God, Men
of Truth, and Haters of Covetousness; zealous in discountenancing all
Immorality, Sin and Wickedness, and promoting Piety and Virtue, Peace and good
Order.

We should have our Judges restored, as at the first, and our Counselors as at
the Beginning. We might then hope for a happy Union in their Counsels, for
promoting the public Tranquillity; that Judgment should run down our Streets as
Water, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream, have it is free Course and due
Exercise among us; that our Officers should be Peace, and Exactors
Righteousness; and the Cry of Unrighteousness, Oppression and Extortion be no
longer heard in the Land.

And Things should yet go well in the midst of us.

And we should be smiled on in our ecclesiastical and religious as well as
civil Affairs; and the Land be always favored with a learned, orthodox, pious
and faithful Ministry; and the Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ have Grace,
Mercy and Peace multiplied to them, and be flourishing under the Dews of
Heaven; be as well-water'd Gardens and fruitful Fields, which the Lord has
blessed; and be increased with the Increases of God; filled with true and
genuine Converts, and Converts with Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy
Ghost.

And the Means of Education should be remarkably smiled on; Schools of Learning
always duly promoted and encouraged, for the Instruction and Government of our
Children and Youth; and the College continued a great and rich Blessing to the
Land; a Fountain whose Streams shall rejoice and make glad the City and People
of God; and from whence our Churches shall be supplied with able and faithful
Pastors, to feed them with Knowledge and Understanding, and to break the Bread
of Life unto them.

In a Word, If Wisdom and Knowledge might be the Stability of our Times, and
Strength of Salvation, and the Fear of the Lord our Treasure, we might hope
that our Privileges, religious and civil, should be continued, and transmitted
as a valuable Inheritance to the latest Posterity.

And God, even our own God, would maintain our Cause, as the Matter might
require; and raise up Friends and Benefactors for us; and disappoint the
Devices and Designs of those that wish us ill.

And we should yet find Favor before the King and his Ministers, and the
Agency for us be always under his gracious Conduct and Direction, and the
Things which belong to our Peace not be hid from them who are entrusted with
our Counsels.

Such Blessings both of the Providence and Grace of God, have we Reason to hope
for, if the Prophecy in my Text should be fulfilled, and we should become a
wise, righteous and holy People. Such Righteousness would soon exalt a People,
we are assured from the Word of God, while Sin will be a Reproach to us, and
bring down the Judgments of Heaven on us: So that we may now apprehend
something of the Advantage, it would be to the Church and People of God, to see
the Accomplishment of this Prophecy, as it would be a happy Means of averting
threatened Judgments, and procuring many desirable needed Favors and Blessings
from the Father of Mercies, and God of all Wisdom and Grace.

I now come to the APPLICATION.

And,

1. We may from what we have heard learn, the Reason why our Times have been,
and are so melancholy at this Day.

It is because Wisdom and Knowledge have not been the Stability of the Times;
the Fear of the Lord has not been our Treasure.

Multitudes have been and are destitute of the Wisdom that is from above, that
is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle and easy to (...) entreated, and that is
full of good Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy. They may be
wise in their own Eyes, and prudent in their own Sight, but not truly wise
according to the Sense that has been given of the Wisdom and Knowledge spoken
of in my Text.

They are poorly qualified for the Service of God, and their Generation,
according to the Will of God, in every Station and Condition of Life.

How many are wise to do Evil, but to do Good have no Knowledge? There Is no
Fear of God in their Hearts, or before their Eyes; they cast off Fear, and
restrain Prayer before the Lord, and will not stir up themselves to take hold
of God; are awfully indolent, slothful and careless about engaging in the Fear
and Service of God, and will not hear his Voice by his Word or Judgments.

And while it is thus with the Generality of God's Covenant professing People,
we may not look for better Times; but may fear the Infliction of more
distressing Judgments, if we remain an impenitent and incorrigible People,
refusing to be reformed.

I pass to a second Use.

2. Let us be thankful for any Tokens we have of the Lord's gracious Presence
with us.

Though it be still in many Respect a Day of Trouble and Distress, a Day of
Darkness and Gloominess, a Day of Clouds and thick Darkness, yet, blessed be
God, we are not without some comfortable Tokens that the Lord is yet among us,
and has not utterly forsaken us.

We have our Privileges, religious and civil, yet continued to us, and have
Reason for Thankfulness to God for the Smiles of his Providence on us, with
respect to such as are now in Civil Rule over us. In a particular manner for
lengthning out the Life of our gracious KING, after so many repeated sorrowful
Breaches on his ROYAL FAMILY, and so far succeeding his Administrations for
lengthening out the Peace and Tranquillity of Europe.

And that we have yet among Us wise and good Rulers, such we trust who fear
God, and espouse the Cause and Interest of his Kingdom and Glory among us; and
are, according to their Abilities and Opportunities, laying themselves out for
promoting the public Weal and Tranquillity of this People, in their most
valuable Interests.

We have cause of Thankfulness also, that we are yet favored with a learned,
useful and faithful Ministry, who have at Heart the Advancement of the Honor
and Glory of God, and the Salvation of precious Souls, committed to their
Charge, and not being ignorant of Satan's Devices are carefully guarding
against them; especially when he is by divine Permission transformed into an
Angel of Light, and endeavoring to propagate a Spirit of Enthusiasm, Error and
Delusion; are then doing their utmost to preserve their Churches from Errors in
Judgment, and Disorders in Practice; and that pure and undefiled Religion may
have a glorious Spread through the Land, without such corrupt Mixtures.

And we should be thankful, that there are yet a happy Number of Churches,
walking in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, and many faithful Saints and
Servants of the Lord, whose Hearts are established with the Grace of God, and
not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines, and are walking before God
in all his Commandments and Ordinances blameless; are meek, humble, sincere
Disciples and Followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, adorning their holy
Profession, by a sober, righteous and godly Life and Conversation; do indeed
fear God, and honor the King, and render to Caes;ar the Things which are
Caesar's; and to God, the Things which are God's; are Lovers of Peace and good
Order, praying for Kings and all in Authority, and living quiet and peaceable
Lives in all Godliness and Honesty.

These are Instances and Tokens of the Grace and Favor of God, which we should
be humbly thankful for. And may we have further Cause to be so; and may God in
his infinite Mercy, prevent the rising Generation from cherishing and
encouraging an ignorant, unlearned and unqualify'd Ministry, however it may be
with respect to many of the present Generation risen up.

May all useful humane Learning be more encouraged and promoted in the midst of
us; for Religion, (as an excellent Divine, not long since, said, in a Sermon on
such an Occasion as this) will soon Decay without Learning, and even die,
without a learned and faithful Ministry.

But I proceed to the third and last Use.

3. Let us all be exhorted to do our utmost, that Wisdom and Knowledge may be
the Stability of our Times, and Strength of Salvation, and the Fear of the Lord
our Treasure.

I would now bring this Exhortation to our Civil Rulers; to the Lord's
Ambassadors; and to the People; and so conclude.

And in the first Place,

1. With all due Deference and Respect to your HONOR, who with the Honorable
Board, have desired me, (however unworthy) to bring the Messages of God to You,
and the Assembly, this Day.

SIR,

We rejoice in the overruling Providence of God in your present Advancement to
the chief Seat of Government among us; and we trust He has done it in Favor to
this People; who, I am persuaded, are near and dear to you, and that you find a
sincere Disposition and Inclination of Heart to promote the most valuable
Interests of this People, which you have now an Opportunity for; and will, we
trust, by the Grace of God helping you, diligently and faithfully improve, to
answer the great and good Ends of civil Rule and Government.

We therefore heartily wish and pray, That you may have given, and increased to
you, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might,
the Spirit of Knowledge and the Fear of the Lord; and may have all that Wisdom
and Grace that may be needful to Conduct the public Affairs in such a manner,
as shall yield peaceful Reflections to you in the close of your Administration;
when having ruled with God as Hezekiah did, you may with him reflect and say,
Remember now, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a
perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in thy Sight 2 Kings 20.3.
. And may humbly plead with God, as another pious Ruler did, Think upon me, my
God for good, according to all that I have done for this People. Nehem. 5.19.


Such a Consciousness of your Integrity, and generous diffusive Benevolence,
will give you Peace and Comfort also, in an advanced Age, -- in the Close of
your Days, -- and even everlasting Consolation and Joy, beyond Death and the
Grave.

Let me in the next Place Address this Exhortion,

2. To the Honorable his Majesty's COUNCIL, and honorable House of
REPRESENTATIVES, now assembled in the House of God.

Hear my Words, O ye wise Men, and give Ear unto me, ye that have Knowledge.
Job 34.2.


Be now exhorted, my worthy Brethren, to do what in you lies, that Wisdom and
Knowledge may be the Stability of the Times, and Strength of Salvation, and the
Fear of the Lord our Treasure.

This has been, I trust, and will be your Prayer to the God of all Wisdom, from
whom comes down every good and perfect Gift.

You know it was the Prayer of a wise and excellent Ruler; Give me now Wisdom
and Knowledge; that I way go out and come in before this People: And God said
unto him, Wisdom and Knowledge is given unto thee 2 Chronicles. I0.I2.
. And he prayed again 1 Kings 3.9, 10.
, Give thy Servant an Understanding Heart, that I may discern between good and
bad: And the Speech pleased the Lord; and God said unto him, because thou have
asked this Thing, I have given thee a wise and an understanding Heart.

And if you, our honored Rulers, have such an Heart given to you, it will be
evident to your own Satisfaction and Comfort, and others also, in your wise and
faithful Improvement of the Privilege granted you, by the Royal Charter, in
the Elections of this Day.

You will have your Hearts and Pens employed in the Choice of those, whom you
verily believe will be able and faithful Counselors; Men of Knowledge and
Discerning, acquainted with the State and Interests of their Country, and
heartily wellaffected to it, as well as loyal to their KING. Men of Integrity,
of known Virtue and Piety, Courage and Resolution, and steady Friends to our
civil and religious Privileges; and that will conduct in our political Affairs
under the Government of a public Spirit, and a generous disinterested View to
the public Good.

If Wisdom, Knowledge and the Fear of God, are so necessary to the Stability of
the Times, and such Qualifications so requisite in civil Rulers; let the
Consideration of it have a governing Influence on your Hearts, in the public
Transactions of this Day, that you may herein approve your selves to an
omniscient GOD, who will accurately and critically observe from what
Principles, and with what Views you shall act in this important Affair.

You have been, I trust, looking out, for the most able, wise and understanding
among our Tribes, and those especially who Fear the Lord: For it cannot be
rationally though it, (as an able Divine and Ruler once said in a Sermon on the
like Occasion,) that such as have not the Fear of God ruling in their own
Hearts, are qualified as they ought to be, for the weighty Charge of Government.

It is therefore greatly to be desired and endeavored by such as have the
Liberty and Favor of choosing such an Order of Men, that those who will not
have God to rule in their own Hearts, should have as little as may be to do, in
the ruling of his People.

You have had, my honored Fathers and Brethren, many seasonable and faithful
Counsels given you on such a Day as this, in the Name and Fear of the Lord, by
his faithful Servants; and I trust you have had them so impressed on your
Minds, as that you will in the Fear of God proceed in the important Affair
before you, which so nearly concerns the Peace, Prosperity and Happiness of the
People of God among whom you live; and that we shall have abundant Cause of
Rejoicing, in the Prospect, that Wisdom and Knowledge shall yet be the
Stability of our Times, and Strength of Salvation, and the Fear of the Lord our
Treasure, and so the Lord be exalted, and our Zion filled with Righteousness.

And if you do this Day faithfully discharge the Trust reposed in you, you will
have the inexpressible Satisfaction and Comfort of contributing to it.

I shall finish my Address to our honored Rulers, with an Extract of some
[seasonable] Passages concerning the Qualifications of a good Senator, or
Representative of his Country, described by an excellent Writer, so early as in
the Reign of King EDWARD the VI th, in a Discourse on the Accomplished Senator
In the 14th Vol. of the Republic of Letters, for September, 1734.
; and well worthy of a great Attention and Regard, on such a Day as this.

The Qualifications are enumerated and described by him in the following Manner.

Before the good Senator can be thoroughly accomplished, he must be well
acquainted with the Customs of his own Country, and the Manners of his
Countrymen, their Tempers, Disposition and general Behavior, their Sentiments
and Opinions concerning the present Posture of Affairs, and all the remarkable
Occurrences and Passages of public Life.

He must thoro'ly understand the Laws of his own Country: He must be well
acquainted with the true Nature of War and Peace; what Quarrels and Enmities
his People are engaged in, and what Leagues and Treaties are subsisting between
them and their Neighbors; what Taxes are already imposed on the Subject, or
necessary to be demanded; what the Rights of the People are; and what the
Proceedings of the Ministry; what Discipline is observed; or in what Manner the
Laws are executed; what are the Dispositions of the Populace, and how at
present they stand affected; what are their Discontents of Differences; and how
they are to be allayed and pacified; what is the present State of Morality; how
the Youth of his Country are educated and employed; what Principles, Customs
and Rules of Conformity are necessary to be introduced to moralize a People;
and what is the present State of Religion, or the public Worship of God.

Nor must he be ignorant of the Genius, Laws, Manners, Interests, Rights and
Demands of his Countries, Allies and Confederates.

He must be no Stranger to the Reasons and Ends of Government, nor to the
Proceedings of all the Courts of Judicature, or public Assemblies.

He should know what daily occurs in the Administration; what are the
Characters of those he is principally concerned with; and what are the Desires
and Expectations of his Fellow Subjects.

Thus ought he to abound with Wisdom, Knowledge, and Experience.

His Resolution should be fixed in all Things to think and act aright.

He should scorn to be implicitly and servilely a Follower of the Opinions or
Dictates of others.

He should never look upon any Thing as just and right, worthy of Praise and
agreeable to his Character, but what is dictated to him by Wisdom and Virtue, by
sound Reason, and the Laws of his Country.

A Senator should also know perfectly the Nature, Limitation, and Extent of the
Kingly Authority. Kings were made, not for their own, but their People's Sake,
and should in all their Counsels and Undertakings prefer the common to any
private or separate Interest whatsoever.

The great Design of their Government is, that the Rights and Liberties of
their People might be preserved.

The Senate have an Authority, and Dignity concurrent with the Regal; and to
this Body they owe proper Deference and Regard, and should always be in
readiness to protect and defend it.

The supreme Power of Kings was intended as a Security for the good and
virtuous, and as a Terror to the Wicked. It was lodged in their Hands, as
Avengers of the Wrongs and Injuries of their Subjects, Protectors of their
Liberties, and Judges to decide between the Good and the Evil.

I will add but one Paragraph more.

A good and upright Judge is the Life and Soul of the Law, and the living
Oracle of a Commonwealth.

It is the proper Business of such a One to be the Minister of Justice, his
first and greatest Accomplishment to know and discern what is true and right.
The Laws of his Country are his only Guide and Direction, to which he will
strictly conform himself in all his Opinions, Proceedings and Sentences. From
these he will never vary in the least Point whatsoever; but will give Judgment
always as they direct, according to the well-known Principles of Justice and
Equity. Anger and Passion, Hope, Love and Affection, Hatred and Malice, and
every the least Shadow and Suspicion of these, will be banished far off, from
every Tribunal and Court of Judicature where he presides, together with Bribery
and Corruption, Fear and Terror, Adulation and Flattery, and whatsoever may
obstruct or pervert the regular Course of Justice.

Most certain it is, That no Order of Subjects whatsoever, has contributed more
to the promoting of Sedition, Strife and Oppression, than a Set of Judges, who
have been of a mercenary, corrupt and adulterous Disposition.

On the other hand, By a due and regular Course of Justice a Nation is
preserved in Peace and Unity. Love and Good Will are every where promoted;
Complaints and Grievances, Hatred and Animosities cease; and a People is raised
to that Pitch of Happiness, as to fear no Evil, and to want nothing which is
good for them.

Such useful, generous Sentiments as these, are diffused through that excellent
Work of the noble Author he refers to; and he adds, They cannot be too
universally known, too frequently inculcated, or too deeply-radicated in the
Breasts of all those, who are Lovers of the public Interest, and heartily
sollicitous for it is Preservation and Advancement.

I shall now proceed to address my self,

3. To the authorized Ambassadors of the Lord, Jesus Christ.

Reverend and dear Brethren,

It should, we well know, be in a particular, manner our great Concern and
Endeavor to make the Times better; and if God will bless our faithful Labors,
Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the Stability of our Times, and Strength of
Salvation, and the Fear of the Lord our Treasure.

Be we then exhorted to do our utmost, that this evangelical Prophecy in my
Text may be fulfilled in our Day.

The great End and principal Design of our Ministry, is to teach Men Wisdom,
Knowledge and the Fear of God.

The Priest's Lips should keep Knowledge, and the People should seek the Law at
our Mouths, for we are the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 2. 7.
.

And if we are destitute of the ministerial Gifts and Graces of the Spirit of
God, how poorly qualified shall we be for this sacred Office, by which we are
bro't so near to God!

Let us mourn for all the Provocations, We, or any of our Order of Men, have
given to God, to deny his Blessing on the Ministry and Administrations of our
Rulers, or our own; and by Faith repair to the great Sacrifice of Atonement for
Mercy and Forgiveness; and humbly beg of God to give us that divine and
heavenly Wisdom and Knowledge we so much need, to qualify us for the faithful
Discharge of our Ministry; and that he would make us wise to win Souls; and
that we may no longer have so much cause to weep bitterly because of an
unsuccessful Ministry; that we labor in vain, and spend our Strength for
naught and in vain. But if we are faithful, our Judgment is with the Lord, and
our Work with our God, and we shall be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord though
Israel be not gathered, and many should go on, to receive the Grace of God in
vain, and even die without Wisdom, and Salvation be forever far from them.

But let us beg of God, my Brethren, that we may not be sent to make any blind
Eyes blinder, and hard Hearts harder, that Men should not convert and be
healed; but that the Hand of the Lord may be with us, and a great Number
believe, and turn to the Lord, and become his willing and obedient People in
the Day of his Power; that he would therefore give to his People every where
hearing Ears and understanding Hearts, that they may know and increase in
Wisdom, Knowledge and the Fear of God; and so the Seals of our Ministry be
multiplied, who shall be our Joy and Crown of Rejoicing in the Day of the Lord,
if we may find Mercy of the Lord in that Day; and after we have preached to
others, not be ourselves Cast-aways.

May the repeated Instances of the Death of our Brethren in the Ministry,
awaken our most sollicitous Endeavors to get ready for that awful Day; and the
Death of that faithful Servant of the Lord, in a particular Manner, whom we
lately followed to his Grave The Reverend Mr. (...)
; and who was the last Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, to our Civil Rulers on a
like Occasion, and then faithfully declared the Counsel of the Lord unto them.

And may a gracious God, for the Lord's sake, cause his Face to shine again on
that Sanctuary in this Town, in such an awful Manner made desolate by the Death
of his worthy Colleague also, The Rev. Mr. Ellis Gray.
but a few Months before him, and who was from one Year to another, the Mouth
of the Assembly, to the God of all Wisdom and Grace, for Assistance and
Direction in the weighty Affairs of Government.

Help Lord, for the godly Man cease, for the Faithful fail from among the
Children of Men!

I shall now close with a Word of Exhortation,

Fourthly, and lastly, To the Body of the People. Hearken O People, every one
of you 1 Kings 22.28.
. Hear Counsel, and receive Instruction; be wise and refuse it not, as ever you
desire to see better Times.

Be you now exhorted to seek for Wisdom, Knowledge and the Fear of God, without
which we shall never see that Stability of the Times, we are so often wishing
and praying for.

If our civil Rulers are endowed with Wisdom and Knowledge, political and
divine, and are every Way qualified for their exalted Stations, yet if the
Generality of the People are ignorant and destitute of the Fear of God, are
careless and slothful in Religion, and will not forsake their evil Ways, and
return to the Lord, and the crying Sins they have been so often warned of, and
humbled for, are still abounding in the midst of them, this will be a
sufficient Provocation to a holy God, to withold his Blessing from their wisest
and best concerted Measures to promote the Prosperity and Happiness of their
People.

Whatever, says one, the Advantages are which Rulers have to promote the
People's Good, and whatever Pains they take to improve them, yet Rulers
themselves are but second Causes, and will fail in their Endeavors, and of
their Aims, as God shall withold his Blessing; and that God oftentimes does, as
a just Punishment of the People's Sins.

When any Detriment befalls the State, it is common for the Ministers of it to
bear the Blame, when as they many Times least deserve it: For if there be an
ungrateful, murmuring, proud Spirit, a mutinous, envious and rebellious Spirit
an irreligious Spirit prevailing among a People, it is not all the Counsels of
the wisest, nor Understanding of the prudent, nor the Conduct of the most
sufficient Men, that can keep off Ruin from them. Such a People may be
miserable, do their Rulers what they can.

It was not King Josiah's's Piety or Prudence (however at present it laid some
kind of Restraint upon them) that could divert the approaching lamentable Fate
of that stubborn, sinful People he had the Rule of.

There is much of the Success of Government depending upon the suitable
becoming Behavior of the People under it. If they continue impenitent and
unreformed, they may look for that awful Judgment, not to have strong Rods for
Scepters to rule them. Their Sins deserve it; and the Lord has threatened thus
to punish the Iniquity of his People. When Israel had degenerated, and their
Religion was become Formality, and their Devotion, Hypocrisy, the Lord faith,
Isa. 29.14. The Wisdom of their wise Men shall perish, and the Understanding of
their prudent Men shall be hid. Thus Samuel threatens the People, 1 Samuel 12.25.
But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your
King. When the Lord forsakes those that have the Rule of his People, no wonder
if we here cause to complain as in Isa. 3.12. They which lead thee, cause thee
to err. But the Rise of this Mischief is often in the Wickedness of the People.
So when God left David to sin in numbering the People, it is said, It was
because God's Anger was kindled against Israel. 2 Samuel 24.1.
And so will the Sins of his prossesing People now, enkindle his Anger against
them, and bring yet greater Darkness and Distress upon them.

When a People highly favored of God with a precious Day of Gospel Grace and
Advantages for getting of Wisdom, will not hear Counsel and receive
Instruction, but despise Reproof; and will not obey the Voice of their
Teachers, yea, hate Knowledge, and will not choose the Fear of the Lord; it may
be looked on as a Time of awful Deadness and Degeneracy indeed. And if it be so
with us at this Day, yet we are now to hear the Voice and Call of Christ the
Incarnate Wisdom of God, in such pungent, affectionate Language as that Prove
8th Chapter beg.
; Does not Wisdom cry, and Understanding put forth her Voice; she utters her
Voice in the Streets; she cries in the chief Place of Concourse; in the City
she utters her Words, saying, unto you, O Men, I call, and my Voice is to the
Sons of Men; O ye simple understand Wisdom; and ye Fools be of an understanding
Heart. How long ye simple ones, will ye love Simplicity, and the Scorners
delight in their Scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge? Turn you at my Reproof;
behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you Prove. 22.23.
.

And what Encouragement have we to seek for Wisdom, Knowledge and the Fear of
God: Prove. Ch.3d.
My Son, if thou will receive my Words, and hide my Commandments with thee, so
that thou incline thine Heart unto Wisdom, and apply thine Heart to
Understanding; yea, if thou will cry after Knowledge, and lift up thy Voice for
Understanding; if thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hid
Treasures, then shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord, and find the
Knowledge of God: For the Lord gives Wisdom; out of his Mouth comes Knowledge
and Understanding. He lays up found Wisdom for the Righteous; He is a Buckler
to them that walk uprightly. He keeps the Paths of Judgment, and preserves
the Way of his Saints. Then shall thou understand Righteousness and Judgment
and Equity, yea every good Path. When Wisdom enters into thine Heart, and
Knowledge is pleasant unto thy Soul, Discretion shall preserve thee,
Understanding shall keep thee. And in the third Chapter, from the 13 th Verse,
Happy is the Man that sindeth Wisdom, and the Man that gets Understanding;
for the Merchandise of it is better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the
Gain thereof than fine Gold. She is more precious than Rubies, and all the
Things thou cannot desire are not be compared to her. Length of Days is in her
right Hand, and in her left Riches and Honor. Her Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. She is a Tree of Life to them that
lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that retains her. Exalt her, and
she shall promote thee: She shall bring thee to Honor when thou do embrace
her. She shall give to thine Head an Ornament of Grace, a Crown of Glory shall
she deliver to thee.

What greater Encouragement can we desire, my Brethren, to seek and plead for
divine and heavenly Wisdom and the Fear of God? But yet how many, though they
have now a Price in their Hands for getting this Wisdom, have no Heart to it?
And are practically saying to almighty God, depart from us, for we desire not
the Knowledge of thy Ways.

And the Fear of the Lord, is so far from being their Treasure, that this World
with it is Honors, Riches and Pleasures, is dearer to them, and more esteemed
and valued, than the Favor of God, or the Riches of an heavenly Inheritance.

Their Time and Tho'ts are swallowed up in worldly Pursuit; in adding to their
worldly Possessions and Treasures; and they spend their Money for that which is
not Bread, and their Labor for that which satisfys not. The Cares of the World
and Deceitfulness of Riches choke the Seed sown in their Hearts, and so it
becomes unfruitful: The Spirit of this World eats out the Vitals of Religion.
And though they may keep up a Form of Godliness, they are utter Strangers to the
Power of it, governing their Hearts and Lives.

Have we not Reason to fear, that the Number of such has been awfully
increased, and great Provocation thereby given to God, to scatter Darkness in
the Paths of our Rulers, and to bring us into perplexing Straits and
Difficulties on many Accounts, out of which we are not extricated to this Day?

The lamentable Degeneracies and Backslidings of this People, have been the
procuring Cause of all the Tokens of the divine Anger.

And if they shall persist in them, it will look awfully with respect to the
Infliction, not only of more temporal Judgments, but of spiritual Plagues and
Judgments too, which are more to be deprecated than any other; and we shall
have reason to fear that the Lord has cast many away from his Presence, and
taken his holy Spirit from them, (...) let them alone in Sin, and given them up
to their own Hearts Lusts, and to walk after their own Counsel, and will suffer
them to live only to fill up the Measure of their Iniquities, and to treasure
up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of
God.

But may God of his infinite Mercy be better to us than our Fears; and by
gracious Influences of his Spirit, revive his Work in the midst of the Years,
and in Wrath remember Mercy for the whole Body of this People, in giving
Wisdom, Knowledge and the Fear of God to them; that our Flesh may no longer
tremble for fear of God, and have so much reason to be afraid of these
Judgments being inflicted on us.

And we shall have reason to hope they are not as yet; if this People shall be
generally stirring up themselves to engage in the Fear and Service of God, to
get Wisdom, and with all their gettings to get Understanding.

And O that all the People of the Land were wise and understood this, and would
consider their latter End! This is the affectionate Wish of the great God
concerning this People; and so is that, O that there were such an Heart in
them, that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always, that it
might be well with them, and their Children forever!

To draw toward a Close.

Let all who have an Interest at the Throne of Grace, unite in our humble and
servent Supplications to that God by whom Kings reign, for our KING in supreme,
and all in subordinate Places of Power and Trust:

That our rightful and lawful Sovereigh, King GEORGE the Second, may be wise as
an Angel of God; that he may be long continued a nursing Father to his Church
and People; both at home and abroad; and that the PROTESTANT SUCCESSION in his
illustrious House may abide before the Lord, and no Weapon formed against it
ever prosper.

And that there may be a Succession of PRINCES on the British Throne, who shall
patronize the Cause of Liberty, and pure Religion, so long as the Sun and Moon
shall endure.

That the KING may be always favored with wise and faithful Counselors, and
the Things which belong to the Nation's Peace not be hid from those who are
entrusted with their Counsels; and that in their Peace we may have Peace.

That our PRIVILEGES, civil and sacred, may be continued; that we may never
come to know the Worth of them by the Want of them.

That Wisdom and Knowledge may be the Stability of our Times; that GOD would
therefore vouchsafe his gracious Presence with our General Assembly this Day,
in the important Affair before them, and in all the public Affairs relating to
the Peace and Prosperity of the Province through the Year; that all may be
overruled to the Advancement of the Glory of God, And the best Good of this
People; and that the providential Presence of God may still be as a Wall of
Fire round about us, and that his spiritual Presence may be the Gory in the
midst of us, and that on all our Glory, he would create a Defense.

To conclude,

Let us pray, That He who dwells between the Cherubims would shine forth, stir
up his Strength and come and save his People, and graciously appear in all our
Mounts of Difficulty, and extricate us out of all those perplexing
Difficulties, our Provocations of a holy and righteous God have bro't us into;
that his tender Mercies may speedily prevent us, now we are brought so low;
that the God of our Salvation would help us; for the Glory of his Name, and
deliver us, and purge away our Sins for his Name's Sake; and that he would make
us glad according to the Days wherein he has afflicted us, and the Years
wherein we have seen Evil.

That he would therefore pour out his Spirit, rain down Righteousness, and
revive his Work in the Hearts of all Ranks, Orders, and Ages of Men, and so
prepare this People for further Mercy and Salvation, even for the Fulfillment of
the Words in my Text, And Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the Stability of thy
Times, and Strength of Salvation; the Fear of the Lord is his Treasure: And
those also of the same evangelical Prophet Chap. 58.8, 9.
, Then shall thy Light break forth as the Morning, and thine Health shall
spring forth. speedily, and thy Righteousness shall go before thee; the Glory
of the Lord shall be thy Rere-ward; Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall
answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am.

NOW unto the Kind eternal, immortal and invisible, the only wise God, our
Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power for ever and ever.

AMEN.
THE able and excellent Ruler and Divine, I have once and again had Reference
to in the foregoing Sermon, was Governor SALTONSTALL, in his Election Sermon,
preached in the Colony of Connecticut in the Year 1697.


