Mr. Harrington's Century-SERMON, May 28th. 1753.

A Century-SERMON Preached at the First-Parish In Lancaster, May 28th. 1753.

By TIMOTHY HARRINGTON, Pastor of the first Church in Lancaster.

If it had not been the LORD, who was on our Side, now may Israel say -- If it
had not been the LORD who was on our Side when Men rose up against us; then
they had swallowed us up quick, when their Wrath was kindled against us --
Blessed be the LORD, who has not given us a Prey to their Teeth. DAVID. I will
remember the Years of the right Hand of the Most-High -- I will remember the
Works of the LORD: Surely I will remember thy Wonders of old. ASAPH. BOSTON: N.
E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, opposite to the Prison in Queen Street,
1753.

To the First-Parish in LANCASTER.
THE following Discourse is Dedicated by theirs in the Gospel.

T. Harrington.

A Century-SERMON.
PSALM cxxix. 1, 2. Many a Time have they afflicted me from my Youth, may
Israel now say:
Many a Time have they afflicted me from my Youth; yet they have not prevailed
against me.

A Century from the Incorporation of the Town, this Day expires -- And although
it was long a Frontier, and has often suffered the Fury of the Enemy; is yet
fair, and flourishing.

The Church of GOD has been his peculiar Care in all Ages of the World -- And
therefore although the Seed of the Serpent have often persecuted the Seed of the
Woman; yet they have never been able fully to accomplish their Desires -- The
Adversary has often lifted up the Horn, and they that hate Mount-Sion have
often bro't her low; yet they have been no more than a Scourge in the Hand of
GOD, to chastise his People, to correct what was amiss, and to make them more
humble and servent in his Service: Yet the Enemy meant not so.

The Church in this World is in a militant State, and may well expect shocking
Assaults from those that hate her. -- She has been troubled on every Side, and
perplexed, but not in Despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not
destroyed; a Bush burning, but not consumed.

It was frequently thus with Israel, while they continued the peculiar People
of God -- Many a Time have they afflicted me from my Youth up, may Israel now
say, many a Time have they afflicted me from my Youth; yet they have not
prevailed against me.

Interpreters agree that this Psalm was written, when some new and heavy
Calamity either pressed hard upon, or impended that People. -- But whether when
Senacherib, with the Host of Assyria invaded Judea; or when Sanballat, and
Confederates, after the Return of the Captivity, made Interest against them in
the Court of Persia; or at some other calamitous Season; is neither easy, nor
important to determine.

For whatever was the particular Occasion of the Writing; the Design is
manifestly to excite that People to a serious Recollection of the numerous
Calamities bro't upon them by their Enemies, ever since their being taken into
Covenant with, and made the peculiar People of God -- As also to acknowledge
the merciful Interpositions of God for them; who notwithstanding their frequent
Rebellions against him, had not suffered their Enemies so far to prevail, as to
cut them off from being a People.

Yet they have not prevailed against me, is not to be understood in the
strictest Sense, as if they had never been overcome, or bro't into Subjection
by their Enemies -- for in this Sense it is not true, as appears from the
Scripture-History of that Church and People. --

The Meaning therefore is, they have never been able wholly to extirpate us, or
to cut us off from being a Church and Nation. --

Our Text is well paraphrased by a learned Prelate. Bp. Patrick in loc.


Our Adversaries may Israel now on this Occasion say, have very often, and very
sorely distressed us, ever since we began to be a People; it is hard to tell
how often, or into how great Straits they have reduced us, since we began to be
a Nation; and yet by the special Favor of God, they have never been able to
accomplish their Desire of our utter Extirpation.

From the Words let us consider,

I. The Church and People of GOD, as frequently afflicted by their Enemies, and
yet preserved from utter Ruin:

And,

II. As ascribing the Glory of their Preservation unto GOD.

I. Then let us consider the Church and People of GOD, as frequently afflicted
by their Enemies, and yet preserved from utter Ruin.

The History of their Affliction and Preservation, from their sojourning in
Egypt, to the Reign of Abasuerus King of Persia, you have on sacred Record, and
is therefore unnecessary to be recited here. --

Vide Stackhouse, on the State of the Jews under the Persian, Grecians and
Romans, to the Coming of Christ -- And Prideaux's Connect.
After the Return of the Captivity from BABYLON, the Jews were subject to the
Persians till the Destruction of their Empire -- and had the Privilege of being
governed by their own Laws, under the Administration of the Tirshatha, in
Conjunction with the High Priest, and great Sanhedrim.

But when the Grecian Empire arose on the Ruins of the Persian, the Jews became
subject to Alexander the Great -- who being incensed by them, while at the
Siege of Tire, immediately after the Reduction of it, marched for Jerusalem,
with a Design of severe Revenge. -- In this Distress, God directed Jaddua, the
high Priest, in his ponfical Robes, with the Priests in their Habits, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem in white Garments, to go forth in Procession, to meet
him.

This was exactly agreeable to a Vision he had seen at Dio in Macedonia,
encouraging him to march into Asia, and assuring him of the Conquest -- At the
first Sight therefore Alexander concluded him to be the Priest of that God, who
conducted his Arms; and embracing him with Respect, went into the City, and
offered Sacrifice to the God of Israel, and at his Departure granted large
Favors to them.

After the Death of Alexander, his Empire was divided among four of his
Captains, the four Horns spoken of in the Prophet Daniel. -- And Egypt fell to
the Share of Ptelomy Soter, who laid Siege to Jerusalem; and making a general
Assault on the Sabbath, when the Jews superstitously refused to defend
themselves, he carried the City, and captivated an Hundred Thousand. -- But on
Consideration of their Fidelity to former Princes, to whom they had been
subjected, he conferred on them many valuable Privileges and Immunities.

And the Jews continued subject to Egypt about an Hundred Years -- but then a
War arising between Ptolomy Epiphanes King of Egypt, and Antiochus the great
King of Syria, and Antiochus being victorious in the War, the Jews submitted
unto him.

Seleucus Philopator, succeeded Antiochus in the Throne of Syria, who being
informed of immense Treasures in the Temple at Jerusalem, sent Heliodorus to
make Seizure of them; and he forcibly entering the Temple for that Purpose, was
struck Speechless by a Vision, fell to the Ground, and was carried off by his
Servants, frustrated in his Design.

Antiochus Epiphanes, a most cruel Persecutor of the Church and People of God,
succeeded Seleucus -- He assaulted Jerusalem, and took it, and flew forty
Thousand, and sold as many into Slavery -- He also forced himself into the Holy
of Holies, he offered a Swine on the Altar of Holocaust, defiled the Temple,
and plundered both That, and the City.

Vide 2 Maccab. 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 Chapters.
And as if this had been but a small Thing, he afterward sent one of his
Generals with an Army and express Order to destroy all the Men remaining in
Jerusalem, and to enslave the Women and Children; who fell on the City on the
Sabbath, when they were at their Devotions, massacred the Men, and captivated
the Women and Children.

After this came forth an Edict, for all Nations [but chiefly levelled at the
Jews] to forsake their own Religion, and conform to that of the King. --

And the Officer to whom he had committed the Execution of this unreasonable
Decree, coming to Jerusalem, caused the Daily Sacrifice to cease, suppressed
the Rites of the Jewish Worship, burnt the Law of Moses; consecrated the Temple
to Jupiter Olympius, set up his Image on the Altar, and compelled the People on
Pain of Death to offer Sacrifice to it.

Such as were found assembled for divine Worship in the Caves were burnt -- And
Eleazer, Solomona and her seven Sons, with numerous others, chose rather to
submit to the most exquisite Torments, than forsake their God.

And to this Time it is supposed the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
alludes; saying, Some were tortured not accepting Deliverance, that they might
obtain a better Resurrection -- Others had Trial of cruel Mockings, yea
moreover of Bonds and Imprisonments: They were stoned, they were sawn asunder,
were burned, See Whithy on the ^lace.
were slain with the Sword -- They wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goatskins,
in the Deserts and Mountains, Dens and Caves of the Earth, destitute,
afflicted, tormented.

But although God at this Time severely rebuked his People, yet He did not
utterly forsake them; but excited Mattathias, and his valiant Sons, to stand up
in the Cause of Israel; who raising Armies, not only made a gallant Stand, but
obtained many signal Victories over their Oppressors. -- And three Years and a
half after the Pollution of the Temple, they pur^^^'d it, and afresh dedicated
it to the Lord; which was the Original of the Feast of Dedication spoken of in
the New Testament.

The Maccabean Family are said to have held the Government of Judea for above
an Hundred Years; and some Part of the Time as Sovereign Princes, until a
Difference arising between Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, two Princes of that Blood;
they reter'd it to Pompey the Great, a Roman General, then in Calosyria -- But
he refusing fully to hear the Matter before his Arrival in Jerusalem;
Aristobulus distrusting his Cause, fled and shut up himself in the Fortress of
Alexandrian; but on the Approach of Pompey, surrendered himself. -- However, his
Party at Jerusalem seized the Mount of the Temple, and made Preparation for a
vigorous Defense -- On which Pompey marched his whole Army to Jerusalem,
besieged and took the Place, and put Twelve Thousand to the Sword.

After this, Rusus another Roman General, plundered the Temple. -- And,

After this, Herod the Great, the Son of Antipas, a noble Idumean, obtained the
Kingdom of Judea, by a full Vote of the Roman Senate. -- In his Time OUR
BLESSED LORD was born, and the Infants murdered at Bethlehem.

But notwithstanding the Afflictions of Israel, from the Infancy of their
Nation, they continued the Church and peculiar People of God, until the
Appearance of the MESSIAH, to take down the Wall of Partition between Jew and
Gentile, and until the Constitution they were under had stood it is appointed
Time -- And until by the greatest of all Crimes, the Crucisixion of their
MESSIAH, they had provoked God to deliver them to the Power of their Enemies.
--

And the Preservation of the Christian Church under her Affliction and
Adversity, has been as remarkable as the Preservation of the Jewish.

For although the People of the Jews combined against it; and although the Heathen
raged, the Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers took Counsel
together to overthrow it; yet their Counsels were turned into Foolishness, and
they unable to accomplish their Desire. -- The Methods they pursued were had in
Derision by the King of Zion, and overul'd to the quicker Spread, and
Establishment of the Truth. --

The holy Lives of the primitive Christians; the Constancy and Intrepidity of
the Martyrs in Prisons, Flames, and Death, under the Ten Persecutions of Rome
Heathen, were more effectual to the Promotion of Christianity, than all the
Stratagem, and Fury of the Enemy to it is suppression. -- For this Reason the
Blood of the Martyrs is called the Seed of the Church -- And thus Christianity
triumphed over all it is Adversaries, until Constantine the Great was fully
seated on the Imperial Throne, -- when it became the established Religion of
the Roman Empire -- And for some time the Church was in Prosperity and Peace.

However,

Before the Death of Constantine, the Arian Heresy appeared: and at last the
Asserters of it became so numerous powerful and malevolent, as to persecute
those who adhered to the Apostolic Faith.

After this, came on the Roman Apostasy, and Papal Tyranny: Errors and
Superstitions over whelmed the whole Western Church -- To which may be added,

The Mohammedan Imposture in the Eastern; and the Oppressing the Churches of
Asia, by the Saracen Power; under which they groan to this Day. --

But to return; although the Western Church suffered under Papal Oppressions; yet
even in the thickest Darkness, there was a Remnant, who did not bow the Knee to
Baal; the Vandois, and Waldenses inhabiting the Valleys of Piedmont. And,

Besides these, almost in every Age God raised up Witnesses to the Truth, until
the sixteenth Century; when Luther, and a Number of pious Reformers, arose in
Germany, boldly contending for the Truth, against the Errors and Usurpations of
Rome.

And diverse Princes of Germany embracing the reformed Religion, boldly in a
Diet of the Empire, protested against a Decree which was made against it;
whereby they acquired the glorious Name of Protestants.

From Germany, the Reformation spread into England; Way being made for it, by
the renouncing of the Popes Supremacy, and by other Transactions in the Reign
of King HENRY the VIII.

And therefore on the Accession of EDWARD the VI. to the Crown, Arch Bp.
Cranmer, Bp. Latimer, Bp. Ridley, and other excellent Persons, under the
Approbation and Patronage of that pious Prince, carried it on to a very
considerable L --

When God thus turned again the Captivity of Sion, they were like those that
Dream; then their Mouth was filled with Laughter, and they said among their
Enemies, The Lord had done great Things for them, whereof they were glad. --

However these pious Reformers, by Reason of the Temper and Circumstances of
the Times, and the praemature Death of that good Prince, could not carry on the
Reformation so far as they earnestly desired. --

And on the Accession of the Princess MARY, a black and heavy Cloud overspread
the noble Design; the Roman Superstition was restored and the Professors of the
reformed Religion were persecuted to the Stake and Death --

But on the Accession of the Princess ELIZABETH, the reformed Religion was
re-established. However, neither that illustrious Princess, nor King JAMES the
I. her Successor, nor their Clergy, would suffer the Reformation to be carried
on further, than it had been in the Reign of King EDWARD.

Moreover, in the Reign of Q. ELIZABETH, an Act of Parliament was passed
requiring Uniformity in Worship under very severe Penalties; -- continued by K.
James I, and more severely urged by K. CHARLES I;

Our Fathers therefore, earnestly desiring a greater Reformation, and Liberty
to Worship God according to their Consciences, chose rather to expose
themselves to almost any Hardships, than violate them. --

And having obtained Liberty of King James the I, to remove, and set down
within certain Limits in America, with Liberty of Worshipping God according to
that Way which appeared to them most agreeable to Scripture; --

They left their native Country, and crossed the Atlantic, with their Families,
into this then howling Wilderness -- founding the Colony of Plymouth in 1620.
-- And the Colony of the Massachusetts in the Year 1630. --

And after their Arrival, for the Trial of their Faith and Patience, God
exercised them with grievous and mortal Sicknesses, with Scarcity and Famine --
Yet they soon spread abroad; and before the Year 1636, had founded the Colony
of Connecticut, and had planted in other Parts. --

But in the Year 1636, the Pequots, the most fierce and Warlike of all the
Indian Tribes in that Part of the Country, and formidable to all their
Neighbors; having committed many barb^^^^^ Outrages on the Narragansetts, to
the Eastward, and (...) to the Northward of them; on the Engl^^^ (...) Dutch,
as they occasionally came among them, and on the Planters on Connecticut River
-- The Colonies unanimously raised their Forces, and cut off seven Hundred; and
Part of those that escaped the English Sword, fled to the (...) and were
destroyed by them; and the other were by the English subjected to, and
incorporated with the Narragansetts and (...). --

After this, there was general Peace and Prosperity for a considerable Term.

Thus much in general: we now proceed to a particular Consideration of the
Affairs of this Town.

In the Year 1645, Sholan, alias Shaumauw, Proprietor of Nashawogg, and Sachem
of the Nastawas, who lived at Wausnacum, informed Mr. Thomas King of Watertown
[with whom he traded, and for whom he had a considerable Friendship] of the
said Tract of Land as well accommodated for a Plantation, desiring that the
English would come and set down by him.

Accordingly Mr. King, Mr. John Presect, and others, See Hablard's Narrative,
Page 5. Harmon Garrett, Thomas Skidmore, Mr. Day, Mr. Symonds, etc.
procured of said Sh^lan, a Deed of said Nathawogg, Ten Miles in Length, and
Eight in Breadth; with these Restrictions, that the English should not molest
the Indians in their Hunting, Fishing, or usual Planting Places -- And the
General Court confirmed the Deed.

On this, the Associates purchased of Mr. King all his Interest in the
Premises; and entered into mutual Obligation by a certain Term to appear on the
Spot, to begin and carry on the Plantation, and (...) with a Preacher to go on
with them.

Having thus concerted Affa^^^ ^^ey sent up diverse Persons, Richard Licton,
Laurence Waters, and John Ball.
[to whom they had given Lots] to perform diverse Things, a^ ^^e common Expense
of the Proprietors, before the Time for their general Appearance; and these
were the first Inhabitants.

But before the Time for their general Appearance; their Minister, to whom they
had committed their mutual Obligation, [whether by Reason of his own Aversion
to the Place, or by the Instigation of such of the Proprietors as were
unwilling to come up themselves, is uncertain] forsook them, carrying with him
said mutual Obligation. And in Consequence of this all the Associates, except
Mr. Prescot, refused to fulfill their Contract, but yet held their Interest. So
that for the Space of seven Years, very little was done to forward the
Plantation. -- But at Length some of the Rest being willing to engage more
heartily in the Affair; On the eighteenth of May, 1653, there being Nine
Families in the Place, they petitioned the General Court for an Incorporation,
and obtained it by the Name of LANCASTER.

From the Year 1654, Mr. Rowlandson preached among them, until the 14th of
April 1658; at which Time they invited him to settle in the Work of the
Ministry among them; and he accepted their Invitation, and probably was
ordained the same Year. --

The Town was in Peace and Prosperity for the Space of Twenty-two Years from
it is Incorporation. -- And the Indians were very serviceable to the
Inhabitants, by supplying them with such (...) and wild Meat as they stood in
Need of; and that (...) moderate Terms. --

But on the Twenty (...) of June 1675. Philip, Sachem of Pocanoket, commonly
called King Philip, rebelled against the English, and began a very bloody and
destructive War.

And on the 22d of August following, Eight Persons, in different Parts of the
Town were killed. Mr. George Bennet. William Fogg, Jacob Farrar, Joseph
Wheeler, Merdecai Mc Load, and his Wife, and two Children.


And as the Sachems of the Narragansett Country joined with Philip in his
Rebellion; so after the Destruction of Canonious's-Fort, commonly called the
Narragansett-Fort, by the Forces of the united Colonies, on the 19th of
December 1075 -- The Indians leaving that Part of the Country, moved toward
Wachusett, and meeting with the Nipnets, and Nashawas, in their March,
persuaded them also to take up Arms against the English; and after this
Combination, Part turned back toward Plymouth Colony, burning and destroying
as they went along. Sec Hubbard, Page 60.


But Philip, with the Rest, confessed by themselves after the Peace to be 1500,
marched for Lancester, in which there were then above fifty Families -- And on
the 10th of February 1675, 6. assaulted in five distinct Bodies and Places,
burning most of the unfortified Houses, and killing several Persons. Mr. Jonas
Fairbank, Joshua Fairbank, Richard Wheeler, at Wheeler's Garrison -- Ephraim
Sawyer at Prescott's Garrison. And in other Places Henry Farrar -- And -- Ball
and Wife.


However, they destroyed no Garrison, but that belonging to the Rev. Mr.
Rowlandson; in which, there were (...) and Inhabitans to the Number of
Forty-Two. And

As there was no Fortification of the Back of the House, and the English being
unable to (...) their Shot on that (...); the Enemy having load^^ (...) Cart
with Combustible Matter, pushed it framing to the House; and thus being reduced
to the sad Necessity of either perishing in the Flames, or resigning themselves
to the Salvages, they surrendered. --

On this the Men, except one who made his Escape were (...), (...) reserved for
Torture -- And (...) of the Women and Children were (...) which, was the (...)
of the Rev. (...) an Account of whose Captivity, Suffering and (...) written by
her own Hand, you have doubtless many (...) you seen in Print --

^

^

^

The Women and Children in general, suffered no other Evils among the Enemy
than what were unavoidable from a State of Captivity, and the Wants the Indians
themselves were in -- And most of them were returned.

Capt. Wadsworth hearing of the Assault of the Town at Marlborough, where (...)
then was, with Forty brave Men. marched immediately to it is Relief -- And as
there was then a very considerable Flood, and the River of Consequence every
where unpassable but at the Bridge; the Indians had taken from thence the
Planks to prevent the passing of Horsemen -- And ambush'd to prevent the
passing of Footmen; but had left their Ambushment before the Arrival of Capt.
Wadsworth, who therefore passed it unmolested, and entered the Town
undiscovered, and forced the Enemy for the present to quit it. -- He quartered
his Men in various Parts of the Town, and tarried some Days; but before his
Departure, lost one of his Men George Harrington at Prescotts Mill.
by the Indians.

This is that famous Capt. Wadsworth, who afterward with Capt. Brocklebank,
and the much greater Part of their Men, gloriously fell in the Cause of their
Country in a Fight with the Enemy at Sudbury. But to return --

About six Weeks after the Assault of the Town, it being judged untenable under
the then present Circumstances, both of that and the Country; the Remainder of
the Inhabitants, except one John Roper. --
who was killed that very Day by the Enemy, drew off under a Guard of Horse and
Foot. -- And immediately on this Desertion of the Place, every Building that
remained, save two, were reduced to Ashes.

And in this State of Desolation, the Town continued for about four Years. --
It may be proper to observe here,

That Sholan, who conveyed this Tract of Land to the English, always behaved in
a peaceable and friendly Manner toward them.

That Matthew, who was his Nephew, and succeeded him as Sachem of the Tribe,
was always in good Terms with the English. --

But that (...) Sam, who was Nephew to Matthew, and succeeded him, was or a
different Temper, and Character; and joining with Philip in his Rebellion, was
taken by the English, and executed as a Rebel.

Those of the Tribe who survived the War, divided; one Part moving to Albany,
and the other to Penicook, with which Tribe they incorporated --




During this Dispersion of the Lancaster People, the Rev. Mr. Rowlandson, was
invited to (...) at Weathersfield in the Colony of Connecticut, and died before
the Resettlement of the Town.

After the Re-settlement, diverse Gentlemen for the Space of seven Years
supplied the Pulpit. Mr. Carter, Mr. Denison, Mr. Wooddrosse, and Mr. Oaks --


In Feb. 1688, Mr. John Whiting was invited to preach on Probation; and
continued preaching until Nov. 1690, when he was invited to settle in the Work
of the Ministry; and he accepting the Invitation, was probably soon after
ordained. --

In 1688. William, Prince of Orange, arrived in England, and King James the
Second abdicated the Throne; whose Cause the French King espousing, involved
the Nation in a War with France, and New England in a War with the Canadians,
French and Indians -- In the Calamities of which this Town had a large Share.
--

For on the 18th of July, 1692, the Indians assaulted the House of Mr. Peter
Joslyn, He still survives in the 88th Year of his Age.
who was at his Labor in the Field -- and knew nothing of it till entering the
House, found his Wife and three Children, and a Woman The Widow Whitcomb.
that lived in his Family, barbarously butchered by their Hatchets, and
weltring in their Gore. --

His Wife's Sister, Elisabeth How. --
with another of his Children were carried into Captivity -- She returned: but
that Child was murdered in the Wilderness -- Thus was he stripped naked, and
called to bitter Weeping and Lamentation. --

In 1695, on a Lord's Day Morning, Mr. Abraham Wheeler, going from Garrison to
his own House, on some Occasion, was there shot by an Enemy, that had laid in
Ambush for him; but although mortally wounded, he rested the Gun from him, and
bro't it toward the Garrison, 'till met by his Friends. --

In 1697. A considerable Body of the Enemy, under five Commanders, but one in
Chief, came and lurked in the Woods for some Time, sending in their Scouts by
Night to observe the Posture of the Town. -- And having done this, they
determined to begin the Attack on Mr. Thomas Sawyer's Garrison; and the firing
at that was to be a Signal to all the Rest, to fall on in their respective
Stations.

And accordingly on the Eleventh of September, when the Inhabitants, suspicious
of no Enemy, were gone out to their Labor; they came in several Companies into
the Town, and were very near surprising said Sawyer's Garrison, both the Gates
being left open; but that Mr. Jabez Fairbank, who was at his own House half a
Mile's Distance, and designing to bring his little Son from said Garrison,
mounted his Horse which came running to him in a Fright; and rode full Speed
into the Gate, but yet nothing suspicious of an Enemy -- However, this was a
Means of saving the Garrison: for the Enemy who were just ready to rush into
it, supposing they were discovered, gave over that Design; and fired at such as
were out in the Fields. --

At that Time, the Rev. Mr. John Whiting being on some Occasion at a Distance
from his Garrison, they surpised and killed him. -- They indeed offered him
Quarter; but he chose rather to fight to the last, than resign himself to those
whose tender Mercies are Cruelty. --

At the same Time they killed Twenty others; wounded two, but not mortally; and
captivated Six, five of whom returned. Killed. Rev. Mr. Whiting, Daniel Hudson
and his Wife and two Daughters, Epbraim Roper and Wife and Daughter, John Skait
and Wife, Joseph Rugg and Wife and three Children, the Widow Rugg, Jonathan
Fairbank and two Children, and two Children of Nathaniel Hudjon. --

Captivated. Jonathan Fairbank's Wife, the Widow Wheeler, Ephraim Roper's Son,
John Skait's Son, Joseph Ruggs's Son, and Mary Glasier. --




On this sorrowful Occasion, the Town set apart a Day for Prayer and Fasting.

From 1697 to 1700, several Gentlemen supplied the Pulpit. Mr. Robinson, Mr.
Jones, and Mr. Whitman. Mr. Jones was invited to settle, but Difficulties
arising, his Ordination was prevented, and he removed.


In May 1701, Mr. Andrew Gardner was invited to preach, and in September
following was invited to settle in the Ministry. --

In 1704, there came an Army of seven Hundred French and Indians from Canada --
with two Tribes, under the Command of Monst. Boocore, designed for Northampton,
-- but a Deserter came and gave Notice of their Numbers and Approach. -- And
those Western Frontiers were seasonably strengthened. --

Moreover, in their March there arose a Mutiny among them about the Division of
the Plunder; and the Contention rose so high, that above two Hundred of them
returned -- But the Rest came on, and sent out their Scouts, who reported, that
the English were ready in great Numbers to receive them. -- On this they called
a Council of War, in which they concluded to lay aside the Design on
Northampton -- and to beat up for Volunteers, for the Assault of Lancaster; and
a large Number enlisted. -- Some of the Accounts which Mr. Penhallow has given
of the Mischiefs done in this Town by the Enemy, are in diverse Cases not only
imperfect, but very Erroneous, which are doubtless owing to the wrong
Information he had.


And on the 30th of July they came within about two Miles of the Town -- and
encamped, and by Night sent in their Spies to observe the Posture of the
English. -- And on the 31st, they fell furiously upon the Town early in the
Morning; and in their first Onset killed Lieut. Nathanael Wilder, near the Gate
of his own Garrison. -- And the same Day three others near the same Garrison.
Abraham How, John Spaulding, and Benjamin Hutchins.


The Enemy were uncommonly brave: and therefore although Capt. Tyng, who had the
Command of the Garrison Soldiers; and Capt. How, who on the Alarm, marched
immediately from Marlborough with what Men he could suddenly raise; and the
Inhabitants maintained a warm Dispute with them for some Time; yet being much
inferior in Number were obliged to retreat into Garrison. -- On which they
burnt the Meeting House, and six other Buildings, and destroyed much of the
live Stock of the Town. Note, What Numbers of the Enemy were killed, either in
the Field, or at the other Garrison is uncertain, but is though it to be
considerable -- among the Rest a French Officer of some Distinction, was
mortally wounded, which greatly exasperated their Spirits:

Before Night there came such Numbers to the Relief of the Town, that the Enemy
retreated; and although pursued, yet were not over-taken. Had they like those in
1697, tarried till the Inhabitants, were dispersed to their Labor, they might
in all human Probability, have done much greater Mischief, if they had not
entirely destroyed the Town. -- But God had Mercy on his People. --

On the 26th of October following, there having been a Party of the Enemy
discovered at Still-River, the Soldiers and Inhabitants belonging to the Rev.
Mr. Gardner's Garrison, with diverse others, went in Quest of them; who
returning in the Evening fatigued with the Service of the Day -- Mr. Gardner,
in Compassion took the Watch that Night upon himself; and coming out of the Box
late at Night, on some Occasion, was heard by one between sleeping and waking
in the House, who supposing him an Enemy, seized the first Gun which came to
Hand, and shot him through the Body in the Parade. -- Mr. Samuel Prescott.


But the fatal Mistake immediately appeared; and he being carried into the
House, forgave the Person that shot him; and in an Hour or two expired, to the
great Grief not only of his Consort, but of his People, who had an exceeding
Value for him. Mr. Gardner was not Ordained.


In May 1705, Mr. John Prentice was preaching among them, and continued
preaching, until Feb. 1707, when he was invited to settle in the Work of the
Ministry, and accepted the Invitation.

On the 15th of October 1705, Mr. Thomas Sawyer, with his Son, Elias Sawyer and
John Biglo.
and another was captivated. --

On the 16th of July 1707, Mr. Jonathan White was killed by the Indians. --

And on the 18th of August following, Twenty-four stout Indians, who according
to their own Account had all been Captains, came to Marlborough, and captivated
Mr. Jonathan Wilder, a Native of this Town, and but lately removed from it. --
The next Day being persu'd by about Thirty of Marlborough and Lancaster; and
overtaken -- the Front of our Men came upon them before they had the least
Apprehension of a Pursuit.

Their Packs were all slung, and it being a misty Day, their Cases were on
their Guns. -- And therefore had ours all run down upon them, they might easily
have destroyed or taken all, and saved the Life of the Captive. -- The Enemy
themselves at the first Appearance of our Men, had determined to resign
themselves to their Mercy. -- But observing that but Ten of the Thirty came
down upon them, they took Courage, unslung their Packs, and fought like Men --
having first dispatched their Captive.

In this Action, the Enemy lost Nine and all their Packs; and on our Part Two,
Mr. John Farrar, and -- Singleterry.
were killed, and Two Mr. Ephraim Wilder, and Mr. Samuel Stevens.
wounded, but not mortally.

It ought to be observed again, that but Ten of our Men were in the Action.

On the 29th of March 1708, the Rev. Mr. John Prentice was ordained.

On August 5. 1710, A Party of the Enemy coming by the Advantage of the Bushes,
very near to Mr. Nathanael, and Mr. Oliver Wilder, and an Indian Servant, at
Labor in the Field, fired upon them. The Servant was killed, but they escaped
to the Garrison. -- And this is the last Mischief that has been done by them
in this Town. --

The Records of the Church in Mr. Rowlandson's Time, were in all Probability
consumed in his Garrison. -- And the Records in Mr. Whiting's Day not being to
be found, we have no Account of the Number of Communicants, or of Baptisms,
from the founding this Church to the Ordination of the Rev. Mr. Prentice in
1708.

But during Mr. Prentice's Ministry, 331 were received to full Communion, and
1593 Baptized. --

After a Life of much Service, Faithfulness, and loved, on the 6th of January
1747, 8. the Rev. Mr. Prentice deceased, greatly lamented. --

From the last recorded by him, to the Re-settlement of the Ministry on Nov.
16. 1748. were 38 Baptisms.

And from the Re-settlement to this Day, 70 Persons have been admitted to full
Communion, and 183 Baptized.

So that from March 1708, to this Day, 401 have been admitted to full
Communion, and 1814 Baptized.

Of the Members in this Church was formed a considerable Part of the Church in
Harvard in 1733.

The Church in Bolton, in 1741.

In Part, the Church in Leominster, 1743.

The Church in the second Precinct, in 1744.

With Propriety therefore this Church may say; Many a Time have they afflicted
me from my Youth, many a Time have they afflicted me from my Youth; yet they
have not prevailed against me. --

Proceed we now to a brief Consideration of the

II. Thing, viz. The Church and People of GOD ascribing unto HIM the Glory of
their Preservation. --

Yet they have not prevailed against me, is designed not only to assert their
Preservation from utter Ruin, but also to ascribe the Glory of it unto GOD --
Unto GOD, who in Consequence of their peculiar Relation to Him, and of his
gracious Promises to Them, had gloriously appeared for them in Egypt, and at
the Red Sea; and often afterward, when endangered or oppressed by Enemies,
more numerous and powerful than themselves.

These Ascriptions are common in the sacred Pages. -- We have heard with our
Ears, O God, our Fathers have told us what Work thou did in their Days, in
the Times of old Psalm. 44. 1.
-- If it had not been the LORD, who was on our Side, now may Israel say -- If
it had not been the LORD, who was on our Side, when Men rose up against us;
then they had swallowed us up quick, when their Wrath was kindled against us --
Then the Waters had overwhelmed us; then the proud Waters had gone over our
Soul -- Blessed be the LORD, who has not given us a Prey to their Teeth -- Our
Help is in the Name of the LORD. Psalm. 124. -- 145, 11 -- 14. inclusi. Isai.
63. 7, 8.


These Acknowledgements and Ascriptions are not only founded on the Reason and
Nature of Things; but also enjoined by divine Authority, to keep divine
Benefits in Memory, to inspire succeeding Generations with Gratitude, and to
engage them effectually in the Fear and Service of the most high GOD --
Accordingly we have the Church of Israel assigning this as a Reason of her
Practice. --

We will show to the Generation to come the Praises of the LORD, and his
Strength, and his wonderful Works that he has done -- For he established a
Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our
Fathers that they should make them known to their Children -- That the
Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be born; who
should arise and declare them to their Children -- That they might set their
Hope in GOD, and not forget the Works of GOD, but keep his Commands, and be
steadfast with him.

The Deliverance of Israel from Oppression and Bondage in Egypt, was to be
celebrated with solemn Festivity, and with the Reason of it carefully to be
transmitted by divine Appointment to Posterity -- And thou shall show thy Son
in that Day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord did unto me,
when I came out of Egypt, -- And it shall be for a Sign unto thee, that the
Lord's Law may be in thy Mouth; thou therefore shall keep this Ordinance. Exodus
13. 8, 9, 10.


And when Haman, who was of the Blood Royal of Amalck, and therefore the
natural Enemy of Israel, plotted their Destruction through the whole Persian
Empire, and had procured of Abasuarus a Decree for that Purpose; God by a very
signal Interposition cast him into the Pit which he had dug, and bro't his
Devices upon his own Head, but gave Joy and Gladness and a good Day unto the
Jews. -- Wherefore Mordecai (no Doubt by divine Direction) appointed this
Preservation to be celebrated annually with Festivity and Joy on the fourteenth
and fifteenth Days of the Month Adar. -- This was celebrated with Thanksgiving
and Praise to GOD. -- Esth. 9.20.etc. --


And as the Commemoration of GOD's appearing to the Relief of his People under
their Distresses is of divine Appointment; We accordingly find them ascribing
the Glory to Him. -- Thus after the Destruction of Pharach and his Host in the
Red Sea, Moses and the People of Israel give GOD the Praise -- The LORD has
triumphed gloriously: the Horse and his Rider he has thrown into the Sea. --
The LORD is my Strength and my Salvation -- Thy right Hand, O LORD, is glorious
in Power -- and has dashed in Pieces the Enemy. Exodus 15.


When Deborah and Barak delivered Israel from the Oppression of Jabin King of
Hazor, they in their triumphal Song give all the Glory unto GOD. -- Praise ye
the LORD for the avenging of Israel -- LORD, when thou wentest out of Seir,
when thou marchedst out of the Field of EDOM; the Earth trembled, and the
Heavens dropped; the Mountains melted before the LORD GOD of Israel -- They
fought from Heaven, the Stars in their Courses fought against Sifera, and the
River Kishon swept them away. Judges 5. --


And when the LORD with Thunder and Lightning discomfitted the Philistines
before his People, who persued them to the Confines of their own Country;
Samuel took a Stone and set it up between Mizpeh and Shen, and called the Name
of it EBENEZER, saying, Hitherto the LORD has helped us. 1 Samuel 7. 12. --


And what shall I more say? For the Time would fail me to tell of David and of
Asa, and of Jehosaphat, and of Hezekias, and of other Worthies; who with the
Prophets and People of God, gave Him the Glory of their Preservation under
Affliction and in Distress from Enemies.

And as the Reason of these Ascriptions has always been the same, and the same
Spirit of Gratitude has rested upon the Saints of all succeeding Ages; So the
Christian Church has always given to the same GOD the Glory of her
Preservation, under the numerous Evils which have been bro't upon her by her
Enemies -- whether Men or Devils.

And well may the Inhabitants of this Country join with the Church in all
preceding Times, in giving Glory to the GOD of Salvation. --

For when they were few in Number, when they were far from human Help, in a
howling Wilderness, and surrounded with numerous Barbarians, who thirsted for
their Blood, and often plotted their Destruction; GOD the GOD of Israel was
their Savior -- They trusted in Him, and were not ashamed -- And
notwithstanding all the Attempts of their Enemies, whether American, or
European, are yet a growing People.

The Habitations of Cruelty are become a Valley of Vision -- Where Satan was
worshipped with horrid Rites, the GOD of Heaven is now adored -- The solitary
Places rejoice, the Wilderness blossometh as the Rose, and the Glory of Sharon
is given unto it. --

Surely, it was GOD that bro't a Vine from far, cast out the Heathen before it,
planted it, and caused it to take Root, and fill the Land; so that the Hills
are covered with the Shadow, and the Bows thereof are like the goodly Cedars.
--

GOD grant, that the Hedges may not be broken down, that it may never be
plucked by those that pass by, that the Boar out of the Wilderness may never
waste it, nor the wild Beasts devour it; but may the Glory of the LORD be upon
it from Generation to Generation. --

But the present Assembly calls for a particular Address. --

Brethren, as through the good Hand of our God upon us, we this Day see the
Completion of a Century from the Incorporation of the Town, and have
recollected some of the signal Mercies of GOD to our Fathers under their
numerous Afflictions by the Enemy; we may with Propriety join with Israel of
old, and say,

If it had not been the LORD who was on our Side; if it had not been the LORD
who was on our Side, when Men rose up against us; then they had swallowed us up
quick, when their Wrath was kindled against us. -- Blessed be the LORD who has
not given us a Prey to their Teeth -- Our Help is in the Name of the LORD --
Who reigns in Zion Head over all Things unto his Church -- And will Reign, till
all opposing Rule, Authority and Power shall be put down, and the Time come for
delivering the Kingdom unto GOD, even the FATHER, and for presenting his Church
without Spot, and with exceeding Joy before the Presence of his Glory.

As the Church was purchased by his own Blood, the FATHER has in all Ages
committed the Preservation of it to HIM; and as Mediator vested him with all
Power in Heaven and Earth. In all the Afflictions of his People, he was
afflicted, in his Love and in his Pity he redeemed them, he bare them, and
carried them all the Days of old. -- He was the Refuge of our Fathers in their
Distresses. -- Let us therefore mention the loving Kindnesses of the LORD, and
the Praises of the LORD, according to all that he has bestowed upon us -- And
the great Goodness toward the House of Israel, which he has bestowed
according to his Mercy, and according to the Multitude of his loving Kindnesses.

Let the Consideration of these Things animate us.

1.) To a firm and unshaken Confidence in Him under all Adversity.

This is one important End for which the merciful Appearances of GOD for our
Fathers in their Distresses are to be recollected. -- He commanded our Fathers
that they should make them known to their Children, that they might set their
Hope in GOD.

2.) Let these Things excite us to a sincere Compliance with all his Precepts,
whether relating to Faith or Practice.

This also is another important Use to be made of them. -- That they might set
their Hope in GOD, and not forget his Works, but keep his Commandments.

And without a sincere Regard to divine Precepts, our Confidence will be
Presumption. -- For there is no Promise of Protection or Blessing to such as
persevere in Disobedience and Unbelief. --

If ye forget the Works of the LORD, and walk not in his Ways, ye may well
expect to be abandoned to all Evil. -- This is evident from the History of
Israel -- For when Joshua and all that Generation were gathered to their
Fathers; and there arose another Generation, who knew not the Works of the
LORD, which he had done in Israel; They forsook the LORD GOD of their Fathers,
and followed after the Gods of the People that were round about them, and
provoked the LORD to Anger -- And he delivered them into the Hands of Spoilers,
that spoiled them, and sold them into the Hands of their Enemies round about,
so that they could not stand any longer before their Enemies. --

Whethersoever they went out, the Hand of the LORD was against them for Evil;
as the LORD had said, and as the LORD had sworn unto them, and they were
greatly, distressed. --

Muse therefore on his Wonders of old, and on his Works in the Days of your
Fathers, 'till the Fire shall burn within you -- 'till sacred Ardors shall rise
in your Souls, and animate you to the most cheerful Trust and Obedience. --

Ye are the Seed of the blessed of the LORD, and the Children of the Covenant
which he made with them -- Fulfill therefore the Obligations, as ye expect the
Blessings of that Covenant. -- Let your Hearts be steadfast in it.

Be ambitious of imitating whatever was excellent in your Ancestors -- Consider
from whence ye are fallen -- Your Works are not perfect before GOD: Remember
therefore how ye have received and heard, and repent -- and strengthen the
Things that remain and are ready to die.

Is not this the Voice of your Fathers, And ye our Children, know ye the GOD of
your Fathers, and serve him with perfect Hearts and willing Minds; if ye seek
him he will be found of you, but if you forsake him he will cast you off
forever. --

Your Fathers bare the Heat and Burden of the Day, they submitted to many
Hardships and Dangers; not only that they might leave unto you a fair temporal
Inheritance, as it is this Day; but also, what they esteemed infinitely
preferable, that they might leave you in the Enjoyment of the Gospel in its
Purity -- For the Sake of This, they ventured their Lives into this Wilderness
-- For This, they exposed themselves to Perils by Sea, to Perils in the
Wilderness, to Perils by the Heathen, and to various Evils.

And ye are risen up in your Fathers Stead; and Prosperity shines in full Orb
upon you -- Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith CHRIST has made you
free. --

Give Commandment to your Households, and to your Seed after you, to walk in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the LORD blameless, and to do Mercy and
Judgment -- That they also may give the same in Charge to theirs -- from
Generation to Generation --

That the divine Blessing may be upon them, and the Kingdom of GOD be advanced
by them.

AMEN.

