HISTORICAL MEMOIRS, Relating to the Housatunnuk Indians:

OR,

An Account of the Methods used, and Pains taken, for the Propagation of the
Gospel among that Heathenish-Tribe, and the Success thereof, under the Ministry
of the late Reverend Mr. JOHN SERGEANT:

TOGETHER,

With the Character of that eminently worthy Missionary; and an Address to the
People of this Country, representing the very great Importance of attaching the
Indians to their Interest, not only by treating them justly and kindly, but by
using proper Endeavors to settle Christianity among them.

By SAMUEL HOPKINS, A. M.

Pastor of a Church in Springfield.

I perceive that GOD is no Respecter of Persons: But in every Nation, he that
fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him. Apostle PETER.
BOSTON: N.E.

Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street, opposite to the Prison. 1753.

PREFACE
Mr Design in writing this History is, to give as clear and faithful an Account
as I am able, of the Rise and Progress of Christianity among the Natives at
Housatunnuk: particularly of Mr. SERGEANT's Mission to them; of the Measures be
took to recover those Indians from their Barbarity, Ignorance and Heathenism,
and to inform them in the Doctrines of the Gospel; and of the Success which, by
the Blessing of God, attended his faithful Endeavors to persuade them to
embrace the true Religion.

In prosecuting this Design, I hope, in some Measure, to do Justice to the
Memory of that excellent Man, who, from generous and pious Principles,
undertook, and with great Industry and Faithfulness prosecuted that
Self-denying Work; to let the generous and pious Donors to that good Design
know, what the Success of their liberal and charitable Contributions to it has
been; and to excite others to follow their laudable and generous Example, by
giving freely of their Substance to promote that good Work, the Conversion of
the Heathen to the Christian Faith. If these Ends are answered, I shall not
regret the Trouble and Pains I have been at.

It may, perhaps, be thought strange, that this Performance has been so long
delayed. To which I would say; It was almost a Year after Mr. SERGEANT's Death
before I could satisfy myself, that Materials were (...) and when I had
collected what were to be (...), and entered upon it, I could proceed but very
st^^ly* by (...) of other Business upon my Hands, and the many unavoida^^^
Avocations that attended me; And after I had finished it, some unforeseen
Accidents and Occurrences, which I need not trouble the Reader with, delayed it
for several Months.

Why it is not more (...) (...) it does appear, may (...) that it is (...) to
the Want of (...) Materials which I expected, and which might have been very
helpful, if they could have been a^^ain'd.

When it was first proposed to me to undertake this Business, I concluded that
Mr. SERGEANT (...) pre^er^'d what was (...) for such a Work; for (...) after he
entered upon his Mission, be (...) to me, desiring that I would send him an
Account of a^l Transa^^ions with those Indians, before he went to them: giving
this as a Reason, why he desired it, viz. That be designed to collect and
preserve Materials for, and, it Time to come, to give the World a History of,
the Progress of Religion among the Indians, if his Success among them should
prove considera^le; or (...) that Purpose, I therefore concluded, that he had
not only kept a Journal of his own Doings among them, but that he had also
care^ully preserved Copies of all his Letters to Gentlemen with whom he
maintained a Correspondence, and their Returns to him; and that little or
nothing more would be needful, than to Transcribe, in their proper Places, what
he had preserved. But I found myself, more or less, disappointed upon all these
Heads. His Journal was indeed something large and particular for five or six
Years, but after that Time it consisted only of a brief Hints, two or three
Pages in Octave, upon common Paper, containing the Space of a Year; and, for
two or three Years, it was wholly warning. He was also so full of Business,
that he had not Time to preserve Copies of those Letters he wrote to Gentlemen
with whom he corresponded, either in this Country, or in Great Britain, except
a very few. Yea, when he wrote Historical Account of the Success of the Gospel
among the Indians at STOCKBRIDGE. under his Ministry, in Compliance with the
Desire of the Committee of Directors for the Society for propagating Christian
Knowledge, in SCOTLAND, signified to him by their President GEORGE DRUMMOND,
Esquire and sent it to them, he had no Leisure to preserve a Copy of it. Some few
Letters likewise, written to him, were not to be found.

When I became acquainted with these Things, I was much discouraged; and had
not I recovered the Originals which Mr. SERGEANT wrote to the Rev. Dr. COLMAN,
to whom he wrote more frequently, and more freely, than to any other Man, I
should not have attempted any Thing of this Nature. And, when I entered upon the
Business, I little thought of composing any Thing that would be fit for public
Flex. My Design was (seeing I had by me what Materials I could come at) to
preserve what might be most likely to be of Use hereafter, which, in all
Probability, would soon have been le^t, by continuing in loose Papers.

And now it is proposed to publish what I have written, I hope the foregoing
Account will excuse me; though the Performance be not to full and complete, as it
might have been, by the Help of those Things which I could not obtain. Every
Reader will be sensible, that Mr. SERGEANT, and the good Cause in which he was
engaged, might have been placed in a more advantageous Light, bad those Things
which are wanting, been preserved. He will also, I trust, (...) as ^ensible
that Eloquence and Neatness of Style are not what I have ^^^sured after, but a
plain Narrative of Facts, in a Language, which I hope will prove intelligible
to all, who take the Trouble of reading what is here presented.

I cannot think any judicious Person, upon mature Consideration, will judge,
that which has been brought to pass by Mr. SERGEANT's Ministry, among the
Indians, is small and inconsiderable. In the Year 1734. when he went first to
those Indians, their Number, great and small, was short of Fifty, and they in
the Depths of Heathenism and Barbarity. In the Year 1749, when he died, they
were increased to 218; 182 Indians had been baptized by him, and a Church
consisting of 42 Indian Communicants commemorated the Sufferings of Christ at
the Lord's-Table. Mr. WOODBRIDGE's school (separate from the boarding School)
had belonging to it 55 Scholars, who were taught to Read and Write, and were
instructed in the Principles of Religion. This indeed is not like a Nation
bring born at once; but, by the Use of ordinary Means, greater Things have
seldom been brought to pass in so short a Time. And we, in this Part of the
Country, have seen Nothing like it, respecting the poor Natives who live upon
our Borders. And if Mr. SERGEANT's Life had been spared to have prosecuted the
Affair of the Boarding-School, according to his Intention, and with his wonted
Wisdom, Prudence and Skill, is it not highly probable, that we should, by this
Time, have seen a considerable Number of the Indian Youth educated there, in
Labor, Industry and good Husbandry, as well as in Learning; who probably might
have proved not only useful Members of Society, but also of the Church of
Christ?

If what I have written upon this Subject may be a Cause of many Thankssgivings
to GOD for his rich Grace and Mercy, exercised to the Indians at STOCKBRIDGE,
by Mr. SERGEANT's Ministry; if it may be a Means of exciting pious and well
disposed Persons to charitable and generous Contributions to promote the
spiritual Good of the poor Natives there, or in other Places; if it may be an
Inducement to any young Gentlemen, qualified for such a Service, to follow the
excellent Example Mr. SERGEANT has given; however mean the Performance is, the
Effect will be good, and will answer the End of the unworthy Author,

Springfield, November 14, 1752. SAMUEL HOPKINS.

Historical Memoirs, etc.
THE Tribe commonly known by the Name of River-Indians is large, most of them
live within, the Limits of New York Government, interspersed among the Dutch,
and never had Endeavors used with them, either to civilize or christianize
them; but still continue in their native Ignorance and Barbarity. A small
Number or them live in the N. W. Corner of Connecticut Government, and a few
Families of them on Housatunnuk River, or at Housatunnuk, which now goes by the
Name of Sheffield in the County of Hampshire, in the S. W. Corner of the
Massachusetts Province, bordering on the Government of New York W. and on
Connecticut Colony S.

These few Indians at Housatunnuk, are they to whom the Rev. Mr. JOHN SERGEANT
received his Mission, and with whom Endeavors have been used for about
eighteen Years past, to form them to Christianity. And it is the Design of this
Treatise, to give an Historical Account of the Measures which have been taken
with them for this End; the Success that has attended them; and what their
present State is.

In Prosecuting this Design, I shall have Occasion to give an Account of a
considerable Part of the Life, Death and Character, of that pious and excellent
Man, the Rev. Mr. JOHN SERGEANT, who preached the Gospel to them, and died in
that Service.

About the Year 17^0. or perhaps something sooner, the General Assembly of this
Province granted two Townships on Housatunnuk River, to some People who were
desirous of settling there. The Land was purchased of the River-Indians, who
had the native Right; but they reserved for themselves two small Tracts of
Land: one lying at a Place they call Ska^eb^ok, and now falls into the first
Parish in Sheffield; the other about 8 or 10 Miles further up the River, which
they call Wnahktukook, and is within the Bounds of Stockbridge. And at each of
these Places dwell about four or five Families of Indians.

When the English made Settlements there, they became acquainted with those
Indians; and Kunkapot, the principal Person among them, was soon taken Notice
of by the English, and spoken of as a Man of Worth. It was by a mere Accident I
became acquainted with his general Character. Mr. Ebenezer Miller, one of my
Neighbors, who had his Account from Housatunnuk, informed me, that he was
strictly temperate, a very just and upright Man in his Dealings, a Man of
Prudence, and industrious in his Business; and inclined to embrace the
Christian Religion: But that there were some Difficulties lying in his Mind,
two of which I remember. One was, that if he became a Christian, his own People
would discard him. The other was, the ill Conversation of Christians; it being
as bad, as he though it, if not worse than that of the Heathen. (An Objection too
just, and it is not to be wondered at, that it should prove a stumbling Block
to an observing Heathen.)

I was much affected with the Story of this Indian, and determined to endeavor
that he, and the Rest of the Indians there, might be instructed in the
Doctrines of Christianity; for this I was prepared, by Dr. Colman's giving me
an Account, the May preceding, of the Money deposited in the Commissioners Hand
for such Purposes; and knowing that the honorable John Stoddard, Esquire of
Northampton, was more than any Man, in the Province, acquainted with the State
of the Indians in general, having often been employed by the Government in
Affairs relating to them, I determined to discourse with him upon it, and to
take his Advice in the Case. Accordingly, March 11th 1734, I waited upon him at
his own House, and conferred with him upon the Subject. He informed me, "That
the River-Indians were the largest Tribe of any near the English Settlements;
that he judged a Missionary among them would be much more likely to do Service,
and to answer the End of his Mission, than those Missionaries, Messieurs
Parker, Hinsdel, and Secomb, who had been some Time before ordained, and sent
to the several Forts and Truck-House: in our Eastern and Western Borders. For
the Tribes, those Gentlemen were sent to, were very much under the Influence of
the French. And further, what Opportunity those Missionaries had to instruct
them, was only at those Forts, when they came in upon a trading Design; and
that, as soon as they had done their Business, they went off, and while they
stayed, were not perhaps in the best Temper to receive Instruction: But as to
the River-Indians, the French had no Influence upon them; a Missionary might
live among them, and take all Opportunities to instruct, not only the Men, but
also their Families: Their Children might be taught to read, and write, and be
led into a Knowledge of the Principles of Christanity, etc. etc.

The Event proved these Reasonings to be very just; for, not long after, those
Missionaries, Messi, Parker, Hinsdel, and Secomb, were discouraged, and threw
up their Missions, as not being able to answer the Ends of them; but a Mission
to the River-Indians proved more successful.

Some Time after, I informed the Rev. Mr. Stephen Williams of Springfield of
these Suggestions, and what I had heard. And upon our Motion the Rev. Mr.
Williams of Hatfield wrote to the Honorable and Rev. Commissioners at Boston;
who desired us that we would take a Journey to Housatunnuk, and confer with the
Indians there, respecting their receiving a Missionary to instruct them. --
About this Time His Excellency Governor Belcher was pleased to honor the two
principal Indians of Housatunnuk with Commissions. To Kunkapot he gave a
Captain's, and to Umpachenee a Lieutenant's. Their Commissions being sent to
Springfield, we heard that they were coming for them, and therefore concluded
we would confer with them here, before we proceeded to Housatunnuk.
Accordingly, on the 22d Day of May, we went to their Lodgings, and discoursed
with them by their Interpreter Jeboikim Van Valkenburgh, who came with them.

The Captain showed himself very desirous of having a Missionary sent among
them, that their Children might be taught to read, etc. The Lieutenant did not
seem so very desirous of it; but yet expressed his Willingness that it should
be so. But, at the same Time, they let us know, that they spoke only for
themselves, and that it would be needful their Brethren should be consulted in
the Affair. We therefore informed them, that some Time in July they might
expect to see us at Housatunnuk, where we would confer with them, and their
Brethren, further upon those Things. But when the Time came, I was sick. The
Rev. Mr. Bull of Westfield therefore took my Place, and, on the 8th of July
1734, accompanied Mr. Williams thither. The Captain and Lieutenant were very
glad to see them, and called their People together, of whom those Gentlemen
inquired, whether they were willing a Minister should be sent to them to
instruct them in the Christian Religion, to teach their Children to read, etc.
The Indians desired four Days to consider of the Thing proposed; and at the End
of those Days they all gave in their Names, and signified their Desires to
those Reverend Gentlemen, that a Minister mig't be sent to them, for the Ends
proposed. Upon which the Rev. Mr. Williams delivered to them a small Belt of
Wompum, as a Confirmation of what had passed between them, and as a Sort of
Record thereof.

A Wompum is a small Cylinder of about one third of an Inch long, and as big
round as a small Straw, with a Hole dril'd through the Middle of it Length-wise,
and is made of the Shell of some Sea Fish, polished very smooth. A Number of
these strung upon small Threads, and knit together in the Form of a Belt, are
called a Belt of Wompum. Some of these Wompum are white, some black, the black
bear the highest Price; they pass among the Natives as Money, and were the only
Coin the Indians had, before they became acquainted with the Europeans. They
also use them as Ornaments, wearing them about their Necks, Wrists, etc. It is
a Custom among the Indians neighboring to us, and I suppose among all others,
to give Belts of Wompum for the Confirmation of all Treaties, and as a
Remembrance of what passes between Parties; so that if one Tribe sends a
Message to another without such a Best, the Message is called, an empty Word,
not to be regarded or remembered: But if a Best accompany's the Message, it is
laid up as a Record of the Thing transacted; and by it, not only the present,
but future Generations, keep in Remembrance what was then done. And these are
all the Records they keep in such Cases.
Not long after the Return of those Gentlemen from Housatunnuk, the Rev. Mr.
Williams went to Boston, where he waited upon the Honorable Commissioners (his
Excellency Governor Belcher being then at their Head) and acquainted them with
the good Disposition of the Indians respecting the Business they went upon. And
the Commissioner, were so encouraged by the Account given them, that they
desired those Gentlemen, Messieurs Williams and Bull to seek after some
suitable Person to be employed as a Missionary to those Indians. As appears by
the following Vote.

At a Meeting of the Commissioners for Indian Affairs, at the Council Chamger
in Boston, August l6th 1734.
Present. His Excellency Governor BELCHER. Esqrs; Thomas Hutchinson, Edward
Hutchinson, Thomas Steel,
Dr. Benjamin Colman, Dr. Joseph Sewall, Adam Winthrop.


A Report of the Rev. Mr. Stephen Williams, and the Rev, Mr. Nehemiah Bull,
read, giving an Account of their Visitation lately made to the Indians at
Housatunnuk, at the Desire of the Commissioners, wherein is set forth their
Conference with said Indians, and their Consent to receive Instruction in the
Christian Religion, and their Desire that the Commissioners would send them a
Minister for that Purpose.

Thereupon,

Voted, That the said Messieurs Williams, and Bull, be desired to use their
Endeavors for obtaining a suitable Person to go and reside there as their
Minister, to instruct them and their Children in Religion, and in Reading, and
to preach the Gospel to them on the Sabbaths. -- That they be allowed to
promise such suitable Person, for his Encouragement, the Salary of One Hundred
Pounds per Annum.

A true Copy Attest. Adam Winthrop.

Before this Time, Mr. SERGEANT's Inclination to serve the Souls of the Natives
had reached our Ears; for he had freely said in private Conversation, that he
had rather be employed as a Missionary to the Natives, if a Door should open
for it, than accept a Call any English Parish might give him. Those Gentlemen
being informed of this, were not at a Loss where to go, but made their
Application to him in September 1734. at New Haven, where he was employed as
one of the Tutors or Yale-College. Their Application to him, and his Answer, I
shall give the Reader in his own Words, as I find them in the Beginning of the
Journal, which he kept of his Mission to the River-Indians at Housatunnuk.

In September 1734. The Rev. Mr. Stephen Williams, and Mr. Nehemiah Bull, being
appointed by the Gentlemen Commissioners in Boston, to treat and agree with
some Person to undertake a Mission to the Indians of Housatunnuk, came to me at
New Haven, with the Proposals; bringing a very encouraing Account of the good
Inclination of those Indians, and of their Desire to be instructed in the
Principles of the Christian Religion.

I was then engaged in Business at Yale-College; but, upon the fair Probability
there appeared of Success, I told the Gentlemen, that I was so far from being
unwilling to devote myself to the Service of God in so good a Cause, that I was
rather desirous, if none better qualified could be found, to improve what
Abilities I had in such an Undertaking; though I was sensible, I must not only
lose a great many agreeable Amusements of Life, especially in leaving my
Business at College, which was the most agreeable to me that could be; but also
expose myself to many Fatigues and Hardships, and I know not to what Dangers,
among a barbarous People. For indeed I should be ashamed to own myself a
Christian, or even a Man, and yet utterly refuse doing what lay in my Power, to
cultivate Humanity among a People naturally ingenious enough, but for Want of
Instruction, living so much below the Dignity of human Nature; and to promote
the Salvation of Souls perishing in the Dark, when the Light of Life is so near
them. Besides, to see so much Pains taken by those of the Romish Church, not
only in other Parts, but also in America, and in our Borders, whose Religion is
so corrupted, that it may scarcely be called Christianity, should, methinks,
excite us to Emulation, who, at least, think we profess Christianity in much
greater Purity.

Upon the earnest Desire of the two forementioned Gentlemen, I readily
consented to undertake the Mission, if I might be accepted upon the Terms I
proposed, viz. that with the Approbation of the Rev. Rector and Trustees of
Yale-College, I would spend about half of the Year with the Indians, and the
Rest of the Year live at College; (for I had a Mind to carry my Pupils through
the Course of their Studies, who now were entering upon their last Year) and
afterward, if there should be any reasonable Encouragement, I would devote
myself entirely to the Service of instructing the Indians. This they agreed to,
and therefore the Rev. Mr. Williams immediately wrote to the honorable Adam
Winthrop, Esquire one of the Commissioners at Boston, to inform him how far they
had proceeded.

The Terms proposed by Mr. SERGEANT were agreeable to the Commissioners, as
appears from the following Letter from the honorable Adam Winthrop, Esquire their
Secretary.

SIR,
By a Letter just received from the Rev. Mr. Stephen Williams, I am informed he
has treated with you about engaging in the Indian's Service at Housatunnuk. And
I am highly gratified with the encouraging Account he gives of your Ingenuity,
Learning, and Piety, and also with your laudable Inclination to undertake the
Service. The only Difficulty he mentions is, That the Rector, Trustes, and also
your Pupils, were unwilling you should leave the College, till they had done
reciting; but that, if the Commissioners would be satisfied with your residing
at Housatunnuk one Quarter of a Year now, and then leave the Indians till the
Spring, you would return and tarry. And Mr. Williams desired that it might be
signified as soon as possible, whether the Commissioners would accept of this
Projection.

Time would not allow of a full Meeting, but I have conferred with His
Excellency the Governor about it, and we do, in the Name of the Commisioners
accept of the Proposal. So that you may proceed and go to Mr. Williams's, who
informs me that he will accompany you to Housatunnuk.

I heartily wish you, through the divine Blessing, good Success, and much
Comfort, in the Employment. And, desiring to hear from you in Answer to this, I
remain,

Sir, your hearty Friend and Servant, Adam Winthrop.


Accordingly Mr. SERGEANT proceeded to Housatunnuk, and in his Journal gives
the following brief Account of his Journey, and the Reception he met with there.

October 8th. I set out from New Haven, and went to Mr. Bull's, who it was
proposed should bear me Company to Housatunnuk, and introduce me to the
Indians, being something acquainted with them, as he had been there before in
the Summer with Mr. Williams, to treat with them, with Respect to their
receiving the Gospel. From Westfield, on Thursday October 11th, we set out in
the Afternoon, designing to lodge at a House about 15 Miles onwards upon the
Road, which was the only House before we came to Housatunnuk. But Night coming
on too soon for us, we were forced to lodge in the Woods without Fire or
Shelter. The next Day we got to Housatunnuk, a little before Night, through a
most doleful Wilderness and the worst Road, perhaps, that ever was rid. We took
Care to inform the Indians we were come, [they had expected us some Time] and
desired them to meet us the next Day, at a Place we appointed, near the Middle
between the Places where the Indian lived; for one half of them lived near
Miles above, up the River, and the other about so much below.

October 13th. In the Afternoon I made a short Discourse to the Indians by an
Interpreter, an Indian called Ebenezer, to which they (about 20 in Number Mr.
Sergeant notes in his Journal some Time after this, that when he speaks of his
Hearers, he intends only adult Persons, and is so to be understood here and
elsewhere.
) gave very good Attention, especially Capt. Kunkapot their Chief, and his
Family.

I adapted my Discourse, as well as I could, to their Capacities and Manner of
Thinking. The next Day Ebenezer told me, that one who had been a little cold in
the Design, was moved with what I said, and seemed now considerably engaged.
The Interpreter could speak English very well, for he had lived with them, and
had got considerable Knowledge in the Principles of Religion, and was very
desirous Mr. Bull would baptize him. Accordingly we met at the Lieutenant's
House on Thursday, where Mr. Bull examined Ebenezer with Respect to his
Knowledge and Resolution to live a Christian Life, and he gave a pretty good
Account of the Principles of the Christian Religion, and said, he would rather
burn in the Fire than forsake the Truth. Mr. Bull made a Prayer, which Ebenezer
interpreted, and I delivered another short Discourse, after which Ebenezer was
baptized by Mr. Bull, making the following Renunciation of Heathenism,
Profession of Christianity, and Promise of a good Life.

Through the Goodness of God toward me, in bringing me into the Way of the
Knowledge of the Gospel, I am convinced of the Truth of the Christian Religion,
and that it is the only Way that leads to Salvation and Happiness. I therefore
freely, and heartily, forsake Heathenish Darkness, and embrace the Light of the
Gospel, and the Way of Holiness. And do now, in Presence of Almighty God, the
Searcher of Hearts, and Witnesses, seriously and solemnly take the Lord
Jehovah, to be my God and P^r^ion, Jesus Christ his Son to be my Lord Redeemer;
and the Holy Ghost to be my Sanctifier and Teacher. And do Covenant and
Promise, by the Help of divine Grace, that I will cleave to the Lord with
Purpose of Heart, believing his revealed Truths, as far as I can gain the
Knowledge of them, obeying his Commands, ^^th these which mark out my Duty, and
those that forbid Sin, sincerely and uprightly to the End of my Life.

Here Ebenezer showed us a little Boy, named ^b^wa^^^, being in the Woods with
his Father, at a considerable Distance, and hearing that I was coming, and
would teach the Children to read, would stay no longer with his Father, but was
resolved to come Home, though his Father (to try him I suppose) told him, if he
left him no Body would take Care of him, to provide him Victuals and Clothes;
but he would not be dissuaded from coming Home to learn his Book. And what
makes this the more remarkable in the Boy, is, that he is exceeding fond of his
Father, as his Father is also of him.

The Indians, as has been observed, living in two Places about 8 or 10 Miles
asunder, it was needful they should come together in one Place, that they, on
the Sabbath might attend upon Mr. SERGEANT's Preaching, and have their Children
taught on the Week Days. When therefore they were together at Lieutenant
Umpachenee's House, they discoursed the Matter, and concluded, that, during the
Winter Season, they would dwell together about half Way between those Places,
where each Party then lived; the Place being well accommodated with Wood and
Water, and also near some English Families, in one of which Mr. SERGEANT might
live, while he served them; but this could continue no longer than the Spring,
when they must return to their own Places to Plant, etc.

Lord's Day, October 20th. I made two Discourses to the Indians, (in Number the
same as before) to which they gave great Attention, and seemed to be well
pleased. They were interpreted by Mr. Van Valkenburgh, a Dutch Man. On Monday
October 21st. They cheerfully set about building a public House at the Place
agreed upon, to serve them, both to meet in on the Sabbath, and to keep the
School in; round which they built small Huts for their several Families to
dwell in. The Cheerfulness and Engagedness they discovered herein, was an
Evidence of the ardent Desires they had to hear the Word preached, and to have
their Children taught to read. And, in a short Time, they all moved with their
Families thither. While these Things were doing, Mr. SERGEANT went up to
Wnabktukook, the Place where the Captain and some others lived, to teach their
Children to read, and was greatly pleased with the Respect they showed him, and
with the Children, they being exceedingly engaged to learn. He went also to
Skatekook, the Place where the Lieutenant and four Families more lived, and
taught their Children. The Number at each Place being about 9 or 10.

The Number of Mr. SERGEANT's Auditors now began to increase. Lord's Day,
November 3. he writes, My Auditory was greater than it had been; and now,
besides Preaching, I prayed by an Interpreter. And to move our Pity to the poor
Heathen who are brought up in Ignorance, he proceeds thus; After Service they
invited me to go, the next Day, up to Wnabktukook, to see a religious Ceremony,
they had learned of their Fathers. Accordingly I went. Ebenezer bore me
Company, of whom I inquired, to satisfy my Curiosity, into the Notions, Customs
and Manners of their Nation. Among other Things, he told me of some he had
known that were Atheists, who supposed all Things began, continued, and ceased,
according to the several Laws of their Natures, without any Cause or Direction
from a superior Hand. Others believed the Sun to be God, or at least the Body,
or Residence, of the Deity; but that now they genernlly believed the Existence
of one supreme invisible Being, the Maker of all Things. He told me also sundry
childish and ridiculous Things, which they believed: As that the seven Stars
were so many Indians translated to Heaven in a Dance; that the Stars in
Charles's Wain, are so many Men hunting a Bear; that they begin the Chase in
the Spring, and hold it all Summer; by the Fall they have wounded it, and that
the Blood turns the Leaves red: by the Winter they have killed it, and the Snow
is made of its Fat; which, being melted by the Heat of the Summer, makes the
Sap of Trees. I leave the Reader to conjecture, whence these Americans happened
to form their Notion so similar to that of the Europeans, who call these Stars
the Great Bear.


There is a large Heap of Stones, I suppose ten Cart Loads, in the Way to
Wanbktukook, which the Indians have thrown together, as they have passed by the
Place; for it used to be their Custom, every Time any one passed by, to throw a
Stone to it: But what was the End of it they cannot tell: Only they say, their
Fathers used to do so, and they do it because it was the Custom of their
Fathers. But Ebenezer says, he supposes it was designed to be as an Expression
of their Gratitude to the supreme Being, that he had preserved them to see the
Place again. These, Things Ebenezer told me, by the Way, as we were riding to
Wnabktukook, which are such childish Fables that I had not taken Notice of
them, had it not been that they believed them, as childish as they are; which
shows us how easily Men brought up in Ignorance are imposed upon, and should,
methinks, excite us the more to pity them. -- When we were come to the Captains
House, there were several of o^^ Indians there, as well from below, as those
that belonged there. After we had been there for some Time, two Men, appointed
for the Service, took a Deer down that hung up in the Wigwam, A Wigwam is an
Indian House, in building of which they take small flexible Poles and stick
them into the Ground, round such a Space as they intend for the Bigness of
their House, whether greater or less; those Poles they bend from each Side, and
fasten them together, making an Arch over Head: Then they fasten small Sticks
to them, cutting the Poles at right Angles, which serve for Ribs. After which
they cover the whole with the Bark of Trees, leaving a Hole in the Top for the
Smoke to go out, and at one or both Ends to go in and out.
which was to be offered, and laid the four Quarters upon a Bark in the Middle
of the House, (the Rest sitting round very serious;) the Skin was taken off
with the entire Head and Neck to the Shoulders; the four Quarters were laid one
upon another, and the Skin, doubled Length wise, was laid upon them, so as to
make it look as much like a whole Deer as might be. When this was done, an
elderly Man, appointed for that Purpose, stood up over it; and, with a pretty
loud Voice, spoke to the following Purpose.

O great God pity us, grant us Food to eat, afford us good and comfortable
Sleep, preserve us from being devoured by the Fowls that sty in the Air. This
Deer is given in Token that we acknowledge thee the Giver of all Things. Then
he halloo'd pretty loud, that God might hear and take Notice of what they were
doing. Then he that made the Offering gave the pro Tempore Priest (for they
have no stated one) a String of Wompum which was to pay him for his Service;
after which he halloo'd again. After these Ceremonies were ended, the two Men
before mentioned, cut the Deer in Pieces and boiled it; and when it was made
ready, a Piece was given to every one, of which they all eat, except he that
offered it, (for he eats none of it) which is to signify it is a Gift, and
therefore free, and he desires none of it back again. While they were eating,
one of the Waiters gave the Skin with the Feet, and some of the Inwards, to an
old Widow Woman, which is a Deed of Charity they always practice upon such
Occasions.

Upon Inquiry into the Original of this Piece of Religion, they gave me the
following fabulous Account of the first Institution of it. They had received it
by Tradition from their Fathers, that there once lived a Man among them, who
was seen to come down from Heaven with Snow-Shoes on, (which was the Original
of Snow-Shoes,) that he lived in great Reputation among them: was esteemed a
Hero, and a Prophet: He cleared their Country of Monsters that infested
theirRoads, and taught them that this was a religious Custom in the Country
above, from whence he came; and of him they learnt this Piece of Religion. That
he married a Wise. among them, and had two Children by her; and that when they
offered a Deer, he used to be their Priest: but some Times he omitted praying
upon such Occasions, which the Indians found Fault with, and this coming to the
Ears of his Wife, she informed him; he confessed it a faulty Neglect, and
apologizing, as well as he could, for himself, promised he would do it next
Time. And accordingly, when the next Occasion offered, he began to pray with
his two Children upon his Knees, and was in a wonderful Manner raised from the
Ground, rising gradually as he continued praying: but when he had got just to
the Top of the Wigwam, they called to him to leave one of his Children, at
least, behind him; and letting one down, he was carried up out of their Sight.
This Child of his also proved an extraordinary Man; of whom they tell several
very ridiculous Stories; which yet they believe with a firm Faith.

The above Historical Account I have not inserted so much for its being
curious, as to excite Compassion toward such ignorant Creatures, and the
charitable Endeavors of generous Minds to bring them out of such a benighted
State.

November 5th. Mr. SERGEANT began to keep School, in the School House which the
Indians had built; and on the next Week his Scholars were in Number 22 or 23,
as he writes; and on the following Week two new Scholars were added to their
Number. These he instructed on the Week Days, and preached on the Sabbaths.

The following Passages, in Mr. SERGEANT's Journal, well deserve the Attention
of those who are concerned for the English Interest in America, and for the
spiritual Good of the Indians.

Monday, November the 25th. I went to Albany, being desired by the Ministers of
the Country, to inquire after the Disposition of the Mohawks, and the Rest of
the Indians in Friendship with the English, toward the Christian Religion;
carrying a Letter from the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, to the Hon. Philip
Livingston, Esquire to desire of him Information in that Matter. Mr. Livingston
told me there was great Probability that the Protestant Religion might, if
proper Means were used, be introduced among most of those Nations; and he
looked upon it absolutely necessary in Order to preserve the Trade with them,
and keep them in Friendship with the English, for the French of Canada were
very industrious to gain them over to their Interest; and that they have
Missionaries among them, who came as near to their Government as they dare;
that the Indians are drawn off, more or less, every Year to Canada. Much the
same Account other Gentlemen gave me. -- Mr. Barclay, an ingenious and
religious young Gentleman, has been about a Year and a half among the Mohawks,
and is learning their Language, and designs to get Episcopal Ordination, to be
a Missionary among them, if the Society for propagating the Gospel in foreign
Parts will support him. He has allowed him a small Encouragement from the
Government for two Years, thirty Pound per Annum. I saw him little more than
half a Year ago, at this Place, when he told me he had all the Encouragement
that could be expected from the Indians; had wrought some considerable
Reformation in their Morals; and that they loved him entirely. The Mohawks are
generally Professors of Christianity; but, for Want of Instruction, have but
little of it in Reality. And, methinks, it is great Pity so ingenious and
worthy a Gentleman as Mr. Barclay should want any Encouragement, in so great
and noble an Undertaking. He now reads to them every Lord's Day the Prayers in
the Liturgy, which are translated into their Language, with some Lessons out of
the New Testament, besides some Manuscript Discourses, made by a former
Missionary, which he has got. But he has no stated Interpreter, and when he has
Occasion for one, is obliged to pay him out of his own Pocket. In a Word, he is
alone in that noble Design. Mr. SERGEANT left the College, designing to return
to it again, as has been observed. The Rev. Mr. Stephen Williams, therefore,
and some others, being very desirous that the Indians might be instructed,
while Mr. SERGEANT was absent, prevailed with Mr. Timothy Woodbridge of
Springfield, to go to them. And when Mr. SERGEANT returned from his
forementioned Journey, he writes thus. Upon my Return from Albany, ( which was
on Saturday November 30th) I found Mr. Timothy Woodbridge, a young Gentleman
very well qualified for the Business, sent up here, to take Care of the School,
and to instruct the Indians in a Catechetical Way, when I should return to my
Business at College.

Though Things had succeeded hitherto according to Mr. SERGEANT's Desires, yet
the Week before he returned to College, he met with some Things very
discouraging, of which he gives the following Account in his Journal.

Lord's Day, December 8th. I had but very few Hearers the Reason of which was,
that some of the Traders had been down from Hudjon's River, and brought a large
Quantity of Rum, and fold to the Indians, with which they got drunk, and
continued so for several Days, and had not got over it by the Sabbath. This was
the most discouraging Week I had. For the Dutch Traders, I was told, had been
very industrious to discourage the Indians from being Christians, thinking it
would lessen their Trade with them, or at least they should not be under so
good Advantages to cheat and impose upon them. For they make vast Profit by
selling them Rum, and making Bargains with them when they are drunk; and
Drunkenness is a Vice the Indians are extremely addicted to. These Traders tell
them, that the Religion we are about to teach them, is not a good one; that we
design in the End to serve ourselves by them, to make Slaves of them and their
Children, and the like. They also took Occasion, from the law there is in this
Province, against private Persons selling the Indians strong Drink, to
prejudice them against the Government and People; as though we were not their
Friends. Upon these Insinuations, I understood some of the Indians were very
much disgusted and affronted; that the Lieutenant was out of Humor; that his
Brother especially was in a great Passion, who is a considerable Man among them.

Upon this Information I desired the Captain and Lieutenant to come to my
Landlords on Lord's Day Evening, (designing the next Day to leave them)
Accordingly they came, and I endeavored to remove those Prejudices, and to
persuade them those Insinuations were utterly groundless and false; that the
Traders doubtless were the Men that intended to make a Prey of them, and their
Children; and labored to satisfy them, that the forementioned Law was designed
in their Favor, to prevent their abusing themselves, and exposing themselves
to the Abuses of others; that the Government did not design to prevent their
having strong Drink; for in other Places some trusty Persons have had
Commissions to sell them Liquor, and other Things they wanted, at the same Rate
they go at in Boston, and Orders to allow them the same Price for their Goods
as they would fetch at Boston. With what I said they seemed well satisfied;
especially Kunkapot; for he saw through the Design of the Traders. And as he is a
temperate Man himself, so he is very much grieved at the Intemperance of his
People; and though he be calm and moderate in his Temper, yet he showed
consderable Warmth and Passion at the wicked and ungenerous Treatment of the
Traders.

The Neighborhood of the Dutch to these Indians has often proved a
Disadvantage and Snare to them, and it is to be feared will prove so still; for
the Indians have often Occasion to go among them upon Business, and to visit
their Brethren: Upon those Occasions the Dutch do not fail of tempting them to
Drunkenness, it there is any Prospect of their finding their Account in it; and
it is to be feared some of them tempt them to Excess, on Purpose to disappoint
the Design of Christianizing them. And, without Doubt, the many Relapses into
Intemperance that have appeared among the Indians, after their Profession of
Christianity (of which have happened too many Instances) have been owing to the
wicked Practice of the Dutch. And as if other Temptations were not enough, they
too often recommend Drunkenness to them by their own Example.

The Time was now come, when Mr. SERGEANT was obliged to return to his Business
at College; and, as a proper Expedient to forward the Design he was now engaged
in, he proposed to take two Indian Children with him, intending thereby to lead
them into some Acquaintance with the English Language and Manners. And the
efore, at the Close of the Conference he had with the Captain and Lieutenant,
mentioned above, he proposed it to them. And in his Journal gives this Account
of the Matter.

Then I asked them if they would let two of their Children go, and live with me
at New Haven the Rest of the Winter; and they agreed that the Captain's only
Son Nungkawwat, and the Lieutenant's oldest Son Etowaukaum, (who by the Way is
Grandson by his Mother to Etowaukaum, Chief of the RiverIndians, who was in
England in Queen Ann's Reign) should be the Children. They were both young;
Nungkawwat about nine Years old; Etowaukaum about eight: Yet they were not only
willing to go with me, they knew not whither, but had a Mind to it. And the
next Morning, Monday December the 9th, we set out for New Haven, leaving Mr.
Woodbridge in the School. The Boys went away with very good Courage, and held
out a long and tedious Journey in a cold Season, with wonderful Resolution.

December 14th. We got to New Haven. I took the Boys into my own Chamber at
College, and sent them to the free School kept at New Haven. They lived very
contentedly, were much made off by every Body; for indeed they were a couple of
very likely Boys, especially the Lieutenant's Son.

The prudent Measures Mr. SERGEANT took with the Indians, the little Time he
spent with them before his Return to College; the Success had; the Hopes he
conceived of being further serviceable to them; together with the Opposition he
met with in prosecuting his good Design; the Reader may best learn from the
following Letter which he wrote to the Commissioners, soon after he got to
New Haven, (how soon I am not certain, for the Copy of it before me, has no
Date) and directed it to the Honorable Adam Winthrop, Esquire their Secretary.

Honorable Sir,
Your Honor's of November 13th I received at Westfield, in my Return from
Housatunnuk. It Is no small Satisfaction to me, that your Honor, with the Rest
of the Honorable and Reverend Commissioners, are pleased to entertain a good
Opinion of me. I have had the Approbation of my Conscience in the Business I
have undertaken, nor have I been at all discontented. Through the Blessing of
God, the Design has hitherto succeeded full to my Expectation, excepting that I
have not had quite so many Auditors as I hoped to have (there being generally
about 30.) There has been about 25 Scholars in the School, besides some older
ones, who took some Pains to learn the Letters; but I suppose their Patience
will hardly hold out to learn to read well. They have always treated me with
Respect and Kindness, in their Way. The Children in the School, I think, were
fond of me, and they all seemed to put great Confidence in me, and what I
believe you will think a sufficient Evidence of it, is, I have brought a Way
with me too little Boys, One is Capt. Kunkapot's only Son, named Nungkawwat,
about nine Years old; the other is Lieut. Umpachenee's eldest Son Etowaukaum,
about eight Years old.

The Lads had a great Mind to come with me, and their Parents were very willing
they should. They bore the Fatigues of the Journey well, and have been very
contented since they have been here. My Design in bringing them is to teach
them English, and to learn Indian of them, as well as I can, I design to keep
them, until I return to Housatunnuk, in the Town School; for my Time is so
taken up with College Business, that I cannot teach them myself.

I could not have the Opinion of the Gentlemen Commissioners: but I doubt not
but what I have done will be grateful to them. However, I did not design they
should be burdensome to the Society, and hope to find so much Charity amongst
Gentlemen in these Parts, as to bear the Charges of their Board and Schooling.
They are two very likely Lads, and, if I do not judge amiss, the Indian
Children excel the generality of ours, in Pregnancy of Parts and good Humor,
I am sure I could not have found an English School, any where, that would have
pleased me so much. Capt. Kunkapot is an excellent Man, and I do believe has
the true Spirit of Christianity in him. He knows a great Deal, and by the
Character all his Acquaintance give of him, his Conduct is unexceptionable. I
found them generally possessed with the Belief of One Supreme Being, the Maker
and Governor of all Things, and that they acknowledged the Difference between
moral Good and Evil; that God regards the Actions of Mankind, in order to
reward or punish them, in some future State of Existence.

I have endeavored to give them right Notions of these Matters, and to
establish them in the Belief of them. And from these Principles, together with
such other Arguments as I thought most convincing to them, to persuade them of
the Necessity of a supernatural Revelation, and to satisfy them that this is
contained in the Holy Scriptures. I desired them from Time to Time to let me
know, if they had any Doubts with Respect to any Thing I had taught them, or
they had otherwise heard, of the Christian Religion. But though they were
inquisitive in some Points, yet they never seemed disposed to contradict what I
said.

I have (after I had in several Discourses told them what I thought previously
necessary given them a brief Account of the Original of Things; the State of
Mankind at the first; the Fall and unhappy Consequences of it; the most
remarkable Dispensations of divine Providence recorded in the old Testament;
God's choosing a peculiar People to himself; his most remarkable Dealings with
them till his final Rejection of them; a short History of our Saviors Births
Life, Actions, and Death; an Account of his Doctrines, and Precepts: In every
Discourse making such practical Reflections, as I though it convenient for them.
They were generally all present that lived thereabout, and gave very good
Attention.

After they had finished the School-House (which was in the Beginning of
November) they moved to that Place with their Families, where they now live.
The Scholars in the School make very good Proficiency. I suppose the Gentlemen
Commissioners are before now informed of Mr. Woodbridge's Character, and the
Reason of putting him into the School, etc, The Children began to be fond of
him before I came away. There is a fair Prospect of considerable Things being
done among them. I found Nothing on the Part of the Indians but what was
encouraging, except their Inclination to strong Drink. But from other People
there are many Discouragements. They are a loose vicious People they live
among, and there are some so prodigioussly wicked as to endeavor all they can
to discourage them; especially the Dutch Traders, whose Gain is all their
Godliness; and this poor People's Ignorance and Vice is their Gain: They trade
with them very much in Rum, which is the Destruction of every Thing that is good
among them. To discourage them they tell them, that our Religion is not a good
one, and that we design only to make Slaves of them. They take Advantage from
the Law of your Province, against selling strong Liquor to them, to prejudice
them against the English. The Traders themselves evade the Force of the Law, by
leaving their Rum just without the Borders of the Province, from whence the
Indians fetch it themselves. The Week before I came away they had a drunken
Frolic, which lasted three or four Days. Kunkapot always keeps clear of such
Frolicks, and Umpachenee had so much the Command of himself as to refrain at
that Time. -- God only knows what may and will be effected; but I am much
afraid that the Dutch will discourage many of them: for they have great
Influence over the Indians. As for the old ones, who are much addicted to
drinking, nothing but the extraordinary Power, that attended Christianity in
its first Propagation, will be sufficient to reform them. The Young I have
great Hopes of, if God is pleased to bless suitable Endeavors with them.

I hoped they (the Indians) would have had a general Meeting of the Tribe,
while I was with them; but their Business (Hunting) made them defer it till
since I came away; and I suppose it is to be about this Time, What will be
concluded in that Meeting will either add Life to our Design, or almost
entirely quash it.

I am sensible I have drawn out this Letter to a very great Length, but if I am
tedious, I will not be more so by apologizing for it, but only beg Leave to
subscribe myself,

Your, and the Rest of the Commissioners most obedient humble Servant, JOHN
SERGEANT.


On the 19th of December, Mr. SERGEANT wrote to the Indians, directing his
Letter to the Captain, Lieutenant, and the Rest. And that the Reader may see
what Pains he took, to accommodate himsaelf to their infant State of Knowledge,
I will transcribe some Passages out of it.

My good Friends and Brethren,
-- You are always in my Heart, and I cease not every Day to pray to God for
you. -- I hope that you are convinced that Men ought to do good, and that God
will reward them that do so, and that God will punish them that live wickedly.
-- That Book teaches us that there is one great God above all, who is most
powerful, wise, just, and good. The Bible also teaches us, that there is one
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, born into the World of a Virgin Mother, and
died to save Sinners. For we are all Sinners, and deserve to be punished; but
Christ took upon himself the Punishment due to us. -- I know you have many
Temptations to draw back. They cannot be your Friends that try to discourage
you. They only endeavor to keep you in Ignorance, that they may be under
better Advantage to cheat you. Knowledge is certainly good. It is to the Mind
what Light is to the Eye. You would think them your greatest Enemies that
should endeavor to put out your Eyes; especially if you were traveling a
difficult Road This World is like a thick and entangled Wilderness; and why
should not you, as well as other People, enjoy the Benefit of the Light: --
Truth is more precious than the Light of the Sun. Don't suffer your Enemies to
impose upon you. --

I am your hearty Friend, and most willing to serve you in all Things, JOHN
SERGEANT.


This Letter was very acceptable to the Indians; and the more so, because it
came to them a little before a general Meeting of the River-Indians, at
Housatunnuk, at which they were to consider, whether it was best that the
Indians there should go on to receive Instruction or not?

It is a Custom among the Indians, not to proceed in any Affair of Importance,
till they have the Consent of the several Clans, belonging to their Nation; and
the Indians, at Housatunnuk, having proceeded so far, without the general
Consent of their Brethren, were much concerned lest they should be frowned upon
at the approaching Meeting, and the more so, because they had heard, that the
Indians of Hudson's River highly resented their receiving a Minister and
Schoolmaster, before they had gained the Approbation of the Rest of their
Tribe; yea, there was a Report, that a Design was on Foot to poison the Captain
and Lieutenant, on that Account; as also, because they had received Commissions
from his Excellency Governor Belcher. Whether there was any just Ground for
these Reports, or whether they were set on Foot by the Dutch Traders to
discourage the Indians, at Housatunnuk, I am not able to say. But however that
was, the Indians were so affected with these flying Stories, that they sent,
desiring some of the Ministers of the County would come to them, and be present
at their general Meeting.

Accordingly, January 15th 1734-5, the Rev. Mr. Stephen Williams of
Springfield, and I, accompanied by John Ashley, Esquire Westfield, went to
Housatunnuk. The Indians, who were expected from Hudson's River, came not till
Saturday, which was the 19th of the Month.

On the Sabbath Mr. Williams, being desired by the Captain and Lieutenant,
preached to the Indians by an Interpreter, in Number about 150, or 200, great
and small. I was with the English at Sheffield, who were then destitute of a
Minister.

To give the Particulars of our Proceedings with those Indians, (a Journal of
which the Rev. Mr. Williams kept, and is now before me,) would be too prolix. I
chose therefore, for Brevity's Sake, to give the Reader a concise Account of
them, from a Letter which Mr. Williams wrote to a Gentleman in Boston, which
was printed in Mr. Appleton's Preface to his Sermon preached at Mr. SERGEANT's
Ordination, and is as follows. We had diverse Conferences with the Indians, and
read to them a Letter from the honorable JOHN STODDARD, Esquire and endeavored to
answer their Objections, etc. and so far satisfied those that came from other
Places, that they thanked us for the Pains we had taken; and desired Mr.
Woodbridge might continue among them (at Housatunnuk) and that Mr. SERGEANT
would return to them; and said they would give an Account to their several
Towns, of what we had offered to them: And gave us Encouragement that they
would as a Nation submit to Instruction. --

Mr. SERGEANT's Account of what followed upon this general Meeting of the
Indians, I will give in his own Words.

It happened as soon as this Meeting [Drinking and Frolicking always conclude
such Meetings] was over, that several of our Indians were taken sick; and two
Men, seized with a violent Fever, died suddenly. This, with the Apprehension
they had before of Mischief, designed by some of the other Indians that came
from the neighboring Government, put them into a great Fright; and made them
suspect that those Persons were poisoned. Though, I believe, the Suspicion was
groundless. For it is so far from being strange to me, that some are sick after
such a Frolic, that I rather wonder they don't half die. For their Dancing is
a most laborious Exercise. They dance round a hot Fire, till they are almost
ready to faint, and are wet with Sweat; and then run out, and, striping
themlselves naked, expose their Bodies to the cold Air, and, it there be Snow
upon the Ground, roll in it till they are cold, and then return to their
Dancing again, and when they are hot, and tired, cool themsselves in the same
Manner, and, it may be, repeat this four or five Times in a Night: concluding
the Frolic with excessive Drinking. And when they are drunk, often fall a
Sleep in the open Air, perhaps buried in Snow.

This general Meeting happened in a very cold Season, and when there was a very
deep Snow upon the Ground. And I could never learn, that there was any certain
Symptom of Poison. However, the Indians were persuaded they were poisoned, and
concluded to apply to some invisible Power for the Discovery of the Murderers.
I shall give an Account of this Matter, as it was related by Mr. Woodbridge, in
a Letter to Mr. Williams in the following Words, viz.

On the 21st of February 1734, 5, in the Afternoon, Capt. Kunkapot informed me,
that he was going down to the Lieutenant's Wigwam, to find out who poisoned
those two Men that lately died there. I though it of nothing further than that they
were going to make a proper Search into the Matter; and therefore said nothing
to dissuade him. About Eight of the Clock in the Evening, Ebenezer came to me,
and told me, they were going to Pawwaw (as we call it) that they might discover
the Murderers that Way; for they expected that those who did the Fact would
appear to their Priests. I immediately rode down to them, found upwards of 40
Indians at the Lieutenant's Wigwam, This Wigwam of the Lieutenant's, if I
mistake not, is about 50 or 60 Feet in Length.
which was swept clean, good Fires made up, and the Indians seated on each Side
of the Fires, from End to End of the Wigwam, except a Space of about five or
six Feet, which was left at one End of the Wigwam, for the Priests, or Pawwaws.
Every Indian had two Sticks about a Foot and a half long, one of them split at
the End, which they held under their Legs as they fat. When I went in they were
all prepared for the Exercise; but had not begun. I asked them, if they were
willing I should be present to fee their Devotion? And, before they gave me an
Answer, the oldest Priest life up his Eyes toward Heaven, and spoke very
earnestly; after which they told me I might be there. They began with rapping
their Sticks, and singing; their eldest Priest sitting, and talking, and acting
a different Part from the Rest, This continued about an Hour. Then the Priest
rose up, and threw off all his Clothes, except the Flap that covered his
Nakedness: And then, naked, passed from one End of the Wigwam to the other,
with his Eyes fast shut, seeming to be in the utmost Agony; used all the
frightful Motions and distorted Gestures imaginable. This continued about
another Hour. Then the first Priest, being beat out, retired, and a second
rose, and acted the same Part; so a third, and a fourth. This continued all
Night, without any Intermission, except some short Intervals, in which they
smoked a Pipe; and some Times, for a short Space, they all got up and danced.

After I had seen these Things, (which it is impossible to describe) I took an
Opportunity to inform them, how improper such a Method of Worship was; how
sinful and displeasing to the great God. Upon which they told me, they knew no
Harm in it; they made their Application to the great God, and to no other. I
informed them, that God was not to be worshipped in such a Manner. And when I
had instructed them as well as I could, they resolved never to do so any more:
And those of them who had been best taught were much troubled, that they had
taken so wrong a Step. Thus far Mr. Woodbridge.

Mr. SERGEANT goes on and observes, that the Indians used to to have an high
Opinion of these Pawwaws, (whose Character answers pretty well to the vulgar
Notions of Wizards and Conjurers) and tell Stories of the great Feats which
they can do. However, they confess they have no Power over Christians. And
concludes with these Words. There may be something, for ought I know, in what
they say: But I am apt to think, they are very much imposed upon by such kind
of Pretenders, as the Rest of the ignorant Part of the World is.

In the Beginning of February, Ebenezer visited Mr. SERGEANT at New Haven, by
whom he wrote another Letter to the Indians. Some Passages of which are as
follows.

To all my good Friends the River-Indians at Housatunnuk, Health, and.
I am very glad to hear that you are all well, and that all Things go well with
you. My Heart is with you, though I am so far distant from you: But the greatest
Pleasure of all is that you have it yet in your Hearts to become Christians. --
When I had heard, that you concluded in your late general Meeting to embrace
Christianity, it was more pleasing to me than cold Water to a thirsty Man in
the Heat of Summer, or a plentiful Meal to one almost starved with Hunger, or
good Success to one who has hunted a qreat While in vain.

I hope you will be a wise and knowing People, and that you will learn to know
the true God, the Maker of all Things, and the Governor of them; and to know
Jesus Christ the Son of God, and Savior of Men. -- It cannot be long before
both you and I must die, and give an Account of ourselves to the great God, who
is high above all. -- Oh! how shall we blame ourselves for ever, if we neglect
our present Opportutunity of preparing ourselves for Death! But on the
contrary, how glad shall we be, even to die, that we may go to God, and to
Jesus Christ who died for us, if we are careful now to please God, and to
prepare ourselves for Heaven! O that I could make you sensible of the
Importance of these Things! I hope to see you again, and to instruct you more
fully in these Things: But in the mean Time, I pray you, for your Soul's Sake,
to embrace the Christian Religion, and make use of the Advantages God gives you
to learn the Truth, and to obey it. I pray the great God to bless you in this
World, with all good Things; and, in the World to come, to bestow on you
eternal Life This is the hearty Prayer of your assured Friend.

New Haven, February 4th. 1734, 5. JOHN SERGEANT.


About the Middle of February is the Time, when the Indians of Housatunnuk
leave their Habitation, and go, with their Families into the Woods, to make
their Year's Stock of Sugar; and the Season for this Business lasts till the
End of March, and some Times to the Middle of April.

Therefore, when the Indians went into the Woods, and took their Children with
them, Mr. Wood^ridge their Shool-Master, made a Visit to his Friends at
Springfield. By him the Indians wrote a Letter to some of the Ministers of the
County; informing them, that though their Business now called them, with their
Families, abroad; yet, in a little Time, they should return again with their
Families to their Habitations, and receive further Instruction; and desired,
that their Remove might not be interpreted, as though they were disaffected to
the Christian Religion; and expressed their Resolution to proceed in it, and to
use their further Endeavors to increase in Christian Knowledge, when they
should return from their Business of making Sugar. The Indians make their Sugar
of the Sap of Maple Trees. They extract the Sap by cutting the Tree on one
Side, in such a Form as that the Sap will naturally gather into a small Channel
at the Bottom of the Hole cut; where they fix into the Tree a small Chip, of 6
or 8 Inches long, which carries the Sap off from the Tree, into a Vessel set to
receive it. Thus they tap a Number of Trees; and, when the Vessels are full,
they gather the Sap, and boil it to such a Degree of Consistence, as to make
Sugar. After it is boiled, they take it off the Fire, and stir it till it is
cold, which is their Way of graining it. The Sugar is very good, of a very
agreeable Taste, and esteemed the most wholesome of any. It might doubtless be
made in great Plenty; and, I cannot but think, to the great Profit of the
Undertakers. If some Man would build him a Sugar-House and provide a set of
Boilers, and other Utensils as they have in the West Indies, I am persuaded he
would find his Account in it, beyond what those in the West Indies can do. For
the Gentleman, who has a Plantation in the West Indies, is at great Expense in
preparing his Ground; planting his Cane, and cultivating it for more than a
Year, before it is fit for Use: in cutting, triming, and toping it; for Mills
to grind it; and not till all this be done is the Sap of the Cane ready for
boiling. All this Charge might be subtracted from the Gentleman's Account, who
uses Maple Trees instead of Cane, except the Expense of taping the Trees, and
gathering the Sap, which is as nothing compared with the other.

It is true indeed, that the Sap of Maple Trees is not so rich as that of the
Sugar Cane; but I suppose the Disproportion is not by far so great as that of
the Expense For, I have been informed that two Men, under the Disadvantage of
boiling it in two Kettles, and in the open Air, have, in a good Season, made a
Barrel in a Week. What then would a Number of Hands do, with a Set of
West India Boilers, Coolers, and other Advantages of Dispatch, which they are
furnished with? Trees sit for this Business are very plenty, in the vast
uncultivated Wilderness between Connecticut and Hudton's Rivers, as also in all
the Northern Borders of this Province And, could the one Half of them be used,
I suppose they would more than furnish all the British Colonies upon the
Continent with Sugar

The Molasses that is made of this Sap it exceeding good, and considerably
resembles Houry. Three, or, at most, four Barrels of this Sap reduced to one,
by boiling, will ferment, and makes a very pleasant Drink, which is
sufficiently spirituous; and, suppose, by being distilled, would make excellent
Rum; though the Experiment has not, that I know of, been yet made.

The Trees, after they have been used 3 or 4 Years successively, must then rest
as many Years; and after they are recruited serve again, as well, or better
than ever. The second and third Years they are better than the first, because
then the Sap is richer than at first, though not quite so plenteous.

The Season for this Business is from the Beginning of February to the End of
March. A Time when People are as much at Leisure as ever.

Would it not therefore be prudent, for those who have a sufficient Number of
these Trees, on their new Farms, to spare them, and use them from Year to Year,
to supply themselves with those Commodities?




To this Letter the Ministers wrote an Answer, April 10. 1735. expressing the
Satisfaction they took in the good Disposition of the Indians, and their
Resulution exprefss'd in the Letter they hid received from them, and their
Willingness to contribute to their Advantage, as far as was in their Power.

In the Beginning of May, several of the Indians went to New Haven, and waited
upon Mr. SERGEANT to Housatunnuk. The Account of which I choose to give in his
own Words.

May the 6th. Came Capt. Kunkapot, Lieut. Umpachenee, his Brother
Johtohkuhkoonaunt, and Ebenezer, to New Haven, to wait upon me up, and to carry
the Boys back, who had been with me all Winter. The Lads had learnt to read and
write English very well, for the Time. Johtohkuhkoonaunt had been a very
vicious Fellow, and a very bitter Enemy to the Gospel; but a little before this
he came strangely about, and was much in Favor of the Christian Religion;
undertook to learn to read, and made extraordinary Proficiency in it. --

I entertained these Men with as much Respect, and Kindness, as I could; showed
them our Library, and the Rarities of the College; with which they seemed to be
well pleased; and behaved themselves, while they were there, well, and with
much Decency.

May the 8th, Mr. SERGEANT left New Haven (those Men accompanying him) and got
to Housatunnuk on the 10th, at Night.

Lord's Day, May the 11th. I preached to an Auditory of about 20 in Number, who
gave great Attention, and some of them were very-much affected with what I
said. The Lieutenant's Wise wept almost all the Time. And others of them
frequently shed Tears, especially the Captain was often very much affected.

The indians now seemed to be in a very good Temper, and, as I was told, had
the greatest Opinion of, and Love for me. -- Now the Indians were parted again
from the School-House; and lived some of them at Wuabktukook, and some at
Skatekook; for at those Places they planted their Corn and Beans, which is all
the Husbandry they carry on. For the Rest of their Living they depend upon
Hunting.

During Mr. SERGEANT's short Tarry with the Indians, (which was but 16 Days) he
and Mr. Woodbridge both kept School; one at one Place, and the other at the
other, each taking his Turn a Week at a place. The Week Mr. SERGEANT kept at
Wuachktukook, he lived at Kunkapot's House, and was very well entertained.

May 26th. Mr. SERGEANT returned again to his Business at New Haven, from
whence he wrote the following Letter to the Rev. Dr. Colman, one of the
Commissioners at Boston.

New Haven, June 3. A.D. 1735. Reverend Sir,
Though I am not so happy as to have much personal Acquaintance with you, yet
your known Character in general, and especially your Relation to the Affair I
have been engaged in, has made me hope, I shall have your Pardon for the
Trouble I now give you.

It Is but lately I returned from Housatunnuk and I doubt not, but you will
rejoice to be informed of the happy Success, God has been pleass'd to bless the
Endeavors with, that have been used to convert the Heathen there to the
Christian Faith. The Design has hitherto succeeded beyond Expectation. They
are, I think, now resolved to be Christians, and are earnestly desirous to be
taught. The Fondness they show for me is surprising; and considering how much a
Stranger I am to them, their own barbarous Education, and how little I have
done to win them, there appears something more than humane in it. And I think
they are now in a better Disposition than I left them in last Fall.

I am very willing (if the Gentlemen Commissioners please) to devote my Life to
the Service of their Souls. And if God shall give Success in it, it will be the
greatest Satisfaction to me. -- There is now, and I hope will be, Work enough
for two; I hope therefore Mr. Woodbridge will be maintained there with me.

I am sensible, that one Hundred Pounds will but just pay the necessary Charges
of living; for the Necessaries of Life are, and must be, dear in this remote
Part of the Country. But I make myself easy in the Matter, assuring myself,
that (if there be any Money) the Gentlemen betrusted with the Affair will do
what is reasonable. Money alone is no Temptation to me, at all, to devote
myself to such a Lite; yet I think it but reasonable to expect to be supported,
so as to have no other Care, than the Business I shall go upon.

Some of the Indians (I perceive) have a Mind to be baptized. Kunkapot,
especially, who appears to me well qualified for it. I have therefore though it it
would be convenient, I should be ordained speedily; at least, as soon as I tm
dismissed from the Concerns of the College. I would gladly be informed whether
it will be expected I should come to Boston for that Purpose. To be ordained
here will be more convenient for me, and less Expensive.

The Lads, I brought down, lived here with me last Winter, upon my Credit. The
Charge has amounted to something considerable, too much for me, under my
present Circumstances, to bear alone; though, were I able, I should gladly bestow
my Money that Way. --

If you will please to return a Line in Answer to these, I shall esteem it a
great Honor and Favor done to

Reverend Sir, Your most humble and obedient Servant, JOHN SERGEANT.


Mr. SERGEANT's self-denying, generous, and pious Behavior, discovered in
devoting himself to the Service of the Souls of the poor Heathen, as above,
raised him very high in the Esteem of many. Nor do I think that the Rev. Dr.
Colman exceeded due Bounds, when he expressed it in the following Letter, and
encouraged and strengthened Mr. SERGEANT in his laudable Undertaking.

Boston, June 18th 1735. Reverend and dear Sir,
Your Letter of the 3d Instant, is very welcome and obliging to me.

I shall think myself happy and honored in your Acquaintance. -- Our Esteem of
Mr. SERGEANT is not to be expressed, who can cheerfully deny himself for the
Service of Christ, and the Souls that may look mean among Men, but are precious
in the Sight of God, and therefore in yours. As God has wonderfully spirited
you, so he owns, and, I trust, will own you more and more. I shall esteem it
our Duty here to do all we can to assist you. -- You are high in the Heart of
Governor Belcher, and all the Commissioners. I have read your Letter to him,
but our public Affairs will not allow us a Meeting presently. I cannot
therefore answer to the main Points of your Letter now, But as to that of your
asking Ordination, I judge, with his Excellency, that it will be fit you should
speedily ask, and receive it, and have it where you are. It will be upon all
Accounts most proper and convenient. And may you have a more abundant Entrance
given you, among the Heathen, when you return to them.

I have taken Leave, this Morning, to insert in a Letrer to a Gentleman in
London, a Copy of yours to me. The Gentleman, three Years ago, pressed me to
receive from his Hand a Security of Twenty Pounds Sterling, per Annum, for
ever, for a fourth Missionary to the Indians on our Borders. But as I could nor
see that the other three were like to benefit the Papisted Indians, I refused
him; giving him my Reasons. -- But I have now shown him an open and effectual
Door at H^usatunnuk, and said all I can to fix him, and his noble Charity, on
the Mission thither. -- If the Gentleman (who will not yet let me name him)
come into my Proposal, it will please me much, and make our Way easier. But, if
this fail, I trust we shall be able to support the good Work of God, begun by
you. I would strengthen your Heart, and Hand, and shall be for doing my utmost,
and so will the Governor, and all the Gentlemen here, I am confident. -- God
give you many Seals of your Ministry, and make you a spiritual Father to a
whole Tribe of Souls; and may a Nation be born in a Day -- Accept of the
sincere and servent Love of,

Sir, your Brother and Servant, Benjamin Colman.


July, the 1st 1735. Mr. SERGEANT (having dismissed his Class at College) left
New Haven, intending to spend the Rest of the Summer, and indeed of his Life,
with the Indians at Housatunnuk, where he arrived on the 5th, and the next
Sabbath preached to the English, there being no Interpreter present. And he,
with Mr. Woodbridge, went on to keep the School, as before; one above, the
other below, changing Place every Week.

Lord's Day, July 13th. Preached to the Indians, few in Number -- No Man
present except Kunkapot, who was very much affected, weeping almost all the
Time. The Men were gone into New York Government, to reap for the Dutch People
there. The Indians reaping for the Dutch does not turn to their Advantage,
(though it might, if they had Prudcnce to save their Wages) but proves a Snare to
them. For (as Mr. SERGEANT observes in his Journal) when the Harvest is over,
the Indians at Hudson'sRiver drink up all their Wages. But he had the Pleasure
to hear that Winampee, one of his Hearers, on this Occasion, overcame the
Temptation, and told the Indians, at Hudson's-River, plainly, that the designed
to go to Heaven, and therefore must leave off such Wickedness. But some of
them, to his great Grief, did not come off so well. Neither is it to be
wondered at, that Men, who for a long Course of Years, have addicted themselves
to Excess, should be overcome, when such Temptations are laid before them by
their Brethren, and urged on by others for the Sake of Gain.

The Pains some of the Honsatunnuk Indians have taken to cure themselves of
this ill Habit, has been very great. And some Instances there have been of
Persons among them, who, when strong Drink has been offered them, have refused
to taste of it, giving this as a Reason, viz. that if they once taste, they are
in the utmost Danger of exceeding the Bounds of Temperance.

August the 13th. Mr. SERGEANT received a Letter from the honorable Adam
Winthrop, Esquire informing him, chat at a Meeting of the Comissioners it was
proposed, and agreed to, that he should be ordained at Deerfield, when his
Excellency Governor Belcher should come thither, upon a Treaty with the Indians
of several Tribes, who were to meet him at that Place. The Indians of
Honsatunnuk, being sent for by the Governor, set out for Deerfield, about the
18th of August. But Mr. SERGEANT was then in Doubt whether he should be able to
go; as he was taken a few Days before with the intermitting Fever, the common
Distemper of all new Comers to Housatunnuk. But on the 26th of the Month, he
was so far recovered of his Illness, that he set out for Deerfield, and was
there ordained on the Sabbath following.

The Account I find of Mr. SERGEANT's Ordination, in his own Journal, is only
this.

Lord's Day, August 31st 1735. I was ordained at Deerfield. I shall therefore
give the Reader an Account of that Solemnity, as I find it in the Preface of
the Rev. Mr. Appleton's Sermon, preached on that Occasion, and in what is
annexed at the End of said Sermon. --

-- And as it was thought highly proper, according to Mr. SERGEANT's Proposal,
that he should be ordained, so his Excellency the Governor, who is at the Head
of the Commissioners, was pleased so to order the Matter, as to have a very
favorable Opportunity for it; for his Excellency, having proposed a Treaty
with some of the Indian Tribes, at Deerfield, gave Orders to the Indians, at
Housatunnuk, to meet him there. Accordingly, the Governor, attended with a
large Committee of His Majesty's Council, and House of Representatives, and
many other Gentlemen, was at Deerfield on August 25th. And that Week being
taken up in the Treaty with the Indians, in ratifying the Peace and Friendship
between us and them, and in giving and receiving the usual Pledges of it; and
Mr. SERGEANT not coming to Town, till Friday Evening, it was judged proper to
have the Ordination on the Lord's Day, which was accordingly carried on, in the
Forenoon of said Day, by the Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, and other Ministers
then present, at the Desire, and in the Presence of His Excellency and the
honorable Gentlanen of the General Court, and those that attended him thither,
together with the Assembly of Christians usually meeting in that Place, and
many of the Indians, who were grave Spectators of the Solemnity, and the
Housatunnuk Indians, who sat by themselves, and attended throughout the whole
Service with great Seriousness; and were much pleased to see one they had such
a Love for, so solemnly separated to the Service of their Souls. As an
Introdudlion to the Ordination, the Rev. Mr. William Williams of Hatfield made
a Speech to His Excellency the Governor, in which he took Notice of God's
inclining the Hearts or some generous Persons in Great Britain, by their
charitable Donations, to seek the Salvation of the benighted Heathen; and of
it is being submited to the Direction of an honorable Corporation there; and
that by them a Number of Honorable and Reverend Commissioners (of which His
Excellency is at the Head) were here appointed for the same End; and of their
having found a suitable Person for the Instruction of the Indians, of which
those at Housatunnuk were desirous: And humbly asked, if it were His
Excellency's Pleasure, that the Pastors then convened should proceed to set him
apart for that Work.

To which His Excellency manifested his Approbation.

Then he observed to Mr. SERGEANT, that he now understood His Excellency, in
the Name of the Commissioners, desired him to take upon him the Ministry, and
Service of a Missionary to the Housatunnuk-Indians; and asked him, if he were
willing to devote himself to that Work?

To which Mr. SERGEANT gave his Consent.

The Ordination then was proceeded in. And after the Fellowssip of Elders was
given, the Rev. Mr. Stephen Williams of Springfield, by an Interpreter, asked
the Indians, if they were willing to receive Mr. SERGEANT, thus solemnly set
apart to the Work, as their Teacher?

To which they manifested their Willingness by rising up.

After the short Account Mr. SERGEANT gave of his Ordination, as above, he in
his Journal adds.

The Affair of the Treaty being made public. I need say nothing of it. Only I
would take Notice, that His Excellency's Treatment of our Indians was exceeding
grateful to them, and they have conceived the highest Opinion of the Governor.
Here Mr. SERGEANT takes Occasion (from a Quarrel that arose between an Indian
and his Wise, by which they were upon the very Point of parting, (though
afterward the Difference was accommodated, and they lived very happily
together) to give some Account of the ill Custom among the Indians of parting
after they are married.

The parting of Man and Wise (says he) is a very common Thing among them.
Indeed it used rarely to happen, that a married Couple live together till they
are old. And as they use but little Ceremony in the Business of Marriage, so
they make a less Thing of parting.

In such a Case, it is their Law, that the Children and all the Household Stuff
belong to the Woman; and indeed every Thing else but the Gun, for that is the
Man's Livelihood. -- The Man, according to their Custom, has no Right to the
Children, any more than any other Person whatever.

Then he goes on,

After the Treaty was over, I went to New Haven, and afcer I had paid a Visit
to my Friends, in New Jersey, (his native Place) I returned again to
Housatunnuk, and brought back the Captain's Son from New Haven (for he had been
there all Summer) who hid, by this Time learnt to speak and read English very
well. -- When I returned, Mr. Woodbridge was not here, for being taken sick
about the Time I was, when he had a little recovered, he went down to
Springfield, for the Confirmation of his Health; but was detained there by
Sickness, till some Time in November. In the mean Time, I kept the School. --

Lord's Day, October 26th. I preached as usual. The Indians showed great
Satisfaction to see me, their Minister, again. I proposed Baptism to the
Captain and his Family; who showed himself very desirous of it. I went up to
his House, in the WeekTime, to discourse with him, and prepare him for it. He
is a very modest, but intelligent Man, of great Integrity, and of a blameless
Conversation; and, from the very first of my reaching there, seemed to have a
serious and religious Turn of Mind.

His Wise also is a very sober good Sort of a Woman. He and his Wife gave great
Attention to what I said. Accordingly, Lord's Day, November 2d. I baptized
Kunkapot by the Name of John, his Wife Mary, and eldest Daughter. The Rest of
the Children were not present, by Reason of the Badness, of the Weather. The
Candidates showed a serious Sense of what they were about. It was done in the
Presence of a considerable Number, both of Christians, and Heathen.

November 7th. I married Ebenezer and Sarah, lawful Publishment having first
been made; for he, said he, being a Christian, chose to be married after the
English Manner, which he preferred to their own.

November 9th. I baptized the Rest of the Captain's Family, as also Ebenezer's
Son; in all, five. And now the Lieutenant and his Wife proposed themselves to
Baptism, the next Lord'sDay. I desired them to come in the Evening to my
Lodgings; and they came, with Ebenezer, their Interpreter.

I discoursed very largely, and as particularly as I though it proper, upon all the
more important and fundamental Points of Belief and Practice, in the Christian
Religion. To which they seriously attended, and were apparently much affected.
This Conversation the Lieutenant has often spoken of since, as what afforded
him more Knowledge, than he had ever gained by all his former Instruction: and
from this Time he seems to have had a new Heart given him.

Lord's Day, November 16th. I baptized the Lieutenant by the Name of Aaron, his
Wife Hannab, and the Rest of his Family; as also the Lieutenant's Wife's
Sister, and Ebenezer's Wife; in all, eleven Persons.

The Lieutenant is a clear-headed smart Man, of a deep Reach, and pleasant
Humor; and is one of the best Speakers we hear; is free in Conversation, and
talks excellently well. He has entirely left off Drinking to Excess, and
declaims against it; shows great Compassion toward the Rest of the Indians,
and seems heartily to lament their miserable Condition; wishes they were come
to the Knowledge of the Gospel; is himself thro'ly convinced of the Truth; and
his Knowledge does not puff him up. And though he is reckoned somewhat haughty,
yet always shows himself modest and teachable enough.

The Indians, in general, now seemed more engaged in Religion than ever before.
I was willing to improve their present Temper, and therefore tarried with them
in the Evening, (for they had now again moved with their Families to the
SchoolHouse, where they lived all Winter) and discoursed with them several
Hours, till indeed I was afraid I should tire their Patienee. However, when I
told them, I was unwilling to be tedious to them, they answered, they were glad
to hear, and should never be tired with hearing those Things. I endeavored to
give them a short View of the whole Scheme of Christianity. They gave good
Attention, and appeared well pleased. [And this I practiced for several
Lord's Day Evenings following.] And when I had done, Whampee and his Wife
proposed themselves to Baptism the next Lord's Day. -- 23d. I baptized Whampee,
his Wife, and Family; the Lieutenant's Brother Tohtobkukboonaut with some
others; in all, eleven Souls -- Saturday of this Week came a Susquabamaab
Indian, who indeed is a remarkable Fellow; he continued with us about a Month;
attended constantly upon Preaching, gave great Attention, and behaved himself
very well while he was here.

Lord's Day, November 30th. In the Evening, I stayed at the School House to
discourse with the Indians. Unnaqaunut, the Sosuahannab Indian, was present. I
therefore shaped my Discourse, in some Measure, for his Instruction;
endeavoring to show the Advantage, and Necessity of Revelation, and the
peculiar Excellencies of the Christian Religion. This. Stranger mightily
approved of what I said. He was formerly very vicious, though a Man of good Sense
and spoke a little Dutch. The Indians generally own the Difference between
moral Good, and Evil, as also a future State of Rewards, and Punishments. And I
suppose that he, being a Man of some Curiosity, and understanding a little
Dutch, might have some better Notions of these Things than the Indians commonly
have. And perhaps had some Knowledge of the peculiar Doctrines of the Christian
Reiligion. He had certainly experienced something more than ordinary, whereby
he had been changed from a very vicious, drunken Fellow, to a sober Man. He
told me sundry strange Things, that had befallen him. He is certainly a very
different Man from what he used to be. He is now a very temperate, rational,
thinking Man, and has not oaty left off drinking to Excess, but drinks no
strong Drink Wall.

Lord's Day, December 7th. I baptized nine mere Persons. About this Time the
Indians agreed to have no Trading in Rum; which they remained by.

Lord's Day 14th. I baptized Nawnawnnekenuk a principal Man, of a very good
Temper and Sense, honest, faithful, and obligng. --

Lord's Day 21 st. There being no Interpreter, I preached to the English only.

About this Time, some of our Indians came to me, and desired my Opinion about
a certain Custom they have and call Keutikaw, or a Dance. I asked them, if
there were any Religion in it? They answered No; but that it was only a civil
Custom of their Nation. However, if 1 disapproved of it, they would omit it. I
told them, it there was nothing more in the Matter, I saw no Harm in it, and I
should be glad of an Opportunity to see some of their People here: But was
afraid they would fall to Drinking, and instead of doing Honor to the Religion
they were now Professors of (which was their Duty) they would scandalize it
before Strangers, They promised me there should be no Drinking; that they would
carefully abstain from it themselves, and, when they sent to invite some of
their Friends to the Keutikaw, should forbid their bringing any Rum. They used
always upon such Occasions to have Plenty of strong Drink, and always made a
drunken Frolic of it, in the End.

Lord's Day, January 18th. I preached at the Lieutenant's House, to an Auditory
of 80 or 90, about one Half bring Strangers. I preached a Discourse suitable
for the Occasion, and afterward fat and discoursed with them for a
considerable Time. They heard with Attention, and I have Reason to think with
Approbation; for I heard some of the elderly Persons expressed themselves much
in Favor of the Christian Religion; wished our Indians might go on and
prosper: and some said, they would come and live here. And two Families did
stay, and are here now. Unnagaunut also left two Sons here in the School, both
likely young Fellows; one, especially, is extraordinary, and lerns at a
prodigious Rate. So that we had now ten Souls added to our Number. The Number
of Scholars is upwards of 40, besides some elderly Persons, who have made
Attempts to learn to read.

The Keutikaw is a Dance which finishes the Mourning for the Dead, and is
celebrated about twelve Months after the Decease, when the Guest invited make
Presents to the Relations of the Deceased, to make up their Loss, and to end
their Mourning. The Manner of doing it is this. The Presents prepared are
delivered to a Speaker, appointed for the Purpose; who, laying them upon the
Shoulders of some elderly Person, makes a Speech, showing the Design of their
present Meeting, and of the Presents prepared. Then he takes them and
distributes them to the Meurners adding some Words of Consolation, and desiring
them to forget their Sorrow, and accept of those Presents to make up their
Loss. After this, they eat together, and make Merry.

Our Indians kept to their Resolution about Drinking, much beyond my
Expectation; for they always used to get Drunk upon such Occasions; but we had
now but very little Drinking The Behavior of our Indians was much taken Notice
of by the Strangers; there being a very observable Reformation in their
Manners. The Lieutenant signalized himself, not only by abstaining from Excess
himself, not by exhorting others also to use with Moderation, what strong Drink
they were allowed. Unnaqaunut was also here, and was very serviceable in
keeping good Order.

By what I have here transcribed, from Mr. SERGEANT's Journal, the Reader will
be sensible, that the Indians had a great Respect for him, and were disposed to
ask, and submit to, his Advice in every Thing, their own ancient Customs not
excepted; that Mr. SERGEANT was very iudustrious and faithful in promoting
their temporal and eternal Good; and that the Blessing of God abundantly
succeeded his Endeavors.

It was then but little more than a Year since those Indians were in the Depth
of Healthesh Ignorance and Darkness, wholly unacquainted with the first
Principles of Christianity, and without God in the World. But, in that short
Space, many of them had gained such Degrees of Knowledge, in the Principles of
Religion, that they were become in Mr. SERGEANT's Opinion, (who was a good
Judge) fit Subjects of Baptism. And they, with their Children, to the Number of
40, were baptized by him, in little more than two Months after his Ordination.
The Number of their Inhabitants, and of their Scholars in the School, was also
increased.

These Things greatly refreshed Mr. SERGEANT's Spirits, and were no small
Encouragement to him, in his difficult Work. They were also Matter of
Admiration to others, and the Occasion of many Thanksgivings to God, whose
Power and Grace were manifest, in turning those poor People from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan to God.

And as many rejoiced to see Mr. SERGEANT cheerfully devote himself to the
Service of Christ, in this self-denying Work, and to hear of the glorious
Success he was favored with in it; so they said many kind and endearing Things
to him by their Letters. And the Reader will not, I trust, be displeased, if I
transcribe some Passages out of them.

The Rev. Dr. Colman, in a Letter November 18. 1735. says,

Reverend and dear Sir,
It is not easy to tell you, how much we have rejoiced here, in your Ordination
to the good and great Work into which you have entered. -- May the Consolations
of God refresh and enlarge your Soul from Time to Time, in all your
Self-denials for the Sake of his Name, and of the dear Souls, for whom you are
laboring. I have read with great Pleasure your first Discourse to those poor
Natives, and have ventured a Copy of it to the Earl of Egmont, and the
Associates of the late eminent Dr. Bray at London. -- I have observed to his
Lordship, that yours is a proper Original; and how juftly adapted to the Genius
and Capacity of the Savages! -- May God make you a Father to them, to beget
them to Christ by the Gospel. -- I gave some Account to the excellent Dr.
Watts, of London, of the strange Disposition of the Housatunnuk Tribe to
receive the Gospel, and of the good Spirit on you, to leave the College, and go
among them. He answers me, that he is always looking out to any Quarter of the
World for such Appearances. May Jesus (says he) the Head of the Church and of
Nations, attend your young Missionary with extraordinary Assitance, and
Success. Methinks (added be) love him upon your Report, for his Courage and
Zeal.

Let your Heart, dear Sir, be encouraged, and your Hands strengthened by the
Love and Prayers of Men of God at such a Distance from you. They hear of you,
and rejoice and bless you, of whom you neither hear nor think.

I have lately received a Letter, and a Gift, from the honorable Samuel Holden
of London I Will give you a Hint of both. In his Letter he says to me, I bless
God I have no Views in List but to honor God, by improving all my
Circumstances to promote his Interest in the World, and the Good of my Fellow
Creatures. Nor do I know any Circumstance here below to invite my Stay. I Have
lived long enough to see all Emptiness and Vanity, etc. --

This most pious Man has remitted me a considerable Gift, Part of which I have
already received. He desires me to dispose of it, in such a Manner as may be
most for the Honor of God, in promoting the Knowledge and Practice of
Religion, or in Relief of the necessitous Members of Jesus Christ. If Mr.
SERGEANT and Mr. Woodbridge, your Brother, and Companion, in the Kingdom and
Patience of Jesus Christ, have Need of Five Pounds each, of this Donation,
please to give your Order how I shall pay or remit it to you. I do (with great
Pleasure and Thankfulness to God) make the Offer of it. -- Pray for Mr. Holden,
and His, for Me also, and Mine. -- Mercy, Grace, and Peace be multiplied to
you, and to the Families you serve. May they be blessed in him, the glorious
Seed, in whom the Families of the Earth are blessed. Amen, etc.

His Excellency Governor Belcher, in a Letter of January 20, 1735, 6. expresses
himself in a most kind and friendly Manner: -- And toward the Close of his
Letter, says to him; 'Set before you the Example of the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, for your Imitation, that you may approve yourself a chosen Vessel
unto Christ, to bear his Name to those that are perishing for lack of Vision.
And may you Sir, be honored of God, by being made an Instrument of taking the
Scales from their Eyes. -- May you be wise to win their Souls, and be able to
say to them, In Christ Jesus have I begotten you through the Gospel. For these
Things will I bow my Knees, and lift up my Heart to him, with whom is the
Residue of the Spirit, etc.

The Rev. Mr. Appicton of Cambridge also, in a Letter of February 25. uses
these Expressions.

-- As it was with great Pleasure, that I saw you so freely surrender up
yourself to the Service of Jesus Christ, and of the Souls of the poor Indians;
so I take this Opportunity to let you know, how much I rejoice to hear of the
wonderful Success of your Labors among them.

This is one of the best Tokens you can have, that God is with you of a Truth:
For what can be a surer Mark of the promised Presence of Christ, than his
spiriting you to preach, and opening their Hearts to receive? Therefore you
must not complain of Solitude, when you hear Christ saying so plainly to you,
Lord am with you. -- Give my hearty Respects to Mr. Woodbridge. -- I heartily
commend you both to the Grace of God, earnest praying that the great Lord of
the Harvest, who has sent you torth, would continue to strengthen your Hands,
and encourage your Heart, by increasing the Fruit of your Labors; and that
these poor, neglected, perishing People, may be your Joy for the present, and
your Crown in the Day of Christ's Appearing, etc.


Mr. SERGEANT, by Reason of Hurry in Busness, kept Copies of but very sew of
the Letters he wrote. I am not therefore able to insert his Answers, either to
His Excellency, or to the Rev. Mr. Appleton: But, having obtained the Originals
written to the Rev. Dr. Colman, shall gratify the Reader with Mr. SERGEANT's
Answer to the foregoing Letter from the Doctor.

Reverend Sir,
Your Favor of the 18th of November I received a few Days ago, which still
adds to the Obligations to Gratitude I was laid under by your former, which was
accompanied with a very acceptable Present, for which I now return you my most
hearty Thanks.

I doubt not but God, in his infinite Mercy, hears the Prayers of good Men,
daily put up to him, for S;uccess in the Cause of Christ, in which I have the
Honor to be engaged. -- Next to the Blessing of God on my Endeavors, the
Prayers and good Wishes of Men of God, yield me the greatest Satistisfaction.
In their Favor I seem to enjoy the Pleasure of Society, in the deepest
Solitude.

I wish I were worthy of the Love of so excellent a Man as Dr. Watts, whom all
above and admire. And if I may be though it worthy, in any Measure, to deserve the
good Opinion of my Fellow-Men, it is not a little owing to the Doctor's
ingenious Writings, which have the Force to charm the Mind to the Love of
Virtue and Piety, and to infuse his own Spirit into his Readers. -- My first
Discourse to them (the Indians) I had no Thought of ever being read by any but
myself, but had I attempted its Amendment, perhaps, I should have made it worse.

God has been pleased to crown our Labors with surprising, and unexpected
Success. I have baptized almost 40 Persons, He might have said quite, as
appears by the following Account.
Infants and Adult. I hope the Adult have a pretty good Understanding of the
main and fundamental Doctrines of the holy Religion, into which they have been
baptized And I always endeavored to possess their Minds with the most serious
Sense of what they were about, when they entered themselves the Disciples of
Christ. Their whole Hearts seemed to be engaged in the Matter: And I have
Reason to think, that the Imperfection of their Knowledge is made up by their
Zeal and Integrity. Those who have been baptized have behaved very well, though
they have, several Times, been tempred to exceed the Rules of Temperance, by
Offers of strong Drink, which used to be their beloved Destruction. They seemed
to be surpised with the Change, they find in themselves; expressing the
Difference between their former State, and the present, by Infancy and Manhood,
dreaming and being awake, Darkness and Light, and the like Metaphors. I pray
God, the Day Star that seems to be arisen in their Hearts, may shine more and
more to the perfect Day.

I thank you for your kind Offer of the Donation from that pious, and generous
Gentleman you mention. I thank God, I do not want myself. But two Indian Lads
live with me; and about three Pounds I design to spend upon these, or some
others, that may assist me in learning the Language; which I cannot well
afford, without the Assistance of Charity. If therefore you will be pleased to
remit to me, by the Bearer, what you offered, I shall accept it with great
Thankfulness: and I think it would be laid out very profitably in the Way I
have mentioned. Pray for me, for our new Proselites, and so our whole Tribe.
May the Blessing of the charitable Man descend upon you, and yours. Which is
the hearty Prayer of, etc.


The Rev. Dr. Colman not only approved of the Method, in which Mr. SERGEANT
proposed to spend the Money offered him, but was so well pleased with it, that
he doubled the Sum; as appears by a Passage in the Doctor's Answer of February
6th 1735, 6.

Mr. Matthew Noble brings me to Day your welcome Letter, of December 26th. And
has received Ten Pounds for yourself, and Five for Mr. Woodbridge. I have
doubled the Sum to you, upon reading your Letter, for the assisting you the
more in supporting the two Indian Boys. -- By a Passage in Mr. SERGEANT's
Journal, it seems as if even the River-Indians had not wholly escaped being
tampered with by the Romish Clergy.

January 26th. -- The Lieutenant asked me what I thought of the Celibacy of the
Romish Clergy, and of their severe Methuds of doing Penance? I was a little
surpised to hear him ask such a Question; for I did not suppose our Indians
knew any Thing of the Matter. However, I readily told him, that those Things
were vain Inventions of Men; and unprofitable Services; that I did not judge
any Man; but I was sure no Body was under Obligation to do them; that our
Business was to mortify our Lusts and Passions, and to regulate our Lives by
the revealed Will of God, and not to go beyond that. -- In Indians living in
two Places, remote from each other, put them to the Trouble of removing from
their proper Habitations in the Winter Season; and laid them under
Disadvantages, as to attending upon the public Worship, and theSchool, in the
Summer. There was therefore, from the Beginning, a Design to accommodate them
with Land, that they might all settle in one Place; and that there might be
Accommodations also for others of the Tribe, who might be disposed to come and
settle with them. The honorable John Stoddard, Esquire in a Letter, wrote to be
communicated to the Indians, at their general Meeting at Housatunnuk, in
January 1734.5. mentioned it as follows.

-- There is a Projection (says he) to get the most of the great Meadow, above
the Mountain of Housatunmuk for the Indians, so that they may live together,
and be able, with Convenience, to attend the public Worship, and have a School
at their Doors: Provided the Government can agree with the English, who have
Lands there, and can suit them with Lands elsewhere. These Things are great
Tokens of Kindness toward the Indians, and they should be very careful how
they put a Slight upon them. At the Treaty at Doorfield, the same Thing was
proposed to them, by Governor Beleber. -- I have been informed, (says His
Excellency) that you will live remote from one another, and that you are not
accommodated with Lands sufficient to support your Families. This Matter I
shall lay before the great Council of this Government, and recommend to them
the giving you Lands for your more convenient and compact Settlement, and what
may be enough for your living comfortably upon.

Accordingly, the Governor laid this Matter before the General Assembly at
their Fall Session, and gives Mr. SERGEANT the following Account of it, in a
Letter of January 20th 1735, 6. -- I laid before them (the General Court) what
I had promised to your little Flock, at the Interview with them at Deerfield;
and Col. Stoddand, Major Pumroy, and Mr. Justice Ingersole, are appointed, by
the General Court, to weigh and consider all Things and Circumstances, so as to
accommodate my Children at Housatunnuk with Land, in the best Manner.

His Excellency adds, I agree with you that some English Families (if sich can
be found as you mention) be interspersed and settled among the Indians; for to
civilize, will be the readrest Way to christianize them.

The Indians of Housatunnuk were informed of the Steps that were taken by the
English, and of the Committee chosen for the abovementioned End; but had a
great Jealousy upon their Minds, that the English had some ill Design upon
them; and had several Consultations among themselves, what Answer they should
make to them they came up. Why they were so cautions, the Reader may best learn
from Mr. SERGEANT's Journal. It may, (says he) perhaps, be wondered that there
should be any Difficult among the Indians in this Affair. But it is the Manner
of the Nation to be slow in their Debates, cautions in their Determinations,
and jealous of their Interest. And the Enemies of the Gospel (for we have a
great many, not only among the Indians in other Places, but also among
pretended Christians; whose Godliness is their Gain) had been very industrious
to throw stumbling Blocks in their Way, and to prevent their accepting the
Proposal of settling together. For there have not been wanting those, and there
are some yet, that tell them, our Design, in this Affair, is only to get the
greater Advantage of them, and bring them more into our Power, that we may
insalve them and their Children.

But these Jealousies were, in some good Measure, removed by the Pains Mr.
SERGEANT took to satisfy them of the kind and good Intention of the English
toward them; and by the Faithfulness both of the Commit and Government in
that Affair.

February 10th. (says Mr. SERGEANT) Major Pumrey, and Mr. Ingersole, two of the
Gentlemen appointed by the Government to weigh and consider the Matter of
procuring for the Indians some Land, came up here upon that Business. -- The
next Day the Indians, being sent for, came to meet the Committee. And, first,
the Major read the Vote of the Assembly, by which the three forementioned
Gentlemen were appointed a Committee for this Affair; and then made a Speech to
them to the following Purport. Friends and Brethren,
The Governor, and General Court, appointed us to come up to treat with you,
and to endeavor to settle you together upon some good interval Land, that you
may better profit by your Minister and Schoolmaster: And for this End we two
are come. Col. Stoddard's Mother being an aged Woman, and sick, prevented his
coming, and will, we hope, be his Excuse to you. But we are come to promote
your civil and religious Interest. We can assure you of the Friendship and good
Will of this Government. Therefore tell us what will suit; that we may inform
the General Court, who will gladly do you good.

Then the Commit asked, Whether they had a Mind to live together? They
answered, Yes; and should be very thankful, if they might be accommodated for
that Purpose: And said, they were all agreed. Then they were asked, Whether the
interval Land above that Mountain (which the Indians call Wnabktukook) would
suit them? They said very well. And whether they were willing to part with
their reserved Land, below at Scatebook, for an Equivalent above? They answered
Yes. Whether they were willing a Lot should be there reserved for the Minister
and School Master? They said Yes, by all Means. Then they were dismissed till
the 18the of the Month.

It must be here observed, that the Lands at Wnabktukook (alias the Great
Meadow) above the Mountain, were comprehended in the North Part of a Township,
which was some Time ago purchased of the Indians, and by the General Assembly
granted to a Number of Proprietors; except a small Part, which Captain
Kunkapot, and some other Indians there, reserved for their own Use; and now
live upon. What the General Assembly designed, was, to agree with those
Proprietors, who had Land above the Mountain, to give up their Right, and to
take Land in other Places, as an Equivalent for it: and to grant to the Indians
a Township six Miles Square, comprizing the Great Meadow in it; that being the
most suitable Spot for the Indians of any that could be had: for they make
little or no Use of any but interval Land.

The Business therefore of the Committee, in the next Place, was with those
English, and Dutch People, who held the Land above the Mountain; with whom,
when they came to discourse, they found little or no Difficulty; for they were
content with the Proposals made to them of equivalent Lands in other Places.
But there were two or three Dutch Men, who were settled above the Mountain, and
had Lands in the Great-Meadow, who were more difficult. To those the Committee
made some very fair Proposals, which they took into Consideration.

The Committee therefore, upon meeting the Indians on the 18th, informed them,
that they had conser'd with the Proprietors of the Land above the Mountain, and
that there was a Prospect of obtaining those Lands for the Indians, according
to their Desire; especially seeing the Governor, and General Court, were so
very desirous of promoting Religion among them; that it was not now in their
Power to settle them together, but they must make Report of what they had done
to the General Assembly; who, if they approved of it, would send another
Committee to accomplish the Affair. And then they desired to know, Whether the
Indians had any Thing further to say to them?

The Indians returned them their hearty Thanks for the Pains they had taken,
and for the Trouble they had been at, in prosecutting the Affair: and added,
that they had nothing further to say, but only that they desired to be settled
together by planting Time.

Upon the Report of this Committee, I suppose, it was, that the General Court
granted to the Indians a Township, six Miles square, above the Mountain;
comprising in it Wnebktukook, or the Great-Meadow. And the same Gentlemen were
appointed a Committee to lay out the Land, and to treat further with those, who
were Proprietors of Land, within the Limits of the Township, to give them an
Equivalent, to Proportion the Meadow Lands to the Indians, and to do all that
was needful that the Indians might be put into the quiet Possession of it. By
the Grant of the General Assembly, Mr. SERGEANT, their Minister, and Mr.
Woodbridge, their Schoolmaster, were made Proprietors, each of a sixtieth Part
of the Township; and four English Families besides were to be accommodated with
such a Part as the Committee should see fit. It was upon Mr. SERGEANT's Desire,
that those Families were admitted. The Ends he had in View were, not only that
He, and Mr. Woodbridge, might have the Comfort of their Neighborhood, and
Society; but especially to civilize and anglicize the Indians, and to be a Help
to them in their secular Affairs. Families, well adapted to answer those Ends,
were to be chosen, and by Col. Stoddord's Approbation (who was a good Judge)
they were to be admitted.

April 20th. These Gentlemen, the honorable John Stoddard, Ebeneze Pumrcy, and
Thomas Ingersole, Esqrs went to Housatunnuk, upon the Business assigned them by
the Court. When they met the Indians, they found some Jealousies yet remaining
upon their Minds, which it was needful for them, in the first Place, to remove.
Of this Matter Mr. SERGEANT, in his Journal, gives the following Account.

The Indians met the Committee; who discoursed with them, informing them of the
Intention of the Government, and the Design of their coming up; reminding them
of what was agreed upon in the Winter, telling them how far they had proceeded
already: for they had, before they came up, agreed with all the Proprietors in
those Parts from whence they came; and had got 12 or 14 Rights to dispose of to
them. After this Lieutenant U^pac^^^^^ spoke to the following Purport. That he
was very sensible of the unhappy Circumstances of his former Life, and of the
miserable State of his Nation; who, being brought up in the greatest Ignorance
and Vice, were Objects of Pity: And that he was also sensible of their great
Obligations to the English, for the Notice that had been taken of them; and
very thankful for their Care of them, in providing for their Instruction in the
Knowledge of the Gospel, and taking Care to have their Children taught to read,
and for their being brought up in the Christian Religion: And said, that for
his Part, he was so fully sensible of these Things, that the Consideration of
them had some Times almost drawn Tears from his Eyes: and that, as for himself,
he thought his Eyes were now opened, and was well satisfied of the Truth of the
Christian Religion, so far as he understood it; though possibly he might be
mistaken; and was only sorry he would had so little Opportunity to be instructed;
wished it had been his Happiness to have been brought up in the Christian
Religion, as he hoped it would be of his Children; for he wished the same Care
that had been taken, might be continued: Yea, 'twas his Desire, that their
whole Tribe might be brought into the same Way they were in. However, there
were two or three Things, which appeared dark in his Eyes. He wondered they had
been neglected so long, and desired to know the true Spring of the great
Favor, so suddenly shown them. If it was from Love and good Will toward them,
he, for his Part, accepted it with all Thankfulness: But, possibly, there might
be some secret Spring, and moving Cause, he was not acquainted with, that might
lessen their Obligations to Gratitude. And what still more stumbled him was
that Major Pumroy, when he was here last Winter, asked them several Questions,
about the Proprietors of several Tracts of Land, and so insisted upon it to
know who they were, and how they came by their Titles, that he was ready to
conceive, the Major suspected they had no Title at all to the Lands they
challenged. If any Gentleman questioned them in this Point, they were not able,
without much Trouble in sending for Friends, and providing Witnesses, to
satisfy him: Or, if any one should insist upon any Thing more than the
Testimony of living Witnesses, he confessed they could prove no Title at all.
However, their Titles were good, according to their Law and Custom in such
Cases.

And another Thing, he could not but wonder at, was, that if the Christian
Religion was so true and good, as he esteemed it to be, how there should be so
many Professors of it, that lived such vicious Lives, and so contrary to what
he was told, were the Rules of it.

This is the Substance of what he said, which he spoke with the greatest
Earnestness.

Col. Stoddard answered him; informing him, what was the Pretense of the first
English Settlers of America, with Respect to the Propagation of the Gospel
among the Natives of the Country; and what is contained in the Charter of this
Government, respecting that Matter: And told him what had been done formerly to
christianize the Indians; particularly by the famous Mr. Eliot; and what
Success had attended those Endeavors; and what is now doing in diverse Parts
of the Province: That the Government had always been ready to promote the
Gospel's Propagation among them: That many Attempts had been made, with but too
little Success: but as soon as ever it was known, that the Indians at
Housatunnuk had a favorable Opinion of the Christian Religion, Care was taken
to have them instructed. It was their Good, and that only, that was sought
after. And, whatever their Enemies might insinuate to the contrary, this was
the Spring of what was now doing for them. -- As for the Difficulty which arose
from what Major Pumroy had said, he answered for himself, that is was not
beccuse he, in the least doubted of their Titles to their Lands, (which he
looked upon as good) that he inquired, who owned this and that Tract, and how
they came by their Titles, but that it was only to gratify his own Curiosity to
know their Laws and Customs.

To the third Difficult the Colonel answered, that it was indeed a shameful
Thing; but sprung from the Corruption of Men's Hearts, and not from any Detect
in the Rules of Living.

Then the Lieutenant spoke again, and said; perhaps, because the Land was in
great Measure given them, there might hereafter some Contention arise between
their Children and ours; and that ours would look upon themselves to have a
Superiority over theirs, because the Land was given them.

He desired therefore to know, how their Titles would be ascertained; and what
Security they could have, that their Children would be free.

To this the Col. answered, that they would have their Titles in the same
Manner that all the People in the Government had; that therefore they had no
more Reason to fear, that Advantage would be taken against them, than any Body
else: that the same Laws which protected others, in their Properties, would
protect them: That there were Laws made peculiarly in Favor of the Indians,
which they would have the Benefit of: that what will be, none can certainly
tell, but, from what has been, we may reasonably hope, that the same Favor
will be continued. But after all, they would be entirely at their Liberty, as
much as they were then, either to go away, or to tarry there, if they had a
Mind to.

Then the Lieutenant expressed his Satisfaction in what had been said, and
added that, for his own Part, he was so abundantly satisfied of the Truth and
Excellency of the Christian Religion, that he would cheerfully die for it. And
after they had discoursed a While upon Religion in general, they were dismis'd;
very much to the Satisfaction of the Indians.

The Committee met with much Difficulty from the Men that were settled above
the Mountain; but at Length sound Means, whereby they were made pretty easy. --
They therefore proceeded in their Business, laid out the Township, which now
goes by the Name of Stockbridge; and, if I mistake not proportioned the
Meadow-Land, which they had got for the Indians. But, some yet remained in the
Hands of the Proprietors, which afterward the Indians were put into the
Possession of: though it cost the Committee, and Mr. SERGEANT too, a great deal
of Trouble, before they could satisfy and remove the Owners.

Capt. Kunkapot had formerly given to Jehoiakim Vanvalkenbeurgh, a Dutch Man,
his special Friend, 40 Acres of Land in this Great-Meadow, and about 250 of
Upland adjoining to it; which he now held. (...) a little after, being reduced,
he was obliged to sell. Some Gentlemen therefore bought him out, and gave the
Land to the Indians, an Equivalent of the unappropriated Lands being given them
by the General Assembly. So that the whole Meadow was in a little Time possessed
by the Indians.

On Monday the 26th of April, the Committee conferred again with the Indians,
and informed them what they had done, respecting their Township; showed them a
Plan of it; desired to know of them, if they would have any Thing altered. The
Indians replied that they were very well satisfied with what was done, and very
thankful for it.

In the Beginning of May, the Indians all settled in their new Town; were
greatly pleased with it. Two new Families were added to their Number. They gave
very much into Husbandry, (says Mr. SERGEANT) planted more this Year than ever
they did before, by three Times at least. -- Mr. Woodbridge lodges at Capt.
Kunkapot's, has a very numerous School, and a tedious Task of it; lives a very
lonesome Life; is indeed indefatigable in his Business; and no Body deserves
more of the Public than he.

When the Commit, upon their first Visitation of the Indians at Housatunnuk,
had finished their Business with them, the Time for geting Sugar was come.

Therefore ( March the first) they all went into the Woods, with their Familes,
upon that Business; expecting to fellow it about six Weeks. They went in two
Companies, about Half with the Captain above the Mountain, the Rest with the
Lieutenant below. Mr. SERGEANT was loath they should be so long without
Instruction, and therefore concluded that he would go with one of the
Companies, and Mr. Woodbridge with the other, and live with them during that
Season.

After the Indians had been out two Days, and prepared themselves Houses, they
sent in two young Men, one to Conduct Mr. SERGEANT to the Captain's House, and
the other to conduct Mr. Woodbridge to the Lieutenant's.

After they had been out about three Weeks, Mr. SERGEANT and Mr. Woodbridge
changed their Quarters; Mr. SERGEANT went to the Lieutenant's Company, and Mr.
Woodbridge to the Captain's, endeavoring that the Indians might have equal
Advantage from their Instructions.

During these six Weeks, Mr. SERGEANT spent his Time very agreably among the
Indians, being employed, in the Day Time, in teaching the Children to read; and
in the Evening he taught the Indians to sing, in which they took great Delight.
He prayed with them Morning and Evening, in their own Language, and said Grace
before, and after Meat, in the same. He also preached to them on the Sabbath by
an Interpreter, and prayed in their own Language; which he began to do on
February 18th, and continued it ever after. For they being desirous, that
Prayers might be made in their own Language, Mr. SERGEANT (by the Assistance of
Interpreters) had composed Prayers for such Occasions, in the Indian Language.
The Snow now was about a Foot and Half deep in those Woods, and the Weather
cold. A Deer-skin with the Hair on, spread upon some Spruce Boughs, and a
Blanket spread upon that, was his Bed; and three Blankets spread over him was
his Covering; where he slept very well. And though their Diet was low, yet it was
cleanly and well dressed, by the Captain's and Lieutenant's Wives. Their Drink
was Water. He had a good Appetite, eat heartily, and was in very good Health,
all the Time he was in the Wilderness with them.

I was (says Mr. SERGEANT) treated very well, while I was with them; and
learned more of their Manners, and Language, than ever I had before. -- They
are altogether without Compliments, in their Treatment one of another. Children
show no Sort of Deference to their Parents, either in Word or Carriage, more
than to any Body else. They are very modest, and the Women and Children
bashful. They are kind one to another, and make every Body welcome, in their
Way, that comes to their Houses. When a Stranger comes into one of their
Houses, he does it, as if it were his own, and, without any Compliments at all,
sits down with the Rest; but says nothing. The Housekeeper immediately offers
him some Victuals, which he receives as though he were at Home; eats freely, and
then begins to talk; to tell his Business, or to relate a Piece of News; but
will enter, before he has eat, into no Discourse. Some Times, when Friends
meet, they say to one another. O! Brother or Cousin; or use some such Word
expressing some Relation. But they have Terms expressive of more particular,
and quire different Relations from any we use. Their Children, born of the same
Parents, stand in three Relations to one another; the eldest calling all the
younger, whether Brothers or Sisters, Nheesumuk. The elder Sisters are to the
younger, whether Brothers, or Sisters, Nmesuk. The younger Children call the
elder Brothers, Netokbannut. And there are other like relative Terms, to which
there are none in our Language Synonymous. And indeed their Language, so far as
I perceive as yet, is extremely different from all the European Languages that
I have any Acquaintance with, and seems, as far as I can judge, in the Genius,
Phraseology, and Pronunciation, of the Words (which abound with Gutturais) to
be most like the Language of the East: though I confess, I am as yet a very
incompetent Judge.

Their Women have a Custom (which is, for ought I know, peculiar to the
aboriginal Americans, for they tell me it is common to all North America at
least) viz. Their Girls, at the first flux of (their Menses, separate
themselves from all Society, live alone in the Woods; some fourteen, some
twenty, and some forty Days; must do no Work at all, nor be seen by any Man for
it is reckoned ominous for a Man to see them in their Separation. They cut off
their Hair when they go out. And some of their Women go out afterward, at the
Return of their Terms, and stay three or four Days. -- What they mean by this
Custom, or whence they derived it, I cannot tell.

About the Time the Indians settled in their new Town, Mr. SERGEANT went to
Westfield, and was there detained by Sickness; so that he was absent from them
two Sabbaths. He took Care to inform the Indians of his Sickness, who expressed
a great deal of Concern for him; inquired by all Opportunities after him, and
said if he should die it would be a great Loss to them: But if it should be so,
they hoped God would provide them another Minister. At his Return, they showed
great Joy and Satisfaction, that he was recovered and restored to them Again.

May 23d. He preached to them in their new Settlement, but lived not among them
as their Schoolmaster did, but kept still at his Lodgings about five Miles
below.

June 12. A Messenger came from Hudson'-River, to call the Indians thither, to
consider of a Murder committed by one of their Tribe. The Captain and
Lieutenant went upon that Occation, and had Opportunity, while they were gone,
to see and converse with many of the principal Indians; spent almost all their
Time in Discourse with them upon the Subject of Religion; and told Mr. SERGEANT
when they returned, that all they talked with, had favorable Thoughts of the
Christian Religion; owned that they themselves were in a wrong Way, and said
they believed they were serving the Devil: And not one objected any Thing
against Christianity, but several said they would come with their Families, and
be instructed.

On the 27th of June Mr. SERGEANT baptized a Child, which being mentioned in
his Journal, he proceeds to say.

And now the whole Number that I have baptized is 52. The Number of Indians now
residing here is upwards of 90; and it is highly probable, if God affords us
the Blessing he has done, we shall have here, in a few Years, some Hundreds of
Indians.

From the imperfect View of the Matter, one may have from this Journal, it will
I believe appear, that the Hand of God has been remarkably in the Affair. But I
am not able, in Writing, to communicate the same View of Things, that I have
from observing the whole from Step to Step. And considering the gross Darkness
the Indians were brought up in, with the great Opposition the Gospel has met
with, not only from the Heathen, but from some also, who have the Name of
Christians, I am surpised at the Progress it has so suddenly made among them.
A very remarkable Reformation appears, more, and more, in their Manners; their
Hearts seem really to be engaged; and Vice, especially Drunkenness (the Vice
they are all addicted to) begins to be a great Disgrace among them. I am not
able to converse much with them in their own own Language, though understand a
great deal they say; and Religion is the Subject of frequent Conversation among
them. Our Dutch Interpreter tells me he is surpised to hear some of them talk,
so sensibly as they do about Religion.

When Mr. SERGEANT was at Westfield, in the Beginning of May, he received a
Letter from Dr. Colman, of April 21. giving him an Account of a generous Offer
Mr. Isaac Hollis of London had made him, of dieting, clothing, lodging, and
instructing 20 Indian Boys at his own Cost.

This is the Gentleman to whom the Doctor wrote, recommending the Mission at
Honsatunnuk to his Generosity; of which he informed Mr. SERGEANT in his Letter
of June 18th 1735. inserted, in Page 30 and 31. And in Answer to the Letter of
the Doctor's, he makes this generous Offer.

Dr. Colman, who was wise and prudent, thought it not best to draw upon Mr.
Hollis, until he should be well informed, what the Charge of maintaining 20
Scholars would amount to, in one Year; for he was apprehensive that it would
rise higher, than the Donor expected. And therefore wrote to Mr. Williams of
Springfield, and to Mr. SERGEANT, for their Thoughts upon the Matter; and also
consulted Governor Belcher; and, upon the best Computation they could make,
concluded, that the Expense of one Child, in a Year, would arise to twenty five
Pounds our Currency, and the whole to five Hundred Pounds per Annum. Of this
Dr. Colman informed Mr. Hollis; and it proved as the Doctor expected. It
exceeded what Mr. Hollis though it of. He therefore reduced the Number of Scholars
to 12; and proposed to support that Number from Year to Year.

About the same Time, the honorable Samuel Holden, Esquire; of London, directed
the Rev. Dr. Colman to bestow one Hundred Pounds of his Money for the Benefit
of the Indians at Stockbridge, which Mr. SERGEANT, with Dr. Colman's
Approbation, thought best to expend for the Benefit of the Females; seeing Mr.
Hollis's Donation was confined to the Males.

Of these noble, and generous Instances of Liberality, Mr. SERGEANT informed
the Indians, who were much affected with them, and very thankful to their pious
Benefactors. And, as a grateful Acknowledgment of the Benefits they had
received from the honorable Corporation at Home, they wrote the following
Letter.

Being very sensible of the former miserable Circumstance, both of ourselves
and Children, by Reason of the Ignorance and Vice in which we were bro't up; we
cannot but resent, with the most hearty Gratitude, the Care you have taken to
instruct us in the Doctrines of the Gospel Truths, necessary sor our prefent
Satisfation and future Happiness.

We bless God, the Father of Mercies, and Giver of all good Things, that he has
has pitied us, and put it into your Hearts to use your Endeavors to
communicate to us that Knowledge of divine Things, which he has given to you.
We also thank God, that he has given us Favor in the eyes of this Government;
especially in making Provision for our living together, which is a very great
Convenience for our own, and our Childrens Instruction, in the Principles of
Religion, and other useful Knowledge. We can, with the greatest Sincerity, say,
that we gladly embrace the blessed Truths of the Gospel, and it is the Purpose
of our Hearts, as we have most of us prosess'd ourselves Christians, so to
continue stedfasst in the Faith; and hope our Children will have the same
Wisdom given them. And we pray God still to continue it in your Hearts, to
provide for our further Instruction, and for that of our Chjildren also, that
we and they may still grow wiser.

And, from the small Measure of Knowledge we have, (being now as it were just
waked out of Sleep) we are so sensible of the Benefit of the Gospel, that we
wish, and pray, that our whole Nation may be brought into the same Way. And we
bless God he still inclines their Hearts more and more to receive the Gospel of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

We can make no Returns for your Favors, but only our hearty Thanks, and
Prayers to God, that he would repay our Benefactors a Thousand Fold into their
Bosoms, for the Kindness they have shown us.

We are at a great Distance from you, and shall never see your Faces in this
World; but hope it will be our Happiness, through the Riches of divine Grace in
Jesus Christ, to rejoice with you in Heaven, our Father's House.

We are your very obliged Friends, and Brethren, in the Faith and Patience of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Isaac Wnaumpee, James Wohquanhekomeek, Abraham
Naukutehewant, John Jcuwoonaunt, Nicholas Uhwaunmut. John Pobpnebonnuwot, Aaron
S^nkewenaukheck, David Naunaunckenuk, Ebenezer Poohpoonuk, Abraham
Johtaunku^koonaunt, Ephraim Woonaunnu^queen,

Stockbridge, July 17th 1736.

In a Letter of July 11th. His Excellency Governor Belcher says to Mr. SERGEANT
-- I desire you ta greet my Children at Housatunnuk, in the kindest Manner from
me, and let them know, I shall be heartily glad to see them at Bosten, with
Corslar their chief Sachem, -- 1 hope to see you with your People, etc.

Accordingly Mr. SERGEANT, and a Number of the Stockbridge Indians, with about
as many Strangers from Hudson-River, went to Boston. And August 5th they waited
upon the Governor and CounciL.

The Lieutenant (says Mr. SERGEANT,) made a Speech, in which he, in the Name of
the Reft, expressed great Thankfulness for the Kindness the Government had
bestowed upon them already, particularly in granting them a Township, for the
Convenience of their living together. And in Return gave up their Challenge to
two Miles of Land, one Mile on each Side the Road from Housatunnuk to
Westfield. -- Prayed for the Assistance of the Government in building a
Meeting House and School-House.

To which the Governor answered very kindly, that the Government was well
pleased with the Inclination they had shown to receive the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus christ; and so long as that good Disposition remained, would not repent
the Care and Charge they had been at to accommodate them for their better
Instruction in the Way of Life; hoped they would go on and answer our Hopes and
Expectations from their good Beginning, and they should never want the Favor
of the Government; that they accepted very kindly the Land they gave up their
Challenge to; that he would make known to the General Court, their Desire
respecting a Meeting and School-House, at their next Session.

Then they made a Present of Skins; which the Governor was pleased to order to
be sold, and the Money to be laid out in Books for me: which, with other
Instances of His Excelleney's Generosity to me, I retain a most grateful Sense
of; and as it springs from the Relation I stand in to this People, it is a
Proof of His Excellency's great Piety, and Concern to promote the Knowledge,
and Practice, of Religion and Virtue, and so I shall ever esteem myself so much
the more bound to be faithful in my Business. --

From Westfield to Sheffield Bounds is about 26 Miles, the Land therefore which
these Indians gave up their Challenge to is 52 square Miles, and should be
esteemed no inconsiderable Return for the Favor bestowed.

August 6th. Mr. SERGEANT and the Indians dined with the Governor and Council,
were courteously treated, and received Presents ol Guns, Blankets, Shirts, etc.
Soon aster which they returned Home, well pleased with the Treatment they had
met with. And though there were some Difficulties attending the Affairs of
Stockbridge, particularly respecting their Lands, not yet got wholly out of the
Proprietors Hands, yet, in the general, Things went well; the Indians increased
in Knowledge and Number, new Families, and particular Persorns, coming to them
from Time to Time, to live there and be instructed. And the Indians in general
behaved well. But about the End of August, some of them went to a Kentikaw, or
Dance, at Squampaumuk, (a Place about 25 Miles distant from Stockbridge; in the
Dutch Country) where, being encompassed with Temptations, some of them drank to
Excess, which was Cause of great Grief to Mr. SERGEANT, and they themselves
were filled with Shame and Confusion of Face when they came Home.

Mr. SERGEANT, who had hitherto lived in English Families, below the Mountain,
in January 1736, 7. moved up into the Indian Town, and lived with Mr
Woodbridge, who had built an House, and brought Home a Wife, etc. Mr. SERGEANT
therefore was no longer under a Necessicy of living at such a Distance from his
People. --

When His Excellency Governor Belcher, according to his Promise of August the
5th to the Indians, recommended it to the General Assembly, to build them a
Meeting House and School-House, the Court granted it: as appears from a Passage
in Colonel Staddard's Letter to Mr. SERGEANT.

The General Court (says the Colonel) have ordered; That a Meeting House of
thirty Feet broad, and forty long, together with a School-House, be built for
the Indians, at the Charge of the Province. And You and Mr. Woodbridge, with
Myself, are appointed to see these Things effected.

As Mr. SERGEANT had, by the Help of Interpreters, before this, translated some
Prayers into the Indian Language, for their daily use; so now he had translated
Dr. Watt's first Catechism into the Indian Tongue, that the Children might
understandingly read and learn it. Some Things, about this Time, appeared with
a discouraging Aspect, and gave Mr. SERGEANT much Trouble; the Principal of
which was, that one of their Dutch Neighbors, not only refused to give up his
Right for an Equivalent, which made the Indians uneasy; but also kept a Store
of Rum by him, of which he either gave or sold to the Indians, so that some of
them drank to Excess, and were very troublesome. But this was Matter of Grief
to most of them, especially to the Captain and Lieutenant, who exerted
themselves to correct such Disorders; and the Indians, in general, behaved
well. New Families were, from Time to Time, added to their Number. And there
were frequent Instances of Mr. SERGEANT's baptizing Persons, who, upon careful
Examination, he found knowing in the Principles of Religion, and seriously
resolved to walk by the excellent Rules of it.

Though the Indians went out this Season, as usual, to make Sugar, yet they
returned from their Work every Week, and attended the public Worship on the
Sabbath. They also discovered an Inclination to the English Customs. For a
couple, who were about marrying, entered their Intentions of it, or made them
known to Mr. SERGEANT, who, upon the two sollowing Sabbaths, published the
Bands of Matrimony between Naukuchewat, and Wauwoonemeen, and then married them
by a Form translated into the Indian Language.

On the 7th of August Mr. SERGEANT began to preach to the Indians in their own
Language, and in Process of Time became so perfect in it, that the Indians were
wont to say, Our Minister speaks our Language better than we do our selves. And
as it cosl him a great deal of Pains to make himself Master of it; so it was no
small Advantage to him, when he was able to use it freely, in Coversation with
the Indians. For he was not only able, better to acquaint himself with the
religious Sentiments of those? who would make a Prosession of Christianity; but
also to converse with Strangers upon religious Subjects, when they came to
visit their Brethren at Stockbridge, or when he had Opportunity elsewhere.

Mr. SARGEANT, about this Time, baptized several Persons. And that the Reader
may know, what Pains he took to inform the Candidates in the Principles or
Christianity; and to satisfy himself that they understood them, and that it was
their serious Purpose and Resolution to live a religious Life; I shall here
transcribe, from his Journal, the concise Account he gives of his Treatment of
them.

Lord-Day, August 14th. A large Auditory. -- I preached in Indian. Yokun and
his Wife proposed themselves to Baptism. Both Persons of good Behavior, and
apparently well disposed to Christianity. The Man had been a Drinker; but
seemed now to be reformed: the Woman always appeared innocent, and virtuously
inclined. I took a great deal of Pains to instruct them in the Principles of
Christianity, and to impress upon their Minds a strong Sense of Religion, and
to compose them to Seriousness. And, having good Satisfaction of their
Knowledge and good Inclimation, Lord's Day, August 21. I baptized Tokum, his
Wise, and three Children. -- This Week, Umpaumut's Son, Pmaupausoo by Name,
from the Island in Hudson's River, where his Father was a Chief, who had been
here a little While, desired Baptism, as also Nomsboos, who about a Year before
came from the Shouwoncos Country. I took Pains to instruct them particularly,
in the Principles of Christianity. They were both young, I was therefore the
more concerned for them that they should be well instructed and have their
Minds impressed with a due Seriousness and Concern, in what they were about: I
therefore chose to deser their Baptism a little longer.

Lord's Day, August 28th, Auditory as usual. -- This Week took a second, and
third Opportunity, to instruct the Candidates for Baptism, when another young
Man also appeared defirous of Baptism; Ukhibnauwequn by Name, -- This Week I
took a great deal of Pains to prepare the Candidates for Baptism. They appeared
very desirous of it, and seemed to understand the Doctrines of Religion well.

Lord's Day, September 14th. I baptized them. --

Mr. SERGEANT had been informed, that the Indians living at Kaunaumeek, a Place
about 18 Miles from Stockbridge, to the N. W. were desirous that he should come
and preach to them. He therefore sent a Messenger, informing them, that
Lord's Day, September 11th he would be with them. And in his Journal of that
Day says.

I preached at Kaunaumeek. I had about 30 Hearers. There were but few Indians
that properly belonged there but they gave Notice of my coming to all that
lived near them; so that a considerable Number were got together. Some of the
Chief of our Indians bore me Company. I had prepared a Sermon in Indian for the
Occasion. They heard me with great Attention, and said they understood me.

We were entertained very kindly: The chief Man there whose Name was
Aunauwauneekbbeek, appeared to be a rational judicious Man. He can speak a
little English, and carries on some farming Business, and lives well. I asked
him before I came away; what he thought of what he had heard? He said he could
not give any Judgment yet; for he had not sufficiently informed himself.
Christianity might be true; he could not pronounce against it, nor could he say
it was right but added, that he should come to hear me sometimes at
Housatunnuk, and inform himself further.

I was well pleased with his Answer, and exhorted him to enquire further into
the Matter; and not to forget to pray to God to instruct him.

Our Indians that were with me took Pains to persuade them to embrace the
Christian Religion, and endeavored to answer those Objections they supposed
might arise in their Minds against it; particularly the Lieutenant talked a
great deal, and very well, upon the Subject.

Another Man there, of some Character, and of good Behavior, who had been
baptized in his Infancy, by some Priest, was well inclined to Religion; and
purposed to come and live with us.

A little more than a Month after this, viz. Lord's Day, October the 9th, the
two principal Indians of Kaunaumeek were at Stockbridge, and heard Mr. SERGEANT
preach. -- took Oppor unity (says he) to discourse with them both, and
particularly with the Chief, who now was free to own that he believed the
Christian Religion was true, and that he was determined to be a Christian. And
added, that he had received such an Impression on his Mind, from what he had
heard from me, and otherwise, of the Christian Religion, that he could not
shake it off; that his Thoughts had been much fixed upon the Matter; that, even
in the Pursuit of his common Business, the could not but entertain himself with
Reflections of this Nature. The other appeared to be fully determined to come
and live with us.

Lord's Day, 16th. Preached as usual. This Week I went upon a Visit to my
Friends in New Jersey. In the mean Time the Chief of the Kaunaumeek Indians
came hither, in Expectation to see me, and hear some further Instructions in
the Doctrines of Christianity; and tarried about a Week: seemed much affected
with what he heard of the Christian Religion, and very desirous of further
Instruction; purposed to come again when he could hear of my Return. That I may
here finish the Story of these two principal Indians of Kaunaumeek viz.
Aunauwauneekbbeek and Wautaunkumeet. I shall look forward to January 22.
February 12, and April 16. 1738.

Lord's Day, January 22d. I preached again at Kaunaumeek, Aunauwauneekbbeek the
principal Man there appeared to be mightily engaged in Matters of Religion; was
desirous of Baptism; sent his Daughter, an only Child, to learn to read; came
himself and tarried all the Week. And I, having good Satisfaction of his
Knowledge and Faith, baptized him and his Daughter. --

Lord's Day, February 12. I preached as usual. Present Aunauwauneekbbeek, and
Wautaunkumeet, from Kaunaumeek. The last left his Son with me. --

Lord's Day, April 16th. I baptized Wautaunkumeet, and two of his Children. He
belonged to Kaunaumeek, but is since come to live with us; is a Man of about
forty Years of Age, very good tempered, and of considerable Knowledge: formerly
addicted to Drinking, but now reformed.

The generous Proposal of Mr. Hollis, to maintain 12 Boys, was not till now put
in Execution. And what Mr SERGEANT says of it in his Journal is.

January 11th 1737, 8. I began to keep the 12 Indian Boys on Mr. Hollis's
Foundation. I took them into my own House, and under my Instruction. It was in
the Spring of the Year 1736 when the Rev. Dr. Colman received from Mr. Hollis
the Offer of maintaining 20 Scholars at Housatunnuk. The Doctor's Caution in
the Affair, mentioned before, delayed the coming of the Money till the Spring
of the Year 1737. Some Time also was taken up in getting their Clothes from
Boston, making of them up, etc. And even then there was no House in
Stockbridge, but Mr. Woodbridge's, which was small. Mr. SERGEANT therefore, who
was building this Summer, and intending to take the Boys under his own
Instruction, though it best to put it off, till his own House could be prepared to
receive them. And accordingly, having prepared it, hired a House Keeper; and,
at the Time above mentioned, he tool them in.

It is probable, his House would have been ready for their Reception sooner, if
he had not been in Want of Money to forward the building of it.

His Salary was no more than One Hundred and fifty Pounds our Money,
twenty-seven Shillings and six Pence of which was then equal to one Ounce of
Silver. And, by Reason of a general Scarcity, all Provisions were very dear.
Little or Nothing could therefore be spared from his Salary toward building.

By a Letter of April 25. 1737. he informed the Commissioners of his being
about to build; desiring some Assistance from them to defrey the Charge of it.
In Answer to which the honorable Adam Winthrop informed him, that he would say
his Letter before the Commissioners at their next Meeting, which would not be
very soon, for they lately met. And in one Letter of July 30. and in another of
September 8. The Secretary Mr. Winthrop informed him that the Commissioners had
not yet met.

But April the 6. 1738. he writes thus to Mr. SERGEANT. I laid before the
Commissioners your Letter for some Allowance toward your building, and they
voted fifty Pounds to be paid you on that Account.

As the Sum, granted by the Commissioners, did not answer his Expectations, not
amounting to ten Pounds Sterling, so neither was it sufficient to relieve his
Necessities; for he, before this, was necessitated to run himself much into
Debt: As he informs Dr. Colman in a Letter of June the 19th, in which he also
says.

I was indeed extremely disappointed in my Expectations, when I found by Mr.
Secretary's late Letter to me, that the Commissioners had voted me no more than
fifty Pounds to assist me in my Settlement. --

Upon the Reception of Col. Winthrop's Letter, I Immediately determined to
apply myself to the General Court, not knowing where else to seek for
Assistance. Whether or no they will think it their Business to help me, I
cannot tell. However, I have put a Petition into Col. Stoddard's Hand, and by
him wrote to the Governor with a great deal of Freedom, praying for his Favor
in the Matter. And I suppose the Colonel has put it forward. If I fail in that
Point, I know not where I shall turn myself.

The General Assembly (which had all along encouraged the Indians of
Housatunnuk, and used their Endeavors to promote the Interest of Religion
among them; not only by giving them a Township of Land that they might settle
together, and by being at great Charge, and Trouble, in removing the
Inhabitants, but also in building a Meeting and School-House, which the Workmen
began last August;) received, and granted Mr. SERGEANT's Petition; voted him
One Hundred Pounds in Bills of the middle Tenor, which was equal to about six
Hundred Pounds our present Money, at fifty Shillings per Ounce.

His Excellency Governor Belcher, who upon all Occasions discovered a great
Regard for Mr. SERGEANT, was very friendly to him upon this Occasion; as
appears from a Passage in his Letter of July 3d to Mr. SERGEANT.

I have (says the Governor) read with much Satisfaction yours of 24th of May,
which is full of the Gentleman, the Christian, and the Gospel Minister; and
therefore inclined me readily to afford all my Weight and Influence, in the
Assembly, for your Help and Encouragement, in the arduous, but excellent Work
you are engaged in. I am thankful to God for succeeding so far the Endeavors
of your Friends, and that we have Reason to hope more Help may be obtained for
you (through the Goodness of God) from the same Fountain, and you will always be
sure of my Assistance.

Mr. SERGEANT, who had taken into his own House, and under his own
Instructions, Mr. Hollis's (...) Boys, found, upon Trial, the Burden was too
heavy for him; and though he performed that Service for near or quite a Year, yet
afterward was obliged to take other Methods with them. All whom he could
persuade to it he sent abroad into English Families, where they were supported
by Mr. Hollis's Bounty, and went to School, to perfect themselves in Reading
and Writing. And those who refused going from Home, lived with their Parents,
and went to Mr. Woodbridge's School. To these Mr. SERGEANT allowed no more of
Mr. Hollis's Bounty, than was sufficient to cloth them. And it was found upon
Trial, that those who lived in English Families, made much the best Progress in
their Learning, beside the Benefit of gaining the English Language. The first
Time that Mr. SERGEANT administered the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to his
People, was June 4th, of which he gave Dr. Colman the following short Account,
in a Letter of June 19th 1738.

The first Lord's Day in this Month, we had the Communion of the Lord's Supper.
There were Eleven Communicants of the Indians, who attended the Ordinance with
as much Seriousness, and apparent Devotion, as ever I observed in any People
upon any Occasion whatever.

Though the Indians had hitherto in general behaved well, yet there had been
diverse Instances of baptized Persons exceeding the Bounds of Temperance. And
the Lieutenant himself, who had appeared so very much engaged in the Christian
Religion, had Occasion to humble himself for the Sin of Drunkenness, before he
came to this Ordinance. Which he did (says Mr. SERGEANT) with a due Appearance
of Seriousness, Gravity, and Resolution of better Obedience for Time to come.

The Commissioners, upon Mr. SERGEANT's Desire, supplied the Communion Table
with two Flagons, two Dishes, and some Wine.

Page 14th. I informed the Reader of Mr. Barclay's being employed among the
Mohawks, and of his Design to get Episcopal Ordination, and to be a Missionary
to them, if the Society for propagating the Gospel in foreign Parts would
support him. -- This his Purpose he put in Execution, went to England, received
Episcopal Ordination, and a Mission, from the Society to the Mohawks. And I
find Mr. SERGEANT recommending him to the Commissioners at Boston, in a Letter
of May the 9th, 1738. in the following Words.

I had just row a Letter from Mr. Barclay, a young Gentleman of Albany, lately
arrived from London, with a Mission from the Society for propagating the Gospel
in foreign Parts, to the Mohawks West of Albany; who tells me he has but a
scanty Allowance ( i. e. from the Society) and could obtain no Salary for an
Interpreter, or Schoolmaster: And that he has Thoughts of applying to the
Commissioners at Boston for Assistance; but would have my Advice first. I
cannot tell what Stock the Corporation has; but I suppose it is scanty, by the
Allowances they afford their Missionaries. However, I could heartily recommend
Mr. Barclay to the Notice, and Favor of the Commissioners? He is a worthy
Gentleman, and well deserves Encouragement in his Undertaking. And every Body,
who has the least Acquaintance with the Indians, and their Manners, must be
very sensible, that it is a vain Thing to send Missionaries among them without
supporting them well. There is no Part in the Bishop's Character, more
necessary in a Missionary among the Indians, than being given to Hospitality.

That the Reader may be sensible what a Prospect there was of Mr. Barclay's
being eminently serviceable among the Mohawks, if he had been duly encouraged;
I shall (asking Mr. Barclay's Pardon) show by transcribing some Passages
contained in his Letters to Mr. SERGEANT. The following, are from a Letter
wrote before he went for Orders, and dated in his School, at Fort-Hunter, June
11th 1736.

I am heartily glad to hear of your Success, I pray God more abundantly to
bless and succeed your Labors; and may you enjoy abundant Satisfaction in the
Discharge of your Function here, and a glorious Reward hereafter. I bless God I
have no Reason to despair of Success in my Mission. They daily become more and
more desirous of Instruction; and would, in all Probability, make great
Progress both in the Knowledge and Practice of Christianity, were proper
Methods taken to instruct them. But I labor under great Disadvantages, for
want of an Interpreter, so that I cannot tell what Progress they make in
Knowledge, nor can I proceed regularly in my Instructions; and I almost despair
of obtaining a perfect Knowledge of their Language, without the Assistance of
an Interpreter, which could I but enjoy for the Space of two or three Years, I
doubt not but that I should be Master of it; and should take greater Pleasure
and Satisfaction in the Discharge of my Duty. Nevertheless, I have the Comfort
of seeing a very great and daily Reformation of Manners among them, which
indeed is the End of all our Endeavors. -- I am almost amazed at the Progress
the Youth make in Reading, and Writing, their own Language. All the young Men,
from 20 to 30 Years, constantly attend School when at Home, and will leave a
Frolic rather than miss. Sundry of them write as good a Hand as myself (which
was fair and good) -- As to the Encouragement I have, for aught I see yet, I
must expect my Reward in another World. I have now been here almost a Year and
half, but have never received a Farthing from any Body.

The Assembly voted me Thirty Pounds for two Years; but by Reason of -- I am
not like to get it till a Governor comes over; and have no great Hope of
further Encouragement from them.

As for the Society, they have allowed me Twenty Pounds for one Year: What
further Encouragement they will give me, I know not. In the mean Time, I am at
great Charges. My Board is six Shillings a Week, which is not above half my
necessary Expense.

In another Letter, a little more than two Years after he had taken Orders,
dated Albany, August 21st 1740. he says,

I am satisfied, I should have much greater Success, if I had a Schoolmaster
and Interpreter. I had the Satisfaction, last Lord's Day, to preach to a Number
of the Six-Nations, who came to this Town to treat with the Governor, who also
was present and has taken a great deal of Pains to countenance my Design. My
Mohawk Congregation behaved so well, that all the Auditory were exceedingly
delighted.

I assure you I have the Cause at Heart, and am well persuaded of your Zeal;
which, that it may increase, and meet with all imaginable Success, and
Encouragement, is the earnest Prayer of, etc.

Is it not manifest, from these Things, that Mr. Barclay discovered a noble,
generous, and Christian Spirit, in giving himself to the Service of God among
the Mohawks, that he might be an Instrument in the Hand of God, of reforming
and christianizing them? And was not there a most encouraging Prospect of his
doing eminent Service, not only to the Souls of those perishing People, but
also to the British Interest?

It is well known to us in this Part of the World, that the Mohawks, or
Six-Nations, are a Terror to, and have in great Measure the Command of, all the
Natives of North America. The French have therefore used their utmost
Endeavors all along to engage them in their Interest; and by their
Missionaries, who are constantly among them, they have drawn off many of them
to settle at Canada, and more or less, every Year, go over to them; from whom,
in Time of War with the French, the British Provinces in North America,
especially the Ma^^achusett^^ and New Hampshire, suffer much. It is also well
known, that most of them remain in a State of Heathenism, and that these of
them, who pretend to be Christians, know but very little of the Principles of
Christianity; for though Mr. Barclay did what he could, while he was among them;
ye it was but a few of them that a single Person could instruct, and that very
imperfectly, for want of an Interpreter.

Their Circumstances therefore loudly call for the compassionate Help of those
who are able to promote the Propagation of the Gospel among them. -- And here I
would beg leave to say, the honorable Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel in foreign Parts do, out of the Charity they are betrusted with,
maintain Missionaries at Boston, New-Port, Stratford, and are frequently
sending them to other Places, where their Parishioners are well (...)
honorably to support them, which evidences it to be plain Fact: incapable of
Dispute, that they wanted not Ability to help these poor Heathen.

It is evident also from the foregoing Account, that Mr. Barclay, who showed a
noble and excellent Spirit in his Disposition to propagate the Gospel among
these Heathen, and to whom such a wide Door opened, and who was so well
qualified for the Service, obtained from the Society but a scant Support for
himself, and could obtain none for a Schoolmaster, and Interpreter. Both
Charity, and Policy, do certainly call for the most vigorous Endeavors to
propagate the Gospel among the Mohawks. And the Reader may easily judge,
Whether the Society for propagating the Gospel in foreign Parts (who have the
Care and Disposal of one of the noblest Charities that has ever been known)
would not employ that Charity full as well, if not better, were those Sums
given to support Missionaries among the Mohawks, where the Gospel is not known,
which are given to support Missionaries in some of the principal Towns in
New England, where the Gospel has been faithfully preached ever since they were
first planted, and where those of the Persuasion of the Church of England are
so numerous and wealthy, that they are well able to give their Ministers an
honorable Support, without the Help of the Society at Home? Whether the former
would not be more agreeable to the pious Design of the Donours, as well as to
the prosess'd Ends of the Society, than the latter? Whether Mr. Barclay, who
was so heartily engaged in that excellent and self denying Service of
propagating the Gospel among the Mohawks, should not have been encouraged by a
plentiful Support from the Society, and also by the Support of a Schoolmaster
and Interpreter for his Assistance, rather than a Missionary at Boston,
Newport, etc? Who would it not grieve to think, that that good Gentleman has
been obliged to leave that Service for want of Encouragement, when there was
such a Prospect of his doing much Good among those perishing Nations? What
other Reason Mr. Barclay had for leaving them, I am not able to say; but if he
had no other than the want of a sufficient Support, and of an Interpreter, was
not that Reason quite sufficient? For how could he answer the Ends of his
Mission under such Disadvantages?

I doubt not but the honorable Society act with Integrity, and Uprightness;
and dispose of the Charity in their Hands, in a Manner that appears right and
best to them, according to the Information they have. Yet, at the same Time, I
am fully persuaded, that, if they were well acquainted with the true State of
Things in this distant Part of the World, they would see just Cause to alter
their Conduct. And I think the Rev. Dr. Colman's Sentiments very just, as
expressed to his Lordship the Bishop of London, upon this Subject, in a Letter
of September 13th 1753.

Were your Lordship, and the pious Trustees here on the Spot, I am sure you
could not think the professed End of your Charter, and the Design of the Donors
answered, in your supporting Missionaries at Boston, Braintree, Newbury,
Stratford, Bristol, Salem, Groton, etc. Or if Seaports of great Trade, such as
Boston, Newport, Marblehead, need to have Ministers of the Church of England
for the Sake of some Inhabitants and Strangers, yet are they well able to
support their own Worship; or did they want some Assistance, there can be no
Pretense for it out of a Fund sacred to God for sending the Gospel into dark
and ignorant Parts of the Earth: They ought to be provided for some other Way,
and not by alienating a devoted and confined Charity, which were to run the
Risque of Sacrilege and great Unfaithfulness See Dr. Colman's Life, Page 142,
143.
--.

If indeed the honorable Society judge it of greater Importance, more for the
Honor of God, and the Good of Souls, more agreeable to the Ends of their
Charter, and the charitable Designs of the pious Donors, to convert those of
the Presbyterian, or Congregational Persuasion, to the Church of England, than
those poor perishing Heathen to the Christian Faith, then it is not strange
that they should employ the Money in their Hands as they at present do; but
upon what Grounds they should form such a Judgment, is not easy to apprehend.

But to return from this Digression.

The One Hundred Pounds which Mr. Holden directed Dr. Colman to employ for the
Benefit of the Indians at Stockbridge, Mr. SERGEANT now proposed to expend upon
the Females, by supporting some of the young Women abroad in English Families,
as the best Way to acquaint them with the English Language and Manners. But
when he communicated his Design to the Indians, though some of them, and the
Captain in particular, liked the Proposal well; yet others, with the Lieutenant
at their Head, strongly opposed it. And though Mr. SERGEANT used his best
Endeavors to persuade them, yet all was in vain: Through the unreasonable
Jealousies the Indians entertained. they would not consent to it. However, Mr.
SERGEANT did this Summer send two of them Abroad, one of which was the
Captain's eldest Daughter; but they would not be content to stay so long as to
be any Benefit to them.

I have (says Mr. SERGEANT in a Letter to Dr. Colman of September 14th 1738.)
spent about Five Pounds upon two of our young Women, in Prosecution of Mr.
Holden's Design, but to little or no Effect. Through a childish Fondness for
Home, they would not be contented to stay long enough where I sent them, to
obtain any Good by it. But as I have been so great a Sharer in Mr. Holden's
Bounty, I make no Account of it, nor desire any Thing for it. --

The Design therefore of employing the Money for the Benefit of the young Women
failing; and Dr. Colman being fully acquainted with Mr. SERGEANT's Necessities,
gave him the Money to assist him in his Settlement.

If you will take the said Hundred Pounds ( says Dr. Colman in a Letter to Mr.
SERGEANT) and use it for your present Settlement, you are welcome to it, as a
Deodand to the Settletlement of the Gospel, in your Settlement, Comfort, and
Strength, in the Work before you. -- Mr. Holden has not only given me Leave,
but even Wills it, that I assist you in the Work before you. And if there open
any Door for teaching some Girls in Women's Work, as was before proposed, inform
me of it, and draw upon me before the Year is out, for Fifty, or even an
Hundred Pounds more, and I will answer your Draught. However, Sir, ask of the
Commissioners, as in Reason you ought, without Regard to this private
Assistance. --

He also, by the honorable Jacob Wendell, Esquire who visited him at Stockbridge
in September, received a Present from the Corporation at Home.

-- By Col. Wendell (says Mr. SERGEANT) I received One Hundred Pound in Money;
a kind and generous Present from the honorable Corporation in London; for
which I thank God and them.

About this Time, Mr. SERGEANT received from Dr. Colman a Legacy of Ten Pound,
left him by the Rev. Mr. Ward, Clerk, late Minister of Kingston in
New Hampshire (says Dr. Colman;) Minister of Exeter lately deceased (says Col.
Winthrop)

And from Time to Time Mr. SERGEANT was relieved, by considerable Presents,
from generous and well disposed Persons. And without the Helps I have
mentioned, he could not have proceeded in his Settlement at Stockbridge, as
every one will be sensible, who know that his Salary was but One Hundred and
fifty Pounds our Money, twenty seven Shillings and fix Pence of which was then
equal to but one Ounce of Silver. Was it then possible that he should spare one
Shilling of this small Sum toward the Charge of Building, etc? Especially
considering he lived in a Place where all the Necessaries of Life must be
purchased at a very dear Rate; and where his tender Heart could not but be
moved to relieve the poor Indians, whose piteous Circumstances daily pleaded
for them, and were enough to move a Heart much harder than his.

It was with a very grateful Spirit, both to God and his Benefactors, that Mr.
SERGEANT received those Donations. He esteemed every Kindness bestowed upon him
on Account of his Mission, as a Favor from Heaven, a new Obligation upon him
to be faithful in his Work, and a Talent for which he was accountable to the
Lord of all; as in his Writings he frequently expressed himself.

He also used his best Endeavors to impress upon the Minds of the Indians a
grateful Sense of the Kindness of their Benefactors; the Account of which
seemed very much to affect them. And at the close of this Year they were laid
under a new Obligation, by a generous Gift of three Hundred Pounds from the
honorable Society in England, Part of which was employed in purchasing
Ploughs, Axes, Hoes, etc. to help them in carrying on their Husbandry. How the
Rest of the Money was expended, does not appear from any of the Papers before
me; but I find, by a Letter from Secretary Winthrop to Mr. SERGEANT, that he
judged it not best that the Indians should have the whole Donation at once, but
that it should be gradually dealt out to them as their Circumstances required;
which I therefore suppose was the Method taken, and that it was from Time to
Time used to their best Advantage; and I am inclined to think, that it was
principally, if not wholly, employed for their Encouragement in Husbandry and
Building, from a Passage in Governor Belcher's Letter written to him on the
Subject, December 5th 1738. -- I have talked with Mr. Secretary Winthrop (says
His Excellency) of the Disposition of the Money come from the honorable
Company at Home, that it may be mostly employed to promote Labor among your
People, by giving them Husbandry Tools, as Axes, Carts, Ploughs, etc. to assist
in building English Houses: To civilize them will be a good Introduction to the
Christianizing of them. I shall again talk with Secretary Winthrop, and others
of the Commissioners, that this Method may be put in Practice without Delay. --
But after all it does not appear, that they ever received the whole; though it
might be so, and Mr. SERGEANT make no mention of it.

The former Part of June this Year, Ephraim Williams, Esquire and Mr. Josiah Jones,
brought their Families to Stockbridge, and settled there; being two of the four
English Families, who, by Order of the General Court, were to settle there, for
Mr. SERGEANT's Comfort and Benefit of the Indians. Lieutenant Brown, and Mr.
Joseph Woodbridge, were the other, who came some Time after.

In the Year 1739, several of the River-Indians, who lived at a Distance from
Stockbridge, discovered an Inclination to hear Mr. SERGEANT preach. Some came
from distant Parts to Stockbridge for that End, others sent for him to preach
to them at the Place of their Abode. And Mr. SERGEANT failed not of improving
all those Opportunities to endeavor their spiritual Good.

April 19th 1739. Mr. SERGEANT returned from Abroad, and in his Journal says.

In the mean Time (that is, while he was absent) there had been a Stranger here
from near the Highlands, named Moumauntissekun, on Purpose, as he said, to hear
me, who had been remarkably checked in his former Course of Drinking.

Lord's Day, April 22. Preached as usual. Three Strangers present, who said
they came on Purpose to hear me preach. In the Evening they came to see me. I
endeavored to encourage them in seeking after God, and said some Things to
confirm them in Belief of the Being and Providence of God.

May 27th. This Week came two young Men from Danbury (a Town on the West Border
of Connecticut) to hear me preach: One said he would come and live with us. --

'June 3d. These young Men were at Meeting. --

June 10th. Preached as usual. Present seven new Hearers from Kaunaumeek and
the Neighborhood, with Aunauwauneekbbeek at the Head of them. -- At the same
Time they told me that the Indians of the Island were very desirous that I
would come and preach to them. I sent Word by Aunauwauneekbbeek that I would,
God willing, be at the Island the 23d of this Instant.

June the 17th. Preached as usual; present some Strangers, and among the Rest
Maumauntissekun -- who came on Purpose to be instructed in the Affairs of
Religion, and seemed to be very desirous of Instruction, and inclined to come
and live with us for that End. He is a Man of some Character among the Indians;
and of a sober and thoughtful Air. The next Day I had Opportunity to talk with
him. I endeavored to show him the Necessity and Importance of Religion,
encouraged him with Diligence and Prayer to enquire after the Truth.

June the 24th. According to their Desire, lately sent by Aunauwauneekbbeek, I
preached to the Indians on the Island in Hudson's River. I had an Auditory of
about 30 intelligent Hearers, who gave good Attention, and seemed well pleased,
especially some of them, with my Coming. The Indians from Kaunaumeek were
there. Some of the Dutch People that lived by the River Side invited me to
lodge with them while I should stay, but the Indians would not consent to it.
Aunauwauneekbbeek, in particular, said he would have me lodge with them on the
Island, that I might pray with them Night and Morning. -- I was entertained
very kindly by the Indians, chiefly by the Care of Weenkeesquoh, An Indian
Woman who had lived at Stockbridge, and kept House for Mr. SERGEANT, and Mr.
Woodbridge.
who had provided for my Entertainment, Tea, small and strong Bear, and a fat
Lamb. In the Evening I desired them to come together to consider, and discourse
upon, the Affair of Religion. With them I had a long Conference upon the Being,
Perfections, and Providence of God; the Necessity of Revelation from him in
order to inform us in his Will; the Truth and Excellency of the Christian
Religion as a Revelation from Heaven, and the like. Some approved of what I
said; but three or four showed themselves very averse to Christianity. A great
many Dutch People were present at the Service, to whom I preached in English:
but their Behavior was much more disorderly than the Indians. And indeed by
their Behavior they seemed to consider the Lord's Day rather as a Season for
Frolicing, than for religious Duties.

26. I returned. In the mean Time 10 Indians had been here from a Place below,
called Wukbquautenauk, with a Design to hear me preach.

July 1. Present at Meeting 17 Stranger, Men Women and Children, from
Wukbquautenauk, including the to above mentioned, who tarried all the Week
past, that they might have Opportunity to hear me. They all came, as they said,
to inform themselves in the Affair of Religion. I preached the same Discourse I
had prepared for, and delivered at the Island. After Service I discoursed with
them privately, persuading them in Favor of Christianity. They seemed to think
favorably of it; particularly one more than the Rest. [N. B. Wukquautenauk is
in Connecticut, about 28 Miles below us.

By this Account it is evident, that there appeared about this Time an uncommon
Desire in the neighboring Indians to hear Mr. SERGEANT; but what Effect his
Endeavors to serve them had, any further than is to be learned from the
Account above, I am not able to say.

I shall also here transcribe, from Mr. SERGEANT's Journal, some Account of the
Indians sending Belts of Wompum from one Tribe to another; as also the Messages
that particularly accompanied them, that the Reader may understand the Indian
Customs in such Cases.

May the 12. (says Mr. SERGEANT) Came hither Jeremy Aunauwauneekbbeek, lately
returned from the Showancos, who brought with him three Belts and a String of
Wompum, with the following Messages, viz.

First Belt,

Brother Netobkum (which in our Dialect signifies my elder Brother) don't think
your Brother Keshum (or younger Brother) has bid himself somewhere in the
Woods. I design to live where I am, so long as the Lord our God shall spare me.
As often as you look here, you shall find your Brother at Mukhauwaumuk, at the
great Island, and at the River Spunnauweh.

Second Belt,

I tell you something further. When I get up in the Morning, I will plant my
Corn; at Noon it will be ripe, so that I shall have enough to eat till Night.
The next Morning I do the same again, and so from Time to Time, as long as God
shall give me Life and Strength.

This was delivered with one Half of the Belt; with the other, Brother, don't
hide my good Thing from me.

Third Belt,

I tell you something further ( both in the dual Number in Indian) Let us with
Consultation seek that which is good; and when we have found it, let us bold it
fast, as long as God our Lord shall preserve our Lives. And let us always teach
our Children that which is good.

This Word your Brother that dwells at Mukhauwaumuk, and your Brother of the
great Island, and at the River Spunnauweh, and your Grandfather ( that is, the
River Indians that live interspersed among the Showancos) tell you so.

The String of Wompum brought an Answer to what our Indians sent to them some
Time ago.

Brother, I thank you for your Word of Advice, you told me drinking was not
good. I now leave it off, and you shall not find your Brother drunk again.

The Messenger added, that they actually had made a Law against buying any Rum
of the Traders, and had broken some Cags in which they had brought it to them,
and spilt die Rum.

January 20th 1739, 40. Preached to a large Auditory, consisting of many
Strangers, who were gathered together here with a Design to promote, and
confirm, a League of Neutrality among the several Tribes of Indians in
North America, in Case there should be a War between England and France, which
was then expected. This Tribe had, about two Months before, received a Message,
which then came directly from the Scattekooks, which imported that the French
and English Mohawks had already consented to stand Neuter. And this Tribe were
now desired to come into the Projection. They therefore prepared three Belts of
Wompum, with distinct Messages to each. Two of the Belts were to be sent to a
Tribe of Eastern Indians, that live at a Place they call Wtanshekaunb^ukko. The
third to a Tribe still further Eastward, at a Place they call Naunauchoowuk,
(the same I suppose which is generally in New England, called Norridgewock.) It
will perhaps be thought an excuseable Digression to insert those Speeches in
this Journal.

With the first Belt they say,

Brother, We have always lived in strict Alliance with you by Leagues of
Friendship, long ago entered into by our fore Fathers; and we have been wont
from Time to Time to consult together what is best to be done, and to
communicate our Determinations one to another: We therefore depend upon it you
will be willing to bear us, because we have been always Friends.

Second Belt,

Brother at Wtanshekaunhtukko. By this we may know we are Brethren, because we
have one Father in Heaven, the Lord of all. Let us have a tender Regard to our
Families. The white People, with whom we respectively live in Alliance, are
about to enter into a War. We only destroy ourselves by meddling with their
Wars. They are great and strong, and reach to the Clouds.

Let us sit and look on when they engage. Don't let any of your People assist
in their Wars. And while they fight, let us sit and smoke together.

Therefore three of your Brethren send you this Message, from the Highlands,
Monhekun, and Scattekook.

Third Belt,

Brother at Naunauchoowuk. Though you had began a ^^^r with the English, you
would regard us, if we should desire you to leave off. You will without Doubt
not intermeddle if we insist upon it. May be, the English think the Indians
prevent their conquering their Enemies, the French; therefore let us sit and
smoke together, and set who will be Conquerers.

A very just and rational Scheme this, and, had it succeeded, would have been
much to the Advantage of the Indians, as well as to us. But there is little or
no Prospect of such a Neutrality taking Place, so long as the French have such
as Ascendent over many of them.

Though the Indians had, for some Years past, improved the interval Land at
Stockbridge; yet it was not divided to them, that every one might know and
improve his own Property, till this Year. In May Session of the General Court,
the Indians preferred a Petition to the Assembly, that it might be done; and
they accordingly appointed Col. Stoddard, and Ephraim Williams, Esquire to divide
the Land to them; which they did to the Satisfaction of the Indians.

August 16. Mr. SERGEANT was married to Mrs. Abigail William, eldest Daughter
of Ephraim Williams, Esquire lately settled at Stockbridge, a Gentlewoman whom he
tenderly loved, and justly esteemed as one of Heaven's greatest Blessings; of
which (in a Letter to Dr. Colman) he speaks as follows.

You will forgive me Sir, if I think that most ingenious Woman -- is not the
smallest Gift of divine Bounty, that I have received, since I undertook a Life
though it to be so self-denying. The more tenderly I love her, the more thankful I
am to Heaven, who has formed her as if on Purpose for me, and given her to me,
as if, (like the Father of Mankind) he though it It not good for me to be here
alone: And in her he took the greatest Satisfaction the Remainder of his Days.

But to return.

The Gifts Mr. SERGEANT this Year received were no small Help to him, in
defreying the necessary Charges of a Family.

June the 17th he writes. This Week I received four Pounds fifteen Shillings
from an unknown Gentleman in England.

June 26th. This Week by Capt. Williams I received from the Rev. Dr. Colman, of
Mr. Holden's Charity, twenty Pounds, Mr. Woodbridge also the same Sum.

Dr. Colman had been informed that Mr. SERGEANT was about Marrying, and
therefore says to him in a L^tter of June 1st;

As I know the Expense of settling yourself in a Dwelling, etc. so it lies with
you, Sir, now to command, as, and when you please. The Residue of the Money for
the current Year is in Col. Winthrop's Hands. At the same Time I do now send
forty Pounds, twenty for yourself, and twenty for Mr. Woodbridge, by the Hand
of Ephraim Williams, Esquire your worthy Neighbor, out of the Money of the
honorable Samuel Holden, Esquire of London, in my Hands. And it is his Pleasure, I
should assist you in the Service you are laboring in. And it you have Need of
further Assistance this Year, for yourself, or Mr. Woodbridge, be not backward,
but timely in letting me know of it; and your Draught shall be answered to the
Sum of an Hundred Pounds.

In answer to which, Mr. SERGEANT wrote July 17. as follows.

-- Your Offer of Assistance to me, and Mr. Woodbridge, from Mr. Holden's
Money, is exceeding kind; the forty Pounds Capt. Williams brought us was very
welcome. The Expense of settling ourselves is indeed very great. You are
sensible the Value of Bills is fallen considerable since our Salaries were
granted. And though we are not in Circumstances of distressing Want, yet such
Assistance as you offer would be very acceptable. I covet not Wealth; but would
gladly live as free as possible from the perplexing Cares of Life, that I may
attend the proper Business of my Calling without Distraction, which truly
requires the most prudent and diligent Application.

Accordingly, in a Letter to Mr. SERGEANT of November 10. the Doctor writes.

I present to You and Mr. Woodbridge, eighty Pounds of Mr. Holden's Money,
fifty Pounds for you, and thirty Pounds for Mr. Woodbridge. -- If your Salary
will not answer for the Support of your Family, you must tell the Commissioners
so by Mr. Secretary Winthrop.

You need not let them know the Assistance added by me; that is but an
occasional Thing. You ought to have a Support from the Commissioner -- What
I Have done for you and Mr. Woodbridge has hitherto pleased Mr. Holden well, and
he adds his Prayers for you in every Letter, and has, I doubt not, your
constant Thanksgiving to God for him, and Supplications on his Behalf, as he
earnestly desires. --

It was with a humble and grateful Spirit that Mr. SERGEANT received these
Donations. In his Letter to the Dotter, of July 17th he says.

In every Letter you write, I see more of your native Goodness, and the Power
of divine Grace, which has made you so great a Blessing; and may it long
continue you such. I blush to think how little I deserve the good Opinion you
are pleased to entertain of me; and how unworthy I am of the divine Bounty, and
repeated Benefactions of Men of Charity, Partakers of the divine Nature. Pray
for me that I may have Grace faithfully to use the Talents committed to my
Trust.

In another Letter of December 26th. I received -- the fifty Pounds you was
pleased to present me with, out of Mr. Holden's Bounty, for which I am most
thankful to God, to you, and to that worthy Gentleman, whose Praise is in all
the Churches. Your Letter is so full of Kindness it almost confounds me. I
blush to consider how little I deserve the least of all that Goodness God is
pleased to bestow upon me, through the Hands of his Servants. May ten Thousand
Blessing from the Fountain of Life and Joy, crown the Heads of my Benefactors!
And may I have Grace given me to improve every Talent to the Glory of my Lord
and Master!

The Meeting House, built for the Indians, at the Charge of the Province, was
now so far completed, that on November 29th (which was a Day of public
Thanksgiving through the Province) the Inhabitants met, and attended the
public Worship in it.

The Indians being much addicted to Drunkenness rendered it necessary that Mr.
SERGEANT, and others concerned for their Good, should use all prudent and
proper Measures to prevent their running into Excess. Accordingly they moved to
the Indians, to restrain those among themselves who were wont to make Gain by
bringing Rum into the Place, and selling it to others; which the well disposed
Indians freely came into; and agreed upon a Penalty of Forty Pounds York Money
to be laid upon those who should do it. Those also who kept Taverns in
neighboring Places, and had sold Drink to such Indians as were given to
Excess, they reproved, and endeavored to dissuade them from a Practice which
proved so hurtful to the Indians. But some evil-minded Persons, among the
English and Dutch, made a Handle of those Things to disgust the Indians;
telling them, that this was an unreasonable Incroachment upon their Liberty;
that those who abridg'd them of the Liberty of using Drink, would by and by
incroach upon their other Liberties; that they were used worse than Slaves;
that they were treated as if they were Dogs, and the like. By these
Insinuations the Indians (who are as fond of Liberty, as of strong Drink) were
much disturbed, and some of them went into great Degrees of Excess; and
New Year's Day being at Hand, which the Dutch frequently honor by being Drunk
upon it, by whose Example the Indians were easily led into the Practice, Mr.
SERGEANT was greatly concerned, lest it should be a Day of great Disorder with
them; to prevent which he took a very prudent Method; which I shall give in his
own Words.

December 30th 1739. Preached as usual, and proposed to have an Exercise of
public Worship on New Year's Day, now at Hand: for I supposed the Indians
designed to have a great Frolic on that Occasion, after the Manner of the
Dutch in the neighboring Government, whose Example they are very apt to
follow: And I thought to have a public Exercise on that Day, the most likely
Method to prevent such Excess; which accordingly succeeded. For on that Day (
January the 1st) the Indians were universally at Meeting, and there was no
Drinking at all, though there was plenty of Rum in the Town. Which was a rare
Instance of Moderation at that Season.

Though there were some disorderly Persons among the Indians, who were too free
with strong Drink, yet this was what the greater Part of them lamented, and
they still, in the general, continued to behave well.

Their Number at Stockbridge from Time to Time increased, by the Addition of
new Families from Abroad; so that from about 50, the Number when Mr. SERGEANT
went among them, they were now increased to 120.

Mr SERGEANT in his Journal of March 27th 1740. says, The whole Number of
Inhabitants is 120. Our Number is increased by the Addition of new Families,
but reckoning by Births and Deaths the Number is somewhat lessened; which has
one Year with another been the Case ever since I have been acquainted with
these Indians.

This perhaps is the Case of the Indians in general, who live bordering upon,
and among the English. Their Numbers do not increase, but in some Places they
are diminished and come almost to Nothing. For which diverse Reasons may be
assigned, viz. Their Intemperance. They are so often Drunk, both Men and Women,
that it is doubtless ruinous to the Constitutions both of Parents and Children.
-- Their great Irregularity in Diet, may be another Reason; for they frequently
go without eating any Thing two or three Days, and when they come again where
it is to be had, they eat an immoderate Quantity, set no Bounds to their
Appetite, but crowd down whatever they can. -- Again, When they are sick, they
take little or no Care of themselves, or of one another; for so long as the
sick Person can stand and walk, he goes out of Doors upon all Occasions, be it
Rain or Snow, or whatever the Weather is, and whatever Distemper he is
exercised with. And in the mean Time they make use of few, or no Means to help
the Sick. It is a Wonder therefore that they be not all sick, and that any
recover when they are so!

In a Letter of September 8th Dr. Colman informed Mr. SERGEANT of the Death of
the honorable Samuel Holden of London, and adds. So that Spring of your
Comfort and Support, is cut off. Blessed be God that it run so long, and so
fully! But yet the Doctor once more assisted Mr. SERGEANT and Mr. Woodbridge,
by sending them some Thing of what remained of that Gentleman's Money. In a
Letter of December 20th he says.

What I am able to do at present, is, to deliver into Mr. Brown's Hands, twenty
Pounds of Mr. Holden's Money for you, and ten Pounds for Mr. Woodbridge. The
Receipt of which Mr. SERGEANT acknowledged in a Letter of March 17th following.

By Mr. Brown, I received your obliging Letter, with the Money and Books you
sent. My Obligations to you increase, and my Gratitude, I hope, in some
Proportion: But God forbid that I should forget the Fountain of Good from
whence every Stream flows! My Heart and Eye, I trust, are to him who has put it
into your Power and Heart to help me.

The Funeral Sermon on Mr. Holden's Death, is excellent, which I read with
great Pleasure. Dr. Colman's Funeral-Sermon on the Death of Mr. Holden,
preached before the General Assembly, and printed at their Desire, and by their
Order.
How happy for, and beneficial to the World, are such large Improvements in
Grace? How honorable to Religion and the glorious Author of our Salvation? May
many such shining Examples of Piety and Virtue appear in the World, to instruct
the ignorant, to reprove the vicious, and to encourage the Hearts of the
faithful.

The Lieutenant's Wife, of whom Mr. SERGEANT has diverse Times spoken, as a
valuable and virtuous Woman, died July 14.

With a comfortable Hope (says Mr. SERGEANT) of eternal Life; spending her last
Moments in exhorting her Husband and Children to Godliness. And when Mr.
SERGEANT visited her a few Days before her Death, and at her Desire prayed with
her; the told him she was content to die, hoping by that Means to be free from
Sin, which was now her Burden; and if her Life was lengthened out, it was
likely, through Temptation, the should be prevailed upon to commit more Sin.

The Captain's Wife also, whom Mr. SERGEANT esteemed a pious Woman, died the
March following of a Consumption.

March the 29th. This Evening (says Mr. SERGEANT) died Kunkapot's Wife, having
enjoyed, all along in her Sickness, a good Hope through Grace of a happy
Eternity.

In the forementioned Letter of March 14th 1741. Mr. SERGEANT first proposed to
Dr. Colman, his Thoughts of setting up a Charity-House, afterward called a
Boarding-School, for the Education of Children in Labor and Industry, as well
as Learning. Experience taught him that the Indian Customs and Way of Living,
were great Impediments to the Progress of Christianity among them, and their
behaving agreeable to their Profession: for the Men live an idle and indolent
Life, which is very unfriendly to Religion; it being their Custom for the Women
to do all the Work, as getting Wood, Planting, Howing, etc The Men generally
esteem it a Shame for them to follow any other Business but that of Hunting.
Hence the Women cannot, if they would, be acquainted with I Housewifry, being
obliged to carry on all the Business abroad. Mr. SERGEANT's Design therefore
was better to regulate their Conduct in that Respect, by taking their Children,
when young, and training up, both Sexes, in Business proper for them, that when
they should be grown up, they might be both able and willing to provide for
themselves in a Way of Diligence and Industry, which would in great Measure
free them from many of those Temptations, by which they are now ensnared; and
enable them to make a much better Figure than they now do, or can do, while
they continue entire Strangers to all the Arts of Industry and good Living, and
indulge themselves in Idleness.

I have (says Mr. SERGEANT to the Doctor) entertained Thoughts (and they have
made a strong Impression on my Mind) of attempting to set up a Charity-House,
for the Instruction of our Indian Children, both Boys and Girls, in Business
and Industry, as well as in Reading, and Writing, and the Matters of Religion.
Whether the Motion be from God, Time will make more manifest. I should be glad
of your Opinion of the Thing. This I believe Mr. Hollis expected would be the
End of his noble Beginning. The Design, I am certain, is good; whether it be
feasible, you may be a better Judge than I. It is what I have though it of for a
long Time; but supposed the Jealousies of the Indians would be a Bar in the
Way; but hoped that Difficulties of that Nature would vanish with Time. I have
kept the Design to myself, nor have I ever mentioned it to any of the Indians.
It may perhaps now be Time to act upon it. I doubt not but I can procure a good
Accommodation of Land for such a Purpose. The Charge I know would be
considerable; but after a While it is to be hoped, with the Blessing of God,
they may be able to maintain themselves, at least in great Measure. If I should
attempt such a Thing, I pray God spare your Life to assist in it, by your
Advice, Prayers, and Influence with your Correspondents Abroad; and to
introduce me into their Acquaintance. --

Dr. Colman seems to receive the Proposal with some Surprise, yet blesses it;
and I hope a Blessing is in it, and pray God it may attend it: though at present
it wants Encouragement.

The Doctor in a Letter of April 4th replies,

-- Dear Sir, What mean you by your projected Charity-House? The God of
Frankins lead and animate you, own and succeed you. I should wish to live to
assist in it by the Will of God. But it needs not at all my living to help it.
It the Motion be of God, he will find Hands. He makes Hearts, forms Purposes in
them, and means to execute them. As Nathan said to David, so I am willing to
encourage you to hope, God is with you. We must not be sudden nether; we may
project what others may execute A good Motion (say they) seldom dies in
Parliament; and ^^all it in Providence? --

But I must leave this Affair, for the present, to attend Mr. SERGEANT in a
long Journey of about ^20 Miles, to Susquabanab-River, where he went with a
Design to open the Way for a Mission to the Shonawoos Indians, so called, who
live upon that River, in Pensylvania Government, and about 50 Miles from any
English Inhabitants.

But because I find the best Account of Mr. SERGEANT's Proceedings in this
Journey, given in a Letter to George Drummond, Esquire of Edinburgh, President of
the Committee of Directors, for the Society for propagating Christian
Knowledge, I shall first bore insert a Letter from Mr. Drummond to Mr.
SERGEANT, and then give his Answer, in which the Account of his journey is
contained. Mr. Drummond's is as follows.

Reverend Sir,
In the Course of Correspondence, with a View to see if the Society for
propagating Christian Knowledge could be any Way useful, in sending the
glorious and everlasting Gospel among the Indians, among whom Satan's Kingdom
has remained so long undisturbed, we have heard with great Pleasure of the
unwearied Pains you take in Labors of this Kind, in which our common Lord is
pleased to honor you with great Success. We desire to bless him for it, and to
offer up our Prayers for the Continuance of his Presence with you, and for the
Preservation of so useful a Life.

I have the Command of the Society's Committee of Directors, as their President
for the Time, heartily to congratulate you on this Account, and to express the
Satisfaction they have in the Prospect of the Help you generously offer to give
the Missionaries we purpose to settle for the forwarding that good Work. The
Rev. Mr. Dickinson, and Mr. Pemberton, give it as their Opinion, that Forty
Pound Sterling per Annum is the least such Gentleman can subsist on. The
Committee transmit this Proposal to the general Meeting, which meets next
Month, with their unanimous Opinion that it should be gone into; and we hope
the Society will agree to the employing of Eighty Pound per Annum for the
Support of two Missionaries in your Parts. We have desired the Gentlemen to
send us a List of proper Persons to correspond with us on the Subject of this
Mission; to be authorized properly by the Society for that End. But I am
particularly ordered, by the Directors, to entreat you will favor us with a
particular Correspondence with yourself, which be pleased to commence with an
Account of what Advances Christianity has made among the Indians hitherto, and
to continue the History from Time to Time. The more particular you are, it will
be the more obliging. If you please to address your Letters to me, I will lay
them before the Committee.

I am with great Esteem, Reverend Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant George
Drummond.
Edinburgh, Feb. 9th 1740.

To the foregoing Letter, the following is Mr. SERGEANT's Answer,

Sir,
Your Favor of February 9th came to Hand a few Days ago, which has laid me
under Obligations to You, and the honorable Committee of Directors, for the
kind and undeserved good Opinion you are pleased to entertain of me, and for
your Prayers (which I highly value) offered on my Behalf, to the God of all
Grace. I ask your continued Prayers for me, that I may have Grace to be found
faithful and successful, in promoting the Kingdom of our glorious Lord, who has
honored me with so great and important a Trust, as that of Preaching the
everlasting Gospel, where his Name has not been known; and in which, through the
Grace of God, I Have Reason to hope my Labor has not been altogether in vain.

There appears to me a fair Prospect of a happy Mission to a Tribe or Indians
in strict Alliance with ours, known by the Name of the Showancos, living in the
Province of Pensylvania, about 220 Miles distant from us; to whom our Indians
have recommended the Christian Religion; but as yet have received no direct and
particular Answer: Only they have heard, that what they sent occasioned much
Talk among them; and that some proposed the sending of two or three of their
Children here, to be instructed in Christianity, in order to teach them.

It was of these Indians, I spoke to the Rev. Mr. Dickinson last Fall; letting
him know, that I designed, by the Favor of divine Providence, to make them a
Visit, and to endeavor to open the Way for the glorious Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ among them; and desired his Interest and the Rev. Mr. Pemberton's
with your honorable Society, for the Support of such Mission, if God should
open the Door for it.

And now I thank God, and you, into whose Heart he has put it, to contribute to
this charitable Design; which I pray God in his infinite Mercy to succeed, to
the Glory of his Name among the Gentiles, and to the Honor of his Son, who is
made Head over all Things to the Church.

Forty Pounds Sterling is indeed the least a Gentleman employed in such Service
can expect. It is very necessary Undertakings of this Nature should be well
supported, that the Missionary may have no other Concern, than to attend the
Business of his Mission, in which he will find he has Work enough to do, and
must put on Resolution not to be shaken by small Opposition. I intend (God
willing) before Winter to make my proposed Visit to those Indians, after which
I may be able to give you a more particular Account. But now proceed, according
to your Desire, to give a History of the Advances Christianity has made among
us.

The Historical Account here spoken of, Mr. SERGEANT sent to the honorable
Society in Scotland, but had no Time to take a Copy of it, as he informed the
Rev. Mr. Pemberton of New York to whom he sent it, to be transmitted to
Great Britain. Had a Copy of it been kept, it would have been a very great Help
to me in composing this Work; for Mr. (...) from his own Papers, Memory, etc.
doubtless, was able to give a much better Account of Things than I can possibly
do, from the few Papers before me: and without Doubt he gave a very just and
correct Account of what passed from the Beginning of his Mission to that Time.
After his History he goes on to say,

Thus, Sir, I have given an Account of the Progress Christianity has made here,
with some general Account of our present State of Affairs. I began to write
presently after I received your Letter in July last, and designed to have
prepared the Answer to yours, and sent it before Winter; but the afflicted
Circumstances of my Family prevented me then, and by one Interruption and
another, I have not been able to finish it till now. I have been so particular,
that, perhaps, I shall be thought tedious. In this Point I hope your Candor
will excuse me. I have omitted a great many Particulars.

You will easily perceive, in the Perusal of this Journal, that the Indians are
a very difficult People to deal with; whoever undertakes to have much to do
with them, had need to fortify himself with an obstinate Patience, Opposition I
always expected, but met with it in Instances where I dreamt not of it, and
least expected it. The Devil has always his Temptations and Instruments to
promote his Cause. A Number we have, I hope, that are truly converted.

Our Affairs are now in a good and flourishing State, considering the
Opposition the Gospel has met with, especially from some professed Christians;
I think, the Progress it has made has been extraordinary. May God own his Work
and bless it.

I purpose, by the Favor of God, some Time next Month to make my Visit to the
Showancos. What I meet with among them I will transmit you an Account of. Let
me have the Blessing of your Prayers, that, however unworthy, I may be made an
Instrument of promoting the Kingdom and Glory of our blessed Lord. And may God
crown all your pious and charitable Designs with happy Success, and you finally
with immortal Glory. And grant me the Honor of being reputed,

Stockbridge, April 29. 1741. Sir, Your most obedient, Humble Servant, JOHN
SERGEANT.


Mr. SERGEANT, according to his Purpose, set out on his Journey, accompanied by
some of his Indians, to the Showanoos, May the 26th. June 3d he arrived at
Sasquahannah. June 7th he preached to the Indians living on Delaware-River, as
he returned from Sasquahannah. And June 20th he got Home.

These brief Hints he has given in his Journal; and in a Letter of June 23d to
George Drummond, Esquire he gives the following more large Account.

Stockbridge, June 23d 1741. Sir,
I am just returned from Sasquahannah; where according to my Design, I have
been, in order to open the Way for the Propagation of the Gospel among the
Showanoos: I found the Place about 220 Miles distant from us, about 50 from any
English Inhabitants, and the Road to it exceeding difficult.

'The Message we carried was this,

Brother, who have seen so many Mornings here at Mukhhauwaumuk, you live in
Friendship with our Grandfather, our League reaches as far as the great Island,
and the River Auwuksauntuguh. The Reason of my coming, is, because I dislike
our Way of living; our Father above does not approve of it, we weary out his
Patience.

You always stand in the Presence of our Father, and he would have his Children
turn about to him. I am come to turn you to him. If you pity your Body and
Soul, you will receive the Christian Religion. It is always the Privilege of
an elder Brother to teach his younger Brother, if he knows any Thing that is
Good. If his Brother be lost, he will tell him, This is the Way to Life.

The enlightening of the Eyes is in the Christian Religion. You will some Time
come to know that we have been lost. You will see what it is to live in
Heathenism, if your Eyes are opened. In the End of the World you will see a
Good prepared if you embrace the Christian Religion in Truth; and if you
believe it not, you will see a Punishment provided. Formerly our Forefathers
used to send Messages to one another, but their Speeches were Nothing. They
were wont in the Conclusion of their Speeches to say, now I see the Sun at Noon
you shall always see clearly; you shall see Nothing amiss: But these Things
which they spoke in Darkness were Nothing. The only true Light which enlightens
the Eyes, is the Christian Religion.

Brother, this is our Teacher; we have brought him with us, thinking perhaps he
may open your Eyes a little, that you may see the Way to eternal Life. We wish
you would hear him. He is our elder Brother.

This Message your Brother at Mauhekun sends you: He likes the Christian
Religion.

It must be noted that the Showanoos call our Indians their elder Brother, and
ours call them their younger Brother.

When we had delivered this Message, they retired a little While, and then
brought in their Answer; which was to this Purpose.

It is true, we have one Father above, and we are always in his Presence. The
Indians have one Way of honoring and pleasing him, and the White People have
another; both are acceptable to Him. I am glad to hear from my Brother, and to
cultivate Friendship with him. He shall always find me here if he has any
Message to send: But Christianity need not be the Bond of Union between us. As
for your Teacher I cannot understand him. If I could understand him, it might
be well to hear him; but be speaks in an unknown Tongue.

It was easy to see, by this Answer, they had no Mind to receive Christianity.
However, I desired them to hear something I had to say, and they agreed it
should be then immediately. I went out about half an Hour to prepare my
Interpreter, by reading my Discourse to him. When I came in again, I found many
of them dispersed, and while I was speaking their Chief went out. They gave no
serious Attention at all to what I said. When I had done, they presently fell
to talking, and reproaching Christianity; and showed an utter Aversion to it. I
would have entered into a Debate with them, and endeavored to remove their
Prejudices, and answered their Objections; but they would hear Nothing of the
Matter. I found they had strong and invincible Prejudices against Christianity,
at least the Protestant Religion; derived, it should seem, from the French, and
confirmed by their own Observation of the Behavior of that vile Sort of Men
the Traders, that go among them; for they said (which I believe is an unhappy
and reproachful Truth) that they would lie, cheat, and debauch their Women, and
even their Wives, if their Husbands were not at Home. They were further
prejudiced against Christianity from the inhospitable Treatment they had
sometimes met with from those who call themselves Christians. They said the
Sinnicas (a Tribe of Indians much under the Influence of the French) gave them
their Country where they now live; but charged them withal never to receive
Christianity from us.

The French spread their Influence far and wide, and indeed I believe (which I
was not so much aware of before this Journey) that they have scattered their
Poison among all the Indians of North America, and have been the Means of
stiring up that Jealousy and Suspicion among our Indians which has made us so
much Difficulty in dealing with them: for they tell them that the Design of the
English is to inslave, and then to destroy them, under the Pretense of making
them Christians. By these strong Prejudices, I found them so averse to the
Reception of Christianity, that I was discouraged in the Attempt, and so left
them, pitying their Ignorance, and praying God to open their Eyes.

When I returned to Delaware, I got the Indians inhabiting there, together, and
preached to them in our Dialect, which they could understand without an
Interpreter. They were about 30 in Number to hear me, who gave a very diligent
Attention, and seemed to be moved, had no Objections to make, but were desirous
of further Instruction. I preached to them twice. The whole Tribe is about 400
in Number; but is much dispersed, having no Accommodation of Land; but I have
engaged some Gentlemen to endeavor to provide for them in that Respect: which,
if it can be effected, to their Satisfaction, there is a hopeful Prospect of a
successful Mission among them. I have drawn out a Journal containing a
particular Account of the Propagation of Christianity among us, which I have
sent to the Rev. Mr. Pemberton, to transmit to you, which I hope will go safe.

Sir, I am your most obedient, etc. JOHN SERGEANT.

To George Drummond, Esquire; at Edinburgh.

A generous and charitable Spirit Mr. SERGEANT discovered in this Visit to the
Showanoos; a tedious Journey it was, and must of Necessity be of considerable
Expense to him; and his Reward is doubtless with God; though that poor People be
not gathered. Isai. 49. 4. 5.
But from Men he received not any Thing as a Consideration of his hard Service.

As Mr. Drummond, in his foregoing Letter, desires, by Order of the Directors,
that Mr. SERGEANT would favor them with a particular Correspondence, and that
he would begin it by giving them an Historical Account of the Progress Religion
had made among the Indians, etc. So Mr. SERGEANT complied with their Desires,
sent an Historical Account, and wrote the foregoing Letter. But I find no
Return he ever had from Mr. Drummond, or any other Member of that Society, nor
any further Correspondence with it; except a Letter Mr. SERGEANT wrote to the
President, for the Time, of that Society of May the 18th 1749. desiring, if it
fell within their Sphere, that they would assist in promoting the
Boarding-School, then begun at Stockbridge. Whether Mr. SERGEANT's Letter
failed by the Way, or what else happened to prevent a friendly Correspondence,
I am not able to say.

Some Time before this, Mr. SERGEANT wrote to Dr. Colman, desiring he would
procure for him Dr. Watts's Works, except a few Pieces already in his Hands;
which I suppose the Doctor did without Charge to Mr. SERGEANT. Before this I
find him acknowledging, in a Letter to the Doctor, the Receipt of Dr. Watts
upon Prayer. And June 1st 1742. Dr. Colman says to him.

I enclose for you twenty Pounds out of the Bounty of Madam Holden and
Daughters, to assist in your Support, in your singular Services for the Kingdom
of our Lord and Master. With this I send you also two Pacquets containing six
more Volumes of Dr. Watts's Works; one Packet contains Humane Understanding,
The World to come; and the Use and Abuse of the Passions. The other Packet has
his Humble Attempt. Strength and Weakness. Heaven and Hell. I put in a Sermon
of Dr. Sewall's, and Dr. Chauncey's and my own.

And to show the Candor and Gratitude of Mr. SERGEANT, I here transcribe the
Substance of his Letter to the Doctor on this Occasion.

Reverend Sir,
It Is several Months since I received your Letter by Mr. Williams, with twenty
Pounds, for which my Thanks have been due, and should have been returned before
now, had I not waited for the Packet that I might, being affected with greater
Gratitude, return my Thanks with double Zeal. The Books are lately come to
Hand, a most acceptable Present; nor have I had Time to peruse them, more than
just to have a Taste of Dr. Watts's Spirit.

When I speak of Dr. Watts's Spirit in his Writings, I mean something the most
excellent to be found in Humane Nature, and near akin to angelick Dignity,
there is something so just and rational, and at the same Time so modest, candid
and generous in that Gentleman's Sentiments, that they strongly impress the
Mind, and engage the Attention and Affections. Would to God the same Spirit of
Candor and superior Devotion showed itself in all Writings, especially of
Divines, and reigned in the Heart of every Christian: How many needless
Controversies would be ended by it? And how much sinful Division cease in the
Christian World? Alas! how much Need have we, at this Day, of the same Candor
and Largeness of Soul? Certainly, methinks, that Devotion must be less
acceptable to God, which subsists in a Soul confined and narrow toward its
Fellow-Men. May divine Grace enable me to be wiser and better by those Means
Providence by you has put into my Hands, to make me so; and may the Blessings
of God rest on you for all your Kindness to me. I am ashamed to deserve so
little of the generous and benevolent Notice you have taken of me: But I know
it is your greatest Satisfaction to do Good; nor will Heaven forget to reward
the Benevolence of your Heart, how little soever I have merited your kind
Notice. Forgive me. Sir, if Gratitude constrains me to write, what perhaps will
be offensive to that Modesty, which almost makes you forget your good Deeds. I
thank you particularly for your own Sermon, and am glad to find in it so just a
Censure of some Things, which unhappily darken the Glory of what has appeared
to bear so many Marks of a divine Work in this Land. -- I have the Satisfaction
to inform you, that there seems to appear a more than common Spirit of
Seriousness and Reformation among our Indians, and a pretty general Disposition
among the Indians in these Parts round about us, to receive Instruction. --


Dr. Colman, being acquainted with Mr. SERGEANT's Design of setting up a
Boarding-School at Stockbridge, as before related, informed the Rev. Mr. Isaac
Hollis of it, who was disposed to encourage it; as appears from the Doctor's
Letter of September 27th 1742. to Mr. SERGEANT, in which are the following
Passages.

Yesterday came to me another Letter from the Rev. Mr. Hollis, wherein he
expresses his Wonder and very great Offense, that nothing more is done by us
here in New England, for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge among the
Heathen; which declares, he thinks, we have no Care for their Souls. You at
Boston (says he) might save it out of your fine Hollands, Silks, and Laces, and
superfine Woollen Cloths; and have a School erected for Heathen Children in
Imitation of what he has essayed already. As to our superfluous Expenses, I
must answer and plead guilty; but as for the School, Difficulties attending it
from the Indisposition of the Indians to send their Children, or those to come
if a School were opened, I must leave you to lay before him. The good Gentleman
promises to lend a helping Hand to such a School, if it were set up here.

That charitable and generous Gentleman Mr. Hollis, had been at the Expense of
about two Hundred and eight Pounds Sterling, in the Space of about four or five
Years, for the Benefit of the Indians at Stockbridge, which was then upwards of
one Thousand Pounds our Money; as appears from a Passage in Dr. Colman's Return
in Compliance with Mr. SERGEANT's Request. August 20th 1743, the whole of which
will by and by be inwserted.

The Passage is,

-- November 19. 1736. I received from Mr. Hollis, his Bill on Col. Wendell, to
pay fifty-six Pounds Sterling for the Education of 12 Indian Boys at
Housatunnuk, under the Care of the Rev. Mr. SERGEANT. And August 15, 1738 I had
a second Order from him for three Hundred and forty-three Pounds our Money. And
again May 17. 1740. a third Order for four Hundred and forty-seven Pounds nine
Shillings. --

But what have we done in Comparison of him? Have any of our wealthy Professors
put to their helping Hand to this laudable and glorious Design? While he has
been at the Expense of maintaining 12 Boys, has any private Gentleman
New England been at the Expense of maintaining one? If therefore Mr. Hollis had
been informed how little we do, is it at all strange that he should express his
Wonder, and very great Offense, that nothing more is done by us here in
New England for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge among the Heathen.

Mr. Hollis also, in the forementioned Letter to Dr. Colman, desired an Account
from Mr. SERGEANT how his Money had been expended, and to what Purpose? Mr.
SERGEANT therefore wrote to him, and not only gave him a particular and
satisfactory Account how his Money had been laid out, but also of what
Advantage it had been: That several of his Scholars had made great Progress in
Learning, etc: -- But Dr. Colman having transcribed the Substance of that
Letter, in his Recommendation of Mr. SERGEANT's Proposal of a more effectual
Method for the Education of Indian Children, which will come in hereafter, I
shall not insert it here.

The Difficulties which Mr. SERGEANT apprehended would attend setting up a
Boarding School, viz. the unreasonable Jealousies of the Indians, vanished more
and more, and he now though it them ripe for such a Proposal; and therefore wrote
to Dr. Colman upon that Subject, January 24th 1742, 3.

-- I am much pleased with Mr. Hollis's Projection for a School -- wrote to you
a Year or two ago about that Matter; -- then thought that the Indians would not
bear such a Design; but now their Temper, especially of late, seems to be much
altered for the better, and a more than ordinary Spirit of Religion seems to
prevail. Thanks be to divine Grace for it! I am now of Opinion there is little
or nothing on the Part of the Indians here, and in their Neighborhood, to
discourage such an Attempt. And if you think it worth while (as indeed I think
it is) to undertake so great a Thing, I pray you, either by yourself or by the
Assistance of some Friend that has a turn of Mind for such Projections, to draw
up a general Plan of a School for the Education of Indian Children; which shall
provide not only for their Instruction in Learning, but also in Labor; and
send it to me, and I will try the Temper of the Indians with it. You may make
some guess of the different Temper prevailing now among the Indians, from what
did a few Years ago by this, that two of our young Women, not long since, of
their own Accord, desired me to provide them Places among the English, that
they might live with them, and support themselves by their own Labor in order
to learn the English Languague and Manners; though a few Years ago they would not
be hired to it. And, accordingly, I sent two of them to Northampton where they
lived contented as far as I know. --

And in another Letter of April 7th he adds upon the same Subject.

-- You will find in what I have written to Mr. Hollis, that I have proposed
the Affair of the free Boarding School to the Indians, and that they are
mightily taken with it. I wait with Impatience for an Answer to what I wrote
you last.

What Mr. SERGEANT wrote to Mr. Hollis, he sent unsealed to Dr. Colman, to
which the Doctor has Respect in the Beginning of his Letter of May the 18th
1743. to Mr. SERGEANT.

Reverend and dear Sir,
Yours of January 24th, and April 7th, are before me. I made no Answer to the
first, waiting for ^our's to Mr. Hollis which has been long in coming. I have
covered it to Mr. Hollis. It will be very acceptable to him. The Account given
of the happy Disposition among your Indian young People, both Male and Female,
is admirable; and I give thanks with you to the blessed Spirit of God. I hope
it will encourage Mr. Hollis to go on; and I purpose to ask Mrs. Holden's Leave
to apply One Hundred, our Currency, toward your projected Boarding-School. I
hope the Commissioners of Boston will make some Allowance toward it. And I
shall be ready to join here in a Subscription for some annual Contribution. But
as for my drawing up a general Plan, as you desire, of such a School, it is out
of my Line; and we must rely on yourself to do it. You must needs have a more
clear Idea of the Thing than we here can; -- that Religion and Labor go
together in it, is, to be sure, most natural. I pray God to bring forward such
a Foundation. -- Old as I am, I have sent a Copy of your Letter to Mr. Hollis
unto Dr. Avery, to communicate it to the Indian Corporation at London and the
same I have copied out for the Commissioners here at Boston. It may be my last
Service, and I hope will be a good one.


Dr. Colman having declined drawing up a general Plan, etc, and desiring Mr.
SERGEANT to do it; he accordingly in a Letter of August the 1st, wrote his
Proposal of a more effectual Method for the Education of Indian Children, etc.
which was as follows.

Stockbridge, August 1. 1743. Reverend Sir,
I now send you a general and rough Draught of that Design for the Education of
Indian Children, which I have some Times formerly hinted to you, that I had
formed in my Mind, with a Desire, that you would communicate it to the World in
as public a Manner, as possible, and with such Recommendations, as you may
think proper.

What I propose therefore in general is, to take such a Method in the Education
of our Indian Children, as shall in the most effectual Manner change their
whole Habit of thinking and acting; and raise them, as far as possible, into
the Condition of a civil industrious and polished People; while at the same
Time the Principles of Virtue and Piety shall be carefully instilled into their
Minds in a Way, that will make the most lasting Impression; and withal to
introduce the English Language among them, instead of their own imperfect and
barbarous Dialect.

And to accomplish this Design, I propose to procure an Accommodation of about
200 Acres of Land in this Place, (which may be had without any Cost of the
Indian Proprietors) and to erect an House on it, such as shall be thought
convenient for a Beginning; and in it to maintain a Number of Children and
Youth (not under ten, nor above twenty Years of Age;) and to have them under
the Direction, Care and Tuition of two Masters, one to take the Oversight of
them in their Hours of Labor, and the other in their Hours of Study, and to
have their Time so divided between Study and Labor as to make one the
Diversion of the other, that as little Time as possible may be lost in
Idleness. It will, I think, be necessary, there should be two Masters for this
Purpose, because it will be too tedious a Task for one I propose that the Fruit
of their Labor shall go to their own Maintenance, and to carry on the general
Design; except perhaps some particular Premiums out of the Profits of their
Labor, if it can be afforded, to encourage Industry I propose also to have a
Stock of Cattle etc. maintained on the Place for the same Purpose.

I propose to take into the Number, upon certain Conditions, from among any of
the Tribes of Indians found about; that by their Means, under the Blessing of
God, the Principles of Virtue and Christian Knowledge may be spread as far as
possible; which, perhaps in a Course of Years may, by the Grace of God, open
the Way for the Propagation Christianity to the remotest Tribes.

To lay the Foundation, and to support so great a Design as this, will, without
Doubt, cost a great Deal of Money; the Supply of which depends altogether upon
the Smiles of divine Providence, and the Charity of good People, who may think
proper to favor it.

The Need of some such Design as this, is very obvious to all that are in any
Measure acquainted with the Disposition and State of the Indians in America. It
is well known, that Virtue and Piety make but slow Progress among them in the
Methods that have hitherto been used to promote these Ends. Nor can I think of
any Thing so likely, as what is here proposed, in human Probability, to root
out their vicious Habits, and to change their whole Way of Living. I hope
therefore the apparent Goodness of this Design will recommend it to all
charitably disposed Persons, who would gladly honor God with their Substance;
and that it will approve itself to, and be promoted by, Persons of all Parties;
since it is a Design generous in its Intention, and calculated for the common
Good of a very miserable and degenerate Part of our Race, and has no Party-View
in it at all. I persuade myself therefore that all those who are concerned for
the Glory of our common MAKER, and the Father of the Spirits of all flesh, and
for the Honor of our common SAVIOR, to whom the Heathen are given for his
Inheritance, and the utmost Ends of the Earth for his Possession, or that are
only inspired with the generous Sentiments of Compassion to the Miserable, will
unite in promoting the Design here proposed.

If PROVIDENCE encourage and succeed this Design, and a Fund sufficient to
carry it on, can be procured, I purpose to enlarge the Foundation, so as to
take in Girls, as well as Boys, to be educated in a Manner suitable to the
Condition of their Sex; for I think the Cultivation of both the Sexes has a
natural Tendency to improve each other more easily and successfully.

I design the Discipline to be used with them shall be as strict as those will
bear, who know nothing like Government among themselves, and have an Aversion
to every Thing that restrains their Liberty.

I know it is apt to be suspected in such Designs, pretended to be for the
public Good, that there is some Self-Interest at Bottom, which is the Spring
of the Motion. If the World suspect any Thing of this Sort in the present
Projection, as some no Doubt will; and the rather, perhaps, because it has been
amused with Projections of this Kind, which have appeared to many mere personal
and selfish, or, at best only Party Designs, I know not how to give any further
Satisfaction for the present, than to declare solemnly that I have no other
Aim, than the Good of the Indians, and that I have no Expectation of any
personal Benefit at all, more than the mere Satisfaction of being instrumental,
under GOD, of doing them so great a Kindness, and rendering them a more happy
Society by cultivating Humanity and Virtue among them.

That the Indians, in general, are a People difficult to be reformed from their
own foolish, barbarous, and wicked Customs, the Unsuccessfulness of Attempts
upon them for this Purpose is a melancholy Proof, which though it may appear
discouraging in further Endeavors; yet, I think, to a generous Mind it should
rather be improved as an Argument to form and execute new Projections for this
Purpose. And indeed, perhaps, the Neglect of promoting Industry among them is
the chief moral Reason of so little being done to Purpose in forming their
Manners. And therefore, I hope the Want of wished for Success in other Attempts
will be no Objection with any that desire to be Benefactors to Mankind against
contributing their Part to this, which I think, has so apparent a Tendency to
promote Industry and Humanity among a barbarous People. But though I think the
Design here proposed has the probable Appearance of proving successful, yet I
do not flatter my self with any Romantic Expectations of accomplishing all the
Ends proposed at once; nor is it to be expected, in the ordinary Course of
Things but that a great Deal of Cest and Pains with Respect to many particular
Persons will be lost. This is what happens of Course in all Designs of this
Nature: And yet, it is to be hoped, some Good will be done: Nor will the
Benefactors loose their Reward with God, though the Design should not be
crowned with all the happy Success might be wished and hoped for. The mere
Suspicion, that the Design in the Event will prove unsuccessful, ought not, I
think, to discourage the Attempt. How many are there, that frustrate the very
Grace of God itself? How many with Respect to whom Christ has died in vain? And
yet (to speak after the Manner of Men) this was no Hindrance to his laying down
his Life for Sinners. He indeed has obtained all the Recompense in the
Salvation of Souls, which he had in his Eye, and GOD all the Glory of his
benevolent Purposes. He sees the Fruit of the Travail of his Soul, and is
satisfied. Nor will any Benefactors here loose the Praise and Reward of their
gracious Intention and Endeavors. (See Isa. xlix. 1-6.)

It may perhaps with some be an Objection against attempting any Thing of this
Sort, that the Indians are a base, ungrateful People, insensible of Kindnesses
done them. To this I reply, that though it be true, that this is the base,
ungrateful Temper of Indians yet I think it is rather an Argument in Favor of
a Projection calculated to promote Humanity among them, than otherwise: For the
Objection supposes them to be greatly debased, and shows the Need there is of
cultivating a Soil so barren, or rather a Soil so overrun with hateful Weeds,
and pricking Thorns. But whatever Weight this Objection might have with others,
certainly it ought to have none with a Christian, who is commanded to imitate
the Beneficence of his HEAVENLY FATHER, who does Good to the Evil and
Unthankful. Had this Consideration swayed the Mind of our blessed SAVIOR,
would he ever have shed his Blood for those, who pursued his Life to Death? Nor
did GOD refuse to distinguish the Israelites with his peculiar Favors from all
the Families of the Earth, because they were an ungrateful stiff-necked and
rebellious House.

I would not have it thought from what I have written above, that all that has
been done here, to introduce Christianity and good Manners, has proved
altogether in vain; for, through the Grace of GOD, some good Effects have
attended our Labors here: And, the Indians seem now well prepared for the
Execution of what I have here proposed; which their Jealousy would have been an
effectual Hindrance to a few Years ago.

I shall be glad of the Thoughts of candid and ingenious Gentlemen communicated
to me for the Improvement of the Design here proposed: And shall be ready to
answer any Queries that may be made in Relation to it.

Thus, Sir, you have what I desire may be communicated to the public from me.
It will be well perhaps that you should preface this with some general Account
of what Mr. Hollis has done, and what he expected from this Country in
Prosecution of his Design; which was what suggested to me the Design proposed
above. Some Gentlemen seem to be of Opinion, that this is not an happy Time to
set such a Design on Foot; which for ought I know is true; but I do not think
it best to postpone it on that Account. For who knows when we shall have a
better Time? It is possible it may be worse. Nor would I wish to have your
blessed MASTER take you from us, 'till you have helped in laying this
Foundation also for the Increase of Glory to his Name by promoting this Scheme,
on which I confess my Heart is much set, and which will (I hope) prosper the
better for your countenancing it.

I thank you for your kind Letter, and for the Pamphlets that accompanied it,
and am,

with great Honor and Reverence your most obliged humble Servant, JOHN
SERGEANT.
Hadley, August 9. P. S. As I have though it it necessary there should be some
Persons proposed to receive and disburse the Moneys, that may be collected for
the Purpose above, I have thought of the Hon. Col. Stoddard, and Col. Porter,
the Rev. Mr. Edwards of Northampton. Major Williams, and Col. Oliver Partridge,
for this Purpose; with whom I have conversed on the Affair, and have their
Consent to be proposed as Persons willing to take this Trouble on them. Which
you may, if you please, signify to the World.

J. S.




Dr. Colman's Return in Compliance with Mr. SERGEANT's Request, is as follows.

Boston, August 22. 1743.
It having pleased my Rev. Brother thus openly to address and oblige me, I do
most willingly publish his Letter: And if my Name and Hand can serve in any
Measure to promote the happy Foundation which his Heart is set on, (I humbly
hope under some special Influence from above) I give them with all my Heart;
with Thanksgiving to GOD who many Years ago was pleased to incline my Honored
Friend and Rev. Brother Mr. Isaac Hollis (then of London) into those Bounties
to us, which are now issuing in this Proposal of a Boarding-School for the more
effectual Instruction and Education of the Indian Children in the Western
Borders of our Province.

It was about the Year 1731, 2. that Mr. Isaac Hollis, (Nephew to Thomas
Hollis, Esquire; the great Benefactor to Harvard College, and soon after his pious
Uncle's Decease) sent me a Hundred Pounds Sterling, with his particular
Directions how to distribute and lay it out; adding, that he had seen many of
my Letters to his Uncle and his to me, which now led him into his Writing to
me, and this his Gift to us.

In the Year 1734, when he had seen the printed Account of the Ordination of
Messieurs Parker, Hinsdel and Secombe, and their Mission to the Indian Tribes
on the Eastern and Western Borders of New England; Mr. Hollis then earnestly
made me a most generous Offer of twenty Pounds Sterling per Annum, for Ever,
for the Support of a fourth Missionary; but in Faithfulness I advised against
such a Disposition of his Money; and as earnestly proposed to him the
Application of it for the Support of a Missionary through the wide Spread of the
destitute Settlements I had heard of in the Province of New Jersey; but he did
not approve of my Advice.

Within two Years after this, I heard of a very promising Door opening for the
Gospel among the Indian Tribe at Housatunnuk, and that a Person of Mr.
SERGEANT's Character for Piety and Learning, (then one of the Tutors in Yale
College in Connecticut) was willing to quit his Fellowship and the Prospect he
reasonably might have of one of the best Settlements our Country could afford
him, in any of our vacant Churches; and to devote vote himself to the Glory of
Christ in the Service of the Souls of those poor Heathen Families; Whereupon I
immediately let Mr. Hollis know, that now I could freely and earnestly advise
him to fix his twenty Pounds Sterling per An. for the Support of this Mission:

In Answer to this Motion, November. 19. 1736. I received from Mr. Hollis his
Bill on Col. Wendell to pay 56 l. Sterling. for the Education of twelve Indian
Boys at Housatunnuk, under the Care of the Rev. Mr. SERGEANT; and Aug. 15.
1738. I had a second Order from him tor 343 l. our Money; and again May 17.
1740. a third Order for 447 l. 9 s.: (Errors execped.)

Upon this gracious Call, and bountiful Direction of Divine Providence, Mr.
SERGEANT has been laying out himself gladly from Year to Year, in the Strength
of GOD, in the Trust commuted to him, with Caution, Care and Diligence,
according to the Measure of Wisdom given him from on High; whence every good
and perfect Gift comes down, both the Heart and Opportunity for the doing Good.

On the Sixth of May 1743. Mr. SERGEANT covered to me a Letter to be forwarded
to the Rev. Mr. Hollis, giving him a particular Account, of the laying out his
Moneys for the Maintenance of his Boys; and of the Methods he bad used for the
cultivating Humanity, and introducing the English Tongue and Manners among
them, and for their Proficiency in Knowledge, Virtue and Piety; by which Means,
through the Blessing of GOD, several of them are affected with a Sense and
Relish of Divine Things; and One of them in particular has made extraordinary
Progress in his Learnings, and appears truly pious, and has been singularly
serviceable to him, assisting him in his Translations Expostions aod
Applications of the Scripture; and also very helpful among the young Indians in
a general religious Concern that has of late prevailed among them. Mr. SERGEANT
adds, that this young Indian is already well qualified to keep School among his
Countrymen; and within a few Years will probably be fit to be a Preacher of the
Gospel to them.

Two or three other of his Boys, Mr. SERGEANT says, are serviceable in
improving the Rest of the Indians in Knowledge and Virtue; and he adds, -- that
it had been a continued Series of unwearied Kindness to the Indians, that had
at length entirely overcome their Jealousies and Suspicions; and gained an
almost universal Disposition in them to receive Instruction.

He then informed Mr. Hollis, that he has had in his Mind, for some Years, to
set up a free Boarding-School for the Education of Indian Children, in which he
proposes that they be brought up to Labor as well as Learning and the
Exercises of Devotion; with which Proposal the Indians seem to be mightily
taken; being sensible of their Folly in their being formerly so backward to
improve the Advantages put into their Hand.

Upon all, Mr. SERGEANT adds his Prayer, that Almighty Power may effect the
merciful Purpose of Sovereign Grace among them! -- and then concludes with a
free and noble Declaration to Mr. Hollis in the following Words,

Sir, As to your making any Allowance to Me, for my Care and Trouble, of which
you speak in your very obliging Letter to me, I neither ask nor desire it, and
beg of you not to think of it; for I should indeed be ashamed to accept any
Thing of you (though my stated Allowance is not large) but your Intercessions
at the Throne of Grace for me, of which I stand in great Need -- We can never
be thankful enough to You, under GOD, for having put it in our Power to do so
much to promote our general Design. Through your Liberalities, Thanksgivings
abound to GOD, who I am sure will reward your Charity; and I doubt not but
Generations to come will bless your Name, and you will find your Reward in
Eternity. --

JOHN SERGEANT.

I was so charmed with the Spirit and Contents of this Letter, that I took a
Copy of it before I sealed it up, and forwarded it to Mr. Hollis: And not only
so, but old as I am, and unapt now to transcribe, yet I wrote several Copies,
and sent one to an Honorable Member of the Corporation at London, who have the
Distribution of the Indian Fund; another to the worthy Secretary of their
Honorable Commissioners here at Boston; and yet a third to a Rev. Minister in
Scotland, if he sees good to communicate it to the Secretary of the Honorable
Society for propagating Christian Knowledge at Edinburgh; and after all I
published it in the Weekly Christian History at Boston, No. 19. So that I have
in a Manner prevented, and abundantly answered, Mr. SERGEANT's Request to me in
his present Letter before it came; and gone beyond all he could imagine or
expect from me, in Way of prefacing and recommending his picus Design and
Proposal. And I can truly add, that I shall account my self honored by GOD in
my advanced Age, If I may finish my Course of Services to my Country, and the
Churches of CHRIST here, by ministering now under my dear younger Brother, in
this his servent devoting his Life and Powers to the Glory of GOD in the
Salvation of the Heathen.

I even dare therefore to recommend Him, and his proposed Boarding-School, not
only to the pious and Charitable among ourselves, nor only to those of the
Denomination of New England in our Nation and Provinces; but also (might it not
be thought presumptuous) even to the most Honorable Societies for propagating
the Gospel and of Christian Knowledge in London and Edinburgh, for their
generous Assistances to a Projection truly Catholic, and without respect of
Parties; which I hope the Divine Providence may be laying by the Hands of his
Servants, Mr. Hollis and Mr. SERGEANT, in this obscure Corner of our Province
at Stockbridge, alias Houstunnuk, for a more effectual Entrance among the
Indians than we have yet seen.

But there are two or three Things more, that I find my self obliged to hint
at, before I conclude the present Writing.

One is (as Mr. SERGEANT requests of me in his Letter) to intimate to the
Public Mr. Hollis his Expectations from Us here in New England. And indeed, in
several of his Letters to me, he has wrote with some Discouragement of Spirit
on this Head; Why We, a People of such Name for Religion, do not exert our
selves more in Prosecution of like Essays for a more effectual gospelizing the
Heathen round about us? And now that He has advanced as he has done for the
Education of a Number at Housatunnuk; he hears of none of our rich Men falling
in with their Assistances.

This has been Matter of Stumbling to him, and I wish the Block may be now
removed by the Contributions of many to the School proposed: which may be an
Odor of a fweet Smell, a Sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to GOD.

Another Thing suggested by Mr. SERGEANT, and a most wise and necessary one in
the present Case, is -- his taking in Girls as well as Boys, if Providence
succeed the Design, and a Fund Fund sufficient to carry it on, can be procured:
I must needs add, on this Head, that this Proposal is a Matter of absolute
Necessity wherein we are not left at Liberty either as Men or Christians; for
there cannot be a Prepagation of Religion among any People without an equal
Regard to both Sexes; not only because Females are alike precious Souls, formed
for GOD and Religion as much as the Males; but also because the Care for the
Souls of Children in Families, and more especially in those of low Degree lies
chiefly upon the Mothers for the first seven or eight Years: Which is an
Observation or Remark which I had the Honor to make unto my dear and honored
ancient Friend Henry Newman, Esquire Secretary to the Honorable and Reverend
Society for promoting Christian Knowledge; which when he had communicated to
Them, they put it into Print, and sent it to the Directors of the 1764 Schools;
(if I have not miscounted) that so a greater Proportion of Girls might be taken
into them to receive a religious Education for the sake of their Posterity, and
therein for the more effectual answering the very End of their Charity-Schools.
By which Instance I received the following Instruction What an unknown and
untho't of Good, a Man may do by a single and occasional right Though It or Line;
it proving in the Case before me, as if I had wrote 1764 Letters to the
Directors of so many Schools, for the Service of Posterity, and in Favor of
Female Children: And what added a Thousand-fold more to the Virtue and Force of
my Line, was the Approbation of so venerable a Body of Gentlemen, and their
Recommendation of it to the Observation of the Overseers of their respective
Schools.

I have now only to add upon Mr. SERGEANT's Postscript, -- that the Gentlemen
whom he has named to receive and disburse the Moneys which may be given for the
building and support of his Boarding-School, are Persons of know Character
among us for Integrity and Honor; to whom I only wish may be added the Rev.
Mr. Stephen Williams of Springfield; whom it pleased GOD to use so much as a
zeaLous and laborious Instrument of the Settlement of the Gospel at Houstunnak.

Now Thanks be to GOD for his Unspeakable Gift, a right liberal Heart and Hand,
in one Part of his Church and another. No Tongue of Man can fully speak of it!
or enough celebrate it! Unspeakable is the Good done to the World by it!
unseakable is the Glory redounding to the Name of CHRIST from it! and also the
Good to our selves in it and from it is unspeakable, both through the Life that
now is, and in that which is to come! Only the Day of CHRIST can reveal the
Glories and Joys awaiting it through a blessed Eternity: -- Lord, when saw we
thee hungry and fed thee? or thirsty and gave thee Drink? -- Verily in as much
as you did it unto one of the least of these ye have done it unto Me.

BENJAMIN COLMAN.


The foregoing Letter of Mr. SERGEANT containing his Proposal, etc. and Dr.
Colman's Return, etc. were made Public by the Doctory, according to Mr.
SERGEANT's Desire; with a Design to excite the pious generous and well disposed
in this Country, and in Great Britain, to charitable Contributions for the
setting up and supporting the proposed Boarding-School. And Dr. Colman
distributed many of them, where he though it they would be most likely to answer
the End proposed. And in a Letter to Mr. SERGEATN of September 17th he gives
him the following Account. --

-- I cover to you your Letter in Print. I wish my Return to it may be
acceptable to you and others; and I humbly beseech God to incline many Hearts,
Here and Abroad, to contribute to your most pious and generous Proposal. I have
covered four of them to His Excellency our Governor, and suggested to him my
Hopes that the General Court will smile upon it, at their next Session.

And in another Letter of the 22d of the same Month.

-- It was a great Pleasure to me Yesterday to see Mr. Josiah Jones. I have
delivered to him twenty Pounds old Tenor, to deliver to you for your further
Assistance and Support in your Work. I have desired him to call at our Deacon
Philips's for two Dozen Copies of your Letter to me, and my Return to it;
presented by Major Henchman, who sends them to you for the Copy. -- I have
distributed already of them 70, and shall receive 50 more to Day to distribute.
I have already covered to Dr. Watts Dr. Guise, Madam Holden, Mr. Newman, Mr.
Oswald and Brackstone, Booksellers, Dr. Avery Mr. Hollis; and to Mr. Willison
of Dundee, and am going to put up for Mr. Palmer, Mr. Coram, Dr. Wilson and
others on the other Side the Water. I have also presented four f(c) Governoor
Shirley, and am sending to Lieutenant Governor Phips and Dummer here; and to
the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, and some Ministers in Connecticut, and to
the Presidents of our Colleges, etc. I have covered to Mr. Speaker Cushing, and
for our three Representatives, and to Mr. Secretary Oliver, and the Board of
Commissioners for the Indians here, to the Minsters here about also. --

By the Pains Dr. Colman took in recommending and distributing Mr. SERGEANT's
Proposal, it is evident he was much engaged in Favor of it; as Mr. SERGEANT
also was; and, I think, not without Reason: for I look upon it as the best
concerted Scheme that has ever been proposed for the Benefit of the Indians.
Nor do I suppose it likely, that they will ever be bro't to be a knowing and
thrifty People, unless, by some such Method of Industry, they are cured of
their Idleness, and other Vices which proceed from it.

When Mr. SERGEANT understood, by Dr. Colman's Letter, what Care and Pains he
had been at to forward this noble Design, his generous Soul was too tenderly
touched to be silent. In a Letter of October 24, he thus expresses his
Gratitude to the Doctor.

Reverend Sir,
With a Heart full of Gratitude, I write to let you know, I have received the
Packet of my printed Proposals, with your most obliging Return and
Recommendation of the Design; together with the twenty Pounds of Money by Mr.
Jones. You heap your Favors so fast upon me, that it almost confounds me. I
blush to be spoken of publicly with so much Commendation by you, when am
conscious to my self, I so little deserve it. May God give me Grace to improve
every Talent to his Glory; and make me an humble Instrument in promoting the
Kingdom of his dear Son among the Heathen. Pray make Madam Holden and her
excellent Daughter as sensible as you can, that I am deeply affected with their
Goodness, and return Praise to God tor their Liberalities. I have it in my Mind
to write her a Letter of Thanks, if it would be acceptable. I am very thankful
to you, Sir, both on my own and the Indians Behalf, that you have taken so much
Pains to recommend my Design. I pray God it may meet with Acceptance in the
World. I heartily consent that Mr. Williams should be added to the Trustees
proposed. He has deserved very highly of us; is a very active Man, and zealous
to promote the Good of the Indians.


In another Letter of November 25th to Dr. Colman, Mr. SERGEANT says.

-- Your Care and Pains, under the Decays and Feebleness of Age, to promote the
Design of my Letter, I accept with great Thankfulness. -- Madam Holden is
exceeding kind, and sets a noble Example. May God put it into the Hearts of
others to follow it. -- I highly approve of the Manner you propose to put
forward a Subscription for something annually, and yet not so confining it, but
that who will, may, give what they please at once. -- Yesterday A Day of
public Thanksgiving through the Province.
we of the English Families, with the Assistance of two Strangers happening to
be present, being ten Persons only that contributed, collected by Subscription
One Hundred and fifteen Pounds ten Shillings, toward our proposed School; some
to be paid annually for the Term of ten Years: an Offering which, I hope, will
be acceptable to him who gives us the Comforts and Blessings of Life, with
which we are able to rejoice and give Thanks before him. Yesterday I also gave
the Indians some Account of the Design; with what was doing for them, chiefly
by your Means. They appeared very thankful, and this Morning sent a Message to
me, to know where the House was designed to be erected, with the Offer of their
Assistance in clearing a Spot of Land to forward the Design. --

The Letter, which Dr. Colman wrote to Mr. SERGEANT, giving hinm Occasion to
say, Madam Holden is exceeding kind, and sets a ^^^le Example, is missing.
Therein I conclude the Doctor had informed him, that Madam Holden had given one
Hundred Pounds toward his Boarding-School. For in his Letter of May 18th
(before transcribed) the Doctor says.

I purpose to ask Mrs. Holden's Leave to apply one Hundred, our Currency, of
her Money, toward your Boarding-School.

And in another Letter of May 24th 1744, he speaks of Madam Holden's
Subscription of one Hundred Pounds. I suppose therefore in the Letrer that is
missing the Doctor informed him of her Donation, which occasioned him to
express himself as above.

For want of that Letter, I am not able to say what Manner of Subscription the
Doctor put forward, and which Mr. SERGEANT so highly approved of, but only from
this Expression of his; for something annually, and yet not so confined hit
that who will, may, give what they please at once. And what Progress it made I
know not, but suppose it was not great. All the Light I have in the Case is
from a Letter of Dr. Colman's to Mr. SERGEANT, dated May 24th 1744, in which he
says.

I have as yet no Subscription but Madam Holden's one Hundred Pounds.

Then he goes on to name four Gentlemen, who subscribed in this Country, and
concludes by saying,

-- I wish it may be slow and sure; believing and not making Haste. God
governs, and I trust will provide. The four Subscriptions above mentioned Mr.
SERGEANT never received. I find them not in his Account, and therefore
conclude, that the War now coming on, and discouraging any further
Subscriptions, those were not paid.

It mud be granted, that the People in Stockbridge discovered a very noble and
generous Spirit, in contributing so largely to that pious Design. Had the
People through the Country given one tenth Part so much, in Proportion to their
Numbers and Abilities, that School, and another for Females, might have been
set up, and well suoported: And had we in general, in this Land, such just and
affecting Views of the deplorable State of the Indians, as the People at
Stockbridge have, whose Eyes affect their Hearts, I doubt not but many
Thousands would have cheerfully given to forward that noble and pious Design,
the best I think that has ever been projected.

Dr. Colman sent one of Mr. SERGEANT's printed Letters, and his own
Recommendation of it, to a Gentleman in a neighboring Town, whose generous
Mind was pleased with the Projection; he therefore wrote back, proposing a
Method of Subscription to encourage it, which the Doctor approved of, and
therefore published the Gentleman's Letter in the Weekly Journal of February
7th 1744. The Letter, with what the Doctor or subjoined io the public Print,
were as follows.

Reverend and dear Sir,
You did me the Favor some Weeks since, to send me the Rev. Mr. SERGEANT's
Scheme, with your Letter annexed to it, for promoting Christian Knowledge among
thr Indians at Honsatunnuck, by civilizing and bringing them to a good Opinion
of Industry, Frugality, etc. which I very much approve of; and the more,
because it appears to me, as if he had truly no private or personal Interest in
View; but only the Honor of his great Master, and the best Welfare of the poor
Heathen, whom the Father gave him for his Inheritance. And therefore I heartily
wish it Success, and hope the Difficulties in raising Money, to carry on such
an Affair, may be surmounted.

I have been expecting every Day, since you sent it to me, to hear of a
Subscription's going forward on that Account, but hear nothing of any such
Thing at present.

I would therefore humbly propose, that a Sheet of Paper or two may be stitched
up at the End of one or more of those printed Letters; and a generous
Subscription begun, by a few well-dispos'd Gentlemen of Boston, and handed
about from one to another to try what may be done that Way: And there every
Subscriber may see at one View the honest Design, judge of it is Necessity, and
act accordingly.

I cannot help thinking the generous Benesactions of the Rev. Mr. HoIlis, and
his just Objection of the Inactivity of a People of such a Name for Religion,
as we in New England, in such an Affair, will put many to the Blush, and
perhaps spur them on to bountiful Liberality in this Scheme. I am no Ways
qualified for a Leader my self, but would willingly follow a few Gentlemen who
would be more likely to give it a Reputation and Currency, with my Subscription
of -- pounds and would use my small Influence to promote it; but it must be
some how or other set a going, whkrh, when once well done, may be easily kept
alive, and in Motion. I have a great deal of Faith that something of this
Nature may be attended with Success, if put into such Hands as shall be
spirited for it, and will not be weary in well doing; but stir up themselves
and others with a well tempered Zeal, mixed with Prudence, so as not to give
Offense to any who do not think exactly as they do; and by such a Behavior,
some who may not be well inclined at one Time, may be very well disposed at
another, to a handsome Subscription.

But, this Method notwithstanding, I hope it will not be though it amiss to have a
Brief from Authority (if Need be) procured and promoted in every Church, in
this Province, to collect what well-dispos'd People would be willing to give to
encourage an Affair of such Importance; and if, before the Collection, these
two Letters should be read, I am humbly of Opinion it would not be impertinent.

If we really believe the admirable Charms you mention at the Close of your
Letter, have any Reality in them, as I am apt to think they have, viz. That a
right literal Heart and Hand, no Tongue can fully speak it! nor enough
celebrate it! Unspeakable is the Good done to the World by it! Unspeakable is
that Glory redounding to the Name of Christ from it! and also the Good to
ourselves in it and from it is Unspeakable, both through the Life which now is
and that which is to come! Only the Day of Christ can reveal the Glories and
Joys awaiting it through a blessed Eternity:

I say, if these wonderful Truths are duly though it of, this pious Scheme of Mr.
SERGEANT will not, cannot, fall to the Ground for want of Money to carry it on,
and support it from Time to Time. I pray God to strengthen our Faith in them.
-- I entreat an Interest in your Prayers, and do assure you that I am with
great Esteem and Respect,

Sir, Your very much obliged bumble Servant, -- --
January, 26th 1744. N. B. I think it my Duty to make the most public Excuse
for the Freedom I take with my honorable Friend in publishing his Letter,
excellent as it is in itself without his Leave; and also to inform him. and the
Public, that a Book will be ready at my House, and at the Shops of Major
Henchman, Capt. John Phillips, and Mr. Joseph Edwards, with blank Leaves
annexed, for taking in Subscriptions: Or if it be desired by Persons in other
Towns any where through the Province, that like Books be sent to them for the
same End, they shall be sent.

Benjamin Colman.




Dr. Colman wrote to the honorable Commissioners upon the same Subject; of
which he gave Mr. SERGEANT the following Account in a Letter of February 9.
1743, 4.

To Day I wrote to Andrew Oliver, Esquire; Secretary to the Commissioners for the
Indians, to be communicated to them, enclosing to them your and my printed
Letter, and these now enclosed ( the foregoing Letter published two Days
before, and no enclosed to Mr. SERGEANT) praying them to take your Proposal
into Consideration, and act as they may see becoming them in their public and
private Capacity.

It will perhaps be Matter of Surprise to the Reader, that when such an
Opportunity presented, and Subscriptions were urged by such forcible Reasons by
Dr. Colman, and the Author of the foregoing Letter; that no Subscriptions (...)
obtained in the Country, save those four abovementioned: For I find no Account
of any more in the Papers before me. All the Reason I am able to give for it
is, that the War with France now came on, which drew the Attention of every
one, and might discourage, for the present, those who were well inclined:
Stockbridge being an exposed Place, where no such Design could be carried on in
Time of War, to good Advantage.

I am sensible some worthy Gentlemen, who were possessed of a laudable Concern
for the Good of the Indians apprehended, that there was too great a Coldness
and Indifference in this Case, considering the Importance of the Affair, and
the happy Prospect there was of its succeeding, if it had been duly encouraged;
and that they were a little impatient on the Account of those Excuses which
were made by some, from whom Subscriptions were expected, viz. That we must not
be too hasty, etc. etc.

One Gentleman in a Letter to Dr. Colman, of May 18th expresses himself thus,

I am sorry the proposed Draught for a Subscription is so hard of Digestion; I
wish Gentlemen would not be quite so over nice and exact, but leave some of the
Prudentials in the Affair to the honorable and Reverend Gentlemen; who I hope
will be appointed, and who will be charitably inclined to take upon them the
Management of that Affair.

A Gentleman also in a Letter to Mr. SERGEANT of July 9th says,

I could have been very glad, that my poor Endeavors with Respect to your
Scheme to propagate Christianity among the Indians, had been attended with any
Success; but I cannot learn that any Thing is done, or doing, about it; and it
seems to me to be as dead at present as if it had never been in Motion. I have
met with several Checks for being too hasty in the Affair. -- Our Backwardness
to generous Actions for the Good of our fellow Creatures, notwithstanding the
excellent Rules of Charity prescribed in Christianity, and enforced by so many
powerful Reasons, is a most convincing Argument, that the Spirit of pure and
undefiled Religion but little prevails, where the Form of it appears. --

I am ready to think that any one, who is well acquainted with this Affair, and
is impartial in the Case, will judge, that a generous Subscription to promote
such a noble Design, would have well became a People of our Profession: The
Rev. and generous Mr. Hollis, when he was made acquainted with Mr. SERGEANT's
Scheme, discovered a very different Spirit from what appeared among us. Before
Mr. SERGEANT's Letter, and Dr. Colman's Recommendation of it, were made public
in this Country, in April 7. 1743. Mr. SERGEANT in a Letter to Mr. Hollis,
informed him of his Design of seting up a Boarding-School. Mr. Hollis, in his
Answer of December 5th 1743, in a most effectual Manner, shows his Approbation
of it, in the following Worlds.

I am pleased with your Proposal about setting up a Boarding-School for Indian
Children. I like it well. May it please the Lord to incline the Hearts of many
to contribute toward it. I desire you would take up for me 12 Boys afresh,
about the Age of 9, 10, 11, or 12 Years, and let them be totally maintained at
my Expense, with Food and Raiment, Education and the like. There may be still a
considerable Sum of Money in the Hands of Col. Wendell; please to apply to him
on my Account for what you want, and I will furnish more as there may be
Occasion for it.

-- N. B. I would have none but Boys educated for me; but it may be well if a
Number of Girls could be educated on the Account of some others. --

Dr. Colman in a Letter informed a certain Gentleman in his Neighborhood of
Mr. Hollis's Generosity, who in his Answer to the Dostor, expresses himself
thus.

This extraordinary additional Bounty of that Reverend Gentleman, I hope will
quicken the Gentlemen here concerned in putting forward Subscriptions. Is it
not amazing to find one single Gentleman (and that a Stranger too) so ready and
free to be at the Expense of supporting 24 Boys, without any Jealousy of his
Charity's being misapplied, and this whole Land so backward to support an equal
Number of Girls, when it is so vastly more our Duty than any Bodies else? May
not a little Impatience here be a Virtue?

To Mr. Hollis's Letter, of December 5. 1743, Mr. SERGEANT wrote an Answer July
2. In which, after his grateful Acknowment of Mr. Hollis's Generosity, and his
hearty Wishes that a full Reward might be given him, by that God who is well
pleased with such Sacrifices, he informs him, that the projected Method of a
Boarding-School was the best he could devise for the Good of the Indians, and
then adds, -- The War with France falls out unhappily for this Design. We are
situated upon the Borders of the Massachusetts Province, open to the French
Settlements, and in the Road where the French and Indians used to make their
Irruptions; but have been hitherto, through the Goodness of God, preserved. --
However, for the present, I believe, it will not be though it prudent to be at any
Expense in the Affair of the Boarding-School. My House is garrisoned; a Number
of Soldiers are sent into the Town; -- and Provisions are scarce: so that I
know not what can be done for your Boys just now. We are, for the present, in
such Confusion and Uncertainty, by Reason of the War, that it is difficult to
say what is best to be done; a little longer Time will probably direct us what
Steps are best to be taken. As soon as may be, I shall gladly prosecute your
pious Design. --

In a Letter also to Dr. Colman of June 29th, he says,

As for our Design here, I believe, it will not be though it prudent to put any
Thing in Execution for the present, till we see a little how the Affair of the
War will turn.

Thus ceased this important Affair of the Boarding-School for the present, and
nothing more was here done about it till the Year 1747. But, in the mean Time,
some Things were acted in Favor of it in England, by some generous and public
spirited Persons, to whom Dr. Colman had sent Mr. SERGEANT's printed Letter,
and his own Return or Recommendation of it; of which I shall give some Account
in its proper Place: Only observing here that it was a Grief to Mr. SERGEANT,
that he could not now proceed in it; but he hoped for a more favorable
Opportunity. -- In a Letter to Dr. Colman of November 7th he expresses himself
thus,

It will be a great Grief to me, if we should not be able to accomplish the
Design I have projected. -- To God's Power and Grace I refer it. --

This Projection of a Boarding-School, and the Pains Mr. SERGEANT was at to
promote it, took up a considerable Part of his Time and Thoughts; for it lay
very near his Heart: But, at the same Time, he prosecuted his Work among the
Indians with Industry and Faithfulness; and a very hard Service he had of it.
For, having a mixed Auditory, he was obliged, on each Part of every Lord's Day,
both to pray and preach in the English and Indian Language, that all might
profit by his Ministry. He himself esteemed his Work to be double on this
Account, and used it as one Argument, with the honorable Commissioners, to
move them to make some Addition to his Salary, which was very small. His Words
are; -- My Labor, by being obliged to preach in Indian, I suppose, is double
to what it would be, if my Hearers understood English. -- And I apprehend it
was more than double; for he wrote every Word he delivered to the Indians (as
he further takes Notice in that Letter;) and that he might be very exact, he
did, for a considerable Time, keep an Interpreter by him two Days in a Week, at
his own Cost, to assist him in the Translation of his Sermons into the Indian
Tongue. And besides, the Indians, being very ignorant, and not able to gain
Knowledge by Reading, as those who can read may do, he was obliged to spend
much of his Time in conversing privately with them, that thereby he might
infuse Knowledge into their Minds; which having been so long, as an
uncultivated Soil, wanted more abundant Labor. He was indeed a rare Instance
of Diligence, Industry, and Painfulness, in his Work; and the Pains he took for
the Good of the poor Natives are not to be expressed.

In the Close of this Year, Dr. Colman again refreshed his Spirit, by sending
him a small Sum. -- 'Please Sir, (says the Doctor in a Letter of November 17th)
to accept the ten Pounds enclosed for you,' for which Mr. SERGEANT returned his
grateful Acknowledgments in a Letter of December 11. -- I have received your
most obliging Letter -- and the ten Pounds enclosed, which I accept with great
Thankfulness. I return Praise to God in the first Place, as the original Author
of every good Thing; and in the next Place to you, who have been made, under
him, the Instrument of many Kindnesses to me. You have my servent Prayers in
Return, springing from an Heart deeply sensible of the Kindness of God to me,
by your Beneficence. May the Smiles and Joy of God to you be the Recompense of
those repeated Favors, with which you have so often refreshed my Bowels.

As Mr. SERGEANT was laborious and faithful in the Work to which he was called;
so there is good Reason to conclude, that he was successful therein: not only
from the Increase of Knowledge, and a visible Reformation among the Indians;
but also from the Temper of Mind some of them discovered at the Time of their
Death, some Instances of which I have given above, and shall here add two or
three more, by suggesting a few Hints concerning some young Persons who died
this Year, and the Beginning of the next. The very brief Account which Mr.
SERGEANT, in his Journal, gives of them is as follows -- May 22. died a young
Person, not baptized; but expressing a serious Disposition of Mind. He was much
in Prayer in his Sickness; deaf, and not able to speak much; but, just before
he died, took his Father by the Hand, exhorted him to mind Religion, to get
baptized; said, he hoped for Happiness, spoke these Things plain, and then
died. January 19. 1745, 6. This Week died Katharine, Kunkapot's eldest
Daughter, with good Hope of future Happiness, and without any Fears of Death.
Feb. 16. This Week died Kewaunnoabkub, Daughter of Naunaunekennuk, with a
strong Hope of eternal Life. What a desirable Sight was it to behold such
young Persons, who, a little before, were Strangers to divine Things, leaving
the World with such a comfortable Hope of a glorious Immortality?

The honorable Corporation for Indian Affairs in London, to whom Dr. Colman
had sent Mr. SERGEANT's printed Letter, and his own Recommendation of it,
received it; and their Treasurer, in a Letter to the honorable Andrew Oliver,
Esquire; Secretary to their honorable Commissioners in Boston, informed him, that
Mr. SERGEANT'S Proposal had gained the Approbation of the Society in London;
that they were inclined to contribute to it; and that when there should be a
Prospect of its taking Effect, they would consider the Matter, and encourage it
as they conveniently could. This Letter Mr. Oliver communicated to Mr.
SERGEANT, who wrote to the honorable Corporation, informing them, that the
Affair of the Boarding-School had been delayed by Reason of the War; that the
Founding of it would cost a considerable Sum, though he hoped it might,
afterward, be carried on with but little Charge; that, upon a Computation
made, it was though it, that two Hundred Pounds Sterling would be needful; that he
purposed to proceed in that Affair, as far as present Circumstances would
admit; and concluded by humbly recommending it to the favorable Notice and
Encouragement of that honorable Corporation. But I find not, among his Papers,
any Answer to this Letter, nor any Account of Money advanced by the Corporation
for that Business; and therefore suppose Nothing was done by them, while Mr.
SERGEANT lived. Perhaps his Letter, in Time of War, might fail of reaching the
Corporation.

Another of those Proposals for a Boarding-School was sent to Dr. Watts, the
Effect of which Dr. Colman informed Mr. SERGEANT of in a Letter of May 21. -- I
am now, dear Sir, (says the Doctor) to inform you, that last Night I received a
Letter from Dr. Watts, dated March 26, wherein he says to me, I have your
Letter from Mr. SERGEANT, and have made a small Collection among a few Friends
for his Design, and pious Work in the Education of some of the neighboring
Indians; and now I enclose a Bill of Exchange to you, for seventy Pounds your
Currency, from Mr. Henry Caswell of Boston, Merchant. So he salutes Mr.
SERGEANT, and wishes him Success. I rejoice with you, Sir, in this first Fruit.
And in a Letter of June 10. the Doctor says, -- I lately informed you of a Bill
seventy Pounds our Currency, from the excellent Dr. Watts of London, -- The
Money is in my Scriptore, wrote upon from him to you. I shall be glad to
forward a Letter of Thanks from you to him. -- Accordingly, Mr. SERGEANT, in
his next Letter to Dr. Colman, says; -- I have enclosed a Letter, such as it
is, for Dr. Watts; be pleased to forward it to him with as much Safety as you
can, and as soon as may be. Of this Letter to Dr. Watts, and of many others
which Mr. SERGEANT wrote to one and another, I find no Copies, which lays me
under no small Disadvantage in my Endeavors to give a good Account of these
Things.

Capt. Thomas Coram of London, a Gentleman who has discovered a generous and
noble Spirit in diverse Projections for the Benefit of the Nation, and for the
Good of Mankind, in some of which he happily succeeded, received from Dr.
Colman Mr. SERGEANT's Proposal for a Boarding-School. When he had read the
Scheme, he was very much pleased with it; and in a Letter dated London, January
23, he gave the Doctor Thanks for the Book, Mr. SERGEANT's printed Letter and
Dr. Colman's Recommendation make a small Book.
and allured him that he had taken no small Pains to promote that good Work,
and that he entertained Hopes, that the Prince of Wales would encourage that
pious Design by becoming the first Subscriber.

Of this Dr. Colman informed Mr. SERGEANT in a Letter of May 7, which much
revived his Hopes respecting his Boarding-School; and in his Answer of May 29,
he says to the Doctor: Mr. Coram has shown an excellent and most generous
Spirit in the Matter, for which I thank God; and desire you, when you write to
him again, to give him my most hearty Thanks, for the Pains he has taken in
this Affair; which I hope will add to the Weight and Glory of that Crown of
Righteoufnefs which waits for him, when he has finished the Work designed him
by Providence. And if he succeeds in this, it may perhaps appear worthy to be
the last Service of so industrious a Labourer for the Good of others. If the
Prince of Wales leads in the Subscription, it looks probable that it may secure
the Success of that Design, I have so earnestly desired to see accomplished. I
am waiting to put something in Execution among the pious and liberal in our own
Country, when the Face of Things, in divine Providence, shall appear
encouraging. --

Capt. Coram was so charmed (to use his own Expression) with Mr. SERGEANT's
Undertaking, that he exerted himself abundantly to promote it. He first got a
Book bound, and a proper Preamble writ in it for Benefactors to Subscribe to,
for the Benefit of Mr. SERGEANT's School: Then he applied to some wealthy
Persons, both in City and Country: And though he found many, who expressed their
Willingness to encourage so good a Design, by their Contributions; yet he could
find no Person who was willing his Name should stand first in the Subscription:
but all chose to subscribe after it was well begun by some proper Person. These
Objections put this generous Gentleman upon the though it of prefering a Petition
to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, that he would honor and encourage
this noble Design, by placing his Name at the Head of the Subscription. He
therefore prepared the following Petition for that End.

To His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, The humble Petition of Thomas
Coram, Gentleman,
most humbly shows,
That, in the Reigns of King William, and Queen Anne, your Petitioner
transacted Affairs of Commerce in His Majesty's Plantations, in North America;
where he resided many Years, and constantly endeavored to promote the Honor
of the Crown and the Good of the Public; some of which Endeavors were crowned
with Success, to the lasting; Benefit of this Kingdom:

That during his Residence in these Parts, he observed with Attention that many
Advantages, that might and ought to have been long since secured there, greatly
for the Honor of the Crown, and the Benefit of His Majesty's Kingdoms, have
hitherto been grossly obstructed or neglected; particularly that of gaining over
the many Tribes of the Heathen Indian Natives, in the vast Wilderness behind
the British Settlements in New England, to the Interest of the British Nation,
and to the Knowledge and Love of Christianity, who, if well treated, and
properly instructed by fit Persons, residing continually among them, would be
effectually attach to the British Interest in all future Times, and prove of
vast Service to the Crown, especially in Time of War with France, whose
Missionaries constantly reside among their neighboring Tribes of Indians near
the French Settlements in Canada, and, instructing them in the French Interest
render them very useful to the French in their Wars, and as injurious to the
British Subjects in the said Plantations:

That Mr. JOHN SERGEANT, a Gentleman of great Probity, Piety, and Learning,
settled at Housatunnuk, one of the furthermost out Parts of the British
Habitations in New England, on the Borders of said Wilderness, being deeply
touched with Compassion for the miserable State of Ignorance and Heathenisu of
those many Tribes of poor Indians, duly sensible of the Truth of the Premises,
has formed an exceelent Scheme for the Education of a Number of those Indian
Children, in such Manner as may, by Degrees, raise them into the Condition of a
civil and industrious People, and introduce the English Language among them,
instead of their own barbarous Jargon, and instruct them in the Principles of
Religion and Virtue; and will himself and Family constantly reside among them,
and apply his Time and best Endeavors, for the most effectual carrying the
same into Execution, whereby, in a Course of Years, a Way may, by God's
Blessing, be opened for the Propagation of Christianity to the remotest of
their Tribes:

That this noble Design cannot, in its Nature, be carried forward without
considerable Expense; the furnishing whereof depends, under God, on the
charitable Contributious of well disposed People; and many worthy Persons of
both Sexes, in and near London, desirous to promote the same, have declared
their Intentions to contribute liberally toward carrying on and supporting
thereof, when a Subscription and Collection for it shall be properly begun.

And for as much as this Undertaking would be greatly encouraged by your Royal
Higness's graciously vouchsaseing to become the first Subscriber and
Contributer thereto and many of His Majesty's good Subjects be induced to give
the more liberally:

May it therefore please your Royal Highness to take the Premises into
Consideration, and graciously condescend to become the first Subscriber and
Contributer to the same.

And your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc. T. C

This Petition, with a Letter, and the Subscription Book, Capt. Coram sent to
Col. John Sbute, Privy Purse to His Royal Highness, with whom he was well
acquainted, who was then about twenty Miles from London, desiring him to lay
them before the Prince of Wales. But his Circumstances would not then admit of
his going to the Prince. The Colonel therefore sent the Letter, Petition, and
Subscription Book, to the Rev. Dr. Ayscough, Clerk of the Closet, and first
Chaplain to his Royal Highness, desiring him to solicit the Prince to become
the first Subscriber.

The Doctor had no sooner laid these Things before his Royal Highness, but he
declared himself ready and free to encourage so good and laudable a Design,
placed his Name at the Head of the Subscription, and gave 20 Guineas for the
Encouragement of the Boarding-School, which was paid to Mr. Corom. Dr. Ayscough
also let him know, that he himself designed to make a Present of a Bible to the
Congregation at Stockridge, which he soon after did; one of the largest Sort,
finely Gilt, bound up in three Vol. large Folio, which now adorns the Pulpit at
Stockbridge, and is made use of for the Benefit of that Congregation, every
Lora's-Day.

While these Things were doing, Capt. Coram though it himself obliged to let Dr.
Aysough know, that this Mr. SERGEANTS Dissenting Minister, and not of the
Church of England. The Doctor replied What if he be a Dissenter? He is a good
Man, and that is every Thing. It is Time those Distinctions should be laid
aside, and not make them where there is none, and the Partition Wall thrown
down; that Christians might love one another: That he loved all good Men alike,
let them be Churchmen or Dissenters.

A noble, generous and catholic Spirit the Doctor herein discovered; and were
all Ministers, of every Denomination, of such an excellent Temper, we should
soon all join Hands to remove the Partition Wall, which has so long divided,
and weakened the Church of Christ; and unite in cultivating and establishing
that Love and Unity the Gospel of Christ so abundantly recommends to us, and
which is both the Strength and Beauty or the Christian Church. The Doctor also
wrote a very kind and obliging Letter to Mr. SERGEANT, which, if it prove as
grateful to the Reader as it was to him, and is to me, I shall think my Time
well spent in transcribing.

Reverend Sir,
I have perused, with great Satisfaction, your Letter to Dr. Colman, concerning
your Proposal of a more effectual Method of converting the Indians, in your
Neighborhood, to Christianity. I likewise had such an Account of your good
Intention and Abilities from Mr. Belcher, Mr. Coram, and some other of your
Friends, that I could not forbear writing to you, both to show my Approbation
of your Design, and to assure you of my encouraging, and assisting it, to the
utmost of my Power. I have recommended it to my Royal Master the Prince of
Wales, who, with his usual Goodness, has contributed toward it; and you may
depend upon my promoting it with all the Zeal that so pious and useful an
Undertaking requires and deserves. Pray God give you Success in it. But
whatever the Event of your Labors may be, you may be sure of the Reward of
them, from that good Being from whom only, dare say, you expect it. Pray God
bless and prosper you, and as many (let them be of whatsoever Denomination) who
love our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity.

I am, good Sir, Your affectionate Brother and humble Servant, Francis Ayscough.
London, May 20. 1746.

Capt. Coram, having succeeded so well with the Prince, in the next Place
applied to the Duke of Cumberland, by the Right Hon. Mr. Points, desiring he
would contribute ten Guineas. The Duke generously replied, 'It would be
Shameful to give so small a Sum to so good a Purpose,' and subscribed Twenty.
The Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Dorset, and the Lord Gewer gave each five
Guineas. And here, so far as I can learn, this well begun Subscription ended,
which every one who reads the foregoing Account will be surpised at, unless I
relate the Occasion of it, otherwise I should have passed it over in Silence.

A certain Gentleman in London, and a Lady of his Acquaintance, (which Lady
Capt. Coram had before appl'd to, to become the first Subscriber) had informed
the Captain, that, when the Subscription was well begun, they would contribute
to that good Design. He therefore now wrote to the Gentleman, acquainted him
with the Success he had met with, sent him a Copy of the above Petition to the
Prince, and informed him, that he designed to wait upon the Lady for her
Subscription. The Gentleman sent back the, Petition to Mr. Coram, and wrote to
him, letting him know, that his Conduct had been such, that neither the Lady,
nor he would have any Thing more to say to him. This Treatment gave the good
Gentleman such a Disgust, that he proceeded no further. And, in a Letter of May
10, he says to Mr. SERGEANT, -- I really believe I should have got ten Times as
much as I have, if I had not been prevented by that unhandsome Usage.

What a Pity is it, that a Subscription to encourage such a pious and noble
Design, that had so good a Lead, and such a fair Prospect of succeeding, should
be put by because of the ill Usage one or two Persons offered to the generous
Promoter of it? Would not one have though it, that seeing that Gentleman and Lady
failed, there was the more Need of applying to others, who had given
Encouragement, that they would smile upon the Affair by their free
Contributions? And is it not more than probable, that the Example of His Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales, of the Duke of Cumberland his Brother, and also
of the noble Persons who had subscribed, would have induced many to free and
liberal Contributions to such an excellent and pious Design?

What Capt. Coram collected, he sent to Mr. Wallis of Boston, by whom it came
to Mr SERGEANT's Hand. He wrote also a very large Letter, dated London, May 10,
in which he informed Mr. SERGEANT of his Proceeding, in all the foregoing
Steps; which Mr. SERGEANT received January 1747; when I find in his Journal
these short Hints, Received Letters from London informing of a Benefaction for
the Indians School; -- went to Boston to take Care of it. -- The Prince of
Wales subscribed 20 Guineas. --

A grateful Sense of Dr. Ayscough's Generasity, Kindness and Condescension,
obliged Mr. SERGEANT to write to him without Delay. The Copy of his Letter
bears Date January 24. 1746, 7. and is as follows.

Reverend Sir,
With great Satisfaction, and much Gratitude, I received your most obliging
Favor of May 20. 1746. assuring me of your approving of my Design, published
in my Letter to Dr. Colman, and of your Readiness to promote it, to the utmost
of your Power. I am extremely obliged to that good Gentleman, Mr. Coram, for
making you acquainted with it, and to you for recommending it to His Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales; and think it my Duty to return you my most hearty
Thanks for this Instance of your Goodness: and am very glad of this Advantage
put into my Hands, to promote a Spirit of Loyalty in the Indians, to His
Majesty, whose Subjects they now readily profess themselves to be; and there is
no Doubt but such Instances of Royal Bounty, well improved, will have a good
Effect, I to attach the Indians to the British Interest.

Your own Gift to our Congregation, I thankfully accept both as an Instance of
jour Goodness, and Piety. As it ever has been, so it will, I trust, still be,
my zealous Endeavor to communicate to this poor People the pure Doctrines of
God, and the Words of eternal Life, as they are contained in the holy
Scriptures; ever praying that they may be made wise to Salvation by them.

I am much obliged to my Friends, that they have recommened me, in so
advantageous a Manner, to Gentlemen of so distinguished and high Stations as
yours; and yet I cannot, without Reluctanc, receive their Compliments, To be
sure, Dr. Colman has spoken too highly of me, and I wish some Things he has
said had been suppressed. Mr. Belcher was ever exceeding kind to me, and highly
deserved of the Indians, having taken great Pains, while he was in the Chair of
this Government, to promote Christianity among them, and to engage them in the
British Interest: And it is a great Pleasure to me, that he has not forgot his
former Kindness. To his pious Zeal to promote this Interest, I attribute his
kind Partiality toward me.

This Design I look upon to be of great importance, and am greatly encouraged
in the Undertaking, in that it has obtained the Approbation and good Influence
of a Gentleman of your Character and Station, which give you so much Advantage
to promote it. I have written largely to Mr. Coram, who will gladly embrace an
Opportunity to communicate to you, what I have written to him.

It is with great Satisfaction I observe the Goodness, the Candor and pious
Disposition of your Mind, which certainly must be approved by that good Being,
who is the Father of the Universe, and the great Savior of the World, who has
given himself a Ransom for all. May his Kingdom be enlarged, and the Fullness of
the Gentiles brought into his holy Church, I have had large Experience of the
Truth of his gracious Promises, and esteem your kind and condescending Notice
of me, is an Instance of the Fulfillment of his Promise to them that deny
themselves for his, and the Gospels Sake, May he graciously consider this
Instance of your Kindness, as an Act of Charity done to himself, when he shall
come to judge the World, bringing his Rewards with him. How happy would it be
for the British Nation, if the Ministers of Religion, of every Denomination,
were endowed with the same Candor and pious Disposition? Then our unhappy party
Distinctions would be soon forgotten. May the same divine Temper, by your happy
Infuence, diffu^e itself among all Orders, promoted by the Example of a Prince
of so many amiable Virtues, as adorn His Royal Highness the Prince or Wales.
Excuse me, Sir, that I hope you will savor me with your future Correfpondence,
which I ihul! eileem a great Honor done to,

Reverend Sir, Your obliged, Humble Servant, JOHN SERGEANT.

To the Rev. Dr. Ayscough, Clerk of the Closet to his Royal Highness the Prince
of Wales, etc.

He also wrote a very large Letter to Capt. Coram, dated Jan. 22. In which he
gives a considerable Account of his Mission the Indians, and of his Succefs in
that Business. It will therefore doubtless be grateful to the Reader to be
entertained with the whole of it.

Sir,
Your most obliging Letter of May 10. 1746, containing an Account of your
generous Endeavors to promote the Design of my public Proposal for the
Indians, I have juit now received together with the Invoice of the Particulars
you have sent to the Care of Mr. Wallis in Boston. By Dr. Colman's Favor, I
was before, in some Measure, acquainted with your Zeal, your generous Concern
and Pains for us; which gave me great Satisfaction, and moved both my Thanks
givings to God and Prayers for you. But your Letter, containing an Account of
your Labors in this Affair, gives me such an Opinion of your Goodness as
exceeds what I could readily have imagined. It is a great Pleasure to me, that
you seem to be moved with so generous a Spirit, and so much above the narrow
and niggardly Conceptions of Bigots; which Temper is as great an Abhorrence to
my Mind as it can be to yours. And I am sure the Pleasure you take, in such
generous Labors for Mankind, must be as much above the little Satisfaction of
Bigots, in promoting their own party Schemes, as the Temper with which you are
actuated is preferable to theirs. And your Reward with God will be in
Proportion to the Excellency of that Charity that moves you, in your generous
Labors for us. Nothing, to be sure, could have been better designed than to
get those great Persons you applied to, to honor the Design with their
Subscriptions: And that it has been favored in our excellent Royal Family, is
by me esteemed an additional Obligation of Duty to endeavor to promote a
Spirit of Loyalty in the Indians, as far as my Influence now, or any Time
hereafter, may reach.

It is now a little more than eleven Years since I was first settled in this
Part of the Country, with a Design to proselite the Indians to the Christian
Faith. Having spent Part of the foregoing Year with them, in two Visits I made
them, I found such Encouragement as induced me to devote myself to this
Service: And have now, with a great deal of Pains, gained such an Acquaintance
with their barbarous Language as to converse with them in it; and with a little
Assistance, in my Study, from an Interpreter, to preach to them, and to read
Prayers, which I have composed for the public Worship, which they attend as
constantly as People generally do in English Assemblies Their Language is
extremely hard to learn, and perhaps I shall never be a thoro' Master of it;
there never having been any European that ever was, except one or two, and they
learned it when they were Children. But the young People among them learn
English well; most of them in this Place understand a great deal of it, and
some speak it freely and correctly. There are many that can read English well,
and some are able to write. When I came into these Parts first they were much
dispersed, four or five Families in a Place, and often moving from Place to
Place. They are now gathered together at this Place, and are much more fixed
than they used to be. Instead of their Bark Hutts, they own seventeen English
Houses, fifteen of which they have built themselves at their own Cost, and some
of them are comfortably furnished with Household Stuff, There were in this Place
but eight or ten Families when I first came, we now reckon near Fifty besides
old People and transient young Persons. The Families indeed are but small, as
is common among the Natives. Near half that are born die in Infancy or
Childhood, which I attribute to their Manner of Living, and want of suitable
Medicines in Time of Sickness. The grown People abundantly die with
Consumptions, begun with violent Colds. The most of the settled Families in our
Neighborhood are gathered to this Place, and the greater Part of them have
received Baptism. Our Number increases from Time to Time by the Addition of new
Families, especially of those who are kindly disposed to Christianity, It is
probable we should have had more of them before now, if there had not come some
Meravian Preachers among some of them near to us. I do not pretend to so much
Acquaintance with that Sort of People, as to pass any positive Judgment about
them; the Converts they have made, are, I think, Enthusiastic and bigoted.
They have rendered themselves so much suspected in the Governments of New York
and Connecticut, that they would not tolerate them within their Bounds. They
refused to take the Oath of Allegiance to King George, or even the Quakers
solemn Declaration. What was the Meaning of this I cannot tell. They drew off a
Number of Indians from these Parts, and some from this Place to Pensylvania. We
have of Indians in regular standing in the Church? 35, 13 Males and 22 Females,
besides five or six under a temporary Suspension from the Communion, some of
which I hope may be recovered to Repentance. Out of our Communion have died
eight or nine, most of whom seem to me to have left the World with a good
Christian Temper, and with a well grounded Hope, besides some other younger
Persons, I could not but hope well of. The Success I have had, through the divine
Blessing, has been though it as great as has attended any late Attempt of this
Kind, and yet I have nothing to boast of; but have Reason to be humbled, that
my Labors have been so much blasted: I am sure nothing affects me with more
Grief than to observe the little Fruit of my Labors. Some of those who have
appeared the most promising Converts, have, to my great Grief, and, some Times,
even to my Astonishment, strangely fallen away, which has almost wholly
discouraged my further Attempts. The Truth is, the Indians are, perhaps, as
fickle and irresolute in their Determinations, as any People in the World: And
when they seem to be wholly recovered from their Vice. easily relapse into
their soolish and wicked national Habits. I speak of the Tribe to which I
Minister, and suppose the same Temper generally prevails among all the American
Indians. Their great national and fundamental Vices are, Idleness and
Drunkenness, which are a great Obstruction to the Propagation of Christianity
among them, with any due and lasting Effect Besides, there is an almost
universal Jealousy spread among the Tribes of Indians, and a Suspicion of the
English. This, I am fore, is in a great Measure the Effect of French Policy and
the Work of their Missionaries.

I cannot think of any Method more likely to conquer these Difficulties, and to
lay the Foundation for the larger Spreading of the Gospel, or attaching the
Indians to the British Interest, than what I have publicly proposed. It it
piease God to give it Effect, it may, in Time, be a Means of a great Deal of
Good: And yet, I dare not promise my self fuddenly any extraordinary Success
from it. I see no Way that will, in human Probability, correct so successfully
their national Habits, as this I have proposed. It is not ealy for those, who
are not acquainted with barbarous Nations to conceive, into what a Degree of
Barbarity they are funk; nor how difficult it is to recover them. A great Deal
has been done for our Indians. To their Honor, this Government has done much;
but yet, so jealous were they at the first, that they could hardly be persuaded
to accept the Kindnesses that were offered them, and some they actually
reiused. We are now got over this Difficulty, which has been a vail Hindrance
to our Design.

Our Situation here is the belt, to lay such a Foundation, of any to be found
in New England. By the Favor of the Government, we have a good Township of
Land, capable of maintaining three Times the Number of Inhabitants that we
have; and, I believe, it might be, in Time, replenished with that Number, by
this Means. And if we could persuade a Number of young People, from the several
remote Tribes, to receive an Education here, they might be a Means of
Propagating Christian Knowledge and Virtue very far among their Tribes: And
there is Ground to hope, we might obtain this, by the Influence of two Eaglish
Missionaries in the Western Parts. I mean Mr. Barclay, a worthy Gentleman, and
my particular Friend, Missionary to the Mohawks, who received his Orders from
the Bishop of London, and is maintained by the Society for Propagating the
Gospel; etc. but as he is Chaplain, at the same Time, in the King's Garrison at
Albany, and obliged to spend halt his Time there, 40 Miles distant from them,
and has no established School Master or Catechist, labors under great
Disadvantages. The other Gentleman, I mear, is Mr. Brainard a zealous and well
disposed young Man, some Account of whom you have in a Pamphlet, which
accompanies this. In a Word, Sir, I think the Design of a School, in the Manner
I have projected, is of very great Importance, not to say absolutely necessary,
in order to the effectual Propagation of the Christian Religion among them; and
unless this People are, beyond all other, under a Curse from Heaven, this would
probably do it: for, except their Complexion, I see nothings in this People,
but that they may be cultivated into as agreeable a People as any other. They
are naturally ingenious and good tempered as other People, and many of the
little Children very pretty and agreeable; and seem to want Nothing but a right
Cultivation to form their Minds and Manners into every laudable. Quality and
Action, human Nature is capable of. If I can be. the Instrument in the Hand of
Providence, to lay such a Foundation as this, it would be a great Satisfaction
to my Mind; and, I hope, Generations to come will have Occasion to remember my
Name with Gratitude.

I am sure, the Design is good; and, it seems to me, as it is necessary as it
is good; for indeed, without this Method of Instruction and Cultivation of
their Children, our Labor seems to be, in great Measure, vain. I cannot but
hope it may be effected, notwithstanding the Discouragements it has hit herto
met with. I believe there might have been some considerable Subscriptions made
in this Country, had not the War prevented. When it shall please God to put an
End to this distressing Calamity, I shall use my utmost Endeavors with the
Assistance of good and well-dispos'd Gentlemen, to put the Matter forward.

I am, etc. JONN SERGEANT.

To Capt. Thomas Coram of London.

These two Letter, from Mr. SERGEANT, I am apprehensive never reached the
Gentlemen to whom they were directed; for, September 24. 1747, Mr. SERGEANT
notes, in his Journal, that, he had then received a Letter from Mr. Wallis of
Boston, informing him that Capt. Coram had received no Letter from him, and was
a little out of Temper upon that Account. And then adds, I immediately laid
aside all other Business and wrote to Dr. Ayscongb and Mr. Coran -- Yea I
suspect, that even this second Letter be now wrote to Dr. Ayscongb, failed by
the Way; for, in a second Letter which the Doctor wrote to Mr. SERGEANT, dated
December 9, 1748, he informs him, that he had received his Letter of July 22,
1748, but makes no Mention of any of an earlier Date. He also says to him, that
he was glad the Congregation of Stockbridge had received the Bible he sent;
which seems to intimate, that the first Information he had of their receiving
of it, was by Mr. SERGEANT's Letter of July 22, 1748; whereas Mr. SERGEANT in
his Letter of January 24, 1746, 7, informed the Doctor of the Receipt of it,
and returned himThanks for it. I have before taken Notice, that as soon as Mr.
Hollis was made acquainted with Mr. SERGEANT's Design of a BoardiugSchool, he
directly ordered twelve more Boys to be taken in upon that Foundation, and
educated wholly at his Cost. But, by Reason of the War, which much affected
them of Stockbridge, his Orders were not put in Execution, and the whole Affair
of the Boarding-School was deferred, till a more favorable Opportunity. Mr.
Hollis, being informed of this, wrote this Year to Dr. Colman, insisting upon
it, that 12 Boys should, without any furtherDelay, be taken and educated at his
Charge: And those Passages of Mr. Hollis's Letter, which related to that
Affair, Dr. Colman transcribed to Mr. SERGEANT. In a Letter of May 7, the
Doctor writes;

Reverend and dear Sir,
Yesterdav I received a Letter from our honored Friend Mr. Hollis, who says;
-- If my Money lie by till the War ends, it may be a long Time indeed. Do yen
see the least Prospect in the World cf it? Would you not wish to see the
Redeemer's Work carried on while you live? I am not willing to have my Money of
three Hundred and fifty Pounds your Currency lying by useless, till the War is
ended. And I do herawith appoint, that there be, as soon as possible, 12 more
Heathen Boys taken on my Account, to be entirely provided for with Lodging and
Maintenance, to be instructed in the Christian Doctrine. And after I know of
this Order's being complied with, I design to make a large Remitance for
further carrying on the Work. -- Thus far Mr. Hollis, from High-Wycomb, Jan.
27. 1746, 7.


The Doctor goes on,

Dear Sir, you will please to communicate this to the honorable Gentlemen, the
Committee, to whom I paid, in your Presence, last Year, Mr. Hollis's three
Hundred and fifty Pounds our Currency, and all the other Moneys in my Hand; and
to advise with them. I am sure, you and they can best tell what can and must be
done. I have wrote myself to Mr. Hollis to Day, wherein I let him know of this
my present writing to you, and I hope you will, as soon as may be, write to Mr.
Hollis, whose good and generous Soul is enough to animate us all. --

Who the Committee were, into whose Hands Dr. Colman paid Mr. Hollis's Money,
and the other Money that was in his Hand, I shall have Occasion to show by and
by.

In another Letter also, he transcribes a Passage from Mr. Hollis, and this
being the last written by Dr. Colman to Mr. SERGEANT, four Days before bis
Death, I shall transcribe so much of it as relates to Mr. SERGEANT, and to the
Affairs of Stockbridge.

Boston, August 25. 1747. Reverend and dear Sir,
With a sick and saint Breast, and a trembling Hand, I now write you (as it
seems to me) my last; but with a reviving Pleasure, on a new Letter Yesterday
received from the Rev. Mr. Hollis, our pious and generous Friend; repeating to
me the same Things which he had before wrote. I request (says be) that the
three Hundred Pounds in your Hands of my Money may be employed in the Education
of twelve new Boys, of Heathen Parents, with all convenient Speed. Yea, I
absolutely insist upon it, and promise herewith to make a Remittance for
further Charge of Education and Maintenance; my Estate being very much
increased; having had a great Deal left me, by a Relative deceased. Please to
inform me, how it has gone with the Lads instructed at my Expense some Time
ago. If some prove naughty, others may come to Good. As for the War with
France, let not that binder the Education of Children at my Expense. I request
it may be done speedily, if there be Indian Parents willing to have their
Children educated. Dr. Colman proceeds, Yesterday in the Evening, our worthy
and good Friend Mr. Wallis of Boston called in upon me, and read me a very good
and most encouraging Letter from his good Uncle Coram of London, respecting his
further Progress at Court respecting, Nova Schola (a new School) in general; --
and also of further Benefits to your Town, and the Support of Religion and
Education at Housatunnuk.

I was rejoiced to see Mr. Wallis; and think Providence has chosen a very good
Hand in him, and that he will naturally, and with Fidelity, minister between
his Uncle and you. I entreated him forthwith to serve you with a Copy of his
Unclen's Letter: and I forward this to him to come therewith.

When I took my Pen in Hand, I feared I should not have been able to write at
all. My Son, the Lord be with thee, and prosper thou when I am dead. May his
holy Pleasure prosper in thy gracious Heart and Hand, which he has sanctified
to serve his gracious Purposes. I intend this Hour, God willing, to write to
Mr. Coram, thank and encourage him, and the Lord reward him; to whom be Glory
forever. -- It seems to be the last from,

Reverend and dear Sir, Your unworthy sinful Brother, Benjamin Colman.


Upon this Letter of the Doctor's, Mr. SERGEANT wrote, My last indeed from this
good Man, whose Soul is gone to rest in the Lord. May I be suffered to add, A
rare Instance indeed of a good Man's dying, as it were with his Pen in his
Hand, laboring to promote the Good of his Country, the Prosperity of his
Friends, and the eternal Salvation of precious; Souls! And who of all his
Brethren, die Sons of New England, has he left behind him, who so tenderly
loves, so ardenrly cares for, and so vigorously endeavors to promote the Good
of his native Country, as Dr. Colman did? But I am steping beside my Line, and
must return. --

If Mr. Wollis sent a Copy of Mr. Coran's Letter to Mr. SERGEANT, as the Doctor
desir's, it is not to be found; therefore what is meant by furtherBenefits to
Stockbridge, and by the Support of Religion and Education at Housatunnak,
spoken of in the Doctor's Letter above, I am not able to say. But by a new
School, I conclude, is included a Female Boardhig-School, which Mr. Coram then,
and since, used Endeavors to promote.

Things relating to the Boarding School, now appearing with a favorable
Aspect, and Mr. Hollis urging very hard, that his twelve Boys might be, without
any further Delay, taken upon that Foundation, Mr. SERGEANT now entertained
serious Tho'ts of prosecuting that Design, in the Manner he had proposed. He
therefore, in the first Place, moved the Indians of Stockbridge, who are the
Proprietors of the undivided Lands in that Township, to give 200 Acres of Land,
to build a School House upon, and to be cultivated by the Children who should
receive their Educaticrr there. The Indians cheerfully complied with the
Motion, and gave 200 Acres of very good Land, about a Mile from the
Meeting House, for that Purpose. The Manner and Time of their giving of it, I
am not acquainted with, but the Facl is well known.

About the Middle of July, Mr. SERGEANT set out on a Journey to Boston, in
order to forward this important Affair. He went by the Way of Northampton,
Halfield and Hadley, that he might confer with those Gentlemen whom he had
nominated, in the Postscript of his Letter to Dr. Colman, of August 1. 1743, to
be a Committee, or Trustees, to receive and disburse the Money which might be
given to promote that good Design, and who had expressed their Willingness to
take that Trouble upon them, viz. the honorable John Stoddard, Eleazer Porter,
Israel Williams and Oliver Partridge, Esqrs; and the Rev. Mr. Edwards. These
are the honorable Gentlemen, the Committee, of whom Dr. Colman speaks, in his
Letter of May 21, above transcribed, to whom the Doctor paid, in Mr. SERGEANT's
Presence, Mr. Hollis's three Hundred and fifty Pounds, and other Moneys which
were in his Hand. By the other Money, I suoppose he means Madam Holden's one
Hundred Pounds, and Dr. Wall's seventy Pounds, which he had received for the
encouraging the Boarding-School,

Those Gentleman Mr. SERGEANT desired would meet at Col. Porter's of Hadley, on
the 20th of July, that he might there confer with them, and take their Advice
and Direction upon the Business before him. Col. Stoddard and Mr. Edwards came
not to the Meeting, and wholly declined having any Thing more to do in that
Affair. The other Gentlemen, Col. Porter, Col. Williams and Col. Partridge met,
before whom Mr. SERGEANT laid open the Affair, with what Clearnesxs he could
proposed to be made a Body Politic to act in that Business, and advised Mr.
SERGEANT to endeavor to accomplish that Matter, and to desire The Assistance
of Mr. Hutchinson, and Mr. Oliver in it. When Mr. SERGEANT came to Boston, he
conferred with those Gentlemen upon the Subject who though it it not best that the
forenamed Gentlemen should be incorporated; but rather that the Matter should
be put into the Hands of the London Corporation, and transacted by their
Commissiones here. The Commissioners themselves were also of the same Mind, and
finally, neither the one nor the other was done, but the whole Care of that
affair (so far as I can learn) devolved on Mr. SERCEANT; who resol'd, with what
Speed he could, to erect a Buiiding for, and to proceed to, the Education of
the Indian Children; more especially those for whose Education Mr. Hollis stood
engaged: and from Boston he wrote to Mr. Hollis, informing him of the Steps he
had taken, and that he designed to proceed in that Affair, as fast as he could.
Of this Letter I find no Copy, but only a Minute in Mr. SERGEANT's Journal,
that he thus wrote to him. September 25, he again wrote to Mr. Hollis, and by
his Answer the Reader may give some Guess what was contained in Mr. SERGEANT's
Letter. Mr. Hollis's Answer is dated from

High Wycomb in Buckinhamshire July 22. 1748. Reverend Sir,
I received some Time since a Letter of yours, dated Sept. 25. I know not the
Cause, why it was so long before it came to Hand. I do not find that my Order,
for the Maintenance, Clothing and Instruction of twelve more Heathen Boys, has
been complied with as yet. If it has not yet been effected, pray let it be done
out of Hand, viz. twelve Boys of Heathen Parents; such as are not Professor of
Christianity, but Children of Heathen Parents. As to my Money, which according
to what Dr. Colman wrote to me, I suppose might amount to 340 or, 350 L.
New England Currency; -- be pleased to let the Gentlemen know, that I am not
willing that it should be laid up as a Fund: I would have it expended in the
Education and Maintenance of the twelve fresh Boys for my Account; and I design
to make a further Remittance for the defreying further Expense. In your next be
pleased to let me know, how much of my Money may Be still remaining. --


Mr. Hollis continuing to urge, that twelve Boys might, out of Hand, be
supported and educated at his Expense, and the War continuing, which forbid its
being done with any Convenience at Stockbridge, Mr. SERGEANT determined to
provide them a suitable Master, and to send them abroad. He therefore went to
Capt. Martin Kellogg, a Gentleman of Newington in Connecticut, with whom he
prevailed to take the twelve Boys for one Year; and to instruct them both in
Learning and in hard Labor. The Indians, when it was proposed to them,
consented that their Children should go. Of this Affair Mr. SERGEANT gives us
these short Hints in his Journal. March 13. 1747, 8. proposed to the Indians to
send their Children with Capt. Kellogg to Newington they consented. April 12.
chose the Boys. May 23. Mr. Hollis's twelve Boys went off to Newington.

Of these Things Mr. SERGEANT (I conclude) gave Mr. Hollis an Account in a
Letter; for in his next and last to Mr. SERGEANT, dated London, October 5, he
says; -- I have a Letter from you, wherein you mentioned concerning the Indian
Boys. Pray let me know if you received of the Gentleman for my Account L. 350,
New England Currency, and in what Manner it may have been disbursed. If
expended let me have Account: -- I have enclosed a Bill of L. 114 New York
Currency; Value L. 60 Sterling. Please to be very particular in yourAnswer to
this. -- Pray let the Gentleman, that has the Care of the Boys, be desired to
pray with them every Morning and every Night, and before and after every Meal,
and that he endeavor to instill into their Minds Principles of Piety and
Godliness --

Feb. 17th. Mr SERGEANT writes; During thy Winter met the Indians once a Week,
to confer with them. -- Communiated Mr: Brainard's Journal to them: Mr.
Woodbridge SchoolMaster at Stockbridge, in a Letter to me, soon after Mr.
SERGEANT's Death, gives a more particular Account of these Meetings in the
following Words -- In the Winter Season, it was his common Practice to meet the
Indians once a Week in the Evening for religious Execises. In these i very
pften accompanied him; and, when sometimes he could not attend, he would desire
me to serve in his Stead. These Exercises seems to have a good Effect, by
begeting in the Minds of the Indians a Seriousness about the Things of
Religion. And in the Summer Season he commonly spent an Hour after public
Service Instruction, Exhortations, and Christian Advice.

This was a very proper and necessary Method to be used with that People, who
mad not the Advantage of increasing in Knowledge by Reading, as others have;
and by those Means a good Degree of Knowledge and Understanding, in the
Principles of Religion, was instil'd into their Minds, by their faithful and
laborious Teacher.

Feb. 21. (be says) The young People meet Lord's Day Evenings for religious
Exercises, Prayer, Singing, etc. This they did of their own Accord. -- This
seems to show, that the Minds of the young People: were impressed with
religious-Sentaments, and that they delighted to draw near to God.

What Sum of Money Mr. SERGEANT had in Hand, or at Command, to enable him co
erect a suitable Building for the Boarding-School, upon the Lands given by
Indians for that End, 1 am not able to say; but he now resolved to use what he
had, for that Purpose, and endeavored to procure more.

He wrote to the Rev. Mr. Andrew Eliot of Boston, desiring him to put forward a
Subscription there. That Gentleman, who was a very hearty Friend to the Cause,
proposed a Method, that was likely to have succeeded, had it been put in
Execution: but there arose so many Objections against the present Execution of
Mr. SERGEANT's Scheme, that Mr. Eliot was discouraged, and nothing was done
them.

He wrote also to the Rev. Mr. Williams of Lebanon upon the same Subject, who
communicated his Letter to the Rev. Mr. Eliot, Minister of second Parish in
that Place, called Goshen: And in a Letter of May 7.. Mr. Williams informed Mr.
SERGEANT, that at Goshen they had gathered by Contribution, on the Day of
general Fasting in Connecticut, about twelve Pounds, and that this
Congregation, on the same Day, contributed to that good Design between thirty
and forty Pounds, which waited his Order. I find by an Account from
Stockbridge, that the exact Sum contributed at Lebanon was forty-nine Pounds
one Shilling. Anout the same Time, if I mistake not, died Mr. Elery of Hartford
in Connecticut, who left by Will, to the Indians of Stockbridge, one Hundred
and twenty Pounds.

Mr. SERGEANT also wrote the following Letter to the Hon. Society for
Propagating Christian Knowledge, in Scotland; desiring Assistance from them.

Stockbridge, in New England, March 18. 1749. Sir,
Some Years are now past, since a Proposal for the more effectual Education of
the Indian Children, and the further Spreading otChristian Knowledge and Piety
among their several Tribes, written in a Letter to the ^^e Reverend and pious
Dr. Colman of Boston, was published, with his Recommendation of theDesign.
Several Copies or the Proposal were dispersed, not only in these Parts, but
also in Great Britain, particularly by the Means of that worthy and excellent
Gentleman, and, if I mistake not, he transmitted some Copies to your honorable
Society.

The Execution of that Design has been much hindered and delayed by the War we
have been engaged in with France. But, as there is now a Prospect of Peace, I
hope that Design may, by the Blessing of God, take Effect. A private Gentleman
in England sets a noble and generous Example, which, if it be followed as it
deserves, wiil, it is to be hoped, soon carry the Design so forward as to
answer some of the great and good Ends proposed. That pious and charitable
Gentleman proposes at his own Cost, to cloth, maintain and educate twelve
Boys. The Design I think so good and so necessary, considering the gross
Ignorance and Barbarity of our Indian Tribes, that I would not be wanting in
any Thing in my Power to forward it. And since your honorable Society has
shown so laudable a Zeal to propagate Christian Knowledge and Piety, among the
poor barbarous Aborigines of America, I though it it proper, humbly, but yet
earnestly, to recommend it to your charitable Notice. If it comes within the
Limits of your Province, I cannot think your Charity can be better bestowed.

The projected School is designed much in the Manner of the Charily Schools in
Ireland, which, we are told, have had wonderful good Effects: and why may not
the same Methods of Education used here, by the Blessing of the same gracious
God, have the like good Effects? By sufficient Experience, I have found, that
more effectual Methods of Education, than what have yet been used, especially
in Respect of Manners and Industry in Business, are highly necessary for this
barbarous uncultivated People.

I would gladly have, in the projected School, all the more useful and
important Parts of Learning that serve in common Life, and that some, at least,
may be fitted there for an Academical Education; and so be qualified to
instruct others; that, in Time, by the Blessing of God, the Kingdom of Chrisl
may spread more successfully far and wide, by their Means, among the remoter
Tribes. One would hope this might be done, and answer, at the same Time, both a
religious and a political View. Certainly, if, from us, Learning and good
Manners could be propagated among them, it would be a Means of engaging them
more firmly in the British Interest: but if, with Learning and good Manners,
true Religion might take Place among them, then they would become the Subjects
of theKing of Heaven, and be joined to theNumber of Christ's Redeemed, which
must needs be the Wish and earnest Desire of every sincere Christian.

The liberal Gentleman, I had Reference to, confines his Charity to Boys, and
these Heathen. I do not blame his Intentio^^ but yet, equal Care, I think,
should be taken of Females; and Christian Children need the Advantage of such
Education as well as Heathen.

I hope this good Design will gain the Aprobation of your hounourable Society,
and that they will be able to contribute toward jot: at least. I doubt not but
they will forgive me the Freedom I have used, in makuing this Application for
that Purpose. the School is already begun, and we have had 12 Boys upon the
projected Plan of Education now almost a Year: An House is in Building for
their Reception, and will be sit for that Purpose, I hope, in a few Months.

May our gracious God direft and succeed your, and all other, pious Endeavors
to enlarge the Kingdom of our glorious Redeemer; which is the earnest Prayer of,

Sir, Your must humble Servant, JOHN SERGEANT.

To the President for the Time of the Hon. Society, etc.

I suppose, either that this Letter sai'd of reaching the Society to which it
was dircted, or that they did not see Cause to do any Thing in Favor of the
Boarding-School; for I find not any Answer to it, nor do I remember ever to
have heard of their doing any Thing to promote it. Seeing that Society desired
a Correspondence with Mr. SERGEANT, and that he would begin it, by giving them
an Account what Progress Religion had made among the Indians at Stockbridge
which he did; and seeing he now wrote to them as above, it is somewhat strange
that he never received a Line from them. The most probable Conjecture I can
make in the Case is, that either his Writings to them, or their Returns, failed
by the Way.

It appears by the foregoing Letter, that Mr. SERGEANT had now erected a
Building for the Boarding School, and that it was like to be fit, in a few
Months, for the Reception of the Scholars. And while he was, with much Pains
and Industry prosecuting that good and pious Design, which was attended with
some Discouragements, his Spirit was refreshed by the Reception of the
following most kind and obliging Letter from the Rev. Dr. Ayscough.

Little-Street, near Liecester Fields, December 9. 1748. Reverend Sir,
I received, last Week, the Favor of yours, dated July 22. 1748. and am glad
to hear that your Congregation are at last in Possession of the Bible; pray God
bless it to them, and, under the Direction of so faithful and pious an
Expositor, make it the Means of Grace and of Salvation to them. I still
continue my ardent Wishes for the Success of the truly Christian and apostolic
Design you are engaged in; and I think the Method you are in, for the educating
young Indians, in the Knowledge of the Truth, the most effectual one that can
be taken. Pray God give you Success. But whether that follows or not, your
Endeavors for it cannot fail of a Reward. I often think of your Pains and of
your Merit, and I look upon myself as Nothing in Comparison of you, who have
devoted yourself to a most hazardous and laborious Life, in Order to introduce
the Knowledge of the Gospel among the Heathen Nations. I must not only consider
you as a good Christian, but also as a useful and good Subject, since every
Convert you make must be looked upon as a new Subject brought over to the
British Interest. And truly, the infinite Pains that are taken by the French
(who seldom come behind us in civil Policy) to make Papists of the Indians,
should teach us to use some Endeavors to make Protestants of them. With this
Sense of your Merit, and the Usefulness and Piety of your Undertaking, you may
be sure I think myself bound to do my utmost to promote it. I wish therefore,
in your next, you would give me a full and particular Account of the Scheme you
are pursuing. That you would let me know, the Situation and Condition of the
Place where you are settled, and of the Country round it; what Progress you
have made; what Number, and of what Sort of Persons, your Congregation
consists; and the State of the School lately set up for the Indian Children;
and whether you have any Salary, or certain Appointment for your Labors or
not. When I am supplied with these Materials, you may depend on my soliciting
in the strongest Manner, and doing the utmost in my Power, to encourage and
support so pious an Undertaking. I recommend you to the divine Providence. I
desire your Prayers for me and all belonging to me; and be assured, Sir, it is
with the highest Satisfaction and Sincerity that I subscribe myself,

Your affectionate Brother, and humble Servant, Francis Ayscough.


Mr. SERGEANT received this Letter but a little While before his Death, and, if
I mistake not, I have been informed, that he had not Opportunity to return an
Answer to it. For the Satisfaction therefore of those into whose Hands this
History may fall, and who want to be informed in the Things after which Dr.
Ayscough enquires; and for the Satisfaction of the Doctor himself, if it should
ever reach him, I shall briefly touch upon what has not been sufficiently
illustrated in the foregoing Account.

As for the Scheme which Mr. SERGEANT was pursuing; -- some Account was given
of it in his Letter of August 1. 1743, to Dr. Colman, to which it may not be
amiss here to add; that his Design was, that the Indian Boys, under the Care of
a faithful Master, who should labor with and inspect them, should subdue and
cultivate the 200 Acres of Land upon which they live; that they should raise
upon it all Sorts of Provisions; that they should keep upon the Farm a Stock of
Cattle, Sheep, Hogs, etc. that the Girls should be employed in Manufacturing
the Wool, Flax, Milk, etc. that should be raised upon it: They also, being
under the Care of a faithful Mistress, who should instruct them in all Sorts of
Business suitable to their Sex. By this Means, they might, after some Time, in
great Measure, if not wholly, support themselves; be formed to Industry; be
acquainted with the English Language and Manners; and be fit, at about 20 Years
of Age, to set up upon Farms of their own. By taking the Indian Children when
young, and bringing them up in the Way of Industry (as well as Learning) Mr.
SERGEANT designed to cure them of Idleness, which they are much addicted to,
and which is a Seed Plot of all Manner of Vice among the Indians.

As to the Situation of the Place where Mr. SERGEANT settled; -- I observed
before, that Housatunnuk is in the S. W. Corner of the Massachusetts Province,
butting upon Connecticut Colony South, and upon New York Government West. For
though by Charter the Massachusetts Province extends West to the South Sea, and
must therefore Butt upon the Gulf of California near the North Part of it, yet
the Dutch being previously settled upon Hudson's River, cut this Province in
two, and at present we inhabit no further West than to the Dutch Settlements.
Stockbridge lies at the North End of what goes by the Name of Housatunnuk,
about 16 or 18 Miles North of Connecticut Line, upon a Stream which goes by the
Name of Housatunnuk River, and empties itself into the Sea, between Milford and
Stratford in Connecticut Colony. This River, though it be Navigable for 8 or 10
Miles from the Mouth of it, and extends itself cross the Colony of Connecticut,
and almost cross the Province of the Massachusetts, more than 120 Miles into
Land, yet is not laid down in any of the Maps, which I have seen of this
Country.

The Place of this River at Stockbridge is about 40 or 45 Miles West of
Connecticut River, and about 25 or 30 Miles East of Hudson's River. It Is Course
at Housatunnuk is from North to South, and after it enters Connecticut Colony
it bears considerably to the East of South, till it falls into the Ocean at
Stratford.

Northampton, upon Connecticut River, is in, or near, the same Parallel of
Latitude with Stockbridge, and Mr. Neal in his History of New England has, in
his Map, laid down Connecticut and Hudson's Rivers, which in the Latitude of
Northampton and Stockbridge are about 70 or 80 Miles asunder. Any one
therefore, by looking into Mr. Neal's Map, and drawing a West Line from
Northampton, of 40, or 45 Miles extent, may easily fix the Place of Stockbridge.

As for the Condition of the Place; -- the foregoing History, with what may be
further said, will perhaps be though it sufficient. -- And as for the Condition of
the Country round it; -- South, upon Housatunnuk River, it has lately been
purchased of the Indians, and is settled by Inhabitants of this Province. The
Name of the Town is Sheffield; it is divided into two Parishes, in each of
which there is a Minister settled. East of Stockbridge there is a Wilderness of
about 40 Miles extent, which reaches to the English Settlements upon
Connecticut River; it is Mountainous, and loaded with immense Quantities of
Timber, of almost all Sorts. In Stockbridge Bounds, and, in the adjacent
Wilderness, is found Plenty of that famous East India Root, Gin Sang. In the
Summer 1751, it was first found.
West is a Wood of about 20 Miles extent, reaching to the Dutch Settlements in
New York Government. And North lies that great and terrible Wilderness, of
several Hundred Miles extent, which reaches to Canada.

What Progress Mr. SERGEANT made, may, I hope, in some good Measure, be judged
of, by the whole Account I have here given. And with Respect to the Number of
Mr. SERGEANT's Congregation, and of what Sort of Persons it consists; -- Mr.
Woodbridge, a little after Mr. SERGEANT's Death, wrote to me, that there were
53 Indian Families in the Town, that they owned 20 Houses built after the
English Mode, and that the whole Number of Indians living at Stockbridge was
then 218; of which 129 have been baptized. Of these 42 were Communicants, 18
Males and 24 Females. The whole Number of Indians baptized by Mr. SERGEANT,
both living and dead, was 182. The Number of Scholars belonging to Mr.
Woodbridge's School was 55, about 40 is the Number which attend the School at
once. There are also about 12 or 13 English Families dwelling there.

As for the School lately set up for the Indian Children, (by which Dr.
Ayscough intends the Boarding-School, and not that under the Care of Mr.
Woodbridge) I have before given an Account of Mr. SERGEANT's taking 12 Indian
Boys upon that Foundation, and at Mr. Hollis's Cost, and committing them to the
Care of Capt. Kellogg of Newington, for a Year. Those Boys made Progress in
Reading and Writing beyond the Captain's Expectation, and in the general
behaved well. Some Time in the Winter Mr. SERGEANT wrote to Capt. Kellogg,
desiring him to come up to Stockbridge with them in April, theCaptain did so;
and upon examining the Boys Mr. SERGEANT was well pleased with the Progress
they had made in their Learning. Mr. SERGEANT now urged Mr. Kellogg to take the
Care of the Boys one Year at Stockbridge, to which he contented: And after
instructing them a While in a private House, he went with them into the
Boarding-School, which was now prepared for their Reception, though far short or
being finished. The Dimentions of this Boarding-School, which Mr. SERGEANT had
erected, are, 38 Feet long, 36 wide: It has three Fire Rooms on one Floor, and
two convenient Rooms besides, with a large Cellar under it. Of these Things
Capt. Kellogg gave me an Account, in a Letter, foon after Mr. SERGEANT's Death:
And this, so far as I understand it, was the State of that School when he died.
His Design was, this Summer, if his Life had been spared, to have gone with
Capt. Kellogg, (who in his Youth was twice taken Captive by the Indians of
Canada, and therefore had some Acquaintance with the Mobawk Language and
Customs) into the Mohawk Country, or to the Six-Nations as they are called, to
invite them to send their Children, to receive an Education in the Boarding
School; and to have opened the Doors of it to the Children of any of the Tribes
of Indians, who would fend them there to be educated.

The last Thing that Dr. Ayscough defir'd to be informed of is, Whether Mr.
SERGEANT had any Salary or certain Appointment for his Labors or not? Before
Mr. SERGEANT's Ordination he received from the Commissioners at the Rate of L.
100 a Year our Currency. At his Ordination they fixed his Salary at L. 150,
when L. 1 7s. 6d. of our Paper Currency was equal to an Ounce of Silver. They
continued ic at L. 150 for the Space of fix Years (as Mr. Woodbridge informs
me) during which Time our Paper Currency was near the same in Value, it having
depreciated no more than from L. 1 7s. 6d. to L. 1. 9s. an Ounce: But
continuing still to fink in its Value, the Commssioners allowed him L. 200, aad
then L. 250, and so it continued till the last Year of his Life, when they gave
him L. 300; L. 2 17s. 9d. of our Paper Currency then, not being more valuable
than an Ounce of Silver.

If by those Additions, the sinking of Money was made good (as I am sensible he
though it it was not; and his Salary was equal in Value, to what it was at his
first Settlement, Silver being the Standard: Yet, it it be considered with
Relation to the Necessries of Life, for which it was expended, his Salary was
not half so good the last Year as it was the first: for Wheat, when he settled
at Stockbridge was to be had for eight Sbillings a Bushel, and other Provisions
in Proportion; but when his Salary was L. 300, it was not to be had under
forty, or forty-five Sbillings a Bushel, and other Provisions were
proportionally dear. The Sum itself confidered, every one must be senfible that
his Salary was small, for it was but equal to L. 36 7s. 3d. our present Lawful
Money, at 6s. 8d. the Ounce: and no more than L27 6s. 2d. Sterling. And can it
be though it, that he could support himself and Family with that Sum, especially
seeing all the Necessaries of Life were then, and are still, very dear in that
remote Part of the Country. Had it not been for the Helps he received from Dr.
Colman's Hand, and from other generous and well disposed Persons, he could not
have subsisited at Stockbridge so long a Time: And after all the Helps he had,
he was, while he lived, involved in many Difficulties, by Reason of the
Scantiness of his Support; and when he died, he left his Estate involved in a
Debt of between 7 and L. 800 New England Currency, even though he had sold some
of it before to answer his necessary Expenses. A Friend of his, who was well
acquainted with his Circumstances, in a Letter to me, written since his Death,
uses the following Expressions. -- I should have mentioned to you the pressing
Want Mr. SERGEANT has often been in, for want of a sufficient Support in his
laborious Work. Had not a good Providence, in asurprising Manner, provided and
sent some Assistance to him, it is not at all probable he would have left any
Thing that could have been a Benefit to his Family. And had it not been for his
singular Prudence, and those Helps, he must have sold most of what the
Government gave him His Right of Land in Stockbridge.
long ago.

Thus I have endeavored to answer the Rev. Dr. Ayscough's Enquiries, which had
Mr. SERGEANT lived to have done, he doubtless would have performed in a much
better Manner, and more to the Satisfaction of those who want to be informed.

It would be a faulty Omission, should I neglect to say, that when his
Excellency Governor Beicher came into his Government of New Jersey, Mr.
SERGEANT wrote to him, congratulated him on that Occasion, expressed his Joy and
Satisfaction that he was appointed Governor of his native Country, and
returned him his most hearty Thanks for the favorable Mention his Excellency
had made of him in England, particularly to Dr. Ayscough, and Mr. Coram. The
Governor, yet retaining his former Kindness and Friendship tor Mr. SERGEANT,
wrote, in a most kind and obliging Manner, to him; assuring him of his
Readiness to serve him, in what lay in his Power, and recommending to him the
keeping up a careful and dutiful Correspondence with Dr. Ayscough and Mr.
Coram, Gentlemen who were both willing and able to assist him, in his laudable
and pious Undertaking.

The very great Regard Dr. Ayscough had for, and his Generosity to, Mr.
SERGEANT, I know not how better express, than in the Doctor's own Words; as
they are contained in a Passage of a Letter which he wrote to his Excellency
Governor Belcher, dated December 9. 1748. where speaking of Mr. SERGEANT he
says, -- I most highly honor, and regard, that worthy Minister of the Gospel
of Christ, and am proud to call him Brother. How much greater is his Merit, and
how much greater will be his future Reward, than that of many of the most
dignified and distinguished among us? You may be assured of my heartiest
Endeavors to promote the good Design he is engaged in. -- I am in great Hopes
of being able to procure some Pension to be settled on him, that he may have
some little Reward for his indefatigable Labors, even in this Life. In the
mean Time, I should be glad to have the Sum of twenty Pounds advanced to Him;
but I am ignorant of the Means of doing it, I can only say, that if you or he
will draw upon me for that Sum, I shall think myself bound to honor your Bill
at Sight. A Bill was accordingly drawn, and the Doctor sent over twenty Pounds
Sterling to Governor Beicher, who, in a Letter of May 16, 1749, (about two
Months before Mr. SERGEANT's Death) informed him of the handsome Remittance the
Rev. Dr. Ayscough had made him; and tells him, that he would pay the Money to
his Order: Which was accordingly done: Either just before or a little after Mr.
SERGEANT's Death.

I have here been the more exact, and have quoted Dr. Ayscough's own Words,
that I might effectually remove a Mistake that some have gone into, who have
though it and said that the twenty Pounds was misapplied; that Dr. Aysscough
designed it for the Boarding-School, and not for Mr. SERGEANT's own Use. Madam
Sergeant, to satisfy others, I suppose, rather than herself (for the Case was
doubtless plain to her) desired Governor Belcher's Sentiments upon that Head,
which he gave her in the following Words,

Madam,
I have deliberately considered the Affair you have laid before me, and this
Day have had Recourse to the Rev. Dr. Ayscough's Letter of the 9th of Dec.
1748, and am of Opinion, that, by the Tenor of it, the twenty Pounds Sterling
I paid him (i. e. Mr. SERGEANT) by the said Doctor's Order, was a Bounty
entirely to himself, for an Addition to his Comfort and Support, as an
Evangelist to the Indians, on Housatunnuk-River.

Given under my Hand at Elisabeth-Town, in East New Jersey, June 29th 1752. J.
Belcher.


While Mr. SERGEANT was carefully and faithfully proceeding in his Ministerial
Labors, and with much Pains, Industry and Application, prosecuting that
excellent, laudable and pious Design of the Boarding-School, (Burdens perhaps
too heavy for his Constitution) purposing also in a little Time to go into the
Mohawk Country to invite their Children to it, he was taken ill of a Slow or
Nervous Fever, attended with Canker, which in a few Weeks, put an End to his
precious Life, (on July 27. 1749, in the 39th Year of his Age) and to all his
generous, pious and noble Tho'ts in Favor of the poor Natives, to some of whom
he was, during his Ministry, a great and rich Blessing, an Instrument in the
Hand of Christ of turning them from Darkness to Light and from the Power of
Satan to God.

To draw Mr. SERGEANT's Character, I am sensible, is a Work to which I am not
equal: but seeing it has not been attempted by any one heretofore, I shall
endeavor to give the justest Representation of him I can, by those Helps I am
furnished with.

The CHARACTER, etc. Of the Reverend Mr. John Sergeant.
THE Reverend Mr. JOHN SERGEANT was born at Newark, in New Jersey, in the Year
1710. His Father died when he was but a Child, after which his Mother was again
married to Col. John Cooper, a Gentleman, who not only proved a tender Husband
to her, but also a kind and generous Father to her Children; having none oF his
own. Mr. SERGEANT, to his Childhood received a Wound by a Sithe in the Ball of
his left Hand, near the Joint of his Wrist, which so affected the Sinews and
Nerves, that his Hand, perished to that Degree, that it was much less than the
other, and in great Measure useless. This Accident was the Occasion of his
leaving off the secular Business he was designed for, and of his betaking
himself to Learning; in which, being a Person of a bright Genius, he made great
Progress: Whereupon his Father in Law, Col. Cooper, resolved to give him a
liberal Education. He entered Yale-College, at New Haven, in the Golany of
Connecticut, September 1725, where the Comeliness of his Person, the Sweetness
of his Temper, the Docency of his Behavior, the Agreableness of his
Conversation, the Diligence with which he applied himself to and the Progress
he made in, his Studies, gained him the Esteem, not only of his Companions, but
also of the Governors of the College. He proceeded Bachelor of Arts, September
1729, and commenced Master 1732, before which he was elected Tutor of the
College, in which he had his Education. In that Post he continued four Years,
to the Satisfaction of those who reposed in him that Trust, and to the
Advantage of those whi were under his Instruction.

By this Time, he was determined for the Work of the Ministry; and though he was
well pleased with the Business he was now in, and stood as fair as any Man
whatever, for a Call and Settlement in any, even the best Parish, that might
become vacant; yet he preferred a Mission to the Heathen: not from any Views he
could have of Worldly Advantage from thence, but from a pious, generous and
ardent Desire of being an Instrument in the Hand of God of Good to the Indians,
who were funk below the Dignity of human Nature, and even to the lowest Degrees
of Ignorance and Barbarity.

There was something very uncommon, and which seems to have been from above, in
the Disposision and Inclination there was in him to this self-denying Service:
For before there was any Prospect of his being employed among the Natives, his
tender Mind was so affected with tHe Thot's of their perishing State, that it
had been his Practice, for a long Time, to make it Daily an Article in his
secret Addresses to God, that he would send him to the Heathen, and make him an
Instrument in turning them from Darkness to Light etc. God granted him that
which he requested; for which he returned his grateful Acknowledgements to him
who beneath Prayer. And of these Things he informed Mr. Woodbridge, his Fellow
Labourer, at his first going to Housalunnuk; but strictly enjoined him to keep
them secret, which he according did till since Mr. SERGEANT's Death.

He was Person to whom Nature proved lavish of her best Gifts; or, in Words
more agreeable to the Christian Scheme, God graciously bestowed upon him
excellent Endowments, both of Body and Mind. In Stature ha was small; yet, of a
very exact and comely Proportion, except his Hand before mention; his Hair
dark; his Eyes black and lively: He was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful
Countenance, and goodly to look to. 1. Sam. xvi. xii.
He was favout'd with a firm, healthy and good Constitution, and therefore
pass's, with the greater Ease, through the many Difficulties and Hardships that
attended him in the Course of his Mission. He was of a most sweet, kind and
benevolent natural Temper; without the least Constitutional Turn toward
Gloomness, Melancholy, of Jealousy? His Conversation open, free, courteous,
pleasant and very attractive; so that all, who had the Happiness to enjoy it,
were pleased and delighted by it. The Powers of his Mind were bright and
strong; whence he was able to use close Application, and with Ease made great
Progrese in Learning: Few of his Years exceeded him.

His natural Accomplishments were polished, enlarged, and improved by a liberal
Education; and rendered him desirable and amiable to all, and very useful in
his Day.

True and undissembled Piety gave Luster and Beauty to all his other
Endowments, both natural and acquired; and prepared him to be eminently
serviceable in the Station God affign'd him. In his tender Years he was of a
very innocent Turn of Mind, and of a blameless Behavior; free from those
Vanities and Vices which young People too often indulge to, and careful to
follow the Ways of Virtue: Which might have inclined one to think, that he was
the Subject of the Grace of God from the Womb. But, in his riper Years, while
he was at College, he was under those Influences from above, which he
apprehended wrought a saving Change in him, and formed him to the divine Life.
And what better Evidence could he have, that he was not mistaken, than what was
consequent upon this Change, viz. a Temper and Conversation becoming the Gospel
of Christ, adorning the Christian Profession he then made? Of this Change,
wrought by the Spirit of God upon his Heart, he very modestly and privately
spoke to some of his intimate Friends, from whom I have my Information: But I
find not that he left one Word in all his Writings, respecting his religious
Experience, Devotion, etc. except one Passage in a Letter he wrote to a Friend,
by whom he seems to have been compelled to boast himself a little, as the
Apostle of the Gentiles was before him. The Passage is this -- With Respect to
my own Christian Experience, I believe, I could give you that Account which
would satisfy you, in your own Way of thinking; though it is now so long since I
passed through that Scene of Conviction, Humiliation, and, what I supposed was
Conversion, that a great many Particulars are now escaped from my Memory. --
Some, perhaps, may blame Mr. SERGEANT, that he did not commit to Writing those
Things which past over him at uch a Season, that he might have reviewed them
for his own Comfort, and left them behind him for the Benefit of others. It was
owing to his very great Modesty and Humility, and to his Care not to do any
Thing, that might be thought to savor of Oftentation in Religion (which is a
Thing very hurtful to its Interest) that he kept those Things to himself. And
whether he did not, by that Modesty, Humility and Guard against Oftentation,
give a clearer Evidence of the Truth of Religion in himself, and discover a
greater Concern for the Honor and Interest of Religion in general, than he
could have done, by Writing his own Life, publishing his own Experiences, and
proclaiming his own Goodness, I leave others to determine? His Life also so
abounded in the Fruits of Righteousness, and was so conformed to the Gospel of
Christ, that we have abundant Reason to conclude the Tree was goody, because
the Fruit was so.

He was very constant and frequent in the Devotions of the Closet, p^^ring out
his Soul to God in servent Addresses of Prayer, Praise, etc; which he found to
be not in vain: for, as he himself though it, God graciously granted him frequent
Answers of Prayer.

He was a devout Worshiper of God in his Family, failed not of Morning and
Evening Devotions; on which Occasions he read, with great Seriousness and
Solemnity of Spirit, a Portion of the holy Scriptures, generally making useful
Observations for the Benefit of his Family. He always read the New Testament
out of the-original Greek, with which he was well acquainted. With great
Solemnity and Reverence he approached the Throne of Grace, and offered his
devout Addresses to God, in the Name of Jesus Christ, the Mediator; through whose
Merits, and Mediation only, he hoped for, and expected, the Acceptance of his
Prayers, and of his Person. There were Instances of his Voice failing, and of
his being obliged to make a Pause in Family Prayer; the Occasion of which was,
a lively Sense and overbearing Apprehension of the glorious Perfections and
incomprehensible Excellencies of the divine Being, as he informed one who
inquired into the Reason of those Interruptions.

He loved the House of God and his public Worship, greatly rejoiced at the
Return of holy Sabbaths, enjoyed much Communion with God in his House, but in
no Part of divine Worship so much as in the Communion of the Supper: in which
he had such evident Communications of divine Love, such Assurance of the
complete Satisfaction of Christ, of the Sufficiency of his Atonement, and of
the Prevalency of his Intercession at the right Hand of God, as almost
transported him, These Emotions were what attended him in his younger Years,
and were not very frequent: But as he advanced in Years, and in Grace, he
preferred the Satisfaction which proceeds from the calm, rational Exercise of
practical Piety and Devotion, to those Emotions of the Mind. These Things he
never openly spoke of, nor would they ever have been known, had not his most
intimate Friends, to whom he privately spoke of them, made them known, after
his Death. Thus he walked with God in devout Exercises of a public, private,
and secret Nature, and enjoyed much Delight and Satisfaction in so doing.

He was of a most tender Conscience; endeavored to keep at the greatest
Distance from every Thing that savored of Impiety, that cast Contempt upon the
Authority of God, or that brought Reproach upon Religion; and used his best
Endeavors to keep a Conscience void of Offense, toward God and toward Men.

He had a very great Love to, and the highest Veneration for, the sacred
Oracles of God; esteemed them infinitely preferable to the Treasures of the
World, and incomparably more valuable than the best human Composures: and the
Study of them was his great Delight. He viewed, with Astonishment and Surprise,
the glorious Methods of divine Love and Grace in the Salvation of Sinners by
Jesus Christ, as discovered in the BIBLE, that pure Source of Light. And while
he formed his own Sentiments by the pure Oracles of God, and followed the Way
of Truth, according to the best Judgment he could make, he was of a most
benevolent and charitable Spirit toward those who differed from him. He loved
Christians of all Denominations, who gave Evidence of their Love to Christ,
much lamented the Distance, Alienation, and Bitterness that appear among
Christians of different Sentiments in lesser Matters, and longed to see them
united in Love and Peace.

His Catholic Temper recommended him to the Esteem of many; to Governor
Belcher's in particular; who, in a Consolatory Letter, written to Mrs. Sergeant
alter his Death, has this Passage.

Mr. SERGEANT being now made free among the Dead, it can be no Flattery to say,
he was a Gentleman of uncommon Piety and Learning, and of great Generosity and
true Compassion to the Souls and Bodies of Men: and more especially to that
poor benighted People, God had committed to his Care; and who before were
perishing for lack of Knowledge. God had, to a peculiar Manner, adapted and
adorned Mr. SERGEANT with many suitable Graces for moving in so difficult a
Sphere in the Church of God here, and for advancing the Kingdom andInterest of
the Redeemer. His many social Virtues, and particularly his Catbolick Way of
Thinking for the better promoting of Christianity, justly and highly merited my
Esteem, and I had great Pleasure in his Acquaintance from first to last

He was full of benevolent, kind and generous Sentiments toward all Mankind,
which disposed him to do Good to all as he had Opportunity. He was a Friend to
every Body, wished well to all, and loved to think the best of all Persons, and
of all Parties of Men. His noble and generous Mind disdained a low, mean,
unworthy Action; and he always treated others, of all Conditions, wjtb great
Propriety. Strict and exact Justice he made his Rule, an his Dealings with all
Persons: yet rather than Cause Contention, by insisting upon his own Right, he
choose to foregoe it. He was compassionate and tenderhearted to the Afflicted;
was liberal and bountiful to tne Poor: and devised liberal Things, both for
their temporal and eternal Good. He suffered not an hard, envious or
ill-natured Word to proceed out of his Mouth; nor did he treat any one, whether
present or absent, with Insolence or Contempt. He was careful to speak Evil of
no Man: And when he was injuriously treated,, and, as he feared,', maliciously
aspersed, by others, it did not raise in him Heat, and Resentment, but rather
Pity and Compassion to those who us!d him ill. He often said, he could freely
forgive, as he expected to be forgiven of God; could heartily, pray for those
who had been abusive and injurious to him: aod he earnestly recommended to
others the Duty of praying for Enemies, as an happy Expedient to promote a
Spirit of Love, Kindngss and Forgiveness toward them.

He had a most happy Command of his Passions, and maintained a constant
Calmaness and Sweetness of Temper: Was never melacholy; yet always fetious:
Never filled with Mirth; yet always cheerful bright and active: And seemed
always have the quiet Possession of himfesf.

I know not to whom the Character of Nathaniel may, with more Justice, be
applied than to him. Behold an Israelite indeed in whom is no Guile. He was
very distant from a crasty, designing guileful Spirit; and admired by those who
were mod acquainted with him, on the Account of his fingular Integrity,
Sincerity and Uprightness.

He carefully and industriously improved his Time, and could not (as he was
wont to say) look back upon an Hour lost, without Uneasiness and Guilt. It was
his Manner to rise early, and, as soon as the Devotions of the Morning were
over, he applied himself to Study; in which, being favored with a firm
Constitution, he was able to bear great Intenseness and Application. The Time
he found needful for the relaxing of his Mind, and for bodily Exercise,(both
which were necessary to him) he spent in a Manner which might best conduce to
his own Health; the Benefit of his Family; or the Service of those who were
under his Care: wisely and prudently endeavoring, that the Hours in which he
refreshed his laboring Mind might be employed to some good and laudable
Purpose: gathering up the Fragments of his Time, that none of it might be lost.
He was indeed an uncommon Instance of Labor and Industry; and by close
Application he brought to pass a great Deal in a little Time; as all would be
ready to grant, could they be made sensible how much he did in the few Years he
spent with the Indians; which I shall endeavor to show, though it will be but in
a faint and imperfect Manner, in the following Particulars.

1. He soon became sensible, that the Method he was at first obliged to use of
instructing the Indians by an Interpreter, would not answer his End; for it was
not only a very slow, but also a very uncertain, Way of communicating to them
Things of the greatest Importance. He himself was not able to know what was
delivered to them by the Interpreter, and had Reason to fear that the Truths,
which he endeavored to communicate, were not well conveyed to their Minds: for
the best Interpreters that could then be had, did not well understand the
Principles of Religion, nor the English Terms in which Mr. SERGEANT delivered
them. He therefore though it it absolutely necessary, that he should learn the
Indian Language, that he might be more certain what was delivered to them, and
make better Progress in teaching of them. He therefore entered upon the new and
difficult Study of their Tongue, and prosecuted it with utmost Application. He
found it, upon Trial, extremely difficult to learn, being entirely different
from any Language he was acquainted with; and often expressed his Fears, that
he should never be able to make himself Master of it. He also though it it a more
difficult Task than it would have been to gain the Knowledge of all the learned
Languages taught in the Schools. However, in something less than three Years,
he gained so much Knowledge in it, as to be able to pray with the Indians in
their own Tongue, and to preach to them in the same, by the Assistance of an
Interpreter; who aided him in the Translation of his Sermons. And, in about two
Years more, by constant Use, he obtained an exact Pronunciation of their
Tongue, though very hard to gain: so that the Indians were wont to say, Our
Minister speaks our Language better than we ourselves came do. When Mr. SERGEANT
had, by a vast Deal of Labor, made himself Master of this strange Language, he
found it to be a dry, barren and imperfect Dialect, and by no Means sufficient
to convey to h^^ Hearers the Knowledge of divine Things: for the Indians ^eing
utter Strangers to Religion, their Language wanted Terms ^xpressi^e of diverse
Things; he was obliged therefore to supply that Defect by introducing English
Words, such as Jesus, Christ etc. which, in Time, by frequent Use, the Indians
well understood. By this Help he so perfected their defective Language, as to
reader it tolerably sufficient for his Purpose.

2. His Ministerial Labors were extremely hard, more than double to those of
other Ministers, in ordinary Cases. He was obliged to compose four Sermons
every Week two for the English, and two for the Indians; his Congregation
consisting of both. Those he prepared for the Indians, he first wrote at large
in English, and then translated them into the Indian Tongue, as he also did a
Portion of Scripture to be read to the Indians on the Sabbath; and
notwithstanding he had so many Sermons to make, they wot well studiedc
excellent Disourses showing that he was a Workman that needed not to be ashamed.

He had a most laborious. Task to perform every Lord's Day. His Manner was to
begin the public Exercise in the Morning, with a short pathetic Prayer for a
Blessing on the Word, in both Languages, Then he read a Portion of Scripture,
with explanatory Notes and Observations, on such Passages as seemed most to
need them, in both. All his public Prayers and the Communion Service were in
both Languages; and it was his steady Practice to preach four Sermons every
Lord's Day' two to the English and two to the Indians; except in the short Days
and cold Season of the Winter he preached but three, one to the English and two
to the Indians. And besides all this, it was his constant Custom, in the Summer
Season, to spend about an Hour with the Indians, after divine Service was over
in the Afternoon; instructing, exhorting, warning and cautioning of them in a
free, familiar and pathetic Manner, in their own Tongue. The Indian Language
abounding in Gutturals renders the Pronunciation of it a most laborious
Exercise to the Lungs: that therefore, with his other sxercises, so exhausted
Mr. SERGEANT's Spirits and Strength, that he was scarcely able to speak when
they were over.

3. The Translation, which, with much Care and Exactness, Mr' SERGEANT made in
His Course of Reading the Scriptures to the Indians, singly considered, cost
him a vast Deal of Labor; for, endeavoring to lead them into the Knowledge of
the Way of Salvation by Christ, to which they were utter Strangers, He, in his
Course of reading the Scriptures to them, translated those Parts of the old
Testament, which appeared most needful for that End, viz. The Account of the
Creation, of the Fall of our first Parents, of God's calling Abraham, of his
Dealings with the Patriarchs and the Children of Israel, of the Prophesies
concerning the Coming of Christ, etc. the four Evangelists, the Acts of the
Apostles and all the Epistles, he also translated. A Performance which must of
Necessity cost him much Time and Pains.

4. In his public Discourses likewise to the English of his Auditory, he went
through all the Epistles, with a labored and learned Paraphrase, critical Notes,
and useful Observations: not by the Help of Expositors, but by a careful
Examination of the Original Greek, endeavoring from thence to gain the true
Sense and Meaning of the, Authors df those Epistles. Mr. Woodbridge has given
me some of his Sentiments upon Mr. SERGEANT's public Performances in the
following Words. I think it a great Pity (says he) that such learned and
well-composed Discourses should be of no further Influence and Benefit than
they are like to prove, by being delivered to a few People from the Desk. There
are a Number of his Sermons very worthy of the Press, a Collection of which
would, perhaps, be as profitable as any Discourses of such a Nature that are
extant: they being correct, and written in a decent, yet familiar Style. There
appears in them not only his unshaken Belief of the Truths of the Gospel, but
also his good Judgment and Talent of conveying to others, the Importance and
Beauty of Religion, They show him to be an accurate Reasoner, by the
Conclusions drawn from the Propositions of his Sermons, and the Force there is
in them to convince every Hearer, of the Truth. His labored and learned
Paraphrases, and critical Notes on the Epistles, would (I think) serve equal
to, if not beyond any Thing that has appeard'd of that Kind, to lead us into
the Knowledge of the Design and Meaning of the Authors. -- He wrote his
Comments with a single View to discover the true Spirit and genuine Sense of
those epistolary Writings. -- There are two Reasons which incline me to wish
they may be made public; the first is the Apprehension I have of their being
really serviceable to Mankind: the other is, that it might appear whether he
was rightly or groundlessly, suspected of holding Things contrary to found
Doctrine. He also says concerning his Sermons in general. -- His People were
not entertained with unconnected and undigested Matter, but with excellent
Discourses. -- Such Productions, every one will grant, must of necessity be the
Effect of much Labor and Study.

It is very true, Mr. SERGEANT was no Bigot, but of a most generous and
catholic Temper. Bigottry was what he had a great Aversion to; and he was far
from the rigged ard nirrow Spirit those are of, who confine Salvation to
themselves, with those who think just as they do. It is a Question with me,
whether his natural Temper was capable of such Severity: to be sure, as it was
cultivated and improved by Grace, he was at a great Distance from it. He though it
himself very ill-treated and much abused by those who represented him as being
unsound in his Principles, and so did those who were best acquainted with him.

But to return.

5. We must add to all his foregoing Labors, the daily and constant
Appiication he was obliged to use with the Indians; who, being very ignorant,
very unstable in their Virtue, and very much exposed to Temptations, wanted
Guarding on every Side, which he failed not of doing.

6. The Trust, which the Rev. Mr. Isaac Hollis reposed in him, added still more
to Mr. SERGEANT's Labor and Care; for it fell upon him to find the twelve
Boys, whom Mr. Hollis generously offered to support, and to persuade them and
their Parents to accept the generous Offer. The Care also of providing a Master
to instruct them, and of Victualling and Clothing of them, lay wholly upon
him. In this Trust he proved a faithful Steward of Mr. Hollis's Money; and as
he had the whole Care of laying of it out, so he gave him an Account how every
Penny was expended, refusing to take any Reward for his Labor and Trouble;
though it was offered and urged by Mr. Hollis.

7. By the foregoing History it also appears, that the Important Affair of the
Boarding-School, which lay very near his Heart, employed much of his Time and
Tho'ts; and was no small Addition to his Labor; especially in some of the last
Years of his Life.

8. To all these we must add, the unavoidable Cares and Concerns of private
Life, which were much increased by the Scantinese of his Support; which yet he
conducted with singular Wisdom, Prudence and Frugality.

View Mr. SERGEANT in this Light; consider him prosecuting such a Variety of
Business, and performing all in the Manner above described, and must we not
grant that he was a surprising instance of Labor, Industry and Faithfulness,
in that great and good Work to which he was called?

Could I represent Mr. SERGEANT in a true and just Light, under the
Self-denials, Hardships, Troubles and Difficulties, which attended him in the
Course of his Mission, it would appear, not only that he past through many and
great Trials, but also that he bear them all with a Fortitude and Calmness of
Mind, becoming the Christian and the Minister of Christ; though, at Times, Things
appeared with such a dark Aspect, that he was almost overborne which Griefs and
Discouragements.

Every one must be sensible, that, to one of so delicate a Make, it must be
difficult and self-denying, to leave the College, that Seat of Learning, and
other Delights, to dwell in a Wilderness: To change the polite Society he had
been used to, for the Conversion of a Number of Savages, the lowest of human
Kind: To forego the Delicacies of Life, for the bare Necessaries of it. -- But
these were but light Things to him, compared with many other Troubles he met
with.

The ill Conduct of the Dutch Traders, who used many Arts and Devices to
dissuade the Indians from hearkening to him; the unreasonable Jealousies of the
Indians, who suspected some evil Design against them, in almost every Thing
that was projected for their Good, gave him unspeakable Trouble and Grief: and
a vast Deal of Pains he was at, to prevent the Evils, which those Things tended
to. But that which gave him still greater Trouble was, the frequent and unhappy
Relapses of some of the Indians, to their former Vices and ill Customs, after
he had conceived Hopes of their being truly reformed. Some, of whom his Hopes
were raised, fell again into Drunkenness; yea, the Lieutenant himself, who
appeared so zealous against that Vice, and seemed to be firmly fixed in the
Ways of Religion, conducted himself in a very disorderly Manner, for a Year or
two together, being frequently intoxicated, and very troublesome: But he was
afterward recovered from his Apostasy; confessed his Wickedness; was restored
to Charity; and walked orderly, to the Day of his Death, which was August 10.
1751. When Things looked with a favorable Aspect, and the Indians appeared to
be seriously engaged in the Ways of Piety and Virtue, it gave him the highest
Pleasure and Satisfaction; but (to use his own Expression) Nothing so affected
him with Grief and Sorrow, his own Sins exceptcd, as the disorderly and wicked
Behavior of those to whom he ministered. His Concern on that Account is not to
be expressed: many Days he spent in Fasting and Prayer, and Sleep departed from
his Eyes, his tender Heart was almost broken, and he forgot to eat his Bread;
and his Eyes poured out Tears unto God. But though he was so tenderly affected,
and concerned for them, yet this was what he did not much discover to the
World; he was also very far from a repining discontented Spirit in the Case;
was calm, submissive and resigned to the Will of God: not forgeting that
Expression of his Lord and Master. -- Even so Father, for so it seemed good in
thy Sight.

As he, in some Measure, had the Trials of Moses in bearing the Camber, Burden
and Strife of his People, so he was in a good Degree possessed of the same
excellent Spirit that was upon him. These are but a Specimen of the Troubles he
met with; many others, too many to be here spoken of, he past through, during his
Mission.

If we consider Mr. SERGEANT in a relative Capacity, he behaved excellently
well in every Relation he sustained. From a Principle of Conscience he was very
careful to render to all their Due, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor
etc; and his benevolent and truly Christian Temper disposed him to do good to
all as be bad Opportunity. He was an able, painful, faithful Minister among the
People, to whom he stood in the Relation of a Pastor. He was a most tender,
kind and obliging Husband to a Spouse, who well understood how to receive such
Treatment, and to make answerable Returns: and while divine Providence
continued them in that haypy and honorable Relation, they were a shining
Example of all that is lovely and beautiful in a married State. He was also a
compassionate, affectionate and loving Father to his dear Children: unwearied
in his Endeavors to instill into their tender Minds a proper Sense of their
Obligations to God; that they might religiously remember their Creator in the
Days of their Youth. As became a Bishop, he ruled well his own House, having
his Children in Subjection with all Gravity: And like David, he walked within
his House with a perfect Heart.

The last Week in June 1749, he was taken with a Nervous Fever, attended with a
Canker and an Inflammation in his Throat: brought upon him, as some thought, by
excessive Care, Fatigue and Application to Business; more than he was able to
bear. He calmly, and without any apparent Concern, spoke or this as his lasr
Sickness; and put some Things in Order, apprehending it to be so. He was able
however to keep about, and preached on the following Sabbath, which was the
first in July. In this his last Sermon to the Indians, he let them know, 'that
for some Time past he had been apprehensive that some heavy Judgment hung over
them, because of their Wickedness: That he feared that some of them grew worse
and worse notwithstanding all that God had done for them, and notwithstanding
the Pains he himself had taken with them for their Good: And that there were
many Ways in which God could, and often did, testify his Displeasure against a
sinful People: and added, it may be God will take me from you, and then my
Mouth will be shut, and I shall speak to you no more.' After this his Illness
increased upon him, and soon confined him to his House and to his Bed. And though
his Sickness was very hard upon him, and he endured much Pain and Distress for
about twenty Days together, in all which Time he had but very little Sleep; yet
his Head was free from any Disorder, and even from Pain: and he spoke of it to
his Wife, with Thankfulness, that God had answered his Prayers, even to his
Desire; in continuing to him the free Exercise of his rational Powers; in
favoring him with clear Evidences of his good Estate; in granting him Ability
to speak freely to those who were about him; and in enabling him clearly to
discern the great and inexpressible Satisfaction arising from living devoted to
God, and sincerely striving to be faithful to the Death.

He carefully improved the Opportunities he had in counseling and charging
those who were about him; and earnestly recommenced to them the early Choice
and diligent Pursuit of the Ways of Wisdom, as being full of Pleasure and
Peace, both in Life and Death, to those who follow them.

The Indians, who from first to last had a great Veneration and hearty
Affection for him, as their Father and best Friend, were greatly concerned for,
and frequently visited him in, his Sickness: upon whom he enforced the
Instructions, Counsels, Warnings and Admonitions he had given them, in the
strongest Manner, charging them carefully to follow the Ways of Virtue and
Religion, as they would meet him at last in Peace. They were very desirous that
his precious Life might be spared, and of their own Accord all assembled at the
Meeting House, where they earnestly prayed that God would continue him to be
still a Blessing to them. And when his Death put an End to their Hopes, they
were very hearty Mourners: and Numbers discovered their Affection for him by
Tears, when ever they came to the House, for a long time after his Death.

He bear with great Patience the Distress that was upon him, through the whole of
his Sickness, praying and endeavoring that Patience might have its perfect
Work in him.

His Spouse, who maintained Hopes of his Recovery, till the last Day of his
Life, being then sensible that he drew near his End, inquired of him, Whether
he had no earnest Desires to live? And whether he saw any Gloom on the Horrors
on the Grave? To which he replied to this Purpose. 'If it be the Will of God
that I should live to do some singular Service for him in the World, I could
wish to be continued to my Family; otherwise I am willing to die: Death is no
Surprise to me. I bless God I may and can trust him in whom I have believed,
and long ago placed my everlasting Dependence upon. My Acquaintance with the
blessed World, to which I hope I am now hastening, through the Mercy of God in
Christ, is not now to commence.' At the same Time, he was full of a humbling
Sense of his own Unworthiness: for when One that stood by observed to him, that
his Work was well done, he replied, 'I can call myself a most unprofitable
Servant, and say, God be merciful to me a Sinner.'

He took his Leave of his beloved Wife and dear Children in an endearing and
desirable Manner; and after saying a considerable Deal, by Way of Counsel and
Advice, he in a tender Manner desired his dear Spouse, patiently and quietly to
submit to the parting Stroke; to go on with good Courage in the Way of Duty;
and added, 'It will be but a little While before we shall meet to part no more'

Last of all, he devoutly recommended his departing Soul to Christ, the
glorious Redeemer; and, after a few saint Groans, rested from his Labors, and
his Works do follow him.

This solemn, awful and last Scene of Life, Mr; SERGEANT, to Appearance, past
through, With as much Calmness, Sedateness and Composure of Mind, as he ever
enjoyed in his Life; and with a serene and pleasant Countenance; which (as the
last Act) Death changed and sent him away. The weeping Spectators of these
Things beheld them with Admiration, and acknowledged they had not before seen
the like: And one of them observed, that it was worth While to die, if it might
be in such a Manner.

He left behind him a most disconsolate and sorrowful Widow, with three small
Children, the eldest about 8 or 9 Years old, and the youngest upon the Breast,
on whom the Countenance of his Father is drawn to the Life. God grant they may
all inherit his Excellencies and Virtues.

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when be comes shall find so doing.
Matthew. 24. 46.

And if be shall come in the second Watch, or come in the third Watch, and find
them so, Blessed are those Servants. Luke 12. 38.

I had Tho'ts of continuing this Historical Account of the Affairs of
Stockbridge, relating to the Indians, down to the present Time; and to have
given an Account of Mr. Hollis's increasing the Boys to be maintained and
educated at his Expense, to the Number of 36, allowing for each Boy L.5
Sterling per Annum: of what the General Assemblies of this Province, and of
Connecticut, have done to encourage the Mohawks, to send their Children to be
educated at Stockbridge; a considerable Number of them being already come
thither for that End: of what Capt. Coram did in England before his Death, to
promote a Female Boarding-School at Stockbridge, and what the honorable
Society in London have done with Respect to it since: of the Rev. Mr. Edwards's
succeeding Mr. SERGEANT in the Ministry, as a Missionary to the Indians, etc.
etc. etc: But as I have not, so perhaps it is not possible at present to
obtain, proper and necessary Materials for that Purpose. I shall not therefore
attempt it. But I hope the Gentlemen who have the Conduct of those Affairs, and
are under Advantages for it, will carefully collect and preserve proper
Materials for it, and that some Body will, in Time to come, give the World a
faithful History of the Success of those important Things which are now
carrying on, for the Good of the poor Natives. For I cannot but hope, that the
Foundation Mr. SERGEANT laid, will, by the Blessing of God, proceed to
something very considerable, and worthy of a Place in future History: and that
he to whom the Heathen are given for his Inheritance, and the utmost Parts of
the Earth for his Possession, will say concerning it, Destroy it not, for a
Blessing is in it. Isai. 65. 8.


The Conclusion, in an Address, etc.
I Shall now conclude by endeavoring to represent, to the People in this
Country, the very great Importance of Treating the Indians, who live among us,
and upon our Borders, in a just, kind and charitable Manner; and that we do, by
all proper Means and Methods, endeavor to attach them to us, and to the
British Interest. This, I apprehend, is a Subject that has been too much
neglected, and that greatly wants to be set in a clear and just Light. And I
sincerely wish, that some Gentleman of greater Abilities and Address than I can
pretend to, would take it in Hand: Though, if my weak Endeavors may be a Means
of moving others to do Justice to a Subject of such Weight, I shall heartily
rejoice in it.

That I may offer what I have to say, in the clearest and most concise Manner I
can, I shall go into the following Method.

First, I shall endeavor to show, that it is of vast Importance to the British
Provinces and Colonies in America, especially to the Provinces of the
Massachusetts, New York, and New Hampshire, that they be in good Terms with the
Indians, and attach them to their Interest. And,

Secondly, I shall endeavor to show, by what Means, this may be effected: or
what are the most likely Methods to bring it to pass.

1. I am to show, that it is of vast Importance, that we be in good Terms with
the Natives; and that we engage them in our Interest, I freely grant, that the
Indians, simply considered, are not of such great Consequence to us. We can
subsist without them. But yet, their Trade is a considerable Article, worthy
the Care of any politic People, and managed as it might, and ought to be,
would yield us great Profit. But if we consider them with Relation to Peace and
War, as attached to us, or to our Enemies, they are of the last Importance to
us: for they certainly have the Balance of Power in their Hand, and are able to
turn it for or against us, according as they stand affected to us. Canada,
inconsiderable as it is, and from which, separate from the Indians, we have
little or nothing to fear, in Time of War; Canada, I say, would be more than a
Match for us, in Case they join with them against us. He must be a great
Stranger to, and very ignorant of, the Circumstances both of the English and
Indians, who is not sensible of this. Our Circumstances are such, that we
cannot guard ourselves against the Incursions of such Enemies in Time of War:
for our Frontiers are of vast extent, and border upon the adjacent Wilderness;
which, though almost inaccessible to us, yet is the very Element in which they
delight to live. They are at Home in it. The People therefore who inhabit our
Frontiers, while they follow their necessary Business, are exposed to be an
easy Prey to them: and many of them have been surpised in their Fields and
Houses. and in a most barbarous Manner put to Death, A small Number of Indians,
encouraged and supported by the French (which they are ready enough to do) can
easily keep us in a constant Alarm, put us to an immense Charge, destroy many,
and impoverish more, in our exposed Places, and not put themselves at all out
of their Way; yea, find their Account in it: for as they live by Hunting, so
where Game is most plenty they are best off: And where can they find a better
Supply, than among our Cattle, Sheep, and Cornfieldsd? There they live at Ease,
distress and impoverish us, and the adjacent Wilderness is their Refuge. By
retiring into it, they are soon out of our Reach; and long Experience has
taught us, how ineffectual the Measures we have taken, for our Safety and
Defense, have proved.

Some, I am sensible, will say, let us not be at any Cost and Pains to gain the
Friendship of such a perfidious Crew, but let us destroy them all. Quickly said
indeed, but not so soon nor so easily effected. Those Persons who are for
destroying them would doubtless soon do it, where they first bound and
delivered up to them. But one Question here is, how we shall get them into our
Power? And another is, Whether it would be so human, generous and
Christian-like, to take away their Lives, were that in our Power, as it would
be to cultivate Friendship with them, and to seek their best Good? If we should
be so sanguine as to endeavor to destroy them, it would doubtless prove a vain
Attempt; and serve only to drive them to the French; who would be very ready to
receive and protect them. If we neglect them, and take no Measures to engage
them in our Interest, or to cultivate Friendship with them, this will probably
render them indifferent to us, and dispose them to hearken to the enticing
Insinuations of Romish Emissaries: and our Situation must be very unhappy, when
they become engaged in the French Interest.

If it be objected, that the French have already gained a large Number of
Indians to their Interest, and therefore if we use our best Endeavors to gain
others, it will avail nothing; for those who are devoted to the French, will
nevertheless distress us in Time of War. I reply,

It is very true, that the French of Canada, through their Policy and Vigilance,
have taken the Advantage of our Neglect, and gained a large Number of the
Natives to their Interest, and are gaining more and more every Year; and some
even from among our own Indians. They spare neither Cost nor Pains to
accomplish their Designs of this Nature; being sensible enough, how
advantageous it is to them, and how injurious to us: and if they continue to be
active, and we negligent, as in Times past, is it not too probable that they
will, in a little Time, attach to themselves all the Indians in North America?
Does it not then concern us to use proper and vigorous Endeavors to prevent
this apparent Mischief, by counter-working the French? who are, I suppose,
tampering with all the Tribes of North America, to engage them in their
Interest. And should we succeed in our Endeavors (as it is highly probable we
might, if proper Steps were taken) so as to engage the Five Nations, and some
other Tribes, in hearty Friendship with us; and especially if we should bestow
such Favors upon them, as would induce them to settle upon our Frontiers; it
would in all Probability prevent the Evil spoken of in the Objection: for the
Indians from Canada would not molest us, if a Number of the Natives, in hearty
Friendship with us, were placed in our Borders. Of this we have had a very
plain Proof the last War, in the Safety of Stockbridge, and the adjacent
Places, from any Attempts of the Enemy from Canada.

Stockbridge is in the very Road of, and more exposed to, the Indians from
Canada, than any other Place whatever; and yet we see that the Enemy turned off
East to Connecticut-River, and West to the Dutch Settlements, where they did
much Mischief; while Stockbridge, Sheffield, New-Marlborough and Number One,
though more exposed, were not molested. This so far as we can discern, was owing
to a small Number of Indians dwelling at Stockbridge, who are our hearty and
fast Friends: which the Enemy being sensible of, cared not to come within their
Reach, least they should be taken in their own Snare. And if we should
encourage the Settlement of other Indian Towns upon our Frontiers, where
Hunting is most handy to them, as Stockbridge has been encouraged: should we
give them Townships of Land suitable for their Improvement, build a
Meeting House and School-House in each Town, and support Ministers and School
Masters in them; would not this convince them that we are their true Friends,
and seek their Good? Would it not induce them to settle in our Borders?
especially those of them who are desirous, that they themselves and their
Children should be instructed? Would they not be a Guard to us in Time of War?
And if, after all, we should meet with some Trouble from the Indians of Canada,
might it not be effectually prevented, by playing our Indians upon them, as
they do theirs upon us? And would not the Charge of all this be a Trifle,
compared with that of defending ourselves in Time of War? But if we neglect
them, and take no Measures to cultivate Friendship with them, and especially if
we deal injuriously by them, shall we not put an Advantage into the Hands of
the French (which they will not fail of improving) to engage them in their
Interest, and to employ them against us in Time of War? which would prove a
very great Calamity to us, if not our utter Ruin. These Things considered, is
it not of very great Importance, that we be at good Terms with the neighboring
Natives.

2. I will, in the next Place, endeavor to show what are the likely Methods to
bring this to pass: Or what Measures we must take with the Indians, if we would
engage them in hearty Friendship with us.

And here, in general, our Conduct toward them must be such as shall make them
sensible, that we are indeed their hearty Friends; and such also as shall
convince them that it is their Interest and Advantage to be in Friendship with
us. Nothing short of this, I apprehend, will attach them to us, so as to answer
the Ends proposed, if we oft^^ treat with them, renew the Friendship, and
bestow upon them large Presents: Or, as they phrase it, Smoke together,
brighten the Chain, or put the Brands together, to kindle up the former Fire;
and yet leave Room for them to suppose that this proceeds not from true
Friendship, but rather from Fear of them, or from Suspicion that they will join
with our Enemies, etc. This will never be sufficient to engage them: the utmost
we can rationally expect from it is. that they will not openly break with us,
but keep up a Show of Friendship, that they may have the Benefit of future
Presents at our Hands.

Again, if we should by any Means convince them that we are their true Friends,
and yet not go into such Measures with them as should turn to their Advantage,
they would hardly be engaged for us. As all other People are governed by
Interest, so are they. And the principal Handle we can take hold of, to attach
them to us by, is their Interest, and that would not fail of doing of it. If a
Tribe of Indians can sell their Skins to us for twenty Shillings, and buy their
Blankets for ten Shillings; they will never go to Canada where they must sell
their Skins for ten Shillings, and give twenty Shillings for a Blanket.
Convince them that it is much for their Interest and Advantage to be our
Friends and Allies, and we need not fear but that they will be so. Now, in
Order to convince them that we are truly their Friends, and that it is their
Interest to be ours; We must,

In the first Place, treat them according to the Rules of Equity and Justice.
We must not defraud and oppress them, but be honest and just in our Dealings
with them.

The Natives with whom we have to do, are Persons of so much Sagacity that they
can distinguish between just and injurious Treatment, as well as other Men.
They are also as ready to resent, and perhaps more forward to revenge Injuries,
than any other People under Heaven. If therefore we treat them in an unjust
Manner, we may rationally expect that they will be so far from being our
Friends, that they will join with our Enemies, and seek Opportunities of
Revenge.

It is well known, that the Indians are generally addicted to Drunkenness, and
that when they have tasted a little Liquor, they have a strong Thirst for more,
and will part with any Thing they have, for a sufficient Quantity to make them
Drunk. -- And is it not as well known, that we have taken the Advantage of this
their vicious Appetite, and for a sew Quarts of Rum have purchased valuable
scffects of them? Have not private Persons thus made their Gains of them,
notwithstanding the good Laws that have been in Force to prevent it? And is not
this the Manner of all private Traders, who go among their several Tribes for
Gain?

In our public Dealings with them at our Truck-Houses, where Rum has been
freely sold them. Care has been taken that they should not be cheated, but that
they should have the full Value of what they had to sell: An Indian therefore,
who was Owner of a Pack of Bever, Deerskins, or any other valuable Goods, could
buy a large Quantity of Rum, and might get Drunk perhaps ten Times or more,
whereas if he had fallen into private Hands, he must have contented himself
with being Drunk but once or twice. Which of these proves most injurious to the
Indians in the End, I shall not pretend to determine.

When they are thus intoxicated, they fall out among themselves, Fight, and
sometimes kill one another, and some have drunk themselves dead on the Spot. An
Instance of each of these there has been, if I am rightly informed, at Fort
Dummer, since that has been improved as a Truck-House. And whether the Guilt of
that Blood does not lie upon us, I leave others to judge.

Now, if we treat the Natives in this Form, will they, can they, live with us?
Will not the Law of Self-Preservation oblige them to leave us, and to go where
they may be better used? Some of the Five Nations plainly speak it out and say,
"We cannot live with the English and Dutch; they bring us so much Rum that it
destroys us; we must go to the French, who will let us have but little strong
Drink." Thus we alienate the Indians from us, and as it were oblige them to go
over to the French, who are often our Enemies, and fail not to employ them
againft us in Time of War. And if we proceed to deal thus injuriously with
them, what can we expert but that they will leave us, and be a severe Scourge
to us?

Though the Indians are sunk below the Dignity of human Nature, and their Lust
after Drink exposes them to be cheated out of what little they have; yet this
gives us no Right to deal unjustiy by them. They have a natural Right to
Justice, and may, with great Propriety challenge it at our Hand, seeing we
prosess to be subject to the Law of Christ, which teach us to do that which is
altogether just. And we should be so far from taking the Advantage of their
Ignorance, Vice and Poverty, to defraud them of what is their just Right, that
we should rather be moved to Pity, and compassionate their deplorable State,
and be Eyes to the Blind, etc.

I am fully persuaded, that if we were upright and just in all our Transations
with them; if our Trade with them were put into the Hands of faithful Men, who
would deal justly by them; and if they were supplied with all Necessaries for
themselves and Families at a moderate Price, it would not be in the Power of
all the French at Canada (subtle as they are) to alienate them from us. The
French are not upon equal Ground with us in this Affair. For their Nothern
Climate is much more inhospitable and severe than ours is: Their Country is not
so productive of those Fruits, which the Indians very much live upon, as ours:
Nor can they afford Goods which arc proper and necessary for the Indians at so
cheap a Lay as we can: Therefore we can give them those Advantages which Canada
cannot. We can, without Damage to ourselves, make it their Interest to adhere
to us: And when Experience has once taught them, that their Interest lies with
us, they will want no other Inducement to engage them to us: Yea, it will not
only attach those or them to us, who are not yet gone to Canada, but it will
induce those who are, to return to their Brethren, for the sake of the Profit
they might reap by it; especialliy if we give them all the Advantage we can,
consistent with our own.

As unjust and abusive Treatment of the Indians tends naturally to alienate
them from us, and to turn them off to the French; so a Series of just and
faithful Dealing with them would be likely to attach them to us, and to make
them our fast Friends. This again appears from the Temper and Conduct of that
Part of the Tribe of the River Indians who live at Stockbridge. For though they
were, for a considerable Time, extremely jealous, that we had some ill Design
upon them, even in the Favors they received at our Hands; (a Jealousy founded,
I suppose, upon the ill Usage the Natives have too often been the Subjects of)
yet by the just Treatment they, for a Course of Years, have met with, from the
Government, from Mr. Sargeant, Mr. Woodbridge, and others, they are become our
hearty Friends; willing to live or die with us, whether in Peace or War.

It is very true, that in order to obtain the End proposed, our Trade with the
Indians muft not be in private Hands. It mud not be in the Power of every
private Person to treat them as he pleases. We may upon good Grounds despair of
their being treated with Equity and Justice, if every one may gratify his
avaricious Temper in dealing with them. Our Trade therefore must be of a
public Nature, and muft be committed to the Care and Management of faithful
Men: Not to such as will seek the Service, and make Friends to procure the Post
for them; (certain Indications of a Self-seeker) but Men of Uprightness and
Integrity must be sought out, such and such only must be be trusted with
Business of such Importance: Good Instructions must be given them, which must
be carefully adhered to.

If the Indian Trade at Canada were in private Hands; if every private Person
there might deal with the Indians at Pleasure, we might then hope that those
who are gone from us would soon return: for, in that Case, it is supposable
enough that they would not meet with much better Usage there, than they do
here: though it is scarcely supposable that they would meet with much worse. The
French Trade with the Indians is wholly in the Hand of public Officers, (if I
am rightly informed) and a private Man, if he want a Dear-skin, a Beaver-skin,
etc. is not allowed to purchase of an Indian, but muft go to the public
Stores. Upon the Supposition that those Officers are faithful, and deal justly
by the Indians, it is surely a wife and politic Method to engage them in their
Favor. And so long as every private Person in the English Government is at
Liberty to trade with them, when, and where, he pleases, and to cheat them out
of what they have, what can we expect but that they will repair to Canada where
they may be better used? Is it not owing to the ill Treatment they have met
with from the English and Dutch, that so many of them are gone already? And if
no proper Measures are taken to prevent their being ill used, will not those
who are yet behind soon follow their Brethren? Yea, if we surnish them with
large Quantities of Rum, make them Drunk, and then defraud them of what they
have, do we not reduce them to a Necessity, either of living low and miserable
with us, or of going from us, that they may sare better? How low, how
dispirited, how miserable and brutish these few are, who live within our
Borders, is too manifest. And whether we, by our ill treating of them, have not
contributed to their Misery, is worthy of our serious Enquiry. Yea, would it
not be proper for us to enquire, Whether we have not, by our Neglect and Abuse
of them, provoked Heaven to let loose the Natives upon us, who have been one of
the forest Scourges that we were ever chastised with? What Multitudes have
they, in a most cruel Manner, murdered in our Borders? How many of our
Neighbors have they led into Captivity? Some of whom have been redeemed at a
very great Expense, and others are become either Pagans or Papists, and
continue still in a foreign Land. And who can count the Cost we have been at,
to defend ourselves against their Incursions?

If the British Government should be difpos'd, in Time to come, to set up and
maintain a public, honest and just Trade with the Five Nations, or any other
Tribes, thereby to attach them to ui, to promote their true Interest, with
other valuable Ends that might there by be answered: This Objection perhaps
would arise, viz. That such a Proceeding will be a very great Expense to the
Public, for our Trade cannot be safe unless it be protected by a considerable
Force. A Fort muft be built, and a Garrison of 50, 60 or perhaps 100 Men, with
their proper Officers, must be maintained at each Place where the Trade is set
up: therefore the Advantage would not countervail the Cost. To this I reply,

If such Garrisons fhould be though it necessary in the Places where a Trade is set
up, to be a Guard to it; the Charge would nothing like equal that of an Indian
War, which perhaps it might prevent.

But further, I apprehend that the Charge of fuch Garrisons might be spared and
that, in instead of being necessary, they would prove very injurious to the
Design; and that it would be a very wrong Step to be taken in that Affair.

All who are in any good Measure acquainted with the Indians know, that they
are extremely jealous, least any Encroachments should be made upon them: and it
is not strange it should be so, considering what has past over them. And if a
Number of armed Men were placed among them, and Forts built for the Defense of
our Trade, they would be Suspicious, that something hostile was intended, and
we should not be able to remove the Suspicion. They would behold us with, a
jealous Eye, and perhaps take Measures to frustrate the whole Design.

The most effectual Way to induce them to trust us, is to trust them: and they
will be ready enough to protect our Trade, if we desire it, and show that we
confide in them to do it. And when a little Experience has taught them, how
advantageous such a Trade would be to them, they would be ready enough to do
it, for their own Advantage. It therefore we should desire them to admit a
Trader into one of their own Forts, or to build a Fort at our Charge in some
convenient Place for such a Defign, and to take Care that our Trade be safe;
this would tend to convince them, both of our Friendship to, and of our
Confidence in, them; and they would not only be pleased with it, but also
ambitious to show us that we may safely trust them: And were I to be the
Truck-Master, I shouid esteem my self much later in their Protection, than in a
Garrison of 100 English Men: For if such a Garrison should be placed among them,
they themselves would suspect some ill Design carrying on against them, and the
French would infallibly tell them, that though we pretended Peace and Friendship,
yet our Design in the End is to dispossess them of their Country.

If indeed a Truck Master should prove an unfaithful Servant, and enrich
himself by defrauding them, he might have Qccasion for English Soldiers to
protect him and his Stores: but if they found him faithful, friendly and just
in his Dealings with them, they would be as careful of him as of their own
Eyes, and venture their own Lives for him. What would not the Indians of
Stockbridge have done for Mr. Sergeant in his Day, whom they had found to be
their true and hearty Friend? And what would they not now do for Mr.
Woodbridge, of whom they have had the like Experience? Indians will be as ready
as the English and perhaps much more so, to serve and protect, if there be
Occasion, those whom they have found to be their faithful and real Friends.

in a Word, I apprehend, that if we had in Times past treated the Natives
according to the Rules of Equity and justice, it would have been quite
sufficient to have engaged them in our Interest, and to have kept them in Amity
and Friendship with us. And that, even now, they might in a little Time be
attached to us, by such Treatment: But this, I confess, I despair of, if every
private Person must be left at his Liberty to treat them as he pleases, and to
defraud them of all they have: which I take to be the Case in New York
Government, who lie next to the Five Nations, and have their Trade; though in
this Province we have good Laws in Force to restrain private Persons from
selling them strong Drink.

2. We should also exercise that Kindness and Generosity toward them, that
shall convince them that it is for their Interest to be in Friendship with us.
We should not, in a Case of such Importance, content ourselves with being
bearly just in our Treatment of them, but we should also be kind and generous,
as a proper Expedient to obtain the End proposed. I am aware, I shall here be
quick interrupted with this Exclamation.

What! kind and generous to such an ungrateful evil Crew! to which I shall only
answer. We have good Authority for being kind to the Unthankful and to the
Evil. And if that good Being who recommends it to us, had not given an Example
of it, in his Dealings with us, how deplorable had our State been? This kind
Temper and Behavior is recommended to us in the Gospel, not only because it is
the Will of our heavenly Father that we should be kind, but also because the
Exercise of it answers excellent Ends; produces very good and desirable
Effects: such as Love, Friendship, Peace, etc. And while we make a Profession
of Christianity, it is Pity the Practice of it, in so material an Article,
should be objected against. And is it not very proper that we should exercise
Kindness and Generosity to the poor Natives, when there is a strong Probability
of its being of very happy Consequence both to them and us?

A great deal of Kindness and Generosity has been exercised toward the River
Indians at Housatunnuk, by this Government, by the honorable Corporation at
Home, by their honorable and Rev. Commissioners at Boston, by the Rev. Mr.
Hollis, by the Rev. Mr. Sergeant, Mr. Woodbridge and others: and the
Consequence has been very happy as to them; they are brought to the Knowledge
of the Gospel, and to a Christian Profession: and many of them; we hope, to the
saving Knowledge of God, We also have found the Benefit of this kind Usage of
them: for thereby they are become our hearty Friends, are united to us in their
Affections, and were a Means, in the Hand of Providence, of covering our most
Western Frontiers the last War. And were the like Kindness shown by us to other
Tribes, is there not Room to hope that the Effects might be alike happy? If
Townships suitable for Indians to settle in, were provided in our Frontiers,
and it were proposed to them that if they would come and settle in them, they
should not only enjoy the Land as their own, but also have a Minister supported
among them to instruct them in the Christian Religion; and also a Schoolmaster
to teach their Children to read and write; would not this induce many of them,
especially of the better Sort, to come and settle in our Borders? And would
they not cover our Frontiers in Case of a War with Frace?

What has been done for the Indians at Stockbridge has doubtless been much
observed, and approved of, by the Natives far and near. That there is a School
set up at Canada, in Imitation of Mr. Sergeant's School at Stockbridge, and a
large Number of Scholars in it, we have heard and receive for Truth. That the
French, who esteem Ignorance to be the Mother of Devotion, and do not desire to
teach the Indians any Thing more than to say their Beads, and to cross
themselves, have done this out of Choice, is not at all likely. They do not
desire that their Indians should become a knowing People. But yet, being
sensible that the Report of Mr. Sergeant's School had spread itself for and
wide, and that, their Indians were pleased with the Method the English had
taken to furnish the Natives with Knowledge they apprehended that unless some
Thing like it were done among them, there would be Danger of the Indians
repairing to us for Instruction, and to prevent this, and to engage them to
themselves, they set up their School. This, I conjecture, is the Truth of the
Case. And if so, it is manifest that the Indians are inclined to seek after
Knowledge: And therefore would be disposed to hearken to such kind and generous
Proposals, if they were made to them. And who can tell but that this, that, or
the other Tribe, would gladly settle such Towns, if they were invited to it in
a proper Manner?

3. Another Step, and, perhaps, the most promising one we can take, to engage
the Indians in Friendship with us is, to send Missionaries among their
respective Tribes, Ministers and Schoolmasters, to instruct them in the
Principles, and to persuade them to the Practice of Christianity. Though they
have so long lived near us, and been conversant with us, yet they remain
ignorant of the Way of Salvation, Strangers to the Gospel, and are perishing
for lack of Knowledge: A Case that might well move our Pity and Compassion
toward them, and put us upon doing what we can for their Relief. And whether
our former Neglect of Things of this Nature has not been provoking to Heaven,
may be worthy of our serious Enquiry.

The Interest the Rev. Mr. Barclay had in the Mohawks, while he was with them,
the Reformation of Manners he wrought among them, their Willingness to receive
Instruction, and their Engagedness to prosecute Learning, are a plain
Indication that faithful Missionaries would be welcome to them. And the Five
Nations being nearest us, and their Friendship of very great Consequence, it
might be proper to begin with them: And what has been done among them by Mr.
Barclay, and others, might be no small Help in the Case. If we should send
Persons well qualified for the Business to reside among them, and support them
well, there would be no Foundation for any Jealousy that we have an ill Design
upon them, and if at any Time such Jealousies should strise they would soon
subside, upon the Indians having a little Experience of our Kindness and
Friendship to them. The prudent Conduct and saithful Labors of such
Missionaries might, by the Blessing of God, serve to remove their Barbarity,
correct their Manners, reform their Lives, promote in them virtuous Sentiments,
and by Degrees form them to true Religion. This we may hope would be the happy
Event, with Respect to many of them, though not to all; and it, by much Labor
and Expense, it might be brought to pass, should we not find our Account in it:
for what would be the Charge of supporting a few Missionaries, compared with
that of an Indian War? And is there not great Probability that such Measures
would in a few Years Time attach them to us in a hearty Friendship? And it the
Five Nations who are a Terror to, and have in great Measure the Command of,
other Tribes, were indeed our Friends, and made so by such Obligations laid
upon them, would it not be an effectual Means of resraining other Indians from
giving us Trouble in Case of a War?

The general Objection here, I am sensible will be; -- There is no Likelihood
of succeeding, and therefore it is not worth while to make any Trial, it would
only be to spend Labor and Money to no good Purpose. To which I reply,

How can we draw the Conclusion before we have made the Experiment? Have we
ever made any proper Trial, and sound ourselves disappointed? And can it be
looked upon just to draw such a Conclusion, in a Case of such Importance,
unless we had better Grounds for it?

It is true, Mr. Sergeant made a Visit to the Susquabanza Indians, Mr. Brainard
also, in his Day, did the same, without Success: but we know that the Excuse
those Indians made was, that they held their Lands of the Five Nations, and
therefore could not comply with such a Motion, till their Consent was first
obtained. And besides, shall we esteem two or three Visits made by private
Persons a sufficient Trial in this Case? Sufficient indeed it was to show that
those good Gentlemen were possessed of an excellent Spirit, and of a laudable
Zeal for the Good of the poor Natives: but yet I apprehend not sufficient to
discourage further Attempts. If those Gentlemen, who went in a private
Capacity, had sustained a public Character, perhaps they had been more
regarded. But however, when we have used our best Endeavors, and they indeed
prove unsuccessful, we may be excusable; but can we look upon ourselves so, if
we sit still and use no Endeavors for the Help of those poor benighted People?

It proper Attempts should be made for Christianizing the Five Nations, there
would, I am sensible, same notable Difficulties lie in the Way, but yet perhaps
none but what might be surmounted.

One Difficulty that would doubtless attend such a laudable Undertaking, would
arise from those who maintain a private Trade among them, from which they reap
great Gain; especially by the Article of Rum, too much of which they convey to
them, and by the Influence of which the Indians are easily defrauded.

These Traders would be very sensible, that if Christianity should prevail
among those Nations, the Hope of their Gain would be gone and seeing by this
Crast they have their Wealth, they would use their utmost Endeavors to
dissuade the Indians from embracing the Ways of Religion. They in Fact did so
at Housatunnuk, where the Number of Indians was small, and their Trade not so
considerable (as the foregoing History shows.) How much more then will they do
it, it Endeavors should be used to convert the Mohawks, whose Trade is vastly
more advantageous? But as the Indians at Housatunnuk, by Mr. Sergeant's Help,
saw through the Artifice they used; and were made sensible of the selfish Views
of the Traders, so doubtless the Five Nations may easily be informed and the
Obstruction soon removed.

Another Difficulty will arise from the false Insinuations of Romish
Emissaries, who will not fail to tell them, that we are about to teach them a
false Religion, and if they hearken to us, they will all certainly be damned.
But when those Indians are properly informed of the Conduct of the French, and
other Roman Catholics, how they deny the Use of the Bible to the common People
among themselves, and that they have no Design to acquaint the Indians with the
Word of God: And on the other Hand, that our Design is not to impose upon them,
but to open the Bible to them, to enable them to read it, and to judge for
themselves: will not this satisfy them of our honest Intentions toward them,
and of the Safety and Propriety of their examining Things, that they may form a
Judgment for themselves?

A third, and perhaps much the greatest Difficulty that would attend this good
Design is, that those Indians esteem themselves Christians already, and value
themselves upon their being as good Christians as their Neighbors. Mr.
Sergeant, in his Journal of November 25 1734, says, -- The Mohawks are
generally Professors of Christianity, but for want of Instruction have but
little of it in Reality. -- They are so ignorant of the Principles of Religion,
that they know not the Difference between one who is baptized and calls himself
a Christian, and one who lives agreably to the Rules Christ has given us to
walk by. They are not sensible of the Necessity of being conformed to those
Rules of Virtue and Holiness which Christ has prescribed. Romish Emissaries
have baptized some of them, others (as I have been informed) have been baptized
by Dutch Ministers; and they esteem it a Privilege belonging to them to have
their Children baptized, whenever they present them; without any Regard being
had, either to the Qualifications of the Parent, or the religious Education of
the Child. When the Rev. Mr; Spencer was among them a few Years ago, they were
much displeased that he declined baptizing some Children, whose Parents were
notoriously ignorant, vicious and wicked. Some Indians from Canada, who had an
English Woman to their Mother, came a few Years past to Westfield, to visit
their English Relations there, and while they stayed at that Place, they had a
Child born, and were much offended with the Rev. Mr. Balantine, who declined
baptizing of it, as they desired. Since the Rev. Mr. Edwards has been at
Stockbridge, one of the Mohawks residing there had a Child born, and was highly
affronted because Mr. Edwards did not baptize it upon his Desire. From these
Instances it is evident, that they account their Children have Right to
Baptism, whenever they desire it. And being baptized, they esteem them good
Christians, whatever their Conversation may be: for they derive their Notions
of Christianity, not from the Bible, (to which they are Strangers) but from the
Example of the Dutch and French, with whom they are conversant, and who profess
themselves to be Christians.

And so far forth as being baptized, in the forementioned Manner, and calling
themselves Christians, will make them so, they are so to be esteemed. Now these
Things being so, it may prove a difficult Thing to make them sensible, that
Drunkenness and other vicious Practices are inconsistent with Christianity;
because those Christians, who fall under their Observation, give them an
Example of Vice, and go such Lengths therein.

But yet I apprehend this Difficulty might also be removed, by giving them a
just and true Account of the Nature and Extent of the Christian Religion; by
informing them what the Will of Christ is; how he expects that we should be
conformed to his Likeness, and to his Laws. The Indians are as capable of
hearing Reasons and giving them their Weight, as other Men: and it is because
they know not what Christianity is, that they esteem themselves Christians, in
their present Circumstances. When they are made acquainted with the Terms of
Salvation, proposed in the Gospel, and what they must do that they may inherit
eternal Life, when they are well instructed in the Doctrines of Christ, they
will be sensible that the Religion which they now have, is little or nothing
like that which is taught by the Gospel. When Mr. Edwards refused to baptize a
Mohawk Child born at Stockbridge, (which I have before mentioned) and they were
very much displeased with him on that Account, he went to them, gave them the
Reasons of his Conduct, and informed them as clearly as he was able of the
Nature and End of Baptism: Those Indians received the Force of his Reasons, and
appeared to be satisfied and contented, when he had taken Pains to inform them.
And I doubt not but proper Instruction and Information would remove the
Difficulty I have been speaking of.

Though Christianizing those Indians may prove a difficult Work, yet if our
Endeavors might, by the divine Blessing, be succeeded, would not the Advantage
thence arising to them, and us, more than compensate the Pains and Expense we
should be at? And is there not so much Ground to hope for Success, as should
induce us to make the Experiment?

I shall now conclude, by briefly suggesting a few Things, not yet mentioned,
the serious Consideration of which may excite us to use our best Endeavors for
the Conversion of the neighboring Indians to the Christian Faith.

1. And in the first Place, should not the Consideration of the divine Bounty
and Goodness, bestowed upon us, excite us to employ Part of that undeserved
Goodness to promote the Knowledge of God, our bountiful Benefactor, among those
who are destitute of it? Through the undeserved Favor and Blessing of God, we
have been prosperous in our secular Affairs, succeeded in our Husbandry, Trade,
etc. and are become a wealthy People: And, were we as willing as we are able,
might we not spare large Sums for the Propagation of the Gospel among the
Heathen? Ought we not then to show our Gratitude to the glorious Author of all
our Comforts, by employing a Part of his Bounty to promote the Redeemer's
Kingdom? Is it not fit that we should thus honor the Lord with our Substance?
Does it not lie as a Reproach upon us, who make an high Profession, that we
expend so little to promote the Knowledge of God among the Natives, and so much
to ill Purposes? Were what we employ in unnecessary Expenses, by which Pride
and Luxury are indulged and nourished, employed in the laudable Method I am
recommending; would it not be sufficient, well to support a Multitude of
Missionaries among the neighboring Tribes? Would it not probably be a Means of
turning many of them from the Power of Satan to God? And would it not be an
Odor of a sweet Smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God? Phil. 4.
18.
And seeing God, by his Blessings, has enabled us to contribute to such a good
Design, should we not cheerfully give of our Substance, for the spiritual
Benefit of the perishing Heathen?

2. Should not the Light and Grace of the Gospel, which we, through divine
Goodness enjoy, be a stronger Argument still to excite us to endeavor the
Conversion of the Heathen?

A few Generations back we were in a State of Heathenism, as they now are:
Aliens from the common Wealth of Israel -- and without God in the World. Ephesians.
2, 12.
But through divine Goodness, the Day spring from on High has visited us, and we
enjoy the Light and Privileges of the Gospel Dispensation. Seeing then God has
had Compassion on us, and bestowed upon us those riches Blessings; ought we not
to have Compassion on the neighboring Heathen, and use our best Endeavors
that they a so may be made Partakers of the Light and Blessings of the Gospel?

3. Should we not be moved to such charitable Endeavors from the Consideration
of the wretched and forlorn Circumstances, in which the poor Natives appear
before our Eyes. We often behold those piteous Objects, appearing half naked
and almost starved; which is the Effect of their vicious Way of Living. We see
them also in the Depths of Ignorance and Barbarity; wholly unacquainted with
the Way of Salvation, and quite unconcerned for their eternal Good: And yet
their Powers, both of Body and Mind, are not inferior to our own. Were they
brought to Civility and Industry, they might stand upon equal Ground with us,
respecting the Comforts of Life: and were they instructed in divine Things,
made acquainted with the great and important Truths of the Gospel, they might
stand as fair for the Kingdom of Heaven as we do. Should not our Eyes therefore
affect our Hearts, when we behold them in such miserable Circumstances? And
should we not exert ourselves in all proper Ways for their Help. Did the Wounds
of the poor Man half dead, who fell among Thieves, plead with so much Eloquence
for human Compassion, as the unhappy State of the poor Natives does for
Christian Charity? And if the Compassion of a Samaritan was moved by the
former, how much more should the Bowels of a Christian be moved by the latter?

4. The noble Example of some generous and pious Persons, at Home, may well
excite us to liberal Contributions for the Benefit of the poor Heathen.

Not only public Societies, but also private Persons, in Great Britain, have
generously and liberally contributed for the Benefit of the Natives in this
distant Part of the World; as the foregoing History shows. Though they are at
3000 Miles Distance, and never beheld, as we do, those miserable Objects; yet,
from a truly pious and generous Spirit, they have sent over their liberal
Contributions, that the Heathen, by their Means, may be informed in the Way of
Life. Verily, they shall not loose their Reward. A noble Example they set
before us, most worthy our Imitation: And how can we excuse ourselves, if we
neglect to copy after it? Some indeed may plead their Inability, but this is
not the Case of all. Are there not among us many wealthy Merchants and Traders?
Are there not also many Farmers, who abound in Wealth, upon the Lands which
were, a few Years ago, the Property of the Indians, who now stand in Need of
their Charity? Should not such Persons be moved, by the generous Examples of
others, to help forward the noble Design of converting the Heathen? Yea, are
not the People in general able to do something to help forward so good a
Design? And will it not lie as a Reproach upon us, if we, who make a high
Profession of Religion, prove void of Charity, when we are so loudly called to
the Exercise of it, not only by the laudable Example of generous Benefactors at
Home; but also by the perishing Circumstances of the neighboring Indians?

I shall only add my hearty Wishes, that this American Continent, which, for
Ages unknown, has been a Seat of Darkness, and full of the Habitations of
Cruelty, may become a Scene of Light and Love; that the Heathen in it, who have
been wont to thirst after Blood, may hunger and thirst after Righteousness;
That the Wilderness and solitary Place may be glad for them, the Desert rejoice
and blossom as the Rose; -- That the Glory of Lebanon may be given unto it, the
Excellency of Carmel and Sharon; That they may see the Glory of the Lord, and
the Excellency of our God. Isai. 35. 1, 2.


FINIS.

