A TREATY HELD WITH THE OHIO INDIANS, AT CARLISLE, In OCTOBER, 1753.

PHILANDELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
New-Printing-Office, near the Market. MDCCLIII.

A TREATY, etc.
To the Honorable JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in
Chief, of the Province of Pennsylvania, and Counties of New Castle, Kent and
Sussex, upon Delaware, The REPORT of RICHARD PETER'S, ISAAC NORRIS, and BENJAMIN
FRANKLIN, Esquires, Commissioners appointed to treat with some Chiefs of the
Ohio Indians, at Carlisle, in the County of Cumberland, by a Commission,
bearing Date the 22d Day of September, 1753.
May it please the GOVERNOR.
NOT knowing but the Indians might be waiting at Carlisle, we made all the
Dispatch possible, as soon as we had received our Commission, and arrived there
on the Twenty-sixth, but were agreeably surprised to find that they came there
only that Day.

IMMEDIATELY on our Arrival we conferred with Andrew Montour, and George
Croghan, in order to know from them what had occasioned the present coming of
the Indians, that we might, by their Intelligence, regulate our first
Intercourse with them; and were informed, that though their principal Design,
when they left Ohio, was to hold a Treaty with the Government of Virginia, at
Winchester, where they had accordingly been; yet they intended a visit to this
Province, to which they had been frequently encouraged by Andrew Montour, who
told them, he had the Governor's repeated Orders to invite them to come and see
him, and assured them of an hearty Welcome; and that they had moreover some
important Matters to propose and transact with this Government.

THE Commissioners finding this to be the Case, and that these Indians were
some of the most considerable Persons of the Six Nations, Delawares, Shawonese,
with Deputies from the Twightwees, and Owendats, met them in Council, in which
the Commissioners declared the Contents of their Commission, acknowledged the
Governor's Invitation, and bid them heartily welcome among their Brethren of
Pennsylvania, to whom their Visit was extremely agreeable. -- Conrad Weiser and
Andrew Montour interpreting between the Commissioners and Indians and several
Magistrates, and others, of the principal Inhabitants of the County, favoring
them with their Presence.

THE Twightwees and Delawares having had several of their great Men cut off by
the French and their Indians, and all the Chiefs of the Owendats being lately
dead, it became necessary to condole their Loss; and no Business could be
begun, agreeable to the Indian Customs, till the Condolances were passed; and
as these could not be made, with the usual Ceremonies, for want of the Goods,
which were not arrived, and it was uncertain when they would, the Commissioners
were put to some Difficulties, and ordered the Interpreters to apply to
Scarrowyady, an Oneido Chief, who had the Conduct of the Treaty in Virginia,
and was a Person of great Weight in their Councils, and to ask his Opinion,
whether the Condolances would be accepted by Belts and Strings, and Lists of
the particular Goods intended to be given, with Assurances of their Delivery as
soon as they should come. Scarrowyady was pleased with their Application; but
frankly declared, that the Indians could not proceed to Business while the
Blood remained on their Garments, and that the Condolances could not be
accepted unless the Goods, intended to cover the Graves, were actually spread
on the Ground before them. A Messenger was therefore forthwith sent to meet and
hasten the Waggoners, since every Thing must stop till the Goods came.

It was then agreed to confer with Scarrowyady, and some others of the Chiefs
of the Shawonese and Delawares, on the State of Affairs at Ohio, and from them
the Commissioners learned, in sundry Conferences, the following Particulars,
viz.

"THAT when the Governor of Pennsylvania's Express arrived at Ohio, with the
Account of the March of a large French Army to the Heads of Ohio, with Intent
to take Possession of that Country, it alarmed the Indians so much, that the
Delawares, at Weningo, an Indian Town, situate high up on Ohio River, went,
agreeable to a Custom established among the Indians, and forbad, by a formal
Notice, the Commander of that Armament, then advanced to the Straits, between
Lake Ontario and Lake Erie, to continue his March, at least not to presume to
come farther than Niagara. This had not however any Effect, but,
notwithstanding this No^^^^ the French continued their March; which, being
afterward taken into Consideration by the Council, at L^gs-Town, they ordered
some of their principal Indians to give the French a second Notice to leave
their Country, and return Home, who meeting them on a River running into Lake
Erie, a little above Weningo, addressed the Commander in these Words:

The second Notice delivered to the Commander of the French Army, then near
Weningo.
Father Onontio.
Your Children on Ohio are alarmed to hear of your coming so far this Way. We
at first heard you came to destroy us; our Women left off planting, and our
Warriors prepared for War. We have since heard you came to visit Us as Friends,
without Design to hurt us; but then we wondered you came with so strong a Body.
If you have had any Cause of Complaint, you might have spoke to Onas, or
Corlaer (meaning the Governors of Pennsylvania, and New York) and not come to
disturb us here. We have a Fire at L^gs-Town, where are the Delawares, and
Shawonese, and Brother Onas; you might have sent Deputies there, and said
openly what you came about, if you had thought amiss of the English being
there; and we invite you to do it now, before you proceed any further.

The French Officer's Answer.
Children,
I FIND you come to give me an Invitation to your Council Fire, with a Design,
as I suppose, to call me to Account for coming here. I must let you know that
my Heart is good to you; I mean no Hurt to you; I am come by the great King's
Command, to do you, my Children, Good. You seem to think I carry my Hatchet
under my Coat; I always carry it openly, not to strike you, but those that
shall oppose me. I cannot come to your Council Fire, nor can I return, or stay
here; I am so heavy a Body that the Stream will carry me down, and down I shall
go, unless you pull off my Arm: But this I will tell you, I am commanded to
build four strong Houses, viz. at Weningo, Mohongialo Forks, L^gs-Town, and
Beaver Creek, and this I will do. As to what concerns Onas, and Assaragoa
(meaning the Governors of Pennsylvania and Virginia) I have spoke to the^ and
let them know they must go off the Land, and I shall speak to them again; if
they will not hear me, it is their Fault, I will take them by the Arm, and
throw them over the Hills. All the Land and Waters on this Side Allegheny Hills
are mine, on the other Side theirs; this is agreed on between the two Crowns
over the great Waters. I do not like your selling your Lands to the English;
they shall draw you into no more foolish Bargains. I will take care of your
Lands for you, and of you. The English give you no Goods but for Land, we give
you our Goods for nothing."

WE were further told by Scarrooyady, that when the Answer to this Message was
brought to Logs-Town, another Council was held, consisting of the Six Nations,
Delawares, and Shawonese, who unanimously agreed to divide themselves into Two
Parties, One to go to Virginia, and Pennsylvania, with Scarrooyady, and the
other to go with the Half King to the French Commander, who had it in Charge to
make the following Declaration, as their third and last Notice.

The Third Notice, delivered by the Half King to the Commander of the French
Forces.
Father,
You say you cannot come to our Council Fire at Logs-Town, we therefore now
come to you, to know what is in your Heart. You remember when you were tired
with the War (meaning Queen Anne's War) you of your own Accord sent for us,
desiring to make Peace with us; when we came, you said to us, Children, we make
a Council Fire for You; we want to talk with you, but we must first eat all
with one Spoon out of this Silver Bowl, and all drink out of this Silver Cup;
let us exchange Hatchets; let us bury our Hatchets in this bottomless Hole; and
now we will make a plain Road to all your Countries, so clear, that Onontio may
sit here and see you all eat and drink out of the Bowl and Cup, which he has
provided for you. Upon this Application of yours we consented to make Peace;
and when the Peace was concluded on both Sides, you made a solemn Declaration,
saying, Whoever shall hereafter transgress this Peace, let the Transgressor be
chastised with a Rod, even though it be I, your Father.

Now, Father, notwithstanding this solemn Declaration of yours, you have
whipped several of your Children; you know best why. Of late You have chastised
the Twightwees very severely, without telling us the Reason; and now you are
come with a strong Band on our Land, and have, contrary to your Engagement,
taken up the Hatchet without any previous Parley. These Things are a Breach of
the Peace; they are contrary to your own Declarations: Therefore, now I come to
forbid you. I will strike over all this Land with my Rod, let it hurt who it
will. I tell you, in plain Words, you must go off this Land. You say you have a
strong Body, a strong Neck, and a strong Voice, that when you speak all the
Indians must hear you. It is true, You are a strong Body, and ours is but weak,
yet we are not afraid of You. We forbid you to come any further; turn back to
the Place from whence you came.

SCARROOYADY, who was the Speaker in these Conferences, when he had finished
this Relation, gave his Reason for setting forth these three Messages to the
French in so distinct a manner; because, said he, the Great Being who lives
above, has ordered us to send three Messages of Peace before we make War: --
And as the Half King has, before this Time, delivered the third and last
Message, we have nothing now to do but to strike the French.

THE Commissioners were likewise informed, by Mr. Croghan, that the Ohio
Indians had received from the Virginia Government at large Number of Arms in
the Spring, and that at their pressing Instances a suitable Quantity of
Ammunition was ordered in the Treaty at Winchester to be lodged for them, in a
Place of Security, on this Side the Ohio, which was committed to the Care of
three Persons, viz. Guest, William Trent, and Andrew Montour, who were
empowered to distribute them to the Indians as their Occasions and Behavior
should require. That all the Tribes settled at or near Allegheny would, take
their Measures from the Encouragement which the^e Indians should find in the
Province of Virginia; and that the kind Intentions of this Government in the
Appropriation of a large Sum of Money for the Use of these Indians, in case
they should be distressed by their Enemies, and their Hunting and Planting
prevented, were well known to them by the repeated Informations of Andrew
Montour and the Traders.

CONRAD WEISER, to whom it was earnestly recommended by the Commissioners, to
procure all the Information possible from the Indians of his Acquaintance,
touching their Condition and Disposition, and the real Designs of the French,
did likewise acquaint us, that all Persons at Ohio would have their Eyes on the
Reception of those Indians, now at Carlisle, and judge of the Affection of this
Province by their Treatment of them: and that as the intended Present was no
Secret to those Indians, it was his Opinion, that the Whole should, at this
Time, be distributed; for if any Thing can, such a generous Donation must needs
attach the Indians entirely to the English.

THESE several Matters being taken into Consideration by the Commissioners, and
the Governor having given them express Directions to accommodate themselves to
the Circumstances of the Indians, as they should appear in examining them at
the Place of Treaty, we were unanimously of Opinion, that an Addition should be
made to the Goods bought at Philadelphia, in which a Regard should be had to
such Articles as were omitted or supplied in less Quantities than was suitable
to the present Wants of the Indians. On this Resolution the Lists of Goods were
examined, and an additional Quantity bought of John Carson, at the Philadelphia
Price, and usual Rate of Carriage.

DURING these Consultations, it was rumoured that the Half King was returned to
Logs-Town, and had received an unsatisfactory Answer, which was confirmed, but
not in such Manner as could be positively relied on, by a Brother of Andrew
Montour, and another Person who came directly from Allegheny. This alarmed the
Commissioners, and made them willing postpone Business till they should know
the Certainty thereof, judging, that if the Half King was returned, he would
certainly send a Messenger Express to Carlisle with an Account of what was done
by him; and from this the Commissioners might take their Measures in the
Distribution of the Present.

A LETTER, wrote by Taaf, and Callender, two Indian Traders, dated the
twenty-eight Day of September, from a Place situate a little on this Side
Allegheny River, directed to William Buchannan, was given him in the Morning of
the first Day of October, and he immediately laid it before the Commissioners
for their Perusal. In this Letter an Account is given, that the Half King was
returned, and had been received in a very contemptuous Manner by the French
Commander, who was then preparing with his Forces to come down the River; and
that the Half King, on his Return, shed Tears, and had actually warned the
English Traders not to pass the Ohio, nor to venture either their Persons or
their Goods, for the French would certainly hurt them. On this News the
Conferences with Scarrooyady, and the Chiefs of the Six Nations, Delawares, and
Shawonest, were renewed, and the Letter read to them, at which they appeared
greatly alarmed; but, after a short Pause, Scarrooyady, addressing himself to
the Delawares and Shawonese, spoke in these Words:

Brethren and Cousins,
I LOOK on this Letter as if it had been a Message from the Half King himself:
We may expect no other Account of the Result of his Journey. However, I advise
you to be still, and neither say nor do any Thing till we get Home, and I see
my Friend and Brother the Half King, and then we shall know what is to be done.

THE Forms of the Condolances, which depend entirely on Indian Customs, were
settled in Conferences with Scarrooyady; and Cayanguileguoa, a sensible Indian,
of the Mohock Nation, and a Person intimate with and much consulted by
Scarrooyady, in which it was agreed to take the Six Nations along with us in
these Condolances; and accordingly the proper Belts and Strings were made
ready, and Scarrooyady prepared himself to express the Sentiments of both in
the Indian Manner. And as the Goods arrived this Morning before Break of Day,
the several Sorts used on those Occasions were laid out; and the Indians were
told that the Commissioners would speak to them at Eleven a Clock.

At a Meeting of the Commissioners, and Indians, at Carlisle, the first Day of
October, 1753.
PRESENT, Esquires, Commissioners.
RICHARD PETER'S, ISAAC NORRIS, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN,
The Deputies of the Six Nations, Delawares, Shawonese, Twightwees, and
Owendats. Interpreters.
CONRAD WEISER, ANDREW MONTOUR,
Esquires, Members of Assembly.
JAMES WRIGHT, JOHN ARMSTRONG,
The Magistrates, and several other Gentlemen and Freeholders of the County of
Cumberland.


The SPEECH of the Commissioners. Brethren, Six Nations, Delawares, Shawonese,
Twightwees, and Owendats,

THOUGH the City of Philadelphia be the Place where all Indians should go, who
have Business to transact with this Government, yet at your Request, signified
to Colonel Fairfax, at Winchester, and by him communicated to our Governor, by
an Express to Philadelphia, he has been pleased on this particular occasion to
dispense with your coming there, and has done us the Honor to depute us to
receive and treat with you at this Town, in his Place and Stead; this is set
forth in his Commission, which we now produce to you, under the Great Seal of
this Province, the authentic Sign and Testimony of all Acts of Government.

Brethren,

By this String we acquaint you, that the Six Nations do, at our Request, join
with us in condoling the Losses you have of late sustained by the Deaths of
several of your Chiefs and principal Men; and that that Scarrooyady is to be
deliver for both what has been agreed to be said on this melancholy Occasion.

Here the Commissioners gave a String of Wampum.
Then Scarryooyady spoke as follows: Brethren, the Twightwees and Shawonese,

IT has pleased Him who is above, that we shall meet here Today, and see one
another; I and my Brother Onas join together to speak to you. As we know that
your Seats at Home are bloody, we wipe away the Blood, and set your Seats in
Order at your Council Fire, that you may sit and consult again in Peace and
Comfort as formerly; that You may hold the ancient Union, and strengthen it,
and continue your old friendly Correspondence.

Here a String was given. Brethren, Twightwees, and Shawonese,

WE suppose that the Blood is now washed off. We jointly, with our Brother
Onas, dig a Grave for your Warriors, killed in your Country; and we bury their
Bones decently; wrapping them up in these Blankets; and with these we cover
their Graves.

Here the Goods were given to the Twightwees, and Shawonese. Brethren,
Twightwees, and Shawonese,

I, and my Brother Onas, jointly condole with the Chiefs of your Towns, your
Women and Children, for the Loss you have sustained. We partake of your Grief,
and mix our Tears with yours. We wipe your Tears from your Eyes, that you may
see the Sun, and that every Thing may become clear and pleasant to your Sight;
and we desire you would mourn no more.

Here a Belt was given.
THE same was said to the Delawares, mutatis mutandis.

And then he spoke to the Owendats, in these Words: Our Children, and Brethren,
the Owendats,

You have heard what I and my Brother Onas have jointly said to the Twightwees,
Shawonese, and Delawares: We now come to speak to you. We are informed that
your good old wise Men are all dead, and you have no more left.

We must let you know, that there was a Friendship established by our and your
Grandfathers; and a mutual Council Fire was kindled. In this Friendship all
those then under the Ground, who had ^^t yet obtained Eyes or Faces (that is,
those unborn) were included; and ^t was then mutually promised to tell the same
to their Children, and Childrens Children: But so many great Men of your Nation
have died in so short a Time, that none but Youths are left; and this makes us
afraid, lest that Treaty, so solemnly established by your Ancestors, should be
forgotten by you: We therefore now come to remind you of it, and renew it; we
re-kindle the old Fire, and put on fresh Fuel.

Here a String was given.
THE other Speeches, of burying the Dead, etc. were the same as those to the
Twightwees, etc:

AFTER each had been spoken to, Scarrooyady proceeded thus: Brethren,
Delawares, Shawonese, Twightwees, and Owendats,

WE, the English, and Six Nations, do now exhort every one of you to do your
utmost to preserve this Union and Friendship, which has so long and happily
continued among us: Let us keep the Chain from rusting, and prevent every Thing
that may hurt or break it, from what Quarter soever it may come.


THEN the Goods alloted for each Nation, as a Present of Condolence, were taken
away by each, and the Council adjourned to the next Day.

At a Meeting of the Commissioners, and Indians, at Carlisle, the 2d of
October, 1753.
PRESENT, The C^^^^^^ioners, The same Indians as Yesterday, The Magistrates,
and several Gentlemen of the County.


The SPEECH of the Commissioners. Brethren, Six Nations, Delawares, Shawonese,
Twightwees, and Owendats,

NOW that your Hearts are eased of their Grief, and we behold one another with
cheerful Countenances, we let you know that the Governor, and good People of
Pennsylvania, did not send us to receive you empty-handed; but put something
into our Pockets, to be given to such as should favor us with this friendly
Visit: These Goods we therefore request you would accept of, and divide amongst
all that are of your Company, in such Proportions as shall be agreeable to you.
You Know how to do this better than we. What we principally desire, is, that
you will consider this Present as a Token of our cordial Esteem for You; and
use it with a Frugality becoming your Circumstances, which call at this Time
for more than ordinary Care.

Brethren,

WITH Pleasure we behold here the Deputies of five different Nations, viz. the
United Six Nations, the Delawares, the Shawonese, the Twightwees, and the
Owendats. Be pleased to cast your Eyes toward this Belt, whereon six Figures
are deleniated, holding one another by the Hands. This is a just Resemblance of
our present Union: The five first Figures representing the five Nations, to
which you belong, as the sixth does the Government of Pennsylvania; with whom
You are linked in a close and firm Union. In whatever Part the Belt is broke,
all the Wampum runs off, and renders the Whole of no Strength or Consistency.
In like Manner, should you break Faith with one another, or with this
Government, the Union is di^^olved. We would therefore hereby place before you
the Necessity of preserving your Faith entire to one another, as well as to
this Government. Do not separate: Do not part on any Score. Let no Differences
nor Jealousies subsist a Moment between Nation and Nation: but join all
together as one Man, sincerely and heartily. We on our Part shall always
perform our Engagements to every one of you. In Testimony whereof, we present
you with this Belt.

Here the Belt was given. Brethren,

We have only this one Thing further to say at this Time: Whatever Answers you
may have to give, or Business to transact with us, we desire you would use
Dispatch; as it may be dangerous to you, and incommodious to us, to be kept
long from our Homes, at this Season of the Year.


At a Meeting of the Commissioners, and Indians, the 3d Day of October, 1753.
PRESENT, The Commissioners, The same Indians as before. Several Gentlemen of
the County.


Scarrooyady, Speaker. Brother Onas,

WHAT we have now to say, I am going to speak, in Behalf of the Twightwees,
Shawonese, Delawares, and Owendats.

You have, like a true and affectionate Brother, comforted Us in our
Affliction. You have wiped away the Blood from our Seats, and set them again in
Order. You have wrapped up the Bones of our Warriors, and covered the Graves of
our wise Men; and wiped the Tears from our Eyes, and the Eyes of our Women and
Children: So that we now see the Sun, and all Things are become pleasant to our
Sight. We shall not fail to acquaint our several Nations with your Kindness. We
shall take Care that it be always remembered by us; and believe it will be
attended with suitable Returns of Love and Affection.


Then One of the Twightwees stood up, and spoke as follows: (Scarrooyady
Interpreter.) Brother Onas,

THE Ottawas, Cheepaways, and the French, have struck us. -- The Stroke was
heavy, and hard to be born, for thereby we lost our King, and several of our
Warriors; but the Loss our Brethren, the English suffered, we grieve for most.
The Love we have had for the English, from our first Knowledge of them, still
continues in our Breasts; and we shall ever retain the same ardent Affection
for them. -- We cover the Graves of the English with this Beaver Blanket. We
mourn for them more than for our own People.

Here he spread on the Floor some Beaver Skins, sewed together in the Form of a
large Blanket.
Then Scarrooyady spoke as follows: Brother Onas,

I SPEAK now on Behalf of all the Indians present, in answer to what you said
when you gave us the Goods and Belt. What you have said to us Yesterday is very
kind, and pleases us exceedingly. The Speech which accompanied the Belt, is
particularly of great Moment. We will take the Belt home to Ohio, where there
is a greater and wiser Council than us, and consider it, and return you a full
Answer. We return you Thanks for the Present.

Gave a String. Brother Onas,

LAST Spring, when you heard of the March of the French Army, you were so good
as to send us word, that we might be on our Guard; We thank you for this
friendly Notice.

Brother Onas,

YOUR People not only trade with us in our Towns, but disperse themselves over
a large and wide extended Country, in which reside many Nations; At one End
live the Twightwees, and at the other End the Caghnawagas, and Adirondacks:
these you must comprehend in your Chain of Friendship: they are, and will be,
your Brethren, let Onontio say what he will.

Gave a String. Brother Onas,

I desire you would hear and take Notice of what I am about to say now. The
Governor of Virginia desired leave to build a strong House on Ohio, which came
to the Ears of the Governor of Canada; and we suppose this caused him to invade
our Country. We do not know his Intent; because he speaks with two Tongues. So
soon as we know his Heart, we shall be able to know what to do; and shall speak
accordingly to him. We desire that Pennsylvania and Virginia would at present
forbear settling on our Lands, over the Allegheny Hills. We advise you rather
to call your People back on this side of the Hills, lest Damage should be done,
and you think i^l of us. But to keep up our Correspondence with our Brother
Onas, we will appoint some Place on the Hills, or near them; and we (...)
appoint George (...) on our Part, and desire you to appoint another on your
Part, by a formal writing, under the Governor's Hand. Let none of your People
settle beyond where they are now; (...) on the (...) Lands, till the Affair is
settled between us and the French. At present, George (...)'s House, at
Juniata, may be the Place where any Thing may be sent to us. We desire a
Commission may be given to the Person entrusted by the Government of
Pennsylvania; and that he may be directed to warn People from settling the
Indian Lands, and empowered to remove them.

Gave a Belt and String. Brother Onas,

All we who are here des^^^ you will hear what we are going to say, and regard
it as a Matter of Moment: The French look on the great Number of your Traders
at Ohio with Envy; they fear they shall lose their Trade. You have more Traders
than are necessary; and they spread themselves over our wide Country, at such
great Distances, that we cannot see them, or protect them. We desire you will
call back the great Number of your Traders, and let only three Setts of Traders
remain, and order these to stay in three Places, which we have appointed for
their Residence, viz. L^gs-Town, the Mouth (...), and the Mouth of (...): the
Indians will then come to them, and buy their Goods in these Places, and no
where else. We shall likewise look on them under our Care, and shall be
accountable for them. We have settled this Point with Virginia in the same
Manner.

Gave a String. Brother Onas,

THE English Goods are sold at too dear a Rate to us. If only honest and sober
Men were to deal with us, we think they might afford the Goods cheaper: We
desire, there^^re, that you will take (...), that none but (...).

Gave a String. Brother Onas,

YOUR Traders now bring scarce any Thing but Rum and (...) Lead, or other
valuable Goods. The Rum ruins us. We beg (...) prevent its coming (...)
Quantities, by regulating the Traders. We never understood (...) Trade was to
be for (...) Flour. We desire it may be forbidden, and none sold in the (...)
Country; but that if the (...) will have any: they may go among the
Inhabitants, and (...) Traders come, they bring thirty or (...) Cag^ and put
them down before us, and make us drink; and get all the Skins that should go to
pay the Debts we have contracted for Goods bought of the Fair Traders; and by
this Means, we not only ruin ourselves but them too. These wicked Whiskey
Sellers, when they have once got the Indians (...) Liquor, make them sell their
very ^^^thes from their Backs. -- In short, if the Practice be continued, we
must be inevitably ruined. We most earnestly therefore beseech you to remedy it.

A treble String. Brother Onas,

I HAVE now done with generals; but have something to say for particular
Nations.

THE Shawonese heard some News since they came here, which troubled their
Minds; on which they addressed themselves to their Grandfathers, the Delawares;
and said, Grandfathers, we will live and die with you, and the Six Nations: We,
our Wives and Children; and Children yet unborn.


N. B. This was occasioned by Conrad Weiser's having told them in private
Conversation, that while he was in the Mohock Country, he was informed, that
the French intended to drive away the Shawonese ( as well as the English) from
Ohio.

SCARROOYADY then proceeded, and said, I have something further to say on
Behalf of the Shawonese. Brother Onas,

At the Beginning of the Summer, when the News was brought to us, of the
Approach of the French, the Shawonese made this Speech to their Uncles, the
Delawares, saying, "Uncles, you have often told us, that we were a sensible and
discreet People; but we lost all our Sense and Wits, when we slipped out of
your Arms; however, we are now in one another's Arms again, and hope we shall
slip out no more. We remember, and are returned to our former Friendship, and
hope it will always continue. In Testimony whereof, we give you, our Uncles, a
String of Ten Rows."


THE Shawonese likewise, at the same time, sent a Speech to the Six Nations,
saying, "Our Brethren, the English, have treated us as People that had Wit: The
French deceived us: But we now turn our Heads about, and are looking
perpetually to the Country of the Six Nations, and our Brethren, the English,
and desire you to make an Apology for us; and they gave eight Strings of
Wampum."

Commissi. Have you any Thing at present further to offer?


Indians. We have done.


Commissioners. Friends and Brethren,

WHEN we met you in Conference Yesterday, we were in Expectation of secing the
Norridgawocks at this Place also; but as they do not appear, we would remind
you of one Article stipulated and confirmed the last Year, which has not been
complied withal: We mean the Return of our Captives.

Although we do not immediately charge YOU of this Tribe with this Neglect, yet
you cannot but remember the Commissioners were assured the last Year, that the
Parents who had their Children then in Captivity might rest satisfied, that
they should be returned them in the Spring following, at furthest; And as this
Promise was made by the Norridgawocks when you were present, you engaged that
you would endeavor that the sveral Articles of Peace then rehewod (of which
this was one) should be complied with by the Norridgawocks, as well as your
selves; yet we must inform you, that after all attempts for their Redemption,
Nothing is done; but the Children still remain in the Hands of the French,
abho' their Parents have since been at the Expense and Trouble of making a
tedious Journey to Canada for that Purpose.

You find that the English have faithfully fulfilled all their Promises with
the Indians, and therefore justly expect the like Return from you; and in
Consequence hereof, that you use your best Endeavors that all our Captives may
be forthwith restored, that so there may be no further Reason for Complaint on
this Account.

You informed us Yesterday that your Minister had been attempting to prejudice
you against the English, insinuating that there would soon be a War between the
two Nations; and thereby would (if possible) have prevented your meeting the
Commissioners at this Time; but that you was jealous of him, and believed him
not to be a good Man, because he had wrote to Governor SHIRILY (as you were
informed) on this Head. To which we reply, That it is absolutety false and
without the least Foundation; for we do assure you, that there is at this Time
a good Harmony subsisting between the King of Great Britain, and the French
King.

The Government of the Massachusetts are fully sensible of the Artifices used
by the French to raise Jealousies and creste Misunderstandings between the
English and the Indians, and of the Methods the French use to defeat the
Measures the English take for maintaining Peace and good Friendship: But as a
Proof of our Sincerity, Governor SHIRLEY,


THE following is a Speech of the Wife of the Piankasha King, after her
Husband's Death, 1753.
addressed to the Shawonese, Six Nations, Delawares, and English: "Remember,
Brethren, that my Husband took a fast Hold of the Chain of Friendship
subsisting between your Nations: Therefore I now deliver up his Child into your
Care and Protection, and desire you would take Care of him; and remember the
Alliance his Father was in with you, and not forget his Friendship, but
continue kind to his Child."

Gave four Strings black and white. Brethren, Shawonese, Delawares, Six
Nations, and English,

WE acquaint all our Brethren, that we have prepared this Beaver Blanket as a
Seat for all our Brethren to sit on in Council. In the Middle of it we have
painted a green Circle, which is the Color and Resemblance of our Hearts;
which we desire our Brethren may believe are sincere toward our Alliance with
them.

Delivered a Beaver Blanket.
Then Scarrooyady stood up and said: Brother Onas,

THE Shawonese and Delawares delivered this Speech to the Six Nations, and
desired they would deliver it to the English; and now I deliver it on their
Behalf.

Brethren,

WE acquaint you, that as the Wife of the Piankasha King delivered his Child to
all the Nations, to be taken Care of, they desire that those Nations may be
interceeded with, to take care that the said Child may be placed in his
Father's Seat, when he comes to be a Man, to rule their People. And the Six
Nations now, in Behalf of the Whole, request that this Petition may not be
forgot by the English, but that they would see the Request fulfilled.

Gave Four Strings.
THEN Scarrooyady desired the Six Nations Council might be made acquainted with
all these Speeches: And added, that they had no more to say; but what they have
said is from their Hearts.

At a Meeting of the Commissioners, and Indians, the 4th of October, 1753.
PRESENT, The Commissioners, The same Indians as before. The Gentlemen of the
County.


The Commissioners, unwilling to lose any Time, prepared their Answers early
this Morning, and sent for the Indians; who having seated themselves, the
following Speech was made to them:

Brethren, Six Nations, Delawares, Shawonese, Twightwees, and Owendats,

THE several Matters delivered by you Yesterday have been well considered; and
we are now going to return You our Answers.

THE Concern expressed by the Twightwees for the Death and Imprisonment of the
English, with their Professions of Love and Esteem, denotes a sincere and
friendly Disposition, which entitles them to our Thanks, and the Continuance of
our Friendship; this they may certainly depend on.

Brethren,

YOU have recommended to us the several Nations, who, you say, live in that
great Extent of Country, over which our Traders travel to dispose of their
Goods, and especially the Twightwees, Adirondacks, and Caghnawagas, who you say
live at different Extremities, and have good Inclinations toward the English.
-- We believe you would not give them this Character unless they deserved it.
Your Recommendations always will have a Weight with Us, and will dispose us in
Favor of them, agreeable to your Request.

Brethren,

THE several Articles which contain your observations on the Indian Traders,
and the loose straggling Manner in which that Trade is carried on, through
Countries lying at great Distances from your Towns -- Your Proposals to remedy
this, by having named three Places for the Traders to reside in, under your
Care and Protection, with a Request, that the Province would appoint the
particular Person to be concerned in this Trade, for whom they will be
answerable -- What you say about the vast Quantities of Rum, and its ill
Effects, and that no more may be brought a ongst you; all these have made a
very strong Impression upon our Minds; and was it now in our Power to rectify
these Disorders, and to put Matters on the Footing you propose, we would do it
with great Pleasure: But these are Affairs which more immediately concern the
Government; in these therefore, we shall imitate your Example, by laying them
before the Governor, assuring you, that our heartiest Representations of the
Necessity of these Regulations shall not be wanting, being convinced, that
unless something effectual be speedily done in these Matters, the good People
of this Province can no longer expect Safety or Profit in their Commerce, nor
the Continuance of your Affection.

Brethren,

We will send an Account to Onondago of all that has been transacted between us.

We will assist you with Horses for the Carriage of the Goods given you.

We grant your Women and young Men their Request for Rum, on Condition it be
not delivered to them until You shall have passed the Mountains.

SCARROOYADY some Days ago desired us to give Orders for the Mending of your
Guns, etc. and we did so; being obliged to send for (...) Gunsmith out of the
Country, as no One of that Trade lived in the Town; who promised to come: But
having broke his Word, it has not been in our Power to comply with this Request.

Here the String given with the Request was returned. HAVING delivered our
general Answer, we shall now proceed to give one to what was said by particular
Nations, as well by the Shawonese in the Forenoon, as by the Twightwees in the
Afternoon.

Brethren, Delawares, and Shawonese,

We are glad to see you in such good Dispositions to each other. We entreat you
to do every Thing you can to preserve the Continuance of this agreeable
Harmony. The Shawonese may be assured we retain no Manner of Remembrance of
their former Miscarriages: We are perfectly reconciled, and our Esteem for
their Nation is the same as ever.

Gave a large String. Brethren, Twightwees,

We shall take your several Presents, Shells, Strings, Beaver, Blanket, and
Calumet Pipe, with us, and deliver them to the Governor; that these and the
several Things said at the Delivery of them, may remain in the Council Chamber,
at Philadelphia, for our mutual Use and Remembrance, whenever it shall please
the Great Being, who sits above, to bring us together in Council again.

Gave a long String.

Brethren,

WE desire you will send these two Strouds to the young King, as an
Acknowledgment of our affectionate Remembrance of his Father's Love to us, and
of our Good Will to him.

BE pleased to present to the Widow of the Piankasha King, our late hearty
Friend, these Handkerchiefs, to wipe the Tears from her Eyes; and likewise give
her Son these two Strowds to clothe him.

Here two Handkerchiefs and two Strands were given. Brethren Twightwees,

WE assure you we entertain no hard Thoughts of you; nor in any wise impute to
you the Misfortune that befell the English in your Town; it was the Chance of
War: We were struck together; we fell together; and we lament your Loss equally
with our own.

Brethren, Six Nations, Delawares, Shawonese, Twightwees, and Owendats,

WE have now finished our Answers; and We hope they will be agreeable to you:
Whatever we have said, has been with a hearty Good Will toward you; our Hearts
have accompanied our Professions, and you will always find our Actions
agreeable to them. Then the Commissioners were silent; and after a Space of
Time, renewed their Speeches to them.

Brethren, Six Nations, Delawares, Shawonese, Twightwees, and Owendats,

WE have something to say to you, to which we entreat you will give your
closest Attention, since it concerns both us and You very much.

Brethren,

WE have held a Council on the present Situation of your Affairs. We have
Reason to think, from the Advices of Taaf and Callender, that it would be too
great a Risque, considering the present Disorder Things are in at Ohio, to
increase the Quantity of Goods already given you: We therefore acquaint you,
that, though the Governor has furnished us with a larger Present of Goods, to
put into your public Store house, as a general Stock, for your Support and
Service, and we did intend to have sent them along with you; we have, on this
late disagreeable Piece of News, altered our Minds, and determined, that the
Goods shall not be delivered till the Governor be made acquainted with your
present Circumstances, and shall give his own Orders for the Disposal of them.
And that they may lie ready for your Use, to be applied for, whenever the
Delivery may be safe, seasonable, and likely to do you the most Service; we
have committed them to the Care of your good Friend George Croghan, who is to
transmit to the Governor, by Express, a true and faithful Account how your
Matters are likely to turn out; and on the Governor's Order, and not otherwise,
to put you into the Possession of them.

THIS we hope you will think a prudent Caution, and a Testimony of our Care for
your real good and Welfare.

Brethren,

WE have a Favor of a particular Nature to request from your Speaker,
Scarrooyady, in which we expect your Concurrence, and joint Interest; and
therefore make it to him in your Presence.


Here the Commissioners applying to Scarrooyady, spoke as follows: Respected
Chief and Brother Scarrooyady,

We have been informed by Andrew Montour, and George Croghan, that you did at
Winchester, in public Council, undertake to go to C^rdina, to solicit the
Release of some Warriors of the Shawonese Nation, who are said to be detained
in the Public Prison of Charlestown, on Account of some Mischief committed by
them, or their Companions, in the inhabited Part of that Province; and these
two Persons, who are your very good Friends, have given it as their Opinion,
if, after you know what has passed at Ohio, you shall now leave this Company of
Indians, and not return with them to their Families, and assist in the
Consultations with the Half King, and their other Chiefs, what Measures to take
in this unhappy Situation of your Affairs, all may be irrecoverably lost at
Allegheny, and the Loss with Justice be laid at your Door. You may, perhaps, be
afraid to disoblige the Shawonese, as it was at their Instance you undertook
this Journey; but we intend to speak to them, and have no Doubt of obtaining
their Consent; convinced as we are, that the Release of these Prisoners will be
so^^^ and more effectually procured by the joint Interposition of the Governors
of Pennsylvania and Virginia, than by your personal Solicitation; in as much
as our Governor, to whom we shall very heartily recommend this Affair, can
send, with greater Dispatch, his Letters to ^span, than you can perform the
Journey; for at this Season, Opportunities present every Day of sending by Sea
to Charlestown; and an Express by Land may be dispatched to Governor
Dinwiddie, as soon as we return to Philadelphia.

Gave a String.
THE Shawonese Chiefs expressing Dissatisfaction at this Endeavor of the
Commissioners to stop Scarrooyady, it gave us some Trouble to satisfy them, and
obtain their Consent; but at last it was effected; and when this was signified
to Scarrooyady, he made this Answer.

Brother Onas,

I WILL, take your Advice, and not go to Virginia at this Time, -- but go Home,
and do every Thing in my Power for the common Good. And since we are here now
together, with a great deal of Pleasure I must acquaint you, that we have set a
Horn on Andrew Montour's Head, and that you may believe what he says to be
true, between the Six Nations and you, they have made him one of their
Counselors, and a great Man among them, and love him dearly.

Scarrooyady gave a large Belt to Andrew Montour, and the Commissioners agreed
to it.
AFTER this Difficulty was got over, nothing else remained to be done; and as
the Absence of these Indians was dangerous, the Commissioners put an End to the
Treaty, and took their Leave of them, making private Presents at parting, to
such of the Chiefs, and others, as were recommended by the Interpreters to
their particular Notice.

THUS, may it please the Governor, we have given a full and just Account of all
our Proceedings, and we hope our Conduct will meet with his Approbation. But,
in Justice to these Indians, and the Promises we made them, we cannot close our
Report, without taking Notice, That the Quantities of strong Liquors sold to
these Indians in the Places of their Residence, and during their Hunting
Season, from all Parts of the Counties over Sasquehannah, have increased of
late to an inconceivable Degree, so as to keep these poor Indians continually
under the Force of Liquor, that they are hereby become dissolute, enfeebled and
indolent when sober, and untractable and mischevious in their Liquor, always
quarreling, and often murdering one another: That the Traders are under no
Bonds, nor give any Security for their Observance of the Laws, and their good
Behavior; and by their own Intemperance, unfair Dealings, and Irregularities,
will, it is to be feared, entirely estrange the Affections of the Indians from
the English, deprive them of their natural Strength and Activity, and oblige
them either to abandon their Country, or submit to any Terms, be they ever so
unreasonable, from the French. These Truths, may it please the Governor, are of
so interesting a Nature, that we shall stand excused in recommending in the
most earnest Manner, the deplorable State of these Indians, and the heavy
Discouragements under which our Commerce with them at present labors, to the
Governor's most serious Consideration, that some good and speedy Remedies may
be provided, before it be too late.

RICHARD PETER'S, ISAAC NORRIS, BENJ. FRANKLIN.

November 1, 1753.

