TRUE GRACE, Distinguished from the EXPERIENCE OF DEVILS;

IN A SERMON, Preached before the SYNOD OF NEW YORK, Convened at New-Ark, in
NEW JERSEY, On September 28. N. S. 1752.

By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Stockbridge in
New England.

(Printed by the Desire of the SYNOD.)

2 Cor. xi. 3. I fear, left by any Means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through
his Subtilty, so your Minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity that is in
CHRIST: V. 14. For Satan Himself; is transformed into an Angel of Light.
NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES PARKER, at the New Printing-Office in Beaver-Street,
MDCCLIII.

At a Meeting of the SYNOD of NEW YORK, at NEWARK, September 28, 1752.
The SYNOD agree, to desire the Reverend Mr. EDWARDS, to publish his Sermon,
preached before them.

A true Copy, RICHARD TREAT, Syn. Clerk.

TRUE GRACE, Distinguished from the EXPERIENCE OF DEVILS.
JAMES II. 19. Thou believe that there is one GOD; thou do well; the Devils
also believe and tremble.
OBSERVE in these Words. 1. Something that some depended on, as an Evidence of
their good Estate, and Acceptance, as the Objects of GOD's Favor, viz. a
speculative Faith, or Belief of the Doctrines of Religion. The great Doctrine
of the Existence of one only GOD is particularly mentioned; probably, because
this was a Doctrine wherein, especially, there was a visible and noted
Distinction, between professing Christians and the Heathens, amongst whom the
Christians in those Days were dispersed: And therefore, this was what many
trusted in, as what recommended 'em to; or at least, was an Evidence of, their
Interest, in the great, spiritual and eternal Privileges, in which real
Christians were distinguished from the rest of the World.

2. How much is allowed concerning this Faith, viz. That it is a good
Attainment: Thou do well. It was good, as it was necessary. This Doctrine was
one of the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity; and, in some Respects, above
all others fundamental. It was necessary to be believed, in order to Salvation:
And a Being without the Belief of this Doctrine, especially in those that had
such Advantage to know, as they had, whom the Apostle wrote to, would be a
great Sin, and what would vastly aggravate their Damnation. This Belief was
also good, as it had a good Tendency in many Respects.

3. What is implicitly denied concerning it, viz. That it is any Evidence of a
Person's being in a State of Salvation. The whole Context, shows this to be the
Design of the Apostle in the Words: And, it is particularly manifest, by the
Conclusion of the Verse; which is the

4. Thing observable in the Words, viz. The Argument by which the Apostle
proves, that this is no Sign of a State of Grace, viz. that it is found in the
Devils. They believe that there is one GOD, and that He is a holy sin-hating
GOD; and that He is a GOD of Truth, and will fulfill his Threatenings, by which
He has denounced future Judgments, and a great Increase of Misery on them; and
that He is an Almighty GOD, and able to execute his threatened Vengeance upon
them.

Therefore, the DOCTRINE I infer from the Words, to make the Subject of my
present Discourse, is this.

Nothing in the Mind of Man, that is of the same Nature with what the Devils
experience, or are the Subjects of, is any sure Sign of saving Grace.

If there be any Thing that the Devils have, or find in themselves, which is an
Evidence of the saving Grace of the Spirit of GOD, then the Apostle's Argument
is not good; which is plainly this: That which is in the Devils, or which they
do, is no certain Evidence of Grace. But the Devils believe that there is one
GOD. Therefore, thy believing that there is one GOD, is no sure Evidence that
thou art gracious. So that the whole Foundation of the Apostle's Argument, lies
in that Proposition: That which is in the Devils, is no certain Sign of Grace.

Nevertheless, I shall mention two or three further Reasons, or Arguments of
the Truth of this Doctrine.

I. The Devils have no Degree of Holiness: And therefore, those Things, which
are Nothing beyond what they are the Subjects of, cannot be holy Experiences.

The Devil once was holy; but when he fell, he lost all his Holiness, and
became perfectly wicked. He is the greatest Sinner, and in some Sense, the
Father of all Sin. John viii. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the
Lusts of your Father ye will do. He was a Murderer from the Beginning, and
abode not in the Truth; because there was no Truth in him: When he speaks a
Lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a Liar, and the Father of it. 1 John,
iii. 8. He that commits Sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from the
Beginning. He is often spoken of, as by Way of Eminence, THE WICKED ONE. So,
Matt. xiii. 19. Then comes the wicked One, and catches away that which was
sown in his Heart. V. 38. The Tares are the Children of the wicked One. 1 John,
ii. 13. I write unto you young Men, because ye have overcome the wicked One.
Chap. iii. 12. Not as Cain, who was of that wicked One. Chap. v. 18. Whosoever
is born of GOD -- keeps himself, and that wicked One touches him not. So the
Devils are called evil Spirits, unclean Spirits, Powers of Darkness, Rulers of
the Darkness of this World, and Wickedness it self: Ephesians. vi. 12. For we wrestle
not against Flesh and Blood; but against Principalities, against Powers,
against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against spiritual Wickedness
in high Places.

Therefore, surely those Things which the Minds of Devils are the Subjects of,
can have Nothing of the Nature of true Holiness in 'em. The Knowledge and
Understanding which they have of the Things of GOD and Religion, cannot ^e of
the Nature of divine and holy Light, nor any Knowledge that is merely of the
same Kind. No such Impressions as are made on their Hearts, can be of a
spiritual Nature. That Kind of Sense, which they have of divine Things, however
great, cannot be an holy Sense. Such Affections as move their Hearts, however
powerful, cannot be holy Affections. If there be no Holiness in them, as they
are in the Devil, there can be no Holiness in them as they are in Man; unless
something be added to them, beyond what is in them, or they are in the Devil.
And if any Thing be added to 'em, then they are not the same Things; but are
something beyond what Devils are the Subjects of; which is contrary to the
Supposition; for the Proposition which I am upon, is, that those Things which
are of the same Nature, and Nothing beyond what Devils are the Subjects of,
cannot be holy Experiences. It Is not the Subject that makes the Affection, or
Experience, or Quality holy; but it is the Quality that makes the Subject holy.

And if those Qualities and Experiences, which the Devils are the Subjects of,
have Nothing of the Nature of Holiness in them; then they can be no certain
Signs, that Persons which have them, are holy or gracious. There is no certain
Sign of true Grace, but those Things which are spiritual and gracious. It Is
GOD's Image that is his Seal and Mark, the Stamp, by which those that are his,
are known. But that, which has Nothing of the Nature of Holiness, has Nothing
of this Image. That, which is a sure Sign of Grace, must either be something,
which has the Nature and Essence of Grace; or is flowing from, or some-way
belonging to its Essence: For that, which distinguishes Things one from
another, is their Essence, or something appertaining to their Essence. And
therefore, that which is sometimes found wholly without the Essence of Holiness
or Grace, can be no essential, sure, or distinguishing Mark of Grace.

II. The Devils are not only absolutely without all true Holiness, but they are
not so much as the Subjects of any common Grace.

If any should imagine, that some Things may be Signs of Grace, which are not
Grace itself, or which have nothing of the Nature and Essence of Grace and
Holiness in them; yet, certainly they will allow, that the Qualifications,
which are sure Evidences of Grace, must be Things that are near akin to Grace,
or having some remarkable Affinity with it. But the Devils are not only wholly
destitute of any true Holiness; but they are at the greatest Distance from it,
and have nothing in them, in any wise akin to it.

There are many in this World, who are wholly destitute of saving Grace, who
yet have common Grace: They have no true Holiness, but nevertheless, have
something of that which is called moral Virtue; and are the Subjects of some
Degree of the common Influences of the Spirit of GOD. It Is so with those in
general, that live under the Light of the Gospel, and are not given up to
judicial Blindness and Hardness. Yea, those that are thus given up, yet have
some Degree of restraining Grace, while they live in this World; without which,
the Earth could not bear them, and they would in no Measure, be tolerable
Members of human Society. But when any are damned, or cast into Hell, as the
Devils are, GOD wholly withdraws his restraining Grace, and all merciful
Influences of his Spirit whatsoever: And they have neither saving Grace, nor
common Grace; neither the Grace of the Spirit; nor any of the common Gifts of
the Spirit; neither true Holiness, nor moral Virtue of any Kind. Hence arises
the vast Increase of the Exercise of Wickedness in the Hearts of Men, when they
are damned. And herein is the chief Difference between the damned in Hell, and
unregenerate and graceless Men in this World: Not that wicked Men in this
World, have any more Holiness or true Virtue than the damned, or that wicked
Men, when they leave this World, have any Principles of Wickedness infused into
'em: But when Men are cast into Hell, GOD perfectly takes away his Spirit from
them, as to all it is merciful common Influences, and entirely withdraws from
them, all Restraints of his Spirit and good Providence.

III. It is unreasonable to suppose, that a Person's being in any Respect as
the Devil is, should be a certain Sign, that he is very unlike, and opposite to
him; and hereafter, shall not have his Part with him. True Saints are extremely
unlike, and contrary to the Devil, both relatively and really. They are so
relatively. The Devil is the grand Rebel; the chief Enemy of GOD and CHRIST;
the Object of GOD's greatest Wrath; a condemned Malefactor, utterly rejected
and cast off by him; forever shut out of his Presence; the Prisoner of his
Justice; an everlasting Inhabitant of the infernal World. The Saints, on the
contrary, are the Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem; Members of the Family, of
the glorious KING of Heaven; the Children of GOD; the Brethren and Spouse of
his dear Son; Heirs of GOD; Joint-heirs with CHRIST; Kings and Priests unto
GOD. And they are extremely different really. The Devil, on Account of his
hateful Nature, and those accursed Dispositions which reign in Him, is called
Satan, the Adversary, Abaddon and Apollyon, the great Destroyer, the Wolf, the
roaring Lion, the great Dragon, the old Serpent. The Saints are represented as
GOD's holy Ones, his anointed Ones, the Excellent of the Earth; the Meek of the
Earth; Lambs and Doves; CHRIST'S little Children; having the Image of GOD, pare
in Heart; GOD' S Jewels; Lilies in CHRIST' S Garden; Plants of Paradise; Stars
of Heaven; Temples of the Living GOD. The Saints, so far as they are Saints,
are as diverse from the Devil, as Heaven is from Hell; and much more contrary
than Light is to Darkness: And the eternal State that they are appointed to, is
answerably diverse and contrary.

Now it is not reasonable to suppose, that a being, in any Respect, as Satan
is, or the being the Subject of, any of the same Properties, Qualifications,
Affections, or Actions, that are in Him, is any certain Evidence, that Persons
are thus exceeding different from him; and in Circumstances so diverse, and
appointed to an eternal State, so extremely contrary in all Respects. Wicked
Men, are in Scripture, called the Children of the Devil. Now is it reasonable
to suppose, that Men's being, in any Respect, as the Devil is, can be a certain
Sign, that they are not his Children, but the Children of the infinitely Holy
and Blessed GOD? We are informed, that wicked Men, shall hereafter, have their
Part with Devils; shall be sentenced to the same everlasting Fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Now, can a Man's being like the Devil in
any Respect, be a sure Token that he shall not have his Part with Him, but with
glorious Angels, and with JESUS CHRIST, dwelling with Him, where he is, that he
may behold, and partake of his Glory?

IMPROVEMENT.
The first USE may lie in several Inferences, for our Instruction.

I. From what has been said, it may be inferred, by Parity of Reason, that
Nothing that damned Men do, or ever will Experience, can be any sure Sign of
Grace.

Damned Men are like the Devils; are conformed to 'em in Nature and State. They
have nothing better in them than the Devils; have no higher Principles in their
Hearts; experience nothing, and do nothing of a more excellent Kind: As they
are the Children and Servants of the Devil; and as such shall dwell with him,
and be Partakers with him, of the same Misery. As CHRIST says, concerning the
Saints, in their future State; Matt. xxii. 30. That they shall be as the Angels
of GOD in Heaven: So it may be said concerning ungodly Men, in their future
State; that they shall be as the fallen, wicked Angels in Hell.

Each of the forementioned Reasons, given to show the Truth of the Doctrine,
with Respect to Devils, hold good with Respect to damned Men. Damned Men have
no Degree of Holiness: And therefore, those Things, which are nothing beyond
what they have, cannot be holy Experiences. So it is true, that the damned Men,
are not only absolutely destitute of all true Holiness, but they have not so
much as any common Grace. And lastly, it is unreasonable to suppose, that a
Person's being in any Respect, as the damned in Hell are, should be a certain
Sign, that they are very unlike and opposite to them, and hereafter, shall not
have their Portion with them.

II. We may hence infer, that no Degree of speculative Knowledge of Things, of
Religion, is any certain Sign of saving Grace. The Devil, before his Fall, was
among those bright and glorious Angels of Heaven, which are represented as
Morning Stars, and Flames of Fire, that excel in Strength and Wisdom. And though
he be now become sinful, yet his Sin has not abolished the Faculties of the
angelick Nature; as when Man fell, he did not lose the Faculties of the human
Nature. Sin destroys spiritual Principles, but not the natural Faculties. It Is
true, Sin, when in full Dominion, entirely prevents the Exercise of the natural
Faculties, in holy and spiritual Understanding; and lays many Impediments in
the Way of their proper Exercise in other Respects: It lays the natural Faculty
of Reason, under great Disadvantages, by the many and strong Prejudices, which
the Mind is brought under the Power of: And in fallen Men, the Faculties of the
Soul, are, doubtless, greatly impeded in their Exercise, through that great
Weakness and Disorder of the corporeal Organ, which it is strictly united to;
which is the Consequence of Sin. But there seems to be nothing in the Nature of
Sin, or moral Corruption, that has any Tendency to destroy the natural
Capacity; or even to diminish it, properly speaking. If Sin were of such a
Nature, as necessarily to have that Tendency and Effect; then it might be
expected, that wicked Men, in a future State, where they are given up entirely
to the unrestrained Exercise of their Corruptions and Lusts, and Sin is, in all
Respects, brought to its greatest Perfection in them, would have the Capacity
of their Souls greatly diminished: Which we have no Reason to suppose; but
rather, on the contrary; that their Capacities are greatly enlarged, and that
their actual Knowledge is vastly increased; and that even with Respect to the
Divine Being, and the Things of Religion, and the great Concerns of the
immortal Souls of Men; and that, with Regard to these Things, the Eyes of
wicked Men are opened; and they, in some Respects, emerge out of Darkness into
clear Light, when they go into another World.

The Greatness of the Abilities of the Devils, may be argued, from the
Representation in Ephesians. vi. 12, We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but
against Principalities, against Powers, etc. The same may also be argued, from
what the Scripture says of Satan's Subtilty. Genesis iii. 1. 2 Cor. xi. 3. Acts
xiii. 10.

And as the Devil has a Faculty of Understanding of large Capacity, so he is
capable of a great speculative Knowledge, of the Things of GOD, and the
invisible and eternal World, as well as other Things; and must needs, actually,
have a great Understanding of these Things; as these are the Things which have
always been chiefly in his View; and as his Circumstances, from his first
Existence, have been such as have tended chiefly to engage Him to attend to
these Things. Before his Fall, he was one of those Angels, who continually
beheld the Face of the Father, which is in Heaven. And Sin has no Tendency to
destroy the Memory: And therefore, has no Tendency to blot out of it, any
speculative Knowledge that was formerly there.

As the Devil's Subtilty, shows his great Capacity; so the Way in which his
Subtilty is exercised and manifested; which is principally in his artful
Management, with Respect to Things of Religion; his exceeding subtle
Representations, Insinuations, Reasonings, and Temptations, concerning these
Things, demonstrates his great actual Understanding of them. As in order to the
being a very artful Disputant in any Science, though it be only to confound and
deceive such as are conversant in the Science; a Person had need to have a
great and extensive Acquaintance with the Things, which pertain to that Science.

Thus the Devil has, undoubtedly a great Degree of speculative Knowledge in
Divinity; having been, as it were, educated in the best Divinity School in the
Universe, viz. The Heaven of Heavens. He must needs have such an extensive and
accurate Knowledge, concerning the Nature and Attributes of GOD, as WE, Worms
of the Dust, in our present State, are not capable of. And he must have a far
more extensive Knowledge of the Works of GOD; as of the Work of Creation in
particular; for he was a Spectator of the Creation of this visible World: He
was one of those Morning-Stars that we read of, Job xxxviii. 4, 5, 6, 7. who
sang together, and of those Sons of GOD, that shouted for Joy, when GOD laid
the Foundations of the Earth, and laid the Measures thereof, and stretched the
Line upon it. And so he must have a very great Knowledge of GOD's Works of
Providence: He has been a Spectator of the Series of these Works from the
Beginning: He has seen how GOD has governed the World in all Ages: He has seen
the whole Train of GOD's wonderful successive Dispensations of Providence
toward his Church, from Generation to Generation. And He has not been an
indifferent Spectator; but the great Opposition, which there has been between
GOD and him, in the whole Course of those Despensations; has necessarily,
greatly engaged his Attention, in the strictest Observation of them. He must
have a great Degree of Knowledge, concerning JESUS CHRIST, as the Savior of
Men; and the Nature and Method of the Work of Redemption, and the wonderful
Wisdom of GOD in this Contrivance. It Is that Work of GOD, wherein, above all
others, GOD has acted in Opposition to him; and in which he has chiefly set
himself in Opposition to GOD. It Is with Relation to this Affair, that that
mighty Warfare has been maintained, which has been carried on between Michael
and his Angels, and the Devil and his Angels, through all Ages, from the
Beginning of the World; and especially, since Christ appeared in the World. The
Devil has had enough to engage his Attention, to the Steps of Divine Wisdom in
this Work; for it is to that Wisdom he has opposed his Subtilty: And he has
seen, and found, to his great Disappointment, and unspeakable Torment; how
divine Wisdom, as exercised in that Work, has baffled and confounded his
Devices. He has a great Knowledge of the Things of another World; for the
Things of that World, are in his immediate View. He has a great Knowledge of
Heaven; for he has been an Inhabitant of that World of Glory: And he has a
great Knowledge of Hell, and the Nature of its Misery; for he is the first
Inhabitant of Hell; and above all the other Inhabitants, has Experience of its
Torment, and has felt them constantly, for more than Fifty-seven Hundred Years.
He must have a great Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures; for it is evident, he is
not hindered from knowing what is written there, by the Use he made of the Words
of Scripture, in his Temptation of our Savior. And if he can know, he has much
Opportunity to know, and must needs have a Disposition to know, with the
greatest Exactness; that he may, to greater Effect, prevent and wrest the
Scripture, and prevent such an Effect of the Word of GOD on the Hearts of Men,
as shall tend to Overthrow his Kingdom. He must have a great Knowledge of the
Nature of Mankind, their Capacity, their Dispositions, and the Corruptions of
their Hearts; for he has had long and great Observation and Experience. The
Heart of Man, is what he has had chiefly to do with, in his subtle Devices,
mighty Efforts, (...) and indefatigable Operations and Exertions of himself,
from the Beginning of the World. And it is evident, that He has a great
speculative Knowledge of the Nature of experimental Religion, by his being able
to imitate it so artfully, and in such a Manner, as to transform himself into
an Angel of Light.

Therefore it is manifest, from my Text and Doctrine, that no Degree of
speculative Knowledge of Things of Religion, is any certain Sign of true Piety.
Whatever clear Notions a Man may have of the Attributes of GOD, and Doctrine of
the Trinity; the Nature of the two Covenants, the Economy of the Persons of
the Trinity, and the Part which each Person has in the Affair of Man's
Redemption; if he can Discourse never so excellently of the Offices of CHRIST,
and the Way of Salvation by him, and the admirable Methods of divine Wisdom;
and the Harmony of the various Attributes of GOD in that Way; if he can talk
never so clearly and exactly of the Method of the Justification of a Sinner,
and of the Nature of Conversion, and the Operations of the Spirit of GOD, in
applying the Redemption of CHRIST; giving good Distinctions, happily solving
Difficulties, and answering Objections; in a Manner tending greatly to the
enlightening the Ignorant, to the Edification of the Church of GOD, and the
Conviction of Gainsayers; and the great Increase of Light in the World: If he
has more Knowledge of this Sort than Hundreds of true Saints, of an ordinary
Education, and most Divines; yet all is no certain Evidence of any Degree of
saving Grace in the Heart.

It Is true, the Scripture often speaks of Knowledge of divine Things, as what
is peculiar to true Saints; as in John, xvii. This is eternal Life, that they
might know thee, the only true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, whom thou have sent.
Matt. xii. 27. No man knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any Man
the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Ps. ix.
10. They that know thy Name, will put their Trust in Thee. Philip. iii. 8. I
count all Things but Loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of CHRIST JESUS
my Lord. But then, we must understand it of a different Kind of Knowledge, from
that speculative Understanding, which the Devil has to so great a Degree. It
will also be allowed, that the spiritual saving Knowledge of GOD, and divine
Things, greatly promotes speculative Knowledge; as it engages the Mind in its
Search into Things of this Kind, and much assists to a distinct Understanding
of them; so that, other Things being equal, they that have spiritual Knowledge,
are much more likely than others, to have a good doctrinal Acquaintance with
Things of Religion; but yet, such Acquaintance may be no distinguishing
Characteristic of true Saints.

III. It may also be inferred from what has been observed, that for Persons
merely to yield a speculative Assent to the Doctrines of Religion as true, is
no certain Evidence of a State of Grace. My Text tells us, that the Devils
believe, and as they believe that there is one GOD, so they believe the Truth
of the Doctrines of Religion in general. The Devil is orthodox in his Faith; he
believes the true Scheme of Doctrine; he is no Deist, Socinian, Arian,
Pelagian, or Antinomian; the Articles of his Faith are all found, and what he
is thoroughly established in.

Therefore, for a Person to believe the Doctrines of Christianity, merely from
the Influence of Things speculative, or from the Force of Arguments, as
discerned only by Speculation, is no Evidence of Grace.

Though it is probably a very rare Thing, for unregenerate Men, to have a strong
Persuasion of the Truth of the Doctrines of Religion, especially, such of 'em
as are very mysterious, and much above the Comprehension of Reason: Yea, it is
manifest, that we have no Warrant to determine, that it can never be so, or to
look upon such a Persuasion, as an infalliable Evidence of Grace; and that no
Person can safely determine his State to be good from such an Evidence. Yet if
He, not only Himself, seems to be very confident of the Truth of Christianity
and its Doctrines, but is able to argue most strongly for the Proof of them;
yet in this, he goes nothing beyond the Devil; who, doubtless, has a great
Knowledge of the rational Arguments, by which the Truth of the Christian
Religion, and its several Principles are evinced.

And therefore, when the Scripture speaks of believing that Jesus is the Son of
GOD, as a sure Evidence of Grace, as in 1. John v. 1. and other Places, it must
be understood, not of a mere speculative Assent, but of another Kind and Manner
of Believing, which is called the Faith of GOD's Elect. Tit. i. 1. There is a
spiritual Conviction of the Truth, which is, a believing with the whole Heart,
peculiar to true Saints; of which I would speak particularly by and by.

IV. It may be inferred, from the Doctrine which has been insisted on, that it is
no certain Sign, that Persons are savingly converted; that they have been
Subjects of very great Distress and Terrors of Mind, through Apprehensions of
GOD's Wrath, and Fears of Damnation.

That the Devils are the Subjects of great Terrors, through Apprehensions of
GOD's Wrath, and Fears of future Effects of it, is implied in my Text; which
speaks not only of their Believing, but Trembling. It must be no small Degree
of Terror, which should make those Principalities and Powers, those mighty,
proud and sturdy Beings, to tremble.

There are many Terrors, that some Persons, who are concerned for their
Salvation, are the Subjects of, which are not from any proper Awakenings of
Conscience, or Apprehensions of Truth; but from melancholy, or frightful
Impressions on their Imagination; or some groundless Apprehensions, and the
Delusions, and false Suggestions of Satan. But if they have had never so great,
and long continued Terrors, from real Awakenings, and Convictions of Truth, and
Views of Things as they are; this is no more than what is in the Devils, and
will be in all wicked Men, in another World. However stupid and senseless most
ungodly men are now, all will be effectually awakened at last: There will no
such Thing as slumbering in Hell. There are many that cannot be awakened by the
most solemn Warnings, and awfu^ Threatenings of the Word of GOD; the most
alarming Discourses from the Pulpit, and the most awakening and awful
Providence; but all will be thoroughly awakened, by the Sound of the last
Trumpet, and the Appearance of CHRIST to Judgment; and all sorts will then be
filled with most amazing Terrors, from Apprehensions of Truth, and seeing
Things as they be; when the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men, and the rich
Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, (such as were the most lofty
and stouthearted, most ready to treat the Things of Religion with Contempt)
shall hide themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains; and say
to the Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the Face of him, that
sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb; for the great Day of his
Wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand? Rev. vi. 15, 16, 17.

Therefore, if Persons have first been awakened, and then afterward have had
Comfort and Joy, it is no certain Sign, that their Comforts are of the right
Kind, that they were preceded by very great Terrors.

V. It may be further inferred from the Doctrine, that no Work of the Law on
Men's Hearts, in Conviction of Guilt, and just Desert of Punishment, is a sure
Argument, that a Person has been savingly converted.

Not only, are no Awakenings and Terrors, any certain Evidence of this, but no
mere legal Work whatsoever; though carried to the utmost Extent that it can be;
Nothing wherein there is no Grace or spiritual Light, but only the mere
Conviction of natural Conscience, and those Acts and Operations of the Mind,
which are the Result of this; and so are, as it were, merely forced by the
clear Light of Conscience, without the Concurrence of the Heart and Inclination
with that Light: I say these Things are no certain Sign of the saving Grace of
GOD, or that a Person was ever savingly converted.

The Evidence of this, from my Text and Doctrine, is demonstrative; because the
Devils are the Subjects of these Things; and all wicked Men that shall finally
perish, will be the Subjects of the same. Natural Conscience is not
extinguished in the damned in Hell; but on the contrary, remains, and is there
in its greatest Strength, and is brought to it is most perfect Exercise; most
fully to do its proper Office, as GOD's Vicegerent in the Soul, to condemn
those Rebels against the King of Heaven and Earth, and manifest GOD's just
Wrath and Vengeance, and by that Means to torment them; and be as a never-dying
Worm within them. Wretched Men find Means in this World, to blind the Eyes, and
stop the Mouth of this Vicegerent of a Sin-revenging GOD; but they shall not be
able to do it always. In another World, the Eyes and Mouth of Conscience will
be fully opened. GOD will hereafter, make wicked Men to see and know these
Things, which now they industriously hide their Eyes from; Isai. xxxvi. 10, 11.
Let Favor be showed to the Wicked, yet will he not learn Righteousness; in the
Land of Uprightness he will dead unjustly, and will not behold the Majesty of
the Lord. Lord, when thy Hand is lifted up, they will not see: But they shall
see, and be ashamed for their Envy at the People; ye the Fire of thine Enemies
shall devour them. We have this Expression often annexed to GOD's Threatenings
of Wrath to his Enemies; And they shall know, that I am the Lord: This shall be
accomplished by their woeful Experience, and clear Light in their Consciences,
whereby they shall be made to know, whether they will or not; how great and
terrible, holy and righteous a GOD JEHOVAH is; whose Authority they have
despised: And they shall know, that he is righteous and holy in their
Destruction. This all the Ungodly will be convinced of, at the Day of Judgment,
by the bringing to Light all their Wickedness of Heart and Practice; and
setting all their Sins, with all their Aggravations, in order, not only in the
View of others, even of the whole World, but in the View of their own
Consciences. This is threatened, Ps. 1. 21. These Things have thou done, and I
kept Silence: Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an One as thy self.
But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes. Compare this
with the four first Verses of the Psalm. -- The End of the Day of Judgment, is
not to find out what is just, as it is with human Judgments, but it is to
manifest what is just; to make known GOD's Justice in the Judgment which he
will execute, to Men's own Consciences, and to the World. And therefore, that
Day is called the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of
GOD. Romans ii. 5. Now Sinners often cavil against the Justice of GOD's
Dispensations, and particularly, the Justice of the Punishment, which GOD
threatens for their Sins; excusing themselves, and condemning GOD: But when GOD
comes to manifest their Wickedness in the Light of that Day, and to call them
to an Account, they will be Speechless; Matt. xxii. 11, 12. And when the King
came to see the Guests, he saw there, a Man which had not on a wedding Grrment:
And be says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding
Garment? And he was Speechless. When the King of Heaven and Earth comes to
Judgment, their Consciences will be so perfectly enlightened and convinced, by
the All-searching Light, they shall then stand in; that their Mouths will be
effectually stopped, as to all Excuses for themselves, all Pleading of their
own Righteousness, to excuse or justify them; and all Objections against the
Justice of their Judge; that their Conscience will condemn them only, and not
GOD.

Therefore, it follows from the Doctrine, that it can be no certain Sign of
Grace, that Persons have had great Convictions of Sin; have had their Sins of
Life, with their Aggravations remarkably set before them, so as greatly to
affect and terrify them; and withal, have had a great Sight of the Wickedness
of their Hearts, and been convinced of the Greatness of the Sin of Unbelief,
and of the Unexcuseableness and Heniousness of their most secret spiritual
Iniquities; and have been brought to be convinced of the utter Insufficiency of
their own Righteousness; and to despair of being recommended to GOD by it; have
been as much brought off from their own Righteousness, as ever any are, under a
mere legal Humiliation; have been convinced that they are wholly without Excuse
before GOD, and deserve Damnation; and that GOD would be just, in executing the
threatened Punishment upon them, though it be so dreadful. All these Things, will
be in all the Ungodly at the Day of Judgment, when they shall stand with
Devils, at the Left Hand, and shall be doomed as accursed, to everlasting Fire,
with them.

Indeed there will be no Submission in them. Their Conscience will be
convinced, that GOD is just in their Condemnation; but yet their Wills will not
be bowed to GOD's Justice. There will be no Acquiescence of Mind, in that
divine Attribute; no yielding of the Soul to GOD's Sovereignty, but the highest
Degree of Enmity and Opposition. A true Submission of the Hear and Will, to the
Justice and Sovereignty of GOD, is therefore allowed to be something peculiar
to true Converts, being something which the Devils and damned Souls are, and
ever will be far from; and which a mere Work of the Law, and Convictions of
Conscience, however great and clear, will never bring Men to.

When Sinners are the Subjects of great Convictions of Conscience, and a
remarkable Work of the Law; it is only a transacting the Business of the Day of
Judgment, in the Conscience before Hand: GOD sits inthroned in the Conscience,
as at the last Day, he will sit inthroned in the Clouds of Heaven; the Sinner
is arraigned, as it were, at GOD's Bar; and GOD appears in his awful Greatness,
as a just and holy, Sin-hating and Sin-revenging GOD, as He will the^. The
Sinners Iniquities are brought to Light; his Sins set in Order before him; the
hidden Things of Darkness, and the Counsels of the Heart are made manifest; as
it will be then: Many Witnesses do, as it were, rise up against the Sinner
under Convictions of Conscience; as they will against the Wicked, at the Day of
Judgment: And the Books are opened, particularly the Book of GOD's strict and
holy Law, is opened in the Conscience, and its Rules applied for the
Condemnation of the Sinner; which is the Book that will be opened at the Day of
Judgment, as the grand Rule of Judgment, to all such Wicked Men as have lived
under it: And the Sentence of the Law is pronounced against the Sinner; and the
Justice of the Sentence made manifest; as it will be at the Day of Judgment.
The Conviction of a Sinner at the Day of Judgment, will be a Work of the Law,
as well as the Conviction of Conscience in this World: And the Work of the Law
(if the Work be merely legal) besure, is never carried further in the
Consciences of Sinners now, that it will be at that Day, when it is Work will be
perfect, in thoroughly stopping the Sinner's Mouth. Romans iii. 19. Now we know,
that what Things soever the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law;
that every Mouth may be stopped, and all the World may become guilty before
GOD. Every Mouth shall be stopped by the Law, either now or hereafter; and all
the World shall become sensibly guilty before GOD; guilty of Death, deserving
of Damnation. -- And therefore, if Sinners have been the Subjects of a great
Work of the Law, and have thus become guilty, and their Mouths have been
stopped; it is no certain Sign that ever they have been converted.

Indeed the Want of a thorough Sense of Guilt, and Desert of Punishment, and
Conviction of the Justice of GOD, in threatening Damnation, is a good Negative
Sign; it is a Sign that a Person never was converted, and truly brought, with
the whole Soul, to embrace CHRIST as a Savior from this Punishment: For it is
easily demonstrable, that there is no such Thing as entirely and cordially
accepting an Offer from GOD, of a Savior, from a Punishment that HE threatens,
which we think we don't deserve. But the having such a Conviction, is no
certain Sign, that Persons have true Faith, or have ever truly received CHRIST
as their Savior. And if Persons have great Comfort, Joy, and Confidence,
suddenly let into their Minds, after great Convictions, of such a Kind as has
been mentioned; it is no infallible Evidence that their Comforts are built on a
good Foundation.

It Is manifest, therefore, that too much Stress has been laid by many Persons,
on a great Work of the Law, preceding their Comforts: Who seem not only to have
looked on such a Work of the Law, as necessary to precede Faith, but also to
have esteemed it as the chief Evidence of the Truth and Genuiness of succeeding
Faith and Comforts. By this Means it is to be feared, very many have been
deceived, and established in a false Hope. And what is to be seen in the Event
of Things, in Multitudes of Instances, confirms this. It may be safely allowed,
not to be so usual for great Convictions of Conscience, to prove abortive, and
fail of a good Issue, as for lesser Convictions; and that more generally, when
the Spirit of GOD proceeds so far with Sinners, in the Work of the Law, as to
give 'em a great Sight of their Hearts, and of the Heniousness of their
spiritual Inquities; and to convince 'em that they are without Excuse and that
all their Righteousness can do nothing to merit GOD's Favors; but that they
lie justly exposed to GOD's eternal Vengeance without Mercy; a Work of saving
Conversion follows. But we can have no Warrant to say, it is universally so, or
to lay it down as an infallible Rule, that when Convictions of Conscience have
gone thus far, saving Faith, and Repentance will surely follow. If any should
think they have Ground for such a Determination, because they cannot conceive
what End GOD should have, in carrying a Work of Conviction to such a Length,
and so preparing the Heart for Faith; and after all, never giving saving Faith
to the Soul; I desire it may be considered, where will be the End of our Doubts
and Difficulties, if we think ourselves sufficient to determine, so positively
and particularly concerning GOD's Ends and Designs in what he does. It may be
asked such an Objector, what is GOD's End in giving a Sinner any Degree of the
Strivings of his Spirit, and Conviction of Conscience; when he afterward
suffers it to come to nothing, and to prove in vain? If He may give some Degree
that may finally be in vain; who shall set the Bounds, and say how great the
Degree shall be? Who can, on sure Grounds, determine, that when a Sinner has so
much of that Conviction, which the Devils and damned in Hell have; true Faith
and eternal Salvation, will be the certain Consequence. This we may certainly
determine, that, if the Apostle's Argument in the Text be good, not any Thing
whatsoever, that the Devils have, is certainly connected with such a
Consequence. Seeing Sinners, while such, are capable of the most perfect
Convictions, and will have them at the Day of Judgment, and in Hell; who shall
say, that GOD never shall cause Reprobates to anticipate the future Judgment
and Damnation in that Respect? And if He does so, who shall say to Him, what
do Thou? Or call him to Account concerning his Ends in so doing. Not but
that many possible wise Ends might be thought of, and mentioned, if it were
needful, or I had now Room for it. -- The Spirit of GOD, is often quenched, by
the Exercise of the Wickedness of Men's Hearts, after he has gone far in a Work
of Conviction; so that their Convictions never have a good Issue. And who can
say that Sinners, by the Exercise of their Opposition and Enmity against GOD,
(which is not at all mortified by the greatest legal Convictions, neither in
the Damned in Hell, nor Sinners on Earth) may not provoke GOD to take his
Spirit from them, even after He has proceeded the greatest Length in a Work of
Conviction? Who can say, that GOD never is provoked to destroy some, after he
has brought 'em, as it were, through the Wilderness, even to the Edge of the
Land of Rest? As he slew some of the Israelites, even in the Plains of Moab.

And let it be considered, where is our Warrant in Scripture, to make use of
any legal Convictions, or any Method or Order of successive Events in a Work of
the Law; and consequent Comforts, as a sure Sign of Regeneration. The Scripture
is abundant, in expressly mentioning Evidences of Grace, and of a State of
Favor with GOD, and Characteristicks of the true Saints: But where do we ever
find such Things as these, amongst those Evidences? Or where do we find any
other Signs insisted on, besides Grace itself, it is Nature, Exercises and
Fruits? These were the Evidences that Job relied upon; These were the Things
that the Psalmist, every where insists upon, as Evidences of his Sincerity: And
particularly in the cxix Psalm, from the Beginning to the End. These were the
Signs that Hezekiah trusted to, in his Sickeness.

These were the Characteristicks given of those that are truly happy, by our
Savior, in the Beginning of his Sermon in the Mount. These are the Things that
CHRIST mentions, as the true Evidences of being his real Disciples, in his
last, and dying Discourse to his Disciples, in the xiv. xv. and xvi. Chapters
of John; and in his intercessary Prayer, Chap. xvii. These are the Things which
the Apostle Paul, often speaks of, as Evidences of his Sincerity, and sure
Title to a Crown of Glory. And these are the Things he often mentions to
others, in his Epistles, as the proper Evidences of real Christianity; a
justified State, and a Title to Glory. He insists on the Fruits of the Spirit;
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance, as the proper Evidences of being CHRIST's, and living in the
Spirit: Gal. v. 22. -- 25. It Is that Charity, or divine Love, which is pure,
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of Mercy, etc. that he insists
on, as the most essential Evidence of true Godliness; without which, all other
Things are Nothing. Such are the Signs which the Apostle James insists on, as
the proper Evidence, of a truly wise and good Man: Jam. iii. 17. The Wisdom
that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, and without
Hypocrisy. And such are the Signs of true Christianity, which the Apostle John
insists on, throughout his Epistles. And we never have any where in the Bible,
from the Beginning to the End of it, any other Signs of Godliness given, than
such as these. If Persons have such Things as these apparently in them, it
ought to be determined, that they are truly converted, without its being
insisted, that it be first known, what Steps or Method the Spirit of GOD took,
to introduce these Things into the Soul; which oftentimes, is altogether
untraceable. All the Works of GOD, are, in some Respects, unsearchable: But the
Scripture, often represents the Works of the Spirit of GOD, as peculiarly so;
Isai. xl. 13. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his
Counselor, has taught Him? Eccles. xi. 5. As thou know not what is the Way
of the Spirit; nor how the Bones do grow in the Womb of her that is with Child;
so thou know not the Works of GOD, who makes All. John iii. 8. The Wind
blows where it lists; and thou hear the Sound thereof; but can not
tell whence it comes, and whither it goes; so is every One that is born of
the Spirit.

VI. It follows from my Text and Doctrine, that it is no certain Sign of Grace,
that Persons have earnest Desires and Longings after Salvation.

The Devils, doubtless, long for Deliverance from the Misery they suffer, and
from that greater Misery which they expect. It they tremble through Fear of it,
they must, necessarily, earnestly desire to be delivered from it. Wicked Men,
are in Scripture, represented as longing for the Privileges of the Righteous,
when the Door is shut, and they are shut out from among them: They come to the
Door, and cry, Lord, Lord, open to us. Therefore, we are not to look on all
Desires, or all Desires that are very earnest and vehement, as certain
Evidences of a pious Heart. There are earnest Desires of a religious Nature,
which the Saints have, that are the proper Breathings of a new Nature, and
distinguishing Qualities of true Saints: But there are also Longings, which
unregenerate Men may have, which are often mistaken for Marks of Godliness:
They think they hunger and thirst after Righteousness; and have earnest Desires
after GOD and CHRIST, and long for Heaven; when indeed, all is to be resolved
into Desires of Salvation, from Self-love; and so is a Longing which arises
from no higher Principles, than the earnest Desires of Devils.

VII. It may be inferred from what has been observed; that Persons who have no
Grace, may have a great Apprehension of an external Glory, in Things heavenly
and divine; and of whatsoever is external, pertaining to Things of Religion.

If Persons have impressed strongly on their Minds, Ideas of that sort, which
are obtained by the external Senses; whether they are of that Kind that enter
by the Ear, as any Kind of Sound; whether it be the most pleasant Music, or
Words spoken of excellent Signification; Words of Scripture, or any other,
immediately suggested, as though they were spoken, though they seem to be never so
suitable to their Case, or adapted to the Subject of their Meditations: Or
whether they are of that Kind, that are obtained by the Eye, as Ideas of a
visible Beauty and Glory; a shining Light, an external Glory of Heaven; golden
Streets, Walls and Gates of precious Stone; splendid Palaces; glorious
Inhabitants, shining fort' as the Sun; a most magnificent Throne, surrounded by
Angels and Saints, in shining Ranks: Or any Thing external, belonging to JESUS
CHRIST; either in his humbled State, as of JESUS hanging on the Cross, with his
Crown of Thorns, his Wounds open, and Blood trickling down; or in his glorified
State, with awful Majesty, or ravishing Beauty and sweetness in his
Countenance; his Face shining above the Brightness of the Sun, and the like:
These Things are no certain Signs of Grace.

Multitudes that are now in Hell, will have Ideas of the external Glory, that
pertains to Things heavenly, far beyond what ever any have in this World. They
will see all that external Glory and Beauty, in which CHRIST will appear at the
Day of Judgment, when the Sun shall be turned into Darkness before him; which,
doubtless, will be Ten Thousand Times greater than ever was impressed on the
Imagination of either Saints or Sinners, in this present State, or ever was
conceived by any mortal Man.

VIII. It may be inferred from the Doctrine, that Persons who have no Grace, may
have a very great and affecting Sense of many divine Things on their Hearts.

The Devil has not only great speculative Knowledge, but he has a Sense of many
divine Things, which deeply affects him, and is most strongly impressed on his
Heart. As

1. The Devils and damned Souls, have a great Sense of the vast Importance of
the Things of another World. They are in the invisible World, and they see and
know how great the Things of that World are: Their Experience teaches 'em in
the most affecting Manner. They have a great Sense of the Worth of Salvation,
and the Worth of immortal Souls, and the vast Importance of those Things, that
concern Men's eternal Welfare. The Parable in the latter End of the xvi. Chap.
of Luke, teaches this, in representing the rich Man in Hell, as entreating that
Lazarus might be sent to his five Brothers, to testify unto them, lest they
should come to that Place of Torment. They who endure the Torments of Hell,
have, doubtless, a most lively and affecting Sense of the Vastness of an
endless Eternity; and of the comparative. Momentariness of this Life, and the
Vanity of the Concerns and Enjoyments of Time. They are convinced effectually,
that all the Things of this World, even those that appear greatest and most
important to the Inhabitants of the Earth, are dispicable Trifles, in
Comparison of the Things of the eternal World. They have a great Sense of the
Preciousness of Time, and of the Means of Grace, and the inestimable Value of
the Privileges which they enjoy, which live under the Gospel. They are fully
sensible of the Folly of those that go on in Sin; neglect their Opportunities;
make Light of the Counsels and Warnings of GOD; and bitterly lament their
exceeding Folly, in their own Sins; by which they have brought on themselves so
great and remediless Misery. When Sinners, by woeful Experience, know the
dreadful Issue of their evil Way; they will mourn at the last, saying, how have
I hated Instruction, and my Heart despised Reproof, and have not obeyed the
Voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine Ear to them that instructed me! Prove.
iv. 11, 12, 13.

Therefore, however, true Godliness is now attended with a great Sense of the
Importance of divine Things; and it is rare, that Men that have no Grace, do
maintain such a Sense, in any steady and persevering Manner; yet it is manifest,
those Things are no certain Evidences of Grace. Unregenerate Men may have a
Sense of the Importance of the Things of Eternity, and the Vanity of the Things
of Time; the Work of immortal Souls; the Preciousness of Time and Means of
Grace, and the Folly of the Ways of allowed Sin: And may have such a Sense of
these Things, as may deeply affect them, and cause 'em to mourn for their own
Sins, and be much concerned for others. Though it be true, they have not these
Things in the same Manner, and in all Respects, from the same Principles and
Views, as godly Men have them.

2. Devils and damned Men, have a strong and most affecting Sense of the awful
Greatness and Majesty of GOD. The awful Majesty of GOD, are greatly made
manifest in the Executions of divine Wrath, which they are the Subjects of. The
making this known, is one Thing GOD has in Design, in his Vengeance on his
Enemies. Romans ix. 22. What, if GOD willing to show his Wrath, and to make his
Power known, endured with much long suffering the Vessels of Wrath, fitted to
Destruction? The Devils tremble before this great and terrible GOD, and under a
strong Sense of his awful Majesty. It Is greatly manifested to them, and damned
Souls now; but shall be manifested in a further Degree, in that Day, when the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance
upon them; and when they shall earnestly desire to fly, and be hid from the
Face of Him that sits on the Throne, (which shall be, because of the Glory of
His Majesty. Isai. ii. 10.) and when they shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction, from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.
When CHRIST comes, at the last Day, in the Glory of his Father, every Eye shall
see him in that Glory, (in this Respect, that they shall see his terrible
Majesty) and they also that pierced Him: Rev. i. 7. Both those Devils, and
wicked Men, which tormented and insulted Him, when he appeared in Meanness and
Ignominy, shall then see him in the Glory of his Father.

It Is evident, therefore, that a Sense of GOD's terrible Majesty, is no certain
Evidence of saving Grace: For we see that wicked Men, and Devils are capable of
it: Yea, many wicked Men in this World have actually had it. This is a
Manifestation, which GOD made of Himself, in the Sight of that wicked
Congregation at Mount Sinai, which they saw, and were deeply affected with; so
that all the People that were in the Camp trembled.

3. Devils and damned Men have some kind of Conviction and Sense of all the
Attributes of GOD, both natural and moral, that is strong and very affecting.

The Devils know GOD's almighty Power: They saw a great Manifestation of it,
when they saw GOD lay the Foundation of the Earth, etc. and were much affected
with it. And they have seen innumerable other great Demonstrations of his
Power; as in the universal Deluge, the Destruction of sodom, the Wonders in
Egypt, at the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness; the causing the Sun to stand
still in Joshua's Time; and many others. And they had a very affecting
Manifestation of GOD's mighty Power on themselves, in casting all their Hosts
down from Heaven into Hell; and have continual affecting Experience of it, in
GOD's reserving them in strong Chains of Darkness, and in the strong Pains they
feel; and will hereafter, have far more affecting Experience of it, when they
shall be punished from the Glory of GOD's Power, with that mighty Destruction,
which they now tremble in Expectation of. So the Devils have a great Knowledge
of the Wisdom of GOD: They have had unspeakably, more Opportunity and Occasion
to observe it, in the Work of Creation, and also in the Works of Providence,
then any mortal Man has ever had; and have been themselves the Subjects of
innumerable affecting Manifestations of it, in GOD's disappointing and
confounding them in their most subtle Devices, in so wonderful and amazing a
Manner. So they see and find the infinite Purity and Holiness of the divine
Nature, in the most affecting Manner, as this appears in his infinite Hatred of
Sin, in what they feel of the dreadful Effects of that Hatred. They know
already, by what they suffer, and will know hereafter to a greater Degree, and
far more affecting Manner, that such is the Opposition of GOD's Nature to Sin,
that it is like a consuming Fire, that burns with infinite Vehemence against
it: They will feel the vehement Heat of that Fire, in a very dreadful Manner.
They also will see the Holiness of GOD, as exercised in his Love to
Righteousness and Holiness, in what they will see of the Reward of the
Righteousness of CHRIST, and the Holiness of his People, in the Glory of CHRIST
and his Church; which also will be very affecting to Devils, and wicked Men.
And the exact Justice of GOD, will be manifested to them in the clearest and
strongest, most convincing and most affecting Light, at the Day of Judgment.
When they will also see great and affecting Demonstrations of the Riches of his
Grace, in the mavelous Fruits of his Love to the Vessels of Mercy; when they
shall see them at the right Hand of CHRIST, shining as the Sun, in the Kingdom
of their Father, and shall hear the blessed Sentence pronounced upon them; and
will be deeply affected with it; as seems naturally implied in the xiii. Chap.
of Luke, 28, 29, Verses. The Devils know GOD's Truth; and therefore, they
believe his Threatenings, and tremble in Expectation of their Accomplishment.
And wicked Men that now doubt his Truth, and dare not trust his Word; will
hereafter, in the most convincing affecting Manner, find his Word to be true,
in all that he has threatened; and will see that he is faithful to his Promises,
in the Rewards of his Saints. Devils and damned Men, know that GOD is eternal
and unchangeable; and therefore, they despair of there ever being an End to
their Misery.

Therefore it is manifest, that merely Persons having an affecting Sense of
some, or even of all GOD's Attributes, is no certain Sign, that they have the
true Grace of GOD in their Hearts.

Object. Here possibly, some may object against the Force of the foregoing
Reasoning. That ungodly Men in this World, are in exceeding different
Circumstances, from those which the Devils are in; and from those which wicked
Men will be in, at the Day of Judgment. Those Things which are visible and
present to these, are now future and invisible to the other. And wicked Men in
this World, are in the Body, that clogs and hinders the Soul, and are
encompassed with Objects that blind and stupify 'em. And therefore, it don't
follow, that, because the Wicked in another World, have a great Apprehension
and lively Sense of such and such Things, without Grace, that ungodly Men, in
their present State may have the same.

Ans. To this I answer: It Is not supposed, that ever Men in this Life have all
those Things which have been; mentioned, to the same Degree that the Devils and
Damned have them. None supposes that ever any in this Life have Terrors of
Conscience to an equal Degree with them. It Is not to be supposed, that any
mortal Man, whether Godly or Ungodly, has an equal Degree of speculative
Knowledge with the Devil. And, as was just now observed, the Wicked, at the Day
of Judgment, will have a vastly greater Idea of the external Glory of CHRIST,
than ever any have in the present State. So, doubtless, they will have a far
greater Sense of GOD's awful Greatness and terrible Majesty, than any could
subsist under in this frail State. So we may well conclude, that the Devils,
and wicked Men in Hell, have a greater and more affecting Sense of the Vastness
of Eternity, and (in some Respects) a greater Sense of the Importance of the
Things of another World, than any here have. And they have also Longings after
Salvation to an higher Degree than any wicked Men in this World.

But yet, it is evident, that Men in this World, may have Things of the same
Kind with Devils and damned Men. The same sort of Light in the Understanding;
the same Views, and the same Affections; the same Sense of Things, the same
Kind of Impressions on the Mind, and on the Heart. If the Objection is against
the Conclusiveness of the Reasoning that has been made use of to prove this;
it is against the Conclusiveness of that Reasoning which is the Apostle's, more
properly than mine. The Apostle judged it, a conclusive Argument, against such
as thought their believing there was one GOD, an Evidence of their being
gracious; that the Devils believed the same. So the Argument is exactly the
same, against such as think they have Grace, because they believe GOD is a holy
GOD, or because they have a Sense of the awful Majesty of GOD. The same may be
observed of other Things that have been mentioned. My Text has Reference not
only to the Act of the Understandings of Devils in believing, but to that
Affection of their Hearts, which accompanies the Views they have: As trembling
is an Effect of the Affection of the Heart. Which shows, that if Men have both
the same Views of Understanding, and also the same Affections of Heart, that
the Devils have, it is no Sign of Grace.

And as to the particular Degree, to which these Things may be carried in Men,
in this World, without Grace; it appears not to be safe, to go about so to
ascertain and fix it, as to make use of it as an infallible Rule to determine
Men's State. I know not where we have any Rule to go by, to fix the precise
Degree, in which GOD by his Providence, or his common Influences on the Mind,
will excite in wicked Men in this World, the same Views and Affections, which
the Wicked have in another World; which it is manifest, the former are capable
of as well as the latter, having the same Faculties and Principles of Soul; and
which Views and Affections, it is evident, they often are actually the Subjects
of in some Degree; some in a greater, and some in a less Degree. The infallible
Evidences of Grace, which are laid down in Scripture, are of another Kind: They
are all of a holy and spiritual Nature; and therefore, Things of that Kind,
which a Heart that is wholly carnal and corrupt, cannot receive, or have any
Experience of. 1. Cor. ii. 14.

I might also here add, that Observation and Experience, in very many
Instances, seems to confirm what Scripture and Reason teaches in these Things.

The second U S E may be of Self-Examination.

Let the Things which have been observed, put all on examining themselves, and
enquiring whether they have any better Evidences of saving Grace, than such as
have been mentioned.

We see how the infallible Spirit of GOD, in the Text, plainly represents the
Things the Devils are the Subjects of, as no sure Sign of Grace. And we have
now, in some Instances, observed how far the Devils, and damned Men go, and
will go in their Experience, their Knowledge of divine Things, their Belief of
Truth, their Awakenings and Terrors of Conscience, their Conviction of Guilt,
and of the Justice of GOD, in their eternal dreadful Damnation, their Longings
after Salvation, their Sight of the external Glory of CHRIST, and heavenly
Things; their Sense of the vast Importance of the Things of Religion, and
another World; their Sense of the awful Greatness and terrible Majesty of GOD,
yea, of all GOD's Attributes. These Things may well put us on serious
Self-Examination, whether we have any Thing to Evidence our good Estate, beyond
what the Devils are the Subjects of. CHRIST said to his Disciples, Except-your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no Case, enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: So the Spirit of CHRIST, in his
Apostle James, does in Effect, say, in my Text, except what you Experience in
your Souls, go beyond the Experiences of Devils, ye shall, in no Case, enter
into the Kingdom of GOD.

Here, it may be, some will be ready to say, I have something besides all these
Things, which have been mentioned; I have Things which the Devils have not,
even Love and Joy.

I answer, you may have something besides the Experiences of Devils, and yet,
nothing beyond them. Though the Experience be different, yet it may not be owing
to any different Principle, but only the different Circumstances, under which
these Principles are exercised. The Principles, from whence the forementioned
Things in Devils and damned Men do arise, are these two, natural Understanding,
and Self-Love. It Is from natural Understanding or Reason, that they have such a
Degree of Knowledge in divine Things, and such a Belief of them. It Is from
these Principles of natural Understanding and Self-Love, as exercised about
their own Dispositions and Actions, and GOD as their Judge, that they have
natural Conscience; and have such Convictions of Conscience, as have been
spoken of. It Is from these Principles, that they have such a Sense of the
Importance of the Things of Religion, and the eternal World, and such Longings
after Salvation. It Is for the joint Exercise of these two Principles, that they
are so sensible of the awful Majesty of GOD, and of all the Attributes of the
divine Nature, and so greatly affected with them. And it is from these
Principles, joined with external Sense, the Wicked, at the Day of Judgment,
will have so great an Apprehension of, and will be so greatly affected by the
external Glory of CHRIST and his Saints. And that you have a Kind of Love or
Gratitude and Joy, which Devils and damned Men have not, may possibly not arise
from any other Principles in your Heart, different from these two, but only
from these Principles, as exercised in different Circumstances. As for
Instance; your being a Subject of the restraining Grace of GOD, and being under
Circumstances of Hope, and the Receipt of Mercy. The natural Understanding and
Self-love of Devils, possibly might affect them in the same Manner, if they
were in the same Circumstances. If your Love to GOD, has it is first Source from
Nothing else than a supposed immediate divine Witness, or any other supposed
Evidence, that CHRIST died for you in particular, and that GOD loves you; it
springs from no higher Principles than Self-love; which is a Principle that
reigns in the Hearts of Devils. Self-love is sufficient, without Grace, to
cause Men to love those that love them, or that they imagine love them, and
make much of them; Luke vi. 32. For if ye love them which love you, what thank
have you? For Sinners also love those that love them. And would not the Hearts
of Devils be filled with great Joy, if they, by any Means, should take up a
confident Persuasion that GOD had pardoned them, and was become their Friend,
and that they should be delivered from that Wrath which they now are in
trembling Expectation of. If the Devils go so far as you have heard, even in
their Circumstances, being totally cast off, and given up to unrestrained
Wickedness, being without Hope, knowing that GOD is, and ever will be their
Enemy, they suffering his Wrath without Mercy: How far may we reasonably
suppose they might go, in Imitation of Grace and pious Experience, if they had
the same Degree of Knowledge, as clear Views, and as strong Conviction, under
Circumstances of Hope, and Offers of Mercy; and being the Subjects of common
Grace, restraining their Corruptions, and assisting and exciting the natural
Principles of Reason, Conscience, etc? Such Things as Devils are the Subjects
of; such great Conviction of Conscience; such a Sense of the Importance of
eternal Things; such affecting Views of the awful Majesty, Greatness, Power,
Holiness, Justice, and Truth of GOD, and such a Sense of his great Grace to the
Saints, if they, or any Thing like 'em, should be in the Heart of a Sinner, in
this World; at the same Time that he, from some strong Impression on his
Imagination, of CHRIST apearing to him, or sweet Words spoken to him, or by
some other Means, has suddenly, after great Terrors, imbibed a strong
Confidence, that now, this Great GOD, is his Friend and Father, has released,
him from all the Misery he feared, and has promised him eternal Happiness: I
say, such Things would, doubtless, vastly heighten his Ecstasy of Joy, and raise
the Exercise of natural Gratitude, (that Principle from whence Sinners love
those that love them) and would occasion a great Imitation of many Graces, in
strong Exercises. Is it any Wonder then, that Multitudes under such a sort of
Affection, are deceived? Especially when they have Devils to help forward the
Delusion, whose great Subtilty, has chiefly been exercised in deceiving
Mankind, through all past Generations.

Enquiry. Here possibly, some may be ready to enquire, If there may be so many
Things, which Men may experience from no higher Principles than are in the
Minds and Hearts of Devils; what are those Exercises and Affections, that are
of a higher Nature, which I must find in my Heart, and which I may justly look
upon as sure Signs of the saving Grace of GOD's Spirit?

Ans. I answer, Those Exercises and Affections which are good Evidences of
Grace, differ from all that the Devils are the Subjects of, and all that can
arise from such Principles as are in their Hearts, in two Things; viz. their
Foundation and their Tendency.

1. They differ in their Foundation, or in that belonging to them, which is
most fundamental in them, and the Foundation of all the rest, which pertains to
'em; viz. An Apprehension, or Sense of the supreme holy Beauty, and Comeliness
of divine Things, as they are in themselves, or in their own Nature.

This the Devils, and Damned in Hell are, and forever will be entirely
destitute of. This the Devils once had, while they stood in their Integrity;
but this they wholly lost, when they fell: And this is the only Thing that can
be mentioned, pertaining to the Devil's Apprehension and Sense of the divine
Being, that he did lose. Nothing else belonging to the Knowledge of GOD, can be
devised, that he is destitute of. It has been observed, that there is no one
Attribute of the divine Nature, but what he is sensible of, and knows, and has
a strong and very affecting Conviction of; and this I think is evident, and
undeniable. But the supreme Beauty of the divine Nature, he is altogether blind
to: He sees no more of it, than a Man born perfectly blind does of Colors. The
great Sight he has of the Attributes of GOD, gives him an Idea, and strong
Sense of his awful Majesty, but no Idea of his Beauty and Comeliness. Though he
has seen so much of GOD's wonderful Works of Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Justice
and Truth, and his wonderful Works of Grace to Mankind, this so many Thousand
Years, and has had Occasion to observe them with the strongest Attention: Yet
all serves not to give him the least Sense of his divine Beauty. And though the
Devils should continue to exercise their mighty Powers of Mind, with the
strongest Intention; and should take Things in all possible Views, in every
Order and Arrangement; yet they never will see this. So little akin, is the
Knowledge they have to this, that the great Degrees of that Knowledge, bring
them no nearer to it. Yet, the more Knowledge they have of GOD, of that Kind,
the more do they hate GOD. That wherein the Beauty of the divine Nature, does
most essentially consist, viz. his Holiness, or moral Excellency, appears, in
their Eyes, furthest from Beauty: It Is on that very Account chiefly that he
appears hateful to 'em. The more Holiness they see in him, the more hateful he
appears: The greater their Sight is of his Holiness, the higher is their Hatred
of him raised. And because of their Hatred of his Holiness, they hate him the
more, the more they see of his other Attributes. They would hate a holy Being,
whatever his other Attributes were; but they hate such a holy Being the worse,
for his being infinitely wise, and infinitely powerful, etc. more than they
would do, if they saw in him less Power, and less Wisdom.

The Wicked, at the Day of Judgment, will see every Thing else in CHRIST, but
his Beauty and Amiableness. There is no one Quality or Property of his Person,
that can be Thought of, but what will be set before them, in the strongest
Light at that Day, but only such as consist in this. They will see him coming
in the Clouds of Heaven, in Power, and great Glory, in the Glory of his Father.
They will have that View of his external Glory, which is vastly beyond what we
can have any Imagination of: And they will have the strongest and most
convincing Demonstrations of all his Attributes and Perfections. They will have
a Sense of his great Majesty, that will be, as it were, infinitely affecting to
them. They shall be made to know effectually, That he is the Lord. They shall
see what he is, and what he does: His Nature and Works, shall appear in the
strongest View. But his holy and infinite Beauty and Amiableness, which is all
in all, and without which every other Quality and Property is Nothing, and
worse than Nothing, they will see Nothing of.

Therefore, it is a Sight or Sense of this that, is the Thing, wherein does
fundamentally consist, the Difference between those Things in which the saving
Grace of GOD's Spirit consists, and the Experiences of Devils and damned Souls.
This is the Foundation of every Thing else that is distinguishing in true
Christian Experience. This is the Foundation of the Faith of GOD's Elect. This
gives the Mind a saving Belief of the Truth of divine Things. It Is a View of
the Excellency of the Things exhibited in the Gospel, or Sense of the divine
Beauty, and Amiableness of the Scheme of Doctrine there exhibited, that
savingly convinces the Mind, that it is indeed divine, or of GOD. This Account
of the Matter is plainly implied: 2 Cor. iv. 3, 4. But if our Gospel be hid, it
is hid to them that are lost; in whom the GOD of this World has blinded the
Minds of them that BELIEVE NOT; lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of
CHRIST, who is the Image of GOD, should shine into them, And, v. 6. For GOD,
who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to
give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of GOD, in the Face of JESUS
CHRIST. It Is very evident that a saving Belief of the Gospel, is here spoken of
by the Apostle, as arising from a View of the divine Glory or Beauty of the
Things it exhibits. It Is by this View, that the Soul of a true Convert is
enabled savingly, to see the Sufficency of CHRIST for his Salvation. He that
has his Eyes opened to behold the divine superlative Beauty and Loveliness of
JESUS CHRIST, is convinced of his Sufficiency, to stand as a Medator between
Him, a guilty Hell-deserving Wretch, and an infinitely holy GOD, in an
exceeding different Manner than ever he can be convinced by all the Arguments
that are made Use of, by the excellent Authors or Preachers.

When he once comes to see CHRIST's divine Loveliness, he wonders no more that
he is thought worthy by GOD the Father, to be accepted for the vilest Sinner.
Now it is not difficult for him to conceive, how the Blood of CHRIST should be
esteemed by GOD so precious, as to be worthy to be accepted as a Compensation
for the greatest Sins. The Soul now properly sees the Preciousness of CHRIST,
and so does properly see and understand the very Ground and Reason of his
Acceptableness to GOD, and the Value GOD sets on his Blood, Obedience and
Intercession. This satisfies the poor guilty Soul, and gives it Rest; when the
finest and most elaborate Discourses, about the Sufficency of CHRIST, and
Suitableness of the Way of Salvation, would not do it. When a Man then comes to
see the proper Foundation of Faith and Affiance, with his own Eyes, then he
believes savingly. He that sees the Son, and believes on Him, has
everlasting Life. John. vi. 40. when CHRIST thus MANIFESTS GOD's NAME to Men,
then they believe that all Things whatsoever GOD has given to CHRIST are of
him, and believes that CHRIST was sent of GOD. John xvii. 6, 7, 8. And they
that thus know CHRIST's Name will trust in him. Ps. ix. 10. In order to true
Faith in JESUS CHRIST, the Son of GOD, is REVEALED IN MEN. Gal. i. 15. 16. And
it is this Sight of the divine Beauty of CHRIST, that bows the Wills, and draws
the Hearts of Men. A Sight of the Greatness of GOD in his Attributes, may
overwhelm Men, and be more than they can endure; but the Enmity and Opposition
of the Heart, may remain in its full Strength, and the Will remain inflexible;
whereas, one Glimpse of the moral and spiritual Glory of GOD, and supreme
Amiableness of JESUS CHRIST, shining into the Heart, overcomes and abolishes
this Opposition, and inclines the Soul to CHRIST, as it were, by an omnipotent
Power: So that now, not only the Understanding, but the Will, and the whole
Soul receives and embraces the Savior. This is most certainly the Discovery,
which is the first internal Foundation of a saving Faith in CHRIST, in the Soul
of the true Convert; and not on having of it immediately suggested and revealed
to the Soul, by a Text of Scripture, or any immediate outward or inward
Witness, that CHRIST loves him, or that he died for him in particular, and is
his Savior; so begetting Confidence and Joy, and a seeming Love to CHRIST,
because he loves Him: By which sort of Faith and Conversion, (demonstrably vain
and counterfeit) Multitudes have been deluded. The Sight of the Glory of GOD,
in the Face of JESUS CHRIST, works true supreme Love to GOD: This is a Sight of
the proper Foundation of supreme Love to GOD, viz. The supreme Loveliness of
his Nature; and a Love to him on this Ground, is truly above any Thing that can
come from a mere Principle of Self-love, which is in the Hearts of Devils, as
well as Men. And this begets true spiritual and holy Joy in the Soul, which is
indeed Joy in GOD, and glorying in him, and not rejoicing in ourselves.

This Sight of the Beauty of divine Things, will excite true Desires and
Longings of Soul, after those Things; not like the Longings of Devils, or any
such forced Desires, as those of a Man in great Danger of Death, after some
bitter Medicine, that he hopes will save his Life; but natural free Desires,
the Desires of Appetite; the Thirstings of a new Nature; as a newborn Babe
desires the Mother's Breast; and as a hungry Man longs for some pleasant Food
he thinks of; or as the thirsty Heart pants after the cool and clear Stream.

This Sense of divine Beauty, is the first Thing in the actual Change made in
the Soul, in true Conversion, and is the Foundation of every Thing else
belonging to that Change; as is evident by those Words of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
iii. 18. But we all with open Face, beholding as in a Glass, the Glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord.

2. Truly gracious Affections and Exercises of Mind differ from such as are
counterfeit, which arise from no higher Principles than are in the Hearts of
Devils, in their Tendency: And that in these two Respects.

(1.) They are of a Tendency and Influence very contrary to that, which was
especially the Devil's Sin, even Pride. That Pride was in a peculiar Manner the
Devil's Sin, is manifest from 1 Timothy iii. 6. Not a Novice left, being lifted up
with Pride, he fell into the Condemnation of the Devil. False and delusive
Experiences evermore tend to this; though oftentimes under the Disguise of great
and extraordinary Humility. Spiritual Pride, is the prevailing Temper, and
general Character of Hypocrites, deluded with false Discoveries and Affections.
They are in general, of a Disposition directly contrary to those two Things
belonging to the Christian Temper, directed to by the Apostle; the One in Romans
xii. 16. Be not wise in your own Conceit; and the other in Philip. ii. 3. Let
each esteem others better than themselves. False Experience is conceited of
itself, and affected with itself. Thus he that has false Humility, is much
affected to think, how he is abased before GOD: He that has false Love, is
affected, when he thinks of the Greatness of his Love. The very Food and
Nourishment of false Experience, is to view itself, and take much Notice of
itself; and it is very Breath and Life is to talk much of itself, or some Way to
be showing it self. Whereas truly gracious Views and Affections, are of a quite
contrary Tendency: They nourish no Self-Conceit; no exalting Conceit of the
Man's own Righteousness, Experience, or Privileges; no high Conceit of his
Humiliations. They incline to no Oftentation, nor Self-Exaltation, under any
Disguise whatsoever. But that Sense of the supreme, holy Beauty and Glory of
GOD and CHRIST, which is the Foundation of them, and that only, mortifies
Pride, and truly humbles the Soul. It not only cuts off some of the outermost
Branches (causing many Branches to grow out, where but one was before) but it
strikes at the very Root of Pride; it alters the very Nature and Disposition of
the Heart. The Light of GOD's Beauty, and that alone truly shows the Soul its
own Deformity, and effectually inclines it to exalt GOD, and abase itself.

(2.) These gracious Exercises and Affections, differ from the other in their
Tendency, to destroy Satan's Interest. 1 st In the Person himself, in their
Tendency, to cause the Soul to hate every Evil, and false Way, and to produce
universal Holiness of Heart and Life; disposing him to make the Service of GOD,
and the promoting his Glory, and the Good of Mankind, the very Business of his
Life. Whereas those false Discoveries and Affections, have not this Effect.
There may indeed, be great Zeal, and a great deal of what is called Religion;
but it is not a truly Christian Zeal; it is not a being zealous of good Works:
Their Religion is not the Service of GOD; it is not a seeking and serving GOD;
but indeed, a seeking and serving themselves. Though there may be a Change of
Life, it is not a Change from every wicked Way, to a uniform Christian Life and
Practice; but only a turning the Stream of Corruption from one Channel to
another. Thus the Apostle James distinguishes, in our Context, a true Faith,
from the Faith of Devils: James ii. 19, 20. Thou believe there is one GOD.
The Devils also believe and tremble. But will thou know, O vain Man, that Faith
without Works is dead? And thus the Apostle John distinguishes true Communion
with GOD. 1 John, i. 6, 7. If we say that we have Fellowship with Him, and walk
in Darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth. But if we walk in the Light, or he
is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of CHRIST
cleanses us from all Sin. By this he distinguishes true spiritual Knowledge,
Chap. ii. 3, 4. Hereby we do know, that we know Him, that we keep his
Commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a
Liar, and the Truth is not in him. And hereby the same Apostle distinguishes
true Love. Chap. iii. 18, 19. Let us not love in Word and in Tongue, but in
Deed, [ in Work, as the Word signifies] and in Truth. And hereby we know that
we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts before him.

2. Truly gracious Experiences, have a Tendency to destroy Satan's Interest in
the World.

False Religion, consisting in the Counterfeits of the Operations of the Spirit
of GOD, and in high Pretenses and great Appearances of inward experimental
Religion; when this prevails among a People, though for the present it may
surprise many, and may be the Occasion of alarming and awakening some Sinners;
yet in the final Issue of Things, tends greatly to wound and weaken the Cause
of vital Religion, and to strengthen the Interest of Satan, desperately to
harden the Hearts of Sinners, exceedingly to fill the World with Prejudice,
against the Power of Godliness, to promote Infidelity, and licentious
Principles and Practices, to build up, and make strong the Devil's Kingdom in
the World, more than open Vice and Profaneness, or professed Atheism, or
public Persecution; and perhaps, more than any Thing else whatsoever.

But it is not so with true Religion, in it is genuine Beauty. That, if it
prevails in great Power, will doubtless, excite the Rage of the Devil, and many
other Enemies of Religion: However, it gives great Advantage to it is Friends,
and exceedingly strengthens their Cause; and tends to convince or confound
Enemies. True Religion, is a divine Light in the Souls of the Saints; and as it
shines out in the Conversation before Men, it tends to induce others to glorify
GOD. There is Nothing like it, (as to Means) to awaken the Consciences of Men,
to convince Infidels, and to stop the Mouths of Gainsayers. Though Men naturally
hate the Power of Godliness; yet, when they see the Fruits of it, there is a
Witness in their Consciences in its Favor. He that serves CHRIST in
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, is acceptable to GOD, and
approved of Man. Romans xiv. 17, 18. The Prevailing of true Religion, ever tends
to the Honor of Religion in the World; though it commonly is the Occasion of
great Persecution. It Is a sure Thing, the more it appears, and is exemplified
in the View of the World, the more will its Honor, and the Honor of its
Author be advanced. Philip. i. 11. Being filled with the Fruits of
Righteousness; which are by JESUS CHRIST, unto the Glory and Praise of GOD.

The third USE may be of Exhortation, to seek those distinguishing
Qualifications and Affections of Soul, which neither the Devil, nor any unholy
Being, has, or can have.

How excellent is that inward Virtue and Religion, which consists in these!
Herein consists the most excellent Experiences of Saints and Angels in Heaven.
Herein consists the best Experience of the Man, CHRIST JESUS; whether in his
humbled, or glorified State. Herein consists the Image of GOD: Yea, this is
spoken of in Scripture, as a Communication of something of GOD's own Beauty and
Excellency, a Participation of the divine Nature; 2 Pet. i. 4. A: Partaking of
his Holiness; Heb. xii. 10. A Partaking of CHRIST's Fullness; John i. 16. Hereby
the Saints are filled with all the Fullness of GOD; Ephesians. iii. 18, 19. Hereby
they have Fellowship with, both the Father and the Son, (1 John i. 3.) that is,
they communicate with them in their Happiness. Yea, by Means of this divine
Virtue, there is a mutual Indwelling of GOD and the Saints; 1 John, iv. 16. GOD
is Love; and he that dwells in Love, dwells in GOD, and GOD in him.

This Qualification must render the Person that has it, excellent and happy
indeed; and doubtless, is the highest Dignity, and Blessedness of any Creature.
This is the peculiar Gift of GOD, which he bestows only on his special
Favorites. As to Silver, Gold, and Diamonds, earthly Crowns and Kingdoms, He
often throws 'em out to those that he esteems as Dogs and Swine; but this is
the peculiar Blessing of his dear Children: This is what Flesh and Blood cannot
impart, and what all the Devils in Hell, cannot work the least Degree of in any
Heart; it is GOD alone can bestow it. This was the special Benefit, which CHRIST
died to procure for his Elect, the most excellent Token of his everlasting
Love; the chief Fruit of his great Labors, and the most precious Purchase of
his Blood.

By this, above all other Things, do Men glorify GOD. By this, above all other
Things, do the Saints shine as Lights in the World, and are Blessings to
Mankind. And this, above all Things, tends to their own Comfort; from hence
arises that Peace with passes all Understanding, and that Joy, which is
unspeakable, and full of Glory. And this is that which will most certainly
issue in the eternal Salvation of those that have it: It Is impossible, that the
Soul, wherein it is, should sink and perish: It Is an immortal Seed; it is
eternal Life begun; and therefore, they that have it, can never die. It Is the
Dawning of the Light of Glory. It Is the Day Star risen in the Heart, that is a
sure Forerunner of that Suns rising, which will bring on an everlasting Day.
This is that Water, which CHRIST gives, which is in him that drink's it, a Well
of Water, springing up into everlasting Life: John iv. 14. It Is something from
Heaven, is of a heavenly Nature, and tends to Heaven. And those that have it,
however they may now Wander in a Wilderness, or be tossed to and fro, on a
tempestuous Ocean, shall certainly arrive in Heaven at last, where this
heavenly Spark shall be increased, and perfected, and the Souls of the Saints,
all be transformed into a bright and pure Flame, and they shall shine forth as
the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father.

AMEN.
FINIS.
SINNERS In the Hands of An angry GOD.

A SERMON Preached at Enfield, July 8 th 1741.

At a Time of great Awakenings; and attended with remarkable Impressions on
many of the Hearers.

By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Northampton.

Amos ix. 2, 3. Though they dig into Hell, thence shall mine Hand take them;
though they climb up to Heaven, thence will I bring them down. And though they
hide themselves in the Top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence;
and though they be hid from my Sight in the Bottom of the Sea, thence I will
command the Serpent, and he shall bite them. The SECOND EDITION.

BOSTON: Printed: NEW YORK: Reprinted by James Parker, at the New
Printing-Office in Beaver-Street, MDCCLIII.

SINNERS In the Hands of an angry GOD.
DEUTERONOMY. XXXII. 35. -- Their Foot shall slide in due Time. --
IN this Verse is threatened the Vengeance of GOD, on the wicked unbelieving
Israelites, that were GOD's visible People, and lived under Means of Grace; and
that, notwithstanding all GOD's wonderful Works, that he had wrought toward
that People, yet remained, as is expressed, ver. 28. void of Counsel, having no
Understanding in them; and that, under all the Cultivations of Heaven, brought
forth bitter and poisonous Fruit; as in the two Verses next preceding the Text.

The Expression that I have chosen for my Text, Their Foot shall slide in due
Time; seems to imply the following Things, relating to the Punishment and
Destruction that these wicked Israelites were exposed to.

1. That they were always exposed to Destruction; as one that stands or walks
in slippery Places, is always exposed to fall. This is implied in the Manner of
their Destruction's coming upon them, being represented by their Foot's
sliding* the same is expressed, Psalm. lxxiii. 18. Surely thou did set them in
slippery Places; thou castedst them down into Destruction.

2. It implies that they were always exposed to sudden unexpected Destruction.
As he that walks in slippery Places is every Moment liable to fall; he cannot
foresee one Moment whether he shall stand or fall the next; and when he does
fall, he falls at once, without Warning. Which is also expressed in that Psalm.
lxxiii. 18, 19. Surely thou did set them in slippery Places; thou castedst
them down into Destruction. How are they brought into Desolation as in a Moment?

3. Another Thing implied is, that they are liable to fall of themselves,
without being thrown down by the Hand of another. As he that stands or walks on
slippery Ground, needs nothing but his own Weight to throw him down.

4. That the Reason why they are not fallen already, and don't fall now, is
only that GOD's appointed Time is not come. For it is said, that when that due
Time, or appointed Time comes, their Foot shall slide. Then they shall be left
to fall, as they are inclined by their own Weight. GOD will not hold them up in
these slippery Places any longer, but will let them go; and then, at that very
Instant, they shall fall into Destruction; as he that stands in such slippery
declining Ground on the Edge of a Pit that he cannot stand alone, when he is let
go, he immediately falls and is lost.

The Observation from the Words that I would now insist upon, is this, There is
Nothing that keeps wicked Men, at any one Moment, out of Hell, but the mere
Pleasure of GOD.

By the mere Pleasure of GOD, I mean his sovereign Pleasure, his arbitrary
Will, restrained by no Obligation, hindered by no Manner of Difficulty, any
more than if nothing else but GOD's mere Will had in the least Degree, or in
any Respect whatsoever, any Hand in the Preservation of wicked Men one Moment.

The Truth of this Observation may appear by the following Considerations.

1. There is no Want of Power in GOD to cast wicked Men into Hell at any
Moment. Men's Hands cannot be strong when GOD rises up: The strongest have no
Power to resist him, nor can any deliver out of his Hands.

He is not only able to cast wicked Men into Hell, but he can most easily do
it. Sometimes an earthly Prince meets with a great deal of Difficulty to subdue
a Rebel, that has found Means to fortify himself, and has made himself strong
by the Numbers of his Followers. But it is not so with GOD. There is no
Fortress that is any Defense from the Power of GOD. Though Hand join in Hand, and
vast Multitudes of GOD's Enemies combine and associate themselves, they are
easily broken in Pieces: They are as great Heaps of light Chaff before the
Whirlwind; or large Quantities of dry Stubble before devouring Flames. We find
it easy to tread on, and crush a Worm, that we see crawling on the Earth; so
it is easy for us to cut or singe a slender Thread that any Things hangs by;
thus easy is it for GOD, when he pleases, to cast his Enemies down to Hell.
What are we, that we should think to stand before him, at whose Rebuke the
Earth trembles, and before whom the Rocks are thrown down?

2. They deserve to be cast into Hell; so that divine Justice never stands in
the Way, it makes no Objection against GOD's using his Power at any Moment to
destroy them. Yea, on the contrary, Justice calls aloud for an infinite
Punishment of their Sins. Divine Justice, says of the Tree that brings forth
such Grapes of Sodom, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the Ground, Luke xiii. 7.
The Sword of divine Justice is every Moment brandished over their Heads, and
it is nothing but the Hand of arbitrary Mercy, and GOD's mere Will, that holds
it back.

3. They are already under a Sentence of Condemnation to Hell. They don't only
justly deserve to be cast down thither; but the Sentence of the Law of GOD,
that eternal and immutable Rule of Righteousness, that GOD has fixed between
him and Mankind, is gone out against them, and stands against them; so that
they are bound over already to Hell. John iii. 18. He that believes not is
condemned already. So that every unconverted Man properly belongs to Hell; that
is his Place; from thence he is. John viii. 23. Ye are from beneath: And
thither he is bound; it is the Place that Justice, and GOD's Word, and the
Sentence of his unchangeable Law assigns to him.

4. They are now the Objects of that very same Anger and Wrath of GOD, that is
expressed in the Torments of Hell* And the Reason why they don't go down to
Hell at each Moment, is not because GOD, in whose Power they are, is not then
very angry with them; as angry as he is with many of those miserable Creatures,
that he is now tormenting in Hell, and do there feel and bear the Fierceness of
his Wrath. Yea, GOD is a great deal more angry with great Numbers that are now
on Earth; yea, doubtless, with many that are now in this Congregation, that it
may be, are at Ease and Quiet, than he is with many of those that are now in
the Flames of Hell.

So that it is not because GOD is unmindful of their Wickedness, and don't
resent it, that he don't let loose his Hand and cut them off. GOD is not
altogether such an One as themselves, though they may imagine him to be so. The
Wrath of GOD burns against them, their Damnation don't slumber, the Pit is
prepared, the Fire is made ready, the Furnace is now hot, ready to receive
them; the Flames do now rage and glow. The glittering Sword is whet, and held
over them, and the Pit has opened her Mouth under them.

5. The Devil stands ready to fall upon them, and seize them as his own, at
what Moment GOD shall permit him. They belong to him; he has their Souls in his
Possession, and under his Dominion. The Scripture represents them as his Goods,
Luke xi. 12. The Devils watch them; they are ever by them, at their right Hand;
they stand waiting for them, like greedy hungry Lions that see their Prey, and
expect to have it, but are for the Present kept back; if GOD should withdraw
his Hand, by which they are restrained, they would in one Moment fly upon their
poor Souls. The old Serpent is gaping for them; Hell opens its Mouth wide to
receive them; and if God should permit it, they would be hastily swallowed up
and lost.

6. There are in the Souls of wicked Men, those hellish Principles reigning,
that would presently kindle and flame out into Hell Fire, if it were not for
GOD's Restraints. There is laid in the very Nature of carnal Men, a Foundation
for the Torments of Hell: There are those currupt Principles, in reigning Power
in them, and in full Possession of them, that are Seeds of Hell Fire. These
Principles are active and powerful, exceeding violent in their Nature, and if
it were not for the restraining Hand of GOD upon them, they would soon break
out, they would flame out after the same Manner as the same Corruptions, the
same Enmity does in the Hearts of damned Souls, and would beget the same
Torments in 'em as they do in them. The Souls of the Wicked, are in Scripture
compared to the troubled Sea, Isai. lvii. 20. For the present GOD restrains
their Wickedness by his mighty Power, as he does the raging Waves of the
troubled Sea, saying, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further; but if GOD
should withdraw that restraining Power, it would soon carry all before it. Sin
is the Ruin and Misery of the Soul; it is destructive in it is Nature; and if
GOD should leave it without Restraint, there would need nothing else to make
the Soul perfectly miserable. The Corruption of the Heart of Man is a Thing
that is immoderate and boundless in its Fury; and while wicked Men live here,
it is like Fire pent up by GOD's Restraints, whenas if it were let loose, it
would set on Fire the Course of Nature; and as the Heart is now a Sink of Sin,
so, if Sin was not restrained, it would immediately turn the Soul into a fiery
Oven, or a Furnace of Fire and Brimstone.

7. It is no Security to wicked Men for one Moment, that there are no visible
Means of Death at Hand. It Is no Security to a natural Man, that he is now in
Health, and that he don't see which Way he should now immediately go out of the
World by any Accident, and that there is no visible Danger in any Respect in
his Circumstances. The manifold and continual Experience of the World in all
Ages, shows that this is no Evidence that a Man is not on the very Brink of
Eternity, and that the next Step will not be into another World. The unseen,
unthought-of Ways and Means of Persons going suddenly out of the World are
innumerable and inconceivable. Unconverted Men walk over the Pit of Hell on a
rotten Covering, and there are innumerable Places in this Covering so weak that
they will not bear their Weight, and these Places are not seen. The Arrows of
Death fly unseen at Noonday; the sharpest Sight cannot discern them* GOD has so
many different unsearchable Ways of taking Wicked Men out of the World and
sending 'em to Hell, that there is nothing to make it appear, that GOD had need
to be at the Expense of a Miracle, or go out of the ordinary Course of his
Providence, to destroy any wicked Man, at any Moment. All the Means that there
are of Sinners going out of the World, are so in GOD's Hands, and so
universally absolutely subject to his Power and Determination, that it don't
depend at all less on the mere Will of GOD, whether Sinners shall at any Moment
go to Hell, than if Means were never made use of, or at all concerned in the
Case.

8. Natural Men's Prudence and Care to preserve their own Lives, or the Care of
others to preserve them, don't secure 'em a Moment. This divine Providence and
universal Experience does also bear Testimony to. There is this clear Evidence
that Men's own Wisdom is no Security to them from Death; That if it were
otherwise we should see some Difference between the wise and politic Men of
the World, and others, with Regard to their Liableness to early and unexpected
Death; but how is it in Fact? Ecles. 2. 16. How dies the wise Man? as the Fool.

9. All wicked Men's Pains and Contrivance they use to escape Hell, while they
continue to reject CHRIST, and so remain wicked Men, don't secure 'em from Hell
one Moment. Almost every natural Man that hears of Hell, flatters himself that
he shall escape it; he depends upon himself for his own Security; he flatters
himself in what he has done, and in what he is now doing, or what he intends to
do; every one lays out Matters in his own Mind how he shall avoid Damnation,
and flatters himself that he contrives well for himself, and that his Schemes
will not fail. They hear indeed that there are but few saved, and that the bigger
Part of Men that have died heretofore are gone to Hell; but each one imagines
that he lays out Matters better for his own Escape than others have done: He
don't intend to come to that Place of Torment; he says within himself, that he
intends to take Care that shall be effectual, and to order Matters so for
himself as not to fail.

But the foolish Children of Men do miserably delude themselves in their own
Schemes, and in their Confidence in their own Strength and Wisdom; they trust
to nothing but a Shadow. The bigger Part of those that heretofore have lived
under the same Means of Grace, and are now dead, are undoubtedly gone to Hell;
and it was not because they were not as wise as those that are now alive; it
was not because they did not lay out Matters as well for themselves to secure
their own Escape. If it were so, that we could come to speak with them, and
could enquire of them, one by one, whether they expected when alive, and when
they used to hear about Hell, ever to be the Subjects of that Misery, we
doubtless should hear one and another reply, No, I never intended to come here;
I had laid out Matters otherwise in my Mind; I thought I should contrive well
for my self; I thought my Scheme good; I intended to take effectual Care; but
it came upon me unexpected; I did not look for it at that Time, and in that
Manner; it came as a Thief; Death outwitted me; GOD's Wrath was too quick for
me; O my cursed Foolishness! I was flattering myself, and pleasing myself with
vain Dreams of what I would do hereafter, and when I was saying Peace and
Safety, then sudden Destruction came upon me.

10. GOD has laid himself under no Obligation, by any Promise, to keep any
natural Man out of Hell one Moment. GOD certainly has made no Promises either
of eternal Life, or of any Deliverance or Preservation from eternal Death, but
what are contained in the Covenant of Grace, the Promises that are given in
CHRIST, in whom all the Promises are Yea and Amen. But surely they have no
Interest in the Promises of the Covenant of Grace, that are not the Children of
the Covenant, and that don't believe in any of the Promises of the Covenant,
and have no Interest in the Mediator of the Covenant.

So that whatever some have imagined and pretended about Promises made to
natural Men's earnest seeking and knocking, it is plain and manifest, that
whatever Pains a natural Man takes in Religion, whatever Prayers he makes, till
he believes in CHRIST, GOD is under no manner of Obligation to keep him a
Moment from eternal Destruction.

So that thus it is, that natural Men are held in the Hand of GOD over the Pit
of Hell; they have deserved the fiery Pit, and are already sentenced to it; and
GOD is dreadfully provoked, his Anger is as great toward them as to those that
are actually suffering the Executions of the Fierceness of his Wrath in Hell,
and they have done nothing in the least, to appease or abate that Anger,
neither is GOD in the least bound by any Promise to hold 'em up one Moment; the
Devil is waiting for them, Hell is gaping for them, the Flames gather and flash
about them, and would fain lay hold on them, and swallow them up; the Fire pent
up in their own Hearts is struggling to break out; and they have no Interest in
any Mediator, there are no Means within Reach that can be any Security to them.
In short, they have no Refuge, nothing to take hold of, all that preserves them
every Moment is the mere arbitrary Will, and uncovenanted unobliged Forbearance
of an incensed GOD.

APPLICATION.
The USE may be of Awakening to unconverted Persons in this Congregation. This
that you have heard is the Case of every one of you that are out of Christ.
That World of Misery, that Lake of burning Brimstone is extended abroad under
you. There is the dreadful Pit of the glowing Flames of the Wrath of GOD; there
is Hell's wide gaping Mouth open; and you have nothing to stand upon, nor any
Thing to take hold of: there is nothing between you and Hell but the Air; it is
only the Power and mere Pleasure of GOD that holds you up.

You probably are not sensible of this; you find you are kept out of Hell, but
don't see the Hand of GOD in it, but look at other Things, as the good State of
your bodily Constitution, your Care of your own Life, and the Means you use for
your own Preservation. But indeed these Things are nothing; if GOD should
withdraw his Hand, they would avail no more to keep you from falling, than the
thin Air to hold up a Person that is suspended in it.

Your Wickedness makes you as it were heavy as Load, and to tend downwards with
great Weight and Pressure toward Hell; and if GOD should let you go, you would
immediately sink and swiftly descend and plunge into the bottomless Gulf, and
your healthy Constitution, and your own Care and Prudence, and best
Contrivance, and all your Righteousness, would have no more Influence to uphold
you and keep you out of Hell, then a Spider's Web would have to stop a falling
Rock. Were it not, that so is the sovereign Pleasure of GOD, the Earth would
not bear you one Moment; for you are a Burden to it; the Creation groans with
you; the Creature is made subject to the Bondage of your Corruption, not
willingly; the Sun don't willingly shine upon you to give you Light to serve
Sin and Satan; the Earth don't willingly yield her Increase to satisfy your
Lusts; nor is it willingly a Stage for your Wickedness to be acted upon; the
Air don't willingly serve you for Breath to maintain the Flame of Life in your
Vitals, while you spend your Life in the Service of GOD's Enemies. GOD's
Creatures are good, and were made for Men to serve GOD with, and don't
willingly subserve to any other Purpose, and groan when they are abused to
Purposes so directly contrary to their Nature and End. And the World would spue
you out, were it not for the sovereign Hand of him who has subjected it in
Hope. There are the black Clouds of GOD's Wrath now hanging directly over your
Heads, full of the dreadful Storm, and big with Thunder; and were it not for
the restraining Hand of GOD, it would immediately burst forth upon you. The
sovereign Pleasure of GOD, for the present, stays his rough Wind; otherwise it
would come with Fury, and your Destruction would come like a Whirlwind, and you
would be like the Chaff of the Summer threshing Floor.

The Wrath of GOD is like great Waters that are dammed for the Present; they
increase more and more, and rise higher and higher, till an Outlet is given,
and the longer the Stream is stopped, the more rapid and mighty is it is Course,
when once it is let loose. It Is true, that Judgment against your evil Works,
has not been executed hitherto; the Floods of GOD's Vengeance have been
withheld; but your Guilt in the mean Time is constantly increasing, and you
are every Day treasuring up more Wrath; the Waters are continually rising, and
waxing more and more mighty; and there is Nothing but the mere Pleasure of GOD,
that holds the Waters back, that are unwilling to be stopped, and press hard to
go forward; if GOD should only withdraw his Hand from the Flood-Gate, it would
immediately fly open, and the fiery Floods of the Fierceness and Wrath of GOD,
would rush forth with inconceivable Fury, and would come upon you with
omnipotent Power; and if your Strength were ten Thousand Times greater than it
is, yea, ten thousand Times greater than the Strength of the stoutest,
sturdiest Devil in Hell, it would be Nothing to withstand or endure it.

The Bow of GOD's Wrath is bent, and the Arrow made ready on the String, and
Justice bends the Arrow at your Heart, and strains the Bow, and it is Nothing
but the mere Pleasure of GOD, and that of an angry GOD, without any Promise or
Obligation at all, that keeps the Arrow one Moment from being made drunk with
your Blood.

Thus are all you that never passed under a great Change of Heart, by the
mighty Power of the SPIRIT of GOD upon your Souls; all that were never born
again, and made new Creatures, and raised from being dead in Sin, to a State of
new, and before altogether unexperienced Light and Life, (however you may have
reformed your Life in many Things, and may have had religious Affections, and
may keep up a Form of Religion in your Families and Closets, and in the Houses
of GOD, and may be strict in it,) you are thus in the Hands of an angry GOD;
it is Nothing but his mere Pleasure, that keeps you from being this Moment
swallowed up in everlasting Destruction.

However unconvinced you may now be of the Truth of what you hear, by and by
you will be fully convinced of it. Those that are gone from being in the like
Circumstances with you, see that it was so with them; for Destruction came
suddenly upon most of them, when they expected Nothing of it, and while they
were saying, Peace and Safety: Now they see, that those Things that they
depended on for Peace and Safety, were Nothing but thin Air and empty Shadows.

The GOD that holds you over the Pit of Hell, much as one holds a Spider, or
some loathsome Infect, over the Fire, abhors you, and is dreadfully provoked;
his Wrath toward you burns like Fire; he looks upon you as worthy of Nothing
else, but to be cast into the Fire; he is of purer Eyes than to bear to have
you in his Sight; you are ten thousand Times so abominable in his Eyes, as the
most hateful venomous Serpent is in ours. You have offended him infinitely more
than ever a stubborn Rebel did his Prince: And yet, it is Nothing but his Hand
that holds you from falling into the Fire every Moment: It Is to be ascribed to
Nothing else, that you did not go to Hell the last Night; that you was suffered
to awake again in this World, after you closed your Eyes to sleep: And there is
no other Reason to be given, why you have not dropped into Hell since you arose
in the Morning, but that GOD's Hand has held you up: There is no other Reason
to be given why you have not gone to Hell, since you have sat here in the House of
GOD, provoking his pure Eyes by your sinful wicked Manner of attending his
solemn Worship: Yea, there is Nothing else that is to be given as a Reason why
you don't this very Moment drop down into Hell.

O Sinner! Consider the fearful Danger you are in: It Is a great Furnace of
Wrath, a wide and bottomless Pit, full of the Fire of Wrath, that you are held
over in the Hand of that GOD, whose Wrath is provoked and incensed as much
against you, as against many of the Damned in Hell: You hang by a slender
Thread, with the Flames of divine Wrath flashing about it, and ready every
Moment to singe it, and burn it asunder; and you have no Interest in any
Mediator, and Nothing to lay hold of to save yourself, Nothing to keep off the
Flames of Wrath, Nothing of your own, Nothing that you ever have done, Nothing
that you can do, to induce GOD to spare you one Moment.

And consider he^e more particularly several Things concerning that Wrath that
you are in such Danger of.

1. Whose Wrath it is: It is the Wrath of the infinite GOD. If it were only the
Wrath of Man, though it were of the most potent Prince, it would be comparatively
little to be regarded. The Wrath of Kings is very much dreaded, especially of
absolute Monarchs, that have the Possessions and Lives of their Subjects wholly
in their Power, to be disposed of at their mere Will. Prove. xx. 2. The Fear of
a King is as the Roaring of a Lion: Whosoever provokes him to Anger, sins
against his own Soul. The Subject that very much enrages an arbitrary Prince,
is liable to suffer the most extreme Torments, that human Art can invent, or
human Power can inflict. But the greatest earthly Potentates, in their greatest
Majesty and Strength, and when clothed in their greatest Terrors, are but
feeble despicable Worms of the Dust, in Comparison of the great and almighty
Creator and King of Heaven and Earth: It is but little that they can do, wh^m
most enraged, and when they have exerted the utmost of their Fury. All the
Kings of the Earth before GOD, are is Grasshoppers, they are Nothing, and less
than Nothing: Both their Love and their Hatred is to be despised. The Wrath of
the great King of Kings, is as much more terrible than their's, as his Majesty
is greater. Luke xii. 4, 5. And I say unto you my Friends, be not afraid of
them that kill the Body, and after that have no more that they can do: But I
will forewarn you whom you shall fear; fear him, which after he has killed,
has Power to cast into Hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him.

2. It Is the Fierceness of his Wrath that you are exposed to. We often read of
the Fury of GOD; as in Isai. lix. 18. According to their Deeds, accordingly he
will repay Fury to his Adversaries. So Isai. lxvi, 15. For behold, the Lord
will come with Fire, and with Chariots, like a Whirlwind, to render his Anger
with Fury, and his Rebukes with Flames of Fire. And so in many other Places. So
we read of GOD's Fierceness. Rev. xix. 15. There we read of the Wine Press of
the Fierceness and Wrath of Almighty GOD. The Words are exceeding terrible. If
it had only been said, the Wrath of GOD, the Words would have implied that
which is infinitely dreadful: But it is not only said so, but the Fierceness and
Wrath of GOD: The Fury of GOD! the Fierceness of Jehovah! Oh how dreadful must
that be! Who can utter or conceive what such Expressions carry in them! But it
is not only said so, but the Fierceness and Wrath of ALMIGHTY GOD. As though
there would be a very great Manifestation of his almighty Power, in what the
Fierceness of his Wrath should inflict, as though Omnipotence should be as it
were enraged, and exerted, as Men were wont to exert their Strength in the
Fierceness of their Wrath. Oh! then what will be the Consequence! What will
become of the poor Worm that shall suffer it! Whose Hands can be strong? And
whose Heart endure? To what a dreadful, inexpressible, inconceivable Depth of
Misery must the poor Creature be sunk who shall be the Subject of this!

Consider this, you that are here present, that yet remain in an unregenerate
State. That GOD will execute the Fierceness of his Anger, implies, that he will
inflict Wrath without any Pity: When GOD beholds the ineffable Extremity of
your Case, and sees your Torment to be so vastly disproportioned to your
Strength, and sees how your poor Soul is crushed and sinks down, as it were
into an infinite Gloom; he will have no Compassion upon you, he will not
forbear the Executions of his Wrath, or in the least lighten his Hand; there
shall be no Moderation or Mercy, nor will GOD then at all stay his rough Wind;
he will have no Regard to your Welfare, nor be at all careful lest you should
suffer too much, in any other Sense, than only that you shall not suffer beyond
what strict Justice requires: Nothing shall be withheld, because it is so hard
for you to bear. Ezekiel. viii. 18. Therefore will I also deal in Fury; mine Eye
shall not spare, neither will I have Pity; and though they cry in mine Ears with
a loud Voice, yet I will not hear them. Now GOD stands ready to pity you; this
is a Day of Mercy; you may cry now with some Encouragement of obtaining Mercy:
But when once the Day of Mercy is past, your most lamentable and dolorous Cries
and Shrieks will be in vain; you will be wholly lost and thrown away of GOD as
to any Regard to your Welfare; GOD will have no other Use to put you to, but
only to suffer Misery; you shall be continued in being to no other End; for you
will be a Vessel of Wrath fitted to Destruction; and there will be no other Use
of this Vessel but only to be filled full of Wrath: GOD will be so far from
pitying you when you cry to him, that it is said he will only Laugh and Mock,
Prove. i. 25, 26. etc.

How awful are those Words, Isai, lxiii. 3. which are the Words of the great
GOD, I will tread them in mine Anger, and will trample them in my Fury, and
their Blood shall be sprinkled upon my Garments, and I will stain all my
Raiment. It Is perhaps impossible, to conceive of Words that carry in them
greater Manifestations of these three Things* viz. Contempt, and Hatred, and
Fierceness of Indignation. If you cry to GOD to pity you, he will be so far
from pitying you in your doleful Case, or showing you the least Regard or
Favor, that instead of that, he will only tread you under Foot: And though he will
know, that you cannot bear the Weight of Omnipotence treading upon you, yet he
will not Regard that, but he will crush you under his Feet without Mercy; He Will
crush out your Blood, and make it fly, and it shall be sprinkled on his
Garments, so as to stain all his Raiment. He will not only hate you, but he
will have you in the utmost Contempt; no Place shall be thought fit for you,
but under his Feet, to be trodden down as the Mire of the Streets.

3. The Misery you are exposed to, is that which GOD will inflict to that End,
that he might show what that Wrath of JEHOVAH is. GOD has had it on his Heart
to show to Angels and Men, both how excellent his Love is, and also how
terrible his Wrath is. Sometimes earthly Kings have a Mind to show how terrible
their Wrath is, by the extreme Punishments they would execute on those that
provoke 'em. Nebuchadnezzar, that mighty and haughty Monarch of the Chaldean
Empire, was willing to show his Wrath, when enraged with Shadrach, Meshech, and
Abednego; and accordingly gave Order, that the burning fiery Furnace should
(...) seven Times hotter than it was before; doubtless, it was raised to the
utmost Degree of Fierceness, that humane Art could raise it: But the great GOD
is also willing to show his Wrath, and magnify his awful Majesty and mighty
Power in the extreme Sufferings of his Enemies. Romans xix. 22. What if God
willing to show HIS Wrath, and to make his Power known, endured with much
Long-suffering, the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction? And seeing this is
his Design and what he has determined, to show how terrible the unmixed,
unrestrained Wrath, the Fury and Fierceness of JEHOVAH is, he will do it to
Effect. There will be something accomplished and brought to pass, that will be
dreadful with a Witness. When the great and angry GOD, has risen up and
executed his awful Vengeance on the poor Sinner; and the Wretch is actually
suffering the infinite Weight and Power of his Indignation, then will GOD call
upon the whole Universe to behold that awful Majesty and mighty Power, that is
to be seen in it. Isai. xxxiii. 12, 13, 14. And the People shall be as the
burning of Lime, as Thorns cut up shall they be burnt in the Fire. Hear ye that
are far off, what I have done; and ye that are near, acknowledge my Might. The
Sinners in Zion are afraid, Fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites, etc.

Thus it will be with you that are in an unconverted State, if you continue in
it; the infinite Might, and Majesty and Terribleness of the OMNIPOTENT GOD
shall be magnified upon you, in the ineffable Strength of your Torments: You
shall be tormented in the Presence of the holy Angels, and in the Presence of
the Lamb; and when you shall be in this State of Suffering, the glorious
Inhabitants of Heaven shall go forth and look on the awful Spectacle, that they
may see what the Wrath and Fierceness of the Almighty is, and when they have
seen it, they will fall down and adore that great Power and Majesty. Isai.
lxvi. 23, 24. And it shall come to pass, that from one new Moon to another, and
from one Sabbath to another, shall all Flesh come to Worship before me, says
the Lord; and they shall go forth and look upon the Carcasses of the Men that
have transgressed against me; for their Worm shall not die, neither shall their
Fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all Flesh.

4. It Is everlasting Wrath. It would be dreadful to suffer this Fierceness and
Wrath of Almighty GOD one Moment; but you must suffer it to all Eternity: There
will be no End to this exquisite horrible Misery: When you look forward, you
shall see a long Forever, a boundless Duration before you, which will swallow
up your Thoughts, and amaze your Soul, and you will absolutely despair of ever
having any Deliverance, any End, any Mitigation, any Rest at all; you will know
certainly, that you must wear out long Ages, Millions of Millions of Ages, in
wrestling and conflicting with this almighty merciless Vengeance, and then,
when you have so done, when so many Ages have actually been spent by you in
this Manner, you will know, that all is but a Point to what remains. So that
your Punishment will indeed be infinite. Oh who can express what the State of a
Soul in such Circumstances is! All that we can possibly say about it, gives but
a very feeble saint Representation of it; it is inexpressible and inconceivable:
For who knows the Power of GOD's Anger?

How dreadful is the State of those that are daily and hourly in Danger of this
great Wrath, and infinite Misery! But this is the dismal Case of every Soul in
this Congregation, that has not been born again, however moral and strict,
sober and religious they may otherwise be. Oh that you would consider it,
whether you be Young or Old. There is Reason to think, that there are many in
this Congregation now hearing this Discourse, that will actually be the
Subjects of this very Misery to all Eternity. We know not who thy are, or in
what Seats they sit, or what Thoughts they now have: It may be, they are now at
Ease, and he^^ all these Things without much Disturbance, and are now
flattering themselves that they are not the Persons, promising themselves that
they shall escape. If we knew that there was one Person, and but one, in the
whole Congregation, that was to be the Subject of this Misery, what an awful
Thing would it be to think of! (...) we knew who it was, what an awful Sight
would it be to see such a Person! How might all the Rest of the Congregation
lift up a lamentable and bitter Cry over him! But alas! instead of one, how
many is it likely, will remember this Discourse in Hell? And it would be a
Wonder, if some that are now present, should not be in Hell in a very short
Time, before this Year is out. And it would be no Wonder if some Persons, that
now sits here in some Seats of this Meeting House in Health, and quiet and
secure, should be there before Tomorrow Morning. Those of you that finally
continue in a natural Condition, that shall keep out of Hell longest, will be
there in a little Time! your Damnation don't slumber; it will come swiftly, and
in all Probability, very suddenly upon many of you* You have Reason to wonder,
that you are not already in Hell. It Is doubtless the Case of some that
heretofore you have seen and known, that never deserved Hell more than you, and
that heretofore, appeared as likely to have been now alive as you: Their Case
is past all Hope; they are crying in extreme Misery and perfect Despair; but
here you are in the Land of the Living, and in the House of GOD, and have an
Opportunity to obtain Salvation. What would not those poor damned hopeless
Souls, give for one Day's such Opportunity as you now enjoy!

And now you have an extraordinary Opportunity, a Day wherein CHRIST has slung
the Door of Mercy wide open; and stands in the Door, calling and crying with a
loud Voice to poor Sinners; a Day wherein many are flocking to him, and
pressing into the Kingdom of GOD; many are daily coming from the East, West,
North and South; many that were very lately in the same miserable Condition
that you are in, are now in an happy State, with their Hearts filled with Love
to Him, that has loved them, and washed them from their Sins in his own Blood,
and rejoicing in Hope of the Glory of GOD. How awful is it to be left behind at
such a Day! To see so many others feasting, while you are pining and perishing!
To see so many rejoicing and singing for Joy of Heart, while you have Cause to
mourn for Sorrow of Heart, and howl for Vexation of Spirit! How can you rest
one Moment in such a Condition? Are not your Souls as precious as the Souls of
the People at The next neighbor Town.
Suffield, where they are flocking from Day to Day to Christ?

Are there no^ many here that have lived long in the World, that are not to
this Day born again, and so are Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
have done Nothing ever since they have lived, but treasure up Wrath against the
Day of Wrath? Oh Sirs, your Case in an especial Manner is extremely dangerous;
your Guilt and Hardness of Heart is extremely great. Don't you see how
generally Persons of your Years are passed over and left, in the present
remarkable and wonderful Dispensation of GOD's Mercy? You had need to consider
your selves, and wake thoroughly out of Sleep; you cannot bear the Fierceness
and Wrath of the infinite GOD.

And you that are young Men, and young Women, will you neglect this precious
Season that you now enjoy, when so many others of your Age are renouncing all
youthful Vanities, and flocking to CHRIST? You especially have now an
extraordinary Opportunity; but if you neglect it, it will soon be with you, as
it is with those Persons that spent away all the precious Days of Youth in Sin,
and are now come to such a dreadful Pass in Blindness and Hardness.

And you Children, that are unconverted, don't you know that you are going down
to Hell, to bear the dreadful Wrath of that GOD, that is now angry with you
every Day, and every Night? Will you be content to be the Children of the
Devil, when so many other Children in the Land are converted, and are become
the holy and happy Children of the King of Kings?

And let every one that is yet ou^ of CHRIST, and hanging over the Pit of Hell,
whether they be old Men and Women, or middle Aged, or young People, or little
Children, now hearken to the loud Calls of GOD's Word and Providence. This
acceptable Year of the LORD, that is a Day of such great Favor to some, will
doubtless be a Day of as remarkable Vengeance to others. Men's Hearts harden,
and their Guilt increases apace at such a Day as this, if they neglect their
Souls: And never was there so great Danger of such Persons being given up to
hardness of Heart, and blindness of Mind. GOD seems now to be hastily gathering
in his Elect in all Parts of the Land; and probably the bigger Part of adult
Persons that ever shall be saved, will be brought in now in a little Time, and
that it will be as it was on the great Out-pouring of the SPIRIT upon the Jews
in the Apostle's Days, the Election will obtain, and the rest will be blinded.
If this should be the Case with you, you will eternally curse this Day, and
will curse the Day that ever you was born, to see such a Season of the pouring
out of GOD's Spirit; and will wish that you had died and gone to Hell before
you had seen it. Now undoubtedly it is, as it was in the Days of John the
Baptist, the Ax is in an extraordinary Manner, laid at the Root of the Trees,
that every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, may be hewn down, and cast
into the Fire.

Therefore, let every one that is out of CHRIST, now awake and fly from the
Wrath to come. The Wrath of almighty GOD, is now undoubtedly hanging over a
great Part of this Congregation: Let every one fly out of Sodom: Haste and
escape for your Lives, look not behind you, escape to the Mountain, lest you be
consumed.

FINIS.

