Mr. Devotion's Election SERMON, May 10th, 1753.

The civil Ruler, a dignified Ser^^^^ (...) the LORD, but a dying Man.

A SERMON Preached before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE Colony of CONNECTICUT, at
HARTFORD, on the Day of the Anniversary ELECTION, May 10th, 1753.

By Ebenezer Devotion, A. M. Pastor of a Church in WINDHAM.

Psalm lxxxii. 6, 7. I have said, ye are Gods: and all of you are Children of
the most High. But ye shall dye like Men, and fall like one of the Princes. Few
years but yield us Proof of Dea^^^^ Ambition
To cull his victims from the fairest Fold,
And sheath his Shafts in all the Pride of Life.
Night Thoughts. N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, Printer to the
GOV. and COMPANY, 1753

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY at HARTFORD, in the Colony of CONNECTICUT, on the Second
Thursday of May, Anno Domini, 1753.
Ordered,
THAT Mr. JONATHAN HUNTINGTON, and Capt. ELIPHALET DYAR, Return the Thanks of
this Assembly, to the Reverend Mr. EBENEZER DEVOTION, for his SERMON Delivered
(on the tenth Day of May Instant,) before the Assembly, and Desire a Copy
thereof that it may be Printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

An Election Sermon.
DEUTERONOMY XXXIV. 5. So Moses the Servant of the LORD, died there in the Land
of Moab, --
IN a state of Existence like the present, where there are Beings made for
Immortality, and put upon Trial a few Years, or rather a few Days, in Order to
be trained up, and fitted for a nobler, happier state of Things: and where
through native Sluggishness, and Inattention or a contracted Stupor, those Beings
too seldom think upon their Errand, the great Business, which immediately, and
especially refers to this better State, it is convenient, it is frequently
needful, that they have a solemn Memento, pointing of them forward to the
Period of their Trial. The Reason of it is plain, viz the immediate, and
powerful Tendency which it has, to awaken in the Minds of Men, a sense of the
Worth of Time, and to beget in them the most vigorous Efforts, to do seasonably
the Business assigned them in the World. And this Reason always holds exactly
proportionate both to the Embarrassments attending the Duty and Business of
Life, and also to the Importance of the Business itself. And hence when by
Reason of an exalted Station, a high Trust, and the Burdens common to
Government, any of our fellow Men have besides the Duties, and Intanglements
common to Men, and Christians, the superadded Weight of a high Trust, the
Government of the Commonwealth; they especially need to have their Eyes turned
forward, their Minds directed to the solemn Period, when their working Time
shall be over, and all present Distinctions laid aside, when Christ shall have
put down all Rule, and delivered up the Kingdom to the Father. Agreeably the
Sacred Writings frequently inculcate a Truth, which all Nature loudly speaks,
viz. the Mortality of Man. The frequent Instances of Mortality before our Eyes,
and the constant Decays of our own mortal Frame, give us frequent
Praemonitions, of our approaching Dissolution. But as though these were little
Things, the sacred Scriptures tell us, over and over again, that we must die*
yea, that it is appointed for all men once to die; not only men of low Degree,
Men of little Note, or Influence, in the World; but even great Men and Princes.
For he sees that wise Men die, likewise the Fool and brutish Person perish.
Psalm. 49. 10.
And lest a high Character, a swelling Title, or the Distinction which
Providence makes among Men in the World, should make such men forget the
Importance of their Business, and forget themselves; there are many faithful
Lessons recorded in Scripture, to keep alive in their Minds, a sense that they
are mortal, and accountable, and of the Obligations thence arising, to act in
some good Proportion to their Character, and Trust; particularly that closing
stroke in the Character of so many of the Kings, and Princes, and Worthies of
Israel, which are recorded in the old Testament, even that finishing stroke in
their Characters; and he died. And among all the Instances of this Kind,
perhaps not one that speaks with greater Emphasis, than that which we are now
to Consider,

And Moses, the Servant of the Lord died there in the Land of Moab. In speaking
to these Words I purpose, I. To consider Moses as the Servant of the Lord. II.
To consider him as the dying Man* and in both to give some Epitome, of the
civil Ruler. That we may proceed, III. To consider those Things which the
foregoing Heads will naturally suggest to us, agreeable to the Occasions of the
Day.


I. To consider Moses as the Servant of the Lord. Moses the Man raised up for
mighty Deeds, like Him whom he was the most eminent Type of; was born in very
bad Times, when inhuman Cruelty prevailed to that Degree, that his Life was
sought for. But that God who had noble Service for him to do in the World,
remarkably interposed by his Providence, and preserved his Life, and so
provided for his Education, that he should be well fitted for the public Part,
which he was to act in the World. And immediately upon the dawning of the Day
of Israel's Deliverance, God himself called him to Action. Moses had by this
Time banished himself from Pharaoh's Court, and disowned his adoptive Sonship
to Pharaoh's Daughter, and was become Son in Law to the Priest of Midian, by
taking his Daughter to Wife; by which means he becomes the Keeper of Jethro's,
his Fathers Flock.

And whilst Moses was leading his Flock to the backside of the Desert, he came
to Mount Horeb, the Mountain of God, where the Angel of the Lord, or rather the
Lord Himself appeared to him in a Flame of Fire, and commun'd with him, first
reminding him of the affliction of his People Israel; and then expressing his
Design of delivering them from their Egyptian Thraldom: And Commissions Moses
to go upon the public, and important* Business, and gives him such Credentials,
that whosoever disputed his Commission might easily be put to Silence. And
since in the History of Moses he generally appears acting some public Part, so
whilst I am considering of him, as the Servant of the Lord, I shall principally
confine myself to the public Parts of his Service, wherein he rendered himself
illustrious among his Kindred, and approved himself eminently the Servant of
the Lord. But even among these I must confine myself to the following
particulars.

(1) His leading forth the Armies of Israel. (2) His giving Laws to the People.
(3) His taking Care that the Laws were well executed. (4) His Friendship to
Aaron, and his Support of public Worship.
(1) I shall consider Moses approving himself the Servant of the Lord, in
leading forth the Host of Israel. God might without improving Moses have led
forth the Armies of Israel, which in a way of Eminence were the Host of the
Lord. Indeed their Deliverance out of Egypt was so much the Lord's immediate
Work, that He is said to have brought them out of Egypt, with an high Hand, and
an outstretched Arm, and with great Terribleness, and with Signs, and with
Wonders. Deuteronomy. 26. 8.
But He might, without using his Servant Moses, thoroughly have subdued that
haughty Monarch, Pharaoh King of Egypt. He might easily have broken his hard
Heart, or Raised so much Compassion in it, as to have eased the galling Yoke,
and released Israel from his Bondage. He might by his immediate Agency, or
under the Conduct of Angels, have led his Chosen safe through the Deep, and
through the Desert. And even when their March was interrupted by Nations
mightier than themselves, he might by the Breath of his Nostrils have devoured
them immediately, or marshaled his Stars to have fought from Heaven in their
Courses against them, and so have left Moses in the mean Time, in his former
Obscurity to have fed his Fathers Flock. But GOD makes use of Men, for the
Accomplishment of his Designs among Men. And as Moses was the Servant of the
(...) so this was one Way, in which he was to serve Him. Israel must be led by
the Hand of Moses. Accordingly Moses by divine Command, and with a high
Commission from the King of Heaven; goes to Pharaoh, King of Egypt, and with an
intrepid Courage, supported by the Authority of his King; not only exposes
himself to the Rage of Pharaoh, who sought his Life; but demands, and
resolutely persists in his Demands, that Israel should be released. Moses does
not threaten him that he would raise an Army, and force a Passage for Israel;
but he urges the Honor, and Authority of his King, and gives Pharaoh to
understand, that it was at his Peril to refuse. And such were the speaking
awful Arguments which he used, as pretty thoroughly convinced Pharaoh, that it
was in vain for him to measure Arms with the Almighty. So the Lord led them
forth by the right Hand of Moses, with his glorious Arm, dividing the Water
before them; to make himself an everlasting Name. Isaiah 63, 12.


And truly the Lord of Hosts was a great King, and his Name was dreadful among
the Heathen. It is mentioned as an Instance of Roman Greatness, while Rome was
in the very Zenith of her Glory, That she saved Egypt when under her
Protection, and caused Antiochus who with a vast Army had laid Siege to Egypt*
to disband, only at the bidding of two or three Senators, who had no other
Armor or Retinue, than a Staff, and a waiting Man. It Is a memorable Instance of
the Power, and Greatness of the Roman common Wealth. But what is this compared
with the Power of the Lord of Hosts, and what was this Terror compared with
that which Seized the Egyptian King; when he whose Excellency is over Israel,
and whose Strength is in the Clouds, dealt with him, by the Hand only of his
Servants Moses, and Aaron. Never was a proud hardened Man more Mortified: for
after several fruitless Shifts, he released near two Millions; not merely of
his Subjects, but even of his Vassals, and all at the instance and bidding of
Moses, and Aaron only, who Demanded in the Name of their God* and King. The
Lord made to himself an everlasting Name, by the mavelous Things he did in
the Land of Egypt, in the Field of Zoan -- When he brought up Israel out of the
Sea, with the Shepherd of his Flock. Moses was the Shepherd, the Leader of his
Flock, the Captain of his Host. He had the Host of Israel at his Command: but
was himself the Servant of the Lord in commanding of them. He was the leader of
Israel, but was led himself by Israel's God. He kept scrupulously cl^se to the
Instructions, which he daily received from Heaven. And though he led Israel
several times to Battle, yet he led them no where, except where the Cloud which
was a Symbol of the divine Presence led him. He had in Battle the Assurance of
the Divine Presence, and with it, the Assurance of Success. Thus faith the Lord
to his Servant Moses, with respect to Og the King of Bashan, who went out with
all his People against Israel, to the Battle at Edrei. Fear him not, for I have
delivered him into thy Hand, and all his People, and this Land, etc. Numb. 21,
34.
Moses the Servant of the Lord served him faithfully, in leading forth his
Armies, both from Egypt, and through the Wilderness: sometimes as the Minister
of God's Vengeance; but oftener as a nursing Father, and good Captain, leading
and feeding Israel. So that there was never a man whom Israel had more Reason
to love; or their Enemies more Reason to fear.

(2) Moses approved himself the Servant of the Lord by giving Law to Israel.
The Jewish Polity, Civil as well as Ecclesiastical, was purely Theocratical.
God was King in Jeshurun, and gave Law to Israel. So that Moses was no other
way a Lawgiver, than only a Promulger of the Law. He did not make the Law, but
declared what was Law; and in this Character he served God eminently. God might
in this Case, as well as in the foregoing, have made use of the Ministry of
Angels, or have spoken immediately from the Excellent Glory, with an audible
voice to the People; but the People were afraid of seeing or hearing
immediately from God, lest the Glory of his Vision, or the Terror of his
Voice, should be too mighty for them. Hence said they unto Moses, speak thou
with us, and we will hear, but let not God speak with us, lest we die. Exodus
20, 19.
But this Service God reserved for Moses to do. And accordingly descends
himself upon the Top of Sinai, and called for Moses to appear in the Place of
Thunder, even upon the Top of the smoking Mountain, to receive the Law at his
Mouth. There he gave him that excellent Compendium of Morality, contained in
the Decalogue, or a Summary of the moral Duties, which men owe to their Maker,
and to one another; cast into ten distinct Precepts. God at sundry Times spoke
to his Servant Moses, and by him gave Laws, which were best adapted to the
Circumstances of the People. Some of them merely of a ritual temporay Nature,
which if we ben't able to see the immediate Reason of, yet may rest satisfied,
and content in this, that they were such as he, who knew infinitely well their
Circumstances, the Temper of their Minds, their Lusts, their proneness to
Idolatry, and their need of a constant heavy Yoke; in his Wisdom saw meet to
enjoin upon them. Some of them were merely typical, referring to the Coming,
and Kingdom of the Messiah; which of Course were to cease, when the great
Antitype Appeared: these like the Twilight of the Morning, were done away by
the opening of the perfect Day. Others of them again, were lasting in their
Nature, and of perpetual Obligation; such were the Laws refering to commutative
Justice, and such were many of the Laws referring to capital Crimes. Many of
these have been transcribed into, and now adorn the English Laws, and will not
cease to be excellent, and useful in their Nature so long as Time lasts. These
were the Laws, which Moses the Servant of the Lord received from God himself,
and published to Israel: and which he adapted, and made in a sense his own
Laws. And in so doing he did eminent Service, for his King. For in such a world
as this we live in, where Pride and Passion, Corruption, and Lust, have
universally diffused themselves among Mankind, there would be no tolerable
Living, unless Men were laid under the direction and restraint of Law. And that
Legislator, that enacts or (being made) adapts, good, wise, and wholesome Laws;
contributes in a good Proportion to the Health, and Prosperity of the
Commonwealth, and deserves well of it. This did Moses: he served his Generation
faithfully this Way according to the Will of God. By this Service to his
Generation, he served his Maker, who is abundantly honored and pleased with a
good moral Government of the World. None of the Princes of Israel, ever
distinguished themselves like Moses in giving Laws to the People. -- Though he
was the Servant of the Lord, he was a dignified one; he was admitted to speak
Face to Face, with his Maker, to receive the Law from his Mouth, and he
delivered it, with some Beams of divine Glory on his Countenance. And truly,
there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew
Face to Face, Deuteronomy. 34. 10.


(3) Moses approved himself eminently the Servant of the Lord, by taking Care
that the Laws were well executed. Laws however good in themselves, can do no
Good, without a strict Observance of them, and the Execution of condign
Punishment upon the Breakers of them. Moses sensible of this, discovered a
tender Regard for the Law, and a suitable Concern for the due Execution of it.
Indeed such was the Burden of public Business, lying upon this great Man, that
he was not able to give his Attendance in executive Courts, except it was in
some high, and important Cases. But he was nevertheless concerned that Justice
should be done, and the Honor of the Law maintained. Agreeably we find this
noble Lawgiver and Judge, upon the Revisal of his Law declaring to Israel, in
a general Assembly of their Tribes, as in Deuteronomy. 1. 13, and on, Take ye wise
Men, and understanding, and known among your Tribes, and I will make them
Rulers over you. -- So I took the Chief of your Tribes, Wise Men and known, and
made them Heads over you, Captains over Thousands, -- and Officers among your
Tribes. And I charged your Judges at that Time, saying, hear the Cause between
your Brethren, and judge righteously between every Man and his Brother and the
Stranger that is with him. Ye shall not respect Persons in Judgment, but you
shall hear the small as well as the great: you shall not be afraid of the Face
of Man; for the Judgment is God's; and the Cause that is too hard for you bring
it unto me, and I will hear it. And this he afterward enforces upon them, by
one of the noblest Arguments, drawn from the highest Topic. For the Lord your
God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, mighty and terrible, which
regards not Persons, nor takes a Reward. He does execute the Judgment of the
Fatherless, and Widow, and loves the Stranger. Here Is a Conduct, and here are
Counsels and Commands, worthy of an inspired Lawgiver and Judge: how equal, how
disinterested; how free from party Spirit, and servile Compliance, and how
every Way becoming God's Deputy, and Viceroy here on Earth.

(4) Moses approved himself the Servant of the Lord by his Friendship to Aaron,
and his Support of the Worship of God Every faithful Servant loves his Master,
and his Master's Friends, and seeks his Master's Honor. Every sincere Servant
of the Lord, is the Friend of God, of all good Men, and especially a Friend to
the Worship of God. This was Moses: he was the Friend of God, and of
Consequence a Friend to good Men, and very especially to Aaron, who stood not
merely in the Relation of a Child to God, but in the Relation of a Priest of
the most High, and was to transact between God, and the People, in Things of
the most solemn Nature, and of infinite Importance. Moses sensible how much the
good of Israel, their spiritual, and everlasting good depended upon Aaron's
Influence, endeavored in all proper Ways to assist, and strengthen him.
Sensible also how much the Increase of Virtue and Piety would contribute to the
Ease of Government, and the Health, and Peace of the Community; he walked Hand
in Hand with Aaron, indulged the greatest Intimacy, and gave him peculiar Marks
of his Friendship and Love. Yea, God himself taught Moses thus to do, by
putting peculiar Marks of Honor and Respect upon Aaron; not as a Man, or as a
good Man, but as one who sustained a high Office, as one from whom, God
expected much Serv^^e, and as one who needed a good Degree of Influence, in
order to maintain the Honor of his Lord, support his sacerdotal Character, and
be extensively Useful to Israel. He admitted him to frequent Intercourses with
Heaven, and often sent him with Moses, to do the Messages of the Lord to
Israel. Hence we find upon Record, so many good Laws and Counsels, introduced
with those Words, And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying. Yea, the
holy anointing Oil, wherewith Moses was commanded to anoint Aaron and his Sons,
and consecrate them, that they might minister unto the Lord in the Priests
Office, was emblematical of Love, and Friendship, the grand Cement, and Band of
Unity; and Foundation of lasting Peace, and Felicity to a Commonwealth, Psalm
133. 1, 2. Behold how good, and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity. It is like the precious Ointment upon the Head, that ran
down upon the Beard, even Aaron's Beard, that went down to the skirts of his
Garment. Moses conducts toward him, as one sensible of the honorable Notices,
which God had taken of him, as one sensible of the vast Importance of the
Business assigned him, of the Good he would hopefully do by his Ministry, and
of his Need of his Brother's Help. And verily if Aaron was to Moses instead of
a Mouth, Moses was to him instead of God. And as Moses was a Friend to Aaron,
so was he to Aaron's Work, even the Business of the Priesthood, which was
assigned him. He was Zealous for the Worship of his God, and manifested it by
the Laws which he published in the Name of the Lord, and by the Punishments he
inflicted upon those that profaned God's Worship and Ordinances, and by the
ample Support, he made for those that attended upon the Altar. Thus he declares
in the Name of the Lord. Levit. 19 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths and reverence
my Sanctuary. And when one was found breaking the Sabbath, Moses by Divine
Command, orders him to be stoned to Death. And as to the Support of those that
attended at God's Altar, his Books are full of it, and very large Provision is
made for it. Indeed Moses acted in all these Things, by immediate Divine
Command; these Laws, and Appointments, issued from the Throne of Heaven. But
Moses shows that his Heart was in them, and that they were as truly his Laws,
as tho they had been the Result of his own cool judicious Reasoning and
Reflection, and established upon his own wisest Observation, and Experience. He
gave fully into them, and adapted them, as the Rule of his Government, and
adhered to them with an invariable Constancy. As to the minute Circumstances of
the Life of this great Ruler, the History is almost silent. Tho the sacred
Pages, song after has Decease, speak of him with Epithets of Honor; such as
the Man of God, a powerful Intercessor with God, and an intimate Acquaintance
with Heaven. But if we take a Review of him, only from his five Books, we may
read in him the accomplished General, facing Danger with an intrepid Courage,
meeting Hardships with an unshaken Firmness and Constancy, submitting to
Disappointments, and bearing up under heavy Burdens, with Evenness, and
Meekness of Temper, and leading Israel with Skilfulness of Hand. We may read in
him the divine Lawgiver, and the disinterested Judge; a hearty Friend to the
established Worship of God, a nursing Father to the Church, and an
Encouragement, and Support to a faithful Ministry. As these are things which
meet in a great Ruler, so in these several Capacities of Life, Moses conducted
with that Integrity and Uprightness, as to show himself heartily attached, to
his God, and to his People; and that his Mind was very much attemper'd to the
Divine Mind. And in the whole he has left an Example, very well worthy the
Imitation of all those, who act in the same public Capacities that he did.

But as Moses was the Servant of the Lord, and a very obedient one too, through
the Course of his Life, so he was obedient even in Death. For according to the
Word of the Lord; or at God's bidding, he went up from the Plains of Moab, unto
Mount Nebo, and died there in the Land of Moab. -- And is he dead? Yea, verily
Moses the Servant of the Lord died there, in the Land of Moab.

This brings me

II. To consider Moses as the dying Man. We have considered him hitherto as the
Hero of his Age, the Leader of the Hebrew Bands, the Scourge, and Terror of
their Enemies, the Friend of GOD, and a powerful Intercessor with Heaven. But
the Scene now shifts, the Curtains draw, Gloominess, and the Shadow of Death
cover him. One would as soon have pitched upon Moses as any Man, to have
outbrav'd the Jaws of Death, and gone triumphing Body and Soul up to Heaven.
But he drags the Load of Flesh no higher, than to the Top of Nebo, where his
Soul drops its Burden, and wings her Way to the upper Regions. If Piety, and
the Love of GOD, could have exempted him from Death, if true Fortitude, and
Greatness could have driven back the King of Terrors, if the greatest
Usefulness to his People, joined with their Prayers, and Tears, could have
reprieved him from the Grave, he had not died. But, like the meanest of Men, he
must pay this last Debt to Nature, and return Dust to Dust. Death, commissioned
Death cuts off the spirit of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of the
Earth. The Angel of Death it seems had no Respect to Persons. There were
thousands in Israel, that could have been better spared than Moses: Thousands
whose Death would not have made such a Breach, as the Death of this one Man; at
a Time when they were just about to pass through Jordan, and encounter many
powerful Nations. At this Juncture especially, they needed the Assistance of
this aged experienced, and brave General, and the Influence of his Name: They
wanted his prudent Counsel, and his Prayers. But he must encounter his last
Enemy, and there could be no Discharge in that War: Israel must fight their own
Enemies, and leave their Leader, and their Prince, to be vanquished by his,
without being able to rescue or assist him. Moses sprung from the same common
Stock with the rest of Mankind, and must share the common Fate with them.
Providence indeed had notably distinguished him from his Brethren, but his
Nature was but human, and the Seeds of Mortality lurked within it, beneath the
pompous Appearance of Honor, and Majesty, unsubdu'd Power, and Victory. Moses
like other Men was but Dust in his Original, and must return to it by
Putrefaction. As there was a Time for him to be born, so he must find Time to
die; yea, tho he was a God he must die like a Man, and fall like one of the
Princes: Tho he was a God, i. e. bore some Resemblance of Him, in Honor,
Power, Influence, and c. yet he was not like GOD Immortal; but like other Men a
dying Creature: Tho at the age of one hundred and twenty his Eye was not dim,
nor his natural Force abated, yet he had the Principles of Mortality within
him, and, like other Men, was liable to Weariness, Pain, and Disease, those
Harbingers of Death, and, like other Men, at last gave up the Ghost. Moses, and
the Patriarchs lived to a greater Age than is common now: But Death reigned
from Adam to Moses inclusively, as effectually as it does now: The Robe of
Royalty, the Coat of Mail, could no more then than now, screne the Prince from
the King of Terrors, nor guard against his deadly Shafts; no, the Prince
changed these for a funeral Habit, and the Dishonours of the Grave: But if his
Greatness could not distinguish him from other Men in his last Moments, his
Goodness could: For when he had some Praemonitions given him, of his
approaching Dissolution, he is undaunted, and shows no Concern for himself, but
is very solicitous for Israel, and pleads immediately with God for a Successor
in the Government, to be set over them: Numb. 27 12, and on. And the Lord said
unto Moses, get thee up into this Mount Abarim, and see the Land which I have
given unto the Children of Israel, and when thou have seen it, thou also shall
be gathered unto thy People, as Aaron thy Brother was gathered. -- And Moses
spoke unto the Lord, saying, Let the Lord, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh,
set a Man over the Congregation, which may go out before them, and which may go
in before them, etc. As he had been illustrious through a troublesome fatiguing,
but very useful Life; so he appeared as a dying Man nobly great, and good. The
certain Prospect of a speedy Departure, could not divide Israel from his Heart,
nor abate his affectionate paternal Care, and Concern for them. He could not be
willing to leave Israel, at that critical Juncture, 'till he had obtained of
GOD, a Ruler for Israel, one who should have Part of Moses's Honor put upon
him, and to whom the Children of Israel should be obedient. This obtained, the
dying Prophet sings the Majesty of GOD, in that rapturous Song, recorded in
Deuteronomy. 33d. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined
forth from Mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of Saints: from his
right Hand went a fiery Law, etc. He also sings the Blessings of the twelve
Tribes* and the Excellency of Israel; then climbs up the Mount to the Top of
Pisgah, and dies there. Cease ye then from Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils!
--

I Pass to the third thing proposed.

III. To consider those Things which the foregoing Heads naturally suggest to
us, agreeable to the Occasions of the Day.

Here then,

1. It becomes the civil Ruler, the good Magistrate, to whom is committed the
Government of the Commonwealth, to protect it against their Enemies. Ever since
Mankind have apostatized from GOD, and corrupted their Way upon Earth* this
Earth which would otherwise have been, the Habitation of Righteousness, and so
the dwelling Place of Peace, has been so filled with Broils and Discord, with
Faction, and War, and Blood; as to render it not unlike a Den of Dragons. In
this corrupt State of Things, although Mankind have been favored with such
natural Notices of Truth, and Justice, and Equity, as to be able to discern
between Right, and Wrong. And the several Divisions of Mankind, into distinct
Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, have for themselves enacted Laws, for the
settling, and securing Property, and maintaining their natural Rights: Yet
these have been too weak, to prevent civil Discord, in the same Community, and
much too weak, to prevent different Kingdoms from unjust Invasions of one
another Properties, and Rights. And when either of these happens, either civil
Discord in the same Community, or an Invasion from a foreign Power; it highly
becomes the Magistrate, I mean those that are at the Head of Government,
vigorously to exert themselves, for the Suppression of one, and the Repulsion
of the other. Their Lives, their Liberties, their Properties, their Families,
their Country demands it of them, that they appear, when Necessity calls for
it; either Personally, or by brave, and well chosen Generals, in the high
Places of the Field, to subdue the Rebel, and drive back the invading Foe. Yea,
the Case may be such, as to make it their Duty to carry War, into neighboring
Kingdoms, for the Defense of their Countries Property, and Right: As where
Neighboring Kingdoms, or States commit Robbery, and incroach upon them, and
refuse Recompense. Such intestine mutunous Jars, such Invasions, and
Encroachments, threaten the very Being of the Government where they are, and
unless prevented, must Issue in the Dissolution of it. The Being of the
Commonwealth requires; that such Power be lodged in the Civil Magistrates Hand,
and the well-being of it requires, that on such special Occasions this Power be
exercised. It behooves those then who set at Helm, to face the Danger, and call
forth those, that are at their Command, to make a Stand against it, and save
their Country.

And in doing this, they fulfill one good Part of their Character, even that of
Shields of the Earth: Which is a Title given to Rulers by the Royal Psalmist,
Psalm. 47. 9. The Princes of the People are gathered together, even the People
of the God of Abraham; for the Shields of the Earth belong unto God. -- The
Shield was a Piece of Armor, formerly used for a Defense in Battle, and as
here used, it is a happy Figure representing the Protection, Defense, and
Safeguard, which good Rulers are to their Land, against the Power, and Craft of
their Enemies. When civil Discord, and Rebellion, broke out in Israel, in the
Instance of Korah, and his Company, Moses immediately interposes for the
Subduing of it.

And so when his People were called to encounter mighty Nations, he very
readily faced the Danger, and eminently fulfilled the Character, of the Shield
of Israel: so did the other good Rulers of Israel that succeeded him. What an
Ornament, and Glory, as well as Safeguard to a Land, is the good Ruler, who in
the midst of those Storms, foreign and domestic which beat upon a State,
stands like a Rock in the Sea, it breaks the Waves, but remains firm and
unshaken itself.

But alas the want of such Shields! After the Death of Moses, and Joshua, when
there was no King in Israel, and every man did what was right in his own Eyes,
though it was wrong in the Eyes of every Body else: Behold what Confusion! Civil
War presently arose between the Tribes, and more than twenty thousand of them
fell in one Day. And this, or something like this, is too easily and too often
the Case when a Community have not men at Helm, that have both Skill, and
Ability, to check such Discord at the first Beginning of it.

2. It becomes the civil Ruler to make, or adapt good Laws, and see them well
executed. In a state of Innocence and Perfection, where Light and Love direct
the Way, and govern every Action; there would doubtless be no need of any other
Laws, than those which are eternal, and necessary in their own Nature, which
are written upon the Mind of every intelligent Creature, in Characters so deep,
as never to be effaced. But in a state of Things like this, in a world where
every Thing is out of Order, and nothing more so, than the minds of men,
especially their wills and affections, the leading Faculties of the Soul there
is the utmost need of good Laws guarded by well chosen Sanctions. The Safety,
Peace, and Prosperity of those Nations, that have been under the happy
Direction, and Restraint of such Laws, speaks this Truth aloud; but the Rapine,
Wars, and Blood, of some barbarous, Ignorant, and lawless Nations, speak it
louder. The highland Clans, and the Crooms of Guinea, are sad Instances of
this. The latter especially proves that the want of good Laws well executed or
in other words, the want of a well concerted Government, makes one of the
richest Parts of the Globe, a Field of Robbery and Blood; where, neither
Property, Liberty, nor Life, is in any tolerable Measure secure. But civil
Rulers, which are Ministers of GOD, for good to the People, are to attend upon
this very Thing, among others, and take Care that they have a good System of
Laws, grounded upon the Fitness of Things, the everlasting Rules of Truth and
Justice; and well adapted to the Circumstances, and State of their People. Upon
this depends the very Foundations of all civil Government, and of all mutual
Society among men; for by them the Magistrate is directed how to govern, and
the People how far to obey; the Magistrate by them is settled in the Possession
of his Authority over the People, and the People too by them are secured from
the arbitrary Power, and unreasonable Demands of the Magistrate, as well as
from the Fraud, Violence, and Oppression of each other. Potters's Antiquity,
Vol. 1. P. 130.
And hence it is doubtless the Duty of the Magistrate to consult the Laws of
Nature, and of Nations, to study Men, and Things, and get well acquainted with
the Genius, and Interest of that People, to whom they are to give Law. The
Divine Law will furnish the Magistrate with a good Model, and the general
Direction of Scripture will abundantly help him, in drawing the Plan for a
noble Body of Laws. But as the State of the Jews differed from that of every
other Nation, so their Laws taken collectively will not suit the Constitution of
any Nation under Heaven. And indeed such are the different Circumstances, and
Constitutions of different Kingdoms, and Governments, that no one Body of Laws
would suit any two distinct Governments. And yet perhaps there is no enlightened
well informed common wealth, but what has some Laws peculiar to it self, that
might well be adapted by another Government. It Is therefore doubtless a Duty,
which the civil Magistrate owes to his People, to look over the Archives of the
best modeled, and most flourishing Kingdoms. And having collected a good Body
of Laws, it remains a Duty for the Magistrate to see that they are well
executed. It will be to very little Purpose to have good Laws, without a good
Execution of them. Those that need Laws most, will be least influenced by them,
if there is nothing more in them than the Reason of Things, and the Magistrates
word. The Law is made for the lawless and disobedient; but it is the Sanction,
or Penalty of the Law, rather than the Fitness, and Reason of it, that
restrains, and governs them. Hence it becomes the chief Rulers of the Common
wealth, to take special Care, that the executive Courts are provided with men
of strict Justice, good Improvement, and Penetration. The civil Government of
Athens was justly esteemed one of the best in the World. Among Heathen
Governments there was none in the Age, wherein Athens flourished, that could
claim Preesidence, if Equality with it. And never did their Glory rise higher
than under the administration of Solon, that great, and wise Lawgiver, and two
or three more, who after some Interruption in the Government, succeeded him,
restored his Laws, and improved upon them. But Solon was as careful to have his
Laws well executed, as he was to give good Laws, and endeavored that his
People should be governed by them after his Death at least an hundred Years;
and bound every one of the Senate by a solemn Oath, and the Forfeiture of a
Golden Statue, as big as himself, not to Violate one Statute.

There can certainly be no Safety in a Community where there are not both good
Laws, and a faithful Execution of them. Nor without these can the civil
Magistrate by any means fulfill the Character of a faithful Servant of the Lord,
or Father of his Country. -- Indeed while he acts the Part of a true Patriot,
in calculating, and executing Laws for the Suppression of Vice, and the
Promotion of his Country; it is next to certain, that Men of perverse Minds,
that hate to be reclaimed, Men of party Spirits that are ever impatient under
Checks, and Men governed merely by sinister Views, whose private Interest is
the Rule, and Measure of their whole Lives, it is almost certain that Men of
this Stamp will make a Noise, and especially if they be any Thing numerous (as
is too often the Case) they will endeavor to raise a Storm in the Community.

But the good Ruler regardless of this, like the good Pilot, will keep a steady
Course through the Storm, with a steady Pace bearing down upon Injustice, and
Vice, and especially upon the popular Evil that threatens the Government. And
if through the Weakness of honest Men, or the Wickedness of others, he falls from
his Seat in the Defense of his Country; he falls a noble Sacrifice, it is a
Death worth dying, a Death more honorable than a Life preserved by a servile
Temper, and mean Compliance.

3. It becomes the civil Magistrate to be a nursing Father to the Church, an
Encourager, and Support of the public Worship. -- The Church of GOD is his
choice Treasure; GOD has spoken the kindest, tenderest, and most glorious
Things of Zion; of any Place upon Earth. Psalm. 132. 14* This is my Rest, says
He, for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it. And the Lord loves the
Gates of Zion, more than all the Dwellings of Jacob. Psalm. 87. 2.
And the Church of CHRIST in Gospel Time is no less the Care, and Treasure of
Heaven, than it was in its Judaism, and Minority.

The Prophet Isaiah, who prophesied so much of Gospel Times, that he is by some
called the evangelical Prophet, points very particularly to the Church of
Christ in the latter Day, even in its Gospel State, when the Lord should lift
up his Hand to the Gentiles, and call them into Church State; he prophesies of
it, and says, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing
Mothers, Isai. 49. 23.
in very strong Terms, importing the Care, and Kindness which the civil
Magistrate should show to the Church of God. Indeed the civil, and
ecclesiastical Polity are distinct, but they are co-assistent to each other:
tho the Nexcis between them is not absolutely necessary to their Being, yet it
is to their well-being; for they have a mutual Dependence upon each Other. 'Tho
a civil Community may flourish, has flourished even in a heathenish Land where
God had no Church, or peculiar People, yet I may venture to say, a civil
Community never flourished without supporting, and being supported, by those
two great Ornaments of a Church, viz. Learning, and Moral Virtue in some of the
cardinal Branches of it at least. The Church of God also has flourished in her
Turn, not only without, but even in Opposition to the civil Magistrate. The
Church of Christ in the early Ages of it, flourished entire upon her own Basis;
And made wonderful Progress against all Opposition from the Bigotry of the
Vulgar, the Power of the Great, and the Wisdom of Philosophy.

But this was at a Time when the civil Magistrate was Heathen, and when the
Jewish Economy, and Church State were to be set aside, and dissolved; and a
new, and distinct Economy and Dispensation to take Place in the World. A
Change this, so great, and so over-bearing, to Jewish-Bigotry, and Gentile
Idolatry, that nothing less than Miracles could prove such Change to be the
Will of God. And doubtless the rapid Progress of the Gospel, and it is
surprising Spread, when Earth, and Hell were combined for its Suppression, was
designed as a miraculous Proof, that Judaism was now ended, and Christanity to
take the Place of it. And this being the Design of its great Author, no Wonder
it flourished in Defiance of all the Powers that were engaged against it. It Is
perhaps from this that some very weak People seem to think that the Gospel
would flourish most, when it was most opposed, and accordingly have invited
Persecution, and had rather break over the Rules of Decency, and Christianity
than not be opposed. But notwithstanding Christianity has flourished without
the Assistance of the civil Power, and even in opposition to it, whilst the
Magistrate was Heathen, and Christianity needed Miracles for its Support, and
Proof; can we thence conclude, that Christianity would be likely to flourish
more eminently in Opposition to the Christian Magistrate, in a Country where it
is generally professed; or that the Magistrates Countenance, Example, and
Influence, would not serve the Cause of Christianity. Certainly we are to admit
no such Thing.

That God that has instituted the Christian Religion, has also appointed
civil Government: So that it is to make the Institutions of Heaven clash with
one another, to suppose that the Christian Religion would flourish most, when
the civil Magistrate most opposed it. In a common state of Things, where
Christianity generally obtains, and the Proofs of it is Divinity are admitted;
the foregoing Supposition carries in it nothing less absurd, than this, viz
that the Appointments of Heaven are so jarring and inconsistent, that the Being
and Life of one depends upon the Destruction of another. And although (as before
observed) in an extraordinary state of Things, the Church of Christ has
flourished in Opposition to the civil Magistrate* Yet at other Times under
Persecution has been covered with Ashes, has mourned, and fled into the
Wilderness, and seemed as though she wound be entirely extinct.

It Is evident that Moses and Aaron thought they never walked stronger than when
they walked Hand in Hand, and that the civil and religious Interests of the
People, on one Hand, and civil and religious Discord on the other, would rise
and fall together. Hence they endeavored not to oppose, but to Strengthen each
other; Aaron for a Mouth to Moses* and Moses instead of GOD, i. e. for a Head
and Ruler unto Aaron. Undoubtedly the civil Magistrate may like a nursing
Father, protect, encourage, and strengthen the Church of God, and the Worship
of God; by Influence, by a good Example, and even by well concerted Laws
respecting the Temporalities of the Church. And this Way he is to approve
himself the Friend of GOD, a nursing Father to the Church, and an Encourager of
Divine Worship. In Things of a temporal civil Nature, the civil Magistrate has
undoubted Right to interpose his Authority for the Church: but not to exercise
Dominion over the Consciences of Men, by imposing Articles of Faith, and
enforcing Subscriptions with Penalties; for though the Purse is Caesar's, the
Conscience is God's: And Authority of this Kind exercised by Men, is a bold
Usurpation of CHRIST's Kingly Government; and tho it might be moderate, and
modest at first, it would probably enough end, in all the Fooleries, and
Butcheries of Rome, and Spain.

Such Authority may make Fools, it may make Knaves, but it will never make
Christians.

Indeed the Plea of Conscience I am sensible is a Subterfuge, where sometimes
honest weak Men, and oftener wicked designing ones take Sanctuary to defend
themselves from Law and Justice, and to do infinite Mischief in the World: But
it is Conscience, and not mere Pretensions to it, that is so sacred and
inviolable.

But whilst the civil Magistrate leaves this to a higher Tribunal; there are
many things tending to the Health, Peace, and flourishing state of Zion which
God requires, and his Church expects from the Magistrate, viz. that he appears
bold and very Courageous for the Suppression of Vice of every Denomination, and
the Encouragement of Virtue. Agreeably St. Paul in his Description of the civil
Ruler says, Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the evil. Romans 13. 3.
Yea God and his People expect of civil Magistrates that they contribute their
Assistance to the support and well being of the Church, by the encouragement of
Learning, supporting Schools the less with the greater, but especially the
Schools of the Prophets, and endowing them with those Privileges which are very
needful to form men for Temple Service, that Zion may have of her Sons for
Prophets, and of her young men for Nazarites. Amos 2. 11.


Moreover the civil Magistrate fulfilling the Character of a nursing Father to
the Church, is to add to these, the Force, and Influence of his own Example,
going before the People in the Paths of Virtue, and Shining in all the Graces
of the Christian Life.

And indeed these are things necessary to the well-being of the Government.
Without Vice suppressed, Virtue encouraged, and Learning promoted, a civil
Government cannot subsist long, the Foundations will sap, and the whole Frame of
Government must fall.

4. It becomes civil Rulers to remember, that they are Servants of the Lord;
but Servants dignified above the rest of their Fellow Servants. Moses that
Divine Man, although he was the Head of Israel, their Ruler and their Judge; yet
was himself ruled of GOD, and was but his Servant. Indeed all are but Servants
unto GOD; he makes even his Angels ministering Spirits: and from the Seraph down
to the lowest Insect it is true of all, that they are Servants unto him.

The civil Magistrate is so. Tho they may be high honored, and revered as
God's, yet they are Servants of the Lord, and as dependent upon their Maker and
Master, as the most abject Slave.

Tho they may have thousands at their Command and say unto one go, and he goes,
and to another come and he comes, yet they are themselves Servants of the Lord,
and must come and go at his bidding, they must serve the Lord, with Fear, and
be entirely submissive to his Will. Tho they may have the Power of Life and
Death, so that whom they will they kill, and whom they will they save alive,
yet after all they are but Servants unto God, and there is not a Soul of them
that can ransom his own Life from the Grave.

As this is the case with civil Magistrates even the most independent of them;
so it becomes them to remember it, and improve it as an Argument to Fidelity;
for it is required of Stewards, of Servants, that they be faithful. They have a
high Trust reposed in them, and many Talents committed to them, to occupy in
their Masters Absence; their Work is great, their Privileges great, and their
Reward, if faithful will also be great when their LORD shall return having
received a Kingdom. -- Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth. Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. Kiss
the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way. Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12.


But whilst the civil Magistrate remembers that he is a Servant, he must
consider of what Class he is, that he is dignified above the rest of his
Fellow Servants, he must steadily bear it in mind, lest he should act beneath
his Character, and forfeit the Honor which his Master has put upon him.

Tho Mankind are all of one Blood, yet all don't stand upon a level; there are
Superiors and Inferiors, as well as Equals among them. Civil Rulers are of the
highest Order amongst Men; they are clothed with the Robes of royalty and
majesty, and in their Office bear some resemblance of the great Governor of
the World; like him they are to consult the good of Men, like him to protect
their People from Injuries, to punish Vice and reward Virtue, and shed their
Kindly influence upon Mankind. The Lord Almighty has given them the Title of
Gods, has put on them some of his Honor, and made them shine with some faint
Beams of his Glory, giving us in them a small Specimen of his Greatness,
Authority and distributive Justice. A powerful Argument must this be with the
good Ruler to act up to the dignity of his Office, and never to sully those
divine Features which he bears: This should be a powerful inducement to him, to
resemble Him, whose Title and Honor he sustains, to be universally benevolent
to mankind, and benificent to those with whom he is concerned, to guard their
Privileges, vindicate their Rights, distribute Justice with an equal Hand, show
Mercy to all Men, and thus keep up the honorable Distinction which God has put
upon him in the World.

The Consideration that we are Men and reasonable Creatures, and capable of an
honorable and happy Alliance with the upper World, might well keep Men from
Symbolizing with the Beast from grovelling in the Dust, and mixing with
Sensuality and Lust. Especially then the Consideration of a state of Eminence,
and Superiority in Life, ought powerfully to guard the Magistrate against
whatsoever is low and mean, servile and sensual, against whatsoever misbecomes
a Man, that is the offspring of GOD. -- The Remembrance, and Consideration of
a state of Dignity, and Eminence in the World, may, and it ought to serve these
noble Purposes. But it is sadly otherwise, when Men take Occasion from their
advanced Station, to nurse false Conceptions of themselves, to feed their
Vanity, and think themselves more than mortal Gods; when they grow giddy, and
look down from their Elevation with Contempt upon the rest of Mankind, as
Creatures made only for their Service, and to bear Burdens. This Temper
generally issues in a Neglect of public Interest, in Oppression, and Tyranny.
But there is enough in the Constitution of Mankind to qualify in the good Ruler
His exalted, dignified State, enough in it, thoroughly weighed, to allay in the
haughty Ruler, the Teemor which puffs him up. For,

5. Civil Rulers are dying Men. Moses tho a dignified Servant of the Lord dyed,
and so must civil Rulers of every Order: Those that are supreme as well as
those that are in subordinate Places of Power, and Trust must bow down to the
King of Terrors; for Gods must die. The Lord accepts not the Person of
Princes, nor regards the rich more than the poor, for they are all the Work
of his Hands, in a Moment shall they die. Job 34. 18.


The lofty Pine as well as the lowly Shrub must bow its Head. Purple and Ermine
give way to the Shroud: for Death steps upon the Thrones, without an
Impeachment for Treason too, and removes the Crown from the Princes Head,
strips him of his royal Attire, and covers him with Dirt. The wise
contemplative Ruler believes it, and acts under the Influence of such Belief,
and prays with the royal Prophet, Lord make me to know mine End and the measure
of my Days, what it is, that I may know how frail I am. Psalm. 39. 4.
But the Man flush't with Honor, and grown giddy with Height, easily flatters
himself that he is more than a Mortal Creature, and becomes vain in his
Imagination: but the Lord pours Contempt upon such Princes, and weakens the
strength of the Mighty, Job 12. 21.
That terrible Message to Tyras is applicable to such, contained in the XXVIII
Chapter of Ezekiel, Because thy Heart is lifted up, and thou have said, I am a
God, I set in the Seat of God, -- Yet thou art a Man, and not GOD, though thou
set thine Heart as the Heart of GOD, -- therefore thus faith the LORD, -- I
will bring Strangers upon thee, -- and they shall bring thee down to the Pit.

The Propet Isaiah also, bears a faithful Message to the scornful Ruler in
XXVIIIth Chapter of his Prophecy. Ye scornful Men that Rule this People;
because ye have said, we have made a Covenant with Death, etc. -- Thus faith
the LORD, -- Your Covenant with Death shall be disannulled, -- When the
Overflowing Scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.
The haughtiest scornfulest Monarch, cannot make such a League with Death, but
that He who holds the Keys of Death can disannul it: for he cannot measure Arms
with the immortal JEHOVAH, who sets upon the Circle of the Earth, -- and
brings the Princes of the Earth to nothing, and makes the Judges of the
Earth as Vanity, Isa. 40. 22, 23.


True Greatness, and Dignity cannot save from Death, much less can any Thing
that is imaginary. Death 'tho' a conquered Enemy; will nevertheless conquer all
the Living: for it is appointed for all Men once to Die, Heb. 9. 27.
It leads Princes in Fetters to it is wide Dominions, and binds them in Iron
Sleep. The civil Ruler may appear to Day in all the Grandeur of an earthly God,
with a splendid Retinue, a bright Train of Attendants: But, ah awful Death!
which sports it is self with Crowns, and tramples Kingdoms under Foot: The
earthly God tomorrow proves the dying Man. He quits the Chair, flings off his
Robes, forsakes the Living, changes his Retinue for the silent Train of
Mourners, retires behind the Scene, and goes to his long Home. None of his
Glory descends after him, he mixes with the Congregation of the Dead, and his
Body crumbles into Dust: All Distinctions are laid aside, the Bubble bursts,
and his honorable Titles vanish to Air.

Where are the wise the great and honorable that are gone before? Where are
our Ancestors, the Train of Godly Rulers, who like Moses led this little Israel
through the Wilderness? JONATHAN LAW Esquire;
And where? alas! where is he? who of late was the Head and Ornament of this
Assembly, the Friend of GOD, and of his Country, whose Name is still dear, and
whose Memory claims the annual Tribute of our Tears. Our Fathers too where are
they, and the Prophets, do they live forever? Where are all those that are gone
before? They live some of them in History, some of them in our Memory: but the
Seats they once filled tell us they are Dead, and the Places which once knew
them, will know them no more. Death great Proprietor of all! it is thine
To tread out Empire, and to quench the Stars.
Night Thoughts. There is enough in the Thought, that the Ruler is the dying
Man to prevent false Greatness, and allay the Pride of Granduer and high Title,
and this is the wise Improvement, which the Ruler should make of the
Admonitions given by the Death of others, and the Contemplation upon his own
Mortality, even this to abate high Thoughts of himself: not to keep him from
acting in his proper Sphere of Elevation, but to keep him from over acting of
it. For as on the one Hand, he is the dignified Servant of the Lord, and
therefore is not to Settle into low Life, but to keep up the Distinction which
Providence has made between him and other Men, and to act with a Greatness
becoming his Character. So on the other Hand, he is the dying Man, and
therefore in the great Business of Life, he is to look upon himself like other
Men, Mortal and Accountable: and that the Distinction which Providence has put
upon him in the World, is but a passing short lived Thing, not given him to
make him absolute, but to improve for the Honor of his Master, and the good of
his Fellow Servants. The good Ruler implies the Man and the Christian, and
since, like them, he is to die; so he should always act with a proper Reference
to Death and the following State, remembering that he carries about with him
continually the Seeds of Mortality, and that his Life, like the Honor of it,
is even a Vapor, which appears for a little Time and then vanishes away.
James 4* 14.
He should bear in mind, that tho he Transacts for God with Men; yet he is to
Transact for himself with God, that he is a Probationer for Eternity, and
acting a Part upon which his everlasting State depends, that Death will shut up
the scene, and finish the Trial.

As the Authority and Influence of the Magistrate will give him no Discharge,
in his Struggle with his last Enemy; so neither will it avail him any Thing, to
have been a Lawgiver and a Judge, when Christ shall come with ten thousands of
his Saints to Judgment. The Inquiry will not then be, who has worn a swelling
Title, and a royal Robe; but who has the new Name, and who is clothed in white
Raiment, for it is only he whose Name will be confessed before the Father and
before his Angels. Rev. 3. 5.
--

It Is Time that I pass to a more particular Application of the foregoing
Discourse; and I shall do it,

I In an humble Address to the Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR,
and ASSISTANTS of this Colony, with the REPRE^ENTATIVES of the Freemen of it,
here present.

Since his Honor's Command is all that can excuse my appearing in this Desk to
Day; let it also apologize for a plain Address.

Renowned Fathers.

I have attempted, though I am sensible with a great deal of Imperfection, to
give some Scetch of the good Ruler, and the dying Man; by some Touches upon
several Things in the public Parts of Moses's Conduct, wherein he approved
himself eminently the Servant of GOD, and a dignified one too, and wherein he
appeared after all but a mortal Man.

Had the Character been drawn to the Life it would have been a perfect Mirror
of good Government. In it we should have seen, the able General, the wise
Lawgiver, the accomplished Judge, the Friend of GOD, and after all, Greatness,
and Goodness submitting to the irresistible Power of Death. But changing the
Things that are to be changed there is nothing in the Character of this great
Man thus considered, but what speaks something Useful to You; my renowned
Fathers.

Was Moses Protector, and Guardian to Israel against their Enemies, so should
you be to Us* Civil, and Military Power, are naturally joined together so far,
that military Power must necessarily rest in the civil Magistrate. Our Eyes
therefore are unto You as our Shields under GOD, to defend us against all
foreign Invasions, by keeping up a Number of well disciplined Troops, and
sending of them forth as Occasion calls, and thoroughly guarding our Frontiers.
And since we are covered from a perfidious blood-thirsty Enemy* upon the North,
by a neighboring Province, which in Time of War is at an immense Expense, to
guard their Frontier, which indeed is ours also* permit me to ask, whether the
Principles of Self-preservation thoroughly pursued, whether common Equity, or
at most, whether that excellent Rule in Christianity, of doing unto others, as
we would they should do unto us, don't demand larger Supplies in Times of War,
than ever this Colony has afforded them? I know it is natural for them to
complain it is equally natural for us to treat that affair with too much
Parsimony. At present we enjoy Peace; blessed be GOD for it: long may it last;
may a good Agreement, and Friendship among the Nations cement, and flourish
whilst the Scars endure. But if GOD in righteous Judgment should suffer War to
arise, between us, and the Northern Tribes; what but the Lives, and Fortunes of
a great many in that Province, could save us from their unhappy Lot? Most
certainly the Safety we enjoy through their Danger, and Distress, demands our
generous Succors, and bids our Shields, be Shields to them.

YOU, our venerable Rulers, are under GOD the Guardians of our Lives, and of
what ever else is dear to us in the World. We look to You, (not expecting the
civil Ruler Personally to appear in the Field, if ever a foreign Enemy should
again assault us, but) that by well con^^^^d Measures, a wise choice of
Officers, a good Levy of Troops* in a Word, that by a wise Superintendency, You
secure, and defend us against them. --

Since my Subject leads me to it, it is not too late here: no, it can never be
too late for an Englishman to commemorate with Gratitude, the Instance wherein
ROGER WOLCOTT, Esquire;
his Honor, who was then second, but now first in the Administration here*
once distinguished himself in his Love, and Zeal for his Country. When in the
last War, he left his Family, his Friends, and Country behind, where he had
lived in Honor, and enjoyed plentiful easy Circumstances, to try the Dangers
of the Sea, and undergo the Hardships of a Siege, in a cold Country, and an
inclement Air: and all to curb the Pride, of an encroaching dangerous Enemy,
and save his Country from the Calamities wherewith 'twas threatened. Such
Instances of Patriotism, deserve the Laurels of a Country, and their Thanks. We
thank your Honor, with the other worthy Gentlemen that led forth our Troops:
we thank our Countrymen all, who Engaged in the Noble Enterprise; but above
all, we thank the LORD of Hosts, who fought the Battle for us, and gave us the
Victory.

May you our honored Rulers, approve yourselves the Shields of the Earth, the
Defense of your People; that under your wise Administration, the People may
lead quiet, and peaceable Lives, and every Man may set under his Vine, and
under his Figtree; and have none to make him afraid.

Was Moses also under GOD a wise Lawgiver, and a Judge to Israel* so should you
be to us. You can never deserve the Character which so well belonged to Moses,
that of a dignified Servant of the LORD, without providing good Laws, and a
good Execution of them. These are such Foundations, that if they are destroyed,
or wanting, the Community unsupported, must sink into one common Ruin. We look
to You, as our Helpers under GOD, to make, and adapt Laws to our Circumstances,
to defend us in our natural and just Rights, against every injurious and
unrighteous Claim, to encourage the most profitable Manufacture, give spring to
the best Branches of Trade, and suppress those that are injurious to the
Commonwealth, to promote good Husbandry, and Frugality, and discountenance
Idleness, to provide a just Weight, and Balance, and to (...) if possible (...)
the passing Medium is kept invariable; for if this vary, distributive Justice*
and right, can hardly be kept from varying with it; and especially to curb the
Growth of Vice of every Denomination, and bear down hard upon it, as that which
is the Bane of Society, and which, if unsubdu'd, will prove fatal to it.

But so different are the private Interest of Men, so various and headstrong
their Passions and Lusts, that good Laws and a strict Execution of them, will
probably bring upon you the Odium of many. But remember Sirs! that ye are the
Servants of GOD, and not of Sin, that ye are to please GOD by obeying his Will
in consulting your Country's Good, and not to please unreasonable Men by
obeying their Humors. It Is the Evidence of a Mind truly great, and a necessary
Ingredient in the Character of a wise Ruler, to be able to discern at a
Distance his Country's Interest and Safety, and beholding it, to follow his own
Light, with a steady Pace, through all the Consequences which it points out to
him, amidst undeserved Reproaches, and hard Treatment. Remember Sirs, the vast
Difference between the good Ruler and the bad one. One is as the Light of the
Morning, when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds, 2 Samuel, 23. 4.
a Comfort and a Blessing to the People. But the other is as a roaring Lion and
arranging Bear, Prove. 28. 15.
a common Enemy and Plague to Mankind. In the remembrance of these Things, may
you ever approve yourselves, wise Lawgivers and equal Judges. --

Moreover, Was Moses the Friend of Aaron, and a support to public Worship: so
should you our honored Rulers, be nursing Fathers to the Church of God. The
Subject I have been upon, would suffer me without Digression to bespeak your
special Favor, to the Gospel Ministry, but I wave it; and in Behalf of my
Fathers, and Brethren as well as for my self, return you our hearty Thanks, for
the many Favors conferred upon us, and the several Exemptions indulged us, by
the legislative Body of this People. We ask but the Continuance of your
Favors, and in common with other Men, your Benevolence, and Protection, and
rest assured we have it.

But for Zions sake I will not hold my Peace. Such is the Tie between the civil
and religious Interest of a People, that it is scarcely to be expected that they
will flourish separately. So that were it only upon political Views, you must
be greatly wanting to the People under your Government, if you should not to
the utmost, endeavor the Promotion of real Religion.

Whoever reads, and believes the indefinite Promises of God to his Covenant
People, and his more express Promises to the Godly, touching temporal good
Things, such as Wealth and Peace, can never doubt the Truth of this. Yea
whoever considers well the natural Connection, which there is between the
several Branches of moral Virtue, such as Temperance, Chastity, Moderation,
Meekness, and c. upon one Hand; and Health, Peace, Frugality and good
Behavior, upon the other; or in a Word, whoever considers the natural
Connection which there is between Holiness and temporal Felicity, must allow
that the civil Ruler is strictly bound to encourage and promote true Religion,
as be consults the good of the Body politic. But this is not all, it is but the
least Part, our all is embarked, not only the comfort of this transitory World,
but our everlasting well-being depends upon inward Holiness, the Religion of
our Minds, which can never flourish without a good moral Behavior; and the
externals of Christianity. Here then with that deference due to my honored
Fathers, and Superiors, but* with an earnestness becoming the importance of
the Subject, I ask your Influence and Assistance, to encourage Religion,
support the Gospel, and maintain Peace, Purity, and good Order in the Church.
Zion always had her Enemies, the Children of Edom were not the first, nor the
last that said, raze it, raze it to the Foundation. Indeed the Attacks that are
made upon the Church, are generally made under the specious: pretense of
Conscience. Conscience is a sacred Thing, and to be treated with the utmost
Tenderness, but the Pretensions to it, are often made use or to cover the
basest Designs.

If under such Pretensions any Number of People should apply to this Venerable
Assembly, to have all Laws repealed, that refer to ecclesiastical, and
religious Affairs, or only to have those repealed, which refer to the
Temporalities of the Church, -- such as respect the supporting it is Officers,
and the building, and repairing a House for GOD, if any such Request should be
preferred, I humble ask of the Honorable Assembly, in favor to the Government
as a civil Community, to reject it with that Abhorrence which it deserves.

Our pious Ancestors, who made Provision by Law, for the Support of a Religion,
and Worship, according to their own Consciences, in Hope of transmitting the
^ame incorrupt to Posterity, earned their Privileges too dear, to be given up
at the request of designing Men.

Among a great many others, it is possible there may be some few honest,
undiscerning, and undesigning Men, that may desire such a Thing, who would be
shocked if they see the natural Tendency, and probable Issue of it. In pity to
them, in favor to their dear Offspring, with ours, in favor to the civil and
religious Interest of this People; for your Country's sake, and for God's sake
let them be denied; as the Abettors of a Scheme very inimical to Church and
State, and which, if God in righteous Judgment should suffer to take Place,
would probably in a course of Years issue, in less than the appearance of
Christianity. And if for your pious Attachment to the civil or religious
Immunity's of this People, you should ever be traduced, and malign'd by any
under your Government: If the ill Treatment only affects you Personally; He who
came down from Heaven, the Governor and Judge of the World, has left you a
blessed Rule illustrated by his own Example, of forgiving the Injury. Father
forgive them, was his dying Prayer for the wretched Rabble, that Mocked him,
that Spit upon him, and Crucified him; when, if he had Pleased, he might have
Called his Father's Legions to have revenged the Injury. But if such ill
Treatment should more than affect your Persons, and through you should strike at
Government, and threaten the public Safety and Peace, may that Wisdom which is
from above, point out the Methods of Redress.

For Zions sake, let me also ask of you, my renowned Fathers, your kind
Influence to encourage Schools of Learning, especially the College within the
Colony, that it may be endowed with the best Advantages, to form Men to Virtue,
and Holiness, furnish them with the most Useful Learning, and fit them for the
Service of the Temple, and the Service of their Country.

And thus fulfilling the Character of dignified Servants of the Lord, may your
Days be filled with Honor, and Usefulness, and Peace, until GOD shall call you
off from Service.

For verily, Sirs, ye are Mortal and must Die. It Is a memorable Instance of
Wisdom in a Macedonian Prince, that he ordered these Words to be pronounced in
his hearing every Day, "Remember Sir, that you are a Man." Though we reverence,
and honor you as our Fathers and Rulers, and call you Gods, yet you are to
remember that you are hastening over into the World of Spirits, where all
present Distinction will be lost. The Habit of your Minds, but not the Honor
of your Names will go with you. Present Grandeur and Title, wont be the Measure
of your future Glory. Remember that but few Days divide you from the eternal
World. It certainly becomes you, my honored Fathers, that are in the highest
state of Elevation, to look down into the dark Valley, and consider, that you,
with other Men, are shortly to take a lodging with the Worms.

May you first like Moses ascend to the Top of Pisgah, and take a view of the
promised Rest, and then at GOD's bidding, drop your Clay, and ascend to Moses,
and to Moses's GOD, and reign with Christ forever and ever.

II. I shall briefly Address my self to my Fathers, and Brethren in the
MINISTRY.

As the good Ruler is the Friend of GOD and the Friend of his Country, a Friend
of Aaron and a Support of the public Worship; so it behooves us especially, to
wish them well, to Pray for them continually, to contribute to the utmost of
our Power toward strengthening their Hands, and increasing their Influence.
Aaron was a Mouth to Moses, so should we in some sense be to the civil
Magistrate: in speaking to God for them, in spreading their Case before his
Throne, in pleading with him that all needed Light and Support, may be afforded
them, and that they may be both faithful and successful in their high Trust. We
are also to be their Mouth as well as the Mouth of GOD to the People, in
warning the People of our respective Charges, against those Vices which
threaten a State; as well as their own Souls, warning them against Sedition,
Rebellion, a mobbish Spirit, and all groundless Murmurs; teaching every Soul to
be subject to the higher Powers, and that so is the Will of GOD, that they
submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man for the LORD's sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, etc. 1. Pet. 2. 13, 14.


We have Duties to discharge both toward Rulers and Ruled, for both are mortal
and accountable, both have Souls to save or loose. And as our own Comfort and
our Crown, depends upon our Faithfulness to the Souls of Men; so we had need be
Prayerful, and Studious, to get a good Understanding of the Will of Christ,
that we may know the Instructions that we are to give, and be able to deal out
a Portion to every one in due Season: Yea, and that we may be able to confront
all Heresies that spring up in the Church of GOD, and put to Silence
Gainsayers. The Difficulty's, my Fathers and Brethren, with a faithful
Discharge of our Trust, in the dispensing the Gospel, and the Seals of it, and
which especially private faithful Reproof, and the public administration of
Discipline, will bring upon us, will call for all our Fortitude, and Strength.
We need the constant Supplies of divine Grace; we shall need the Exercise of
continual Faith in the Promises of GOD, and verily we may find abundant
Support, from the Encouragements and Promises of the Gospel, peculiar to a
faithful Ministry.

May we go forth in the Strength of CHRIST, and be faithful in all his House.

Let us remember, that as our Work is great, so our Time is short. We have but
our Day, and with many of us it is a Day far spent; the Evening is approaching:
Our Fellow Laborers, very many of them, within a short Time, have quitted
their Labor, and are called Home. The Shadows of the Evening grow long, and we
must hasten, my Fathers, out of the Vineyard; we must hasten Home; neither our
Office, nor Usefulness, nor the Prayers of our People, can exempt us from the
common Fate. Princes, and Priests, and People, lie undistinguished beneath the
Clods, as Moses went to Mount Nebo, so Aaron went to Mount Hor, and died there.
Let us live well that we may die well; it is dying well, that perfects the Man's
Character; let us so live, that we may look, and long for the blessed Hope, and
glorious Appearing, of the great GOD, and our SAVIOR.

III. One word to the ASSEMBLY, and I have done.

Are our Rulers dignified Servants, and dying Men? You are to honor, and
submit to them, but not adore them. Our Rulers are under GOD our Guardians,
they have a high Trust reposed in them, a heavy Work lying upon them.
Contribute your Proportion, to lessen the Weight, and make Government easy, by
being yourselves obedient, to every salutary righteous Ordinance of theirs, by
setting a good Example, and using all your Influence to promote Peace, and
Truth. Look upon them as Men set over us by the wise Governor of the World,
and yet that we are all alike, and equal in this one Thing, viz. this, that we
are mortal, and accountable. And accordingly be this your great Concern, to
make ready for Death. See to it in Time that the Sting of it is taken out, and
that you are interested in Him, who is the Resurrection, and the Life, who
holds the Keys of Death, and Hell in his Hand, and who alone can save your
Souls from Destruction. Make ready for the great Day of Decision, for the
general Assemblage of all Nations, and Kindreds of the Earth. And may we all
once more have a happy Meeting at the Resurrection of the Just, and having the
Harps of God, may we join the happy Consort, and sing the Song of Moses, the
Servant of GOD, and the Song of the LAMB, saying, Great, and mavelous are thy
Works, LORD, GOD Almighty, just, and true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints,
who shall not fear thee, O LORD, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art Holy:
for all Nations shall come, and worship before thee; for thy Judgments are made
manifest. Rev. 15. 3, 4.


FINIS.

