GOD' s Mercy surmounting Man's Cruelty, Exemplified in the CAPTIVITY AND
REDEMPTION OF ELIZABETH HANSON,

Wife of John Hanson, of Knoxmarsh at Kecheachy, in Dover Township, who was
taken Captive with her Children, and Maidservant, by the Indians in
New England, in the Year 1724.

In which are inserted, Sundry remarkable Preservations, Deliverances, and
Marks of the Care and Kindness of Providence over her and her Children, worthy
to be remembered.

The Substance of which was taken from her own Mouth, and now published for
general Service.

The SECOND EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by JAMES CHATTIN, in Church-Alley. 1754.

GOD's Mercy surmounting Man's Cruelty, etc.
REmarkable and many are the Providence of God toward his people for their
deliverance in a time of trouble, by which we may behold, as in lively
characters, the truth of that saying, That he is a God near at hand, and always
ready to help and assist those that fear him, and put their confidence in him.

The sacred writings give us instances of the truth hereof in days of old, as
in the cases of the Israelites, Job, David, Daniel, Paul, Silas, and many
others. Besides which, our modern histories have plentifully abounded with
Instances of God's fatherly care over his people, in their sharpest trials,
deepest distresses, and forest exercises, by which we may know he is a God that
changes not, but is the same yesterday today and for ever.

Among the many modern instances, I think I have ^^t met with a more singular
one, of the mercy and proserving hand of God, than in the case of Elizabeth
Hanson, wife of John Hanson, of Knoxmarsh, in Kecheachy, in Dover township, in
New England, who was taken into captivity the 27 th day of 6th month, called
August, 1724, and carried away ( with four children and a servant) by the
Indians; which relation, as it was taken from her own mouth by a friend, is as
follows.

AS soon as the Indians discovered ^emselves (having, as we afterward
understood, been sculking in the fields some days watching their opportunity
when my dear husband, with the ren o^ our men, were gone out of the way) two of
them came in upon us, and then eleven more, all naked, with their guns and
tomahauks, and in a great fury killed one child immediately^ as soon as they
entered the door, thinking thereby to strike in us the (...) terror, and to
make us more fearful of them.

After which, in like fury the captain came up to me; but at my request, he
gave me quarter. There was with me our servant, and six of our children; two of
the little ones being at play about the orchard, and my youngest child but
fourteen days old, whether in cradle or arms, I now remember not: being in this
condition, I was very unfit for the hardships I after met with, (...) which I
shall endeavor briefly to relate.

They went to rifling the house in a great hurry (fearing as I suppose, a
surprise from our people, it being late in the afternoon) and packed up some
linen, woollen, and what other thing pleased them best; and when they had done
what they would, they turned out of the house immediately, and, while they were
at the door, two of my younger children, one six, and the other four years old,
came in sight, and being under a great surprise, cried aloud, upon which one of
the Indians running to them, took ^em under the arms, and brought them to us.
M^ ma^d prevailed with the biggest to be quiet and still; but the other could
by no means be prevailed with, but continued screeking and crying very much,
and the Indians to case themselves of the noise, and to prevent the danger of a
discovery that might arise from it, immediately, before my face, knocked his
brains out. I bore this as well as I could, not daring to appear disturbed or
show much uneasiness, lest they should do the same to the other: but should
have been exceeding glad if they had kept our of sight till we had gone from
the house.

Now having killed two of my children, they scalp'd 'em (a practice common with
these people, which is, whenever they kill any enemies, they cut the skin off
from the crown of their heads, and carry it with them for a restimony and (...)
that they have killed so many, receiving (...) a reward for every scalp) and
the^ (...) to leave the house in great haste, without doing any other spoil
than taking what they had packed together, with m^self and little babe,
fourteen days old, the boy six, and two daughters, the one about fourteen, and
the other about sixteen years, with my servant girl.

It must be considered that I having lain-in but 14 days, and being but very
tender and weakly, and removed now out of a good room well accommodated with
fire, bedding, and other things suiting a person in my condition, in made these
hardships to me greater than if I had been in a strong and healthy frame; yet,
for all this, I must go or die. There was no resistance.

In this condition aforesaid we left the house, each Indian having something;
and I with my babe and three children that could go of themselves. The captain,
tho he had as great a load as he could well carry, and was helped up with it,
did for all that, carry my babe for me in his arms, which I took to be a favor
from him. Thus we went through several swamps, and some brooks, they carefully
avoiding all paths of any track like a road, lest by our footsteps we should be
followed.

We got that night, I suppose, not quite ten miles from our house, on a direct
line; then taking up their quarters, lighted a fire, some of them lying down
while others kept watch; I being both wet and weary, and lying on the cold
ground in the open woods, took but little rest.

However, early in the morning, we must go just as the day appeared, traveling
very hard all that day through sundry rivers, brooks and swamps, they as before,
carefully avoiding all paths, for the reason already assigned: at night I (...)
wet and tired exceedingly, having the (...) on the cold ground, in the (...).
Thus, for 26 days, day by day, we (...) very hard, sometimes a little by water,
(...) lakes and ponds; and in this journey we wen^ up some very high mountains,
so steep, that I was for^'d to creep up on my hands and knees; under which
difficulty, the Indian my master, would mostly carry my babe for me, which I
took as a great favor of God that his heart was so tenderly inclined to assist
me, though he had, as it is said, a very heavy burden of his own; nay, he would
sometimes take my very blanket, so that I had nothing to do, but take my little
boy by the hand for his help, and assist him as well as I could, taking him up
in my arms a little at times, because so small; and when we came at very bad
places, he would lend me his hand, or coming behind, would push me before him:
in all which, he showed some humanity and civility more than I could have
expected: for which privilege I was secretly thankful to God, as the moving
cause thereof.

Next to this, we had some very great runs of water and brooks to wade through in
which at times we met with much difficulty, wading often to our middles, and
sometimes our girls were up to their shoulders and chins, the Indians carrying
my boy on their shoulders. At the side of one of these runs or rivers, the
Indians would have my eldest daughter Sarah to sing them a song; then was
brought into her remembrance that passage in the 137th Psalm, By the rivers of
Babylon, there we sat down, yea we wept when we remembered Zion; we hanged our
harps on the willows in the miost thereof; for there they that carried us away
captive, required of us a song, and they that wasted us, required of us mirth.
When my poor child had given me this account, it was very affecting, and my
heart was very full of trouble, yet on my child's account, I was glad that she
had so good an inclination, which she yet further manifested, in longing for a
bible, that we might have the comfort of reading the holy text at vacant times,
for our spiritual comfort under our present affliction.

Next to the difficulties of the rivers, were the prodigious swamps and
thickets, very difficult to pass through; in which places my master would
sometimes lead me by the hand a great way togege^her, and give me what help he
was capable of under the straits we went through; and we passing one after
another, the first made it pretty passable for the hindmost.

But the greatest difficulty that deserves the first to be named, was want of
food, having at times nothing to eat but pieces of old beaver-skinmatch-coats,
which the Indians having hid (for they ca^^ naked as is said before) which in
their going back again they took with them, and they were used more for food
than raiment: being cut into long narrow straps, they gave us little pieces,
which by the Indians example we laid on the fire till the hair was
singe-edaway, and the^^ we eat them as a sweet morsel, experimentally knowing,
that to the hungry soul, every bitter thing is sweet.

It Is to be considered further, that of this poor diet we had but very scanty
allowance; so that we were in no danger of being over charged. But that which
added to my trouble, was the complaints of my poor children, especially the
little boy. Sometimes the Indians would catch a squirrel, or a beaver, and at
other times we met with nuts, berries, and roots they dug out of the ground,
with the bank of some trees: but we had no corn for a great while together,
though some of the younger Indians went back, and brought some corn from the
English inhabitants (the harvest not being gathered) of which we had a little
allowed us: but when they caught a beaver, we lived high while it lasted, they
allowed me the guts and garbage for myself and children; but not allowing us to
clean and wash them as they ought, made the food very irksome to us, to feed
upon, and nothing besides pinching hunger could have made it any way tolerable
to be borne.

The next difficulty was no less hard to me; for my daily travel and hard
living made my milk dry almost quite up, and how to preserve my poor babe's
life, was no small care on my mind; having no other sustenance for him, many
times, but cold water, which I took in my mouth, and let it fall on my breast,
when I gave him the teat to suck in, with what it could get from the breast;
and when I had any of the broth of the beaver's-guts, or other guts, I fed my
babe with it, and as well as I could I preserved his life till I got to Canada,
and then I had some other food, of which more in (...) place.

Having by this time got considerably on the way, the Indians parted; and we
were divided amongst them. This was a sore grief to us all: but we must submit,
and no way to help ourselves. My eldest daughter was first taken away, and
carried to another part of the country, far distant from us, where, for the
present, we must take leave of her, though with a heavy heart.

We did not travel far after this, before they divided again, taking my second
daughter and servant maid from me, into another part of the country: so, I
having now only my babe at my breast, and little boy six years old, we remained
with the captain still: but my daughter and servant underwent great hardships
after they were parted from me, traveling three days, without any food, taking
nothing for support, but cold water; and the third day, what with the cold, the
wet, and hunger, the servant fell down as dead in a swoon, being both very cold
and wet, at which the Indians with whom they were, were surpised, showing some
kind of tenderness, being unwilling then to loose them by death, having got
them so near home, hoping, if they lived, by their ransom to make considerable
profit of them.

In a few days after this, they got near their journey's end, where they had
more plenty of corn and other food: but flesh often fell very short, having no
other way to depend on for it, but hunting; and when that failed, they had very
short commons. It was not long ^re my daughter and servant were likewise
parted; and my daughter's master being sick, was not able to hunt for flesh:
neither had they any corn in that place, but were forced to eat bark of trees
for a whole week.

Being almost famished in this distress, Providence so ordered, that some other
Indians hearing of their misery and want, came to visit them; (these people
being very kind and helpful to one another, which is very commendable) and
brought unto them the guts and liver of a beaver, which afforded them a good
repast, being but four in number, the Indian, his wife and daughter, and my
daughter.

By this time my master and our company got to our journey's end, where we were
better fed at times, having some corn and venison, and wild fowl, or what they
could catch by hunting in the woods; and my master having a large family,
fifteen in number, we had at times very short commons, more especially when
game was scarce.

But here our lodging was still on the cold ground, in a poor wigwam (which is
a kind of little shelter made with the rind of trees and mats for a covering,
something like a tent.) These are so easily set up and taken down, that they
often remove them from one place to another: out shoes and stockings and our
other clothes being wore out, in this long journey through the bushes and sawmps,
and the weather coming in very hard, we were poorly defended from the cold, for
want of necessaries; which caused one of m^ feet, one of the little babe's, and
both of the little bo^^'s to freeze; and this was no small exercise, yet through
mercy we all did well.

Now though we got to our journey's end, we were never long in one place, but
very often moved from one place to another, carrying our wigwams with us, which
we could do, without much difficulty. This being for the convenience of
hunting, made our accommodations much more unpleasant than if we had continued
in one place, by reason the coldness and dampness of the ground, where our
wigwams were pitched, made it very unwholesome and unpleasant lodging.

Having now got to the Indian fort, many of the Indians came to visit us, and
in their way welcomed my master home; and held a great rejoicing, with dancing,
firing of guns, beating on hollow trees, instead of drums, shouting, drinking
and feasting, after their manner, in much excess for several days together,
which I suppose, in their thoughts, was a kind of thanks to God put up for
their safe return and good success* but while they were in their jolitry and
mirth, my mind was greatly exercised toward the Lord, that I, with my dear
children separated from me, might be preserved from repining aginst God, under
our affliction on the one hand, and on the other, we might have our dependence
on him, who rules the hearts of men, and can do what he pleases in the kingdoms
of the earth, knowing that his care is over them who put their trust in him;
but I found it very hard to keep my mind as I ought, in the resignation which
is proper it should be in, under such afflictions and sore trials, as at that
time I suffered, in being under various fears and doubts concerning my children
that were separated from me, which helped to and to, and greatly increase my
troubles: and herein I may truly say, my afflictions are not to be set forth in
words to the extent of them.

We had not been long at home ere my master went a hunting, and was absent
about a week, he ordering me in his absence to get in wood, gather nuts, etc. I
was very diligent, cutting the wood, and putting it in order, not having very
far to carry it: but when he returned, having got no prey, he was very much out
of humor, and the disappointment was so great, that he could not forbear
revenging it on us poor captives. However he allowed me a little boiled corn
for myself and child, but with a very angry look threw a stick or corn-cob at
me, with such violence as did bespeak he grudged our eating. At this his squaw
and daughter broke out in a great crying. This made me fear mischief was
hatching against us: and on it, I immediately went out of his presence into
another wigwam; upon which he came after me, and in great fury tore my blanket
off my back, and took my little boy from me and struck him down as he went
along before him; but the poor child, not being hurt, only frighted in the
fall, started up and ran away, without crying; then the Indian my master left
me; but his wife's mother came and sat down by me, and told me, I must sleep
there that night. She then going from me a little time, came back with a small
skin to cover my feet withal, informing that my master intended now to kill us;
and I being desirous to know the reason, expostulated, that in his absence I
had been diligent to do as I was ordered by him. Thus, as well as I could, I
made her sensible how unreasonable he was. Now, though she could not understand
me, nor I her, but by signs, we reasoned as well as we could. she therefore
made signs that I must die, advising me, by pointing up with her fingers, in
her way, to pray to God, endeavoring by her signs and tears to instruct me in
that which was most needful, viz. to prepare for death, which now threatened me;
the poor old squaw was so very kind and tender, that she would not leave me all
that night, but laid herself down at my feet, designing what she could to
asuage her son-in-law's wrath, who had conceived evil against me, chiefly as I
understood, because the want of victuals urged him ot it. My rest was little
this night, my poor babe sleeping sweetly by me.

I dreaded the tragical design of my master, looking every hour for his coming
to execute his bloody will upon us: but he being weary with his hunting and
travel in the woods, having toiled for nothing, went to rest, and forgot it.
Next morning he applied himself again to hunting in the woods, but I dreaded
his returning empty, and prayed secretly in my heart, that he might catch some
food to satisfy his hunger, and cool his ill humor. He had been gone but a
little time till he returned with booty, having shot some wild ducks; and now
he appeared in a better temper, ordering the fowls to be dressed with speed;
for these kind of people, when they have plenty, spend it as freely as they get
it; using with gluttony and drunkenness in two days time, as much as, with
prudent management, might serve a week. Thus do they live, for the most part,
either in excess of gluttony and drunkenness, or under great straits for want
of necessaries. However, in this plentiful time I felt the comfort of it in
part with the family, having a portion sent for me and my little ones, which
was very acceptable. Now, I thinking the bitterness of death was over for this
time, my spirits were a little easier.

Not long after this, he got into the like ill humor again, threatening to take
away my life. But I always observed whenever he was in such a temper, he wanted
food, and was pinched with hunger. But when he had success in hunting, to take
either bears, beavers, bucks or fowls, on which he could fill ^his belly, he
was better humoured, though he was naturally of a very hot and passionate temper,
throwing sticks, stones, or whatever lay in his way, on every ^^ight occasion.
This made me in continual danger of my life: but God, whose Providence is over
all his works, so preserved me, that I never received any damage from him that
was of any great consequence to me; for which I ever desire to be thankful to
my maker.

When flesh was scarce, we had only the guts and garbage allowed to our part;
and not being permitted to cleanse the guts any otherwise than emptying the
dung, without so much as washing them, as before is noted, in that filthy
pickle we must boil them, and eat them, which was very unpleasant: but hunger
made up that difficulty, so that this food which was very often our lot, became
pretty tolerable to a sharp apperite, which otherwise by no means could have
been dispensed with. Thus I considered, none knows what they can undergo, till
the^ are tried; for what I had thought in my own family not fit for food, would
here have been a dainty-dish, and a sweet morsel.

By this time, what with ^atigue of spirits, hard labor, mean diet, and often
want of natural rest, I was brought so low, that my milk was dried up, my babe
very poor and weak, just skin and bone; for I could perceive all her joints
from one end of the back to the other; and how to get what would suit her weak
apperite, I was at a loss; on which one of the Indian squaws perceiving my
uncasiness about my child, began some discourse with me, in which she advised
me to take the kernels of walnuts, clean them, and beat them with a little
water, which I did, and when I had so done, the water looked like milk; then
she advised me to add to this water, a little of the finest of the Indian corn
meal, and boil it a little together, I did so, and it became palatable, and was
very nourishing to the babe, so that she began to thrive and look well; which
was before, more like to die than live. I found that with this kind of diet the
Indians did often nurse their infants. This was no small comfort to me: but
this comfort was soon mixed with bitterness and trouble, which thus happened;
my master taking notice of my dear babe's thriving condition, would often look
upon her, and say, when she was fat enough, she should he killed, and he would
eat her; and pursuant to his pretense, at a certain time, he made me fetch him
a stick that he had prepared for a spit, to roast the child upon, as he said,
which when I had done, he made me sit down by him, and undress the infant. When
the child was naked, he felt her arms, legs, and thighs, and told me, she was
not fat enough yet; I must dress her again until she was better in case.

Now though he thus acted, I could not persuade myself, that he intended to do as
he pretended, but only to aggravate and afflict me: neither ever could I think
but our lives would be preserved from his barbarous hands, by the overruling
power of him in whose providence I put my trust, both day and night.

A little time after this my master fell sick, and in his sickness, as he lay
in his wigwam, he ordered his own son to beat my son: but the old squaw, the
Indian boy's grandmother, would not suffer him to do it: then his father, my
master, being provoked, caught up a stick very sharp at one end, and with great
violence threw it from him, at my son, and hit him on the breast, with which my
child was much bruised, and the pain, with the surprise, made him turn as pale
as death; I entreating him not to cry, and the boy, though but six years old,
bore it with wonderful patience, not so much as in the least complaining, so
that the child's patience asuaged the barbarity of his heart: who, no doubt,
would have carried his passion and resentment much higher, had the child cried,
as always complaining did aggravate his passion, and his anger grew hotter upon
it. Some little time after, on the same day, he got up on his feet, but far
from being well. However, though he was sick, his wife and daughter let me know,
he intended to kill us, and I was under a fear, unless Providence now
intercepted, how it would end. I therefore put down my child, and going out of
his presence, went to cut wood for the fire, as I used to do, hoping that
would, in part, allay his passion; but withal ^re I came to the wigwam again, I
expected my child would be killed in this mad fit, having no other way but to
cast my care upon God, who had hitherto helped and cared for me and mine.

Under this great feud the old squaw, my master's mother-in-law left him; but
my mistress and her daughter abode in the wigwam with my master; and when I
came with my wood, the daughter came to me, whom I asked, if her father had
killed my children, and she made me a sign. No, with a countenance that seemed
pleased it was so; for instead of his further venting his passion on me, and my
children, the Lord, in whom I trusted, did seasonably interpose, and I took it
as a merciful deliverance from him, and the Indian was under some sense of the
same as himself did confess to them about him afterward.

Thus it was, a little after he got up on his feet, the Lord struck him with
great sickness, and a violent pain, as appeared by the complaint he made in a
doleful and hideous manner; which when I understood, not having yet seen him, I
went to another squaw, that was come to see my master, which could both speak
and understand English, and enquired of her if my mistress (for so I always
called her, and him master) thought that master would die? She answered, Yes,
it was very likely he would, being worse and worse: Then I told her, He struck
my boy a dreadful blow without any provocation at all, and had threatened to
kill us all in his fury and passion; upon which the squaw told me, My master
had confessed the above abuse he offered my child, and that the mischief he had
done, was the cause why God a afflicted him with that sickness and pain, and he
had promised never to abuse us in such ^ort more: and after this he soon
recovered, but was not so passionate; nor do I remember he ever after struck
either me or children, so as to hurt us, or with that mischie^ous intent as
before he used to do. This I took as the Lord's doing, and it was marvelous in
my eyes.

Some few weeks after this, my master made another remove, having, as before,
made several: but this was the longest ever he made, it being two days journey,
and mostly upon ice. The first day's journey the ice was bare, but the next day
some snow falling, made it very troublesome, tedious and difficult traveling;
and I took much damage in often falling, having the care of my babe, that added
not a little to my uneasiness; and the last night, when we came to encamp, it
being in the night, I was ordered to fetch water: but having sat a while on
the cold ground, I could neither go nor stand; but crawling on my hands and
knees, a young Indian squaw came to see our people, being of another family, in
compassion took the kettle, and knowing where to go, which I did not, fetched
the water for me. This I took as a great kindness and favor, that her heart
was inclined to do me this service.

I now saw the design of this journey; my master being, as I suppose, weary to
keep us, was willing to make what he could of our ransom; therefore he went
further toward the French, and left his family in this place, where they had a
great dance, sundry other Indians coming to our people, this held some time,
and while they were in it, I got out of their way in a corner of the wigwam as
well as I could: but every time they came by me, in their dancing, they would
bow my head toward the ground, and frequently kick me with as great fury as
they could bear, being sundry of them barefoot, and others having Indian
mockosons: this dance held some time, and they made (in their manner) great
rejoicings and noise.

It was not many days ere my master returned from the French; but he was in
such a humor, when he came back, he would not suffer me in his presence.
Therefore I had a little shelter made with some boughs, they having dug
through the snow to the ground, the snow being pretty deep. In this hole, I and
my poor children were put to lodge, the weather being very sharp, with hard
frost, in the month called January, made it more redious to me and my children.
Our stay was not long in this place, before he took me to the French, in order
for a chapman; and when we came among them, I was exposed to sale, and he asked
for me ^00 livers: but his chapman not complying with his demand, put him in a
great rage, offering him but 600, he said in a great passion, If he could not
have his demand, he would make a great ^^re, and burn me and the babe in the
view of the town, which was named Fort-Royal. The Frenchman bid the Indian make
his fire, and I will, says he, help you, if you think that will do you more
good than 600 livers, calling my master fool, and speaking roughly to him, bid
him be gone. But at the same time, the Frenchman was very civil to me; and, for
my encouragement, bid me be of good cheer, for I should be redeemed, and not go
back with them again.

Retiring now with my master for this night, the next day I was redeemed for
600 livers; and, in treating with my master, the Frenchman queried, Why he
asked so much for the child's ransom? Urging, when she had her belly-ful, she
would die. My master said, No, she would not die, having already lived 26 days
on nothing but water, believing the child to be a devil. The Frenchman told
him, No, the child is ordered for longer life; and it has pleased God to
preserve her to admiration. My master said, No she was a devil, and he believed
she would not die, unless they took a hatchet and beat her brains out. Thus
ended their discourse, and I was, as aforesaid, with my babe, ransomed for 600
livers, my little bo^, likewise at the same time, for an additional sum of
livers, was redeemed also.

I now having changed my landlord, my table and diet, as well as my lodging,
the French were civil beyond what I could either desire or expect. But the next
day after I was redeemed, the Romish priest took my babe from me, and according
to their custom, they baptized her, urging if she died before that, she would
be damned, like some of our modern pretended reformed priests, and they gave
her a name as pleased them best; which was Mary ann Frossways, telling me, My
child, if she now died, would be saved, being baptized; and my landlord
speaking to the priest that baptized her, said, It would be well now Frossways
was baptized for her to die, being now in a state to be saved But the priest
said, No, the child having been so miraculously preserved through so many
hardships, she may be designed by God for some great work, and by her life
being still continued, may much more glorify God than if she should now die. A
very sensible remark, and I wish it may prove true.

I having been about five months amongst the Indians. In about one month after
I got amongst the French, my dear husband, to my unspeakable comfort and joy,
came to me, who was now himself concerned to redeem his children, two of our
daughters being still captives, and only myself and two little ones redeemed;
and through great difficulty and trouble he recovered the younger daughter: but
the eldest we could by no means obtain from their hands, for the squaw, to whom
she was given, had a son which she intended my daughter should in time be
prevailed with the marry; the Indians are very civil toward their captive
women, not offering any incivility by any indecent carriage (unless they be
much overgone in Equor) which is commendable in them so far.

However the affections they had for my daughter, made them refuse all offers
and terms of ransom; so that after my poor husband had waited, and made what
attempts and endeavors he could to obtain his child, and all to no purpose, we
were forced to make homeward, leaving our daughter to our great grief, behind
us, amongst the Indians, and set forward over the lake, with three of our
children, and the servant-maid, in company with sundry others, and by the
kindness of providence we got well home on the kindness of providence we got
well home on the first day of the seventh month, 1725. From which it appears I
had been from home amongst the Indians and French, about twelve months and
(...) days.

In the series of which time, the many deliverances and wonderful providence
of God unto us, and over (...) has been, and I hope will so remain to be as a
continued obligation on my mind, ever to live in that fear, love and obedience
to God, duly regarding, by his grace, with meekness and wisdom, to approve
myself by his spirit, in all holiness of life, and godliness of conversation,
to the praise of him that has called me, who is God blessed for ever.

But my dear husband, poor man! could not enjoy himself in quiet with us, for
want of his dear daughter Sarah, that was left behind, and not willing to omit
any thing for her redemption which lay in his power, he could not be easy
without making a second attempt; in order to which, he took his journey about
the 19th day, of the second month, 1727, in company with a kinsman and his
wife, who went to redeem some of their children, and were so happy as to obtain
what they went about (...) but my dear husband being taken sick on the way,
grew worse and worse, as we were informed, and was sensible he should not get
over it; telling my kinsman, that, if it was the Lord's will he must die in the
wilderness, he was freely given up ot it. He was under a good composure of
mind, and sensible to his last moments, and died, as near as we (...) guess, in
about the halfway between Albany and Canada, in my kinsman's arms, and is at
rest, I hope, in the Lord: and though my own and childrens loss is very great;
yet I doubt not but his gain is much more: I therefore desire and pray, that
the Lord will enable me patiently to submit to his will in all things he is
pleased to suffer to be my lot while here, earnestly supplicating the God and
Father of all our mercies, to be a father to my fatherless children, and give
unto them that blessing which makes truly rich, and adds no sorrow with it;
that as they grow in years, they may grow in grace, and experience the joy of
his salvation, which is come by Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior. Amen.

Now though my husband died, by reason of which his labor was ended, yet my
kinsman prosecuted the thing, and left no stone unturned that he thought, or
could be advised, was proper to the obtaining my daughter's freedom; but could
by no means prevail; for, as is before said (she being in another part of the
country distant from where I was) and given to an old squaw, who intended to
marry her in time, to her son using what persuasions she could to effect her
end, sometimes by fair means, and sometimes more severe. In the mean time, a
Frenchman intercepted, and they, by persuasions, enticing my child to marry, in
order to obtain her freedom, by reason that those captives married by the
French, are by that marriage made free among them, the Indians having then no
pretense longer to keep them as Captives, she therefore was prevailed upon, for
the reasons afore-assigned, to marry, and she was accordingly married to the
said Frenchman.

Thus, as well, and as near as I can from my memory (not being capable of
keeping a journal) I have given a short, but a true account of some of the
remarkable trials and wonderful deliverances, which I never purposed to expose;
but that I hope thereby the merciful kindness and goodness of God may be
magnified, and the reader hereof provoked with more care and fear to serve him
in righteousness and humility, and then my designed end purpose will be
answered.

E. H.

As the following Pastoral Hymn, wrote by the excellent ADDISON, seems adapted
to the foregoing remarkable Providence, 'twas thought it would not be amiss to
add it to fill a vacant Page.
I.
THE Lord my Pasture does prepare,
And feed my with a Shepherd's Care*
His Presence does my Wants supply,
And guard me with a watchful Eye;
My Noonday Walks he does attend,
And all my Midnight Hours defend.
II.
When in the sultry Glebe I faint,
Or on the thristy Mountain pant;
To fertile Vales, and dewy Meads
My weary wandering Steps he leads;
Where peaceful Rivers, soft and slow,
Amidst the verdant Landscape flow.
III.
Though in the Paths of Death I tread,
With gloomy Horrors overspread,
My steadfast Heart does fear no Ill,
For thou, O Lord, art with me still;
Thy friendly Crook does give me Aid,
And guide me through the dreadful Shade,
IV.
Though in a bare and rugged Way,
Through devious lonely Wilds I stray,
Thy Bounty does my pains beguile;
The barren Wilderness does smile,
With sudden Greens, and Herbage crowned*
And Streams does murmur all around.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by JAMES CHATTIN, in Church-Alley, Philadelphia.
Price. s. d. DOVER's useful Miscellany, 1 6 DR. Barclay's Catechism, 2 0 S
^ullers's Ditto, 1 0 J. Woolman against Negro-keeping, 0 6 J. Owen's Spelling*
Book, 2 0 S ^'s Short History of a long Travel, 0 6 The Royal Primer improved,
0 6 Ditto, bound different, 0 8 J. ^^^wood's Davideis, a Poem, 2 0 J. F's Essay
on Conduct, in Verse, 0 6 D. Roberts's Memoirs of the Life of John Roberts, 1 0
J. Jeffrys' Address to the Church of England, 0 9 D. ^^oll's Epistle to persons
disowned, 0 3 The Art of Contentment, 2 6 The Travels and Labors of Richard
Davies, 2 6

Errata, Page 8, l. 26, r. her. l. 28, r. her. l. 32, r. her.


