The Nature and Extent of Christ's Redemption.

A SERMON PREACHED before the GENERAL ASSEMELY, OF VIRGINIA: At WILLIAMSBURG,
November 11th, 1753.

By WILLIAM STITH, A. M. President of William and Mary College.

Published at the Request of the House of Burgesses.

WILLIAMSBURG. Printed and Sold by WILLIAM HUNTER. MDCCLIII.

Abstract from the Journal of the House of Burgesses.
Monday, November 12th, 1753.
Ordered,

THAT the Thanks of this House be returned to the Reverend Mr. William Stith,
for his excellent Sermon, preached Yesterday, before the Council and this
House, and that he be desired to print it; and that Mr. Carter do wait on him
for that Purpose.

John Randolph, C. H. B.

To the HONORABLE Sir George Lyttelton, Bart.
One of the Lords Commissioners of His MAJESTY'S Treasury, and Member of
Parliament for Oakhampton.
SIR,
YOU must not be surprised at an Address of this Nature, from so distant a Part
of the British Dominions, as Virginia. Your Reputation, as a Patriot, and a Man
of Sense, Learning, Probity, and Honor, has been long well known to us, as
well from your Writings, as from your long upright and unblemished Conduct in
Parliament. And if that had been wanting, yet your Fame, as the noblest Work of
God, an honest Man, has been wafted to us on the Wings of Poetry, and is
rendered sacred to all Ages, and through all Regions, in the Works of your late
great and immortal Friend, Mr. POPE.

BUT however beautiful your Character may appear in these Points of View, yet
it was not even that, which drew upon you this Dedication. It is to the
Christian, and the Man of Piety and Religion, that this Address is directed; to
the Author of the Observations on the Conversion and Apostleship of St. Paul;
one of the neatest, clearest, and most convincing Defenses of the Christian
Religion, that our Age has produced; although our Age has produced not a few
excellent Pieces of the like Kind.

AS the following Discourse was written with the same Spirit and Intent of
clearing up the Christian Verity, and of wiping off from the Gospel the Stain
of Cruelty and Injustice, cast upon it by the Rashness and Violence of Men, who
know not, what Manner of Spirit they are of; so, when it was ordered to be
printed, I could not think of any Person, to whom it could be addressed with
greater Propriety, than yourself. For however short it may be of your Piece, in
the Strength of Reasoning, and Elegancy of Composition; yet I will venture to
hope, that it was written with as honest a Design, and with as sincere and
genuine a Love of Truth and the Gospel.

I hope, Sir, you will excuse this Boldness and Intrusion in a Stranger; who is
wholly unknown to you farther, than that I remember you, as a Contemporary at
Oxford, and that I have been transiently in your Company there; although it is
very probable, you may have quite forgotten me. I am, with all due Regard to
your Dignity and Figure in the Nation, but with a much greater Respect and
Esteem for your personal Merit and Virtue,

SIR, Your Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, William Stith.

THE PREFACE.
THERE is one Thing, which I think it proper to advertise the Reader of. When I
had almost finished this Sermon, I had Occasion to turn to, and re-examine,
Monsieur Limborch's Letter to Mr. Lock, which I have quoted; and I found, that
Letter had Reference to Mr. Locke's Treatise of The Reasonableness of
Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures. Although I am a great Admirer of
Mr. Locke's Writings, and have been no instudious Reader of them, yet I never
had to my Knowledge read that Tract; being deterred from it, I believe, by the
long Roll of Controversy with Edwards, tagged to the End of it; a Kind of
Reading, which even Mr. Locke's Genius could not sanctify, or render promising
and pleasant to me. However having conceived Hopes of getting some new Light in
my Subject from that Piece, I stopped my Pen and ceased Writing, 'till I had
read it over. But how great was my Pleasure and Surprise, to find most of the
nice and hazardous Truths, which I have deduced under the third Head of this
Discourse, displayed with still greater Evidence and Beauty, by that admirable
Writer, with many others, which I have left untouched? So that, had I read that
Treatise before, I dare say, I should never have written that third Head of
Discourse, concerning the Salvation of the Gentiles; knowing it to have been so
much better treated by that masterly Hand.

WE have indeed, in some Points, trod so exactly in the same Tract, that it
will not be easily believed, that I have not borrowed from him. But I declare,
to the best of my Remembrance, that I had never read that Discourse before. If
I had ever read it, it must have been four or five and twenty Years ago, when I
was at the University; and thus it is possible, his Notions may have so
incorporated with my own Thoughts, that I cannot now distinguish the one from
the other. But I am rather apt to think, that we have both hit on the same
Truths by the same Means; viz. by a free, courageous, and honest use of our
Reason, assisted and improved by a diligent Study and Search into sacred
Scripture.

A SERMON.
St. MATTHEW, vii. 13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait Gate, for wide is the
Gate, and broad is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many there be which
go in thereat: Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, which leads
unto Life, and few there be, that find it.


THESE Words, at first View, seem to carry a terrible Aspect, and to declare,
that the greatest Part of Mankind will miss their Way to eternal Life, and
perish everlastingly. And accordingly we find them so understood by some
Persons; and particularly a late Author from our Press says: Is it not certain,
that the most of Mankind perish? And to hope the contrary, however natural it
is to a generous Soul, is blasphemously to hope, that GOD will be a Liar. This
is said in a Pamplet, entitled, The impartial Trial, Impartially tried, and
convicted of Partiality. P. 47.
This violent Denunciation against the greatest Part of Mankind is founded, I
presume, upon this, and some other parallel Texts of Scripture. But however
cautious I would be, of incurring the horrid Crime of Blasphemy, yet I must
confess myself to be one of those generous Souls, who not only hope, but firmly
believe better things. And I have therefore chosen this Portion of Scripture,
for the Subject of my present Discourse; in the Prosecution of which I shall
endeavor

I. TO settle and ascertain the Sense of these Words.

II. I shall consider some other Texts, which are thought to have the same
Meaning, and to include the like dreadful Sentence against the greatest Part of
Mankind.

III. AND lastly, I shall show the Universality of CHRIST'S Redemption; -- that
he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for our Sins only, but also for
the Sins of the whole World. 1 John ii. 2.

I. I am to settle and ascertain the Sense of these Words. And to this Purpose
it must be remembered, that but few of the Jews of that Age came in to Christ,
and embraced the Gospel. And this was an Event, that was often foretold by the
Prophets of the Old Testament, that only a Remnant should be saved. It is true
indeed, that when the Prophets speak of this Remnant, their first and immediate
Meaning respected the small Remainder of the Jewish Nation, which was to return
from the Babylonian Captivity, and to settle in Judea, and again to become a
Nation. But although this was their primary and immediate Meaning, yet we are not
to restrain it wholly to this Sense. For with an Address, usual to the
Prophecies of the Old Testament, it had a farther prophetical Glance at the
Times of the Gospel; and signified, that a small Part only of the Jewish Nation
should receive the MESSIAH, when he came, and accept those gracious Terms of
Salvation which GOD, in his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, has appointed.

I am sensible, how dangerous it is, to give into whimsical and distant
Interpretations of the Scriptures; yet think myself obliged to submit to any
such Application of them, as is made or authorized by the inspired Writers. And
I think, we are plainly led to this Allusion and Sense by St. Paul, in the xi.
Chapt. of his Epistle to the Romans. He is there treating of GOD'S Rejection of
the Jews, which he denies to be total, and instances in himself who was not
only a Christian, but an Apostle. And then having alluded to the seven thousand
Men in Israel, in the Days of Elias, whom God reserved to himself, and who had
not bowed the Knee to Baal, he adds: Even so then, at this present Time also,
there is a REMNANT according to the Election of Grace. Romans xi. 5. where the
Apostle plainly refers to the Remnant to be saved, so often mentioned by the
Prophets of the Old Testament; as indeed Dr. Hammond, and other Commentators,
observe.

AND now, since the Jews were such a perverse and stiff-necked Generation, and
so obstinately set against Christ and the Gospel; and since this was so
remarkable and eminent an Event, that it was often hinted, or even plainly
foretold, by their ancient Prophets; our Blessed SAVIOR, in the Words of my
Text, advises his Auditors to avoid the sinful and pernicious Conduct of the
Generality of their Countrymen; -- not to enter in at the wide Gate, nor travel
in the broad Way of their national Prejudices, in expecting worldly Advantages
and a glorious temporal MESSIAH, and rejecting the lowly JESUS: Because strait
was the Gate of the Gospel, and narrow the way (...) Theophyl.
through the thorny Paths of Affliction and Persecution, that led unto Life,
and few (Jews) there were, that would find it. So that (according to this
Interpretation, and the Sense, which I have always had of these Words ever
since my first studying or knowing any thing of the Scriptures) they are to be
understood of the Jews of that Age, and not to be extended to all Christians,
or to Mankind in general.

AND this Sense and Interpretation will be still more evident, if we consider
and collate with it the parallel Passage in St. Luke; where the Occasion is
more particularly related, and the Application to the Jews more express and
indubitable. The Words are: Then said we unto him; Lord, are there few, that be
saved? And he said unto them: Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many,
I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. When once the
Master of the House is risen up, and has shut to the Door, and ye begin to
stand without, and to knock at the Door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and
he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not, whence you are: Then shall ye
begin to say; we have eaten and drunk in thy Presence, and thou have taught in
our Streets. (Which Circumstances did certainly only agree with the Jews of
that Time, and can by no means be applied to all Christians throughout all
Ages.) But he shall say; I tell you, know you not, whence you may depart from
me, all ye Workers of Iniquity. There shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth,
when ye shall see Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob, (the grand Patriarchs of the
Jewish Nation) and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and you yourselves
thrust out. And they shall come from the East, and from the West, and from the
North, and from the South, i. e. The Gentiles shall come from all Parts of the
Earth and be gathered to the Gospel.
and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God. Luke xiii. 23. 29. And now, in this
parallel Passage, the Metaphor in my Text, -- the entering in at the strait
Gate, and that many should seek to enter in and should not be able, -- is so
clearly and so undeniably applied to the Jewish Nation, that I shall not spend
my Breath, or waste your Time and Patience, in proving so clear a Point; -- so
clear indeed, that Theophylact, Grotius, and all the Commentators, that I am
acquainted with, are unanimously agreed in it.

NEITHER is it a sufficient Objection to this Interpretation, that the Words of
my Text are found in our SAVIOR'S Sermon on the Mount, which was designed to
give a general Sketch of Christian Morals, for universal Instruction and
Improvement, and without Respect to the Jews or any other particular Cases. For
although such may be the general Nature and Tendency of that Divine Discourse,
yet are we not wholly to exclude from it all Precepts adapted to particular
Cases. For to instance only in that famous Precept in the foregoing Chapter of
this Gospel: I say unto you; Take no Thought for your Life, what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your Body, what ye shall put on. And so he
goes on, proposing to Imitation the Thoughtlesness and Improvidence of the
Fowls of the Air, which neither sow, nor reap, nor gather into Barns, and yet
are plentifully provided for and fed by our Heavenly Father. Nay, he even draws
an Example from senseless and inanimate Things, -- from the Lilics of the
Field, which neither toil, nor spin, and yet even Solomon in all his Glory was
not arrayed like one of these. -- Even this famous Precept, I say, was
particular, and peculiarly adapted to that Age and Time. For by the Apostles
and first Propagators of the Christian Religion, it was to be taken in it is
strictest and most literal Meaning. They were sent forth to preach the Gospel
to all Nations, and were under a particular Providence of GOD, and the
immediate Direction of his Holy Spirit; -- and therefore ought to be entirely
free from all worldly Care and Solicitude, and wholly intent and taken up with
the grand Business, they went upon. They ought not to have had any manner of
Thought about what they should eat, or what they should drink, or wherewithal
they should be clothed; -- but to leave all such things to the Care of that
Master, whose Errand they were upon; and who well knew, they had need of those
things, and was well able to provide for them.

FOR them therefore, and for them only, -- for the Apostles and first
Propagators of the Christian Doctrine, -- was this Precept immediately designed
in it is strict and literal Meaning. But with Relation to Christians in general,
it must of necessity be taken in a laxer and more extensive Sense; so as not to
exclude a moderate Concern and Endeavor to provide for ourselves and Families,
together with an honest Industry and prudent Management, and all the other
ordinary Means of Living. For these are the Terms, upon which GOD has granted
us the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life; and to comply with them is so far
from being sinful, that it is in truth only to comply with the Dictate and
Disposition of Divine Providence. But to make this Precept equally obligatory,
in it is strict Signification, upon all Christians, and in all Ages, would be of
very bad and ruinous Consequence to Mankind. There were indeed Men enough
intent upon the Affairs of Life, to support the Apostles and first Propagators
of Christianity; and their Labors were not missed in the general Provision of
the World. But if this Precept was to be taken universally in it is literal
Sense; what would become of Mankind? who would sow? who would reap? -- and who
would gather into Barns the Staff of human Life, and make the necessary
Provision for the World's Subsistence?

AS therefore this Precept is by the very Nature of the Thing limited, and
adapted in its strict Meaning to the Apostles and first Preachers of the
Gospel; so likewise have the Words of my Text their particular Sense, and are
immediately designed for that perverse and murderous Race, the Jews of that
Age. Although in a wider Signification, they may be understood excellently to
express the Straitness and Difficulty of entering upon a Christian Course of
Life; that it is very easy and natural for Men to fall into the broad Way of
Vice; and that Multitudes, alas! but too many, travel down it into the very
Gate of Hell and Destruction. -- But I now proceed

II. TO consider some other Texts of Scripture, which are thought to have the
same Meaning, and to include the like dreadful Sentence against the greatest
Part of Mankind.

AND among these, there are none more eminent or more liable to be mistaken,
than those Places, where it is said; That many are called, but few are chosen.
Matt. xx. 16. xxii 14. These Words some fiery Zealots eagerly lay hold of, and
without Mercy, or the least Hesitation, condemn the Bulk of their
Fellow Christians to eternal Perdition. But this is a Point of much easier
Discussion than the Words of my Text. For in expounding them I had no former
human Guide, but was wholly led by the Light of Scripture and my own Reason;
but here we have the plain Tract of the Commentators to follow, who all agree,
that these Words relate to the Jews of that Age. But for the fuller
Understanding of this Matter, it will be necessary to consider and explain the
foregoing Parables to which these Words are a Kind of Inference. I shall
therefore endeavor to give an Exposition of the Parable of the Marriage Feast,
in the xxii. Chapt. of St. Matthew's Gospel; in which I shall chiefly follow
two excellent Interpreters of Scripture, Theophylact among the Greeks, and Dr.
Whitby of our Church. The same Sense of this Parable is likewise gathered from
various Authors, by that diligent and laborious Compiler, Mr. Poole, Synops
Critic. in loc.


2. (...) Vid. Cap. xx. 1-16. Theophyl.
THE Kingdom of Heaven, (i. e. the State and Success of the Gospel) is like
unto a certain King, which made a Marriage for his Son. Where by the King is
meant (...) Id.
Almighty GOD; by the (...) Id.
Son, CHRIST JESUS; and by the Marriage, the Promulgation of the Gospel; or in
Scripture Phrase, CHRIST'S Marriage with his Spouse the Church.

3. AND sent forth his The Ancients, following Origin, interpret this of Moses
and the Prophets. But the Dinner's being prepared, and the Marriage's being now
ready (v. 4. 8.) will not permit us to understand these Servants to be the
ancient Prophets; but the Vehenience and Urgency of the Invitation, as to a
Thing now present, plainly point out and affix the Meaning to the Apostles, and
first Preachers of the Gospel.
Servants (i. e. he sent the Apostles and the Seventy, Chap. x.) to call them
that were bidden, to the Wedding, (i. e. to call the Jews, who were instructed
and invited to the Gospel, by the Prophecies and Scriptures of the Old
Testament. Accordingly we find the Apostles and Seventy commanded by CHRIST,
not to go into the Way of the Gentiles, nor to any City of the Samaritans, but
to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel. Matt. x. 5. 6.) and they would not
come.

4. AGAIN be sent forth other These the Ancients interpret to be the Apostles,
and first Propagators of the Gospel.
Servants (meaning after his Ascension, he sent forth the Apostles and others,
which were fitted by the Descent of the Holy GHOST, Acts ii.) saying tell them,
which are bidden; Behold I have prepared my Dinner: my Oxen and my Fatlings are
killed, come unto the Marriage. For now it was high Time; the Lamb of GOD was
slain, the Dinner was ready, and all things waited for the Jews to come to the
Feast of the Gospel.

5. BUT they made light of it, and went their Ways, one to his (...) Theophyl.
Farm, another to his (...) Theophyl.
Merchandise. (i. e.) Some of the Jews slighted the Gospel, and were drawn away
by worldly Considerations, by the Pursuit of the various Interests and
Pleasures of this Life.

6. And the Remnant took his Servants and entreated them spitefully, and slew
them. But others acted more roundly and maliciously: They not only slighted
GOD'S gracious Invitations to the Gospel, but despitefully used and flew his
Apostles and Teachers.

7. BUT when the King heard thereof, he was wroth; and sent forth his (...) Id.
Armies (the Roman Armies under Vespasian and Titus) and destroyed those
Murderers, and burnt up their City.

8. THEN says he to his Servants: The Wedding is ready (i. e. the Times of the
Gospel are come) but they which were bidden (the Jews) were not worthy.

9. GO ye therefore into the (...) Id.
Highways (i. e. to the Gentiles) and as many as ye shall find, bid to the
Marriage; Call all promiscuously into the Gospel, without Distinction of
Persons or Nations.

10. SO these Servants went out into the Highways, and gathered together all,
as many as they sound, both bad and good: and the Wedding was furnished with
Guests.

11. AND when the King came in to see the Guests (at the last Day, when GOD
shall make Enquiry into our Lives and Conversations) he saw there a Man, which
had not on a (...) Theophyl.
Wedding Garment. (i. e.) whose Faith and Conversation were not such, as suited
the Gospel.

12. AND he says unto him; Friend, how came thou in hither (what Pretensions
have you to a Place in Heaven?) not having on a Wedding Garment? And he was
Speechless.

13. THEN said the King to the Servants; Bind him hand and foot, and take him
away, and cast him into outer Darkness (i. e. into Hell) There shall be Weeping
and (...) Id.
Gnashing of Teeth: There shall they be in exquisite Torment, and in vain
repent, and be vexed, and grieve, for their Folly and Ingratitude, in rejecting
the Feast of the Gospel.

14. FOR (...) Id.
many (Jews) are called (and invited to the Gospel) but few (of them) are
chosen (and will accept GOD'S gracious Offer)

AND now, according to this plain, and in my Opinion, this true and
indisputable Sense of the Parable, it is evident, that these Words do no ways
relate to Christians throughout all Ages, but were immediately aimed at the
Jews, for their Wickedness and Perverseness in rejecting Christ and the Gospel.
And it would be very easy, to expound the other Parable, in the xx Chapt. of
this Gospel. concerning the Householder hiring Laborers into his Vineyard in
the same Sense and Manner; and to show, that these Words, ( many are called,
but few are chosen) which are likewise used as an Inference to that Parable,
are no ways designed against Christians or Mankind in general, but do solely
respect the Jews of that Age. But this would perhaps be more tedious than
necessary; and I hope, that what has been said will be sufficient to vindicate
these Texts from the Perversion of rash and violent Men, who are continually
brandishing the Firebrands of Hell against all, they dislike; and who, if they
have a Zeal of God, yet certainly it is not according to Knowledge.

AND as these Expressions were designed for the Jews, as Threats and Warnings
to them, so we may observe, that they are only to be found in St. Matthew's
Gospel; which was written for the Use of the Jews, and originally in Hebrew,
although no authentic Copy of it is now extant in that Language. But it was
translated very early into Greek (the Language at that Time universally used
and understood through the Roman Empire) by some sure, if not inspired, Hand.
For if we may credit the Tradition in Proem in Evangel
Theophylact, it was done by St. John, the Evangelist. And although there is one
parallel Passage in St. Luke to the Words of my Text; yet there the Occasion
and Application to the Jews is so plain, as not easily to be mistaken.

BUT it will perhaps be said, that this does not yet salve the Matter, or
clearly vindicate GOD'S Justice and Mercy. He has created a Set of poor
Creatures, to crawl upon the Face of this Earth, and continually to conflict
with the Miseries and Troubles of this Life; and after that is ended, -- all of
them, except a very few choice Saints, -- will be consigned to everlasting
Torments in the Life to come. And all this, with GOD'S certain Foreknowledge,
and premeditated Design; -- nay (to put the finishing Hand to the Horror of the
Picture) by his own absolute and irreversible Decrees from all Eternity. Such
is the amiable Light, in which some Men paint to us the Father of Mercies and
God of all Comfort. And this is the more confidently insisted upon, because the
greatest Part and Bulk of Mankind, through all ages, have been Heathens; and
these they conclude to be all to a Man turned into Hell, and damned without
Dispute and without Reversion. -- Wherefore to clear up the Truth in this
Matter, or at least to propose my honest and sincere, though perhaps simple,
Opinion about it; I proceed,

III. AND lastly to show the Universality of CHRIST'S Redemption, that he is
the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for our Sins only, but also for the Sins
of the whole World. 1 John ii. 2. And for the clearer and more distinct
Explication of this Subject, I shall observe

1. That there is no Remission of Sin, or Salvation, but by the merits and
Sufferings of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. He is the Lamb of God, which takes away
the Sin of the World; (John i. 29) who (...) the Blood of Goats and Calves, but
by his own Blood, entered in (...) into the holy Place, having obtained eternal
Redemption for us. Heb. 1. ^. 12. It is by his propitiatory Sacrifice, offered
once for all, and by the Satisfaction thereby made to GOD's Justice (in a
Manner, and upon Reasons, incomprehensible to our weak Sense and Understanding)
that we can have any Access to the Throne of Grace, or Inheritance among the
Saints in Light. He is therefore emphatically styled by the Prophet, The Lord,
our Righteousness. Jer. xxiii. 6. For with his Stripes we are healed, and by
his imputed Righteousness we are justified and accepted in the Sight of GOD.
Neither is there Salvation in any other: For there is none other Name under
Heaven, given among Men, whereby we must be saved. Acts iv. 12.

2. AS we are thus, by CHRIST'S Merits and Satisfaction, put into a Capacity of
Salvation, so is Faith required on our Part, as an indispensable Condition for
entering into the Kingdom of Heaven: An indispensable Condition, I mean, to
those, who have the Christian Faith offered unto them, or who have the
Opportunity to know and embrace the Gospel. For by Grace are we saved, though
Faith. Ephesians. ii. 8. So must the Son of Man be listed up, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but leave eternal Life. John iii. 14. 15.
He that believes on the Son, has everlasting Life: And he, that believes not
the Son, shall not see Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him. Ibid. v 36.

ALL therefore, to whom the Knowledge of the Gospel shall come, are obliged, at
the Hazard of their eternal Salvation, to receive and believe it. -- However,
GOD is not so rigorous, as to expect more from Men, than is given to them; and
therefore,

3. FROM those, who had only a confused Notion of the thing, and no distinct
Perception of the Gospel Truths, and Terms of Salvation in CHRIST JESUS, there
was not required a full and explicit Faith in all the Articles of the
Christian Religion; but in them, a firm Trust in GOD'S Promises, and a general
Belief in a MESSIAH to come, were sufficient to Salvation. And such was the
Case of Abel and Noah, of Abraham and the Patriarchs, of Moses and the
Prophets, and in short of all holy and pious Persons under the Jewish
Dispensation. They were all certainly saved by the Death and Merit of JESUS
CHRIST; and yet it is as certain, that they had very imperfect Ideas of that
Death and Merit, and of the Nature of that Salvation. Their Eye never saw,
neither did it enter into their Hearts to conceive, that the eternal Son of the
Father, who is over all God blessed for ever, Romans ix. 5. should take upon
himself our Nature, and therein die for our Sins, and rise again for our
Justification. Of these, I say, and other, the grand and constituent Truths of
that great Mystery of Salvation, they had a very dark and imperfect Knowledge;
or indeed, of the greatest Part, perhaps no Notion at all. And yet, I believe,
it is universally allowed that these Men were saved; -- and saved by that very
CHRIST, of whose Nature and Office they had so faint and glimmering an Idea.
Many Prophets and Kings (says our SAVIOR) desired to see the things, which ye
see, and did not see them, and to hear the things, which ye bear, and did not
hear them. Luke x. 24. For however diligently the Prophet might enquire and
search into that mighty Salvation, which CHRIST has wrought for us, which
things the very Angels desire to look into (1 Pet. i. 10. 12) yet it is
certain, that they only had a Shadow of good things to come, and not the very
Image of the things (Heb. x. 1) -- only a Glimpse and imperfect Sketch of
CHRIST'S Redemption, and not a full View and complete Knowledge of it. And
accordingly GOD was content with their acting and believing according to that
Proportion of Light, which he had vouchsafed to give them.

BUT as GOD was not severe, to require of the holy Men under the Old Testament
a full and explicit Belief of all the Articles and Mysteries of the Christian
Faith, so

4. NEITHER will he demand from the Poor and Ignorant under the Gospel, a
particular and expiicite Belief of all those Articles of Faith, whose
Signification and Meaning it exceeds their Capacity to understand. As there are
Different Degrees in Men's Opportunities and Understandings, so will there
likewise be different Degrees in the things required of them; and in Acts of
Faith, as well as in Works of Charity, if there be first a willing Mind, it
will be accepted according to that a Man has, and not according to that he
has not. a Cor. viii. 12. -- And as these are the plain Dictates of natural
Justice, so

5. IT seems equally unreasonable to think, that GOD will condemn to eternal
Perdition, for the Want of Faith, those honest and virtuous Heathens, who, as
far as human Frailty would permit, acted sincerely and conscientiously,
according to the best of their Knowledge and Understanding, and whose
Misfortune only it was to be ignorant of both the Mosaical and Christian
Covenants.

IT is shocking to right Reason, and contradictory to the first Principles of
common Sense, that Men should be held to Impossibilities. But as to whomsoever
much is given, of him shall much be required (Luke xii. 48) so is it equally a
Dictate of natural Equity, that to whomsoever little is given, of him can only
little be required. God is not so austere and cruel a Task-master, as to exact
the full Tale of Bricks without the proper Allowance of Straw: He will never
condemn the Heathen for Want of Faith, in those things, which they neither
knew, nor could know, without an express Revelation. On the contrary, he is a
Being of infinite Truth and Justice, and will not damn any Man for what is not
his own Fault. Nay, it is to be presumed, that whosoever has the Unhappiness
to be condemned at the last Day, their Guilt will be so clear and so
undeniable, that they will not be able to open their Mouth against the Justice
of the Sentence; but God will be justified in his Saying; and clear, when he
judges. Ps. li. 4.

AND the Justness of this Reasoning seems plainly allowed by St. Paul, who
says: How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent? Romans x. 14.
15. Which was exactly the Case, I am now mentioning. No Prophet was sent to the
Gentiles, neither had the Heathen Knowledge of God's revealed Laws; and
consequently they could lie under no Obligation, arising solely from them. How
could such a Man as Socrates, or as Confucius, the Chinese (who, by their
Story, may be esteemed among the best mere Men of unassisted Reason, that ever
lived) -- but how could they, I say, know (at least without a Preacher) that
Salvation was to be obtained only among the Jews, an obscure and despised
Nation in their Days, and so remote, especially from Consfucius, that it is not
probable, that he ever so much as heard of them?

AND agreeable to this is the express Doctrine of St. Paul, in the ii. Chapter
of his Epistle to the Romans; where he clearly determines, that the Gentiles
shall not be judged, at the last Day, by any revealed Law, but shall stand or
fall, shall be received to eternal Glory and Peace, or delivered over to
everlasting Tribulation and Anguish, according as they have acted up to the Law
of Nature. But hear the Wisdom, Equity, and good Sense of the Divine Oracles
themselves. God will render to every Man according to his Deeds. V. 6. --
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, upon every Soul of Man, that
does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the (...) Theodor.
Gentile. But Glory, Honor, and Peace to every Man, that works Good, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile. For there is no Respect of Persons with
God. For as many, as have sinned (...) (...).
without Law (i. e. without the Knowledge of any revealed Law) shall also
perish without (Respect to that) Law: and as many as have sinned in the (Light
of

the revealed) Law shall be judged by the (revealed) Law -- In the Day, when
God shall judge the Secrets of Men by JESUS CHRIST, according to my Gospel.
Romans ii. 9. etc. For when the Gentiles, which have not the (revealed) Law, do
by Nature the things contained in the (written) Law, these having not the
(revealed) Law, are (...) Theod.
a Law unto themselves. Which (...) Theod. (...) Theophyl.
show the Work of the Law, written in their Hearts; their Conscience also
bearing Witness, and their Thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing
one another. ver. 15.

AND here the Apostle's Doctrine is so clear and express, that we find the
Generality of Expositors, ancient and modern, are agreed, that according to
this, Melchisedeck, Job, Jethro, the Ninevites, and some other Heathens, were
saved. But they seem very cautious, how they admit through this Gap the Rabble
of Greeks and Romans, and other good and virtuous Heathens: As if they had a
particular Pique and Exception against St. Paul's Word (...), used here ver. 9,
10; and because the Greeks are expressly mentioned for the Gentiles in general,
they are therefore to be particularly excluded from the Terms of Salvation,
here declared upon their acting up sincerely and conscientiously to the Law of
Nature.

But if it be asked, how the Gentiles are saved? the Answer is only in general,
that they are saved by the Death and Mediation of JESUS CHRIST. Neither do I
know a better Account of this Matter, than what is given by a very eminent,
judicious, and learned Protestant Divine, Philippus a Limborch. In a Letter to
Mr. Lock, he says Quid si hic addatnr muner's sacerdotalis fructas; quod
mundus Deo sit reconciliatus; adeo ut nunc per Christum omnibus ^^nnino
hominibna remedium paratum sit e miseria sua sin quam occasion percati Adami
propriisque peccatis inciderunt) emergendi, et salutem aeternum consequendi.
Hoc posito, puto explicari posse, qua ratione ii, qui de Christo ne fando
quidem audiverunt, per Christum salvari possint. Nempe quod Deus illis (qui
instinctu luminis Naturae ad gratiam et misericordiam ejus confugiuut,
delictorumque ^esipiscentiam agunt, eorumque veniam supplices petunt) gratiam
per Christum impetratam applicet, ipfisque propter Christum remissionem
peccatorum et justitiam impu^et. Atqne ita beneficium, quod ubi Christus
praedicatus est, non nifi per directam in Christum fidem obtineri potest, illi
fine directa in Christum, ipsus non praedicatum, side consequnntur per
gratiosam imputationem divinam; qui favores et beneficia sua, latius extendere
potest, quam promissorum verba ferunt. Ut ita omnium salus in sacrificio
Christi propitiatorio sundetur. Limberch apud Lock, Vol. 3d. P. 621. Edit.
(...), 1727.
: That the Fruit of CHRIST'S Sacerdotal Office is, that the World is reconciled
to GOD; so that new, through CHRIST, all Men of all Kinds, Ages, and Nations
(omnibus omnino bominibus) have a Remedy against that Misery into which they
fell, by Occasion of Adam's Sin, and through their own actual Transgressions,
and an Opportunity given them of attaining eternal Salvation. And from hence he
thinks, a rational Account may be given, how those, who have never so much as
heard of CHRIST, may yet be saved through CHRIST. If, by the Light of Nature
they sincerely repent them of their Sins, and humbly ask Pardon for them, and
fly to GOD'S Favor and Mercy, that then GOD will apply to them the Grace
obtained by CHRIST, for his Sake will impute Righteousness to them, and grant
them Remission of Sins. And thus the Gentiles, by GOD'S gracious Imputation,
and without a direct Faith in CHRIST, who was never preached to them, will
obtain that Benefit, which cannot be obtained, where CHRIST has been preached,
otherwise than by a direct Faith in him. So that the Salvation of all Mankind
is founded in CHRIST'S propitiatory Sacrifice. Neither is GOD limited in Points
of Favor, but he may extend his Mercy and Benefits, beyond what the strict
Words of his Promises may import.

AND agreeable to this Opinion of Monsieur Limberch were the Sentiments of his
Friend, that great Master of Reason, and diligent Searcher into Scripture, Mr.
Lock. To this Question: What shall become of all Mankind, who lived before our
SAVIOR'S Time; who never heard of his Name; and consequently could not believe
in him? The Answer (says he) is so obvious and natural, that one would wonder,
how any reasonable Man should think it worth the urging. No Body was, or can be
required to believe, what was never proposed to him to believe. The
Reasonableness of Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures. Locke's Works
folio Vol. ii. P. 527, 529. etc. Edit. 1727.


AND thus have I fairly and heartily delivered to you my Thoughts upon this
Subject, without Disguise or Dissimulation, and I hope, without Offense. For as
I am conscious to myself, that I had no other Motive to treat this nice
Doctrine, but the Love of Truth and of the Gospel; so the same Affection of
Mind, and strict Attachment to the Truth which is in Christ Jesus, will make me
always desirous of Information, and ready to correct any mistaken Notion, I may
have formed. It is true, in explaining the various Scriptures, that have fallen
under my Consideration in treating this Subject, I have often departed from the
beaten Tract of the Commentators. I am sorry for it; and do profess a very high
Regard and Veneration for these excellent Persons, who have spent their Time,
their Parts, and their Labors, in opening and explaining to us those holy
Volumes, which alone have the Words of eternal Life. But however I may have
varied from them, I hope, I have not departed from sacred Scripture and the
Truth. Those are the grand Objects, which I have in View, and to which all
other Regards shall for ever give place, and submit. To vindicate GOD'S Ways to
Man, -- to clear up and explain to human Reason his righteous Methods of Grace
and Salvation, -- and to reconcile the Gospel to the Dictates of natural
Justice and Equity, -- was my sole Aim in undertaking this Subject. If I have
any way succeeded in so noble an Attempt, it will be a sufficient Recompense,
and my Pains are amply rewarded; but if I have not, yet the Consciousness of my
Integrity will afford me abundant Comfort and Satisfaction, against any
Growlings of Malice, or Flouts of Ignorance, that may be occasioned by it.

HOWEVER, I would not be so far misunderstood, as if I meant to say, that
Salvation is a trifling Affair, and easily obtained by any Body. I know, it
requires a steady Course of holy Living, -- Piety and Obedience to GOD, Justice
and Charity to Mankind, and a regular Discharge of of our Duty to ourselves and
Families; -- which, in the present corrupt State of human Nature, cannot be
deemed such a trifling and easy Matter. On the contrary, we are exhorted in
Scripture, to work out our own Salvation, with Fear and Trembling, Phil. ii.
1^. and our State in this Life is expressed, by running the Race, which is set
before us, Heb. xii. 1. by fighting the good Fight of Faith, 1. Tim. vi. 12.
and by many other Contests of Difficulty and Danger. And in particular it is
often compared to a Warfare, which is of all others the most hazardous
Condition of Life.

NEITHER do I pretend to define, what Numbers shall be saved. The holy
Scriptures have no where done it, that I know of; and I shall not interpose my
weak Sense and Judgment in Points, where they have thought proper to be silent.
This perhaps is one of those secret Counsels, which it is not for us to know,
and which the Father has put in his own Power, for very obvious Reasons. For
had the Scriptures said, that many will be saved and few damned, it might have
tended to make us remiss in our Christian Warfare, and negligent in the Way of
GOD'S Commandments: Or had GOD acted by these Men's Advice, and declared with
Vehemence and Passion, that the Kingdom of Heaven should be shut against all
but a few choice Saints, it would have been apt to hurry Men into Despair, and
to have made them give over a Pursuit, of so great Difficulty, and so little
Chance of Success. My Design therefore, in this present Discourse, is only to
explain the Sense of these Scriptures; and to show, that they by no means
contain a Denunciation of eternal Perdition against the most of Mankind; -- but
yet without presuming myself to determine, what Proportion will be saved. There
is indeed great Room to hope well from that Judge, who is in his Nature
infinitely kind and beneficent, whose tender Mercy is over all his Works, and
who in Wrath remembers Mercy, Habbukuk iii. 2. and we may be assured, that
nothing will be determined against us, that is hard or unjust, -- nothing but
what is exceedingly tender, compassionate, and equitable.

Now unto him, that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask
or think, according to the Power, that works in us, -- Unto him be Glory in
the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without End, Amen.
Ephesians. iii. 20, 21.

FINIS.

