SOME ACCOUNT OF THE Pennsylvania Hospital;

From its first RISE, to the Beginning of the Fifth Month, called May, 1754.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL. MDCCLIV.

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE PENNSYLVANIA HOSPITAL.
ABOUT the End of the Year 1750, some Persons, who had frequent Opportunities
of observing the Distress of such distempered Poor as from Time to Time came to
Philadelphia, for the Advice and Assistance of the Physicians and Surgeons of
that City; how difficult it was for them to procure suitable Lodgings, and
other Conveniences proper for their respective Cases, and how expensive the
Providing good and careful Nurses, and other Attendants, for want whereof, many
must suffer greatly, and some probably perish, that might otherwise have been
restored to Health and Comfort, and become useful to themselves, their
Families, and the Public, for many Years after; and considering moreover, that
even the poor Inhabitants of this City, though they had Homes, yet were therein
but badly accommodated in Sickness, and could not be so well and so easily
taken Care of in their separate Habitations, as they might be in one convenient
House, under one Inspection, and in the Hands of skilful Practitioners; and
several of the Inhabitants of the Province, who unhappily became disordered in
their Senses, wandered about, to the Terror of their Neighbors, there being no
Place (except the House of Correction) in which they might be confined, and
subjected to proper Management for their Recovery, and that House was by no
Means fitted for such Purposes; did charitably consult together, and confer
with their Friends and Acquaintances, on the best Means of relieving the
Distressed, under those Circumstances; and an Infirmary, or Hospital, in the
Manner of several lately established in Great Britain, being proposed, was so
generally approved, that there was Reason to expect a considerable Subscription
from the Inhabitants of this City, toward the Support of such an Hospital; but
the Expense of erecting a Building sufficiently large and commodious for the
Purpose, it was thought would be too heavy, unless the Subscription could be
made general through the Province, and some Assistance could be obtained from
the Assembly; the following Petition was therefore drawn, and presented to the
House on the 23d of January, 1750-51.

To the Honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES of the Province of Pennsylvania,
The PETITION of sundry Inhabitants of the said Province.
Humbly shows,
THAT with the Numbers of People the Number of Lunaticks, or Persons
distempered in Mind, and deprived of their rational Faculties, hat greatly
increased in this Province.

THAT some of them going at large, are a Terror to their Neighbors, who are
daily apprehensive of the Violences they may commit; and others are continually
wasting their Substance, to the great Injury of themselves and Families, ill
disposed Persons wickedly taking Advantage of their unhappy Condition, and
drawing them into unreasonable Bargains, etc.

THAT few or none of them are so sensible of their Condition as to submit
voluntarily to the Treatment their respective Cases require, and therefore
continue in the same deplorable State during their Lives; whereas it has been
found, by the Experience of many Years, that above two Thirds of the mad People
received into Bethlehem Hospital, and there treated properly, have been
perfectly cured.

YOUR Petitioners beg Leave farther to represent, that though the good Laws of
this Province have made many compassionate and charitable Provisions for the
Relief of the Poor, yet something farther seems wanting in Favor of such whose
Poverty is made mo^^ miserable by the additional Weight of a grievous Disease,
from which they might easily be relieved, if they were not situated at too
great a Distance from regular Advice and Assistance, whereby many languish out
their Lives, tortured perhaps with the Stone, devoured by the Cancer, deprived
of Sight by Cataracts, or gradually decaying by loathsome Distempers; who, if
the Expense in the present Manner of nursing and attending them separately when
they come to Town, were not so discouraging, might again, by the judicious
Assistance of Physic and Surgery, be enabled to taste the Blessings of Health,
and be made in a few Weeks useful Members of the Community, able to provide for
themselves and Families.

THE kind Care our Assemblies have heretofore taken for the Relief of sick and
distempered Strangers, by providing a Place for their Reception and
Accommodation, leaves us no Room to doubt their showing an equal tender Concern
for the Inhabitants. And we hope they will be of Opinion with us, that a small
Provincial Hospital, erected and put under proper Regulations, in the Care of
Persons to be appointed by this House, or otherwise, as they shall think meet,
with Power to receive and apply the charitable Benefactions of good People
toward enlarging and supporting the same, and some other Provisions in a Law
for the Purposes abovementioned, will be a good Work, acceptable to GOD, and to
all the good People they represent.

WE therefore humbly recommend the Premises to their serious Consideration.

ON the second Reading of the Petition, January 29, the House gave Leave to the
Petitioners to bring in a Bill, which was read the first Time on the first of
February. For some Time it was doubtful whether the Bill would not miscarry,
many of the Members not readily conceiving the Necessity or Usefulness of the
Design; and apprehending moreover, that the Expense of paying Physicians and
Surgeons, would eat up the whole of any Fund that could be reasonably expected
to be raised; but three of the Profession, viz. Doctors Lloyd Zachary, Thomas
Bond, and Phineas Bond, generously offering to attend the Hospital gratis for
three Years, and the other Objections being by Degrees got over, the Bill, on
the seventh of the same Month, passed the House, Nemine Contradicente, and in
May following it received the Governor's Assent, and was enacted into a Law, as
follows.

An ACT to encourage the Establishing of an HOSPITAL for the Relief of the Sick
Poor of this Province, and for the Reception and Cure of Lunaticks.
WHEREAS the saving and restoring useful and laborious Members to a Community,
is a Work of public Service, and the Relief of the Sick Poor is not only an
Act of Humanity, but a religious Duty; and whereas there are frequently, in
many Parts of this Province, poor distempered Persons, who languish long in
Pain and Misery under various Disorders of Body and Mind, and being scattered
abroad in different and very distant Habitations, cannot have the Benefit of
regular Advice, Attendance, Lodging, Diet and Medicines, but at a great
Expense, and therefore often suffer for want thereof; which Inconveniency might
be happily removed, by collecting the Patients into one common Provincial
Hospital, properly disposed and appointed, where they may be comfortably
subsisted, and their Health taken Care of at a small Charge, and by the
Blessing of GOD on the Endeavors of skilful Physicians and Surgeons, their
Diseases may be cured and removed. And whereas it is represented to this
Assembly, that there is a charitable Disposition in diverse Inhabitants of this
Province to contribute largely toward so good a Work, if such Contributors
might be incorporated with proper Powers and Privileges for carrying on and
completing the same, and some Part of the Public Money given and appropriated
to the Providing a suitable Building for the Purposes aforesaid.

THEREFORE, for the Encouragement of so useful, pious and charitable a Design,
we pray that it may be enacted, And be it enacted by the Honorable JAMES
HAMILTON, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor under the Honorable THOMAS PENN, and
RICHARD PENN, Esquires, true and absolute Proprietaries of the Province of
Pennsylvania, and Counties of New Castle, Kent and Sussex, upon Delaware, by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Representatives of the Freemen of the
said Province in General Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That
it shall and may be lawful to and for all Persons, each of whom shall have
contributed or subscribed the Sum of Ten Pounds or more, toward founding an
Hospital, for the Reception and Relief of Lunaticks, and other distempered and
sick Poor within this Province, or as many of them as shall think fit to
assemble and meet on the first Day of the Month called July next; and for all
Persons who shall thereafter contribute the like Sum of Ten Pounds or more
(together with the said first Subscribers) or so many of them as shall think
fit to assemble and meet on the second Day of the first Week, in the Month
called May, yearly for ever, at some convenient Place in the City of
Philadelphia, then and there to elect by Ballot, twelve fit and suitable
Persons of their own Number to be Managers of the said Contribution and
Hospital, and one other Person to be Treasurer of the same, until the next
Election; and farther, to make such Laws, Rules and Orders, as shall appear to
them the said Contributors met, or the major Part of them, to be good, useful
and necessary, for the well governing, ordering and regulating the said
Hospital, and for the Regulation of the future Elections of Managers,
Treasurer, and other necessary Officers and Ministers thereof, and for limiting
and appointing their Number, Trust, and Authority, and generally for the well
ordering all other Things concerning the Government, Estate, Goods, Lands,
Revenues, as also all the Business and Affairs of the said Hospital: All which
Laws, Rules and Orders, so to be made as aforesaid, shall be from Time to Time
inviolably observed by all concerned, according to the Tenor and Effect of
them, provided they be not repugnant to the Laws of England or this Government,
and are approved by the Chief Justice, the Speaker of the Assembly, and the
Attorney General of this Province for the Time being, under their Hands and
Seals. And the said Contributors shall be, and are hereby made a Body Corporate
in Law, to all Intents and Purposes, and shall have perpetual Succession, and
may sue, or be sued, plead, or be impleaded, by the Name of The Contributors to
the Pennsylvania Hospital, in all Courts of Judicature within this Province,
and by that Name, shall and may receive and take any Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, not exceeding the yearly Value of One Thousand Pounds, of the
Gift, Alienation, Bequest, or Devise of any Person or Persons whomsoever; and
of any Goods or Chattels whatsoever; and the said Contributors are hereby
empowered to have and use one common Seal in their Affairs, and the same at
their Pleasure to change and alter.

PROVIDED nevertheless, That no General Meeting of the said Contributors, nor
any Persons acting under them, shall employ any Money or other Estate, expressly
given or added to the Capital Stock of the said Hospital, in any other Way than
by applying its annual Interest or Rent toward the Entertainment and Care of
the sick and distempered Poor, that shall be from Time to Time brought and
placed therein, for the Cure of their Diseases, from any Part of this Province,
without Partiality or Preference.

AND for the further Encouragement of this beneficent Undertaking* Be it
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when the said Contributors shall have
met and chosen their Managers and Treasurer as aforesaid, and shall have raised
by their Contributions, a Capital Stock of Two Thousand Pounds Value (the
yearly Interest or Rent of which is to be applied to the Accommodating of the
Sick Poor in the said Hospital, free of Charge for Diet, Attendance, Advice and
Medicines) and shall make the same appear to the Satisfaction of the Speaker of
the Assembly for the Time being; that then it shall and may be lawful for the
said Speaker of the Assembly, and he is hereby required to sign an Order or
Orders on the Provincial Treasurer, or Trustees of the Loan Office, for the
Payment of Two Thousand Pounds, in two yearly Payments, to the Treasurer of the
said Hospital, to be applied to the Founding, Building, and Furnishing of the
same.

AND be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Accounts of the
Disbursements of the said Two Thousand Pounds, so ordered by the Speaker of the
Assembly aforesaid, or any Part thereof that shall be hereafter expended, as
the Case may be, and of the Rents, Products, and Interests of any real or
personal Estates or Sums of Money charitably given to the Use of the said
Hospital, together with a List of such Donations, shall be fairly drawn out and
published annually in the Gazette, or other Newspapers: And the Managers of
the said Hospital shall at all Times, when required, submit the Books,
Accounts, Affairs, and Economy thereof, to the Inspection and free Examination
of such Visitors as may from Time to Time be appointed by the Assembly of this
Province, to visit and inspect the same.

PROVIDED always, and it is hereby further enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That if at any Time hereafter, there should not be a constant Succession of
Contributors to meet yearly and choose Managers as aforesaid, then the said
Hospital, and the Estate and Affairs thereof, shall be in the Management, and
under the Direction of such Persons as shall be from Time to Time appointed by
Act of General Assembly of this Province for that Purpose.

As soon as the Law was published, the Promoters of the Design set on Foot a
Subscription, which in a short Time amounted to considerable more than the Sum
required by the Act. And on the First of the Month called July, 1751, a
Majority of the Contributors met at the State-House in Philadelphia, and
pursuant to the Act chose by Ballot twelve Managers, and a Treasurer, viz.

MANAGERS,
JOSHUA CROSBY, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, THOMAS BOND, SAMUEL HAZARD, RICHARD PETER'S,
ISRAEL PEMBERTON, junior, SAMUEL RHODES, HUGH ROBERTS, JOSEPH MORRIS, JOHN
SMITH, EVAN MORGAN, CHARLES NORRIS. TREASURER, JOHN REYNELL.
THE Managers met soon after the Choice, and viewed several Spots of Ground in
and near the City, which were thought suitable to erect Buildings on for this
Purpose; and agreeing in Judgment, that one particular Lot, belonging to the
Proprietaries, would suit as well or better than any other, they drew up the
following respectful Address, and sent it (with the following Letter) to Thomas
Hyam, and Sylvanus Bevan, to be presented by them to the Proprietaries. And
that it may be seen at one View, what has been hitherto done in that Affair, it
is thought proper to add the Answers the Managers received from their Agents,
and* other Papers relative thereto.

To the Honorable THOMAS PENN, and RICHARD PENN, Esquires, Proprietaries of
the Province of Pennsylvania, etc.
The ADDRESS of the Managers of the Pennsylvania Hospital.
May it please the Proprietaries,
IT has been long observed, that this your Province, remarkable for the
Goodness of its Constitution, Laws and Government, and many other Advantages,
is yet deficient of a common Hospital or Infirmary, for the Relief of such Poor
as are afflicted with curable Diseases.

YOUR good People here, to supply this Defect, and out of a tender charitable
Regard for their Fellow Creatures, have voluntarily subscribed, and are still
subscribing, large Sums toward a Stock for the Support of such an Hospital:
And the General Assembly being petitioned by a Number of the Inhabitants of all
Ranks and Denominations, have passed an Act to encourage the same, and granted*
Two Thousand Pounds for the Founding, Building, and Furnishing thereof.

IN Pursuance of that Act, we the Subscribers were, on the first of this
Instant, chosen by the Contributors to be Managers of the said Hospital, and
think it our Duty to take this first Opportunity of laying the Affair before
our Proprietaries, in humble Confidence that so good and pious an Undertaking
will not fail of their Approbation; hoping withal, from the accustomed Bounty
of the Proprietary Family, in encouraging former Designs of publi^^ Utility to
the People of their Province, the present will also receive their kind
Assistance; and as private Persons raise a Stock to support the Hospital, and
the Assembly build the House, so (that all concerned in the Province may share
in the Honor, Merit and Pleasure of promoting so good a Work) the
Proprietaries will be pleased ^o favor us with the Grant of a Piece of Ground
for the Buildings, and their necessary Accommodations.

IF any Thing should occur to the Proprietaries, that they may think of Service
with respect to the Management or Rules of the Hospital, we should be obliged
to them for their Sentiments, being desirous that what falls within our Duty,
may be done to the ^reatest Advantage for the Public.

Philadelphia, July 6, 1751. We are, with great Respect, Your very affectionate
Friends, JOSHUA CROSBY, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, THOMAS BOND, SAMUEL HAZARD, ISRAEL
PEMBERTON, junior, HUGH ROBERTS. SAMUEL RHODES, JOSEPH MORRIS, JOHN SMITH, EVAN
MORGAN* CHARLES NORRIS.


Philadelphia, July 6, 1731. Esteemed Friends, Thomas Hyam, and Silvanus Bevan,
THE Opinion we have of your beneficent Principles, induces us to make this
Application to you, and we hope the Opportunity of exerting your Tenderness to
the Afflicted and Distressed, will be so acceptable, as to render any Apology
unnecessary for our Freedom in requesting your Friendship in delivering and
soliciting the Address we herewith send to our Proprietaries, THOMAS and
RICHARD PENN.

THE Circumstances of this Province have, in a few Years past, been much
altered, by the Addition of a great Number of Persons who arrive here from
several Parts of Europe, many of whom are poor, and settle in remote Parts of
the Country, where suitable Provision cannot be made for their Relief from the
various Disorders of Body and Mind some of them labor under; the Consideration
of which has lately raised in many of the Inhabitants of this City a
benevolent Concern, and engaged them to apply for the Assistance of the
Legislature, by whom a Law is passed, and some Provision made out of the
Provincial Treasury for the Erecting a public Hospital or Infirmary, under the
Direction of a Corporation, by whom we have lately been elected the Managers;
but as the public Funds are not sufficient to answer the Expense of endowing
it, a charitable Subscription for that Purpose has been proposed and begun
with good Success. The Necessity and Advantages of this Institution are so
apparent, that Persons of all Ranks unite very heartily in promoting it; and as
several of our most eminent Physicians and Surgeons have freely offered their
Service for some Years, we have good Grounds to expect that this Undertaking
may be of general Service much sooner than was at first expected, and that our
Legislature will soon make a further Provision for the Building, which we
apprehend it will be prudent to contrive and erect in such Manner, as to admit
of such Additions as the future State of the Province may require. The
principal Difficulty we now labor under, is the Want of a commodious Lot of
Ground in a healthy Situation; for (though we have so great Encouragement as we
have mentioned) we cannot flatter ourselves with speedily raising a Sum
sufficient to enable us to provide for all other necessary Charges, and to
purchase a suitable Piece of Ground so near the built Part of the City, as the
constant Attendance of the Physicians, and other Considerations, will
necessarily require: We are therefore under the Necessity of laying the State
of our Case before our Proprietaries, and we hope the same Motives which have
induced others, will have due Weight with them to promote this good Work, and
that they will generously direct a Piece of Ground to be allotted for this
Service.

THERE are several Lots in different Parts of this City very suitable, but from
their Situation, etc. are of great Value for other Purposes; we have therefore
thought of one, which is in a Part of the Town quite unimproved, and where, in
all Probability, there will be the Convenience of an open Air for many Years;
it is the vacant Part of the Square between the Ninth and Tenth-streets from
Delaware, on the South Side of Mulberry-street, and is 396 Feet East and West,
and 360 Feet North and South. The Lots in this Part of the City have not
advanced in Value for several Years past, and are not likely to be soon
settled; so that we are in Hopes, if you will favor us with your Application
for this Piece of Ground, you will meet with no Difficulty in obtaining it.

THE Interest of the Proprietaries and People are so nearly connected, that it
seems to us self-evident that they mutually share in whatever contributes to
the Prosperity and Advantage of the Province; which Consideration, added to the
Satisfaction arising from Acts of Charity and Benevolence, will, we hope, have
so much Weight with them, as to render any other Argument superfluous; but as
your own Prudence will suggest to you the most effectual Method of soliciting
this Address successfully, we rely thereon so much, as to think it unnecessary
to add any Thing more on this Occasion, than that your Friendship therein will
be exceedingly grateful to us, and our Fellow-citizens in general; and next to
obtaining the Lot we ask for, the most agreeable Service you can do us, is to
obtain a speedy Answer; for the Promoting this Undertaking appears to us so
necessary, that all concerned therein are unanimous in determining to prepare
for the Building early in the Spring next Year.

We are, with much Respect, Signed as before. Your obliged and real Friends.


London, 18th 1st Mo. 1752. Esteemed Friends,
WE received yours the Sixth July past, and the Address which it brought was by
us delivered to THOMAS PENN, Esquire, unto which we most readily joined what
Interest we have with him and his Brother, to grant your Request of a Piece of
Ground, whereon to build the proposed Hospital in your City; and we make no
Doubt but Joshua Crosby has informed you of what his Answer was, and also of
what Thomas Hyam and Son wrote him from Time to Time on the Subject; and now we
have the Pleasure to acquaint you, that Yesterday we received a Letter from him
granting your Request, a Copy whereof is here under.

We are your assured Friends, THOMAS HYAM, SYLVANUS BEVAN.
To the Managers of the Pennsylvania Hospital.

London, January 17, 1752. Gentlemen,
YOU may inform the Directors of the Hospital at Philadelphia, that we sent
Orders to the Governor, the Nineteenth of December, by Way of New England, to
grant them a Piece of Ground to build the Hospital upon, though not the Piece
they asked, yet one of the same Size, and when, if it should be necessary, we
can grant them an Addition.

I am, Gentlemen, Your affectionate Friend, THOMAS PENN.
To Messieurs Sylvanus Bevan, and Thomas Hyam,

THE Governor was pleased to favor the Managers with a Copy of the
Instructions he received upon this Occasion, which, after due Consideration,
they made some Observations upon, and sent to their Agents. A Copy of these
several Papers here follow in their Order.

THOMAS PENN, and RICHARD PENN, true and absolute Proprietaries of the Province
of Pennsylvania, and of the Counties of New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, on
Delaware, in America:
To JAMES HAMILTON, Esquire our Lieutenant Governor of our said Province, and
Counties, and to all other Persons whom these Presents may concern, greeting.
WHEREAS it has been represented unto us, that there is a Want in our said
Province of a common Hospital or Infirmary, for the Relief of such Poor as are
afflicted with curable Diseases; and that many of the good Inhabitants thereof,
to supply that Defect, and out of a tender and charitable Regard to their
Fellow Creatures, had voluntarily subscribed, and were still subscribing, large
Sums of Money, toward a Stock for the Support of such an Hospital; and that
the Assembly there, being petitioned by a Number of the Inhabitants of all
Ranks and Denominations, had already granted Two Thousand Pounds, for the
Founding, Building and Furnishing thereof; and that the Persons who had
contributed toward the Stock thereof, or many of them, had, in the Month of
July last past, chosen certain Persons to be Managers of the said intended
Hospital.

AND whereas the said Managers have addressed us, laying the said Affair before
us, in Confidence that so good and pious an Undertaking would not fail of our
Approbation, and hoping, from the accustomed Bounty of our Family in
encouraging former Designs of public Utility to the People of our said
Province, the present would also receive our kind Assistance; and that as
private Persons raised the Stock to support the Hospital, and the Assembly were
to build the House, so that we would be pleased to favor the said Managers
with the Grant of a Piece of Ground for the Buildings and necessary
Accommodations for the said Hospital; and also requesting our Sentiments, if
any Thing should occur to us that we might think of Service with respect to the
Management or Rules of the said Hospital:

KNOW ye therefore, that we, having taken the Premises into our Consideration,
and approving and greatly favoring the said general Scheme and Intention, and
being desirous to aid and assist the same, as conceiving that the due Execution
thereof may tend to the Relief of many poor and necessitous Persons in our said
Province, and to the general Benefit and Advantage of the same, have resolved
to incorporate the present and future Subscribers by our Grant of
Incorporation; and at the same time to grant unto such Corporation so
incorporated, a valuable Tract of Land in a proper Place within our good City
of Philadelphia.

IN order whereto, we do by these Presents give, grant, and commit unto you,
our said Lieutenant Governor, full Power, Commission, and Authority, by one
Instrument or Grant of Incorporation, to be issued in our Names, and to be
sealed with the Great Seal of our said Province, to incorporate and erect into
a Body Politic or Corporate, by such Name or Title as to you shall seem most
apt and convenient, all and every such Persons, who already have subscribed and
paid, or at any Time hereafter shall subscribe and pay the Sum of Ten Pounds or
more, of current Money of our said Province, toward the Founding and
Establishing an Hospital for the Reception and Relief of Lunaticks, and other
distempered and sick Poor within our said Province, such Corporation to have
Continuance to such Contributors and their Successors for ever; and to grant
all usual, common, proper and reasonable Powers of a Corporation unto such
Corporation, and their Successors; and particularly for the Making of such
reasonable and lawful Bylaws, Rules and Orders, as to the said Corporation, or
the major Part of them, when duly assembled in such Manner as shall be therein
appointed, shall seem useful and necessary for the well-ordering, regulating
and governing the said Hospital; for the Regulation of the future Elections of
Managers, Treasurer or Treasurers, and other necessary Officers and Ministers
thereof; for limiting their Numbers, Trusts and Authorities, and the Times and
Durations of their respective Continuance in their Offices, and the Causes and
Manner of removing any of them (if Occasion should require) and generally, for
the well-ordering* all other Matters and Things, any way relating to or
concerning the good Government, Estate, Lands, Rents, Revenues, Interest,
Moneys and Goods, and all other the Business and Affairs of the said Hospital,
and of the Poor therein, and of the Officers and Ministers thereof. And also to
grant, that all such Bylaws, Rules and Orders, so to be made as aforesaid,
shall be from Time to Time inviolably observed by all concerned, according to
the Tenor and Effect of them, provided they be reasonable in themselves, not
repugnant to the Laws of Great Britain, or of our said Province, and be first
approved by us, or such of us, our Heirs or Assigns, Proprietaries of our said
Province, as shall for the Time being be in America, and by the Chief Justice,
and Speaker of the Assembly for the Time being, under our and their Hands and
Seals, in case we, or either of us, or the Heirs or Assigns of us, or of either
of us, or any of them, shall for the Time being happen to be in America; but in
case we, or either of us, nor any of the Heirs or Assigns of either of us,
Proprietaries of our said Province, shall happen from Time to Time to be in
America, then being first approved by and under the Hands and Seals of the
Governor or Lieutenant Governor, the Chief Justice, the Speaker of the
Assembly, and the Attorney General of our said Province for the Time being, or
by any three of them. And also to grant and appoint such Persons to be present
and immediate Officers of such Corporation (until a future Election of new
Ones) as have already been chosen or appointed by the Subscribers thereto; and
to grant Power to the said Corporation, and to their Successors, to take and
receive, and to hold and enjoy, for the Use of the said Corporation, any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments within our said Province, not exceeding in the whole
the yearly Value of One Thousand Pounds at the Time of such taking of the Gift,
Grant, Alienation, Bequest or Devise of any Person or Persons whatsoever; and
also to take, receive, hold and enjoy, any Goods or Chattels, to any Value
whatsoever: And to grant unto the said Corporation Power to use a common Seal
for the Business of the said Corporation, and the same at Pleasure to alter and
change; but you are in such our Grant of Incorporation to insert one or more
express Provisoes and Conditions, that no General Meeting of the Members of
such Corporation, or any Persons acting under them, shall sell or convert into
Money, any real Estate, given or to be given to the said Corporation (unless
directed so to do by the Donor or Donors of the same) nor shall employ or
dispose of any Principal Money or other Effects, which are or shall be given or
added for the Purpose of increasing of the Capital Stock of the said
Corporation, in any other Manner than by applying the annual Rent, Revenue,
Income, or Interest of the same, toward the Entertainment and Cure of the sick
and distempered Poor, that shall from Time to Time be brought and placed in or
under the Care of the said Hospital, and the Officers and Ministers thereof,
for the Cure of their Diseases, from any Part of our said Province, without
Partiality or Preference. And also that fair, full and plain Accounts in
Writing, of all Subscriptions, Benefactions, Donations, and Gifts of every Kind
to the said Corporation, and of the Disposal, Employment and Disbursements of
the same, and of the Rents, Revenues, Incomes, Interest and Produce arising
therefrom, and of the Disposal thereof, and of all Salaries paid to any
Officers or Servants, shall constantly lay open in some public Part of the
Hospital, for the free View and Inspection, at all Times in the Day, of any
Subscriber or Contributor; and that an Account of the same, signed by three or
more of the Managers, be, from Time to Time, once in the Month of October, in
every Year, published in the Gazette, or other News-paper, printed in our said
Province, for the Information of all Persons. And that the Books, Accounts,
Affairs, Economy, Disposition, and Management of the said Hospital, and of all
the Estate, Rents, Revenues, and Interest thereof, and of all the Managers,
Treasurers, Officers, Ministers and Servants thereof, and every Matter and
Thing relating to the same, or to any of them, and all Abuses concerning the
same (if any such should ever happen) shall at all Times be subject to the
Inspection, free Examination and Reformation of such Visitors, not exceeding
four in Number, as we, our Heirs or Assigns, Proprietaries of the said
Province, or the Lieutenant Governor of the said Province for the Time being,
shall from Time to Time appoint, so as the Chief Justice, and the Speaker of
the Assembly of our said Province for the Time being, be always two of such
Visitors.

AND we do hereby give, grant and commit to you, our said Lieutenant Governor,
further Power, Commission and Authority, in and by the same Instrument or Grant
of Incorporation to be so issued as aforesaid, to give and grant unto, and for
the Use of the said Corporation, and their Successors for ever, all that Part
of the Square or Parcel of vacant Land, in our said City of Philadelphia,
herein after described; That is to say, All that Piece or Parcel of Land
situated, lying and being on the North Side of Sassafras-street, between Sixth
and Seventh-streets from Delaware, containing from East to West on
Sassafras-street Three Hundred and Ninety-six Feet, or thereabouts, little more
or less, and from South to North, on Sixth and Seventh-streets, Three Hundred
Feet, and bounding Northwards on other vacant Land, Part of the same Square,
reserved to us, to hold unto, and to the Use of the said Corporation and their
Successors, to and for the Use of the said Hospital for ever, rendering to the
Hands of our Receiver-General, and of the Receiver-General of us, our Heirs, or
Assigns, Proprietaries of the said Province for the Time being, in our said
Province, for our Use, the yearly Rent of Five Shillings of lawful Money of
Great Britain, on the first Day of March in each and every Year henceforth for
ever, under a declared and express Provisoe and Condition to be contained in
such Grant of Incorporation, that if, at any Time hereafter, there shall not be
a constant Succession of Contributors to meet yearly and choose Managers and
Officers, then the said Tract of Land thereby to be granted, shall revert and
return to us, our Heirs and Assigns, Proprietaries of our said Province, as in
our first and former Estate. And you are to insert in such Grant, all such
other proper Clauses and Matters not contrary to, or inconsistent with, the
Directions hereby given, as to you shall seem proper and reasonable; and
particularly for the Enrolment of the said Grant in the Master of the
Rolls-Office in Philadelphia.

FOR all which this shall be to you our sufficient Warrant, Commission and
Authority.

GIVEN under our Hands and Seals this Twenty-eighth Day of October, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty-one. THOMAS PENN, L. S. RICHARD PENN, L. S.

Signed, sealed and delivered by the before named THOMAS PENN, and RICHARD
PENN, Esquires, in the Presence of us, FRANCIS AIR, ROBERT GWYNN,



REMARKS.
T HE Design of the Hospital being (in itself) so beneficent, and our
honorable Proprietaries having fully expressed their Approbation of it in
strong Terms, as well as declared their kind Intentions of aiding and assisting
it, by granting a valuable Tract of Land, in a proper Place, for an Hospital;
all therefore that seems necessary for us to do, is to convince our honorable
Proprietaries, that the Methods by which they have proposed to aid and assist
the Hospital, will by no Means answer these good Intentions, but are really
inconsistent therewith.

WE must then beg Leave to remark in the first Place, with regard to the
Charter, That as the Act of Assembly is undoubtedly the best Grant of
Incorporation that we can possibly have, and as the Representatives of the
Freemen of this Province have generously contributed toward the Design, we
should fail of the Respect that is justly due to them, were we to accept of any
other, without obtaining some very great and manifest Advantage by it; but that
there are no such Advantages in the Charter proposed, is evident at first View:
On the contrary, we should by it be confined to stricter Limits than we now
are, particularly with respect to the Power of making Bylaws, and being
subjected to Visitors of the Proprietaries Appointment. But that Clause which
makes the Lot (and of Consequence the Buildings on it) revert to the
Proprietaries, on Failure of a Succession of Contributors, is so weighty an
Objection, that were there no other, we could not entertain the least Thoughts
of accepting the Charter; for as the Sum allowed for Support of the Hospital is
limited, we may reasonably conclude, that in Time there will cease to be a
Succession of Contributors, and no Person can imagine that when that happens to
be the Case, the Lot and Buildings ought to become the private Property of any
Man: And though the Act of Assembly has made Provision in a Manner which may be
liable to some Inconveniences, yet it can scarce fail of answering the Purposes
first intended. The Proprietaries, to be sure, have not attended to these
Consequences, or they never would have proposed any Thing so inconsistent with
the Design they intended to promote.

AS to the Lot that the Proprietaries designed for the Hospital, it is so
situated, and so circumstanced, that it will by no Means be suitable for the
Purpose; it is a moist Piece of Ground, adjoining to the Brick-yards, where
there are Ponds of standing Water, and therefore must be unhealthy, and more
fit for a Burying-place (to which Use Part of it is already applied) than for
any other Service; besides, as it is Part of a Square allotted by the late
honorable Proprietary for public Uses, as the old Maps of the City will show,
our Fellow-citizens would tax us with Injustice to them, if we should accept of
this Lot by a Grant from our present Proprietaries, in such Terms as would seem
to imply our assenting to their having a Right to the Remainder of the Square.

Philadelphia, 2 d of 7 th Mo. 1752. Esteemed Friends, Thomas Hyam, and
Sylvanus Bevan,
WE now, on Behalf of the Contributors to the Pennsylvania Hospital, with much
Gratitude and Respect, acknowledge the benevolent Disposition you have
manifested by your Industry and Care in soliciting our Address to our
Proprietaries; and as we are fully convinced nothing has been wanting on your
Parts, we should have been much pleased that the Lot which the Proprietaries
proposed for the Hospital, and the Terms of their Grant, were such as we
desired, or could accept.

IMMEDIATELY after the Receipt of your Letter, with the Copy of that you had
from the Proprietaries, our President waited on the Governor, who was pleased
to communicate to us the Instructions he had received; and as the Answer given
by the Proprietaries to you, may have induced you to think they had granted our
Request, we think it necessary to send you a Copy of their Instructions to the
Governor, after Perusal of which, and of the few Remarks we have made thereon,
we have no Doubt you will approve of our Resolutions not to accept of a Lot on
these Terms.

BEFORE we agreed on the Address to the Proprietaries, we surveyed the Square
(of which the Lot proposed by them is a Part) and the Situation appeared to us
in every Respect inconvenient and unsuitable for our Purpose: It is contiguous
to the Brick-makers Grounds, from which the City has been furnished with
Bricks above Forty Years past, so that their large Ponds being continually
filled with standing Water, renders the Neighborhood unhealthy, and of course
absolutely improper for our Purpose, which is to restore the Sick to Health;
and the only proper Use of that Square will be for a Burying-ground, to which
Service some Part of it has been applied by a Grant from the Proprietaries;
and the Dissatisfaction which appeared, and still subsists among our
Fellow-citizens, on the Proprietaries claiming a Right to make that Grant is so
great, that if there were no other Objection, we would not run the Risque of
increasing it.

WE still think that the Lot we first mentioned is more suitable for us than
any other so near the City, and of so small Value, and we are not entirely
without Hopes that the Proprietaries, who have so fully declared their
Approbation of our Design, will still grant the same to us; we are assured, if
they regard their own Interest in the Affections of the People, or even attend
to the Justice of their concurring in the Promoting of every Scheme calculated
for the Public Utility of their Province, they will cheerfully grant it to us:
And if you should entertain the same Sentiments, we request you to renew your
Solicitations to them, and if you find them still unwilling to favor our
Request, we should be pleased to know whether they will sell it to us, or let
it for ever on an annual Rent, and the Price or Rent they propose; for as the
Number of Contributors still continues gradually increasing, we shall rather
endeavor to purchase a Lot in a proper Situation, than to build the House in
an inconvenient Place, or to accept of any Lot on such Terms as we know would
give a general Dissatisfaction.

ONE of the Contributors has offered to give a Lot of Ground much larger than
that we now ask, and in a very good Air, but being about a Mile out of Town, we
are apprehensive it will be inconvenient to the Physicians, who, as they freely
give their Attendance, should be subjected to as little Difficulty as possible.

WE have, for the present, hired a House tolerably convenient, into which we
began to admit Patients about six Months since; the Number since received is
Twenty-three, of which Twelve have been cured and discharged, and Eleven are
remaining; and as the Benefits of this Institution become daily more attended
to, we have not the least Doubt that the Minds of such who are blessed with the
Means, will gradually become the more freely disposed to contribute toward
this good Work, and that it will soon become of general Service to the People
of this Province.

THE kind Manner in which you have cheerfully engaged to serve us, gives us
Reason to think you will approve of our writing to you with so much Freedom, we
shall not therefore offer any Apology for it.

We are your obliged Friends. Signed by Order, and on Behalf of the Managers of
the Pennsylvania Hospital, JOSHUA CROSBY, President.


To the MANAGERS of the Pennsylvania Hospital.
Respected Friends,
-- WE attended your Proprietary, THOMAS PENN, Esquire, and presented to him
your Remarks on the Grant of Land made by him and his Brother RICHARD to your
Society (dated the Eighth of October, 1751) and requested instead thereof that
Spot which your Me^^^ial mentioned, and desired might be granted for the
intended Hospital; he perused the Remarks, and made Objections to them,
alleging that the Ground which you desired was contiguous to that which they
have offered, consequently no Difference in the Healthiness thereof. And as to
the Remark against its reverting to the Proprietaries, be very readily declared
nothing more was intended by the Clause in the Grant, than that provided the
Scheme for the Establishment and Continuance of the Hospital should not
succeed, either for want of the Sum proposed to be raised as a Fund, or through
any other Cause, that then the Ground should revert, etc. but as to the
Erections thereon, they should be at the Managers Disposal. We desired his
Answer in Writing, but he refused the Giving it in that Manner, and added, the
Governor should have the necessary Instructions on the Affair, unto whom you
might apply concerning it. On the whole, he came to this Resolution, not to
make any Alteration in what was before granted, nor to let or sell the Spot of
Ground you pitch upon; and therefore we are of Opinion, you should either
accept the Proprietary's Offer, with the Clause relating to the reverting to
them being explained, or else to fix on some other Piece of Ground. And if
there is no other Objection than the small Distance of a Mile to the Place
which one of the Contributors has offered to give you, may not that be more
fit for an Hospital or Infirmary, than to have it in the City, where infections
Diseases may be much more liable to spread. We observe, with Pleasure, the
Success that has attended the Beginning of the good Work you are engaged in,
and hope it will go forward, and be happily completed, and are, with hearty
Salutes,

Your real Friends, THOMAS HYAM, SYLVANUS BEVAN.



Esteemed Friends, Thomas Hyam, and Sylvanus Bevan, Pennsylvania Hospital, 30th
6th Mo: 1753.
W E have lately received your Favor of Thirty-first First Month last, with
Duplicate of your former Letters to our President, and being sensible that you
have solicited our Address to the Proprietaries with all the Diligence and
Care we could desire or expect, we gratefully acknowledge your Friendship, and
think ourselves under the same Obligations we should have been if your kind
Endeavors had obtained the desired Effect.

THE Accounts of the Affairs of the Hospital, and of its present State, will be
laid before the Assembly at their next Meeting, and soon after published, of
which we shall direct Duplicates to be sent you; and as you have interested
yourselves in the Promotion of it, and we are convinced of your good Wishes for
its Success, when we can give you a pleasing Account of its Advancement, shall
take the Liberty of communicating the same, being, with real Respects,

Your obliged Friends. Signed on Behalf of the Board of Managers, JOSHUA CROSBY.


THE following Papers were published in the Pennsylvania Gazette, of August the
eighth, and fifteenth, 1751, viz.

Post obitum benefacta manent, aeternaque Virtus
Non metuit, Stygiis nec rapiatur Aquis.
I was sick, and ye visited me. MATTHEW. XXV. AMONG all the innumerable Species
of Animals which inhabit the Air, Earth and Water, so exceedingly different in
their Production, their Properties, and the Manner of their Existence, and so
varied in Form, that even of the same Kind, it can scarce be said there are two
Individuals in all Respects alike; it is remarkable there are none within our
Observation distinguished from the rest by this Particular, that they are by
Nature incapable of Diseases. The old Poets, how* extravagant soever in their
Fictions, durst never offend so far against Nature and Probability, as even to
feign such a Thing; and therefore, though they made their Achilles invulnerable
from Head to Foot, and clad him beside in impenetrable Armor, forged by the
Immortals, they were obliged to leave one soft unguarded Place in his Heel, how
small soever, for Destruction to enter at. -- But though every Animal that has
Life is liable to Death, Man, of all other Creatures, has the greatest Number
of Diseases to his Share; whether they are the Effects of our Intemperance and
Vice, or are given us, that we may have a greater Opportunity of exercising
toward each other that Virtue, which most of all recommends us to the Deity, I
mean CHARITY.

THE great Author of our Faith, whose Life should be the constant Object of our
Imitation, as far as it is not inimitable, always showed the greatest
Compassion and Regard for the Sick; he disdained not to visit and administer
Comfort and Health to the meanest of the People; and he frequently inculcated
the same Disposition in his Doctrine and Precepts to his Disciples. For this
one Thing (in that beautiful Parable of the Traveller wounded by Thieves) the
Samaritan (who was esteemed no better than a Heretic or Infidel by the
Orthodox of those Times) is preferred to the Priest and the Levite, because he
did not, like them, pass by regardless of the Distress of his Brother Mortal,
but when he came to the Place where the half-dead Traveller lay, he had
Compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his Wounds, pouring in Oil and
Wine, and set him on his own Beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took Care of
him. -- Dives, also, the rich Man, is represented as being excluded from the
Happiness of Heaven, because he fared sumptuously every Day, and had Plenty of
all Things, and yet neglected to comfort and assist his poor Neighbor, who was
helpless, and full of Sores, and might perhaps have been revived and restored
with small Care, by the Crumbs that fell from his Table, or, as we say, with
his loose Corns. -- I was sick, and ye visited me, is one of the Terms of
Admission into Bliss, and the Contrary, a Cause of Exclusion: That is, as our
Savior himself explains it, Ye have visited, or ye have not visited, assisted
and comforted those who stood in need of it, even though they were the least, or
meanest of Mankind. This Branch of Charity seems essential to the true Spirit
of Christianity, and should be extended to all in General, whether Deserving or
Undeserving, as far as our Power reaches. Of the ten Lepers who were cleansed,
nine seem to have been much more unworthy than the Tenth, yet, in respect to
the Cure of their Disease, they equally shared the Goodness of GOD. And the
great Physician in sending forth his Disciples, always gave them a particular
Charge, that into whatsoever City they entered, they should heal all the Sick,
without Distinction.

WHEN the good Samaritan left his Patient at the Inn, he gave Money to the
Host, and said, take Care of him, and what thou spendest more, I will repay
thee. We are in this World mutual Hosts to each other; the Circumstances and
Fortunes of Men and Families are continually changing; in the Course of a few
Years we have seen the Rich become Poor, and the Poor Rich; the Children of the
Wealthy languishing in Want and Misery, and those of their Servants lifted into
Estates, and abounding in the good Things of this Life. Since then our present
State, how prosperous soever, has no Stability, but what depends on the good
Providence of GOD, how careful should we be not to harden our Hearts against
the Distresses of our Fellow Creatures, left he who owns and governs All,
should punish our Inhumanity, deprive us of a Stewardship in which we have so
unworthily behaved, laugh at our Calamity, and mock when our Fear comes.
Methinks when Objects of Charity, and Opportunities of relieving them, present
themselves, we should hear the Voice of this Samaritan, as if it were the Voice
of GOD sounding in our Ears, Take Care of them, and whatsoever thou spendest, I
will repay thee.

BUT the Good particular Men may do separately in relieving the Sick, is small,
compared with what they may do collectively, or by a joint Endeavor and
Interest. Hence the Erecting of Hospitals or Infirmaries by Subscription, for
the Reception, Entertainment, and Cure of the Sick Poor, has been found by
Experience exceedingly beneficial, as they turn out annually great Numbers of
Patients perfectly cured, who might otherwise have been lost to their Families,
and to Society. Hence Infirmaries spread more and more in Europe, new Ones
being continually erected in large Cities and populous Towns, where generally
the most skilful Physicians and Surgeons inhabit. And the Subscribers have had
the Satisfaction in a few Years of seeing the Good they proposed to do, become
much more extensive than was at first expected; for the Multitude and Variety
of Cases continually treated in those Infirmaries, not only render the
Physicians and Surgeons who attend them, still more expert and skilful, for the
Benefit of others, but afford such speedy and effectual Instruction to the
young Students of both Professions, who come from different and remote Parts of
the Country for Improvement, that they return with a more ample Stock of
Knowledge in their Art, and become Blessings to the Neighbourhoods in which
they fix their Residence.

IT is therefore a great Pleasure to all the Benevolent and Charitable, who
have been acquainted with these Things in other Countries, to observe, that an
Institution of the same Kind has met with such Encouragement in Pennsylvania,
and is in such Forwardness, that there is Reason to expect it may be carried
into Execution the ensuing Year. May the Father of Mercies grant it his
Blessing, and Thousand of our unhappy Fellow Creatures, yet unborn, will have
cause to bless him, for (...) it into the Hearts of the generous Contributors,
and enabling them thus to provide for their Relief.

Homines ad Deos, nulla re propius accedunt, quam Salutem Hominibus dando.
CICER. ORAT. THIS Motto, taken from a Pagan Author, expresses the general Sense
of Mankind, even in the earliest Ages, concerning that great Duty and extensive
Charity, the administering Comfort and Relief to the Sick. If Men, without any
other Assistance than the Dictates of natural Reason, had so high an Opinion of
it, what may be expected from Christians, to whom it has been so warmly
recommended by the best Example of human Conduct. To visit the Sick, to feed
the Hungry, to clothe the Naked, and comfort the Afflicted, are the inseparable
Duties of a Christian Life.

ACCORDINGLY it is observable, that the Christian Doctrine has had a real
Effect on the Conduct of Mankind, which the mere Knowledge of Duty, without the
Sanctions Revelation affords, never produced among the Heathens: For History
shows, that from the earliest Times of Christianity, in all well regulated
States where Christians obtained sufficient Influence, public Funds and
private Charities have been appropriated to the Building of Hospitals, for
receiving, supporting, and curing those unhappy Creatures, whose Poverty is
aggravated by the additional Load of bodily Pain. But of these Kind of
Institutions among the Pagans, there is no Trace in the History of their Times.

THAT good Prince EDWARD VI. was so affected at the Miseries of his poor
diseased Subjects, represented in a Charity Sermon preached to him on the
Occasion, that he soon after laid the Foundation of four of the largest
Hospitals now in London, which the Citizens finished, and have ever since
maintained.

IN Hide-park, at Bath, in Edinburgh, Liverpool, Winchester, and in the County
of Devon, and sundry other Places in Great Britain, large and commodious
Infirmaries have been lately erected, from trifling Beginnings of private
Charities: And so wonderfully does Providence favor these pious Institutions,
that there is not an Instance of any One's failing for want of necessary
charitable Contributions. Extract from the Tour through Great Britain, Vol. 3.
Page 293.

IN the Year 1740, on the Promotion of Dr. Gilbert, Dean of this Church, to the
Bishopric of Land^ff, his Majesty was pleased to confer the Deanery on Dr.
Alured Clarke, who was installed in the Month of January, in that Year; and if
we may be allowed to judge from the pious Acts he began with in (...) Station,
a more worthy Man could not have been preferred thereto.

THE House, an ancient Building, belonging to that Dignity, had, through the
Remissness of its former Possessors, been too long neglected; wherefore his
first Work was to set about altering and repairing that, which he did within
nine Months of his Instalment, at an Expense of about Eight Hundred Pounds.

BEFORE this was perfected, viz. in the Spring 1741, he drew up and published
Proposals for founding an Hospital in this City, for lodging, dieting, and
curing the sick and lame Poor thereof, and of the County of Devon, on the like
Plan of that which he had before founded at Winchester, for the Benefit of that
City, and County of Hants. A De^^gn so good, recommended by the pious Eloquence
of a Divine so learned and judicious, on Views so visibly disinterested, and so
clearly abstracted from all Party Schemes or Intentions, met with the general
Applause and Assistance of the Gentry and Clergy of all Parties, Sects and
Denominations; who, however different in Religion and Politics, unanimously
joined in this pious Undertaking: And a Subscription being opened in March,
has already (November, 1741) brought in about Two Thousand Pounds, of which
near Fifteen Hundred Pounds are annual Engagements, which, it is highly
probable, will be not only continued, but much augmented, so that it is hoped
that Two Hundred Patients at a Time may be provided for. John Tuckfield, of
Radd^n, Esquire was pleased to accommodate the Governors with a Plot of Ground near
Southernbay, without the City Walls, at a very moderate Price, and to give One
Hundred Pounds toward carrying on the Building for the intended Hospital, the
Plan of which was commodiously designed by the Direction of the Dean, and the
first Stone thereof laid by him, assisted by the Bishop of Exon, Sir William
Courtenay, Knight of the Shire, Sir Henry Northcote, and Humphry Sydenham,
Esquires, the Citizens in Parliament, the Honorable Henry Roll, and John
Tuckfield, Esquire attended by a great Number of Clergy and Gentry, that are
Subscribers, and Thousands of joyful Spectators, on the Twenty-seventh of
August, 1741. The Building contains upwards of Three Hundred Feet in Length,
and is already in a good Forwardness.




THE Increase of poor diseased Foreigners and others, settled in the distant
Parts of this Province, where regular Advice and Assistance cannot be procured,
but at an Expense that neither they nor their Townships can afford, has wakened
the Attention of sundry humane and well disposed Minds, to procure some more
certain, effectual and easy Methods for their Relief than have hitherto been
provided; and having represented the Affair to the Assembly, a Law was passed,
without one dissenting Voice, giving Two Thousand Pounds for building and
furnishing a Provincial Hospital, on Condition that Two Thousand Pounds more
should be raised by private Donations, to be put out to Interest as Part of a
perpetual Fund for supporting it; and the Contributors were made a Body
Corporate, with all the Powers necessary on the Occasion. Since which, People
of all Ranks in this City have united zealously and heartily in promoting this
pious and excellent Design, and more than the Sum stipulated was subscribed in
a few Days only, and a much larger Sum will probably be raised here, if the
Country cheerfully contributes to the Capital Stock* which it is not to be
doubted they will do, when they consider how much they are interested in it.

THE Difference between nursing and curing the Sick in an Hospital, and
separately in private Lodgings, with Regard to the Expense, is at least as ten
to one. For Instance, suppose a Person under the Necessity of having a Limb
amputated, he must have the constant Attendance of a Nurse, a Room, Fire, etc.
which cannot for the first three or four Weeks be procured at less Expense than
Fifteen Shillings a Week, and never after at less than Ten: If he continues two
Months, his Nursing will be Five Pounds, his Surgeon's Fee, and other
accidental Charges, commonly amounts to Three Pounds, in the whole near Ten
Pounds; whereas in an Hospital, one Nurse, one Fire, etc. will be sufficient
for ten Patients, the Extra Expenses will be inconsiderable, and the Surgeons
Fees taken off, which will bring the above Calculation within the Limits of
Truth.

BUT the Difference with regard to the unhappy Sufferer is still greater. In an
Hospital his Case will be treated according to the best Rules of Art, by Men of
Experience and known Abilities in their Profession. His Lodgings will be
commodious, clean and neat, in an healthy and open Situation, his Diet will be
well chosen, and properly administered: He will have many other necessary
Conveniences for his Relief, such as hot and cold Baths, Sweating-rooms,
Chirurgic Machines, Bandage, etc. which can rarely be procured in the best
private Lodgings, much less in those miserable loathsome Holes, which are the
common Receptacles of the diseased Poor that are brought to this City. -- In
short, a Beggar, in a well regulated Hospital, stands an equal Chance with a
Prince in his Palace for a comfortable Subsistence, and an expeditious and
effectual Cure of his Diseases.

IT is hoped therefore, that whoever will maturely consider the inestimable
Blessings that are connected to a proper Execution of the present Hospital
Scheme in this City, can never be so void of Humanity, and the essential Duties
of Religion, as to turn a deaf Ear to the numberless Cries of the Poor and
Needy, and refuse, for their Assistance, a little of that Superfluity, which a
bountiful Providence has so liberally bestowed on them.

ON the Sixteenth of August it being made appear, to the Satisfaction of the
Assembly, that the Contributions amounted to upwards of Two Thousand Pounds, an
Order was obtained for the Two Thousand Pounds that had been conditionally
granted by the Act, One Thousand Pounds to be paid immediately, the other in
Twelve Months. The Money, when received, was let out at Interest on good
Security, that it might be improving till it should be wanted for the Building,
which the Managers were obliged to postpone till a Piece of Ground could be
obtained that would afford sufficient Room in an airy, healthy Situation, and
yet so nigh the built Streets of the City, as that the Managers, Physicians and
Surgeons, might readily and conveniently visit the House on every Occasion. But
that some Good might be doing in the mean Time, the Managers concluded to hire
a House, and take in some Patients for a Beginning; but some Doubts arising
concerning the Power and Duty of the Managers, a general Meeting of the
Contributors was called to settle the same, and the following Law was passed
for those and other Purposes, viz.

A LAW for regulating the Elections of the Managers and Treasurer of the
Pennsylvania Hospital, and declaring their Trust, Duty and Authority.
WHEREAS by an Act of the General Assembly of the Province of Pennsylvania,
entitled, An Act to encourage the Establishing of an Hospital for the Relief
of the Sick Poor of this Province, and for the Reception and Cure of Lunaticks*
the Contributors to the said Hospital are made a Body Corporate, and empowered
to meet, and to make such Laws, Rules and Orders, as shall appear to them the
said Contributors met, or the major Part of them, to be good, useful and
necessary, for the well governing and regulating the said Hospital, and for the
Regulation of the Elections of Managers, a Treasurer, and other necessary
Officers and Ministers thereof, and for limiting and appointing their Number,
Trust and Authority.

AND whereas, in Pursuance of the said Law, the Contributors have met, and have
chosen twelve Managers and a Treasurer, which Treasurer has received
considerable Sums of Money for the Use of the said Hospital, and it is now
become necessary, for the more orderly Disposition and Application of the said
Moneys, and of such Sums as may hereafter be received, and for the more sure
Direction of the Managers and Treasurer therein, to declare and appoint their
Trust, Authority and Duty: Therefore it is enacted by the Contributors to the
Pennsylvania Hospital, in general Meeting duly assembled, That the Managers of
the said Hospital for the Time being, shall have the Power of disposing of all
Moneys paid to the Treasurer for the Building, Furnishing, Support, Use and
Service of the Hospital, and for the Hiring and Furnishing a House or Houses
for the Reception of Patients, until the said Hospital shall be built, under
the Limitations and Restrictions of the beforementioned Act of Assembly. And
the said Managers shall likewise have the Power to direct the Manner and Terms
of receiving and discharging of Patients; and all Officers and Servants
belonging to the Hospital, other than the Treasurer, shall be in the Choice,
and under the Direction of the Managers, who shall allow and order their
respective Salaries, and may displace them, and appoint others, as often as
they shall think fit. And the said Managers shall have the Power of calling
general Meetings of the Contributors, as often as they judge it necessary for
the Service and Advantage of the Hospital; and shall cause due and public
Notice to be given of the Time, Place, and Design or Purpose of such occasional
Meeting, at least ten Days before the same is to be held, and shall nominate
some discreet Member to preside therein, and regulate the Debates thereof. And
the said Managers shall have the Keeping, and Power of affixing, the Seal of
the Corporation, which Seal shall be made nearly agreeable to the Form or
Draught hereunto annexed; and they shall settle the Accounts with the Treasurer
from Time to Time, and take Care that all Laws, Rules and Orders made by the
Contributors, and legally approved, be duly and faithfully executed; for all
which, or any other Services relating to the Hospital, they shall not claim,
receive, or retain, any Fee, Gratuity or Reward whatsoever.

AND for the more orderly Execution of their Duty and Trust, the Managers are
hereby required to meet at least once a Month at the Hospital, or some other
fit Place in the City of Philadelphia, to confer and conclude concerning the
Matters hereby committed to them; and shall cause fair Minutes of their
Proceedings to be kept by their Clerk, in a Book to be provided for that
Purpose: In every of which Meetings of the Managers aforesaid, eight of their
Number met shall be a Quorum, capable to consult, confer and conclude of and
upon all Matters appertaining to their Trust, according to the aforesaid Act of
Assembly, and the Laws of this Corporation; and whatsoever seven of the Number
so met shall so conclude, shall be deemed and taken for and as the Resolution
of the Managers for the Time, and accordingly entered in their Minutes. To
which Minutes, and also to the Treasurer's Accounts, all Persons concerned
shall have free Recourse at all seasonable Times.

AND it is further enacted by the Contributors aforesaid, that every Treasurer
hereafter chosen shall, before he take upon himself the Execution of his
Office, enter into an Obligation, with one sufficient Surety, in double the
Value that does, or probably may come into his Hands, during the Continuance of
his Office, as near as can be estimated by the Managers, unto the Contributors
of the Pennsylvania Hospital; conditioned, that he will, once in three Months,
or oftener if required, render his Accounts to the Managers of the said
Hospital, and well and truly account, adjust and settle with them when
required, for and concerning all Moneys that are or shall come into his Hands
belonging to the said Contributors, and pay the Balance that shall appear on
such Settlement to be in his Hands, unto such Person, or for such Service as a
Board of Managers for the Time being shall order and appoint, and not
otherwise; and that he will at the Expiration of his Office, well and truly
deliver up and pay the Balance of the Moneys then remaining in his Hands,
together with the Books of Accounts concerning the same, and other the Papers
and Writings in his Keeping belonging to the Contributors, unto his Successor
in the said Office; and that he will do and execute all other Things as
Treasurer to the Contributors aforesaid, according to the true Sense and
Meaning of this Law. And he is hereby authorized immediately upon entering into
his Office, to demand and receive of the preceding Treasurer, his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, the Cash, Books of Accounts, Writings and other
Effects belonging to the Corporation, giving his Receipt for the same.

AND for the more regular and satisfactory conducting of future Elections, and
the Preventing of Disputes and Misunderstandings among the Contributors,
concerning the same, it is hereby farther enacted, That the Place and Hour of
the Election shall be appointed by the Managers of the current Year, and
notified by their Clerk, at least twenty Days before the Election, by printed
Advertisements: And the said Managers shall and are hereby required and
empowered to nominate three discreet Members of this Corporation to inspect and
judge of the said Election, and declare who are the Persons elected; and the
Managers shall cause their Clerk to enter in their Book of Minutes the Names of
the Persons elected, according to the Tickets.

AND if any Person elected Manager, shall refuse or neglect to act, or shall be
absent from three successive Monthly Meetings of the Managers, in any of the
first ten Months of the Year for which he shall be elected Manager; or if
within the same Year or Term of his Office, he shall be confined by Sickness,
or otherwise rendered incapable of executing the Office of a Manager, according
to the true Meaning of this Law, or shall die, the rest of the Managers, as
often as Occasion shall require, in any of the Cases aforesaid, shall proceed
in their Duty and Office without him; or if they think fit they shall nominate
another of the Contributors to supply his Place of a Manager until the then
next ensuing Election.

AND if any Person so elected Treasurer, shall absent himself from his said
Office for the Space of thirty Days, or shall be otherwise rendered incapable,
or neglect his Office or Duty of Treasurer, it shall and may be lawful for the
Managers for the Time being, to displace him from the said Office; and the
Managers causing their Clerk to make a Minute for the Purpose, containing their
Reasons for displacing him, he shall thereupon, and from thenceforth, cease to
be the Treasurer aforesaid, and shall, upon Notice thereof, adjust and settle
with the Managers, and pay and deliver the Money, Books, Writings, Accounts,
and all other Effects whatsoever in his Hands belonging to this Corporation, to
such Person or Persons as the Managers shall order and appoint; and in that
Case, and so often, and also if the Treasurer shall depart this Life, the
Managers shall nominate another of the Members of this Corporation, but not of
their own Number, to be Treasurer until the next Meeting for the annual
Election, or other general Meeting of the Contributors.

PROVIDED always, any Thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding,
That before the Managers for the Time being proceed to erect any Building for
the said Hospital, a Plan of such proposed Building, with an Estimation of the
Expense, shall be prepared and laid before a general Meeting of the
Contributors for their Consideration; and their Approbation shall be obtained
before the same is carried into Execution.

Signed by Order of a general Meeting of the Contributors, JOSHUA CROSBY,
President.
January 17, 1752, The above Bill was read three Times at a general Meeting of
the Contributors to the Pennsylvania Hospital, and passed by a very great
Majority. B. FRANKLIN, Clerk.
We approve this Law, WILLIAM ALLEN, Chief Justice. ISAAC NORRIS, Speaker of
the Assembly. TENCH FRANCIS, Attorney General.


THE Managers hired the most convenient House that could be procured, with
Gardens, etc. agreed with a Matron to govern the Family, and nurse the Sick,
and provided Beds and other necessary Furniture; and prepared the following
Rules respecting the Admission and Discharge of Patients, a Number of which
were printed and dispersed among the Contributors, viz.

RULES agreed to by the MANAGERS of the Pennsylvania Hospital, for the
Admission and Discharge of Patients.
First, THAT no Patients shall be admitted whose Cases are judged incurable,
Lunaticks excepted; nor any whose Cases do not require the particular
Conveniences of an Hospital.

Secondly, THAT no Person, having the Smallpox, Itch, or other infectious
Distempers, shall be admitted, until there are proper Apartments prepared for
the Reception of such as are afflicted with those Diseases; and if any such
Persons should be inadvertently admitted, they shall forthwith be discharged.

Thirdly, THAT Women having young Children shall not be received, unless their
Children are taken Care of elsewhere, that the Hospital may not be burdened
with the Maintenance of such Children, nor the Patients disturbed with their
Noise.

Fourthly, THAT all Persons desirous of being admitted into the Hospital (not
Inhabitants of Philadelphia) must, before they leave their Abode, have their
Cases drawn up in a plain Manner, and sent to the Managers, together with a
Certificate from a Justice of Peace, and the Overseer or Overseers of the Poor
of the Township in which they reside, that they have gained a Residence in such
Township, and are unable to pay for Medicines and Attendance; to which an
Answer shall speedily be returned, informing them whether and when they may be
admitted. All Persons employed in drawing up their Cases, are desired to be
particular in enumerating the Symptoms, and to mention the Patient's Age, Sex,
and Place of Abode, with the Distance from the City of Philadelphia.

Fifthly, THAT all Persons who have thus obtained a Letter of License to be
received into the Hospital, must be there at the Time mentioned for their
Reception, and bring with them that Letter, and must likewise deposite in the
Hands of the Treasurer so much Money* or give such Security as shall be
mentioned in their respective Letters of License, to indemnify the Hospital
either from the Expense of Burial, in case they die, or to defray the Expense
of carrying them back to their Place of Abode, and that they may not become a
Charge to the City.

Sixthly, IF several Persons, not excluded by the preceding Exceptions, are
applying when they cannot be received, without exceeding the Number allowed by
the Managers to be entertained at one Time in the Hospital, the Preference will
be given, when the Cases are equally urgent, first to such as are recommended
by one or more of the Contributors, Members of this Corporation, residing in
the Township to which the poor Persons belong; secondly, to those who stand
first in the List of Applications; but if some Cases are urgent, and others can
admit of Delay, those with the most urgent Symptoms shall be preferred.

Seventhly, NOTWITHSTANDING such Letters of License, if it shall appear by a
personal Examination of any of the Patients, that their Cases are
misrepresented, and that they are improper Subjects of the Hospital, the
Managers shall have the Power of refusing them Admission.

Eighthly, THAT at least one Bed shall be provided for Accidents that require
immediate Relief.

Ninthly, THAT if there shall be Room in the Hospital to spare, after as many
poor Patients are accommodated as the Interest of the Capital Stock can
support, the Managers shall have the Liberty of taking in other Patients, at
such reasonable Rates as they can agree for; and the Profits arising from
boarding and nursing such Patients, shall be appropriated to the same Uses as
the Interest-money of the public Stock. Provided that no such Persons, under
Pretense of coming to board in the Hospital, shall be admitted, unless, on the
first Application made on his Behalf, a Certificate be produced from the
Overseer or Overseers of the Poor of the Township in which he lives, of his
having gained a Residence in the said Township; and unless sufficient Security
be given to the Managers to indemnify the City and Hospital from all Charges
and Expenses whatsoever, occasioned by his removing hither.

Tenthly, THAT those who are taken into the Hospital at a private Expense, may
employ any Physicians or Surgeons they desire.

Eleventhly, THAT all Persons who have been admitted into the Hospital, shall
be discharged as soon as they are cured, or, after a reasonable Time of Trial,
are judged incurable.

Twelfthly, THAT all Patients when cured, sign Certificates of their particular
Cases, and of the Benefit they have received in this Hospital, to be either
published or otherwise disposed of, as the Managers may think proper.

Thirteenthly, THAT no Patient go out of the Hospital without Leave from one of
the Physicians or Surgeons first signified to the Matron: That they do not
swear, curse, get drunk, behave rudely or indecently, on Pain of Expulsion
after the first Admonition.

Fourteenthly, THAT no Patient presume to play at Cards, Dice, or any other
Game within the Hospital, or to beg any where in the City of Philadelphia, on
Pain of being discharged for Irregularity.

Fifteenthly, THAT such Patients as are able shall assist in nursing others,
washing and ironing the Linen, washing and cleaning the Rooms, and such other
Services as the Matron shall require.

THE foregoing Rules were agreed to by a Board of Managers of the Pennsylvania
Hospital, the Twenty-third Day of the First Month (January) 1752. BENJAMIN
FRANKLIN, Clerk.
We do approve of the foregoing Rules, WILLIAM ALLEN, Chief Justice. ISAAC
NORRIS, Speaker of the Assembly. TENCH FRANCIS, Attorney General.


ABOUT this Time all the Physicians and Surgeons, who were Contributors, were
consulted, in order to form some Rules relating to the Choice, Admission and
Conduct of the Practitioners, and, after sundry Meetings, the following were
prepared and agreed to at a general Meeting of the Contributors, viz.

RULES to be observed in the Choice of the Physicians and Surgeons of the
Pennsylvania Hospital, to limit and appoint their Number, Authority and Duty,
and to raise a Fund for supplying the said Hospital with Medicines.
Imprimis, THE Managers of the said Hospital shall, within ten Days after their
first Meeting in the Month called May, yearly, choose six Practitioners in
Physic and Surgery, to visit and take Care of the Patients in the said
Hospital, and the other Practitioners (who are at this Time Members of this
Corporation) shall have the Privilege of attending and observing the Practice
of those chosen for the Service of the Year.

Secondly, THE Practitioners chosen shall give their Attendance at such Times,
and in such Manner, and be classed with each other, as shall be concluded and
agreed upon by the Managers and Practitioners.

Thirdly, UPON extraordinary Cases, the Practitioners in Attendance shall call
in two or more of the Practitioners chosen for the Service of the Year, to
consult with.

Fourthly, IN all such Cases, which will admit of Time for Deliberation, all
the six Practitioners chosen for the Service of the Year, shall have timely
Notice thereof.

Fifthly, IF any Practitioner be removed by the Managers for Neglect of Duty,
or any other Cause, or shall die, in that Case the Managers shall choose
another Practitioner (who is a Member of this Corporation) to supply his Place.

Sixthly, EACH Apprentice or other Student the Practitioners shall introduce to
see the Practice of the Hospital, shall pay one English Guinea, or Thirty-four
Shillings, current Money, per Year, to be laid out in Medicines, or such other
Manner as the Managers think most proper.

Seventhly, No Practitioner, during the Term for which he is chosen to serve
the Hospital, shall act as a Manager.

Eighthly, THE Practitioners shall keep a fair Account (in a Book provided for
that Purpose) of the several Patients under their Care, of the Disorders they
labor under, and shall enter in the said Book the Recipes or Prescriptions
they make for each of them.

Ninthly, No Person shall be received hereafter as a Candidate to be employed
in the said Hospital, as a Physician or Surgeon, until he be a Member of this
Corporation, and of the Age of Twenty-seven Years, has served a regular
Apprenticeship in this City or Suburbs, has studied Physic or Surgery seven
Years or more, and has undergone an Examination of six of the Practitioners of
the Hospital, in the Presence of the Managers, and is approved of by them: And
with respect to Strangers, they shall have resided three Years or more in this
City, and shall be examined and approved of in the Manner, and under the
Restrictions aforesaid.

Tenthly, THESE Rules shall continue in Force two Years, and from thence to the
Time of the next general Meeting of the Contributors, and no longer.

THE foregoing Rules were agreed to at a general Meeting of the Contributors to
the Pennsylvania Hospital, the sixth Day of April, 1752, and three Times read,
and ordered to be engrossed; and at a Meeting of the Contributors on the
thirteenth Day of April, 1752, were again read, and, by their Order, signed by
JOSHUA CROSBY, President.
We do approve of these Rules, WILLIAM ALLEN, Chief Justice. ISAAC NORRIS,
Speaker of the Assembly: TENCH FRANCIS, Attorney General.


THROUGH the Industry of the Managers, every Thing was ready for the Admission
of Patients by the Tenth of February, 1752, and the first were accordingly
taken in on that Day. From which Time the Physicians and Surgeons, with a
Committee of the Managers, have constantly and cheerfully given Attendance at
the House twice a Week, to visit the Sick, examine Cases, admit and discharge
Patients, etc. besides the daily Attendance of the former.

ON the 7th of May, 1752, there was a new Choice of Directors, and a Treasurer,
viz.

MANAGERS,
JOSHUA CROSBY, HUGH ROBERTS, JOHN SMITH, ISRAEL PEMBERTON, jun. BENJAMIN
FRANKLIN, JOSEPH MORRIS, ISAAC JONES, SAMUEL RHODES, SAMUEL HAZARD, JOHN
REYNELL, WILLIAM GRIFFITTS, THOMAS LAWRENCE, jun. TREASURER, CHARLES NORRIS.
THE Managers met soon after, and chose six Physicians and Surgeons for the
ensuing Year, viz. Doctors Lloyd Zachary, Thomas Bond, Phineas Bond, Thomas
Cadwallader, Samuel Preston Moore, and John Redman; and those agreed to attend
in the following Order.

May Lloyd Zachary T. Cadwallader Thomas Bond June T. Cadwallader Thomas Bond
S. Preston Moore July Thomas Bond S. Preston Moore Phineas Bond August S.
Preston Moore Phineas Bond John Redman September Lloyd Zachary Phineas Bond
John Redman October Lloyd Zachary T. Cadwallader John Redman November Lloyd
Zachary T. Cadwallader Thomas Bond December T. Cadwallader Thomas Bond S.
Preston Moore January Thomas Bond S. Preston Moore Phineas Bond February S.
Preston Moore Phineas Bond John Redman March Lloyd Zachary Phineas Bond John
Redman April Lloyd Zachary T. Cadwallader John Redman

THE Practitioners charitably supplied the Medicines gratis till December,
1752, when the Managers having procured an Assortment of Drugs from London,
opened an Apothecary's Shop in the Hospital, and it being found necessary,
appointed an Apothecary to attend and make up the Medicines daily, according to
the Prescriptions, with an Allowance of Fifteen Pounds per Annum for his Care
and Trouble, he giving Bond, with two sufficient Sureties, for the faithful
Performance of his Trust. -- To pay for these Medicines, which cost One Hundred
Twelve Pounds, Fifteen Shillings, and Twopence Halfpenny, Sterling, a
Subscription was set on Foot among the charitable Widows, and other good Women
of the City, and the following Sums were contributed, viz.

Mary Allen, L 24 6 0 Margaret Clymer, 1 7 0 Deborah Claypoole, 5 8 0 Mary
Calvert, 2 0 0 Susannah Dillwyn, 5 0 0 Sarah Edgell, 3 0 0 Sarah Fishbourne, 2
0 0 Abigail Griffitts, 10 0 0 Frances Griffitts, 2 3 6 Elizabeth Griffitts,
jun. 1 7 0 Elizabeth Holton, 1 0 0 Hannah Kearney, 1 0 0 Miriam Kelly, 1 7 0
Sarah Lloyd, 1 10 0 Sarah Logan, 10 0 0 Hannah Lloyd, L 3 0 0 Sarah Mifflin, 2
0 0 Debby Morris, 2 14 0 Debby Norris, 5 8 0 Content Nicholson, 1 0 0 Hannah
Ogden, 2 0 0 Mary Plumstead, 1 14 6 Mary Powell, 5 8 0 Elizabeth Paschall, 3 0
0 Beulah Paschall, 1 7 0 Martha Roberts, 1 0 0 Mary Standley, 5 8 0 Ann
Strettel, 2 0 0 Rebecca Steel, 3 0 0 Sundry Women, by Isaac Jones, 3 10 0

FROM this Bounty the Managers have since been enabled to furnish Medicines to
many poor Out-patients, who, at their Request, have been kindly visited by the
Physicians gratis, besides the Service of them to those in the Hospital.

ABOUT the Beginning of this Year twelve Tin Boxes were provided, on which were
written these Words in Gold Letters, CHARITY FOR THE HOSPITAL. One Box for each
Manager, to be put up in his House, ready to receive casual Benefactions, in
Imitation of a good Custom practiced in some foreign Countries, where these
Kind of Boxes are frequent in Shops, Stores, and other Places of Business, and
into which the Buyer and Seller (when different Prices are proposed) often
agree to throw the Difference, instead of splitting it: In which the Successful
in Trade sometimes piously deposite a Part of their extraordinary Gains, and
Magistrates throw their petty Fees; a Custom worthy Imitation! But these Boxes
among us have produced but little for the Hospital as yet, not through want of
Charity in our People, but from their being unacquainted with the Nature and
Design of them.

IN March, 1753, Doctor Lloyd Zachary, who had diligently attended the Hospital
from the Beginning, being disabled by a paralytick Disorder, Doctor William
Shippen was about this Time chosen, by the Managers, to supply his Place.

IN May, 1753, the Committee of Managers appointed to settle the Accounts of
the Hospital, made a Report of them, of which the following is an Abstract, viz.

UPON a View of the general Accounts of the Hospital, from the Beginning to
this Day, we find them to stand as follows: The (...) given by Law for
founding, building and furnishing the Provincial Hospital.
Dr. Cr. To real Securies in the Treasurer's Hands for sundry Sums lent out on
Interest, L 1850 0 0 By two Orders drawn by the Speaker of the Assembly upon
the Trustees of the Loan-Office, and paid, L 2000 0 0 To House-rent and
Furniture to this Date, 185 10 5 By sundry Sums received for Interest of Money
lent, 67 0 0 L 2035 10 5 L 2067 0 0 Balance due to the Stock, 31 9 7 L 2067 0
0 The Capital Stock of the Provincial Hospital.
Dr. Cr. To sixty Bonds given by sundry Subscribers, amounting to L 1454 16 8
By One Hundred and Thirty-five Subscriptions, amounting in the Whole to Two
Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty-one Pounds, Sixteen Shillings, and Eight
pence, - - L 2751 16 8 To sundry Subscriptions, for which Bonds are not yet
given, 335 0 0 To real Securities in the Treasurer's Hands, for sundry Sums
lent out on Interest, 800 0 0 To an Annuity of Thirty-five Shillings Sterling,
per Annum, issuing out of a Lot of Land on Cedar-street, given by Joseph
Wharton, in Lieu of his Subscription, 50 0 0 To a Lot of Land in the Northern
Liberties, given by Matthias Koplin, as a Subscription, 24 0 0 L 2663 16 8
Balance due to Capital Stock, 88 0 0 L 2751 16 8 The Maintenance of the
Pennsylvania Hospital.
Dr. Cr. To Expenses of Housekeeping, Firewood and Wages, from the Beginning
to this Date, amounting to, L 300 1 ^/^ 9 ^/4 By Interest-money received to
this Date, L 121 11 6 By sundry Sums received for boarding Patients on Pay 80
11 4 By a Donation From B. Franklin's Charity-Box, 1 10 0 L 203 12 10 Ball.
expended more than received, 97 0 11 L 300 13 9

WE do also herewith lay before the Board, a complete List of Subscribers, and
an Account of the Patients received in the Hospital to this Time, by which it
appears, That from the Eleventh of the Second Month, 1752, to the Fourth of the
Fifth Month, 1753, there have been Sixty-four Patients received.

Of which 32 have been cured and discharged. 4 have been considerably relieved.
5 discharged as Incurables. 1 discharged for irregular Behavior. 1 discharged
because admitted contrary to Rules. 2 left the Hospital without Leave. 6 have
been taken away by their Friends. 5 have died with various Disorders. 8
remains. In all, 64


WE likewise report, that several Out-patients have received the Advice of the
Physicians, and the Use of the Medicines, etc.

All which we submit to the Board, Philadelphia, 5 th Mo. 5, 1753. SAMUEL
HAZARD, JOHN REYNELL, JOHN SMITH.


THE Managers and Treasurer chosen at the Election on the 7th of May, 1753,
were as follow, viz.

MANAGERS,
JOSHUA CROSRBY, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ISRAEL PEMBERTON, jun. JOHN SMITH, SAMUEL
RHODES, JOHN REYNELL, SAMUEL HAZARD, JOSEPH MORRIS, HUGH ROBERTS, WILLIAM
GRIFFITTS, ISAAC JONES, EVAN MORGAN. TREASURER, CHARLES NORRIS.
THE Managers re-chose the following Physicians and Surgeons to attend the
Hospital for the ensuing Year, viz. Doctors Thomas Bond, Phineas Bond, Thomas
Cadwallader, John Redman, Samuel Preston Moore, and William Shippen.

IN the Beginning of 1754, Spinning-wheels were provided by the Managers, for
the Employment of such of the Women Patients as may be able to use them.

IN the Second Month, 1754, a Bill lying before the House of Assembly, for
reemitting and continuing the Currency of the Bills of Credit of this Province,
and for striking a further Sum, the following Proposal was laid before the
House, viz.

To the REPRESENTATIVES of the Freemen of the Province of Pennsylvania, in
General Assembly met.
WE the Subscribers being persuaded, that the same charitable Disposition which
induced the House of Representatives some Time ago to found an Hospital for the
Relief of the Sick Poor, etc. will still incline them to promote all proper
Measures to render so laudable an Institution of the most extensive Service,
with this View we offer to sign the ^aper Bills of Credit proposed to be issued
by the Law now under Consideration, and we will contribute such Sums of Money
as may by Law become due to us for that Service, toward increasing the Capital
Stock of the said Hospital, or to be applied in such other Manner, for the Uses
thereof, as the Managers may think most proper.

Submitted with all due Respect to the Consideration of the House, 2d Mo. 11th,
1754. Hugh Roberts, John Reynell, Joseph Wharton, John Smith, James Pemberton,
Isaac Greenleafe, Isaac Jones, Thomas Crosby, Daniel Williams, Charles Jones,
Samuel Hazard, Samuel Rhodes, Joseph Morris, Samuel Sansom, Edward Pennington,
Thomas Clifford, William Grant, Thomas Say, Joseph Saunders, George Spofford,
John Pole, Joseph King, Owen Jones, Israel Pemberton, Jonathan Evans, William
Logan, Samuel Burge.


AND three of the Members of the House, viz. Edward Warner, Evan Morgan, and
Joseph Fox, offered to sign the said Money upon the same Terms, and their Names
were accordingly inserted in the Bill As the Bill miscarried, nothing was
obtained by this kind Proposal for the Hospital.
.

IN the same Month the Accounts of the Hospital were laid before the House of
Assembly, and a Committee appointed to examine them, and to visit the Hospital,
who having accordingly done so, made their Report in Writing, which (having
recited the foregoing general State of the said Accounts) concludes thus:

WE also report, that by the List of Patients, we find, that from the Eleventh
of Second Month, 1752, to the Fourth of Fifth Month, 1753, there were
Sixty-four Patients received into the Hospital, afflicted with Lunacy, and
various other Disorders, which required the Conveniences of such a Place; of
which Number Thirty-two were cured and discharged, and some others received
considerable Relief. We likewise report, that we have visited the Hospital, and
find a considerable Number of distempered Patients there, who are well taken
Care of, and the Whole appears to us to be under very regular and good
Management, and likely to answer the original Design.

All which we submit to the House, JOSEPH TROTTER, WILLIAM CALLENDER, MAHLON
KIRKBRIDE, GEORGE ASHBRIDGE, JAMES WRIGHT, JOHN ARMSTRONG, MOSES STARR.


ABOUT this Time a Seal was procured by the Managers; it was engraven on
Silver, the Device, the good Samaritan taking the sick Man, and delivering him
to the Innkeeper, with these Words underneath, Take Care of him, and I will
repay thee.

THE Twenty-seventh of Fourth Month, 1754, John Reynell, and John Smith, the
Committee appointed for that Purpose, reported an Account of Patients remaining
on the Twenty-eighth of Fourth Month, 1753, and of such as have been admitted
into the Pennsylvania Hospital from that Time to the Twenty-seventh of Fourth
Month, 1754, from which it appears that there were Sixty-one Patients.

Of which 28 were cured and discharged. 7 received considerable Benefit. 2
discharged at the Request of their Friends. 1 discharged for Disobedience to
Rules. 2 judged incurable. 5 died. 16 remained. In all, 61


AND the Committee appointed to state and settle the Accounts to this Time,
made their Report, of which the following is an Abstract.

On a general State of the Accounts, it appears that The Stock granted by Act
of Assembly for building, founding, and furnishing the Hospital.
Dr. Cr. To Cash lent out on Land Securities in the Treasurer's Hands, L 1850 0
0 By Cash of the Trustees of the Loan Office, at two Payments, L 2000 0 0 To
Expenses of Furniture, House-rent, etc. adjusted 4th of 5 th Mo. 1752, 143 5 7
By Interest received by the Treasurer last Year, L 67 0 0 Ditto, 5th of 5 th
Mo. 1753, 42 4 9 Ditto this Year, 160 0 0 Ditto, 6th of 5 th Mo. 1754, 84 12 7
227 7 0 L 2120 3 0 L 2227 0 0 Balance due to the Stock, 106 17 0 L 2227 0 0
The Capital Stock of the Pennsylvania Hospital.
Dr. Cr. To Fifty-seven Bonds remaining due from sundry Subscribers, amounting
to L 1389 16 8 By One Hundred and Thirty three Subscriptions before the
Settlement of Accounts, on the 4th of 5 th Mo. 1752, L 2721 16 8 To
Twenty-three Subscriptions for which Bonds are not yet given, 198 0 0 By two
additional Subscriptions in 1753, 30 0 0 To Land Securities in the Treasurer's
Hands, for Money lent to Persons on Interest, 1000 0 0 By one Ditto, in 1754,
10 0 0 To Deeds in the Treasurer's Hands for a Lot near Germantown, and an
Annuity of Thirty-five Shillings Sterling per Annum, both which were valued at
74 0 0 L 2761 16 8 L 2661 16 8 Balance in the Treasurer's Hands, 100 0 0 L
2761 16 8 The Household Expenses of the Pennsylvania Hospital.
Dr. Cr. To Balance of last Year's Account, L 97 0 11 By Interest-money
received from the Subscribers, L 140 4 9 To the Amount of Provisions, Firewood
and Wages, from the 4th of 5 th Mo. 1753, to this Day, 326 2 0 Received from
the Borrowers of Money lent, 57 0 0 L 423 3 0 By Donations from several
Charity-Boxes, 1 15 0 By Cash received for the Boarding of Pay Patients, 53 18
6 L 252 18 3 Balance expended more than is yet received, 170 4 9 L 423 3 0

WE likewise find that the Amount of Subscriptions collected from Widows and
other charitable Women, toward paying for the Medicines received from Sylvanus
and Timothy Bevan last Year, and paid into the Hands of William Griffitts, is
One Hundred and Eleven Pounds, Five Shillings and Sixpence, and that the
Balance remaining due on Account of said Medicines, is Seventy-nine Pounds,
Sixteen Shillings and Four-pence Halfpenny, which ought speedily to be
discharged.

Submitted to the Board of Managers, Philadelphia, 6 5 th Mo. 1754. HUGH
ROBERTS, ISRAEL PEMBERTON.


ABSTRACT of Cases admitted into the Pennsylvania Hospital, from the Eleventh
of the Second Month, 1752, to the Twenty-seventh of the Fourth Month, 1754.
Admitted. Cured. Relieved. Irregular Behavior. Incurable. Taken away by their
Friends. Dead. Remaining. AGUES -- -- 3 3 Cancer, -- -- 3 2 -- -- -- -- -- 1
Colliquative Purging, -- 2 -- -- -- -- -- 2 Consumption, -- -- 1 -- -- -- -- 1
Contusion, -- -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- 1 Cough, of long standing, -- 1 1
Dropsies, -- -- 9 4 1 -- -- -- 3 1 Empyema, -- -- 1 1 Eyes disordered, -- -- 2
1 1 Falling Sickness, -- -- 3 1 -- -- 2 Fevers, -- -- -- 2 2 Fistula in An^, --
-- 3 2 1 -- in Perinaeo, -- 2 1 -- -- -- -- -- 1 Flux, -- -- -- 1 -- -- -- --
-- 1 Gutta Serena, -- -- 1 1 Hair Lip, -- -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- 1 Hypocondriac
Melancholy, -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- 1 Hypopyon, -- -- 1 1 Lunacy, -- -- -- 18 2
3 -- 4 6 -- 3 Mortification, -- -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- 1 Prolapsus Any, -- 1 1 --
Uteri, -- -- 1 1 Palsy, -- -- -- 1 1 -- of the Bladder, -- 1 -- -- -- -- -- --
1 Rheumatism and Sciatica, 6 4 -- -- -- -- -- 2 Scorbutic and scrophulous
Diseases, 9 6 1 1 -- -- -- 1 Ulcers, with Caries, etc. -- 37 21 4 2 1 3 3 3
Vertigo, -- -- 1 1 Uterine Disorder, -- 1 1 Wen, -- -- -- 1 1 Wounded, -- -- 1
1 In all, 117 60 11 3 7 10 10 16

N. B. THE Majority of the Lunaticks taken in had been many Years disordered,
and their Diseases become too habitual to admit of Relief; others whose Cases
were recent, and might probably have been cured, being put in at private
Expense, were so hastily taken away by their Friends, that sufficient Time was
not allowed for their Recovery: The Managers have therefore, as well for the
Sake of the Afflicted, as the Reputation of the Hospital, resolved to admit
none hereafter, who are not allowed to remain twelve Months in the House, if
not cured sooner, or judged by the Physicians to be incurable.

THE Choice of the Sick to be supported on the public Stock, was confined to
such only whose Cases could not be healed properly in their respective
Habitations, (...) ^^quired the extraordinary Conveniences and Advantages of an
Hospital; amongst these, several, for want of (...) noble Charity in Time, had
(...) too long to receive any other Advantage from it than the Relief of their
Poverty, and the Sati^faction of being convinced they had every Chance for
Recovery that Care and Tenderness could afford.

FROM the foregoing Accounts it appears, That from the Tenth of February* 1752,
to the Twenty-seventh of April, 1754, which is but about two Years and two
Months, sixty Persons, afflicted with various Distempers, have been cured,
besides many others that have received considerable Relief, both In and
Out-patients; and if so much Good has been done by so small a Number of
Contributors, how much more then may reasonably be expected from the liberal
Aid and Assistance of the Well-disposed who hitherto have not joined in the
Undertaking? Experience has more and more convinced all concerned, of the great
Usefulness of this Charity. -- The careful Attendance afforded to the Sick
Poor; the Neatness, Cleanness, and Regularity of Diet with which they are kept
in the Hospital, are found to contribute to their Recovery much sooner than
their own Manner of Living at Home, and render the Physic they take more
effectual. Here they have the best Advice, and the best Medicines, which are
Helps to Recovery, that many in better Circumstances in different Parts of the
Province do not enjoy. In short, there is scarce any one Kind of doing Good,
which is not hereby in some Manner promoted; for not only the Sick are visited
and relieved, but the Stranger is taken in, the Ignorant instructed, and the
Bad reclaimed The kind Visits and Conversation of some serious Persons, and the
pious Books that have been left in the Hospital, recommended to the Perusal of
the Patients, together with the exact Regularity kept in the House, have been
attended with a Blessing in these Respects.
; present Wants are supplied, and the future prevented, and (by easing poor
Families of the Burden of supporting and curing their Sick) it is also the
Means of feeding the Hungry, and clothing the Naked.

IT is therefore hoped, that by additional Benefactions from pious and
benevolent Persons (an Account of which will be published yearly according to
Law) this Charity may be farther extended, so as to embrace with open Arms all
the Sick Poor that need the Relief it affords, and that the Managers will not,
in Time to come, be under a Necessity, from the Narrowness of the Funds, of
refusing Admittance to any proper Object. It is hoped that a deaf Ear will not
be turned to the Cries of those, in whose Favor both Religion and Humanity
strongly plead; who are recommended by the great Pattern of human Conduct; who
in Sickness are lost to Society; who contribute greatly to the Instruction of
those Youth to whom the Lives of High and Low may hereafter be entrusted, whose
Prayers are to be sent up for their Deliverers; but that all will assist to
render the Funds of this Hospital answerable to the Necessities of the Poor. --
Incapacity of contributing can by none be pleaded; the Rich only indeed can
bestow large Sums, but most can spare something yearly, which collected from
many, might make a handsome Revenue, by which great Numbers of distressed
Objects can be taken Care of, and relieved, many of whom may possibly one Day
make a Part of the blessed Company above, when a Cup of cold Water given to
them will not be unrewarded. Let People but reflect what unnecessary Expenses
they have been at in any Year for vain Superfluities or Entertainments, for
mere Amusements or Diversions, or perhaps in vicious Debauches; and then let
them put the Question to themselves, Whether they do not wish that Money had
been given in the Way now proposed? If this Reflection has Influence on their
future Conduct, the Poor will be provided for. The least Mite may be here given
without a Blush; for what (...) would not choose to give the Treasurer, or any
Manager, the Trouble to rece^^^ may be put into their Charity-boxes, or into
the Box which is fixed in the Entry of the Hospital: Where Money cannot so well
be spared, Provision or Linen, Blankets, and any Kind of Furniture, Herbs and
Roots for the Kitchen, or the Apothecary, or other Necessaries of a Family, may
be delivered to the Matron or Governess; old Linen, and even Rags, for Lint,
Bandages, and other chyrurgical Dressings, are acceptable, being scarce to be
purchased sometimes for Money; and though they are of little or no Value to those
who have them, they are absolutely necessary in such an Hospital, and will be
thankfully received.

IT ought in Justice to be here observed, that the Practitioners have not only
given their Advice and Attendance gratis, but have made their Visits with even
greater Assiduity and Constancy than is sometimes used to their richer
Patients; and that the Managers have attended their Monthly Boards, and the
Committees the Visitations of two Days in every Week, with greater Readiness
and Punctuality than has been usually known in any other public Business,
where Interest was not immediately concerned; owing, no Doubt, to that
Satisfaction which naturally arises in humane Minds from a Consciousness of
doing Good, and from the frequent pleasing Sight of Misery relieved, Distress
removed, grievous Diseases healed, Health restored, and those who were admitted
languishing, groaning, and almost despairing of Recovery, discharged sound and
hearty, with cheerful and thankful Countenances, gratefully acknowledging the
Care that has been taken of them, praising GOD, and blessing their Benefactors,
who by their bountiful Contributions founded so excellent an Institution.

N. B. All Persons who shall be disposed to contribute to the Support of this
Hospital by Will, are advised to do it in the following Manner.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Contributors to the Pennsylvania Hospital,
the Sum of (...) to be paid to their Treasurer for the Time being, and applied
toward carrying on the charitable Design of the said Hospital.

Erratum. In Page 10, the fifth Line from the Bottom, for and when, read and
where.

LIST of the CONTRIBUTORS to the Pennsylvania HOSPITAL.
A WILLIAM ALLEN, Esquire L 150 0 0 Ditto, per Ann. during Life, 12 0 0 Stephen
Anthony, 10 0 0 John Armitt, 20 0 0 William Attwood, 50 0 0 B John and James
Bankson, 10 0 0 Anthony Benezet, 10 0 0 Daniel Benezet, 15 0 0 William Blair,
10 0 0 John Blakey, Hatter, 1 0 0 John Bleakley, 50 0 0 Thomas Bond, 25 0 0
Phineas Bond, 10 0 0 John Bowman, 12 0 0 William Branson, 50 0 0 John Brooks, 5
0 0 C Thomas Cadwallader, 25 0 0 John Campbell, 3 0 0 William Clemm, 3 0 0 John
Coats, 10 0 0 Warwick Coats, 5 0 0 Joseph Cox, 5 0 0 Moses Cox, 3 0 0 Joshua
Crosby, 100 0 0 Thomas Crosby, 25 0 0 D David Deshler, 15 0 0 E George Emlen,
100 0 0 Joshua Emlen, 10 0 0 Samuel Emlen, junior, 13 10 0 F Richard Farmar, 10
0 0 William Fishbourne, 15 0 0 Joshua Fisher, 10 0 0 Enoch Flower, 15 0 0
Joseph Fox, 25 0 0 Benjamin Franklin, 25 0 0 Solomon Fussell, L 10 0 0 G John
Goodwin, junior, 10 0 0 Thomas Graeme, 20 0 0 William Grant, 10 0 0 George
Gray, Brewer, 15 0 0 Isaac Greenleafe, 20 0 0 William Griffitts, 10 0 0 H David
Hall, 10 0 0 Adam Harker, 10 0 0 Arent Hassert, 25 0 0 Samuel Hazard, 10 0 0
Edward Hicks, 10 0 0 Augustine Hicks, 5 0 0 William Hinton, 2 0 0 William
Hodge, 5 0 0 Andrew Hodge, 4 0 0 Joshua Howell, 10 0 0 John Hughes, 10 0 0
Philip Hulbert, 5 0 0 J Abel James, 15 0 0 Robert Janney, 10 0 0 Derrick
Johnson, 25 0 0 Joseph Johnson, 5 0 0 Matthew John's, 10 0 0 Isaac Jones, 10 0 0
Charles Jones, 15 0 0 John Jones, Merchant, 10 0 0 K John Kearsley, 30 0 0 John
Kearsley, junior, 10 0 0 Joseph King, 10 0 0 Matthias Koplin, 24 0 0 L John
Lassell, 5 0 0 Thomas Lawrence, junior, 10 0 0 Joseph Leech, 10 0 0 Jacob
Lewis, 10 0 0 Thomas Lightfoot, 15 0 0 Thomas Livezey, junior, 4 0 0 James
Logan, L 25 0 0 John Lord, 5 0 0 Joseph Lownes, 12 0 0 James Lownes, 10 0 0
Benjamin Loxley, 12 0 0 M Wight Massey, 10 0 0 William Masters, 27 0 0 John
Meas, 10 0 0 Rees Meredith, 40 0 0 Jonathan Mifflin, 33 6 8 George Mifflin, 25
0 0 John Mifflin, 25 0 0 Samuel Mifflin, 25 0 0 William Mood, 10 0 0 Samuel
Preston Moore, 30 0 0 Robert Moore, 25 0 0 Evan Morgan, 10 0 0 Anthony Morris,
75 0 0 Anthony Morris, junior, 50 0 0 Joseph Morris, 15 0 0 Samuel Morris,
Sheriff, 10 0 0 Morris Morris, 10 0 0 N Samuel Neave, 25 0 0 John Nelson, 10 0
0 William Nicholson, 3 0 0 John Nixon, 10 0 0 Samuel Noble, 10 0 0 Isaac
Norris, 100 0 0 Charles Norris, 25 0 0 Peter Nygh, 10 0 0 P John Palmer, 10 0 0
Thomas Paschall, 10 0 0 Oswald Peele, 25 0 0 Israel Pemberton, 100 0 0 Israel
Pemberton, junior, 100 0 0 James Pemberton, 25 0 0 John Pemberton, 25 0 0
Edward Pennington, 20 0 0 Richard Peter's, 50 0 0 William Plumsted, L 25 0 0
John Pole, 15 0 0 Samuel Powell 50 0 0 R Andrew Rambo, 5 0 0 John Redman, 10 0
0 John Reynell, 40 0 0 Samuel Rhodes, 10 0 0 Joseph Richardson, Merchant, 15 0
0 Francis Richardson, 15 0 0 Hugh Roberts, 25 0 0 John Ross, 15 0 0 S Samuel
Sansom, 15 0 0 Thomas Say, 10 0 0 Edward Shippen, 10 0 0 William Shippen, 10 0
0 John Smith, 50 0 0 Peter Sonmans, 12 0 0 Christopher Sour, 25 0 0 Charles and
Alexander Stedman, 40 0 0 Thomas Stretch, 10 0 0 T Adam Thomson, 10 0 0 Joseph
Trotter, 10 0 0 Robert Tuite, 20 0 0 U John Unbekandt, 10 0 0 W William
Wallace, 10 0 0 James West, 3 0 0 Joseph Wharton, 50 0 0 Townsend White, 10 0 0
John Wier, 5 0 0 Robert Willan, 10 0 0 Daniel Williams, 10 0 0 Caspar Wistar,
50 0 0 John Wistar, 20 0 0 Edmund Woolley, 5 0 0 James Wright, 20 0 0 Z Lloyd
Zachary, 30 0 0

The END.

