The MADNESS of Mankind, REPRESENTED IN A SERMON PREACHED IN THE NEW
PRESBYTERIAN CHURH in PHILADELPHIA on the 9th of June 1754

BY SAMUEL FINLEY, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Nottingham.

Published at the DESIRE of many of the AUDIENCE, with a few Enlargements.

PHILADELPHIA, Printed and Sold by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Corner-House of
Front- and Market-Streets.

The MADNESS of Mankind, REPRESENTED IN A SERMON PREACHED In the New
Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia on the 9th of June, 1754.
Eccles. ix. 3. -- And Madness is in their Heart while they live, and after
that they go to the Dead.


WHOEVER seriously views and wisely considers the Manners of Mankind, and
brings them to the Test of right Reason, will be forced to receive the same
melancholy Idea of them, represented in this Text. The Words are Solomon's, who
was not only an indefatigable Student of Nature, but an accurate Observer of
divine Providence, of the Conduct of Men, and the several Consequences of
Actions, divine and human. He here tells us the Result of his Researches
respecting these. As to Providence, that though God has a special Regard to the
Holy and Good; yet in external Things he makes no Difference; but all Things
come alike to all. As to Mankind, that they take Occasion from these
promiscuous Dispensations to commit Wickedness without Reserve: Their Heart is
full of Evil: for they observe, that such as work Wickedness are set up, and
they who tempt God are even delivered. Mal. iii. 15. This has sometimes been
puzzling to the Pious, but has struck the Ungodly with Madness. Hence it comes
that Madness is in their Heart while they live.

Madness is a State of Irregularity and Discomposure. The Person affected with
it, is not fixed in his Purpose; is not influenced in his Conduct by the most
engaging Motives; pays no Regard to the Dictates of right Reason; nor is
careful about what is decorous, profitable, disadvantageous, or dangerous.

Now we are assured, by unerring Truth, that this is the State of the Sons of
Men. It Is true, they make high Pretenses to Wisdom, and have a Show of it; but
the Wisdom of this World is Foolishness with God. 1. Cor. iii. 19. If Madness
were concealed in the Heart we could not discover it: But out of the Abundance
of the Heart the Mouth speaks; Matthew. xii. 34. and so by Men's Words and
Actions we come to know what is in their Hearts. Hence, a Course of Life,
contrary to right Reason, and just Rules of Conduct, will evidence
Heart-Madness.

In treating this Subject, I am naturally led to show wherein the Madness of
human Hearts discovers itself. This cannot be done, but by mentioning
particular Instances of human Conduct.

And as I apprehend, that the Method of such a Narration is in a great Measure
arbitrary, I shall not attempt a nice Arrangement of the general Heads in
natural Order; but propose them as they occur. And,

I. Precipitant Conclusions concerning Persons, Things, or Opinions, formed
without Evidence, and often in Defiance of Demonstration to the contrary,
discover a Degree of Madness. The Crowd of Mankind determine the most important
Points, without weighing the Reasons on both Sides of the Question. In their
own Imagination they quickly penetrate Matters, which to the more Judicious are
abstruse and intricate. If they embrace Truth, it is by Accident. They contend
not for Religion, because they see its proper Evidence; but because they have
been accustomed to it: And thus they may be orthodox and regular Christians,
from no better Principles than those from which the Turks are Mahometans, Nay,
they form their Judgment of Religion, the highest Concern of all, with more
Indifference than of the small Affairs of this Life. From hence arise the many
sottish Opinions, wild Reveries, and destructive Heresies, that pass for pure
Religion with their respective Votaries, divide the christianized World into so
many opposite Parties, are contended for with a Peremptoriness that knows not
to yield to Argument, and promoted frequently with a bitter, sometimes with a
bloody, Zeal. What intelligent Christian is there, who, without a Mixture of
Pity and Contempt, can observe the Professors of Wisdom become Fools? Romans i.
22. Hear the Dictates of eternal Wisdom pronounced Folly, with a supercilious
Air? and fanciful Chimeras substituted in its Room? It would seem as though the
Faculty of Reasoning was, to many, given in vain; while one asserts the
Uselesness of it in Religion, another its Sufficiency, in our lapsed State.
This denies the Necessity of any divine Revelation; that asserts, every
Circumstance must be immediately revealed. One thinks Saving Grace consists in
moral Honesty, another places it in the Observation of invented Forms. One is a
Libertine, who fancies he serves GOD while he gratifies his Lusts; another is
superstitious, and thinks to please him by monkish Austerities. One is content
with a dead Faith, which neither purifies the Heart, nor works by Love; another
is persuaded he shall be saved by his good Works, though imperfect, without
Faith in the Righteousness of Christ. This lays the whole Stress on orthodox
Principles; that thinks it indifferent what we believe. Some doubt not their
Safety, because they are of such a particular religious Denomination; others
are of Opinion, that all Denominations stand alike fair for Salvation. Here is
a Bigot who esteems every Circumstance in Religion to be essential, and
whatever he believes to be right and true must be a Term of Communion; there is
a Latitudinarian whose Religion has little or nothing in it that is important,
or worthy to be earnestly contended for. Here unaffecting Speculation is
triumphant; there Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. Here Religion is dressed
in gaudy Attire, with Jewish worldly Pomp, insomuch that its first Institution
is hardly at all discernable; there the pure external Ordinances of God himself
are rejected with Scorn, from a swollen Conceit of Spirituality. Now all these
contradictory Parties will be equally stiff and positive in their Notions; yet
are all equally extravagant and monstrous: all opposite to divine Revelation,
and the Reason of Things. And are all these, O my Soul! are all these the
rational Sons of Men! Are all these sure they are wise! Can Truth, divine
Truth, be a System -- a System did I say? a Heap of Dotages! Can Reason, strict
Reason, approve Contradictions! or rather, must we not assuredly conclude, that
Madness is in their Heart while they live?

Nor shall we find more Wisdom in their Judgment of Men than of Things. They
conclude of Characters in the Lump: can hardly see any thing amiable and good
where some Things displease; nor are Blemishes apt to be disgustful where some
good Qualities shine. Superficial Defects hide substantial Excellencies from
the vulgar Eye; whilst the Absence of all valuable Accomplishments is easily
supposed by mere Sound, and empty Show. Wisdom and Virtue, meanly clothed, are
despised; whilst Ignorance and Vice, dressed in Purple, are honored. An easy
Air and genteel Address, often recommend Nonsense, and make Flattery appear
sincere; but an uncouth Mode will cause the same Persons, to disielish
undissembled Regard, and solid Discretion. Even learned Critics do sometimes
defend the very Absurdities of a favorite Author; and censure what is truly
sublime in another. Whole Communities, nay, whole Nations, like under the
Censure which belongs only to a Part, and, perhaps, a small Part of them. Thus
Mankind judge as though Reason taught them to make the Conclusion universal,
when the Premises are only particular.

II. Men judge not more precipit^^tly than speak and act inconsiderately. How
^^^^^quently may we see proper and impr^^^^ confu^ed No Respect had to Time, or
Place, or (...); nor a Thought of the obvious and ^^^^oidable Consequences? How
many live as if there was no need of Caution, no possible Danger of missing the
Right, nor any Extreme to be feared? -- As if nothing could follow from any
Course of Conduct, and a necessary Cause would not produce its genuine Effect?
-- As if Prudence and Circumspection were mere Names, and no Power of
Deliberation had ever been given? They live at random, and seem to consider
Right and Wrong with absolute Indifference. In the religious Life, some are
offensive, others stumble and fall, and some take Offense when none is given.
In the civil Life, many ruin themselves in their worldly Affairs, and others
too, by Indiscretion. Some live above their Ability, engage in Matters too high
for them, and fall by those Means by which they thought to rise. The imprudent
Pursuit of Grandeur brings others into Contempt, whilst they industrious seek
to obtain a Character which they cannot support; and climb to a Pinnacle where
their Brains are turned, and they cannot stand.

Many, in a devout Qualm, engage in a Course of strict Religion, without a
rational Sense of its Importance, or counting the Cost. Luke xiv. 28. They
think not what Offenses and stumbling Blocks are in the (...) -- What Artifices
of Satan, what A^^^^^^ents of the Flesh, and what Terrors of the World, are
combined to turn them aside. -- How strait the Gate, how narrow the Path,
Matthew. vii. 14. how arduous the Ascent, and how deceitful and impotent their
Souls. -- What Self-denial, what Humbleness of Mind, what Watchfulness and
Care, and what Courage and determinate Resolution, are requisite for the
Purpose. They assure themselves that they will stand firm against all Assaults,
though they were at no Pains to dig deep, and found themselves on a Rock:
Hence, when the Rain descends, when the Floods come, and the Winds blow, and
beat upon them, they fall, Matthew. vii. 26, 27. and are carried headlong down
the Stream. Hence their Goodness is as a Morning-Cloud, and vanishes like the
early Dew. Hos. vi. 4. They either become profane, or are taken in the Snare of
some delusive Opinion, or Heresy: They turn away their Ears from the Truth, and
are turned into Fables: 2 Timothy iv. 4. And thus ends their Religion.

III. Many appear to have false Views of what is advantageous, or hurtful; and
draw false Inferences from Actions and Event. In how strange a Light do they
look on strict Piety, who disdain it as mean, or avoid it as unpleasant; and
how come the Paths of Sin to appear honorable and blissful? Religious Persons,
and spiritual Conversation, are by many shunned as though they were dangerous,
while the Loose and Profane are chosen for Companions, as though they were most
safe. They are not afraid to violate the Laws of God; yet they dread his
threatened Vengeance. Hell is their Terror, Sin their Sport and Entertainment.
They tremble at the Effect, yet delight in its proper Cause. But how absurd is
it, mentally to separate Misery from Sin, when they can never be separated in
Fact? The eternal Reason of Things has made their Connection inviolable.

What false Apprehensions have many of their own Cases? The Aged and Infirm
think of Years to come, and hence defer their intended Preparation for Death.
The Drunkard never knows his Capacity, but thinks he may safely venture to take
the other Glass: nor does the covetous Miser ever judge truly of his Necessity;
and therefore lives poor in the Midst of Plenty.

Every Occurrence is perverted. The Goodness of GOD, which would seem
sufficient to me^^ hard Hearts, and form them according to his Will, becomes a
Mean of hardening them against him. If he gives to some Abundance of worldly
Wealth, they use it as though it were a License given them to indulge
Wantonness, Excess of Riot, Luxury, and all those sensual Pleasures, which to
others are forbidden. If Honor and Power are conferred on them, they act as
though they were advanced above a scrupulous Regard to the divine Commands.
They seem to say, Who is the Lord, that we should obey him? Exodus v. 2. Because
the Wicked prosper, they conclude it is quite safe to follow their Ways: And
because Sentence against an evil Work is not speedily executed, Eccles. viii.
11. they are bold in Impiety, presuming on perpetual Impunity. They see Men
despise Piety, and even sit in the Scorner's Chair, yet no visible Evil befalls
them; hence some are tempted to think divine Threats are but Bug-bears, and
Religion but a Fancy. On the contrary, pious People are distressed, often
severely reproached and run down, and no visible Regard manifested for all
their Care to please God: Upon this others readily determine, that it is vain
to serve him. Mal. iii. 14. Some, who made a plausible Profession of strict
Religion, fall away, and prove themselves, by their After-conduct, to have been
but Hypocrites: Therefore, others carefully avoid every Appearance of Piety,
that they may avoid Hypocrisy: They expect to be counted honest and upright,
when they are openly wicked, and glory in their Shame.

IV. There are Numbers who do not so much as attempt to form their Judgment, or
regulate their Practice, by Reason. They follow the Vogue without Scruple. They
seek no other Test of Truth, than that at is said by the Great or the Many; nor
any other Proof of the Propriety and Goodness (...) Behavior, but that it is
modish. (...) is to them instead of Reason, and (...)ences them much more
powerfully than the Authority of GOD himself. Let their Conduct be irrational,
let it be wicked too, provided only it be fashionable. Has it a Multitude to
patronize it? then it is no Matter though it cannot stand the Test of Scripture;
no, nor of common Sense. The Crowd, like a Torrent, carries these along, and
they lose themselves in it. Their weak Minds are confused with the Tumult, and
made giddy with the Glare of worldly Pomp. Sedate Thought and calm Reason, by
Means of numberless airy Vanities, lose their Weight, and are resolved into
Fume and Vapor. In this Plight, it is no Wonder that they esteem those
contemptibly weak who choose rather to expose themselves to the Censure of the
World, than to offend God. They judge Religion itself by the Fashion. By that
they determine which of the divine Commands it is proper to obey; and which of
them, for the sake of Decency, is to be laid aside. If religious Discourse is
reckoned unpolite, a serious Expression will shock a gay Company, and a few
would go near to disperse them. Though it is the Will of God, that Sin should
be reproved, and the Sinner made ashamed; yet we would offend against modern
Politeness, should we discover even a calm Disapprobation of what is wickedly
spoken or acted in Company. They who would be quite acceptable to this World,
must, at least seem, to approve what GOD condemns, that so none may ever be
made uneasy by their Presence. They must say to every one that despises the
LORD, and that walks after the Imagination of his Heart, ye shall have Peace,
and no Evil shall come upon you. Jer. xxiii. 17. But surely, the Friendship of
the World is Enmity with God. Jam. iv. 4.

But let us proceed further, and take a View of Men who mistake not their Duty;
who acknowledge the Things that are excellent, being instructed out of the Law;
and we cannot but conclude that they exceed in Madness. For,

V. Multitudes continually counteract their Judgment and Conscience, when
rightly informed. They own the Soul to be more excellent than the Body, yet are
most anxious to provide for the latter. They spare not Cost and Pains to cure a
bodily Distemper, while the immortal Spirit, all disordered, is quite
neglected. Remedies are carefully sought for an Headache; but none for an hard
Heart. A Fever is deplored; irregular and distorted Passions are indulged. The
Body is gorgeously clothed, and delicately fed, while the Soul is naked,
without Righteousness, and no Bread of Life sought after for its Nourishment.
It is of more Value than the the whole World, yet is bartered away for a very
small Part of it; for Vanity, for Songs, for Triffles. That Heaven is
infinitely preferable to this Earth, eternal Glory to temporal Felicity, is not
disputed; yet Sinners choose to live here always. They are conscious to
themselves, that they would desire no other Kind of Blessedness that this World
affords, could they but still enjoy it, and enjoy it fully; and hence grasp the
Present, regardless of the Future. They acknowledge, that they should make it
the very Business of their Life to please God, and that his Favor is more
valuable than the Favor of all Mankind; yet they gratify their Appetites and
Humors, when they know they displease him in so doing: and if they stand fair
in the Opinion of Men, are quite careless about his Approbation. They commend
Virtue, but practice Vice; and while they own, that Wickedness is the Way to
Hell, walk boldly on in that Way at all Adventures.

They confess, that Reason should guide, and the Passions should be governed by
its Dictates; yet when their Passions become clamorous, the Voice of Reason is
drowned, and its loudest Remonstrations no more heard. The covetous Man is
drawn into Absurdities by the Love of Money, the Voluptious harries on in
Pursuit of ruining Pleasures, and Thirst of Praise carries the Ambitious
headlong.

They make no suitable Improvement of their own Experiences, nor correct past
Follies by After-observation. The World and its evil Customs are infectious;
they have been often caught in the same Snare, yet never learn to be guarded
and circumspect. The Review of past Scenes of guilty Pleasures gives griping
Remorse; the present do not satisfy, yet many Trials convince them not that the
future will surely disappoint them. After drinking to Excess, the Heart is
thirsty; and Hunger succeeds the most plenteous Repast. In the midst of
Laughter the Heart is sorrowful, and the End of that Mirth is Heaviness. Prove.
xiv. 13. For oftentimes Reason is debauched, the Conscience feared, the
Passions inflamed, the Constitution broken, Estate ruined, and the Person
despised. Guilt is contracted, Time wasted, and the Spirits flag by means of an
immoderate Elevation. Sensual Joys cloy and surfeit, but do not content: they
gratify the Brute, but starve the Man, and frequently ruin the Christian. Yet,
see Multitudes of Mortals eagerly fluttering to grasp Joys, which, like airy
Phantoms, still elude their Embraces; and are hardly the Shadows of Realities!
-- disappointed, they nevertheless still pursue, still go the tiresome Round,
and tread the same beaten Path, in vain! In fine, after numberless Experiments,
they neither learn the Emptiness of earthly Things, nor the Deceitfulness of
their own Hearts.

VI. It is well known, that Madness hurries Persons, who are affected with it,
into most desperate Courses: And this is the Case of Mankind. They know the
Judgment of God, that they who commit such Things are worthy of Death; Romans i.
32. yet they do them, and delight in them. They sin against plainest Precepts,
guarded with most awful Threatenings. In the very Sight of Sinai's burning
Mount, amidst the Thunders of offended Jehovah, hardy Rebels durst form a God
of Gold. Sinners are still the same. They sin against shocking Terrors, felt by
themselves; and disregard alluring Offers of Pardon, and charming Promises of
eternal Salvation. They sin, while they are receiving tender Mercies, never
considering, that the Goodness of God should lead them to Repentance; Romans ii.
4. and while they suffer the Inflictions of severe Judgments. Examples of
Despair, the fearful Ends of wretched Offenders, deter them not; nor are they
persuaded to be religious by the Deathbed Joys of pure and living Piety. Let
their dearest Friends, and the most learned and godly Ministers, convince and
beseech them, yet will they not yield themselves to God. SOLOMON with all his
Wisdom, the royal Authority, joined with the sublimest Strains, of the sweet
Singer of ISRAEL, the persuasive Oratory of APOLLOS, with Peter's burning Zeal,
could not turn Sinners from their Course. Let Miracles be wrought, the
Mountains removed, the Dead raised, the Deaf made to hear, and the Blind to
see; even these Things will not have the Force of Argument with them. Uncover
Destruction, and make Hell naked before them, with open Eyes they rush into
those Flames. Let Angels come from Heaven, and Fiends from the Infernals; let
eternal Raptures, and endless Horrors, be presented lively to their View, they
will hardly so much as make a Pause. Tell them, nay show them, how sottish and
foolish their Way is, yet they will not be ashamed. Conscience speaks, but is
not heard; commands, but is not obeyed. What shall I say more? -- They rush on
God himself, on the thick Bosses of his Buckler, Job xv. 26. -- They provoke
incensed Omnipotence to unequal Engagement; defy his Power, despise his Wrath,
and, like LEVIATMAN, laugh at the Shaking of his Spear. Job xli. 29. They
cannot successfully contend, nor is it possible to esape, yet they will not
submit; -- will be broken rather than bow, and dashed in Pieces like a Potter's
Vessel, Psalm ii. 9. rather than comply with the confessedly righteous Will of
God. They are told, that eternal Damnation cannot be avoided, nor eternal Glory
obtained, but only by the Merits of JESUS CHRIST; yet many, (could it have been
thought!) many make light even of a Savior! despise the Redeemer! most horrid,
most desperate Thought! His exquisite Agonies, his exceedingly sorrowful Soul,
his bloody Sweat, the Soldiers Scourges, the Crown of Thorns, the cruel
Mockings, the painful and accursed Death he endured for Sin, instead of
affecting them with Reverence and Love to his Person, are the Matter of their
Scorn; or, at best, received with the coldest Indifference. O my Soul! come not
thou into their Secret; unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou united!
Genesis xlix. 6. -- Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at the Madness, the daring
Impiety, of guilty Mortals! be horribly afraid! be ye very desolate! Jer. ii.
12.

VII. Madness discovers itself in absurd and unreasonable Hopes. Earthly-minded
and sensual Persons hope to content their lustful Appetites, by gratifying them
to the full; whereas it is plain, that all vicious Passions, like the Dropsy,
increase by Indulgence: Endeavors to satisfy them, and by that Means to get
rid of their importunate Cravings, is the same as heaping Fuel on Fire, in
order to extinguish it, which yet only serves to heighten and perpetuate the
Flame. There is no Mean that has a proper Tendency to quell irregular Desires,
but only Self-denial.

Some hope to obtain Heaven without Holiness; to he glorious in the Eyes of the
Lord, Isai. xlix. 5. though quite unlike Him; to dwell with Pleasure for ever
in his Presence, though Enemies in their Minds by wicked Works; Col. i. 21. and
to enjoy spiritual Blessedness, while they carnalize their Affections, and more
and more indispose themselves to relish it. Thus they separate what GOD has
joined together, while they expect the End without the appointed Means. They
hope to be pardoned without an Heart-purifying Faith, and accepted of God
without the imputed Righteousness of Christ: -- to be embraced by that Mercy
which they grossly abuse, and spared by that Patience which they continue to
provoke. Nay, they propose what is obviously impossible; to live with the
Wicked, the Worldly, and Debauched, and yet to die with the Holy and
Self-denied: -- to be Followers of the meek and humble Jesus, and yet indulge
Wrath and Ambition: -- and to be happy without friendly Intercourse with the
Father of their Spirits, and Fountain of Bliss; and hence live contented
without having Fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. 1 John i.
3. Though all fallible, and prone to deceive, they nevertheless depend more
firmly on each others Word, than on the Promise and Oath of God, who cannot
lie. Tit. i. 2. They hope to get Victory over Sin by slothful Wishes, without
striving earnestly against it, and to become some how good, without ever
exercising themselves unto Godliness. 1 Timothy iv. 7. O! what shocking
Disappointments will such Hopes meet with! The higher they rise, the more
dreadful their Fall! They will all be cut down like a Tree, Job xix. 10. and
end in certain Despair.

VIII. Madness appears in the precarious Fickleness of human Hearts. Mankind
are blown hither and thither, like withered Leaves in Autum, or like Chaff, the
Sport of Winds. They are not only contradictory, to each other, but the same
Individual is discordant with himself. One Thing is approved in the Morning,
the Contrary in the Evening. Now Love is predominant, but the next Pulse beats
Disaffection to the same Object. This Hour the Sinner, disturbed in Mind,
rejects a favorite Lust with Abhorrence; the next he recalls and embraces it.
He now resolves to be religious in Earnest, but presently defers it till
Tomorrow; and when the Morrow is come, he has forgotten the Whole. Now the
Judgment is clear, and Things appear in comely Order; now it is covered with
Clouds, and what was Order becomes Confusion. Now the Heart is calm, easy, and
pliant; now a Tempest ruffles the Bosom, and Obstinacy that cannot bend, takes
Place. Now Mercy and Kindness sweeten the Temper, which is presently soured by
Revenge and Moroseness. Now he steers a steady Course this Way, but turns to a
different Point with the next veering Gale. Excellent Sentiments are quickly
blotted, and the last Impressions still razed out by the next succeeding. A
determinate and fixed Resolve but mocks the Observer, and seems more like the
Effect of Chance, than of Judgment and Deliberation.

How ludicrous are the quick Changes of Customs and Fashions! yet each of them
approved, and each of them censured in its Turn, by the very same Persons! Now
it pleases; now it gives Disgust; and now it pleases again. The Gay and
Fashionable, and they who live in affluent Circumstances, are busied too, and
even perplexed, in the Variety of Vanity; and wearied in the giddy Chase, --
and though many of them are, in some lesser Points, more polished than others,
yet they afford us a prospect, not more rational, nor less wild, than those
they despise. Worldly Prosperity, perverted from its Use by human Depravity,
makes their Passions impetuous, their Impatience violent, and their Judgment
weak. This being the Character, though not of all, yet of the greater Part of
those who glory in high Life, what can follow from it but a wild Inconstancy!
-- O my Soul! how evanid are human Thoughts, and human Things! How delusive the
Scenes of mortal Pleasures! and how little Reason is there to depend on the
Power, or Wisdom, or Fidelity of the fallen human Race! Trust not in Princes
themselves, nor in the Son of Man, in whom there is no Help: Psalm. cxlvi. 3.
but rather, cease from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils; for wherein is he
to be accounted off? Isai. ii. 22. These Characters are no Fictions, nor
Exaggerations of the Truth, but are all taken from the Life: And though the
half is not told, yet in what a shocking Point of Light do even these rough and
imperfect Sketches set Mankind!

But what aggravates this Madness to the highest Degree, is, that after all
they go to the Dead. Solemn Consideration! -- The Gay and Jovial, the Rich, the
Great, the Poor and Mean, the Sorrowful and Afflicted, -- all depart hence, and
are seen no more among the Living! See whole Ages swept away by the Besom of
Destruction! Isai. xiv. 23. noisy and bustling Millions silent in the Dust! and
all their mortal Honors, their sensual Joys, and earthly Cares, are for ever
departed with them. What Authority or Empire have Alexander the Great, Cyrus,
or Caesar, now? Where are their Favorites, their Friends, their Flatterers,
and their Subjects? Who fears their Frowns, trembles at their Threats, or
courts their Favor, in the House of Silence? And what do their Triumphs and
Spoils avail them now? Implacable Enemies are hushed into everlasting Peace.
Are these the Men that made the Earth tremble? that shook Kingdoms? Isai. xiv.
16, they are become weak as the meanest; ( v. 10.) their Pomp is brought down
to the Grave; the Worm is spread under them, and the Worms cover them. vor. 11.
Thus Mankind, in every Age, bustle and die. Like Bubbles, they are blown up,
glitter, and break: like Flowers, they spring, bloom, and are cut down: and
like Shadows they pass away, and continue not. Job xiv. 2. But whither do they
pass? Where shall our curious, or rather sollicitous Thoughts follow them? Is
Death the End of their Existence? No. Aster that comes the Judgment. Heb. ix.
27. They are summoned to appear before the august, the impartial, and sovereign
Judge; they stand at his Bar, and hear an irrevocable Doom. What Doom? Can we
bear to contemplate the State of those, who madly provoked their Judge, and
persisted impenitent? Does not the Heart recoil, the Imagination startle, at
the direful Thought of an horrible Gloom, -- Regions of eternal Despair, -- the
Steam of Sulphur mixed with unquenchable Fire, -- the torturing Gripes, the
relentless Lashes of a guilty Conscience, that gnawing, never-dying Vulture, --
the insufferable Impressions of almighty Wrath, -- and the hideous Shrieks of
damned Souls? Are the bare Thoughts of these Things shocking? what then will it
be to endure them? And can we judge those to be sober, and in their right
Minds, who are in continual Danger of plunging into these Miseries, and yet are
secure and careless about any Endeavors to escape from the Wrath to come? What
an amazing Scene do the Sons and Daughters of Pleasure exhibit to us? They are
daily exposed to a thousand Deaths; are easily broken by numberless unforeseen
Accidents; and if they die impenitent, they are for ever undone: yet are no
more alarmed than if they were immortal. All thoughtless, all volatile, hating
serious Things, and Lectures of Death, which therefore surprises them, finds
them unprovided, hurries them away, and pushes them reluctant down the dreadful
Precipice, -- from Time into Eternity. O the hardy Adventure! to take a Leap in
the Dark into an endless, unalterable State! Merry Company, Balls, Assemblies,
and Plays, amuse them so, that they forget they are mortal, till they die; and
see not their Danger, till they are beyond Relief. They live in Jest, and after
that they go to the Dead in Earnest. What Degree of Folly is it, to catch a
Feather, and let go a Crown! to gain a Toy, and lose a Kingdom! for a Morsel to
barter a Birthright! and for a Moment's Pleasure to part with everlasting Joys,
and suffer eternal Woes! And are these your Men of Sense, who look indignant on
those who are so weak as to be deeply concerned about such important Affairs?
Vain Man, forsooth, would be wise, though he is born like the wild Asse's Colt.
Job xi. 12. It is an inexpressible Absurdity, that temporal Things, whether
Riches, Honor, or Pleasures, should ingross the intensest Thoughts of Beings
bound for Eternity: And it is an eternal Solecism in Religion, to be engaged
about the Concerns of it in a cold and indifferent Manner. The Kingdom of
Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by Force. Matthew. xi. 12.

After considering all these Things, will it seem an Abuse of Mankind, if I
compare this World to a great Bedlam, filled with Persons strangely and
variously distracted? Some are so desperate, as to refuse all salutary
Medicines; and the Habit so inveterate, as to nonplus the Physician's Skill,
and make him almost despair of their Cure: Some appear hopeful for a while, but
relapse, and their Case is more dangerous than before: And some are actually
recovered in a less, some in a greater Degree; but not so much as one perfectly
well. My Text will warrant the Comparison: and I may not flatter Mankind by
soothing Expressions, when their Case requires plain Dealing; nor be so polite
as not to learn of God how to speak, when I deliver his Message.

From the Whole we are taught,

1. How little Reason any one has to be puffed up with popular Applause, or
disspirited when he does not obtain it. For, consider who are the Judges? Are
they all Persons of sound Minds, whose Conclusions are according to Truth? Far
from it. It is true, all fancy themselves mighty good Judges of Merit: but I
speak charitably, when I say, perhaps one in an Hundred can distinguish. That
Soul, therefore, is lighter than Vanity, that is tossed hither and thither,
according to the ebbing and flowing Tides of inconstant Affections. The
favorable Opinion of Mankind is chiefly to be valued as it gives an
Opportunity to serve their best Interests more successfully.

2. How much Reason there is in that divine Exhortation, Be not conformed to
this World. Romans xii. 2. Do not act upon its Principles, nor accommodate
yourselves to its evil Customs and Modes. For this World is at Variance with
God, and no Man can serve two Masters. Matthew. vi. 24. It is here modish to make
light of Religion, and treat it, if treated at all, with an Air of the most
absolute Indifference, and Unconcern. -- Nay, with many it is polite, to sneer
at solemn Devotion, and make a Mock of Sin. He appears big, who dares trample
on sacred and inviolable Authority, and laugh at divine Threatenings; and wise,
who can ridicule the Mysteries of the Gospel. He who is a Companion of such
Fools, shall be destroyed. Prove. xiii. 20.

Lastly, Let the Follies of others be a Motive to engage your more earnest
Pursuit of saving Wisdom. Seek her as Silver, search for her as for hidden
Treasure. Prove. ii. iv. Happy is the Man that finds her; for she is more
precious than Silver, than fine Gold and Rubies. -- Her Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. chap. iii. ver. 13, 14, 15, and 17.
If any of you lack this spiritual Wisdom, ask it of GOD, who gives liberally,
and upbraids not: and let it ever be a small Matter with you, to be judged weak
and foolish by a mad World, provided always that you are wise to Salvation.

THE END.
Advertisement.
THE Revd. Author of the ensuing Discourse, living at a Distance from the
Press, through mistake the Texts of Scripture are inserted in the Body of the
Sermon, which were designed to be placed in the Margent. The Reader is desired
to correct the following Errata. p. 8, l. 26, for supposed, r. supplied. p. 10,
l. 10, for industrious, r. industriously.


