Mr. Lockwood's Election-SERMON,

May 9th, 1754.

RELIGION the highest Interest of a civil Community, and the surest Means of
its Prosperity.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE General Assembly OF THE COLONY OF CONNECTICUT, AT
HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE Anniversary Election, MAY 9th, 1754.

By JAMES LOCKWOOD, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Wethersfield.

ISAIAH i. 19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the Good of the
Land. But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the Sword: for the
mouth of the LORD has spoken it. NEW LONDON, Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY
GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY, 1754.

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY holden at Hartford, in the Colony of CONNECTICUT, on the
Second Thursday of May, Anno Dom. 1754.
ORDERED, That JOHN CHESTER Esquire; and Col. ELISHA WILLIAMS, Return the Thanks of
this Assembly, to the Rev'd Mr. JAMES LOCKWOOD, for his SERMON Delivered (on
the ninth Day of May Instant,) before the Assembly, and Desire a Copy thereof
that it may be PRINTED.

George Wyllys Secr.

An Election Sermon.
I. SAMUEL XII. 14. If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and obey his
Voice, and not rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye,
and also the King that reigns over you, continue following the Lord your God.
THE People of Israel were remarkably distinguished by the Favors of God, and
the Smiles of his Providence, above all other Nations then on the Earth; and
they unhappily and remarkably distinguished Themselves, by their Ingratitude
and Perverseness; and their uneasy, mutinous, and disobedient Temper and
Conduct. This reproachful Stigma, is justly lest on their Character, in the
Oracles of God; -- A stiff-necked People; -- A rebellious House. After they had
long groaned* under their Burdens and miserable Slavery, in the Land of Egypt;
God made bare his own Arm, in a signal and remarkable Manner, for their
Deliverance: by Signs, and Wonders, and awful Judgments; (...) the Egyptian
Tyrant, and (...) He brought (...) Egypt, and House (...) them under his own
(...) Himself, (...) Head; and he (...) good and excellent Laws, (...) and
during at (...) through the Wilderness, He was their (...) and Defense* a wall of
Fire round about them* (...) Security. He commanded the Clouds from above, and
opened the Doors of Heaven, and (...) ^^wn M^^n^ upon them to eat* he g^ve them
of the Corn of Heaven* -- He (...) the ^^ck also and the waters gush^d out, and
the Streams overflowed. Psalm. lxxviii.
He cast out the He^^^^^ (...) ^^^^re them, and planted them in a good (...)*
the Land promised to their Fathers (...) up Judges for them, to execute Jus^^^^
an^ Judgment* and to lead forth their Armies (...): These generally were
occasional and extraordinary Officers; who, like the Rom^n (...) of old, were
called to the Administration, on some extraordinary Exigence of State, (...)
that was over, their Authority expired (...) at an End. And now great was the
I^gr^^^^^de of this People! how perverse their Carri^^^ under a long Series of
Mercies and Salvations! how often did they murmur against Moses and the other
Servants of the Lord! how often rebel against God Himself! and to all their
other Sins and Provocations, they added this also, that they asked a King to be
set over them, like the other Nations round about them; for this they applied
to Samuel, who had long judged them, in the Integrity of his Heart; and guided
them by the Skilfulness of his Hands. This their Request, was highly
displeasing to that good Man; who, accordingly, warmly remonstrated and
protested against it, and labored to dissuade them from it, but in vain, they
were obstinate and inflexible in their Demand; -- nay, but we will have a King
to reign over us. 1 Samuel viii. 19.
Provoking as this must have been to God, who himself was their King, and whom
they rejected, that he should not reign over them; after having expressed a
suitable Resentment, and shown them their Wickedness and Guilt, He gave way to
their Request and Saul the Son of K^sh was Anointed King over them. Here the
Form of their Civil Government, was considerably altered, yet not so, but that
God still continued to be their King and civil Head, so as He was not of any
other Nation in the World: and their Kings, who henceforth reigned over them,
were but his Viceroys; for, their political Laws were enacted by God, and
These, their Kings were obliged to transcribe, when they entered upon their
Government, and invariably to conform all their Administrations to them; and
from Time to Time, on special and extraordinary Occasions, to consult the
Oracle of God, and take their Measures thence. Ungrateful and rebellious as
this People were, to their King, and their GOD; yet, He did not utterly forsake
and abandon them; but his great Goodness and Mercy triumphed over their
Perverseness and Disobedience: agreably, He tells them, by his Servant Samuel,
in the Words now read; If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and obey his
voice, and not rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye,
and also the King that reigns over you, continue following the Lord your God.
Here is a divi^^ Promise to Israel, of a mighty, comprehensive Blessing* on a
Condition. The Condition is expressed in the former Part of the Verse; the
Promise in the Close of it; in the preceding Part of the Verse, we have not a
vain and useless Accumulation of Words, but these various Expressions,
importing much the same Thing, are heaped together, as is usual in the Sacred
Writings, to intimate the great Importance of the Matter, express it the more
strongly and emphatically, and the more effectually to engage our Attention and
Conformity to it. Religion in general, is frequently set forth by each of these
Expressions singly, and when they are all said together, they express it with
special Force and Emphasis; or, if we are to seek a more particular Meaning of
these several Expressions; the first may mean, that sacred Reverence and holy
Fear of the blessed God, which ought to be found reigning, in the Hearts of all
his reasonable Creatures, in Connection with every other Branch, of a pious and
religious Temper of Mind; and the other Expressions may signify, the proper and
genuine Effects of such a Temper, in a Life of Sobriety, Godliness and
Righteousness; and so it comes to the same Thing. Now, on Condition of their
being religious and obedient, of their fearing God and serving him, He
graciously promises them his Blessing and Prosperity* This we have in the Close
of the Verse; Then shall both ye* and also the King that reigns over you
continue following the Lord your God. To follow God, frequently Signifies, the
same Thing with serving and obeying him, and conforming to his Will and Laws;
but here it plainly has a different Meaning; Then shall ye* and also the King
that reigns over you, continue following the Lord your God. i.e. Ye shall be
a secure and happy People. Though you have grievously offended in asking a King,
yet, if ye will now fear and obey God; He will graciously forgive what is past,
He will still be your God and your King, He will go before you, to lead and
conduct you, to defend and bless you; and under his Conduct, Protection, and
Blessing; you shall be a happy and prosperous People.

The PROPOSITION obviously contained in the Words, and which may be considered
on this Occasion, is this,

Religion is the truest Interest and highest Happiness of a People* Or, It Is
the surest and best Means, to promote the Welfare and Felicity of a Civil
Community.

This is a most important Point, in which we are all most intimately concerned.
Religion and Holiness, to fear and obey God, and to be conformed to his
Perfections, is certainly, the most excellent, the most important Thing in the
World: it is the Beauty, the Ornament and Glory of every individual Person: It Is
the surest, and most unfailing, the only unfailing Means of promoting their
true Peace and Comfort, their Happiness and Well-being in this World; of making
them Easy and Happy in themselves, and Blessings to those about them: and it is
absolutely necessary to the Well-being and Happiness of all Persons in the
World to come. The primary End and Design of all Religion, is, to rescue us
from the misery and fatal effects of the Apostasy, to recover us to Holiness,
and the Favor of God, and to raise us to the highest Happiness, and Perfection
of our Natures, in the coming World; -- Godliness is profitable unto all
Things, having Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy iv. 8.
This Consideration infers on all Persons, the strongest Obligations to lead
holy, religious and obedient Lives: But this is not all, such is the friendly
Aspect of true Virtue and Religion on Mankind; that, not only has it the most
direct and powerful Tendency, to advance our true Happiness and Well-being,
singly considered, but, it is likewise the most effectual, the best and surest
Means in the World, to promote the Felicity and Welfare of a People, and Nation
or Civil Community. The serious Practice or Religion, has a blessed Influence
on all Orders and Ranks of Persons in the Sta^^, from the highest Ruler, down
to the lowest and meanest Subject; and to put the whole political Body into a
flourishing and prosperous State. This DOCTRINE may be Confirmed and
Illustrated, I. From the Example of past Ages, and the Promises and
Declarations of God's Word. II. From the general Tendency and Influence of
Religion. And, III. From some particular Branches of Religion, that directly
and obviously Subserve the Interest, and promote the Felicity of a civil
Community: Of these in Order.


I. That Religion is the Surest and best Means, to promote the Welfare of the
State; appears from the Example of past Ages, and the Promises and Declarations
of God's Word It we consult the History of the J^ws, which lies before us in
the Sacred Writings, we shall find, this was apparently the Case of that
People; they were under prosperous or afflicted Circumstances, as Religion
flourished or languish'd among them: When their ways pleased the Lord, and they
were obedient to his Laws, the remarkable Smiles of his Providence were upon
them; but when they were disobedient and rebellious, and Idolatry and
Wickedness prevailed, the Indignation of Heaven Smoaked against them, and
wasting Calamities and Judgments broke in upon them; and this was so constantly
the ^^nour of God's Dealings with that People, that one might pretty easily
determine, from a Knowledge of their moral Character, and the State of Religion
among them, at any given Time; how it went with them, as to their outward
Welfare and Prosperity; and this was but agreeable, to the numerous divine
Promises and Threatenings to that Purpose: besides my Text, and the Words that
immediately succeed them, you (...) see as a Specimen, Deuteronomy* 28. 1, 2. and 15.
and 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. And it shall come to pass, if thou shall hearken diligently
unto the Voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his Commandments,
which I command thee this Day; that the Lord thy God will set thee on high
above all Nations of the Earth. And all these Blessings shall come on thee, and
overtake thee. If thou shall hearken unto the Voice of the Lord thy God. But if
thou will not hearken unto the Voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do
all his Commandments, and his Statutes, which I command thee this Day; all
these Curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee. -- Hear ye me, Asa, and
all Judah and Benjamin, the Lord is with you, while ye be with Him; and if ye
seek him he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.
But the Books of Moses, and the Writings of the Prophets are full of Passages
to this Purpose; and the Dealings of God with that People, were agreeable
thereto, from Generation to Generation: the Blessings and Judgments of God were
interchangeably upon them, according as they feared him and obeyed his Voice,
or sinned and rebelled against him; this was evidently and remarkably the Case
of the Jewish Nation: and although God has not Strictly confined himself to
Scripture Presidents in this Matter, nor any where told us, that the
Administrations of his Providence, toward other Nations and Kingdoms, shall,
in all Points, be conformable to the Dealings of his Providence, with his
People Israel; yet, those Promises and Threats, whereby the Observation of the
Laws of God and Religion, was enforced on that People, excepting so far, as
they were specially designed and adapted to the peculiar Circumstances of that
People, and their peculiar Relation to the blessed God, may justly be
applicable to other Nations, and civil Combinations of men. And it we reflect
further; that the same glorious Being, who was the God of Israel and their
King, is the moral Governor of all mankind; that he equally hates and abhors
Iniquity and Vice all over the World, can never be the Patron of Sin, nor
countenance Wickedness and Rebellion in any Nation or People; and that he
universally approves Virtue and Holiness, and loves it wherever it appears; we
may easily believe, since all civil Communities, are the Creatures of Time,
erected in it, and will all terminate and end with it; and so are incapable, as
Souls, of Rewards or Punishments in the World to come; I say, we may well
conclude, that God will manifest the Holiness of his Nature, and the Equity of
his Government, by frowning upon and punishing, a wicked and licentious; and by
protecting and rewarding a righteous and an obedient People, in this World. The
Promises, Threatenings and numerous Declarations of God's Word, with the
correspondent Dispensations of his Providence, toward his People, in past
Ages, illustrate and confirm the Point before us; that Religion is the true
Interest of a People, the surest and best means of their Prosperity and
Happiness. This important Point may be illustrated,

II. From the general Tendency and Influence of Religion. The great things of
Religion are revealed and set before us, in the Word of God: And when we
conform to that Revelation, and comply with the Demands of it; when we believe
and act and live, as God requires we should do in his Word, we are then
Religious. The Bible is the complete Standard and Measure of our Religion:
There are indeed diverse important Articles of Religion, concerning God, the
Difference between Virtue and Vice, and our Duty and Happiness, that are
discoverable by the Light of Nature: But all the great Truths and Duties of
Morality, are adopted by Christ, and incorporated into his Laws, are refined
and purified, and set in the fairest and strongest Point of Light, and raised
to their highest Perfection in the Christian Institution. The Bible then, is
our complete Directory in Matters of Religion, this is the sure Word of
Prophesy, to which we must all take heed, as to a light that Shines in a dark
Place. GOD himself is the Author of this Book; here he speaks to us, and makes
known the great Things, that belong to our Peace; He sets his own glorious
Perfections in our View; the mysterious Manner of his Subsistence; his allwise,
good, and powerful Providence, without which, not a Sparrow falls to the
Ground; the primitive State of Man, as he came holy and perfect from the Hand
of GOD; the Fall and Apostasy of Man from GOD, and the Guilt and Pollution,
which in Consequence of that Apostasy, have overspread the human Race; the
glorious Method of Recovery, by JESUS CHRIST the Mediator; the Terms and
Demands of the Gospel Covenant; all the appointed Means and Ordinances, of Life
and Salvation; the amiable Rules of Holiness, and Gospel Obedience; Precepts
and Directions, for the Discharge of Duty, in the various Stations and
Characters of Life; and the strongest Motives to a Compliance with our Duty, in
a View of the last Judgment, and the Retributions of Eternity: This Sacred
System of Religion, in all the various Branches of it, unitedly and
harmoniously tends, to advance and further, the Welfare and Happiness of
Mankind in general, and particularly to promote the Tranquillity and Interest,
of Nations and civil Societies; -- As it forbids whatsoever is detrimental to
the public Interest; -- Requires those Things, that directly conduce to its
Prosperity; -- Forms the Minds of Men, to a Disposition to promote the good of
the State; -- And as it has a particular Influence, to avert Impending
Calamities; and to draw down Blessings and Salvations upon the State.


1. As it forbids whatsoever is detrimental to the public Interest. This is a
Sinful, apostate World, in which we live; a guilty, rebellious Province of the
Most High: it bears the sad and numerous Marks, of Guilt and Apostasy, in that
Wickedness and Vice, and those Miseries and Calamities that overspread the
Earth. Sin is the dismal Source, of all the Evils and Calamities the World
groans under. this is the fatal Door, at which Misery first entered, and this
is the accursed Thing, that in all Ages of the World, separates between GOD and
the Soul; between GOD and a People, and throws open the Floodgate, to an
Inundation of Evils, upon particular Persons, and upon Civil Communities.
Misery is the natural Offspring of Sin, and they are usually found together.
Now Religion tends to advance the public Good, as it utterly forbids and
condemns all Sin, and Iniquity; requires us, To cease to do Evil; To deny all
Ungodliness and every worldly Lust; and to cleanse Ourselves from all
Filthiness, of Flesh and Spirit. A great Design of the Christian Institution*
is, -- to put an End to Sin, and destroy the Works of the Devil, and to
Suppress and root out, th^se vicious and enormous Practices; that are so fatal
to social Peace, and the Happiness of Mankind. And as civil Government is of
divine Original and Institution; all those Practices and licentious Courses,
that are hurtful to the Public, are evil and wrong, not only in a political,
but also in a moral and religious View; being strictly forbidden by God: and
the Prohibition of GOD in the Case, lays a solemn Tie on the Consciences of all
Sorts of Persons, carefully to shun and avoid all Immorality and Vice, and
every Thing that is prejudicial to the State. And as far as the Authority of
GOD, the Supreme Ruler of the World, and the Judge of it, is regarded and
reverenced by Mankind on Earth; so far, will Religion have an actual and
blessed Influence, to suppress and root out, all those unrighteous and
exorbitant Practices, that are so fatal and ruinous to the Public.

2. As it requires those Things, that directly tend to the Prosperity of the
State. In a Civil Community, there is a necessary Subordination of Persons;
some are entrusted with Authority and Power, to rule over Others, and to manage
and conduct the public Affairs: whilst others are in Places of Inferiority and
Subjection: and the Health and Prosperity of the Community, very much depends,
on the faithful Discharge of the Duties, incumbent on the various Members of
it, resulting from the Stations they hold in, or Relations they bear to the
State; and on the steady, cheerful Practice, of the great Duties of Morality,
and the sacred Branches of practical Religion, in their several Places,
Circumstances and Relations. When the several Denominations of Persons in the
State, are faithful, diligent, and active, in their respective Places, to
promote the Public Weal, and in all their Intercourse and Dealing, with their
Fellow Men, maintain a serious and steady Care to practice every relative and
social Duty, and to exhibit in their Lives and Conduct, affair and amiable
Transcript, of that perfect System of Morality, and practical Religion, the SON
OF GOD came down from Heaven to Teach and Inculcate; such a Community can
hardly fail, in the usual Course of Things, of being in a prosperous and
flourishing State. Now, the Laws of GOD and Religion, require and enjoin, all
these Virtues and Duties so apparently conducive to the Good of the Public.
They oblige every Member of the State, and every Man in the World, to the
serious, faithful Discharge, of all the Duties arising from their respective
Relations to the Community and to one another; -- To owe no Man any Thing; --
To render to all their Due; Romans xiii. 7, 8.
Strictly to observe, in all their relative and social Conduct, that sacred
Rule of Equity and Righteousness -- Whatsoever ye would, that Men should do to
you, do ye even so to them. Mat. vii. 12
And in a word, To do Justice, love Mercy, and walk Humbly before God. Mic. vi.
8.
We are not l^ft at Liberty, to practice or neglect these amiable Virtues and
Duties, as we may think fit: but we are bound to the Practice of them, bound by
the Authority of GOD Himself, which lays a direct and solemn Obligation on our
Souls and Consciences.

GOD, who requires these Things, as he is our King and Lawgiver, so he is our
constant Inspector; The Lord looks from Heaven; be beholds all the Sons of
Men. Psalm. xxxiii. 13.
His Eyes are upon all their Ways; they are not hid from his Face, neither is
their Iniquity hid from his Eyes. Jer. xvi. 17.
And He sees and observes all the Doings of the Children of Men; not as a
regardless Spectator, but as a righteous Governor and Judge, who will bring
every Work into Judgment, and every secret Thing; Eccl. xii. 14.
And before whose righteous Tribunal, all Pretenses to Religion and Godliness,
where the Virtues of the social Life, and the great Duties of Morality, so
necessary, so conducive to the Peace and Happiness of Mankind, and the
Tranquillity of the State, have been wanting and neglected; will appear to be
vain and nothing worth. Again,

3. Religion forms the Minds of Men to a Disposition, to promote the Good and
Tranquillity of the State. The depraved and vitiated Temper and Disposition of
Men's Minds, is the true Source of those guilty and exorbitant Courses, that are
so fatal and destructive to particular Persons, and to the Public. This is the
Spring of those open Abominations, corrupt and debauch^d Practices, which in
the natural Course of Things, weaken and endanger the State; and if persisted
in, will bring on a total Dissolution and utter Ruin. When this Fountain of
Iniquity is purified; this vicious and depraved Temper is rectified, and
changed to Holiness, this will gently, yet powerfully lead and engage Persons,
as, to approve themselves to GOD in all other Branches of Christian Duty, so
saithfully to exert themselves in their Places, to advance the Welfare of the
Public. Now, the Gospel and Religion of JESUS, is admirably designed and
calculated, to produce this blessed Effect, and this blessed Effect it does and
will actually produce, wherever it is cordially and sincerely entertained, and
submitted to. Hence we are said, To be sanctified by the Word; Joh. xvii. 17.
To be born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word
of God which lives and abidet for ever. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
The Gospel of CHRIST, attended by the sacred Influences of the divine SPIRIT,
is the powerful Means, of rectifying the sinful Nature of Man, and forming it
to Purity and Holiness, and a governing Disposition to please and obey GOD in
all Things. As the Laws of Religion requires, the universal Practice of Virtue
and Holiness; they that are truly religious choose to obey GOD and lead holy
Lives; there is a blessed Agreement and Harmony, though not a perfect one,
between the Temper of their Minds, and the sacred Laws of Religion: they are
not only awed and influenced by the Authority and Command of GOD; but they find
an inward Propensity and Disposition, to devote and approve themselves to GOD,
not only in the Duties of Piety and Godliness, but in the Performance of all
relative and social Duties, and to exert themselves in their Places, to promote
the welfare of Mankind, and the Tranquillity and Happiness of the State. A good
Man indeed may labor under Mistakes, as to the true Interest of the Public, as
he may in other Matters, and so from wrong Apprehensions may fail of his Duty;
he may likewise be wrought upon, by Temptations from within, or from without to
neglect his Duty in Particular Instances; but these Things, I hope, are no
Parts of his Religion; they are so many Instances of his Want of Religion, or
the Imperfection of it. Religion in it is native and genuine Influence makes men
better, more useful and greater Blessings, in the various Relations and
Characters of Life, and forms them to a prevailing Disposition to please and
Honor GOD in all their Ways, and to further and promote the public Interest
and Happiness. No good Man will live in the habitual, known neglect of his Duty
to the Public: his own Heart, and the ruling Temper of his Mind, will excite
and prompt him to honor and obey GOD, and to do good to Men.

4. Religion is the Interest and Happiness of a People, as it has a particular
moral Influence to avert impending Calamities, and to draw down Blessings and
Salvations upon the State. Practical Religion, that Temper of Mind, and that
course of Life, the Gospel is intended to form Mankind to, has evidently a
particular moral Tendency and Influence, to skreen and shelter a People from
public Calamities, and to draw down public Mercies and Salvations. This renders
a People acceptable and dear to GOD, whose alwise, good and powerful
Providence, orders and overrules all the Affairs of this lower World. The
mighty Influence, Holiness, Devotion and fervent humble Prayer have, to secure
and protect a People, and to engage the special Blessings of GOD upon them, is
apparent through out the Bible. How often did Moses and the other Servants of
God, by their fervent Prayers avert those wasting Judgments, which an angry GOD
seemed ready to inflict on rebellious Israel? Those wonderful and surprising
Words of GOD to Moses, in Deuteronomy. 9. 14. may serve to illustrate the Point; and
show, how mighty and prevailing an Influence, the Piety and fervent
Intercessions of his People have to promote the Security and Happiness of the
Public -- I have seen this People, and behold, it is a stiff necked People, let
me alone that I may destroy them, and blot out their Name from under Heaven. So
God would have spared Sodom, and Gomorrah, upon the noble, humble Intercession
of Abraham, if but ten righteous Persons had been found there. And God, in all
Ages of the World, is a Prayer-hearing GOD, and his Ears are ever open to the
humble Cries of his People. But, this Point may be further illustrated,

III. From some particular Branches of Religion, that directly and obviously
subserve the Interest, and promote the Felicity of the civil Community. The
Particulars I shall adduce for this Purpose are such as these;

1. Faithfulness in Rulers. Whatever distinguishing Model of Civil Rule, a
Community may be cast under, it is of great Importance to it is Welfare; that
they, who are preferred to Places of Trust and Power, be wise and good and
faithful Men; these are great Blessings to the Public: now, it is Religion that
adorns Rulers with their most valuable Qualifications: this, I know, is not the
only Qualification, nor is every good Man fit to rule over Others: there are
diverse other and inferior Principles, that may Influence and prompt Persons, to
do considerable Good, in their Places; though Holiness and a true Principle of
Religion, should not be found prevailing, and bearing Sway in their Hearts: but
Gospel Holiness, is the most valuable Ingredient, the divinest Touch, in the
Character of Rulers. When the Supreme Love of God, and of Christ his Son, and a
fervent Charity and Benevolence to Mankind, are ever glowing in their Hearts,
and Religion is planted deep there; This Sacred, this powerful Principle, tends
to awaken and animate all their Powers, to promote the Peace and Welfare and
Felicity of their People; to protect and skreen them on every Side, to guard
and secure their valuable Rights and Privileges: This determines them, to a
firm and steady Adherence, to the Rules of Justice and Equity, in all their
Administrations; and to that Plan of Government, which fixes their own Powers
and Prerogatives, as also, the Rights and Privileges of the People; carefully
avoiding all guilty Reaches, after despotic and arbitrary Rule, on the one
Hand, and equally careful, they don't tamely suffer their Authority and Laws to
be insulted and trampled upon, on the other. This leads them, to consult and
study the true Interest of the Community; that they may be Ministers of God to
them for Good; -- may frame such Laws, as are wisely designed and calculated to
advance their best Interest -- that breathe forth Terror, to the Workers of
Iniquity; but Praise and Encouragment to those that do well.

It disarms Temptations of their Power and Influence, or renders them Proof
against them, and victorious over 'em; -- Temptations from within, from the
Lusts and Corruptions of their own Hearts; and from without, from the Flattery
or Bribery of Others, or from popular Uneasiness and Clamor; -- Inspires them,
with a noble Fortitude and Resolution, with a firm and steady Hand, to carry
the Laws into Execution; to check and bridle, the unruly and licentious, and to
chastise the Workers of Iniquity; to suppress Immorality and root out Vice,
that Justice and Judgment may run down the Streets, as a River, and
Righteousness as a Flood that overflows: This will fill their Hearts, with a
paternal Affection for their People, and a tender Concern for their Well-being
and Prosperity -- Inspire them with the noble Ambition, of approving
Themselves, Fathers to their Country, and Benefactors to Mankind; will animate
their ardent Prayers, to the great Father of the Universe; that He would Shower
his rich and numerous Salvations upon them. The Light and Purity, of their
amiable Life, and pious Example, will have a happy and powerful Tendency, to
put Iniquity Itself to the Blush, and to Shame the wicked and profane from
their ungodly Courses; or to allure and charm them, into the Paths of Holiness
and Righteousness. The happy and direct Influence of such Rulers to promote the
Interest of the State, is obvious to all.

2. Another Branch of Religion, that Immediately promotes the Welfare of the
State, is, Submission and Loyalty in the People. As Rulers are raised up by
GOD, not for their own Sakes, but the People's; there is the highest Reason,
they should be treated with Respect, Honor and Submission. For People to treat
their Persons or Characters, with Rudeness and Disrespect; to slight and vilify
their Laws, or rashly censure their Administrations; to cherish uneasy and
mutinous Dispositions, or give into Seditious and riotous Practices, is very
inexcusable; -- This is to counteract the great, and good, and beneficial
Design, of civil Government; and is highly injurious to the Public: on the
Contrary, to treat them with a Deference and Respect, suitable to the Dignity
of their Places; freely to Submit to their Authority and Laws, and cheerfully
to afford them (as in Point of Justice and Equity, they are bound to do) a
suitable and honorable Maintenance, according to the Rank they hold in the
State, and the Importance and Dignity of their Character; and to bow the Knee
before God, the Father of Lights, from whom comes down every good and perfect
Gift; that He would bless their Persons, and prosper and succeed their
Administrations: this, it is apparent, has a direct Tendency, and is very
necessary, to the Public Weal and Tranquillity. Now, the Laws of Religion
indispensably exact, and a Principle of it prevailing in the Heart, will lead
and dispose People, to a cheerful Yielding all due Honor, Submission and
Loyalty, to their civil Rulers. These are the Laws of Christ; Let every Soul be
Subject unto the higher Powers. For there is no Power but of God: the Powers
that be are ordained of God. Rom xiii 1.
Submit yourselves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake. 1 Pet. ii 13.
For this Cause, pay you Tribute also: for they are God's Ministers, attending
continually upon this very Thing. Render therefore to all their Dues. Romans 13. 6
-- I exhort therefore, that first of all* Supplications, Prayers,
intercessions and giving of Thanks be made for all Men; for Kings, and for all
that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all
Godliness and Honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the Sight of God our
Savior. 1 Timothy ii 1


3. Truth and Justice, directly subserve the Interest of the State. To be
perfectly just and true, is the Prerogative of the most high GOD; to be
sincerely so, and to practice those divine Virtues, ^s far, as human Frailty
and Imperfection will admit, is the Beauty and Glory of Man; and it is no small
Part, of the strength and security of the Body politic. Where Unrighteousness
and Falsehood have a general Spread among a People, and Deceit, Treachery and
Lies are prevalent; and People give their Tongues a Loose to Detraction and
Slander; and are false to their Promises, Engagements and Contracts; and where
Dishonesty, Knavery and Oppression are commonly practiced: These Things,
besides their moral Influence, to Kindle the Wrath of Heaven, which may set
them on Fire on every side, and bring on a speedy Dissolution; they have a
direct and dismal Influence, to enervate the State, to depress and ruin a
People: for if they thus delude, bite and devour one another, (the Case is
plain) they will be consumed and devoured, one of another. But, when Truth and
Equity, are the Character and Complexion of a People; and they detest and shun
the base and vile Arts of Dissimulation and Fraud, and all injurious Treatment
of their follow Men, in their Persons, Property and Characters; and in all
their Traffic and mutual Commerce, in all their Words and relative Behavior,
they render to every one his due, and pay a steady Regard to the Rules of
Justice, Integrity and Truth; this, naturally and Immediately conduces, to the
Well-being and Happiness of Mankind, and to the Peace and Prosperity of the
State. Now such an upright and amiable Conduct, the Laws of God indispensably
require. The righteous Lord loves Righteousness. Psalm. xi. 7.
To do Justice and Judgment, is more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice.
Prove. xxi. 3.
That which is altogether Just shall thou follow. Deuteronomy. xvi. 20.
And the Rectitude of a pious Mind, or Religion bearing sway in the Heart,
naturally leads and disposes Persons, to the Practice of Truth and Equity, in
all their various and important Branches.

4. A quiet and peaceable Behavior, directly conduces to the Tranquillity of
the State. Peace and Unity and mutual Harmony, in Opposition to unchristian
Animosity, Strife and Contention, are of vast Importance to the Welfare of the
State. When Persons are peevish and litigious, and ready to take Fire on the
slightest Provocation are apt to put the worst Construction, on the Words and
Actions of others, and by artful, malicious Insinuations, or inhuman and
barbarous Comment on their Imperfections, they foment Jealousies and mutual
Aversions; when such a Temper prevails and becomes common, it is no Wonder, if
the sacred Bonds of Peace are burst asunder, and consumed; and the Body politic
is thrown into Disorders, unnatural and fatal Convulsions* Contention and
Strife is an intestine Malady, that preys upon the Vitals of a State, and
naturally tends to its Ruin and Destruction: now, Religion is designed to heal
the vicious Dispositions of Men, to suppress and root out, those Lusts, and
evil Qualities, which are the unhappy Sources of Contention and Strife; and to
unite Mankind in the strongest Bonds of Love and Peace. It requires, that we
make it our Study and Endeavor, to live in Love, in Unity and Harmony with our
fellow Men. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor and evil
speaking be put away from You, with all Malice. And be ye kind one to another,
tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven You. Ephesians. iv. 31, 32.
I therefore -- beseech You, that ye walk, -- with all Lowliness and Meekness,
with Long-suffering, for-bearing one another in Love; endeavoring to keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. Ephesians. iv. 1, 2, 3.
Peace and Unity, are peculiarly agreeable to the Spirit of the Gospel: It is
called the Gospel of Peace, not only, because it is the appointed Means, of our
Peace and Reconciliation with God; but also, because it is designed, and most
wisely adapted, to reconcile Men to one another, and to unite them in a sacred
and lasting Peace. It breathes Love and Good Will, Peace and Harmony to the
Sons of Men; and in Conformity to the Design and Spirit of it, it is the Duty of
all its Professor, especially those of the same Community, whether sacred or
political, to cultivate Benevolence, Charity and Peace. Every Breast should be
inspired, with gentle and peaceful Dispositions; every Member of a Community,
cheerfully move onward, in their appointed Spheres, and attend to their proper
Business, without jarring, without interfering, in perfect Peace, Amity and
Harmony. Mutual Benevolence and Love should warm and unite every Heart, and
render all the Parts of their Conduct consistent, peaceful and harmonious. This
is the Genius, this the Tendency of Religion; and how much it is the Beauty,
the Strength and Glory of the State, is open to all.

5. A public Spirit, and subordinating our private Views and Interests to the
Common Good, directly conduces to the public Tranquillity. A narrow, contracted
and selfish Spirit, is pernicious to the State. Nothing can give a People a
more gloomy Prospect, than the general Prevalence of such a Temper: The common
Good will be neglected, and Persons will little regard, how it fares with the
Public, so they can but grasp the World to themselves, and fill their own
Coffers: in that sordid and despicable Point, all their Views, Schemes and
Designs will center. And when Persons in Authority, and Places of Eminence, are
under the Influence and Control of such a Spirit; the Aspect upon the State,
is peculiarly threatening and baleful: now, the Religion of the Gospel, is
designed and calculated to cure this mean, this sordid Temper, and to produce
and cherish a public, a noble and generous Spirit. It ennobleth and enlarges
the Mind, beyond any other Profession or Science whatsoever. Upon this Scheme,
while the Earth, and the transient Enjoyments of this Life, shrink into the
narrowest Dimensions, and are accounted as the Dust of the Balance, the Drop of
the Bucket, yea, less than Nothing; the intellectual World opens wider to our
View; the Perfections of the Deity, the Nature and Excellence of Virtue, the
Dignity of the human Soul, the Redemption of the World by Jesus Christ, and the
Solemnities of the last Judgment, are displayed in the largest Characters. The
Mind of Man seems to adapt Itself to the different Nature of its Objects; it is
contracted and debased, by being conversant in little and low Things, and feels
a proportionable Enlargement, arising from the Contemplation of these great and
sublime Ideas. Religion greatens our Views, and opens our Hearts, to the most
noble and generous Sentiments; it leads us to consider all Mankind as Brethren,
and to extend our benevolent Regards to them all; to bear on our Hearts the
Interest of the Public, and to endeavor to promote it; to regard the Happiness
of the Community, to which we belong, as our own Happiness; and to take a noble
Satisfaction, after the Example of God, in advancing the Welfare of Mankind,
and diffusing Felicity all around us. Under the Influence of this excellent
Spirit, Moses, Samuel, David, Nehemiah, etc. were rich and diffusive Blessings
in their Div; and all the noble Patriots and Benefactors of later Date, having
served their Generations by the Will of God, have merited immortal Honors, and
embalmed their Memories to all Posterity.

6. Diligence and Industry, directly conduce to the Weal of the Public. The
ruling Providence of God, has assigned us all, our particular Stations and
Callings in this World; in which, it is our Duty, diligently and industriously
to employ Ourselves: nor will any Pretenses to a public Spirit, warrant, our
breaking over the Boundaries of our particular Province, and becoming
Busy-Bodies, in other Men's Matters. Sloth and Idleness, or a slack and dozing
Attendance to the Duties of our Callings, is branded in the holy Scriptures,
with Reproach and Infamy; and condemned, as iniquitous and criminal; but
Industry and a diligent Application to the Business of Life, is recommended and
urged. As the Door turns upon its Hinges, so does the Slothful upon his Bed.
Prove. xxvi. 14.
Go to the Ant thou Sluggard, consider her Ways, and be wise. Prove. vi. 6.
-- Study to be quiet, and to do your own Business. 1 These. iv. 11.
And a Compliance with these Precepts of Religion, is beneficial, not only to
particular Persons, but to the State. it is a happy Means of preventing many
other Vices, that are detrimental to the Public; -- Extravagance and
Intemperance, Disorders and Contentions, which are the natural Off spring of
Idleness, and an Aversion to Business: and it is the appointed Way, for Persons
to thrive in the World, and acquire Wealth and Riches. He becomes poor that
deals with a slack Hand, but the Hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove. x. 4.
Now, the Wealth of particular Members, is the Riches and Strength of the
Community: and where Idleness and its natural Consequents are generally
avoided; and Industry and Frugality are the Character of a People; such a
Community is, so far, in a prosperous and flourishing State. The Laws of
Religion, indeed forbid Covetousness, and an unreasonable and immoderate Desire
of Riches; and it is for the Benefit of the Public, they do so; for such a
Temper of Mind, frequently proves a Snare and a prevailing Temptation to
Injustice and Oppression, and it renders Persons, selfish and close* fisted,
and so no good Members of a Community: but the Laws of GOD require, that we
diligently apply Ourselves to our particular Callings; that we may acquire an
honest and comfortable Subsistence, for Ourselves and Families, and be in a
Capacity, to do Good to others and to promote the Interest of the Public.

7. Another, and the last Thing I shall here mention, that evidently subserves
the public Interest, is, the religious Education of Children and Youth. On
this, under GOD, depends the Propagation of Religion, and the true Interest and
Happiness of a People, to future Generations: were all those important Branches
of Religion, that have been mentioned, generally attended to, and put in
Practice in a Community; though we may well suppose, they would, for the present,
be a happy People; yet, if the rising Generation were neglected, and little or
no Care taken, to form them to Civility and Virtue, to the Duties of
Righteousness and the social Life; the Welfare and Tranquillity of such a People
would be but short-lived, and in the natural Course of Things, would expire and
die with them, and be buried in their Graves: and in the next Generation,
Ignorance, Barbarism and all manner of Vice would break in like a Flood, and
bear down and over whelm the public Peace and Tranquillity: to prevent this, and
to render the civil, as well as religious Interest of a People, a durable and
lasting Thing; the Laws of God require, not only, that we attend to Religion as
the one Thing needful, ourselves; but that we teach and transmit it to our
Posterity, and train up our Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.
Besides the other methods GOD has appointed, for the Continuance and
Propagation of Religion in the World; it lies as a Duty upon Parents, to teach
and recommend it, to those under their Care, and faithfully to exert
Themselves, in the Use of all suitable Means, to form them to Holiness and
practical Religion; agreeably the pious Israelites were resolved, to declare
the wonderful Works of GOD, to their Children; That the Generations to come
might know them, even the Children which should be born: who should arise and
declare them to their Children: that they might set their Hope in God, and not
forget the Works of God; but keep his Commandments. Psalm. lxxviii. 6, 7.
It Is the gracious Intention of GOD, that Christianity should be perpetuated in
the World, and handed down from Father to Son, to the latest Posterity: and he
has made it the indispensable Duty of Governors of Families, to take Care, that
they who are to come after them, may know and practice it; that Religion may
live when they are dead, and flourish in all succeeding Ages to the World's
End. As the Civil State, as well as the Churches of Christ, is furnished with
Members from private Families: if the Governors of these little Communities,
were faithful to the great Trust reposed in them, and Family-Religion and
Discipline were thoroughly, prudently and strictly maintained and exercised,
and all due Pains taken, to engage Children and Youth in the Interest of
Religion, and early to form them to Holiness, and all the Virtues of the social
Life; it would afford, a fair and blessed Prospect, that the Generations to
come would fear and serve GOD, and that Religion, and as nearly connected
therewith, the Civil State, would prosper and flourish from Generation to
Generation. In fine; a firm and inviolable Adherence to the Laws of Christ, and
the genuine, benevolent Genius and Spirit of the Gospel, exerting and diffusing
itself, among all Ranks and Orders of Men, and animating and swaying the
Body-politic; and a pious Care to transmit Religion to Posterity; this, if any
Thing, will render a People flourishing, happy and glorious; will establish
their Peace as a River, and their Tranquillity as the Waves of the Sea.

What now remains, is some IMPROVEMENT of this Subject. And here,

I. Hence see, how nearly connected the Prosperity of the State is, with the
special Means of Religion, particularly, the Christian Ministry, and public
Schools of Education and Learning; and how much it concerns a christian State,
to see they are suitably Encouraged and Supported. That Sacred Volume, that
contains our Religion came down from GOD, and is attended with such apparent
Marks and Evidences of its divine Original, as powerfully recommend it to all
Mankind: and as the Religion of the Gospel is most wisely contrived, and
powerfully conduces to the Tranquillity of the State; if the Matter be
considered in this Light, it is plainly incumbent on the Rulers of a People, as
they would promote the Peace and Happiness of the Community, which is the End
and Business of their Office, to see that the Ministers of Religion are
suitably encouraged and supported. The public Means of Education likewise are
to be regarded, as public Means of Religion, and as such, to be tenderly
cherished and liberally supported. As the Christian Ministry is a principal
Means of keeping Religion alive in the World, and promoting the Interests of
it, and so is nearly connected with the Prosperity of the State; the public
Seminaries of Learning, are the Sources of such a Ministry. It was chiefly if
not altogether upon religious Considerations, that Princes, as well as private
Persons, have erected Colleges, and assigned liberal Endowments to Students and
Professors; upon the same Account, they meet with Encouragement and Protection
from all christian States, as being esteemed the necessary Means, to have the
sacred Oracles -- preserved and understood. And it is well known, that after a
long Night of Ignorance and Superstition, the Reformations of the Church, and
that of Learning began together, and made proportionable Advances. When the
Christian Faith was first published to the World, the divine Author of it
miraculously furnished its Dispensers to their great Work: but after
Christianity had spread and gotten Footing in the World, that extraordinary
Interposure of divine Providence was discontinued; and in the ordinary Methods
of Education and Instruction, Persons are to be trained up and ^ur^^h'd for the
Christian Ministry; and it is a Duty incumbent on every Generation of
Christians, and every Christian State, to make Provision for a Ministerial
Succession in the Churches: This is not an indifferent (...), but the
Providence of GOD seems evidently to devolve it upon Them as indispensible
Duty; and to constitute them Trustees, to provide in this Regard, for the
Generation to come; so that it highly behooves them, as to erect, so liberally
to endow and support Seminaries of Learning: But for our Colleges in this Land,
what would become of our Churches? -- What of Religion? The Flocks of CHRIST
must disperse; or find none, but illiterate and unqualified Persons to feed and
conduct them. And for our College in partiticular, it was founded with the
Approbation; and has grown and flourished under the Smiles of the Government:
and the noble End of its being founded, -- the Propagation of the Christian
protestant Religion, and the furnishing these Churches with a learned, pious
and orthodox Ministry, has been so far answered, as justly to demand, our
sincere and grateful Acknowlegements to the most High. But, as the People and
Churches in the Land, are grown numerous; it is evidently necessary, the College
should be put under the best Circumstances; in Order to its continuing sully to
answer the great and good Ends of its Institution: and it naturally and
rightfully looks to the Government, for Encouragement and Support: and the near
Connection of the most valuable Interests of the Government, with the Prosperity
of that Society; the rich and diffusive Blessing it has proved already; the
fair and animating Prospect we have* it will prove much more so; the firm and
steady Adherence of its Overseers and Governors, (in a fluctuating Age) to the
peculiar, distinguishing Doctrines of the Gospel -- Doctrines, which the pious
Planters of this Land, and the venerable Founders of the College, justly
apprehended of sacred Importance, -- and Doctrines, which, to the Honor of the
Churches of this Colony, and of New England, they still own and profess; these
Views, happily concur, to place that Seminary, in a favorable Point of Light;
and powerfully to recommend it, to the most cordial Patronage, and generous
Regards of the Government.

II. We see hence, in Proportion as Vice and Immorality prevail, the
Foundations of a State are weakened, Its Felicity impaired, and the just
Judgments of offended Heaven, may reasonably be feared. As Virtue and Religion
raise a People to Honor and Felicity, Sin tends to sink and ruin them, and it
raises the Indignation of the most high GOD, and exposes their most valuable
Interests to be swept away by his desolating Rebukes. In this View of the Case;
what Reason -- what abundant Reason have we, to reflect on the State of this
Land, of this Colony in particular, with a trembling Concern! For, how is this
Land degenerated from its primitive Purity and Holiness! -- stained and
contaminated with Iniquity and Vice! That Vine, that noble Vine, that was
planted here by the Hand of Heaven, Does it not bring forth Grapes of Gall, and
Clusters that are bitter? Our holy and pious Ancestors now with GOD, were they
to return to this Earth, how would they weep over their apostate Children? --
their polluted and guilty Offspring? How is that Relish for serious Godliness,
and strict Religion, which rendered them, the excellent and honorable of the
Earth, vitiated among their Children? And what Vice, what Immorality almost can
be named, but it is practiced among us? Injustice, Oppression, Falsehood,
Detraction, Uncharitableness, Uncleanness, Intemperance and Profaneness, to
mention no more -- These tend, in the natural Train of Things, to sink and ruin
us: but that is not all; they stir up the Indignation of GOD against us; they
break down the Wall of his protecting Providence around us, and throw open the
Floodgates, to all Manner of Evils and Calamities to rush in upon us. How long
it may please a long-suffering GOD, to bear with a rebellious People, or how
soon, he will whet his glittering Sword, and his Right Hand will take hold on
Vengeance, we know not; but this we well know, that it infinitely concerns such
a People, without Delay, to repent of their Sins, reform their Lives, and
return obediently to GOD and their Duty. But, it is Time to proceed, in the,

III Place, to a particular Address, agreeable to what has been delivered, to
the several Orders of Men here present, -- The Civil Magistracy; -- The
Christian Ministry; and -- The Body of the People.


I. Let me address myself to our CIVIL RULERS; particularly to the Honorable
the GOVERNOR the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and to the Rest of the Honorable Gentlemen
of the General Assembly of this Colony, in their present Convention.

Honored Fathers, I doubt not, it is with Satisfaction and Pleasure you
reflect; that the Holy Religion we all profess, with unsearchable Wisdom is
designed and calculated by the divine Author of it, not only to answer and
attain, its primary and great Design, the Happiness and Salvation of Men in the
coming World; but, likewise, so suited, in the best Manner suited, and directly
tends, to further and advance the Welfare and Felicity of civil Communities on
Earth. For, after all that has been said, or can be said, by the ablest
Statesmen and wisest Politicians, nothing certainly ever entered into the Heart
of Man, that is so powerful* so effectual a Means, of making a People happy,
great and flourishing, as Religion. And as the Providence of GOD has raised
You, to your respective Places of Eminence and Trust, to promote the
Tranquillity and Peace of this People; you will permit me, since the same
Providence has called me into this Desk, on this Occasion; with all the
Respect, your distinguished Characters demand; with all the Freedom becoming a
Minister of GOD; to recommend Religion to You, as the most amiable and
excellent, the most important and necessary Thing in the World. As You are Men,
and the Subjects of GOD and his SON, your highest Interest, your Peace and
Comfort and Tranquillity in this World, and your Happiness and Well-being in the
next, are depending on this Point: and as You are the Rulers of this People,
your Interest and Prosperity are nearly concerned in it It Is therefore of the
utmost Importance, that in all your Conduct, and all your Administrations,
Religion be your prevailing, your governing Principle: under the blessed
Influence thereof, you are steadily, vigorously to exert yourselves, to promote
the Tranquillity and Welfare of this Government; by framing such Laws, as are
requisite, for the suppressing and rooting out of Immorality and Vice, and the
promoting Righteousness and every social Virtue; by lodging the executive
Authority and Power, in the Hands of faithful Men -- Men that fear GOD and hate
Covetousness; and effectually providing, if it be possible, that the Laws of
the Colony, be faithfully, thoroughly executed; by protecting and cherishing
the Ministers and Churches of CHRIST; and by extending your constant, generous
Regards to the School of the Prophets. This last is a Matter of so great and
general Importance, (as any one will the more easily perceive at such a Time,
when so many Flocks of CHRIST are destitute, and as Sheep without a Shepherd,
and are looking and crying thither, in vain crying for a supply;) as might well
justify a Warmth and Importunity of Address, which in a Matter of little
Moment, would be quite inexcusable, before an Audience, I so highly, so justly
revere: but I choose rather to take it for granted, that You are fully sensible
of the Importance of the Case, and that your Fatherly Protection, your constant
Smiles, and generous Support, will cheerfully be afforded to that Seminary.

Further, Permit me to recommend it, as of the biggest Importance, that You be
careful to promote Religion, and so the Welfare of the State, by animating your
People to every Thing that is laudable and praiseworthy, by your own Example,
Countenance and Influence; by frowning upon the vicious, the licentious and
unjust; by Scorning the Scorner, after the Example of GOD, and showing Grace
and Favor to the lowly and virtuous; by setting Religion in all its Beauty and
captivating Charms before our Eyes, in the Holiness and Sanctity of your own
Conversation. Evil Rulers have ever been able to render Vice reputable; and
cannot the righteous do as much for Virtue? is Virtue (the greatest of all
earthly Blessings! the fairest and the loveliest of all human Accomplishments!)
the only Thing, which Power cannot render honorable? Which Majesty cannot
manifest to be lovely? nor Courts, becoming? Can the highest Examples only
influence to Evil? GOD forbid? this were to strip Grandeur of its noblest
Prerogative, as well as its truest and richest Interest. Let our Rulers hear
the Advice of a Ruler, (the wisest of all earthly Rulers) upon this Head; Take
away the Dross from the Silver, and there shall come forth a Vessel for the
Finer: take away the Wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be
established in Righteousness. -- Remembering always, that it is the noblest
Prerogative of a King that sits on the Throne of Judgment, that he
scatters away all Evil with his Eyes; That he is then, truly the Substitute
of the supreme Sovereign, when the Righteous are honored in his Presence, and
the Vile contemned.

My honored Fathers, May that glorious Being, who stands in the Congregation
of the Mighty, and judges among the Gods; by whom Kings reign and Princes
decree Justice, scatter Light into all your Paths; direct all your Counsels;
and prosper all your Labors, to promote the Virtue and Religion; the
Tranquillity and Happiness of this People. And after you have been rich and
lasting Blessings, in your elevated Stations; may You all meet the gracious
Approbation, and transporting Euge of the supreme Sovereign; well done good and
faithful Servants; enter ye into the Joy of your LORD.

II. Permit me, with all Humility, to address myself to the Ministers of
CHRIST, convened on this Occasion.

Reverend Fathers and Brethren. We are not only Members of Civil Society in
Common with Others, and as such, under Engagements to promote its Welfare, and
to do this, in those Ways and Methods, Religion dictates and prescribes; but,
we are by divine Designation and Appointment, the Ministers of Religion; and as
such, under peculiar Obligations to advance its sacred Interests. You will
permit me therefore, on this Occasion humbly to urge You, as well as myself, to
exert all our Abilities in so noble, so glorious a Cause; -- a Cause, in which
the Honor of the blessed GOD, and his Son JESUS CHRIST, and the present and
eternal Well-being and Felicity of Mankind are nearly concerned. The End of our
Office is, to promote the Designs of redeeming Love, in recovering sinful,
guilty, miserable Men, to the Favor and Image of GOD, in bringing them to a
Life of Holiness, and the Practice of all the amiable Duties of Obedience, and
building them up to a Meetness for the heavenly State. Sensible of our own
Insufficiency for these Things; looking to, and humbly depending on Christ and
his Grace; animated by a tender Compassion and fervent Love to immortal Souls;
let us take Heed to Ourselves, and to the Flocks of Christ over which the Holy
Ghost has made us Overseers; -- preach the Word, be instant in Season and out
of Season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all Long-Suffering and Doctrine. As our
Commission extends to the whole Counsel of God revealed in his Word, and is
limited and bounded by it; let us keep back Nothing from our Hearers, that may
be profitable to them, but give to every one a Portion in due Season. And as we
are set for the Defense of the Gospel, let us prudently, faithfully caution and
guard Our Hearers against the Errors and false Doctrines of a degenerate Age;
and endeavor to confirm and establish them in the great and important Truths
of the Gospel; -- represent in the Course of our Ministry, the whole System of
Christian Doctrine, and the various Branches of it, in their due Connection and
mutual Relation; and set them, at once, in the most natural and easy, the
strongest and most convincing Light. We must likewise explain and Illustrate,
the various Precepts of Morality, and Rules of holy Living, and place them in
their native and amiable Light, and enforce them on the Minds of Men, by the
strongest and most engaging Motives; such especially, as are peculiar to the
blessed Gospel, than which, none can be more striking and powerful.

Reverend, Respected, You well know, it is the plain, serious, affectionate
Preaching of CHRIST crucified, and his unsearchable Riches, the Merit of his
Cross, the Prevalence of his Intercession, and the Power of his Grace, and the
other peculiar Doctrines of the Gospel, that are nearly connected therewith;
GOD has been wont especially to own and bless; and we may cheerfully expect, he
will still own and bless to the producing of Faith toward our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, and Repentance from dead Works, and all the excellent Fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness, in Life and Conversation. And if we thus plant,
thus water, (still enforcing all our Ministrations in the House of GOD, by the
sanctity and exemplary Obedience of our own Lives) and GOD shall please to give
the Increase; we shall be the happy Instruments of promoting the most important
and valuable Interest of our fellow-men; of forming them to Loyalty and
Subjection to Civil Authority, not for Wrath, but for Conscience Sake; and to
the diligent Practice of the various Duties and Virtues of the Christian and
Social Life; and so of rendering them useful and Blessings to the Public, in
their respective Stations and Places: and what is more, infinitely more; we
shall be the happy means of plucking miserable Sinners from the Jaws of Ruin
and Destruction; of rescuing them from the Slavery of Sin and Tyranny of Satan,
and of restoring them to the Favor of GOD, and of making them his loyal
Subjects, and of raising them to the highest Happiness and Perfection of their
Natures in the coming World. And when we consider the inestimable Worth of
immortal Souls, committed to our Care; the Danger, the amazing Danger, many of
them are in, of perishing and being miserable forever; the gracious Provision
made in the Gospel for their Salvation; and the strict and solemn Account, we
must quickly render to GOD the Judge of all, of our Conduct in the Ministry;
ought not these affecting Views, to quicken and animate all our Powers to
advance the Kingdom and Interest of the Redeemer, in the World; and the
Happiness and Salvation of our Fellow Men? May CHRIST JESUS our divine Master,
who purchased the Church, here on Earth with his own Blood, and being returned
to his Throne in the Heavens; has committed the Care of it to his Ministers;
ever afford us his gracious Presence, -- make us wise to win Souls, and
faithful in our LORD'S Work, and crown our Labors with abundant Success; that
so the Blessing of many Souls ready to perish, may come upon us, who may be our
Crown and our Joy, in the great Day of the LORD*

III. In the last Place, let me address myself to the numerous Assembly here
present. Be persuaded all, to contribute your Parts, to promote the Welfare and
Felicity of this Government, by the serious Practice of Religion, in all the
amiable and important Branches of it. As You are Members of this Community, You
are bound to seek its Welfare, and to endeavor, in your Places, to advance its
Peace and Prosperity. Be it your first, your great Concern to do so, by a
speedy Reformation of whatever is amiss, by repenting of your Iniquities, and
parting with them, and by Lives of Holiness, Virtue and strict Religion. There
is great Need of a Reformation: the Sins and Abominations to be found among us,
are so many and so great; that we may well fear the angry Resentments of the
Most High, and the fearful Rebukes of his Providence: and how soon it will
please the Judge of all the Earth, provoked by our numerous Transgressions, by
our Impenitence, our Contempt of the glorious Gospel, and the Means of it, to
pour his Indignation on a thankless Land, and inflict his Vengeance on a
polluted guilty People; we know not: be sure, if You continue incorrigible and
unreform'd, You must expect, sooner or later, that Wrath will overtake You; and
that the desolating Judgments of Heaven will light upon You. It infinitely
concerns You, Sirs, that without Delay, You repent and return to GOD and your
Duty. See to it, that Religion be planted deep in your Hearts, and that it has
a prevailing, Sovereign Influence on your Lives; -- that you live in the steady
Practice of all the amiable Duties of it; of serious Devotion and Piety toward
the blessed GOD; of Loyalty and dutiful Submission to our Civil Rulers; of
Justice and Equity, of Truth and Faithfulness in all your Dealings; of
Temperance and Sobriety, and of Diligence and Industry in your several
Callings; studying the Things that make for Peace, and the Things, whereby You
may edify one another; and adorning the Doctrine of GOD our Savior in all
Things.

This is the appointed Way, and a Way which in its own Nature tends to promote
the public Welfare and Happiness: and to this, you are all bound, most solemnly
bound, as You have named the Name of CHRIST, and taken upon You the Profession
of his holy Religion.

But to have done; Religion, not only subserves the Interest of the State, but
the cordial, thoro' Practice of it, is the direct Course, the only Course, to
secure and promote your future Well-being, and your Happiness to all Eternity.
If you approve yourselves to GOD the supreme Ruler of the World, in the sincere
Practice of Holiness and Gospel Obedience; and walk humbly, fruitfully and
obediently before Him; This will be Matter of Support and unspeakable
Consolation to You, when You come to leave the Society of Mortals here on
Earth, and to lay down your Heads in the dark and silent Grave; This will
enable You, to look up with Confidence and holy Boldness, in that great Day of
the Lord; when all the civil Distinctions that obtain, among Men shall be no
more; when all the transitory Scenes of Time shall disappear; when the Kingdoms
and Empires of the Earth shall melt away; and CHRIST himself shall deliver up
the Kingdom, to GOD even the FATHER, and GOD shall be all in all.

FINIS.
These Election Sermons preached at Hartford, printed by T. Green of N London,
are to be sold singly or collectively bound, by said Green. Authors dead a *
fixed.
1713 Sermon. 1. On Genesis 20 11* by Mr * ^ulkler, of Col^^est. 1714 Sermon. 2. On
Prove. 14. ^4 by Mr. * (...) of Farm^^g. 1715 Sermon. 3. On Deuteronomy 17. 18, by Mr. *
Moss of Darby 1716 Sermon. 4. On 1 These 4 11 by Mr. Stoddard of Wood^. 1717 Sermon.
5. On Psalm 121. ^ by Mr. Cutler of Stratford. 1718 Sermon. 6. On 1 Timothy 2. 2 by
Mr. * (...) of C^xter. 1719 Sermon. 7. On 1 Sa^ 2. ^0. by Mr. Chauncy of Durham
1720 Sermon. 8. On Rev. ^. 1 by Mr * (...) of East Hadd^^ 1721 Sermon. 9. On 2 Chronicles 20 3^ by Mr. * Mars^ of Windsor 1722 Sermon. 10. On Psalm. 7^. 7. by Mr *
Burnham of Kensing. 1723 Sermon. 11. On Micah 2. by Mr. * Williams of Ma^^s^ 1724
Sermon. 12. On ^^^k 9. 11 by Mr. * Woodbridges of Ha^t. 1725 Sermon. 13. On Eccl.
10. 17. by Mr. * Mather of Saybrock 1726 Sermon. 14. On Josh 1. 1^. by Mr. * Fisk
of Haddam 1727 Sermon. 15. On Isa 52 7. by Mr. * Woodbridge of Hartf. 1728 Sermon.
16. On Psalm ^^. 20 by Mr. * Buckingham of Heart. 1730 Sermon. 17. On Rev 2. ^. by
Mr. Russel of Middletown 1731 Sermon. 18. On Psalm. 2. 4 by Mr. * Whittelsey of
Wallingf. 1732 Sermon. 19. On Heb. 9 2^ by Mr. Edwards of Windsor 1733 Sermon. 20.
On Isa 65. ^ by Mr. * Adams of N London 1734 Sermon. 21. On Neh. 7. 2. by Mr
Chauncy of Durham. 1736 Sermon. 22. On Psalm. 103. 1^ by Mr. * Marsh of Windsor
1737 Sermon. 23. On Josh 24. 2^ by Mr. Colton of Hartford 1738 Sermon. 24. On Man
22 21 by Mr. Eliot of Killingworth 1740 Sermon. 25. On (...) 16. 7. by Mr
Heminway of E. Have. 1741 Sermon. 26. On Josh 17. by Mr Williams of Lebanon. 1742
Sermon. 27. On Psalm. 147. 2. by Mr Styles of N Haven 1744 Sermon. 28. On Psa 77 20
by Mr Worthington of S brook 1745 Sermon. 29. On 2 Samuel 23. 4 by Mr. Whitman of
Hartf* 1746 Sermon. 30. On 2 Chronicles. 19 ^ by Mr. Hall of Wallingf. 1747 Sermon. 31.
On 2 Chronicles 12. 12 by Mr. * Hun of Reading. 1748 Sermon. 32. On Psalm. 2 10. by Mr
Eells of Stonington. 1749 Sermon. 33. On Romans 13. 6. by Mr Todd of East Guilford.
1750 Sermon. 34. On Psalm. 11. 3. by Mr. Hobart of Fairfield. 1751 Sermon. 35. On
Psalm. 122* 4. 5 by Mr Lord of Norwich. 1752 Sermon. 36. On Psalm 78. 72 by Mr
Woodbridge of Glassen. 1753 Sermon. 37. On Deuteronomy. 34. 5. by Mr. Devotion of
Windham 1754 Sermon. 38. On 1 Samuel 12. 14 by Mr Lackwood of Wethe^^

