The American INSTRUCTOR: OR, Young Man's Best Companion.

CONTAINING, Spelling, Reading, Writing, and Arithmetic, in an easier Way than
any yet published; and how to qualify any Person for Business, without the Help
of a Master.

Instructions to write Variety of Hands, with Copies both in Prose and Verse.
How to write Letters on Business or Friendship. Forms of Indentures, Bonds,
Bills of Sale, Receipts, Wills, Leases, Releases, etc.

Also Merchants Accounts, and a short and easy Method of Shop and Book keeping;
with a Description of the several American Colonies.

Together with the Carpenter's Plain and exact Rule: Showing how to measure
Carpenters, Joyners, Sawyers, Bricklayers, Plaisterers, Plumbers, Masons,
Glasiers, and Painters Work. How to undertake each Work, and at what Price; the
Rates of each Commodity, and the common Wages of Journeymen; with Gunter's
Line, and Coggeshal's Description of the Sliding-Rule.

Likewise the PRACTICAL GAUGER made Easy; the Art of Dialling, and how to erect
and fix any Dial; with Instructions for Dying, Coloring, and making Colors.

To which is added, The POOR PLANTER'S PHYSICIAN: With Instructions for Marking
on Linen; how to Pickle and Preserve; to make diverse Sorts of Wine; and many
excellent Plasters, and Medicines, necessary in all Families.

And also, Prudent Advice to young Tradesmen and Dealers.

The whole better adapted to these American Colonies, than any other Book of
the like Kind.

By GEORGE FISHER, Accomptant.

The Tenth Edition, Revised and Corrected.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN and D. HALL, at the New-Printing Office,
in Market Street, 1753.

THE PREFACE.
I Need say but little by way of Preface, in relation to the Usefulness of this
Book, the Title Page so fully declaring its Contents: But as a Preface is
usually expected, I must and cannot well avoid saying something with respect to
its Utility.

As to the first Step of forming the young Man's Mind for Business, viz. The
being instructed in, and acquainted with our Mother Tongue, viz. English, it
must and is acknowledged by all, to be a due and principal Qualification in
writing Business, and therefore it is necessary to be therewith well acquainted.

Then in the next Place, to write a good, fair, free, and commendable Hand, is
as necessary in most, if not in all the Affairs of Life, and Occurrences of
Business.

The next Thing touched on, is in relation to the inditing of some few Epistles
or Letters in a familiar Style, and on sundry Subjects and Occasions: With
Directions how to subscribe or conclude a Letter, and also to superscribe or
direct Letters, according to the different Ranks and Qualities of the Persons
to whom directed: And this cannot be denied but to be a Qualification fit for a
young Man, and also to others more adult Years.

The next Accomplishment for a young Man, and large^^ treated on in this Book,
is that excellent Science (...) Arithmetic, both Vulgar and Decimal: Leading
him (...) the Hand, and by easy Steps, through its whole (...).

Again the young Man is next shown the ingenious Art o^ Book-keeping after the
Italian Manner, by way of Doubl^ Entry; and that is an Accomplishment that
capacitates hi^ for Business in the highest Degree: Under which Head, h^ is
also informed how to draw out or make various Sorts o^ Accounts or Writings,
relating to Mercantile Affairs; a^ Bills of Lading, Invoices, Accounts of
Sales, together with authentic Examples of Bills of Exchange, with Notes
concerning them; likewise Bills of Parcels of diverse Kinds; also various Sorts
of Receipts, etc. All which is expedien^ for a young Man to know and
understand, if he would be dextrous in Business.

Next he has a concise Account of the several American Colonies; with a short
but comprehensive Account of all the Arts and Sciences: An historical Table of
the most remarkable Events that have happened in the World; and An Abstract of
the History of England.

Here are also, easy, plain, and likewise curious Directions for measuring all
Sorts of Planes and Solids (Arithmetically and Instrumentally) as the Works of
Carpenters, Joiners, Sawyers, Bricklayers, Masons, Plaisterers. Painters,
Glasiers, etc. with the Prices of their Works.

Here is likewise shown the Methods, of extracting the Square and Cube Roots,
with some of their Uses, in relation to Measuring, etc.

Also Practical Gauging of diverse Kinds of Vessels, Tuns, etc. Likewise
Dialling in various Kinds, with the Representation of the several Sorts of
Dials, and how to beautify and adorn them.

Next are Precedents of Law Writings, as Bonds, Bills Indentures, Wills,
Letters of Attorney, etc. in great V^^riety, and adapted to these American
Colonies.

Lastly, some Directions relating to the pleasant and delightful Art of
Graffing and Inoculating. To which is subjoined, some Instructions to young
Women how to Pickle and Preserve all Kinds of Fruits and Flowers, etc. with
Instructions for making diverse Sorts of Wines of English Growth; and also for
preparing many excellent Medicines, Plasters, etc. with several good
Prescriptions of proper Use against most Distempers: Fit for, and necessary in,
all Families. Including the whole of that useful little Tra^^ entitled, The
Poor Planter's Physician.

To the whole is added, some prudential Advice to a young Tradesman or Dealer;
which, if observed, may, with God's Blessing, make his Fortune.

In the British Edition of this Book, there were many Things of little or no
Use in these Parts of the World: In this Edition those Things are omitted, and
in their Room many other Matters inserted, more immediately useful to us
Americans. And many Errors in the Arithmetical Part are here carefully
corrected.

VALE and FRUERE.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR YOUTH, To SPELL, READ, and WRITE TRUE ENGLISH.
The Use of Great and Small Letters; how to divide them into Vowels and
Consonants; what Diphthongs are, their Numbers, and how pronounced and written.

THE Subject Part of this Book being to instruct Young (as well as Old) People,
in the general Rules of Business and Conversation thereunto belonging, the
first Step I shall take for forming the Mind for Business, is that most
necessary Accomplishment, the Spelling and Writing good and proper English; for
let a Person write never so good a Hand, yet if he be defective in Spelling, he
will be ridiculed and contemptibly smiled at, notwithstanding his fair Writing;
and which will, indeed, make his Orthographical Faults be more conspicuous. But
to the Matter.

First, We are to take Notice, that of Letters are made Syllables, of Syllables
Words, and of Words, Sentences, etc.

The Letters are in Number 24; to which if you add j and v Consonants, being of
a different Shape and Sound from the rest, they make 26. As to the Letters, we
are to observe their Names, their Form, and their Force: Their Names, whereby
to know them; their Form, whether great or small; and their Force in
Pronounciation or Utterance.

Letters are distinguished, according to their Sound, (...) Vowels and
Consonants: A Vowe^ is a Letter that soundet^ by itself, and they be five in
Number, viz. a, e, i, o, u, an^ y, the Greek Vowel; which also is a Vowel in
English, when it comes after a Consonant, and has the Sound of i; a^ in by,
sly, reply, etc. A Consonant is a Letter that soundet^ not, except it be joined
with a Vowel, for without one o^ the Vowels no Syllable can be made; as, b, c,
d, etc. with^out the Aid of a Vowel, make nothing: So that Vowels an^
Consonants may be compared to Nouns ^ubstantive and Noun^ Adjective, each
requiring the other's Assistance. Though w^ have but 24 Letters, and 6 of them
Vowels, yet we have 21 Consonants; for j, v, and y, when they are set before
any Vowel, in the same Syllable, become Consonants; a^ was said before
concerning y; as in Jupiter, Juno, Jilt, vulgar* violent, vigor, etc. Note,
That j Consonant has the Soun^ of g, as in j in, jangle, jingle, etc.

When two Vowels come or meet together in a Word, and are not parted in the
Pronounciation, but united in one Sound such are called Diphthongs; being 13,
viz. ai, ei, oi, and ui, au, eu, ou, ee, oo, ea, eo, oa, and ei; as in maid,
faith* either, join, aul, eunuch, stout, feed, seed, food, brood* stealth,
wealth, people, st^eple, boat, goat, heat, beat, feat* friend, field, etc.
Note, That in the first 7 Words, bot^ Vowels are sounded; but in the other 15,
one of them i^ scarcely heard.

There are also those that are called Tripthongs, where thre^ Vowels meet in
one Sound, as in Beauty, Beau, Lieu, and View: Likewise ay, ey, oy, uy, aw, ew,
and ow become Diphthongs, at the End of Words, but are called improper
Diphthongs; as in say, key, joy, saw, bow, etc.

Of Letters Great and Small, and when to be used.
FIRST Negatively* Great Letters are not to be used in the Middle or latter End
of a Word, except the whole Word be so written, as JEHOVAH, LORD, or Titles of
Books, etc. For it would be very absurd to write thus: To Mr. geoRgE RoGeRs In
thaMes StReEt.

1 st, Great Letters, or Capitals, are written at the Beginning of Sentences;
as, Fear God. Honor the King. Know when to speak, and when to hold your Tongue.

2 dly* After every Period, or Full Stop, when new Matter begins. As, Some time
after that Accident, another followed, which was this, etc. London, May 16.
Turin, June 12, etc.

3 dly, All Proper Names of Persons, Places, Ships, Rivers, etc. are to begin
with a Capital; as, George, London, the Dr^adnought, Thames, Severn: All
Christian Names and Surnames, both of Men and Women, must begin with a Great
Letter; as, Samuel Sharp, Mary Sweeting, etc.

4 thly, The more eminent Words in a Sentence; as Faith is the Foundation of
the Christian Religion; or, any Word that we have a particular Regard or
Deference for; as, God, Christ, King, Queen, etc.

5 thly, At the Beginning of every Line in Poetry; as, Improve your Time: Time
passes quickly on;
Nor does so good succeed, as that that is gone.


6 thly, All Names of Arts, and Sciences, and Trades; as, Writing, Arithmetic,
Geometry, Music, Carpenter, Smith, etc. And evermore the Personal Pronoun I,
and the Interjection O, must be Capitals.

For it is ridiculous to write thus; On Monday last i came to your House, but
you was not at Home; then i went, etc.

Lastly, I think I may venture to give a general Rule when Capitals are to
begin Words, which is this; All Nouns Substantive may begin with a great
Letter; and a Substantive may be known by the Signs either of A, An, or The,
before them; as, a House, a Mill, an Ox, an Ass, the City, the River, etc. And
I think the Adjective (which declares what Sort of a Thing the Substantive is)
may be with a Small, and the Substantive with a Great Letter; as, the white
Horse, the long Rope, brown Bread, fat Beef, etc.

Small Letters are commonly written in all other Places, as Verbs of the Active
and Passive Voice, etc.

Observations concerning the Sound of Letters, and which are omitted in
Pronounciation.
A, Is not sounded in Pharaoh, nor in Sabbath, but as if written Pharo, and
Sabbath; neither in Marriage, but as Marrige; also Parliament as Parliment, and
Chaplain as Chaplin, etc. In some proper Names it is not sounded, but dropped in
the Pronounciation; as in Aaron, Isaac, Canaan, Balaam, which are pronounced as
if written Aron, Isac, Canan, Balam; but we must except Ba-al, and Ga-al. A is
sounded broad like aw, in Words before ld and ll; as in bald, scald, ball,
wall, ^all, etc.

B is not sounded in thumb, dumb, plumb, (...), doubt, debt, subtle, etc. but
sounded as if written thum, dum, plum lam, dout, det, subtle.

C is sounded hard like K, before a, o, and u, and before l and r; as in these
Words, cane, came, comb, cub, clay, crane, crab; and soft in cement, city, and
tendency; C loses its Sound in scene, science, and victuals, and in ve^dict,
likewise in indict, indictment; also before k, as in stack, rack, stick, thick,
brick.

Ch is sounded like K, in Words of Foreign Extraction, and in many proper Names
of the holy Scripture; as in Chorus, Chemist, Chrysostom, Christ, Chederlaomer,
Baruch, Archippus, etc. Ch in French Words sound like sh, as in Chevalier,
pronounced as Shevalier: Machine as Masheen, Marshall as Marshal, Capuchin as
Capushen, Chaise as Shaze, etc.

D is not sounded in Ribband, nor in Wednesday, but pronounced as Ribbin, and
Wensday; the Termination ed is shortened into t; as burned, burnt; choked,
choakt; ripped, ripped; passed, past; choped, chopped; etc.

E is not sounded in heart, neither in hearth, or dearth, etc. and seldom heard
but in Monosyllables; as in me, he, she, ye, the, etc. where it has the Sound
of ee; but in Words, derived from the Hebrew and Greek, e has its perfect
Sound, as, Jesse, Jubilee, Mamre, Nineve, Candace, Cloe, Eunice; Penelope,
Salmone, Phebe, Epitome, Catastrophe, Gethsemane, and from the Latin simile,
and praemunire, etc. E final, or e at the End of a Word, serves to lengthen the
Sound, and to distinguish it from other Words without e, which are sounded
short; as in these Examples following, viz. cane, can; hate, hat; bite, bit;
fare, far; hope hop; made, mad; mane, man; scrape, scrap; stare, star; tune,
tun; write, writ; etc. And in Words of more than one Syllable, lengthens the
Sound of the last Syllable, but does not increase the Number of Syllables; as,
admire, demise, blaspheme, etc. E lengthens the Syllable in Tire, Kenite, and
Shu-la-mite. E must not be made to lengthen a Syllable, when it is made short
by two Consonants; as in pass, turn, black; not pass, turn, black. Words
ending in cre, gre, and tree, Sound the e before the r, as in these Words; acre,
lucre, center, sepulcher; tygre, maugre, mitre, luster; which are sounded as if
written aker, luker, senter, sepulker, tiger mauger, miter, and luster. E final,
when not sounded, serves to soften c and g, as in ace, place, lace, spice,
truce, oblige, huge, age, etc. If Nouns in e final take s after them with an
Apostrophe before it, it stands for his, as the Pope's Eye, or the Eye of the
Pope. If without an Apostrophe, it makes the Plural Number, as Tables. E must
be joined to long s in these Words; Horse, Nurse, Purse; not Horse, Nurs, or
Purs. If to e at the End of a Word, a long Vowel be added, the e is to be
omitted, as in writing, loving, doing, etc. not writeing, loveing, or doing;
except the Terminations ge and ce before able, as in charge-able, peace-able,
etc. E must not be written after a Diphthong, in these Words; vain, maid, gain,
fear, gnaw, etc. not vain, maid, gain, etc.

F in Plurals is changed into v, as, strife, strives, staff, staves.

G is not sounded in sign, reign, neither in gnaw, gnat, assign, design,
seignior, seraglio, phlegm, etc. but sounded as ^f senior, seralio, fleme. G is
sounded soft in gender, ginger, and gipsy; but hard in Gibeon, Giberah, Gilboa,
Geth-semane, and hard also in these Proper Names, Gibson, Gilman, and Gilbert;
and likewise in these common Words, gelt, geld, gird, gimp, geese, gander,
gabble, gather, gild, etc. Observe, That if G be hard with a long Vowel, ue is
joined and pronounced in the same Syllable; as in Plague, Prague, Hague, rogue,
league, dialogue, catalogue, etc.

Gh in the End of some Words, where au or ou goes before, has the Sound of ff,
as in tough, rough; cough, laugh, ^ounded as if tuff, ruff, coff, laff; but
huff, cuff, snuff, and buff, must be so written. -- Gh is not sounded in
mighty, though, through, neither in daughter, or Vaughan.

H has Place, but no Sound, in Crystal, Chronicle, Christ, Ghost, John,
Rhine, Schedule, and Schism. H is not sounded at the End of Words, if it be
alone, without t or c before ^t, as, snatch, watch, etc.

l is not sounded in adieu, juice, venison, fruit, bruise, Salisbury; but
sounded like ee in oblige, Magazine, and Machine, etc. l is sounded long in
proper Names ending in iah, Jeremiah, Hezekiah; but short in A-ri-el and
Me-ri-am. -- The tail'd j, or Consonant, has been spoke of before.

K is nearly allied in Sound with C; but to know when to use one, and when the
other, Note, that C has the Force of K only before a, o, oo, and u, and these
two Consonants l and r; and therefore we must not write, kare for care, kow for
cow, krown for crown; and the use of K is only be^fore e, i, and n; wherefore
we must write keep, key, knight* kill, etc. not ceep, cey, cnight, nor cil* We
must write Ca^lendar, Catherine, rather than Calendar, or Katherine.

L is not sounded in calf, half, chalk, stalk, walk; bu^ pronounced as if cafe,
hafe, chauk, flauk, wauk. Neithe^ is l pronounced in Bristol, Holborn, Lincoln,
Salmon, o^ Chaldron; but sounded as if writ Bristow, Hoburn, Lincon* Sammon,
and Chaudron; nor in Colonel, where the first l hat^ the Sound of rr, as
Curronel.

M has the Sound of n, in the Word account.

N is not heard in autumn, lime-kiln, solemn, limn, hymn column, nor in condemn.

O is not sounded in people, faoffe, basin, mutton, and (...) also in yeoman,
mason, righteous, bacon, jeopardy, and crimson* O sometimes sounds like oo, as
in doing, moving, proving, etc* O is not heard in coroner, damosel, Nicholas,
carrion, (...) in chariot; but pronounced as if writ crowner, damsel* Nicklas,
carrin, and charrit. -- O is sometimes sounde^ like i; as in women and flagon,
pronounced as if wimme^ and flaggin. And sometimes O is sounded as u, as in
cordui^* conjure, attorney, and Monmouth, being heard as if (...) cundit,
cunjur, attorney, and Munmouth.

P is written, but not sounded, in empty, presumptuous* psalm, sumpter,
account, attempt, psalter, and symptom; als^ in sumptuous, contemptuous,
receipt, and consumptive, etc.

Ph have the sound of f, when together in one Syllable; (...) in philosophy,
physician, Asaph, and elephant, but we mu^^ not write filosophy, fisitian, nor
Asaf, or elefant. Ph (...) parted in shep-herd, up-hold, and in Clap-ham, and
other such compounded Words.

Q. After Q always follows u in all Words; and in Frenc^ Words it has the
Sound of k; as in risque, liquor, catho^lique, banquet, conquer, masquerade,
chequer; pronounce^ as risk, likker, catholic, banquet, etc.

S is not sounded in island, viscount, or isle, nor in Lisle^ but pronounced as
island, vicount, i will, and Lile.

There be two Sorts of s's, the long s, thus s; and the lit^tle s, thus s; the
long s in the Beginning and Middle (...) Words, (but never at the latter End)
and the short or smal^ s at the latter End of Words, and sounds hard like z, in
(...) the Words of the plural Number, and in Words of the thir^ Person; as
names, worms, he reads, she hears* S sound ^ard, in Words that terminate in
sion, as in circumcision, ^vasion, delusion; but after a Co^sonant soft, as in
c^^version, commission, dimension. S is likewise soun^ed hard in the^e Words,
raise, praise, chaise, cheese, these, compose, exp^se, ^ruise, refuse,
applause, pause, clause, wisdom, casement, and damsel. -- I do not think it any
very great Abuse, to ^ave the small s sometimes in the Beginning or Middle of a
Word, as well as at the latter End; especially if a t follow (...), thus st.

Th sounds fine in thin, think, and wrath; and is sounded ^ard in thee, th^n,
they, that, blythe, tithe, and sith; (...) in mother, brother, hither,
thither; and in loath, cloth, and cloathier, etc.

Ti before a Vowel or Diphthong, has the Sound of si; as (...) patience,
dictionary, gratian, oblation, nation, translation; ^xcept when s goes just
before it, as in these Words, question, ^ustian, bastion, combustion, and
celestial, and also bestial, ^c. In some Words of Hebrew and Greek, ti retains
its ^atural Sound; as in S^ealatiel, Phaltiel, Shephatiah, Cotittia,
^dramyttium, and the like; and in mightier and mightiest, ^^ptiest, emptied;
and from pity, we say piti-able.

U is sounded like i in bury, birry, buzy, bizze; business, (...) bizness.

W is not sounded, though written, in answer, sword, whore, nor in swooning
away, neither is it heard in wrap, wrath, wrong, wretch, wreath, wrangle,
wriggle; but ^ronounced as if sord, hoar, souning, and has the Sound of (...)
in the last seven Words, viz. rap, rath, rong, etc.

Wh belongs to Words purely English; as what, when, where and wheel.

X is sounded as z, in Xenophon, Xerxes, Xenocrates, and Xantippe.

Y is either a Vowel or Consonant, as hinted before. A Vowel, in my, by, sly,
thy; and sometimes, when a Vowel, (...) has the Sound of ee, as in worthily,
christianity, liberty, ^ormerly, formally, Normondy, and Dorothy. Y is a
Consonant when it begins a Word, as in yet, you, yonder, younger, and yesterday.

Z has its proper Sound, in Zeno, zeal, zealous, and in Zenobia. It has the
Sound of s in Elizabeth, size, prize, and Melchizedeck; the first of which
Words has been formerly, and sometimes now is writ with an s, thus, Elisabeth.

Thus far for the Sound of Letters single; and now I shall give a few Notes
concerning two Letters, when they are united in one Sound, called Diphthongs;
and first of

Ai and Ay. These have the Sound of a, in air, fair, pair, may, stay, play; but
a is lost in Calais, (a Town of France) and pronounced separately in Sinai, (a
Mountain of Arabia)*

Ei, and Ey, are sounded in eight, straight, slight, and heyday! and are
pronounced as e, in key, veil, and convey but eye must be excepted: And ei is
sounded as a, in neighbor, and heir, being pronounced as nabor and arc.

Oi and Oy have a Sound peculiar to themselves; as in oil and oyster; but make
no Diphthong in going or doing.

Au and Aw commonly keep a proper Sound; as in augur^* austere, daw, maw, saw,
etc. but au is lost in aunt, an^ gauger, being sounded as ant and gager;
likewise is not hear^ in Em-ma-us, and Ca-per-na-um.

Eu and Ew have an united Sound in all Words, as in feu^ brew, new, and grew;
but eu, is no Diphthong in Zac che us, or in Bar-ti-me-us.

Ou and Ow. Ou is expressed in foul, soul, proud, loud; an^ ow in bow, cow, and
now; but ou sounds like oo, in s^up (a French Dish) Stroud, (a Town in Kent)
and Cowper, (a Man Name) sounded as if soop, Strood, and Cooper.

Ee is no Diphthong in Be-e-rites, Be-er-she-ba, and in B^^el-ze-bub, one of
the e's is dropped in Pronounciation; neithe^ in Words beginning with re, or pre,
as re-enter, pre e-m^^nence.

Oo is properly sounded in cool, fool, pool, and tool; (...) has the Sound of
u in root, foot, and soot; and makes (...) Diphthong in Co-os, co-o-pe-rate.

Ea sounds like a, in sea, pea, seam, and ream; and hat^ the sound of e in
bread, head, lead, dead, search, leathe^* feather, heaven, and leaven; but is
no Diphthong in ven-g^^ance, mis-cre-ant, or any Hebrew, Greek, or Latin Word^
as in Ka-desh, Bar-ne a, Kir-jath-je-a-rim, nor in Ce s^^re-a, i-de a, or
o-ce-an; neither in re al, be-a-ti-tude, (...) a tor; but except creature; nor
in Words beginning with (...) as pre-amble, etc.

Oa is sounded as o in goat, boat, and coat; and sounde^ broad, as au, in broad
and groat; but is no Diphthong Go-a, (a City in India) or in the Hebrew Words
Zo-an, (...), and Gil-bo-a.

Ie before a single Consonant, sounds like ee, as in brief, chief, and thief;
but if before two Consonants, it sounds like e; as in friend, field; but at the
End of English Words* e final is not heard, as in die, signify; and is no
Diphthong in A-bi e zer, Eli-e-zer, nor in the English Words di-er, carri-er,
or clo-thi er; and in Words derived from the Latin, ^e is parted, as in
cli-ent, o-ri-ent, qui-et, and sci-ence.

Ui is sounded as u in juice, fruit, and suit; but u is lost in conduit, build,
and guise, and is no Diphthong in je suit, ge-nu-in, or fru-i-ti-on.

AE and OE be no English Diphthongs, but are used in Aesop, Aeneas, Aetna,
Caesar, Oedipus, and Economy; but in common Words they are neglected; as in
equity, female, and tragedy, though derived of aequitas, foemina, and tragoedia.

Of Syllables, and their Divsion, being the Art of Spelling.
A Syllable is a taking Letters together, and ut^^ring them in one Breath, as
vir-tue; so that virtue being thus divided, or taken asunder, makes two
Syllables, viz. vir and tue, which put together, forms the word virtue. And
many times a Vowel, or a Diphthong, of themselves, make a Syllable; as in
a-bate, e-ve-ry, i-dle, o-ver, u-su-rie; so of Diphthongs, as au-ger, Eu-stace,
ow-ner, ai^der, oy-ster Ea-ton, oa-ten: By which we may particularly note, That
no Syllable can be made, be there never so many Consonants, or so few, without
the Aid of a Vowel or Diphthong.

The longest Monosyllables we have in English, are length, strength, and
streights; which still would be nothing, without the Vowel e and i.

All Spelling may be taken in, under these four following general Rules, or
Heads.

1 st, When a Consonant comes between two Vowels in dividing the Word into
^yllables, the Consonant is joined to the latter Vowel; as in sta-ture,
na-ture, de-li-ver, u ni-ty, etc. except compound Words, which terminate in ed,
en, est, eth, er, ing, ish, and ous; as coasted, gold-en, know-est, know-eth,
bear-er, fool-ing, bar-ba-rous, ra-ven-ous, and sub-urbs.

2 dly, When two Consonants come together in the Middle of a Word, they are to
be parted if not proper to begin a Word; as num-ber, stran-ger, for-tune, etc.
not numb-er, strang-er, fort-une: To this Rule is excepted, Words with x, as
ox-en, ex-er-cise, etc. When the same Consonant is doubled in a Word, the first
belongs to the foregoing, and the latter to the following Syllable, as in the
Rule above, and in these words, Ab ba, ac-cord, an-no, ad-der, etc.

3 dly, Consonants that can begin Words, must not be parted in the Middle; as
a-gree, be-stow, re-frain, etc. not ag-ree, bes-tow, ref-rain. -- These
Consonants may begin Words, viz. bl, br, ch, cr, dr, dw, fl, fr, gh, gl, gr,
kn, etc. as blunt, break, chaw, cry, draw, dwell, flesh, ghost, etc. On the
Contrary, Consonants that cannot begin Words, must be parted in the Middle, as
in Sul-tan, and as said above.

4 thly, When two Vowels come together, not making a Diphthong, they must be
divided; as in vi-al, va-li-ant, Li-o-nel, du-el, cru-el, me-te-or, and
La-o-di-ce-a.

Some particular Notes.

L is doubled in Words of one Syllable; as well, tell, swell, ball, wall, fall,
will, hill, mill, etc. But in Words of more than one Syllable, the Word always
te^minates with single l, as, angel, Babel, hurtful, dutiful, and beautiful.
Neither must l be doubled in always, also, although; not all-way, all-so,
all-though, etc. But Words accented on the last Syllable, must be excepted from
the Rule above, viz. install, recall, inroll, rebel, and repel.

Y must be used before the Termination ing, as buying, lying, carrying,
marrying, paying, slaying, burying, etc.

The long s must never be used at the End of a Word, o^ immediately after the
short or small s.

X should be used instead of ct, where it appears to have been in the Original;
as reflection connection, rather than reflection, or connection, etc.

Remember, that if you cannot write out the whole Word at the End of the Line,
break it off at the End of a Syllable, thus -- condemn; not thus -- condemn:
Again -- discharge; not -- discharge.

C must not be put between two Consonants; as think, no^ thinck; thank, not
thanck; brink, not brinck; but if a Vowel goes before c, you must write c
before k, as brick, stick, thick, etc.

E final must not be placed after a Syllable made long by a Diphthong, as rain,
not rain; brain, not brain; restrain, not restrain, etc. Neither is it
necessary after a double Consonant, as inn and add; not inn or add: But we
must except Anne, a Christian Name, and Done, a Surname; and also Deal, the
Name of a Town in Kent.

Ph must be retained in Words of a Foreign Original; as fancy, prophet; not
fancy, profet.

U follows Q in all Words, as was said before.

Q is better than C, in some Words from the Latin, as oblique, antique,
relic, rather than oblike, antike, or relike. Also paquet, risque, traffic,
and Fabrique, from the French.

K is by some thought unnecessary in Words of Foreign Extraction, viz.
arithmetic, music, logic, public, catholic, and physic; rather than
arithmetic, etc.

Of S and C. Some People may easily drop into Error by mistaking S for C, as in
the Beginning of the following Words, where C has the perfect Sound of S,
though C must undoubtedly be written, viz. in Ceiling Celestial Civet Certain
Cymbal Cistern Centurion Cinnamon Ceremony Cellar Censure Censor Cease
Celebrate Cell Censer Celerity Cypress Circle Circuit Cement Ceruss Center
Cinque Cipher City Citron


But these Words must be written with S, viz.

Science Schedule Scepter Scheme Scarcity Schism Sciatica Scythian
When to write ti, and when si -- viz.

with ti. with si. Contention Confusion Action Occasion Contradiction Contusion
Attention Oppression Benediction Allusion Apparition Ascension Concoction
Aversion Declaration Aspersion Ambition Commission Contrition Comprehension
Oration Circumcision Oblation Conclusion
These Words spell thus, Passion, not Pashon Fashion, not Fation Cushion, not
Cution Gloucester, not Gloucester Worcester, not Worster Salisbury, not Salsbury
Leicester, not Lester. Shrewsbury, not Shrosbury Carlisle, not Carlisle
Westminster, not Westmiste^


Another Qualification in Spelling, is rightly to distingui^^ Words of the same
Sound, though widely different in the Sense and Signification: Such as these
that follow, viz.

A
ABel, Cain's Brother Able, to do a Thing A Bell, to ring Accidents, Chances
Accidence, a Book Acre, of Land Acorn, of an Oak Achor, a Valley of that Name
Advice, Counsel Advise, to counsel Account, Esteem Account, of Reckoning Ale, a
Drink Ail, Trouble All, every one Awl, for Shoemakers Alley, a narrow Place
Ally, a Friend or Confederate Allay, to give Ease Alloy, baser Metal Altar, for
Sacrifice Al^er, to change Ale-hoof, an Herb Aloof, at a Distance Allowed,
approved Aloud, to speak so Amiss, wrong (...), or Mistress Ant, a Pismire
Aunt, a Father's Sister Anchor, of a Ship Anchor, a Rundlet A Peal, of Bells
Appeal, to higher Powers Appear, to be seen A Peer, a Lord Array, good Order
Array, to cloth A Rose, to smell to Arose, did rise Are, they be Heir, to an
Estate Arrant, notorious Errand, a Message Arrows, to shoot Arras, Hangings A
Scent, or Smell Ascent, a going up Assent, Agreement Assistance, Help
Assistants, Helpers Augur, a Soothsayer Augre, to bore with Ax, to cut with
Acts, of Parliament Austere, severe Oyster, a Shell Fish
B
Babel, the Tower Bab^le, to prate Ba^on, Hog's Flesh Baken, in the Oven
Beckon, to make a Sign Bail, a Surety Bale, of Goods Bald, without Hair Bawled,
cried out Ball, to play with Bawl, to cry aloud Barbara, a Woman's Name
Barbary, in Africa Barberry, a Fruit Bare, naked Bear, a Beast, or to bear
Bays, of Bay Trees Baize, Cloth of Colchester Base, Vile Ba^s, in Music Belly,
Part of the Body Belie, to speak falsely Be, they are Be, that makes Honey
Beer, to drink Bier, to carry the Dead on Bell, to ring, Bell, an Idol Berry, a
small Fruit Bury, the Dead Blue, a Color Blew, as the Wind Board, a Plank,
Bored, a Hole Boar, a Beast Bore, to bore Boor, a Country Fellow Bold,
Confi^ent Bowl'd, at the Jack Bolt, the Door Boult, the Meal Bow, to bend, or
the Bow Bough, of a Tree Boy, a Lad Buoy, of an Anchor Bread, to eat Bred,
brought up Breech^s, to wear Breaches, broken Places Bruit, a Report Brute,
Beast Burrow, for Coneys Borough, a Corporation By, near Buy, with Money
Brews, he breweth Bruise, a Hurt Brewis, of Fat and Bread
C
Cain, that killed his Brother Cane, to walk with Caen, in Normandy Calais, in
France Chalice, a Cup Call, by Name Cawl, or Suet Cannon, a great Gun Canon, a
Church Rule Capital, great or chief Capitol, a Tower in Rome Car^er, full Speed
Carrier, of Goods Cellar, for Liquors Seller, that sells Ce^ser, for Incense
Censor, a Reformer Censure, to judge Cen^aury, an Herb Century, an hundred
Years Centry or Se^tinel, a Soldier on Guard Chair, to sit in Chare, a Job of
Work Champaine, Wine of France Campaign, a wide Field, or Summer's Expedition
Cho^er, Rage or Anger Collar, of the Neck Collar, of Beef or Brawn Cieling, of
a Room Sealing, with a ^eal Cittern, for Music Citron, a Fruit Clerk, a
Clergyman Clerk, of a Parish Clause, Part of a Sentence Claws, of a Beast or
Bird Coat, a Garment Cote, for Sheep Comb, for the Hair Come, hither Commit, to
do Comet, a blazing Star Common, usual Commune, or converse Condemn, to Death
Contemn, to despise Council, of the King Counsel, Advice Could, or could Cud,
to chew as Beasts Current, a passing or running Stream Courant, a Messenger or
News-paper Currants, Fruit Crick, in the Neck Creek, of the Sea or River
Cousin, a Relation Coz^n, to cheat Cymbal, a musical Instrument Symbol, a Mark
or Sign Cypress, a Tree Cyprus, an Island Cruse, for Oil Cruize, by the Sea
Coast Cygnet, a young Swan Signet, a Seal
D
Dane, of Denmark Deign, to vouchsafe Dam, stopping Water Damn, to condemn
Dame, a Mistress Dear, of Price Dear, in a Park Deceased, dead Diseased, sick
Decent, becoming Descent, going down Dissent, to disagree D^ep, low in the
Earth Diep, a Town in France Defer* to put off Differ, to disagree Derbe, a
City of Asia Derby, a Town of Engla^^ Desert, Merit Desert, a Wilderness Dew, a
falling Mist Due, owing Do, to make Do, a female Deer Dough, Paste Don, a
Spanish Lord Done, acted Dun, of Color Dolphin, a Fish Dauphine, the French
King eldest Son Devices, Inventions Devizes, in Wiltshire Doer, that does
Door, of a House Dragon, a Beast Dragoon, a Soldier Draught, of Drink Drought,
^ryness Dolor, Grief or Pain Dollar, a Piece of Money Demure, Sober Demur, a
Stop or Doubt
E
Ear, of the Head Ever, ever Early, betimes* Yearly, every Year Earth, the
Ground Hearth, of the Chimney Easter, the Festival Esther, a Woman's Name
Enter, to go in Inter, to bury Elder, not the Younger Eld^rn, a Tree Eaten, or
swallowed Eton, a Town's Name Eminent, famous Imminent, over Head Enough, in
Number Enough, in Quantity Earn, to deserve Yarn, Woollen Thread Yearn, to pity
Envy, or Hatred Envoy, a Messenger Exercise, Labor or Practice Exorcise, to
conjure Err, to mistake Er, Brother to Onan, Sons of Judah Extant, in being
Extent, Distance
F
Fain, desirous Feign, to dissemble Fair, beautiful, or a Market Fare, Victuals
Faint, weary Feint, a false March Fourth, in Number Forth, to go out Feed to
eat Fee'd, rewarded Fir, Wood Fur, or Hair Felon, a Criminal Fellon, a Whitlow
File, of Steel Foil, put to the worst Fly, as a Bird Fly, or Insect Fillip,
with the Fingers Philip, a Man's Name Flower, of the Field Flour, Meal Floor,
of the Room Follow, to come after Fallow, Ground not plowed Find, to find any
thing Fined, amerced Fiend, a Devil Flea off the Skin, and also Vermin Flee, to
escape Fowl, a Bird Foul, dirty Francis, a Man's Name Frances, a Woman's Name
Frays, Quarrels Froise, Pancake with Bacon
G
Gall, of a Beast Gaul, France Garden, of Herbs Guardian, an Overseer Genteel,
graceful Gentile, a Heathen Gentle, mild Gesture, Carriage Jester, a merry
Fellow Groan, with Grief Grown, greater Guilt, of Sin Gilt, with Gold Greater,
bigger Grater, for Nutmegs Grave, for the Dead Greave, Armor for the Leg
Guess, to imagine Guest, one entertained Gluttonous, greedy Glutinous, sticking
as Pitch Great, large Grate, for Coals, etc. Graze, to eat Grays, a Town Groat,
Four pence Grot, a Cave Galleys, Ships with Oars Gallows, for Criminals
H
Hare, of the Fields Hair, of the Head Harsh, severe Hash, minced Meat Haven, a
Harbor Heaven, a large Place of Happiness Heart, of the Body Heart, of the
Woods, or an overgrown Buck Herd, of Cattle Heard, did hear Hard, not soft, or
difficult Here, in this Place Hear, with the Ears High, lofty Hie, away, make
haste Him, that Man Hymn, to sing Hail, congealed Rain Hale, the Ship Hall, in
a House Haul, pull Higher, taller Hire, W^ges His, of him Hiss, as a Snake, or
to deride Hoar, Frost Whore, a lewd Woman Hole, or Hollowness Wh^le, in^ire Ho!
lo! to call H^llow, to make holy Holy, pious Wholly, entirely Home, one's House
Holm, Holly Hoop, for a Tub Whoop, or ho! lo! Hugh, a Man's Name Hue* of Color
Hew, with an Ax
I.
I, I myself Eye, to ^ee with Idle, lazy Idol, an Image I Will, I will I Will, of a
Church Isle, an Island Oil, of Olives Employ, in Work Imply, to signify In,
within Inn, for Travelers Incite, to stir up Insight, Knowledge Ingenious, of
quick Parts Ingenuous, candid Iron, Metal Ironie, speaking by Contra^
K
Ketch, a Ship Catch, to take Kill, to slay Kiln, for Lime Kind, good natured
Coined, Money Knave, dishonest Nave, of a Whe^l Knight, by Honor Night,
Darkness
L.
Laid, placed Lade, the Water Lane, not a Street Lain, did lie Latin, a Tongue
Latten, Tin Lattice, of a Window L^ttice, a Woman's Name ^ettuce, Sallad ^ease,
of a House L^ash, three L^es, of Wine L^ese, old Word for lose L^aper, that
jumpeth L^p^r, one leprous L^ssen, to make less L^sson, to read L^^st, smallest
L^st, for fear L^thargy, Sleepiness L^^urgy, Church Service L^er, in wait Liar,
that tells Lies Limb, a Member Limn, to paint Line, Length L^in, of Veal L^w,
humble (...), behold Lose, to suffer Loss Loose, to let go Lower, to let down
Lour, to frown
M.
Made, finished Maid, a young Woman Main, Chief Mane, of a Horse Male, the He
Mail, Armor Manner, Custom Manor, a Lordship Market, to buy or sell in Mark
it, note it Marsh, low Ground Mash, for a Horse, or of a Net Martin, a Man's
Name Marten, a Bird Mead, a Meadow Mede, one of Media Mean, of low Value Mien,
Carriage or Aspect Meat, to eat Mete, to measure Message, Business Message, a
House Mews, for Hawks Muse, to meditate Mighty, powerful Moiety, half Mile,
Measure Moil, Labor Might, Strength Mite, in Cheese Moat, a Ditch Mote, in the
Sun More, in Quantity Moor, a black Mower, that moweth Moore, barren Ground
Mortar, made of Lime Mortar, to pound in Mole, Vermin* Mould, to cast in
N.
Nay, denial Neigh, as a Horse Neither, none of the two Nether, lower Naught,
bad Naught, nothing Nigh, near Nigh, a Man's Name Nice, curious Niece, a
Brother's Daughter Not, denying Knot, to tie Note, mark Note, of one's Hand
Nose, of the Face Noah's Ark
O.
Oar, of a Boat Ore, crude Metal Over, over Off, cast off Of, belonging to Our,
belonging to us Hour, of the Day Oh! alas! Owe, in Debt One, in Number Own, to
acknowledge Order, Rule Oraure, Dung
P.
Pair, a Couple Pare, cut off Pear, a Fruit Pattin, for a Woman Patent, a Grant
Peer, a Lord Pier, of Dover Peter, a Man^s Name Petre, Salt Pail, for Water
Pale, of Countenance Pale, a Fence Place, Room Plaise, a Fish Parson, of the
Parish Person, any Man Pole, for Hops Poll, of the Head Pool, of Water Pore,
with the Eyes, or of the Skin Poor, necessitous Polate, of the Mouth Pallet,
Bed Pos^, a Nosegay Poesy, Poetry Power, mighty Pour, as Water Prey, a Booty
Pray, beseech Profit, Gain Pr^phet, a Foreteller Practice, Exercise Practice,
to exercise Presence, being here Presents, Gifts Princes, the King's Sons
Princesses, the King's Daug^^ters Please, to content Pleas, Defenses Precedent,
an Example President, Chief Principal, Chief Principle, the first Rule
Q.
Quire, of Paper Choir, of Singers Queen, the King's Wife Queen, an Harlot
R
Rack, to torment Wreck, of a Ship Rain, Water Reign, of the King Rein, of a
Bridle Rays, of the Sun Raise, lift up Race, to run Raze, to demolish Rice,
Grain Rise, to get up Red, in Color Read, the Book Reed, of the Water Relick,
a Remainder Relict, a Widow Roe, of a Fish, or a Fema^^ Deer Row, the Boat
Right, not wrong Ri^e, a Ceremony Write, with a Pen Wright, a Wheelwright
Reddish, of Color Radish, a Root Rear, set up Rere, behind Ruff, for the Neck
Rough, not smooth Rye, Corn Rye, in Sussex Wry, crooked Ring, the Bells Wring,
the Hands Rhyme, a Fog or Mist Rhyme, Verse Rind, of Cheese R^de, did ride Road,
the Highway Rote, got by Heart Wrote, did write Wrought, did work
S.
Savor, Taste or Smell Savior, that saves Sheep* a Beast Ship, for the Sea
Sight, View Cite, to summons Sail, of a Ship Sale, of Goods Sink, sink down
Cinque, Five Slow, not quick She, Fruit Sow, Seed Sew, with a Needle So, thus
Slight, neglected Slight, of Hand Some a Part Sum, of Money Soul, or Spirit
Sole, a Fish Sole, of a Shoe Son, of a Father Sun, in the Firmament Sore,
painful Soar, aloft Swore, did swear Stare, to look on earnestly Stair, a Step
Style, to get over Style, of Writing Sound, whole, firm; also Noise Swoon, to
faint away Straight, not crooked Strait, narrow Succor, Help Sucker, a young
Spri^ Spear, a Weapon Sphere, a Globe
T
Then, at that Time Than, in Comparison Tame, gentle, not wild Them, in
Oxfordshire Tear, to rent Tear, of the Eye Tare, an Allowance in Weight Tare, a
Vetch Tail of a Beast Tale, a Story Tiles, for the House Toyls, Nets Toil, to
Labor There, in that Place Their, of them Throne, of the King Thrown, as a
Stone Tide, a flowing Water Tied, made fast Time of the Day Thyme, an Herb Team
of Horse^ Teem, with Child Twice, twice one To, the Preposition Too, likewise
Toe of the Foot Tow, to draw Tow, to spin Told, as a Story Tolled, as a Bell
Tour, a Journey Tower, of a Church
V.
Vacation, Leisure Vocation, a Calling Veil, a Covering Vale, between two Hills
Vain, foolish Vein, of the Body Vane, or Weathercock Value, Worth Valley, a
Vale Vial, a Glass Viol, a Fiddle
U.
Your, of you Ewer, a Basin Use, Practice Use, to be wont Ewes, Sheep
W.
Wade, in the Water Weighed, in the Scales Whale, of the Sea Wail, lament Ware,
Merchandise Were, was Where, what Place Weigh to weigh Wey, five Quarters Weal,
good Wheal, from Scourging Wield, a Sword Weald, of Sussex in Kent Wen, in the
Neck When, at what Time White, of Color Wight, an Island Whist, Silence Wist,
knew Wood, of Trees Would, for Would
Y.
Yea, Yes Ye, you Ewe, a Sheep Yew, a Tree Yarn, made of Wool Yearn, to weep
Of Stops, Marks, and Points, used in Reading and Writing, with their Places
and Significations.
THESE are of absolute Necessity; and great R^^gard ought to be had to them, to
avoid Confusion an^ Misconstruction, and for the better Understanding of (...)
we read and write ourselves; and are likewise of U^e (...) others that shall
hear us read, or see our Writing: The^ teach us to observe proper Distances of
Time, with the n^^cessary Raising and Falling of the Tone or Voice in Read^ing,
and the needful Stops or Marks to be used in Writing that we may understand it
ourselves, and that our Meanin^ may not be misunderstood or misapplied by
others.

Stops, or Pauses, considered as Intervals in Reading, are ^ndeed no more than
four; though there are other Marks (...) be taken notice of, but to other
Purposes: The Names of these four principal Stops are, viz. a Comma, Semicolon,
Colon, and Period or Full Stop; and these do bear to one another a kind of
progressional Proportion of Time; for the Comma signifies a Stop of leisurely
telling One, the Semicolon Two, the Colon Three, and the Period Four. --

And are made or marked thus:

Comma, (,) at the Foot of a Word.

Semicolon (;), a Point over the Comma.

Colon (:) two Points

Period () a single Point at the Foot of a Word.

, Example of the Comma.) There is not any thing in the World, perhaps, that is
more talked of, and less understood, than the Business of a happy Life.

; Example of the Semicolon.) It is not a Curse that makes way for a Blessing;
the bare Wish is an Injury; the Moderation of Antigonus was remarkable.

: Example of the Colon.) A sound Mind is not to be shaken with popular
Applause: But, Anger is startled at every Accident.

. Example of the Period) It is a (...) says Fabius, for a Commander to excuse
himself, by saying (...) was not aware of it. A Cruelty that was only fit for
M^rius to suffer, Sylla to command, and Cataline to act.

By the Examples foregoing, we may easily note, that a Comma is a Note of a
short Stay, between Words in the Sentence; and therefore the Tenor of the Voice
must still be kept up. -- The Semicolon is a little longer, and the Tone of the
Voice very little abated. -- The Colon signifies perfect Sense, though not an
End of the Sentence; and the Voice a little abated, or let fall. -- The Period
denotes perfect Sense, and the End of the Sentence.

? When the Question is asked, there is a crooked Mark made over the Period
thus? and is called a Note of Interrogation: Example, What could be happier
than the State of Mankind, when People lived without either Avarice or Envy?
The Time of Pause for this Stop, is the same with the Semicolon.

! If a sudden Crying out, or Wondering, be expressed, then this Mark is made
over the Full Stop, thus! and called a Note of Admiration, or Exclamation.
Example, Oh the astonishing Wonders that are in the elementary World!

() If one Sentence be within another, of which it is no Part, then it is placed
between two Semicircles or Parenthesis, made thus () Example, Pompey, on the
other Side (that hardly ever spoke in Public without a Blush) had a wonderful
Sweetness of Nature. Again, if Authors be sure to make Choice of the best; and
(as I said before) to stick close to them. Once more; Honor thy Father and
Mother (which is the first Commandment with Promise) that it may ^e well with
thee. -- In reading a Parenthesis, the Tone must be somewhat lower, as a Thing
or Matter that comes in by the bye, breaking in as it were on the main
Coherence of the Period. The Time is equal to a Comma, and ought to be read
pretty quick, lest it detain the Ear too long from the Sense of the more
important Matter.

' Apostrophe is a Comma at the Head of Letters, signifying some Letter or
Letters left out for quicker Pronounciation; as I Will for I will, would for
would, sha'n't for shall not, never for never, is it for is it, it is for it
is, in the for in the, over for over: Or to denote a Genitive Case; as, my
Father's House, my Uncle's Wife, etc.

/ Accent is (...) over a Vowel, to denote that the Stress of Sound in (...) is
on that Syllable.

^ Breve or (...) Mark over a Vowel, signifies it must be sounded short or
quick.

^ Caret signifies something is wanting, and is placed underneath the Line,
just where any thing omitted, by Mistake, or Forgetfulness, etc. should be
brought in.

^ Circumflex is of the same Shape with the Caret, but is placed over some
Vowel, to show the Syllable to be long, as Eu-phra-tes.

^ Dialysis, or two Points placed over two Vowels in a Word, signifies they are
to be parted, being no Diphthong.

- Hyphen, or Note of Connection, is a straight Line; which being set at the
End of a Line, shows that the Syllables of that Word are parted, and the
Remainder of it is at the Beginning of the next Line; and sometimes is used in
compound Words; as Burnt-sacrifices, Heartbreaking, Soul-healing, Book-keeper,
etc. N. B. That when you have not Room to write the whole Word at the End of a
Line, but are obliged to finish it at the Beginning of the next, such Words
must be truly divided, according to the Rules of Spelling; as re strain, not --
restrain. When the Hyphen is placed over a Vowel, it is properly a Dash, and
signifies the Omission of m or n; it is much used in old Latin Authors, and
sometimes in English, especially in Law Business. Example; It is very
come^dable to write a good Hand.

Index, is a Note like a Hand, pointing to something very remarkable.

* Asterism, or Star, directs to some Remark in the Margin, or at the Foot of
the Page. Several of them together, denote something defective, or immodest, in
that Passage of the Author.

Obelisk, is a Mark like a Dagger, and refers to the Margin, as the Asterism *;
And in Dictionaries, it signifies the Word to be obsolete, or old, and out of
use.

Paragraph, denotes a Division, comprehending several Sentences under one Head.

Section, signifies the Beginning of a new Head of Discourse, and is used in
sub dividing a Chapter, or Book, into lesser Parts or Portions.

[] Brackets or Crotchets, generally include a Word or Sentence, explanatory of
what went before; or Words of the same Sense, which may be used in their Stead.

" Quotation, or double Comma (...) is used at the Beginning of the Line, and
shows what (...) from an Author to be in his own Words.

Thus much for Pointing, Stops, and Marks; which, if carefully heeded and
observed, will add Grace and Credit to your Writing.

Of Abreviations.
TO be ready in these, shows a Dexterity in Writing; and is very necessary for
Dispatch: For by these, we expeditiously express, or set down a Word,
shortening it, by making some initial Letter or Letters, belonging to the Word,
to express it; as in the Table following.

A, For Answer or Afternoon A. B. Arts Bachelor A. Bp. Archbishop Acct.
Account A. D. Anno Domini, Year of our Lord A. M. Anno Mundi, Year of the World
Admrs. Administrators A. M. Artium Magister, Master of Arts Ana. of each a like
Quatity Ap. April, or Apostle Adml. Admiral Agt. Against Amt. Amount Anab.
Anabaptist Aug. August A. R. Anno Regni, in the Year of the Reign Ast. P. G.
Astronomy Professor of Gresham College Aust. Austin, or Austria B. A. Bachelor
of Arts B. D. Bachelor of Divinity B. V. Blessed Virgin Bart. Baronet Bp.
Bishop Cha. Charles, or Chapter Cant. Canticles, or Canterbury Cat. Catechism
Cha. Charles, or Charity Chap. Chapter Cent. Centum Chapter Church Chanc.
Chancellor Chron. Chronicles Capt. Captain Clem. Clement Col. Colossians Cl.
Clericus Co. Country Coll. Colonel Comrs. Commissioners Con. Constance or
Constantine Conf. Confessor Could for could Cor. Corinthians or Corollary Cr.
Creditor C. R. Carolus Rex, or Charles the King C. C. C. Corpus Christi College
C. S. Custos, Sigilli, Keeper of the Seal C.P.S. Custos Privati Sigil^^ Keeper
of the Privy Seal D. Dean or Duke Dan. Daniel Dr. Doctor or Debtor Dea. Deacon
Do. Ditto D. Denarii, Pence Dec. Or xber, or 10 ber, D^^cember Devon.
Devonshire Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy Dec. Deceased D. C. Dean of Christ Church Doct.
Doctrine D. D. Doctor of Divinity E. for Earl Earld. Earldom Edm. Edmund Edw.
Edward E. gr. Exempli gratia, for Example Engl. England Eliz. Elizabeth Esa.
Esaiah Ephesians. Ephesians Eccl. Ecclesiastes Ex. Exodus, or Example Ev. Evangelist
Exp. Explanation Expo. Exposition Esquire Esquire Exon. Exeter Fr. French, or
France Feb. February Fra. Francis F. R. S. Fellow of the Roy^^ Society G. God,
Great, or Gosp^^ Gal. Galatians Genesis Genesis Genmo. Generalissimo Geo. George
G. R. Georgius Rex, George the King Gar. Garrison Genesis General Gent. Gentleman
Gosp. Gospel Greg. Gregory Hen. Henry Hamp. Hamper Hund. Hundred Hum. Humphry
Heb. Hebrews i. e. id est, that is I. H. S. Jesus Hominum Salvator, Jesus
Savior of Men Id. Idem, the same Inst. Instance or Instant Ja. James, or Jacob
Jan. January Jer. Jeremiah Jes. Jesus Jno. John Jud. Judges Is. Isaac I Will, I
will Is It, is it I Would, I had I m I am J. D. Jurium Doctor, Doctor of Laws Jos.
Joshua K. King Km. Kingdom Knt. Knight L. Lord L. Liber, a Book L. Librae,
Pounds Lieu. Lieutenant Lp Lordship Ladishp. Ladyship L. L. D. Legum Doctor,
Doctor of Laws Learng. Learning Lon. London Lr. Letter Lam. Lamentations Lev.
Leviticus Let Us Let us M. Marquis, or Monday, or Morning Mar. March Mat.
Matthew M. Manipulus, a Handful M. A Master of Arts Maty Majesty Md. Madam
Mons. Monsieur Math. Mathematician Mr. Master Mrs. Mistress M. D. Medicinae
Doctor, Doctor of Physic M. S. Memoriae Sacrum, Sacred to the Memory; also
Manuscript Mich. Michael, or Michaelmas Min. Minister N. Note, or Nativity Not.
Nathaniel, or Nativity N. B. Nota been, Note, or mark well Nic. Nicolas, or
Nicodemus N. S. New Style No. Number n.l. Non liquet, it appears not Nov. or
^ber, November O. Oliver Obj. Objection Obt. Obedient O. W. Old Word O. S. Old
Style Oct. or 8 ber, October Oxon. Oxford P Paul, Paulus, Publius, President
Pugil, a Handful Pen. Penelope Pd. paid Par. Parish p. per, or by Pat. Patience
or Patrick Per Ct. Per Centum, by the Hundred Parl. Parliament Pet. Peter Phil.
Philippians, or Philip Philom. Philomethes, a Lover of Learning. Philo-Math.
Philo Mathematicus, a Lover of the Mathematics. P. M. G. Professor of Music at
Gresham College Pros. Th. G. Professor of Divinity at Gresham College Pris.
Priscilla Pr. Priest Ps. Psalm Q Queen or Question q. quasi, as it were q. d.
quasi dicat, as if he should say q. l. quantum libet, as much as you please q.
s. quantum sufficet, a sufficient Quantity qr. Quarter, or a Farthing R. Reason
R. Rex, King; or Regina, Queen Revd. Reverend Rev. Revelations Rich. Richard
Robt. Robert Rog. Roger Ret. Return Re^. Prof. Regius Professor, founded by K.
Henry VIII. Romans Romans Rt Honble. Right Honorable Rt Wpl. Right Worshipful
St. Saint Sam. Samuel Sect. Section Sept. or 7 ber, Septemb^^ Serj. Sergeant
Serve. Servant Shr. Shire Shall Not, for shall not Salop, Shropshire Sol. Solution
Staff. Stafford Sp. Spain, or Spanish Sr. Sir ss. Semissis, half a Pound S. S.
T. P. A Professor, a Doctor of Philosophy Stew. Steward Tho. Thomas These.
Thessalonians The. Theophilus To. Tobias V. Virgin or Verse U. Use Vid. see
Ven. Venerable Viz. Videlicet, to wit, that is to say Wm. William Wp. Worship
Wpl. Worshipful W. R. William Rex wn. when Xn. Christian Xt. Christ Xtopher
Christopher ye. the in. then yo. you ym. them yt. that yr. your Z. Zeal and.
et, and etc. and caetera, and the or, and so forth.
And now having (...) my Directions concerning (...)* Pointing, etc. I shall
proceed to give some Instruc^^ons in relation to the most useful Art of Writing.

When any Person has thoroughly acquainted himself with (...), and understands
good English, etc. the next Step (...), is the Acquiring of the accomplishing
Art of fair (...) to put this Spelling in Practice: In order thereto, (...)
^^deavour to give such Directions, and proper (...) as may duly qualify any
Person therein.

(...) principally, there must be a fixed Desire and (...) imprinted in the
Mind, for its Attainment^ For (...) had never acquired, or arrived to any
Proficiency (...) I had not had a strong Desire and Inclination to it, (...)
being convinced of its excellent Use in Trade, (...) Manner of Business,
according to the Verse, (...) was his Genius, most sublime his Thought,
(...) first fair Writing to Perfection brought, etc.
(...) to the Desire, there must be added a steady Resolu^^^^ (...) go through
with it, 'till it is gained; and by a (...) and indefatigable Application,
overcome all seeming (...), that may arise in the Progress of its Attainment,
(...) to this Distich; By frequent Use, Experience gains its Growth;
But Knowledge flies from Laziness and Sloth.


DIRECTIONS to BEGINNERS.
FIRST, it is necessary to be provided with the following Implements, viz. good
Pens, good and free Ink, also good Paper, when arrived to commendable
Perfor^^^ces; likewise a flat Ruler for Sureness, and a round one (...)
Dispatch, with a Leaden Plummet or Pencil to rule (...): Also Gum Sandrick
Powder, (or Pounce as they call (...) with a little Cotton dipped therein,
which rub gently (...) the Paper, to make it bear Ink the better; particularly
(...) full Hands are to be written, such as Text, etc. and ^^pecially when you
are obliged to scratch out a Word or ^etter; for then there will be a Necessity
for its Use; And (...) the Place with the Pounce, smooth it with the Haft of
the Penknife, or clean Paper, and then you may write that is proper in the same
Place. These Implements are (...) up in these Lines.

A Penknife Razor Metal, Quills good Store;
Gum Sandrick Powder, to pounce Paper over;
Ink, shining black; Paper more white than Snow,
Round and flat Rulers, on yourself bestow,
With willing Mind, these, and industrious Hand,
Will make this Art your Servant a^ Command.
To hold the Pen.
THE Pen must be held somewhat sloping, with the Thumb and the two Fingers next
to it; the Ball of the Middle Finger must be placed strait, just against the
upper Part of the Cut or Cradle, to keep the Pen steady* The Fore Finger lying
strait on the Middle Finger; and the Thumb must be fixed a little higher than
the End of the Fore Finger, bending in the Joint; and the Pen be so placed, to
be held easily without griping. The Elbow must be drawn pretty close to the
Body, almost to touch it. You must support your Hand, by leaning on the Table
Edge, resting on it, half way between your Wrist and Elbow, not suffering the
Ball, or fleshy Part of your Hand to touch the Paper; but resting your Hand on
the End of your Little Finger, that and your fourth Finger bending inwards, and
supported on the Table as abovesaid. So fixed, and sitting pretty upright, not
leaning your Breast against the Table, proceed to the making the small o, the
a, e, c, i, m, r, s, w, and x; which must be all made of equal Bigness and
Height, the Distance or Width between the two Strokes of the n, must be the
same with the Distance or Width of the three Strokes of the m; the same
Proportion of Width must be observed in the u, w, and o. The Letters with Stems
or Heads, must be of equal Height; as the b, d, f, h k, l, and s. And those
with Tails* must be of equal Depth* as the f, g, p, q, and s. The Capitals must
bear the same Proportion one to another, with respect to Bigness and Height, as
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and I, etc. -- This Proportion of Letters, both of
Small and Great, must be observed in, and will serve for, all Hands whatsoever.
N. B. That all upright S^rokes, and those leaning to the left Hand, must be
fine or hair Strokes; and all downright Strokes must be fuller or blacker. And
when you are in Joining, where Letters will naturally join, without any
straining, take not off the Pen in Writing, especially in Running or Mixed
Hands. Care likewise must be duly taken, that there be an ^qual Distance
between Letter and Letter, and also between Word and Word. The Distance between
Word and Word, may be the Space that the small m takes up; but between Letter
and Letter, not quite so much. Sit not long at writing (that is, no longer than
you improve) especially at the first, lest it weary you, and you grow weary of
Learning. Imitate the best Examples, and have a constant Eye at your Copy; and
be not ambitious of writing fast, before you can write well: Expedition will
naturally follow, after you have ^ained a Habit of writing fair and free; and
it is much more ^ommendable to be an Hour in writing six Lines well, than (...)
be able to write sixty Lines in the same Time, which per^aps is perfect
Scribble, and altogether unintelligible. And ^esides, by a slow and fair
Procedure, you will learn in half ^he Time; and therefore it is a vain Thought
in a Learner, (...) desire to be quick before he has acquired Experience, and
a Freedom of Writing by frequent Practice. If you have Cotton in your Ink, look
well that there be no Hairs at the Nib of your Pen. Never overcharge your Pen
with Ink; ^ut shake what is too much into the Ink again. When you ^eave off,
keep your Pen or Pens in Water, till you come to ^our Writing again.

How to make a Pen.
THIS is gained sooner by Experience and Observation from others that can make
a Pen well, than by ver^al Directions. But Note, That those Quills called
Seconds ^re the best, as being hard, long and round in the Barrel; and before
you begin to cut the Quill, scrape off the super^uous Scurff with the Back of
your Penknife, and most on ^he Back of the Quill, that the Slit may be the
finer, and without Gander's Teeth (as the Roughness of the Slit is by ^ome
called.) After you have scraped the Quill as above^^id, cut the Quill at the
End, half through, on the back ^art; and then turning up the Belly, cut the
other half or ^art quite through, viz. about a quarter or almost half an (...),
at the End of the Quill, which will then appear ^^rked: Then enter the
Penknife a little in the back Notch; and then putting the Peg of the
Penknife, Haft (or the and of another Quill) into the back Notch, holding your
^humb pretty hard on the Back of the Quill, (as high as (...) intend the Slit
to be) then with a sudden or quick ^witch, force up the Slit; it must be sudden
and smart, that the Slit may be the Clearer: Then by several Cuts of (...)
Side, bring the Quill into equal Shape, or Form, on (...) Sides, (...) ^aving
brought it to a fine Point, place the (...) of the Nib on the Nail of your
Thumb, and enter the (...) a^ the Extremity of the Nib, and cut it through, a
(...) sloping: Then with an almost downright Cut of the Kni^^ cut off the Nib;
and then by other proper Cuts, finish (...) Pen, bringing it into Handsome
Shape, and proper For^ But meddle not with the Nib again, by giving it any
(...) or fine Cuts; for that causes a Roughness, and spoil^^ But if you do, to
bring the Nib the evener, you must (...) it again, as above directed. Note,
That the Breadth the Nib must be proportioned to the Breadth of the (...) or
downright black Strokes of the Letters, in whatsoe^^^ Hand you write, whether
Small or Text. Note also, (...) in your sitting to write, you place yourself
directly against fore-right Light, or else to have it on your left Hand, ((...)
I esteem best) but by no Means to have the Light on (...) right Hand, because
the Shadow of your Writing-Hand (...) obstruct your Sight, and therefore is
very improper. (...) therefore, me thinks, all Persons in fixing up their
Acco^^^ting Houses, should have a particular Regard to their (...), in respect
to what was before mentioned.

Thus far for Direction. Now for Application. I (...) here set Copies of the
most usual, fashionable, and c^^^mendable Hands for Business; with Alphabets of
Great (...) Small Letters proper to each. Be sure you make your (...) well,
(both Small and Great) before you (...) joining. Be careful in Imitation, and
observe the (...) Directions, and without doubt you will gain your Command of
Hand, or the Art of striking Letters, and gained by frequent practicing after
good Examples.

N. B. It Is necessary for all those who would qualify themselves for Business,
often to imitate this Print-Hand; to make clean Marks on Bales, or plain
Directions on Parcels.


Copies in Prose, and Clinking, in Alphabetical Order
A.
ART is gained by great Labor and Industry.

A covetous Man is always, as he fancies, in Want*

Add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge.

A blind Man's Wife, they say, needs no Painting.

A comely Countenance is a silent Commendation.

A Place of ill Example may endanger a good Man.

A prudent Man values Content more than Riches.

A virtuous Mind is rather to be chosen than Promotion.

A fair Piece of Writing is a Sort of speaking Picture.

All mundane Things run a continual Round.

Authority is the main Point in Government.

All God's Commandments keep most divinely pure.

A Man's Manners oft-times forms his Fortune.

A great Liar is seldom believed, though he speaks Truth*

All evil Things and vain, strive never to maintain.

A virtuous minded Youth, will ever love the Truth.

A prudent Youth and wise, will not Advice despise.

All you that write well, strive others to excel.

Abundance ruins some, but Want makes all to moan*

Amendment still should shine, in all and every Lin^.

A greater Loss cannot be, than that of Liberty.

A good and virtuous Lad, will shun whatever is bad.

Abundance proves a Snare, but most of Want are (...)

All Idleness avoid, by it most are destroyed.

All idle lazy Boys, obstruct their Parents Joys.

A Man by Conduct may keep Misery away.

All Mishap has been occasioned by our Sin.

Avoid the Occasion still, of running into Ill.

A Youth that would transcend, mu^^ ever mind to me*

A Lad that would excel, must mind his Copy well.

B.
Bounty is commendable in some, but it ruins others.

By a commendable Deportment we gain Reputation.

By Delight, and some Care, we come to write fair.

By Diligence and Industry, we come to Preferment.

Beauty without Virtue, is but a painted Sepulcher.

Beauty commands some, but Money all Men.

By constant Amendment, we rise to Preferment.

Brave Men will do nothing unbecoming themselves.

Be wise and beware; of blotting take care.

Bounty is more commended than imitated.

By Iniquity and Sin, Misfortunes enter in.

By Idleness and Play, Youth squander Time away.

Barren are those Joys, we waste away in Toys.

Blessed are their Joys above, who do their Time improve.

Badness brings all Sadness, therefore follow Goodness.

By trusting to Tomorrow, Men plunge themselves in Sorrow.

Be wise betimes, shun darling Crimes.

C.
Contentment is preferable to Riches and Honor.

Can they be counted wise, who Counsel do despise?

Care mixed with Delight, will bring us soon to write.

Consider the Shortness of Life, and Certainty of Death.

Contentment is a Gem, beyond a Diadem.

Competency with Content, is a great Happiness.

Contention and Strife, make uneasy our Life.

Courtiers receive Presents in a Morning, and forget 'em by Night.

Caution and Care, often baffle a Snare.

Contentment makes a Man happy without a Fortune.

Censure no Man, nor detract from any Man.

D.
Deride not Infirmities, nor triumph over Injuries.

Delight and some Care, will make you write fair.

Delight in Virtue's Ways, and then you will merit Praise.

Death conquers potent Princes, and their Powers.

Delight in what you undertake to learn.

Duty, Fear, and Love, we owe to God above.

Death is before the old Man's Face, and may be at the young One's Back.

Death only can declare, what Dust the Bodies of all Mortals are.

Drinking is the Drowning of Cares, not the Cure of them.

Death destroys not the Soul, but an ill Life does.

Do to others as you would, that they unto you should.

Delay is the Remora to all good Success.

Deprive no Person of his lawful Due, lest they should do the same by you.

Delight and Pleasure's but a golden Dream.

Death is less feard' by a Fool than a Philosopher.

E.
Endless Joys have those, whose Sins are (...) Foes.

Every Plant and (...) to us God'^ (...).

Example often does rule, the wise Man and the Fool.

Examples often prevail, when Arguments do fail.

Every idle Thought, to Judgment must be brought.

Every Sluggard is the Cause of his own Misfortune.

Envious Men do fret, when they see others get.

Evil Company makes the Good bad, and the Bad worse.

Experience is the best Looking glass of Wisdom.

Even at Head and Feet, be sure your Letters keep.

Endeavor to do well, and then you may excel.

Every Man is right, that mixes Profit with Delight.

Evil Men and sly, take care how you come nigh.

Envy and Care, make the Body grow spare.

Every moneyed Man, has others at Command.

F.
Fair Words commonly dress foul Deeds.

Fair Faces have sometimes foul Conditions.

Few do Good with what they have gotten ill.

Future Events must be left to Providence.

Fools are ruled by their Humor, but wise Men by Interes^

Firm keep your Mind on Things that are sublime.

Fear is a good Watchman, but a bad Defender.

Fate will still have, a kind Chance for the Brave.

Fraud in Childhood, will become Knavery in Manhood.

Fear without Hope turns to Despair.

Faith and Hope are both dead when divided.

Fortune at some Hours to all is kind.

Feigned Looks often hide what the false Heart does know

Fortune and Fame create a great Name.

Friends in Adversity are not often found.

Fools and knaves are not Companions for honest Men.

Frugality and Industry are the Hands of Fortune.

G.
Godliness with Contentment is great Gain.

Good Manners in a La^^ will make his Parents glad.

Great Mind^ and small Means ruin many Men.

Good Manners, Grace and Truth, are Ornaments in Youth

Good Men, as well as bad, have sometimes Fortunes sad*

Great Good you sure will find, if ^ou are well inclined.

Godliness has the Promise of the ^ife that now is, etc.

God's Works only are perfect in their Kind.

Gluttony ransacks Noah's Ark (...) the Riot of a Meal.

Grief (...) Breast, will never let you rest.

Greater (...) than of Play.

Great Men, though they should, are not always good.

Good Men are safe when wicked Ones are at odds.

Get what you get honestly, and use it frugally.

God is Omnipresent, True, and Almighty.

H.
Hasty Resolutions are seldom fortunate.

Haste makes Waste of Paper, Ink and Time.

He that stumbles, and falls not, mends his Pace.

Honor and Renown will the Ingenious crown.

Hypocrites first cheat the World, and at last themselves.

Human Life will human Frailties have.

Honor that is true, it is lawful to pursue.

He that sends a Fool of an Errand, ought to follow him.

Honors are Burdens, and Riches have Wings.

He is a wise Security, that secures himself.

He that sins against Conscience, sins with a Witness.

Honor the hoary Head, that Virtue's Paths do tread.

Happy are their Joys, who turn away from Toys.

Hours fly swift away; improve each Moment in the Day.

He that swims in Sin, must sink in Sorrow.

He that fears not an Oath, will not tremble at a Lie.

He has his Work half done, that has it well begun.

I.
Instruction, and a good Education, is a durable Portion.

Ignorance is the greatest Enemy to Learning.

^n praising sparing be, and blame most sparingly.

^maginary Toys, do please some idle Boys.

Intemperance is attended by Diseases, and Idleness with (...).

It is good to have a Friend, but bad to need him.

Idleness and Sloth, decreaseth Learning's Growth.

Innocence need not fear the Lion, or the rugged Bear.

It is better to be unborn than untaught.

It is too late to spare, when the Bottom is bare.

Idleness has no Advocate, but many Friends.

Improvement of Parts, is by Improvement of Time.

If you would win a Pen of Gold, first learn well the Pen to hol^.

It is the Work of an Age, to repair the Miscarriage of an Hour.

K.
Keep a close Mouth, if you would have a wise Head.

Kings, as well as mean Men, must die.

Kings may command, and Subjects must (...)

Kingdoms and Crowns, must in the (...)

Knowledge sublime, is gained by (...)

Keep at a Distance from Company that is ill.

Keep good Decorum in your Words and Deeds.

Keep close your Intention, for Fear of Prevention.

Kings may win Crowns, but cannot conquer Death.

Keep Faith with all Men, and have a Care of a Lie.

Keep good Company, if you would keep a good Name.

Knowledge, if abused, is like a Gem ill used.

Kingdoms bring Care, and Crowns are heavy Things to wea^

Keep out evil Thoughts by entertaining good Ones.

Kind Actions neglected, make Friendship suspected.

Keep safe good Counsel, and entertain not ill Advice.

Kindl^ not Passion's Fire, it b^^ns with dreadful Ire.

L.
Learn to live, as you would wish to die.

Love and Honor will bear no Rivals.

^earn to unlearn what you have learnt amiss.

^earn now, in Time of Youth, to follow Grace and Tru^^

^iberty is grateful to all, but destructive to many.

^ying is the Duty of none, but the Custom of many.

^earning do but love, and then you will improve.

^^^erality, without Discretion, becomes Profuseness.

^et no Jest intrude upon good Manners.

Learn now, in youthful Prime, to husband well your (...)

Learn how to make as well as use a Pen.

Liberality should have no Object but the Poor.

Lost Opportunities are very rarely, if ever, recovered.

Let not the Work of Today be put off 'till Tomorrow.

Laugh not out of Measure, nor out or Season.

M.
Money makes honest Men and Knaves, Fools and (...)

Monuments of Learning are the most durable.

Many know Good, but do not the Good they know.

Make use of Time now whilst you are in your Prime.

Money commonly corrupts both Church and State.

Many think not of living, 'till they can live no longer.

Money pleads all Causes, and defends all Titles.

Many, when they have filled their Bellies, complain of (...) Stomac^

Measure not Goodness by good Words only.

Marriage is out of Season, if we are either too Young too (...)

Most precious Time esteem, which no One can redeem.

Many live Beggars all their Lives, that they may not die so.

Money make^ some Men mad, many merry, but few sad.

Many are led by the Ears more than by the Understanding.

Most precious Things are still possessed with Fear.

Many are made Saints on Earth, that never reach Heaven.

Men of Intrigue commonly sail with all Winds.

Money answers all Objections, and removes all Scruples.

Money and Poverty make great Knaves and little Ones.

Misfortune is the Touchstone of Friendship.

Marriage, say some, breeds Cares and Cuckolds.

Mend your Manners, and that will mend your Fortune.

Many want Help that have not the Face to ask it.

Momentary and vain, is all earthly Gain.

N.
Nothing is constant in this uncertain World.

Necessity is commonly the Mother of Invention.

Next to a good Conscience, prefer a good Name.

None so high can be, as no Mis-hap to see.

Nothing is so hard but Diligence may overcome.

No Task's too hard, when Heaven's the Reward.

None can lay himself under an Obligation to do Ill.

Never lament or weep, for Loss of what you cannot keep.

Noise and talk, without some Rule, does indicate that Man a Fool.

Nature seldom changes with the Climate.

Never study to please others, and thereby ruin yourself.

Nature's oldest Law we find, is that we to ourselves be kind.

O.
Opportunity neglected brings severe Repentance.

On present Time depends our future State.

Opus and Usus, as we read, are sometimes Latin for our Need.

Of what gives most Delight, we soonest lose the Sight.

Omitting doing Good, is a committing Evil.

Orators are more solicitous to speak well than to do so.

Our Sand does run apace, and soon we end our Race.

Our Inclinations get the Rein, to gain a Point we should restrain.

Our Minds must be cultivated, as well as our Plants.

Other People's Death should be Memento's to our own.

Our early care should be, to live most piously.

Our Time of Life is called a Span, by which observe how frail is Man.

One false Step sometimes prevents another.

P.
Provide against the worst, and hope for the best.

Poor Men want many Things, but covetous Men all.

Patience and Time run through the roughest Day.

Put to your Tongue a Bridle, that it talk not idle.

Pain, Disgrace, and Poverty, have frightful Looks.

Prayers and Provender hinder no Man's Journey.

Put not off the main Business of Life, to the very Article of Death.

Pain we can count, but Pleasure steals away.

Poor Freedom is better than rich Slavery.

Patience is the Lord of the lean Meat of Adversity.

Passion and Partiality govern in too many Cases.

Perfection in this World, is Virtue; and in the next, Knowledge.

Q.
Quick Promisers are commonly slow Performers.

Quietness and Content are Mates most excellent.

Qualify exorbitant Passions with Quietness and Patience.

Quiet Men have quiet Minds, and enjoy Content.

Quicken Learning with Alacrity and Delight.

Quarrelsome Persons sometimes meet with their Match.

Quot Homines tot Sententiae^^ (...) many Men, etc.

Quills are made for Pens, and Pens for Letters.

Quietly learn to bear a C^oss, if we repine, it is to our Loss.

Questions in Jest, no serious Answers need.

Quench Passion's Heat; don't suffer it to reign.

Quantity with some is what they would hit; but Quality prevails with Men of Wit.

R.
Remember your Duty to God, your Neighbor and yourself.

Repentance comes too late, when all is consumed.

Reason should always guide, and over our Acts preside.

Rep^tation is the Darling of human Affection.

Rest continued long, makes Idleness grow strong.

Rely on Virtue more than Blood; for that is what you should.

Repent Today, Tomorrow may be too late.

Reputation is like a Glass, when cracked, it will be crazy*

Reputation is gained by many Actions, and lost by one.

Remember Death, and do not forget Judgment.

Religion in Hypocrites, is as it were but Skin deep.

Relations and Friends, pursue their own Ends.

Religion has and does give Countenance to much Wickedness.

Riches serve a wise Man, and rule a Fool.

Run no great Risque for 'vantage small, though some for Money hazard all.

Reason's Dictates follow still; which if you do, you will never do Ill.

Righteous Men's Prayers shall be regarded.

Repentance is a quite forsaking Sin; but he repents not that remains therein.

Resolve to amend, and pursue it to your End.

Review the Time that you have misspent; think upon it, and lament.

Recreation should fit us for Business, not rob us of Time.

S.
^in and Sorrow are inseparable Companions.

^ome are too stiff to bend, and too old to mend,

^ome willinglier discharge a Reckoning, than pay a Debt.

^in is most certain, first Cause of Misfortune.

^tudy to live quiet, and to do your own Business.

^ome in their Zeal are hot, but Knowledge they have not.

^et Bounds to Zeal by Discretion.

^ilence is the Sanctuary of Prudence and Discretion.

^oth is an Argument of a mean and degenerate Mind.

^hort and therefore vain, is all earthly Gain.

^oft Words, sometimes, work upon the proudest Heart.

^leep and Idleness are Enemies to Learning.

(...) is the Cause of Shame; who love it are to blame.

^mall Means, and large Minds, ruin many Men.

^hort, are all Extremes, whether of Good or Ill.

^pend Time in good Duties* and Treasure in good Works.

^ome go fine and brave, finely to play the Knave.

^ix Foot of Earth, ends all Distinctions of our Birth.

^ome must die, that others may live, said the Grave-dig^^r.

(...) People are commonly pleased with silly Things.

^ome are full of oral Sanctity, and mental Impiety.

^mall Profit comes from all ungodly Gain.

T.
(...) up a Child in the Love and Practice of good Manners.

The End of Mirth is many times the Beginning of Sorrow.

^ime is so swift of Foot, that none can overtake it*

^ime passes swift away, no Mortal can it stay.

^ime passes swift away, improve therefore each Day.

^he doing nothing, is very near doing Evil.

Those who will not mend Today, shall have more Worl^ Tomorrow*

The Borrower is a Slave to the Lender; and the Security a Slave to both*

Truth is the strongest Bands of human Society.

The Endowments of the Mind, ought not to be confined.

There Is no discerning Pate, that can contend with Fate.

The Destruction of the Poor is their Poverty.

The Country cares not what the City thinks.

To do Good is the Way to find it. 1753.

It Is just so much lost as is idly spent.

There is no such Thing in Nature as Perfection.

Time, Tide, and Carriers, will for no Man stay.

The Unfortunate are insulted by every Rascal.

It Is inhuman to sport with another's Infirmities.

V.
Virtue is first to be sought for, and Money the next.

Vain and transitory, is all mundane Glory.

Virtue and Fortune work Wonders in the World.

Value more good Conscience than a great Fame.

Unwillingly go to Law, and willingly make an End.

Understanding a Thing is half doing it. 1746.

Variety is the Happiness of Life. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7.

Virtuou^ and brave Actions gain Reputation.

Use soft Words and hard Arguments. 1 2 3 4 5

Virtue is commended of all, but followed by few.

Unthankfulness is the Cause of the Earth's Unfruitfulness.

Vain Conceitedness is ridiculed by all. 1749.

Virtue is seldom found a Match for Power.

Understand Things not by their Form, but Quality.

Virtue all commend, but few do it attend.

Union and Peace, make Discord to cease. 1760.

Valor and Greatness, are preferred before Neatness.

Vain and foolish Things, Disreputation bring.

Virtuous Actions will bring Reputation still.

W.
What is more vain than public Light to shun.

Who fears no Bad, stands most unarmed to Ill.

What pleases God must be, none alters his Decree.

We are many Times deceived with the bare Show of (...)

Women and Wine, though they smile, they make Men pine.

When Fortune knocks, b^ sure to open the Door.

Wine is a Turn-coat; first a Friend, then an Enemy.

What is violent is seldom permanent. l. 4.10.9.

When good Cheer is lacking, our Friends will be pac^ing.

We dance well, while Fortune plays on the Music.

We keep a better Account of our Money than our Time.

Wickedness in Jest leads us to Wickedness in Earnest.

We must not blame Fortune for our own Faults.

Where Knavery is in Credit, Honesty is put out of Countenance.

We must look to Time past, to improve what is to come.

What is fixed in our Hearts, is seldom out of our Heads.

Wickedness comes on by Degree^, as well as Virtue.

Would you be rich, be industriou^; if wise, be studious.

X.
Xenophon was a great Captain, as well as a Philosopher.

Xerxes wept at the Thoughts that his vast Army would be dead in 100 Years.

Xerxes whipped the Sea because it would not obey his Command.

(...), though a Philosopher, was very dull and heavy.

(...) lived without Sickness one hundred and seven Years.

(...) of the best for ever mind, and imitate in kind.

(...) bad Thoughts, and what is Sin, forth of your Mind, and let what is good
come in.

Xamine well how you improve, for that will be as you your Learning love.

Xercise will much Improvement gain. 1 2 3 4 5 6.

Xperience is the Mistress of all Arts and Sciences.

Xcel in what you can, and strive to lead the Van.

Xpress your Desire to learn by your Diligence.

Y.
Youth is full of Disorder, and Age of Infirmity.

Young Men lament your Minutes misspent.

Your Time improve, and squand^r't not away.

Your Spelling mind, and Sense of what you write.

Yield quietly to what must come unavoidably.

Young Men in Strength should provide against Age and Weakness.

Youth in their Prime, should manage well their Time.

Youth to the Grave do go, as well as the Aged do.

Yield yourself Servant to Righteousness and to Holiness.

Your Copy mind, write fair, and of blotting beware.

Your Care should appear by writing most fair.

Your Delight and your Care will make you write fair.

Z.
Zeal, in a good Cause, commands Applause.

Zeal, mixed with Love, is harmless as the Dove.

Zealously strive, with Emulation write, 1753.

Zealously strive for an eternal Crown. 1 2 3 4 5.

Zeno was the first of the Stoic Philosophers.

Zeal without Knowledge, is but Religious Wildfire.

Zaccheus he was low but yet his Faith wa'n't so.

Zeal, if not rightly directed, is very pernicious.

Zealously bend amain fair writing to attain.

Short Lines for Text Hand.
Abandon whatsoever's Ill -- Be Wise betimes.

Care destroys the Body -- Do the Things that are Just.

Expect to receive as you give -- Frequent good Company

Give what you give cheerfully -- Have good Men in (...)

Imitate that which is good -- Keep God's Commandmen^

Learn to be wise -- Money answers all Things.

Nothing get, nothing have -- Observe Modesty.

Pleasures are very short -- Pains are very long.

Quit all Revenge -- Quiet your Passions.

Recompense a good Turn -- Repent of your Sins.

Spare for to live -- Sin very little.

Time will improve -- Turn from your Sins.

Use moderate Pleasure -- Use not bad Company.

Vain are some Pleasures -- Vile are some Vulgar.

Wisdom is the principal Thing -- Wise Men are scarce.

Xenophon and Xenocrates -- Zeno and Zenobia.

Double Lines in Verse.
All you that in fair Writing would excel,
How much you write regard not, but how well.
Bear your Pen lightly, keep a steady Hand,
And that is the Way, fair Writing to command,
Carefully mend in each succeeding Line,
For that is the Way to reach to what is fine.
Descending Strokes are dark, but upwards small;
Even at Head and Feet keep Letters all.
From Blots keep clean your Book; and always mind
To have your Letters all one Way inclined.
Grace every Letter with perfect, full and small,
And keep a due Proportion in them all.
Hold your Pen lightly, gripe it not too hard,
And with due Care your Copy well regard.
^oin every Letter to its next, with Care,
And let the Stroke be admirably fair.
Keep a light Hand, and smoothly glide along.
^scending fine, and downward Strokes are strong.
Let graceful Beauty in each Line appear,
And see the Front do not excel the Rear:
Majesty Grace, beautiful and strong,
^oth, or else ought, to every Line belong.
No rough Edges ever should be seen:
^ut all the Letters should be smooth and clean.
^f Care depends the Beauty of each Line,
^or that alone will make your Art to shine.
^raise is deserving to the careful Hand,
^ut to the Unthinking, does Correction stand.
Quit yourself nobly, with a prudent Care,
^f clumsey Writing, and of Blots beware.
^emember strictly what the Art enjoins,
^qual sized Letters, and as equal Lines.
^mall Letters must of equal Height be seen;
^he same of Great; both beautifully clean.
^ime and Delight will easy make the Task:
^elight, Delight's the only Thing I ask!
^ain are the Hopes of those that think to gai^
This noble Treasure, without taking Pain.
Whilst idle Drones supinely dream of Fame,
^he Industrious actually do get the same.
^amples of the best, with Emulation strive,
^o imitate, and then your Name'll survive.
^outh is the Time for Progress in all Arts;
^hen use your Youth to gain most noble Parts.
^eal for Attainment of each Art should burn
With fervent Warmth, then to Account 'twill turn.
Since good Ink is necessary to good Writing, I shall give Receipt or two for
making some of the best Black Ink in (...) World, which is as follows, viz.

A Receipt for Black Ink.
TO six Quarts of Rain or River Water, (but Rain Water is the best) put one
Pound and a Half of fresh blue (...) of Aleppo (for those of Smyrna are not
strong enough) bruised pretty small; 8 Ounces of Copperas, clean, rock* and
green; also 8 Ounces of clean, bright, and clear (...) Arabic; and 2 Ounces of
Roche Allom: Let these (...) together in a large Stone Bottle, or clean Stone
Pot, earthen Pot, with a narrow Mouth to keep it free from (...) shake, roll,
or stir it well, once every Day, and you (...) have excellent Ink in about a
Month's Time: And (...) Older it grows, the better 'twill be for Use.

Ingredients for a Quart.
1 Quart of Water, 4 Ounces of Gall^, 2 Ounces of (...), and 2 Ounces of Gum,
mixed and stirred as above

If you soak the green Peeling of Walnuts (at (...) Time of the Year when
pretty ripe) and Oak Saw-dust small Chips of it, in Rain Water, and stirred
pretty (...) for a Fortnight, and then strained, and the Water used (...) the
same Ingredients as above, the Ink will still be stron^ and better.

How to make Red Ink.
TAKE 3 Pints of Stale Beer, (rather than Vine^^ and 4 Ounces of Ground Brazil
Wood; simmer (...) together for an Hour; and then strain it through a Flannel,
etc, then bottle it up (well stopped) for Use.

Or you may dissolve half an Ounce of Gum Stennega, Arabic, in half a Pint of
Water; then put a Penny (...) of Vermillion into a small Gallipot, and pour
some of (...) Gum Water to it, and stir it well, and mix it together (...) a
Hair-pencil, to a proper Consistency; but it will not inc^^^porate presently,
but by the next Day it will; then have a clean Pen, dip it into the Ink, having
first well stirre^ with the Pencil, and then you may use it: It is a fine (...)
curious Red, though not so free as the other. And after (...) same manner, you
may make any other colored Ink, Blue, Green, Yellow, Purple, etc. having
diverse Gallip^^ for that Use. In like manner you may mix the Shell (...) for
curious Occasions, pouring two or three Drops, accord^^^ to Direction, into the
Shell, and mix it well with a (...) Hair Pencil, and with it put a little into
a clean Pen, (...) The small Shells may be bought a some Fan-sellers, (...)
Fan-painters, at two or three for Twopence; or the (...) ones (which are the
best) at the Colour-shops, at Six-(...) a Piece.

To keep Ink from Freezing or Moulding.
^N hard frosty Weather* Ink will be apt to freeze; which (...) if (...) it
does, it will be good for nothing; for it takes (...) all its Blackness and
Beauty. To prevent which (if (...) have not the Convenience of keeping it warm,
or from (...) Cold) put a few Drops of Brandy, or other Spirits, into (...) and
it will not freeze. And to hinder its Moulding, put ^ittle Salt therein.

^^miliar Letters on several Occasions, and on diverse Subjects.
BEFORE we enter upon Arithmetic, it may be proper to give some Examples of
Letters on various Subjects, (...) upon diverse Occasions; which Letters
frequently read (...), and sometimes copied, it may be a good Introduction,
(...) handsome Style of Sense, and to a commendable Man^^r (...) of Writing*
besides the Help and Use they may be of in (...) and observing the Method of
Spelling good English* (...) orthographically placing Great Letters, or
Capitals, ^here they ought to be; and also an imprinting in the Mind (...) due
Notion of Points, Stops, etc. and when and where (...) be made.

Let^ers are variously worded, and ought properly to ex^^es^ the Desi^es,
Thoughts, etc. of the Writer to the ^eader, that thereby the Receiver of the
Letter may fully ^^derstand, and be justly informed of the Occasions, Wants,
(...) Intentions of the Sender.

Letters being writ on diverse Subjects, and on sundry Oc^^sions, they may be
ranked under these Denominations, or ^^veral Heads following, viz. Letters of
proffered Assistance, ^etters Consolatory, Letters of Thanks, Letters
Congratulatory, (...) of Repro^f, Ditto of Excuse, Ditto Accusatory, Ditto
(...) A^vice or Counsel, Ditto of Recommendation, Ditto (...), Ditto of
Remorstrance, and Letters of Visit, properly (...) Familiar Letters, Letters of
Business; and lastly, Mixed ^etters, that is, on various Subjects, and
different Affairs.

I shall not have Room to touch upon every one of those ^articularly; but I
shall give sundry Examples promiscuously ^xhibited, and are such as these that
follow, viz.

A Letter from a Son to his Father.
London, 6 th Dec. 1746. Honored Father,
WITH all dutiful Respect, I trouble you with these Lines, to enquire of the
good State of your Health, (of which I shall be extremely glad to hear) and to
present you my most humble Duty, and Tenders of filial, and most affectionate
Service I have not had the Favor of my Letter from you, since that from you
dated the 8th of Oct* last, which I replied to the very next Post, and in such
Particulars as you enjoined me. I have sent you, Sir, by Samuel Simple, the
Pemsey Carrier, a Spaniel Dog, which is an excellent good one of his Kind, and
fit for the Sport of your Place; his Name is Tray, and is very free for the
Water and if he has any Fault, it is being a little too eager, bu^ he is
young, and may be brought to what you please to have him. I hope my Sister Mary
is well, to whom pray give my kind Love, and also be pleased to accept of my
Duty to yourself, which is the Present needful from,

Sir, your most Dutiful Son, and humble Servant, Anthony Addlehill.


The Answer.
Pemsey, 28 Xber, 1746. Dear Toney,
I Received your Letter of the 6th Instant, and I take notice of your dutiful
Respect and kind Wishes for my Health, which, I thank God, I prefectly enjoy at
present* as I wish and hope you do yours. -- I received your Present of the
Dog; but the poor Cur was almost starved, having (as I suppose) had nothing on
the Road; but he is now in good Condition, and has been tried as to his
Mettle, and find he is a good one. I have sent you by the Carrier hal^ a Dozen
wild Ducks, which Tray fetched when I had (...) them. Your Sister Molly
remembers her kind Love to you and has sent you a Turkey, and a Chine of
Bacon, to which I wish you (and your Friends, if you invite any) (...) good
Stomach. With my Blessing and Prayers to God for you, conclude your tender and
very

Loving Father, Andrew Addlehill.
P. S. We have a great many Wild Fowl in our Level, so that you may expect
another Present of that Kind in a little Time.




Note, That these four short Lines are called the Postscript, because they are
writ after, when the Body of the Letter is done.

A Letter from a Young Man to his Uncle.
Norwich, Dec. 7. 1746. Honored Uncle, SIR,
THE many kind and courteous Things that you have done for me, obliged me, in
Point of Gratitude, as well as Duty, to return you my most humble Thanks, and
to offer you my poor, but real and hearty Service, in the Affair between you
and Mr. A. B. of this Place: And if you will please but to communicate to me your
Intentions, and give me your Directions therein, I shall observe and follow
them with all Punctuality; and will from time to time give an exact Account of
my Negociations in that Affair.

So expecting to receive your Commands by the first convenient Opportunity, I
rest and remain,

Sir, your most obliged Nephew, and very humble Servant, Brian Bing.

The Uncle's Answer.
London, 13 th Dec. 1749. Nephew,
I Take your Offer of Service to me in the Business between me and Mr. A. B. of
your City, very kindly, and think more fitter to adjust that Aff^ir than
yourself; but I am unwilling to go to Law, and had rather, much rather, that
you would endeavor to bring him to some reasonable Accommodation; for in such
Contests the Winner is a Loser at the Upshot. So if I can bring him to any
reasonable Terms, I shall be very glad: You understand the Affair, and so I
shall commit it wholly to your discreet and good Management, being persuaded
that you will do for me as for yourself: So I remain

your Loving, And Affectionate Uncle, Bazil Bing.

A Letter from a Niece to her Aunt.
London, 7 th Dec. 1750. Madam,
THE Trouble I have already given you, puts me to the Blush, when I think of
intruding again on your Goodness; but Necessity, that frequently puts us upon
what we have not always a Mind to, and forces us against our Inclinations, is
now the Motive that induces me to be thus troublesome. Pray dear Madam, excuse
me, if I once more beg your Assistance in this Time of my unlucky Misfortune,
and I shall ever have a grateful Remembrance of your Goodness to me; and I hope
I shall be one Time or other in a Capacity of making some Returns of the many
Obligations your Goodness has conferred upon me,

your most respectful^ Niece, And humble Servant, Penelope Pinch.

A Letter of proffered Assistance to a Friend.
Dear Friend.
I Should be false to true Friendship, if I should neglect or cast off my
Friend in Adversity; I hearing that you are under some Misfortune, and, at
present somewhat pinched with Want, I send you these Lines for your
Consolation, ^efining you to bear up against your ill Luck with as much
Presence of Mind as you can; for assure yourself I shall suddenly follow this
Epistle in Person, and come, I hope, opportunely enough to your Assistance;
'till which Time, take Courage, and be assured that you shall not be
disappointed of timely Help, from, dear Friend,

Yours, in Reality, Timothy Timely.

A Brother to a Sister.
Dear Sister,
THE great Distance and long Absence of me from you (though I have not wanted
good Company) makes me very solicitous concerning your Welfare. Natural
Affection ^nclines me strongly to have you in Remembrance, tendering ^our
Health and Welfare in every Respect as dear as my own; and there is nothing at
my Command, but, if you request, (...) shall be freely yours. Notwithstanding
the Distance, I ^urpose (God willing) to make you a Visit very shortly, and ^ad
done it before now, but an urgent Occasion interposed, ^he Particulars of which
being too long for a Letter, I shall ^cquaint you of when I see you. Pray give
my due Respects (...) all Friends, particularly to honest Mr. S. T. and so in a
^opeful Expectation of finding you all well at my Arrival, I ^onclude, and
remain,

Dear Sister, Your affectionate Brother, and humble Servant, James Canter.

A Letter from a Youth at School to his Parents.
London, 6 th Dec. 1751. Honored Father and Mother,
I Received your kind Letter of the 4th of. November past, and also the several
Things therein mentioned, by the Chichester Carrier, for which I return you my
most humble and hearty Thanks, they coming very seasonably to the Re^ief of my
Occasions. -- I begin to make pretty good Improvement in my Learning now (though
at the first it seemed a-like irksome, and hard) and I hope to gain the Point
at ^ast, for which you sent me hither. Pray. dear Parents, accept of my most
humble Duty to yourselves, and kind Love pray remember to my Brothers, and
Sisters, and to my quondam Play-fellows, particularly to Jacky Rattlebrains,
and tell him I hope by this Time he begins to be a little serious. -- This
being all at present from,

Honored Parents, Your dutiful Son, and humble Servant, Nathaniel Serious.

From an Apprentice to his Friends.
Honored Father and Mother,
BY these I let you know, that by your good Care and Conduct I am well settled,
and am very well pleased with my Station, and could not but in Duty return you
my hearty Thanks in a gratef^l Acknowledgment of your Love and tender Care of
me; I will endeavor to go through my Business cheerfully; and having begun well,
I hope I shall persevere so to do to the End, and that I may be a Comfort to
you hereafter, and in some Measure make a Return of your Love and Kindness to
me, who am,

Your most dutiful and obedient Son, and Servant, Daniel Diligent.

A Letter of Recommendation.
SIR,
THE Bearer hereof Francis Faithful, I send to you (...) one whose Honesty you
may rely on, and my Experience of his Conduct and Fidelity gives me a certain
kind of Confidence, in recommending him to you; but you know me, Sir, and I
believe you cannot in the least think that I would recommend any one to you,
that I had the least Umbrage of Suspicion or Doubt concerning their Probity. I
am wit^ due Respect,

Sir, your real Friend, and humble Servant, George Generous.

A Daughter to a Mother, in relation to Marriage.
Honored Mother,
WITH all Duty, Humility and Respect, I addres^ myself to you in these Lines,
hoping they will find you in perfect Health both of Body and Mind, for which ^
am never wanting in my Prayer to implore. As I would act nothing that is very
material, without your Knowledge, Consent, and Approbation, I thought it my
Duty to ac^quaint you of a Matter of the greatest Weight and Importance, pardon
me, if I blush to name it, viz. that of my Marriage; the Person (as I think) is
well deserving of me or one much better; it is Mr. A. B. of C. You know both
him and his Character, viz. one sober, diligent, and good humored; but however
I shall submit to your good Pleasure and Guidance in an Affair of such
momentous Concern, and remain,

Honored Mother, Your dutiful Daughter, and very humble Servant, Mary Modesty.

To a Country Chapman.
Mr. Francis Fairdealer, London, 9 th May, 1753.
YOU and I have formerly had Trading together, and it is not my Fault that we
do not continue so to do; for assure yourself, I have a great Value and Respect
for you, and on that Account none shall be more ready to oblige you ^n what I
may; and pray let us once more reassume our Dealings together; and you shall
find, that for any Goods you have Occasion for in my Way, none shall use you
more kindly than,

Sir, Your real Friend, and humble Servant, Titus Tradewell*

A Letter of Congratulation.
SIR,
IF you were but sensible how much I am affec^^^ with the good and most
acceptable News that I (...) your good ^ortune, you would conclude that the Joy
that surprises (...) ^or the same, is equal to yours that enjoy so happy a
(...) (...) Providence: I could express myself further on this Theme* and
enlarge exceedingly on so pleasing a Subject; but let this (...) present
suffice, till I have a more favorable Opportunity (...) expressing my Joy to
you personally: In the Interim, I (...) truly,

Sir, Your sincere Friend, and very humble Servant, Ralph Real.

A Letter of Enquiry of Health.
Hammersmith, 9 th October. 1752. SIR,
I Not hearing from you in such a Length of Time as from the 11 th of June last
to this Time, I am therefore under a great Concern for you, lest some
Misfortune of Sickness, or some other Accident has happened to you, or to some
one of your Family; my Uneasiness thereon, occasions my giving you the Trouble
of these Lines, which I wish may find Things with you better than my Fears
suggest; however to put me out of Pain, be pleased to let me know the Certainty
with what convenient Speed you can; and thereby you will very much oblige,

Sir, Your cordial and real Friend, and very humble Servant, Peter Pitiful.

A Letter by Way of Petition to a Friend.
Honored Sir,
I Am uncertain whether my late Misfortunes have come to your Knowledge;
however, I most humbly presume on your good Nature, being assured by sundry
Examples of your Compassion, that you will think of, and take Pity o^ the
Distressed; therefore, as an Object truly deserving Com^passion. I most humbly
implore, and petition you to consider the many Losses and Disappointments that
I have me^ with in my unlucky and wayward Fortune, which have re^duced me to
such necessitous Circumstances, that I cannot possibly proceed in my Affairs:
You was pleased once to sti^e me your Friend, and so I was indeed; and so I
would most certainly be now, and show it by a signal Proof of Kindness, if our
Circumstances were changed, by standing between you and Misfortune, and
screening you from the malevolent and inauspicious Influences of cross grained
Stars. I doubt not, Sir, but your Generosity and Goodness is (...) great; and I
hope, with all Humility, you will be pleased to interpose your good Offices,
etc. between unlucky Fortune, and,

Sir, Your very humble Servant, Lawrence Luckless.

A Letter of Friendship.
Dear Friend,
IT is now a long Time (as I account it) since you and I have had any mutual
Converse by Letter, which to me is a great Unhappiness; and really, if Distance
did not somewhat excuse, I should be apt to tax you with Unkindness; but
however, perhaps you may not have the same Convenience of Writing at your Place
(for want of Postage) as we have at ours, and on that Account, I shall not
insist on your Infringement of Friendship; but the chief Purport of these is to
enquire of your Welfare, and to have an Answer given to,

Sir, Your real Friend, and very humble Servant, Kendrick Kindly.

A Letter of Correspondence.
SIR,
YOURS of the 5th ult. is now before me; in answer to which, I positively
declare, That Mr. A. B. has not been with me to present the Bill of Exchange
that you mention in your Letter of Advice to me, and therefore there can be no
just Cause of Protest, or any other Charge, put on,

Sir, Your humble Servant, John Innocent.

It is as proper to know how to Subscribe; and how to Direct, as it is how to
write a Letter.

SUBSCRIPTIONS.
To his most Excellent Majesty, or, to his most Sacred Majesty, etc. To the
Queen's most Excellent Majesty, etc. To the Prince, To his Roya^ Highness, etc.
To the Princess, To her Royal Highness, etc.

To Spiritual Lords, To his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; or, To the
most Reverend Father in God, etc.

To other Bishops, To the Right Reverend Father in God, etc.

To the Inferior Clergy, To the Reverend Mr. A etc. or To the Reverend Doctor,
etc.

To Temporal Lords, To his Grace the Duke of, etc. To the Right Honorable the
Marquis of Hallifax. To the Right Honorable the Ear^ of Sussex. To the Right
Honorable the Lord Viscount A^^burnham.

The Sons of Nobility.
Must be dignified (though not immediate Heirs) with (...) Title of Honorable,
as being their Due by Birth.

To a Baronet, Honorable, by virtue of his Patent, (...) Right Worshipful; and
also to a Knight, Right Worshipfu^ To an Esquire, Worshipful. -- Every Privy
Counselor, the not a Nobleman, has the Title of Right Honorable. (...)
Ambassadors have the Style of Excellency; as has also (...) Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, and the Captain General (...) his Majesty's Forces. The Lord Mayor of
Lond^n, duri^^ his Mayoralty, has the Title of Right Honorable. (...) the
Sheriffs, during that Office, have the Title of Rig^^ Worshipful. All Mayors of
Corporations have the Title (...) Esquires, during their Office.

For the Beginning of Letters.
To the King; Sir, or may it please your Majesty.

To the Queen; Madam, or May it please your Majesty.

To the Prince; Sir, or May it please your Royal Highne^^*

To the Princess; Madam, or May it please your Royal Highnes^*

To a Duke; My Lord, or May it please your Grace.

To a Duchess; Madam, or May it please your Grace.

To a Marquess; My Lord, or May it please your Lordshi^*

To a Marchioness; Madam, or may it please your Ladyshi^*

To an Earl, Viscount, or Baron; Right Honorable, (...) May it please your
Lordship.

To their Consorts; Madam, or May it please your Ladyshi^*

To a Knight; Sir, or Right Worshipful,

To his Lady; Madam, or May it please your Ladyship.

To a Mayor, Justice of the Peace, Esquires, etc. Sir, (...) May it please your
Worship.

At Subscribing your Name, conclude with the same Tit^^ you began with; as My
Lord, your Lordship, etc.

Of Secret Writing.
HHRE it may not be improper to say something (...) Secret Writing; to which
Bishop Wilkins, in his Boo^ of Mathematical Magic, speaks largely; but it is
princ^^pally concerning Writing in Cipher, which requires gre^^ Pains, and an
uncommon Share of Ingenuity, both in Write^^ and Readers. But however I shall
show two or three particular Ways, that are very pretty and amusing, and also
very easy, both as to Cost and Pains. And

First, If you dip your Pen in the Juice of a Lemon, or of an Onion, or in your
own Urine, or in Spirits of Vitriol, and write on clean Paper whatever you
intend, it shall not be discerned till you hold it to the Fire, and then it
will appear legible. And if with any of the aforementioned, you write on your
Skin, as on your Arm, the Back of your Hand, etc. it shall not be seen till you
burn a Piece of Paper, and with the Ashes rub on the Place, and then it will
appear very plain. And this I have experienced and tried, and therefore can
say, Probatum est.

Another Way is, When you write a Letter that you intend shall not be
discovered, but to those you think fit; is first to write your Thoughts on one
Side of your Letter with black Ink, as usual (but it ought to be on thin Paper)
and then on the contrary Side, go over the said Matter that you would have
secret, with a clean Pen dipped in Milk; and that Writing shall not be read
without holding it to the Fire, as mentioned above, and then it will appear
legible, in a bluish Color.

A third Method, is to have two Pieces of Paper of equal Size, and the
uppermost cut in chequered Holes or Squares, big enough to contain any Word of
six or seven Syllables, and in these Squares write your Mind in regular Sense;
and then take off the said chequered Paper, and fill up the Vacancies with
Words of any Kind, which will render it perfect Nonsense, and not capable of
being read, to any Purpose of Intelligence. And transmit and send the said
uppermost, or chequered Paper, or another exactly of the same Form, to your
Correspondent; whereby he shall, by laying it nicely on your said Letter, read
your intended Sense, without being perplexed with the Words of Amusement
intermixed, which makes it altogether unintelligible.

Or again, you may write to your Friend in proper Sense, with common Ink, and
let the Lines be at so commodious a Distance, that what you intend to be
secret, may be written between them with Water, wherein Galls have been steeped
a little Time (but not long enough to tincture the Water) and when dry, nothing
of the Writing between the said Lines ca^ be seen; but when it is to be read,
you must, with a fine Hair Pencil, dipped in Copper as Water, go between the
said Lines, and so you make it legible. Note, This Way will give no Ground for
Suspicion, because the Letter seems to carry a necessary Sense in those Lines
that are set at such a proper Distance, etc.

Of ARITHMETIC.
AFTER Writing, the next necessary Step toward qualifying a Person for
Business, is the Understanding that truly laudable and most excellent
Accomplishment, the noble Science of Arithmetic; a Knowledge so necessary in
all the Parts of Life and Business, that scarce any Thing is done without it.

In my Directions for its Attainment, I shall proceed with such Plainness of
Method, and Familarity of Style, as shall render it easy to be understood, and
conspicuous to the meanest Capacity.

And first of Notation and Numeration.

In Notation, we must note or observe that all Numbers are expressed by, or
composed of, these ten Figures or Characters following, viz.

One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six, Seven, Eight, Nine, Cipher.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0

Nine of these are called significant Figures, to distinguish them from the
Cipher, which of itself signifies nothing; but as it is placed (in whole
Numbers) serves to increase the Value of the next Figure or Figures that stand
before it; as 3 is but Three; but before the Cipher thus 30, the 3 becomes
Thirty, etc. But in Decimal Fractions, the (0) decreases the Value of the
Figure behind it; for therein, 3 is three Tenths of any Thing; but by placing 0
before it, thus, 03, it is decreased from 3 tenth Parts, to three hundredth
Parts of any Thing, etc. -- We are to note, That every one, or any, of the
abovementioned nine Figures, or Digits, have two Values; one certain, and
another uncertain; the certain Value is, when it stands alone by itself; the
uncertain is, when joined or placed with other Figures or Ciphers; for when any
one of these Figures stands alone, they signify no more than their own simple
Value; as 5 is but Five, 4 but Four, 6 but Six, and 3 no more than Three, etc.
And this is the certain Value of a Figure: But when another Figure or Cipher is
annexed, they then are increased in their Value ten Times; as 5, or 5 Units, or
Ones, to 5 Tens or Fifty, 4 to 4 Tens or Forty, 6 to 6 Tens or Sixty, and 3 to
^ Tens or Thirty; as thus, 51, Fifty-one; 42, Forty-two; 63, Sixty-three; ^4,
Thirty-four, etc. Again, if any of ^he said Figures stand in the third Place
toward the Left Hand, they signify so many Hundreds as they expressed Units or
Ones; as 500 is Five Hundreds, 400 Four Hun^reds, 600 Six Hundreds, and 300
Three Hundreds, etc. If any of them possess the 4th Place toward the
Left Hand, ^hey are so many Thousands as they contain Units. And so, any, or
every Figure, increases by a Ten-fold Proportion, from the Right Hand to the
Left, according to the Place it (...) found or stands in; so that 5 may be but
Five, or Fifty; Five Hundred, or Five Thousand. In the first Place, 5; in ^he
second 50; in the third 500; in the fourth Place 5000, etc. And therefore, this
is the uncertain Value of a Figure. But the true Value of Figures in
Conjunction, may be fully ^earnt and understood by the following Table.

The Numeration Table.
C Thous. of Mil. X Thous. of Mil. Thous. of Mil. C. of Millions. Ten of
Millions. Millions. C of Thous. Tens of Thous. Thousands. Hundreds. Tens. Units
12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 1 2 3
4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3
4 5 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 1 2 1

Hund. Thous. of Mil. Hundreds of Mil. Hundreds of Thous. Units or Ones 123 456
789 012 12 345 678 901 1 234 567 890 123 456 789 12 345 678 1 234 567 123 456
12 345 1 234 123 12 1

For the easier Reading of any Number, first get the Words at the Head of the
Table by Heart; as Units, Tens, Hundreds, Thousands, etc. and applied thus, 75,
five Units, five, and 7 Tens, Seventy, that is, Seventy-five. Again, 678; 8
Units, Eight; 7 Tens, Seventy; and 6 Hundreds, six hundred; that is, Six
hundred seventy eight. Once more, 3456; 6 Units, six; five Tens, fifty; 4
Hundreds, four Hundred; 3 Thousands, three Thousand; together, Three thousand
four hundred fifty-six. Read the 4th Line of the Table downwards, viz.
123456789; here the Valuation of the Figures is from the Right Hand to the
Left, as 1 in the ninth Place is Hundreds of Millions; but to be read from the
Left Hand to the Right; thus, One hundred twenty three Millions, four hundred
and fifty-six thousand, seven hundred eighty-nine. But any Number may yet be
read more intelligibly, viz. by Stops, thus: Make a Comm^ after every third
Figure or Cipher, beginning at the Right Hand, and so on toward the Left,
making a Stop after every third Figure or Cipher, as abovesaid; thereby
distinguishing every third Place into Hundreds, as Hundreds of Units, Hundreds
of Thousands, Hundreds of Millions and hundred Thousands of Millions, etc. And
for Trial let us read the first Line of the Table; the last Place in Va^luation
is Hundred Thousands of Millions, and to be pointe^ into Periods thus, 123,
456, 789, 012; and read thus, On^ hundred twenty three thousand, four hundred
fifty-six Millions, seven hundred eighty nine thousand, and twelve; tha^ is, no
hundreds but twelve. Again, ^ead the following Number, viz. 276, 245, 678, 921,
460; here the first Poin^ or Period is between 4 and 1, and the last between 2
an^ 6, and to be read thus; 276 Millions of Millions, 245 Thousands of
Millions, 678 Millions, 921 Thousands, 460 Units, or Ones. And thus may any
Number be read with ^ase, though a large one: And thus are large Numbers o^
Sums expressed, or set out in the Exchequer, Bank, Lottery Tickets, etc. as
thus, No. 224, 156 -- 19, 478, -- and 420,000* etc. The foregoing Table of
Numeration is on the Right Hand distanced out into Periods, for the easier
Reading thereof,

Numbers to be read or written, viz.

^6, Ninety-six. ^42, Two hundred forty-two. ^924, Seven thousand 9 hundred 24.
^4006, Fifty-four thousand and six. ^24707, Five hundred 24 thousand 707.
^706240, Four millions 706 thousand 240. ^2700472, Sixty-two millions 700
thousand 472. ^74960204, Four hundred 74 millions 960 thousand 204. ^214007042,
Four thousand 214 millions 7 thousand 42. ^4214800240, Forty-four thousand 214
millions 8 hundred thousand 240.
Of Numerical-Letters.
Sometimes Numbers are expressed by Le^^^rs; and it is ^ecessary to understand
them, for the readier Reading the ^ates of Years, frequently used at the Foot
of Title Page^ (...) Books, and on Funeral Monuments, and in Roman Hi^^ory, etc.

^ signifies One. V Five. X Ten. L Fifty. C An hundred. CC Two hundred. D or D
Five hundred. M or M A Thousand. Five Thousand. Ten Thousand. 50000 Fifty
Thousand. 100000 A Hundred Thousand. 500000 Five hundred Thousand. 1000000 Ten
Hundred Thousand, or a Million. M.DCCLIII. expresses this present Date of 1753,
M. being One Thousand, D Five Hundred, CC Two Hundred, and LIII Fifty-three;
together One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty-three.
ADDITION.
IS the putting together two or more Numbers or Sums, (...) as their total
Value may be discovered or known*

Herein we must always observe to set the Numbers to be added, orderly one
under the other; that is, Units under Units, Tens under Tens, Hundreds under
Hundreds, etc. as in the subsequent Examples.

Addition of Numbers of one Denomination.
Yards. Gallons. Pounds. T. U. H. T. U. x of Th. Th. H. T. U 24 756 5796 42 432
3974 68 578 6722 86 696 7967 24 422 24^ 42 678 3^ 286 3562 2474

In Addition of simple Numbers, whether it (...) Gallons, Pounds, or any Thing
else, remember to (...) every 10 that you find in the first Row of Rank of
(...) being Units, to the next Row of Tens; and the (...) the Rank of Tens to
the Row of Hundreds, etc. (...) ever it makes in the last, you must set it
down, (...) what it will.

The Numbers above are set down in order, as (...); that is, Units under Units,
Tens under (...) as may be plainly understood, by being indicated (...) Head of
each Row, or Rank with Units, Tens, (...) etc. Then in ^asting up each Example,
to know its (...) I begin at the Right Hand, or Unit's Rank, of the (...)
ample, and say, 2 and 4 is 6, and 6 is 12, and (...) and 2 is 22, and 4 is 26;
in which Row there (...) Tens and 6 over; wherefore I set down 6 just under
(...) Rank, and carry 2 to the next or last Row, and say (...) I carry and 4
makes 6, and 2 is 8, and 8 is 16, (...) 22, and 4 is 26, and 2 is 28; and it
being the (...) set down the Amount, viz. 28; so that the Total (...) of Yards
is found to be (by this Method) at the (...) 286. And the next or second
Example, is found (...) same Method to be 3562 Gallons. And in the (...) last
Example, the Total Number of Pounds is found (...) same Way to be 247484. And
so the Total of (...) Example of the same kind, viz. simple Numbers (...)
Denomination, may be found. Note, That when (...) the Ranks amount to just 10,
20, 30, 40, 50, etc (...) you must set down the 0, under its proper Rank, and
(...) either 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5, according to the Number of Tens that you find,
to the next Row; and so you will always do, when it so happens, whether in the
first, second, or third Row; or in any other, except the last, where what it
amounts to must be set down, without any Reserve or Carriage in the Mind,
because there is no other Row or Rank to carry to, as was hinted before.

And so much for Addition of Numbers of one Denomination, which never varies
from what has been said above; serving strictly to keep to the critical, and
nicely setting down in perpendicular Order your several Numbers, that Units may
prec^sely and directly stand under Units, Tens under Tens, etc. as has fully
been declared before The next in Order of Course, is Addition of Numbers of
several Denominations, or Addition of Money.

As we in England, or Great Britain, keep our Accounts in Pounds, Shillings,
and Pence, and Parts of a Penny; so you are ^o note, that 4 Farthings make 1
Penny, 12 Pence 1 Shilling, and 20 Shillings 1 Pound.


And here also you are strictly to observe, and with the same Punctuality to
mind, that Pounds be set directly under Pounds, Shillings under Shillings,
Pence under Pence, and Farthings under Farthings; as in the Examples hereafter
following.

But before you proceed, it will be necessary to have the following Tables by
Heart, for the readier Knowledge how many Shillings there are in so many Pence,
and apprehending how many Pounds are contained in so many Shillings, etc.

Pence. s. d. 20 is 1 8. 30 -- 2 6 40 -- 3 4 50 -- 4 2 60 -- 5 0 70 -- 5 10 80
-- 6 8 90 -- 7 6 100 -- 8 4 110 -- 9 2 120 -- 10 0

s. l. s. 30 is 1 10. 40 -- 2 0 50 -- 2 10 60 -- 3 0 70 -- 3 10 80 -- 4 0 90 --
4 10 100 -- 5 0 110 -- 5 10 120 -- 6 0

The Use of these Tables is this; when ever you are casting up any Example, or
Sum of Money, you begin at the Right Hand (as before in Sums of one
Denomination) the Place of Pence, and suppose the Rank, Row, or Denomination of
Pence amounts, from the Bottom to the Top, to 56; then your Table of Pence
tells you that 50 d. is 4 s. and 2 d. 6 over is 4 s. 8 d. If to 92 d. the Table
tells you that 90 d. is 7 s. 6. and 2 d. over is 7 s. 8 d. And if to 81 d. the
Table shows that 80 d. is 6 s. 8 d. and 1 d. more makes 6 s. 9 d. etc.

The Shillings Table serves to lead you to a quick Recollection how many Pounds
there are in so many Shillings; as admit the Rank of Shillings arises to 57 s.
the Table says that 50 s. is 2 l. 10 s. and 7 s. over makes 2 l. 17 s. If to 84
s. the Table declares that 80 s. is just 4 l. and 4 s. over makes 4 l. 4 s. If
to 112 s. the Table tells you that 100 s. is 5 l. and 12 s. more makes 5 l. 12
s. etc.

Addition of Money.
Money Owing, and Money Received, as follows.

(1)
l. s. d. Ow. to Mr. Andrews 4 12 6 M. Bent 7 06 9 Mr. Crawley 4 12 0 Mr.
Dupper 6 17 7 Mr. Edlin 5 06 6 Mr. Franklin 4 12 3 Mr. Gregory 6 00 0 Mr.
Fisher 5 15 4 45 02 11

(2)
l. s. d. Rec. for Tobacco 46 10 9 Sugar 79 16 0 Indigo 42 18 3 Broad Cloth 66
12 4 Canary 90 16 0 Port-Wine 84 07 6 Rice 24 12 0 Logwood 60 10 0 496 02 10

Note, That l. stands for Pounds, s. for Shillings, d. for Pence, and qr. for
Farthings; in regard that Libra signifies a Pound, Solidus a Shilling, Denarius
a Penny, and Quadrans a Farthing.

I begin with the first Example of Money Owing, and say 4 and 3 is 7, and 6 is
13, and 7 is 20, and 9 is 29, and 6 makes 35 Pence; now 30 Pence, according to
the Table, is 2 s. and 6 d. and 5 d. makes 2 s. and 11 d. I set down 11 exactly
under the Rank of Pence, and say -- 2 Shillings that I carry (which I do to the
Rank of Shillings) and 5 is 7, and 2 is 9, (for I only take the Units Rank of
Shillings) and ^ is 15, and 7 makes 22, and 2 is 24, and 6 is 30, and 2 makes
32; and now being come to the Top of the Sum, and (...) making 32, I come down
with the Tens of Shillings, ^aying 32 and 10 is 42, and 10 is 52, and 10 is 62,
and ^0 is 72, and 10 makes 82 Shillings; and the Table telling (...) that 80
Shillings is 4 Pounds, I know therefore 82 s. (...) 4 l. 2 s. wherefore I set
down the odd 2 s. just under the Row of Shillings, and carry 4 Pounds to the
Pounds; saying, ^ that I carry and 5 is 9, and 6 is 15, and 4 is 19, and 5 ^s
24, and 6 is 30, and 4 is 34, and 7 is 41, and 4 makes ^5 Pounds; so that the
Total of those several Sums of Money, due to those seve^al Persons, amounts to
45 l. 2 s. 11 d. as in the Example.

In the second Example of Money received, I begin at the Right Hand (as in all
Additions, Subtractions, and Multiplications, we do, and ought so to do,
working from the Right Hand to the Left; but in Division you begin the
Operation at the Left, and work toward the Right) and say, 6 and 4 is 10, and
3 is 13, and 9 makes 22; and 22 Pence being 1 s and 10 d. I set down 10 d. and
carry 1 s. to the Shillings* ^aying 1 that I carry, and 2 is 3, and 7 is 10,
and 6 is 16, and 2 is 18, and 8 is 26, and 6 makes 32; then I come down with
the Tens, saying, 32 and 10 makes 42, etc and find at the Bottom it comes to
102 Shillings; which making 5 l. 2 s. I set down 2 s. and carry 5 l. to the
Pounds; saying, 5 that I carry, and 4 is 9, etc. I find that at the Top it
amounts to 36, wherefore I set down 6 exactly under its own Rank, viz. the Rank
of Units of Pounds, and carry 3 for the 3 Tens that are in 30; for at all Times
in the first Denomination of Addition, whether of Money, Weight, or Measure,
that is in the Denomination of Pounds, Tuns, or Yards, you must cast them up as
Sums of one Denomination; that is, for every Ten carry One to the next, etc.
saying, 3 that I carry and 6 is 9, and 2 is 11, and 8 is 19, etc. and find that
at the Top it comes to 49; wherefore I set down 49 before the 6, and the total
Amount of the Money received for those particular Goods or Wares sold, is 496
l. 2 s. 10 d.

More Examples for Practice.
l. s. d. 10 20 12 4 Money due from Mr. Money 17 12 6 l. 146 12 3 Mr. Gaunt 26
10 2 278 10 9 Mr. Hern 50 00 0 46 16 6 Mr. James 44 12 8 100 00 0 Mr. King 60
14 0 72 12 4 Mr. Smith 29 16 6 69 16 6 Mr. Monk 16 10 0 460 12 6 Mr. Napper 20
00 0 49 10 0 Mr. Oliver 27 11 4 7 12 4 Mr. Perkins 17 04 0 22 10 0 Mr. Quinton
20 10 3 164 12 9 Mr. Roper 46 16 8 75 10 6 Total 377 18 3 1494 16 6 -- 1

Over the middle Example there are Numbers set, to (...) note what you must
stop at, if you cannot cast it up without

Addition of Avoirdupois Weight.
By this Weight are weighed all Kinds of Grocery Good or Wares, or Goods
subject to waste; as Tobacco, Su^ar Fruit and Drugs, as also Butter, Cheese,
All^m, Tallo^* Flesh, Iron, Brass, Copper, Lead, Tin, or Pewter, Pit^^* Tar,
Rosi^, Hemp, Flax, Soap, Salt, and all Kind of Go^^bled Goods; that is, those
Goods that have Dust, Dross, Waste.

A Table of this Weight is as follows, viz.
4 Quarters make 1 Dram Marked, dr. Drams 16 Drams make 1 Ounce Marked, oz.
Ounces 16 Ounces make 1 Pound Marked, lb. Pounds 28 Pound make 1 qr. of a
hundred Weight, or 112 lb. Marked, qrs. Quarters 4 Quarters make 1 Hundred With.
Marked, C. Hundreds. 20 Hundred With. make 1 Tun Marked, T. Tuns
Small Weight ^ 4 28 28 28 10 16 16 ^ qrs. lb. C. qrs. lb. C. qrs. lb. lb. oz.
dr. ^ 1 16 24 1 12 9 1 16 24 11 12 ^ 2 24 42 2 00 4 3 26 42 14 15 ^ 3 06 16 1
12 7 1 00 64 10 11 ^ 0 12 25 3 24 5 3 27 29 09 10 ^ 1 20 19 0 20 4 3 00 16 12
13 ^ 2 00 26 1 22 2 2 02 27 13 14 ^9 3 22 154 3 06 34 3 15 206 09 11

In the first of these Examples I begin at the Right Hand, (...) wit, at the
Denomination of Pounds, and stop at every ^8, so many Pounds making a Quarter;
that is, at every 28 (...) make a Speck on my Nail (not in the Sum, for that
Way (...) not proper or handsome) and I find two 28^s, and 22 lb. ^ver;
wherefore I set down 22, and carry 2 qrs. to the Quarters, and adding them up
find them 11, which is 2 Hun^red and 3 qrs. over; wherefore I set down 3, and
carry 2 (...) the Hundreds; which also added up, make 39; so that (...) Total
Weight is 39 C. 3 qrs. and 22 lb. etc*

And for the Example of Small Weigh^, there I stop at 16 and 16, and at 10 in
the Pounds, and fi^d the Total 206 lb. ^ oz. and 11 Drams. There Is no Occasion
for stopping, but ^nly at 28 in the Great Weight, and at 16 and 16 in the ^mall.

Note, That in weighing at the Waterside, or elsewhere, they do not weigh by
the Ton in Great Weight, ^^ough some Goods are sold by it, as Iron, Logwood,
Cheese, etc. but by Hundreds, Quarters, and Pounds, and afterward ^omputed by
Tuns, etc.

Addition of Troy Weight.
By this Weight are weighed Jewels, Gold, Silver, Pearl, (...), and Liquors; a
Pint of Water, Wine, etc (...) a Pound, and the usual Denominations are Pounds,
(...), Penny-weights, and Grains, as in the following Table, (...).

Not^, That 24 Grains make 1 Penny-weight, 20 Penny-weights 1 Ounce, and 12
Ounces 1 Pound Troy.


Note also, That 25 lb. is a Quarter of a Hundred by thi^ Weight, 100 lb. is
one hundred Weight, and 20 hundred one Tun of Gold or Silver.

Examples of Troy Weight.
6 Ingots of Silv. with. viz. 10 12 20 ^4 10 20 24 N^. l. oz. pw. gr. lb. oz. pw.
gr. oz. pw. gr. 1 With. 4 05 12 10 14 06 10 11 204 10 14 2 5 04 16 17 24 10 11 12
96 07 17 3 3 11 19 20 21 06 07 17 100 11 12 4 4 06 07 12 21 10 12 14 56 16 20 5
5 01 11 12 16 11 12 13 212 10 2^ 6 4 11 12 13 21 07 06 17 96 19 1^ 28 06 00 12
121 05 01 12 767 17 0^

In the Denomination of Grains I stop at 24, and find i^ to amount to 3
Penny-weights and 12 Grains over; where^fore I set down 12 Grains and carry
three Penny-weights (...) the Penny-weights; then I say, 3 that I carried and 2
is (...) and 1 is 6, and 7 is 13, and 9 is 22, and 6 is 28, and 2 (...) 30; and
then coming down with the Tens, I say, 30 and (...) is 40, and 10 is 50; etc.
just as I do in Addition of (...) (for as there 20 s. make a Pound, so here 20
Penny-weigh^ make an Ounce) and find it to come just to 80; now in ^^ there are
just 4 Twenties, or 4 Ounces; wherefore I (...) down 00, and carry 4 to the
Ounces, and find them to (...) mount to 42; which makes 3 Pounds and 6 Ounces
ove^ wherefore I set down 6, and carry 3 to the Pounds; sayin^ 3 I carry and 4
is 7, and 5 is 12, etc. and find they (...) to 28; so the Total is 28 l. 06 oz.
00 pw. 12 gr. and so (...) the rest.

How to prove Addition.
IN all Additions, whether of simple Numbers, that (...) Numbers of one
Denomination; or in Examples co^^pound, that is, of diverse Denominations, as
Pounds, Sh^^^lings, Pence and Farthings; or Tuns, Hundreds, Quarter^ and
Pounds, Great Weight; or Pounds, Ounces, and (...) Small Weight; Pounds,
Ounces, Penny-weights and Grai^^ Troy-Weight; I say, in any of the Examples
above-me^^tioned, the truest and best Method of Proof is to (...) the same
downwards (beginning at the Top) as you did (...) same upwards* beginning at
the Bottom) and if it (...) the same Total, the Work is infallibly right, and
beyond any Contradiction; and is much better and more sensible than the common
Method used in Schools, of making two Totals, by omitting the upper Line in the
Second, which is altogether impracticable in real Business. I might here also
give the several Examples of other Additions, such as Apothecaries Weight,
Cloth, Liquid, Dry, and Long Measures, Time, etc. but the Method serves for any
of them, having respect to the several Tables of Quantity belonging to those
several Denominations of Addition above mentioned, which are as follows, viz.

A Table of the Parts of Apothecaries Weight.
Marks. 20 Grains 1 Scruple a Scruple 3 Scruples 1 Dram. a Dram. 8 Drams 1
Ounce. an Ounce. 12 Ounces 1 Pound. lb a Pound.
By these Weights they compound their Medicines; but they buy and sell their
Drugs by Avoirdupois Weight.

Cloth Measure.
4 Nails, or 9 Inches, 1 qr. of a Yard. 4 qrs. or 36 Inches, 1 Yard. 5 qrs. or
45 Inches, 1 Ell English. 3 qrs. or 27 Inches, 1 Ell Flemish. 6 qrs. or 54
Inches, 1 French Ell.
A Table of Wool-Weight.
Note, That 7 lb. makes 1 Clove; 2 Cloves, or 14 lb. 1 ^tone; 2 Stones or 28
lb. 1 Tod; 6 Tod and a Half 1 Wey, or 82 lb. 2 Weys, or 364 lb. 1 Sack; and 12
Sacks 1 Last, or 3^8 lb. 240 lb. 1 Pack of Wool.

Note, That 1 lb. 2 oz. 12 pw. Troy, is equal to a Pound ^voirdupois. And a
Pound Troy is about 13 oz. 2 Drams and a Half Avoirdupois.

l. s. d. Pound of Weight Troy of Silver is worth 3 02 2 Pound With. Avoirdupois
3 15 3 1/^

L100 in Gold weighs 1 11 3/^ Avoirdup. With. in Silver 26 04

A Pound Avoirdupois is heavier than a Pound Troy: But (...) Ounce Troy is
heavier than an Ounce Avoirdupois.

A Table of Liquid Measure.
Liquid Measure is of two Sorts, viz. one for (...) Brandy, etc. and the other
for Beer and Ale.

Wine, etc.
8 Pints 1 Gallon, 42 Gallons 1 Tierce, 63 Gallons 1 Hogshead, 84 Gallons 1
Puncheon, 2 Hogsheads 1 Pipe or But^ 2 Pipes or Butts 1 Tun, 252 Gallons.
Note, That sweet Oil has 236 Gallons to the Tun: (...) Oil from Greenland
has 252 Gallons to the Tun.

Note, The Wine Gallon contains 231 Cubic or solid Inch^^ by which all Liquids
are measured, except Beer and Ale.

Beer Measure.
8 Pints 1 Gallon, 9 Gallons 1 Firkin, 2 Firkins 1 Kilderkin. 2 Kilderkins 1
Barrel, or (...) Gallons, 1 Barrel and Half, or 54 G^^^lons, 1 Hogshead.
Ale Measure.
8 Pints 1 Gallon, 8 Gallons 1 Firkin of Ale, Soap, or Herrings, 2 Firkins 1
Kilderkin, 2 Kilderkins 1 Barrel, or ^ Gallons, 1 Barrel and Half, or 48
G^^^lons, 1 Hogshead.
Note, The Beer and Ale Gallon are the same, viz. 2 solid Inches; but with this
Difference, i. e. the Barrel (...) Beer contains 1228 Cubic Inches, or 4
Gallons more (...) the Barrel of Ale.

In a Tun of Wine are
2 Pipes or Butts, 6 Tierces, 252 Gallons, 504 Pottles, 1008 Quarts, 2016
Pints.
In a Pipe or Butt are
2 Hogsheads, 3 Tierces, 126 Gallons, 252 Pottles, 504 Quarts, 1008 Pints.
In a Puncheon are
84 Gallons, 168 Pottles, 336 Quarts, 672 Pints.
In a Hogshead are
63 Gallons* 126 Pottles, 252 Quarts, 504 Pints.
In a Barrel of Beer
2 Kilderkins, 4 Firkins, 36 Gallons. 72 Pottles, 144 Quarts, ^88 Pints
In a Barrel of Ale are
^ Kilderkins, 4 Firkins, 32 Gallons, 64 Pottles, 128 Quarts, 256 Pints,
Dry Measure.
^ Pints 1 Quart, ^ Quarts 1 Pottle, ^ Pottles 1 Gallon, ^ Gallons 1 Peck, ^
Pecks 1 Bushel Land Measure, ^ Pecks 1 Bushel Water Measure, ^ Bushels 1 Comb,
or half Quarter, ^ Combs 1 Quarter, ^ Quarters 1 Chaldron, ^ Quarters 1 Wey, ^
Weys 1 Last, or 10 Quarters, Fatts or Vatts, or 56 Bushels, of Sea Coal, 1
Chaldron; and 21 Chaldron is accounted a Score in the River of Thames; Salt and
Sea Coal are ^eaped, or else there are 5 Pecks to the Bushel.
In the Last are
2 Weys 10 Quarters, 80 Bushels, 320 Pecks, 1280 Pottles, 2560 Quarts, 5120
Pints.
In a Wey are
5 Quarters, 40 Bushels, 160 Pecks, 320 Gallons, 640 Pottles, 1280 Quarts, 2560
Pints.
Note, By an Act Anno 1712, the Bushel is 2178 Cubic ^nches; and a Gallon of
this Measure is 272* Cubic Inches.

Long Measure.
3 Barley Corns 1 Inch, 2 Inches 1 Foot, 3 Feet 1 Yard, 3 Feet 9 Inches 1
Ell-Engl. 5 Feet a Geometrical Pace, 5 Yards and Half, 1 Pole, Perch, or Rod, 6
Feet 1 Fathom, or 2 Yards, 40 Poles, or 220 Yards, 1 Furlong, 8 Furlongs 1
Mile, or 1760 Yards, 3 Miles 1 League, 20 Leagues, or 60 Miles, 1 Degree; and
360 Degrees the supposed Circumference of the Earth and Sea.
In a Mile are
8 Furlongs, 320 Poles, 760 Yards, 5280 Feet, 63360 Inches, 190080 Barley
Corns.
Land Measure.
5 Yards and Half, 1 Pole, Perch or Rod. 40 Poles make 1 Rod, or quarter of an
Acre. 160 Poles in Length, and 1 in Breadth, is 1 Acre. 80 Poles in Length, and
2 in Breadth, 1 Acre; and 40 Poles in Length, and 4 in Breadth, 1 Acre. 4 Poles
in Length make 1 Chain. 10 Chains in Length, and 1 in Breadth, make 1 Acre.
Time.
60 Seconds 1 Minute, 60 Minutes 1 Hour, 24 Hours 1 Day natural, 7 Days 1 Week,
4 Weeks 1 Month, 13 Months, 1 Day, and 6 Hours, 1 Solar Year.
In a Year are
31557^^0 Seconds, 525^60 Minutes, 8^66 Hours, 365 Days 6 (...)
Note, The Year is also divided into 12 Calendar Month, which contain 365 Days,
according to this good old Verse, viz.

Thirty Days has September, April, June, and November*

February has 28 alone, and all the rest Thirty and one.

SUBTRACTION.
THE next Rule in Arithmetic is Subtraction (or commonly called ^ubtraction)
and this Rule teaches to take a lesser Number, or Sum, out of a greater, and
shows the Remainder, Rest, Excess, or Difference.

Note always to place the lesser Number under the greate^ (with the same Care
and Order as in Addition) so the Unit^ may stand under Units, Tens under Tens,
etc. and the Remainder under the Line is the Difference sought: And such
Difference being added again to the lesser Number, shall make the greater
Number, and is a certain Proof of the said Rule.

A general Rule.
Whatever you used to stop at in Addition (whether of one Denomination or of
several) the same you must borrow in Subtraction, when need requires:
Remembering to pay, or carry 1 to the next Place toward the Left Hand.
Example* Suppose Mr. Andrews owes to Mr. Baker ^ whereof Mr. A. has paid to
Mr. B. the Sum of in part; what remains due to Mr. Baker?

Here the lesser Number 146, stands under the greater 323; and to find the
Remainder or Sum resting due, I say, 6 from 3 I cannot; but 6 from 13 (for yo^
must always borrow 10 of the next Figure in the same under Line, and put it to
the Figure or Cipher that stands directly over the Figure you substract) and
there remains 7; then 1 that I borrow and 4 is 5, for as I borrowed 10 (or 1)
out of 4, so I must pay the said 1 or 10 (for so it really is, because of the
De^^ple Proportion of Increase from the Right Hand to the Left) to the said
Figure 4 again, as above hinted: I say, 5 from 2 I cannot; but 5 from 12
(borrowing 10, and putting it to the over Figure 2, as above directed) and
there remains 7; then 1 that I borrowed and 1 is 2, from 3 the over Figure, and
there rests 1, and so the Example is done; and by it is shown that A. still
owes B. 177 Pounds as appears in the Work; and for Proof of its Verity, add 177
the Remainder, to 146 the lesser of the two given Numbers, and it will make
323, being the same with the greater Number, or Sum of Money first due; and
therefore, a sure Proof of the Truth and Certainty of the Rule. And as
Subtraction is proved by Addition, so may Addition be proved by Subtraction;
for if the two aforesaid Numbers, viz. 323 and 146, are added, their Total is
469, from which if you deduct 146, the Remainder will be the greater Number; or
if you substract 323 from the said 469, the Remainder will be 146, the lesser
Number.

All Examples or Sums in Substraction of one Denomination, are performed as
above, they varying act at all: But however, once more for the better
Explanation. Admit, a great Sheep Master has in all 69^4 Sheep, and takes out
of them 2490 to dispose of at Market; how many does he leave behind? To know
this, set them down thus: From -- 6904 the Greater Number, Take -- 2490 the
Lesser Number. Answer 4414 the Remainder.


Here I say, 0 from 4, and there remains 4; then 9 from nothing (or 0) I
cannot; but 9 from 10 (putting or making the 0 10) and there remains 1; then 1
that I borrow and 4 make 5; and 5 from 9, and there rest 4; and lastly* 2 from
6, and there remains also 4, (for I borrowed none, and therefore there is no
Occasion of paying) so that he leaves behind him just 4414; which put to the
Number he takes to Market, make (...) Number he first had, viz. 6904, and shows
the Deducti^^ (...) true, and the Answer right.

More Examples for Practice.
l. Yards. Gallons. Pounds. From 4796 3700 47200 479673 Take 2929 1976 31976
9769^ Rem. 1867 1724 15224 381978 Proof. 4796 3700 47200 47967^

Any Distance of Time that is from any particular Date (...) a Year, may be
known by substracting that Date from the present Date of the Year.

Example.

^

Subtraction of diverse Denominations. Of Money.
l. s. d. Due 9 02 6 Paid 6 16 4 Rests due 2 06 2

Suppose Mr. Campion owes (...) Darnell 9 l. 2 s. 6 d. and (...) has paid Mr.
D. in part 6 l ^word 4 d. what remains due to Mr (...)? Answer, Due to Mr (...)
2 l. 6 s. 2 d. as by this (...)*

10 20 12 4 l. s. d. q. Sold for 242 16 3 Paid in part 174 12 6 Answer 68 03 9

Again, Mr. Edwards sells to Mr. Francis, Spanish Wool to the Value of 242 l.
16 s. 3 d., and pays present Money, and by a Note on Mr. Goodwin, the Sum of
174 l. 12 s. 6 d.; what Money remains unpaid from Mr. Francis? Answer 68 l. 3
s. 9 d..

In the first of these Examples I say, 4 d. from 6 d. and there remains 2 d.
then 16 s. from 2 s. I cannot, but borrowing one Integer of the next
Denomination, or 1 Pound, which is 20 s. I say 16 from 20, and there rests 4,
and taking the over Number 2, and putting it to the Remainder 4, makes 6;
wherefore I put down 6 in the Place of Shillings, and say, 1 that I borro^ and
6 is 7; now 7 l. from 9 l. there remains 2 l. so the Money resting due to Mr.
Darnell, is 2 l 6 s. 2 d. as in the Example.

In the second Example I say, 2 Farthings (or a Halfpenny) from 3 Farthings,
and there remains 1 or ^, which I set down in its proper Place, viz. under the
Denomination of Farthings; then 6 from 3 I cannot, but 6 from 12, (as marked
over the Denomination) and there remains 6, and 3 d. over it makes 9 d. which I
place under the Line in its right Place, viz. of Pence; then 1 that I borrowed
(that is 1 Shilling) and 12 is 13; 13 s. from 16 s. and there rests 3, which I
likewise set down under its own Rank; then 4 from 2 I cannot but 4 from 12
(borrowing 10, as in Addition I carry 1 for every 10) and there rests 8; then 1
that I borrow and 7 makes 8; 8 from 4 I cannot, but 8 from 14, and there
remains 6; so that the Sum remaining due is 68 l. 3 s. 9 d. as in the Work. And
for its Proof you must add the Remainder, 68 l. 3 s. 9 d.. to the lesser, or
under Sum, 174 l. 12 s. 6 d., and it makes 242 l. 16 s. 3 d., the Sum first
due, and is a Proof of the Work's being right. See the Example above.

More Examples for Practice.
10 20 12 4 10 20 12 10 20 12 4 l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. Due 174 16 6 74 10 4
2471 07 0 Paid 97 12 4 29 12 9 1976 16 6 Remain 77 04 1 44 17 7 494 10 5 Proof
174 16 6 74 10 4 2471 07 0 10 20 12 10 20 12 10 20 12 1 st Due 74 00 00 274 16
6 796 00 0 Paid 46 12 10 197 19 4 279 11 7 Balance 27 07 02 76 17 2 516 08 5
Proof 74 00 00 274 16 6 796 00 0

Sometimes a Sum owing ^ may be paid at several Times; then the several
Payments must be added together, and their Total deducted from the Sum first
due, as in this and the Examples following.

l. s. d. l. s. d. More due 249 12 0 Received 100 10 0 Received at several
Times. 24 12 6 Paid to several Persons. 6 16 0 9 14 9 10 0^ 0 20 00 0 5 12 6 16
16 6 20 10 0 22 10 2 7 09 6 13 12 6 9 08 6 7 16 4 7 12 6 Received in all 115 02
9 Paid in all 67 09 0 Rest due 134 09 3 Remains in the Bag. 33 01 0 Proof 249
12 0

Avoirdupois Weight.
10 20 4 28 10 4 28 10 16 16 Tuns. C. qrs. lb. C. qrs. lb. lb. oz. dr. from 44
12 1 10 246 2 12 146 02 10 ^ake 39 14 2 06 164 3 22 97 10 12 4 17 3 04 81 2 18
48 07 14 Proof 44 12 1 1^ 246 2 12 146 02 10

Troy Weight.
10 12 20 24 10 20 24 lb. oz. pwt. gr. oz. pwt. gr. From 462 04 10 11 1247 10
12 Take 196 09 06 16 976 16 17 Remain 265 07 03 19 270 13 19 Proof 462 04 10 11
1247 10 12

And so much for Subtraction; which Method will serve ^or any Denomination
whatever, having respect to the se^eral Tables of Quantity, as before hinted in
Addition.

MULTIPLICATION.
THE next Rule in order is Multiplication, and perhap^ the most serviceable
Rule in Business, for its quick Dispatch, of all others in Arithmetic, and I
shall endea^vour to show, by its Nature, Quality and Use, that it is so* And,

1. Multiplication is a Rule that by two Numbers g^ve^ teaches to find out a
third which shall contain either of (...) two as many Times as the other
contains Units.

2. In some Cases Multipli^ation is also a compendio^^ Worki^g of Addition.

3. It serves likewise to bring great Denominations into small, as Pounds into
Shillings, Pence, or Farthings

4. Having the Length and Breadth of a plain Supe^ficies, we find its Contents
in Square Measure.

5. By Multiplication we find by having the Value of (...) Thing, or the Wages
of one Person, how to know the ^^^lue of many Things, or the Wages of many
Pesons.

In Multiplication we are particularly to take Notice (...) these three Terms,
viz.

The Multiplicand, The Multiplier, and The Product.
1. The Multiplicand (generally (...) greater of the tw^ Numbers) is the Number
to be ^^ltiplied.

2. The Multiplier, (generally the lesser of the two Num^bers) is the Number to
multiply with.

3. The Product, or Result of the Work, being the Answer.

But before any Procedure can be made in this Rule, it (...) necessary to have
the following Table by Heart* and that very perfectly.

The Multiplication Table.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30
33 36 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 ^^ 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 36 42 48 54 60 66 72
49 56 63 70 77 84 64 72 80 88 96 81 90 99 108 100 110 120 121 132 144

This Table is so plain and easy, that there is no need of ^^^^ction* for it is
but guiding the Eye from the Side Column ^o the Head, and in its opposite Angel
or Square you have ^he Answer; and contrariwise, by directing the Eye from ^he
Head to the Side, you have the same; as 6 times 9 is 54, and 9 times 6 is 54;
so 7 times 8 is 5^, and 8 times 7 is ^6, etc. And so it ought to be got by
heart for the more ^exterous Readiness in multiplying.

Now for Application.
Example 1. How many is 3 times 472? Which ^ must be set down as in the Margin;
and then say, 3 ^imes 2 is 6; which place under 3 the Multiplier; ^hen 3 times
7 is 21; set down 1 under 7, and car^y 2 for the two Tens; as in Addition of
one D^no^ination; then 3 times 4 is 12, and 2 is 14; which set down, and the
Product is 1416; that is, 3 times 472 makes so much; and may be proved by
Addition, by setting dow^ 472 three times, in additional Order, and casting it
up* which makes the Assertion good in the second Definition, that this Rule
compendiously performs the Office of Addition. Likewise the foregoing Example
agrees with the first Definition; for as 3 times 472 makes 1416, so does 47^
times 3 make the same, viz. 1416.

Example 2. Again, how many makes 742 multiplied by 4?

^ Here I say, 4 times 2 is 8, and ^ times 4 is 16; 6, and carry 1; and ^ times
7 is 28, and 1 is 29, which se^ down; so the whole Product is 2968, as per
Example.

More Examples of one Figure in the Multiplier, are these, viz.

Multiplic. 7420 4444 7460 90704 5678^ Multiplier 5 6 7 8 ^ Product 37100 26664
52220 725632 51110^

Compound Multiplication.
Is when the Multiplier consists of two, three, four, (...) more Figures, or
Figures and Ciphers.

And here you must begin with that Figure which is in the Place of Units of the
Multiplier, and go through the who^^ Multiplicand, by multiplying each Figure
of it first by tha^ said Unit Figure, then by the next, to wit, by the Figur^
in the Place of Tens of the Multiplier, then with the third etc. to the last;
always remembering to place the (...) Figure of every Product or Line, (for you
will ever have (...) many as you have significant Figures in the Multiplier) I
sa^ remember to place the first Figure of each Line exactly an^ perpendicularly
under the Figure you multiply by; and the^ add the several Lines or Products
together, which so co^^lected gives the total Product required, as in the
Exampl^ following, viz.

Example 1.

H^w many is, or are, 23 times 7426? first I ^ ^egin with the Unit Figure 3 in
the Multiplier, ^aying 3 times 6 is 18; 8 (which I set directly under 3 by
which I multiply) and carry 1; then ^ times 2 is 6, and 1 is 7; then 3 times 4
is ^2; 2 and carry 1; then 3 times 7 is 21, and 1 is 22: And so I have done
with the first ^igure of the Multiplier, viz. 3, Then I go to (...) next, that
is 2, and twice 6 is 12; 2 and carry 1, which 2 is placed in a direct Line
under 2, the Multiply^^g Figure) then twice 2 is 4, and 1 is 5, then twice 4 is
8; (...) lastly, twice 7 is 14, which I set down: Then I add the (...) Products
together, saying 8 is 8, etc. and the Total is (...) right and proper Product,
or Result of the Multipli^^tion, viz. 170798. Again,

Example 2.

What is the Result or total Product of ^ It will appear too prolix, and
altogether ^^necessary, to give more verbal Directions; (...), indeed nauseous
Tautology, since those (...) above are sufficient; and therefore the ^arner is
referred to the Observation of the ^^ample, as also to those two that follow,
viz. ^ When Ciphers are intermixed with Figures in the (...), then multiply by
the Figures as above; and when you (...) to a Cipher in the Multiplier, then
set down another (...) exactly and perpendicularly under it, then begin the
^^^tiplicand again with the next Figure to the Cipher in the Multiplier, and go
through it in the same Line, placing the first Figure of that Product next to
the Cipher toward the Left Hand, but then heed must be taken that the next
Figure or Cipher of the next Line must be set down one Degree farther toward
the Left Hand, and not immediately under the last Figure set down next to the
Cipher: As in the following Examples may be fully understood.

^

When you have a Cipher or Ciphers in the Mutliplier* at the Beginning toward
the Right Hand, then set it, (...) them, backwards from the Place of Units
toward the Righ^^hand; and when you have multiplied by the Figure or ^^^gures,
annex the Cipher or Ciphers: As in these (...)*

^

If you have Ciphers both in the Multiplicand and Mult^^plier, then neglect the
Ciphers in both, and multiply (...) the Figures, and annex the Ciphers at last:
As in the Examples.

^

When you are to multiply by 10, 100, 1000, or 10000, (...) is only adding or
annexing so many Ciphers to the Multi^licand, that is, either 1, 2, 3, or 4
Ciphers, and the Work (...) done. Example, Suppose I am to multiply 375 by the
Numbers above; if I multiply it by 10, then I join 0 to ^75, and then it makes,
or the Product is 3750: If by 100, ^hen I annex 00, and then it makes 37500: If
by 1000, (...) put to it 000, and then it produces 375000. And lastly, (...) by
10000, I then add 0000, and then it makes 3750000 etc. And thus may any Number
be multiplied, when the Multiplier consists of a Unit with any Number of
Ciphers, and done by Inspection only, without any formal setting ^own the
Multiplicand, with a Line drawn under it, etc.

Thus far for Direction in the Manner how to multiply; (...) next will be to
show the Uses of Multiplication in real ^usiness, and how to apply it on proper
Occasions, viz.

1. Suppose you want to know how many Half Crowns ^ere are in 246 l. you know
that 8 Half Crowns make 1 l. therefore set them down thus.

^

Again, in 1968 Half Crowns how many Pence?

^

And this serves to make out, that great Denominations (...) brought into
smaller by this Rule, according to the third ^efinition.

2. Admit you wanted to know the Contents of a large (...) board Table, 34 Feet
long, and 4 Feet wide; mul^^^ly 34 the Length, by 4 the Breadth, and the Answer
will ^136 Square Feet for the true Contents of such a Table. (...) this agrees
with the 4th Definition of this Rule.

3. If I know the Value of a Yard of Broadcloth to be (...) Shillings, what is
the Value of 220 Yards of the said ^oth in Shillings?

^

If the Wages of 1 Seaman be 23 Shillings a Month, wha^ is the Wages of 250
Seamen for the same Time?

^

Answer 5750 Shillings, or 287 l. 10 s.

And these two Examples accord with the fifth Definition or Use of this Rule.

And thus much for plain Multiplication.

I shall, in the next Place, say some small Matter concerni^^ Multiplication of
Money, and a little of its Use, and so co^^clude this Rule.

Multiplication of Money.
Multiplication of Money (what most would learn abo^^ any thing) has great
Affinity with Addition of Money; (...) same Method being taken in carrying from
one Denomin^^tion to the next, viz. from Farthings to Pence, from Pen^^ to
Shillings, and from Shillings to Pounds. And as in A^^dition (and other
Multiplications) you begin at the Right-han^ and proceed toward the Left; so
here you begin at the lea^^ Denomination, which is also at the Right Hand.

This Method of accompting is the most apt and expeditious of all others, for
small Quantities; and therefore extremely necessary in making Bills of Parcels,
etc. and is, beyond all Contradiction, as sure and certain as any way
whatsoever.

The general Rule,
Is always to multiply the Price by the Quantity.

The first Step is, for Quantities from 2 to 12; and this (...) done by one
Multiplier; as in the Examples following.

^

Here I say 6 times 6 is 36 Pence, which is just 3 s. I set ^own 0 in the Place
of Pence, and carry 3 s. to the Place of ^hillings, (exactly the same as in
Addition of Money) then 6 ^^mes 12 is 72, and 3 is 75 s. or 3 l. 15 s.
wherefore I set ^own 15 in the Place of Shillings, and carry 3 to the Pounds;
(...) 6 times 7 is 42 and 3 is 45 l. So the whole Amount of (...) 6 Cloths, at
7 -- 12 -- 6 per Cloth, is 45 l. 15 s* as in the Work, and very concise.

Example 2.

Again, how much is 9 times 13 s. 4 d. or what is the ^mount of 9 Marks? ^

In this Example I say, 9 ^^mes 4 is 36 d. or 3 s. I set ^own 0, and carry 3;
then times 3 is 27, and 3 makes 30; I set down 00 and carry (as in
Multiplication of simple Numbers;) then 9 times 1 9, and 3 is 12, which being
the Tens of Shillings, conse^uently they are Angels; which being halved, make
just 6 l. (...) so much is the Value of 9 Marks, or any thing else at ^ut
Price, viz. 13 s. 4 d.

Example 3.

Once more, What comes 12 Gallons of Wine at 5 s. 4 d. (...) Gallon? ^

Here I say, 12 times 4 is 48; 0 and ^any 4; then 12 times 5 is 60, and 4 is
(...) 4 s. or 3 l. 4 s.

The next Degree or Step of Advance in this Way of ^eckoning, is of Quantities
exceeding 12, even to 12 times ^2, or 144; all which as far as 144, are found
in that ex^ellent Table, the Table of Multiplication; which is a ready ^elp to
all Purposes of Reckoning, and particularly in this ^ay; and that you may
proceed with Dexterity, you must (...) very ready in the said Table, that you
may be immedi^^ely apprehensive what component Parts hit your Quantity
^roposed, or pretty near it, (for any Quantity below 12 needs no Recollection
at all, as in two of the Examples foregoing) and then work accordingly; as 15
Yards at, etc. I readily know that 3 and 5, or 5 and 3, are to be my
Multipliers. If to 21, then three and 7, or 7 and 3, as above. If to 30, then 5
and 6, or 6 and 5, also 3 and 10, or 10 and 3. If to 45, 48, 56, 66, 72, 96,
etc. then 5 and 9, 6 and 8, 7 and 8, 6 and 11, 6 and 12, and 8 and 12, etc. are
to be Multipliers, and exactly hit their several Quantities of which they are
component Parts; and Examples of this Kind have two Multiplications for their
Solution.

When the Quantity proposed is a Number irregular, or such a Number that no two
Numbers in the Table can be found to answer it, then we must multiply by two
such Numbers as come pretty near it, as is said above; and for the Number
wanting, to make up the Number or Quantity proposed, multiply the given Price
of one by the Number that is wanting; which will make three Products by (...)
Multiplications; which last Product must be added to the foregoing Products
resulting from two Multiplications, an^ the Total will be the Answer.

And first, I shall show Examples of the second Step, (...) of Regular
Quantities that exceed 12, and are precisely an^swered at two Multiplications,
such as mentioned above, viz. ^

What comes 15 Yards of Muslin to, at per Yard?

Here 3 times 5 is 15 d. or 1 s. and 3 d. 3 and carry 1 s. then 3 times 3 is 9,
and 1 is 10 s. so the first Product is 10 s. 3 d. which I multiply by 5,
saying, 5 times 3 is 15 d. or 1 s. 3 d. 3 and carry 1; then 5 times 10 is 50,
and 1 is 51 s. or 2 l. 11 s. So the whole Amount of 15 Yards, at 3 s. 5 d. per
Yard, is 2 l. 11 s. 3 d. And demonstrable thus, viz. If 10 s. 3 d. be the Value
of three times 3 s. 5 d. then 5 times the Value of 10 s. 3 d. must of Necessity
be 15 times the Value of 3 s. 3 d. because 5 times 3 is 15: And its Truth may
be proved by Additions and Multiplication, thus; set down 3 s* 5 d. three times
in additional Order, and put the three Line^ together, and the Total of them
multiply by 5, as before and the Answer will be the some. Or set down 17 s. 1 d
(the Product of 3 s. 5 d. multiplied by 5) three times also and add them
together, and the total will be exactly the same with the Result by
Multiplication; as in the following Specimen of Work.

^

Here the first of these two Proofs is worked by Addition and Multiplication,
and the second by Multiplication (as per Margin) and Addition. Also,

By this we see, that in all Examples under this Head, we are to pitch on two
Numbers (for Multipliers) in the Table; which multiplied together, make the
Quantity proposed; and then we are to multiply the Price by one of the Numbers,
(it matters not by which first) and then that Product is to be multiplied by
the other Number, and the second or last Product will be the Answer.

Example 2.

Again, What is the Value of 21 Gallons of Brandy?

^ In this Example I say, times 9 is 63 d. or 5 s. 3 d. I set down 3 and carry
5; then 7 times 7 is 49, and 5 is 54 s. or 2 l. 14 s. So the first Product is 2
l. 14 s. 3 d. which I multiply by 3, and that produces the last Product or
Answer, viz. 8 l. 2 s. 9 d.

Now follow a few more Examples of this Sort, without any verbal Directions,
because I think those already given to (...) sufficient.

Example 3.

What comes 30 Else of Holland to, ^

Example 4.

45 Pound of Raw Silk ^

In the first Product of this Example I say, the half of 7 is 3 and half, or 3
l. 10 s. and in the last, the half of 15 (...) and half, or 7 l. 10 s. etc*

Example 5.

56 Bushels of Wheat.

^

Example 6.

72 Broad Pcs. at ^

In the first Product the (...) of 28 Angels is 14 l. etc

Example 7.

108 lb. of Indigo Lahor

^

Example 8.

96 C. of Currants, at -- ^

The next Gradation of Advance is of Quantities irregular, or of Numbers that
are not to be answered precisely at two Multiplications: In this Case, there
arises no Increase of Difficulty, but it is as easy as the Examples foregoing;
only here you will have an Addition of one Line more, occasioned by bringing
down the Price of one to be added to the last Product, or else a Line more made
by multiplying the Price by what is defective or wanting in the Number by two
Multiplications to make up the proposed Quantity complete; as it may be of 2,
3, 4, 5, etc. as by the subsequent Examples may be seen and understood.

Example 1. What is the Product of 2 l. 13 s. 6 d. multiplied by 39?

^ Here I find that 6 multiplied by 6, makes 36; which is within 3 of the
Quantity proposed; wherefore I multiply by 6, and that Product again by the
other 6; the last Product is 96 l. 6 s. which is the Value of 36, but we want
to know the Value of 39; wherefore I multiply the Price of one, ^iz. 2 l. 13 s.
6 d. by 3 that is defective or wanting to ^ake up 36 to 39, saying 3 times 6 is
18 d. etc. And find (...) 3 times 2 l. 13 s. 6 d. is 8 l. 00 s. 6 d. which
added to 6 l. 6 s. 0 d. the Total gives the complete Value of 39; (...) 36 and
3 makes 39. See the Work.

Example 2. What comes 79 C. with. of Cheese to, at 28 s. (...) C. weight?

^ In this Example I say, 7 times 0 is 0; then 7 times 8 is 56; 6 and carry 5;
and 7 times 2 is 14, and 5 is 19; the half of which is 9 and half, or 9 l. 10
s. 0 d. So the first Product is 9 l. 16 s. 0 d. which multiplied by 11 produces
107 l. 16 s. 0 d. or the Value of 77; then for 2 wanting I multiply the Price
by it, and that gives 2 l. 16 s. 0 d. which added to 107 l. 16 s. 0 d. which
makes the whole Value of 79, viz. 110 l 12 s. 0 d. as in the Work. Or, as there
are no Pence in the Price, you may multiply 28 s. by ^ 79 without bringing it
into Pounds as you work it, but omit it till the last, and then cut off or
separate the last Figure or Cipher of the Product toward the Right Hand, and
halve those toward the Left, which Half will be Pounds, and the Figure cut off
Shillings, as in this Example.

The Half of 2, is 1, and the Half of 1 is 0, which 1 joined to the 2 severed
from 221, makes 12; so the Answe^ is 110 l. 12 s. as before.

Example 3. 112 Pound of Sugar at 5 per lb. set (...) thus: ^

Here after I have multiplied by 10 and 10, the Parts of 100, there wants 12;
wherefore I multiplied 5 d. by 12, and it gives 5 s. 6 d. for 12 lb. at 5 d.,
which added to 2 l. 5 s. 10 d. the Value of 100, makes 2 l. 11 s. 4 d. the true
Value of 112 lb. at 5 d. per Pound.

Example 4. 94 Stone of Beef, at 22 d. or 1 s. 10 d. per Stone.

^ Here what is wanting after the two Multiplications, is 4; wherefore I
multiply 1 s. 10 d. (the Price) by 4, which produces 7 s. 4 d, to be added, etc.

Example 5. 97 C. of Raisins,

^ After I have multiplied by 9 and 10, I multiply the Price 25 s. 6 d. by the
Quantity wanting, and it produces 8 l. 18 s. 6 d. then for the Half C. I take
Half of the Price, which is 12 s. 9 d. and then collect the three Lines, the
Total of which is 124 l, 6 s. 3 d. for the Answer.

Note. From the last Example may be observed, that there (...) no need of too
much Solicitude concerning coming so ^ery near by two Multiplications, for
there 7 is wanting to ^ake up the true Quantity; nay, if the two
Multiplications (...) short by 20 or 12, it is near enough; for it is as easy to
^ultiply the Price by 10 or 12* as by 2 or 3, and the Ad^^tion is the same.

Example 6. Once more; What comes 110 C. of Hops to, at 4 l. 10 s. 6 d. per C.

^ After I have multiplied by 10 and 10, which makes 100, I multiply the Price,
4 l. 10 s. 6 d. by 10 that is wanting, which gives the same with the first
Product, viz. 45 l. 5 s. 0 d. which stands under the Product by 100; and for
the of a C. I take of the Price, viz. first the Half, and then the Half of that
Half, that is 2 l. 5 s. 3 d. an^ and 1 l. 2 s. 7 d.; which fou^ Lines added
together, mak^ 501 l. 2 s. 10 d. for the Answer

To prove Multiplication.
Whether of Simple Numbers, or of Money; it is (...) surely done by Division;
but before that is known, take (...) Method, viz. As you multiplied the
Multiplicand by (...) Multiplier, so contrariwise multiply the Multiplier by
(...) Multiplicand; and if the Products are alike, the Work (...) right; or
otherwise one of them is wrong, and must be (...) over again till they do agree.

Example 1.

^

Here (reversly) I say, 5 times 4 is 20; 0 and (...) times 4 is 24, and 2 is
26; 6 and carry 2, and 3 (...) 12, and 2 is 14. Then 5 Times 2 is 10; 0 and
(...) 6 tim^s 2 is 12, and 1 is 13; 3 and carry 1; and (...) 2 is 6, and 1 is
7. Which Products added togeth^^ (...) 8760, the Hours in a Year, without
taking in the (...) Hours, which the Year does consist of more than 365 Day^

Example 2.

^ I say here, twice 7 is 14; 2 and carry 1 s. and 3 times 7 is 21* and 1 is 22
s. or 1 l. 2 s. Again, twice 8 is 16 d. 4 and carry 1 s. and and twice 8 is 16,
and 1 is 17 s, 17 and carry 0; and once 8 is 8 l. Thus both these Examples are
the same in Consequence as if you proceeded in the common and regular Method of
Multiplication, and shows the Truth of the Operation.

The next Rule in Order, of Course, is

DIVISION.
THIS Rule, though accounted the hardest Lesson in Arithmetic, yet I shall
make it easy and intelligible to ^he meanest Capacity.

The Use of this Rule is to know how many times one Num^er or Sum is contained
in another; as if it were asked, how ^ften is 9 contained in 54? the Answer is
6 times; or, how ^any times 12 is there in 144? Answer 12 times.

As by Multiplication great Names or Denominations are ^rought into small; so
contrarily, by Division, small Names (...) brought into greater; as Farthings
(from one Gradation (...)) into Pounds, Pounds Weight into Tuns Weight, (...)
Liquid into Tuns Liquid, etc.

(...) Rule we are to take particular Notice of these three (...) Terms
following, viz.

The Dividend, or Number to be divided. The Divisor, or Number by which we
divide. The Quotient, or Answer to the Work; which (...) shows how often the
Divisor is contained in (...) ^ividend.
The Remainder; which is an uncertain Branch of this (...), because there is
sometimes a Remainder, and some^^^es not. And you must particularly note, That
the ^emainder is ever of the same Name with the Dividend, (...) is always less
than the Divisor; for if it be more, or ^^ual to the Divisor, the Work is wrong.

Division is either Single or Compound; Single, when the ^ivisor consists of
a single Figure, and the Dividend of two at most. Any of this sort is answered
by the Multip^^^cation Table; as if 63 were to be divided by 7, the Answ^^ will
be 9 times. Here 63 is the Dividend, 7 the Diviso^ and 9 the Quotient or Answer.

Compound Division is when the Dividend has many, (...) more Figures or
Ciphers than two, and the Divisor one (...) more Figures or Ciphers, etc.

Example.

How many times 7 is there contained in 365? Or, (...) many Weeks in a Year?

A General Rule for Working.^
Note 1. Seek, 2. Multiply, 3. Substract.

Having set down the Example with two crooked Lines, (...) half Parenthesis,
one for the Divisor, and the other for (...) Quotient, I begin according to the
aforementioned (...) Rule for Working, by seeking or asking how often I (...)
take 7, the Divisor, out of 36 the two first Figures of (...) Dividend (for I
cannot take 7 out of 3, the Quotient, (...) never to begin with 0) and the
Answer is 5 times; whe^^^fore I place 5 in the Quotient, and multiply the
Divisor (...) by it (as directed in the General Rule) saying 5 times 7 is (...)
which I place under 36; and then thirdly, according to (...) said Rule, I
substract 35 from 36, and there remains 1; (...) which I bring down the next,
or last Figure of the Divide^^ viz. 5, and then there is 15 for a new Dividend,
(...) Dividual, to work upon; then I ask or seek again, (...) often 7 may be
taken in 15? and the Answer is 2 time^ wherefore I put 2 in the Quotient next
to the 5; by whi^^ 2 I also multiply the Divisor 7, saying, twice 7 is (...)
which I set down under 15, and substract, and there r^^mains 1, which I place
between two Semicircles thus, (...) as it stands in the Work; where observe,
That 365 is (...) Dividend, 7 the Divisor, 52 the Quotient, or Answer, (...) 1
the Remainder. The Quotient declares that 7 is (...) in 365, 52 times, and 1
over, or remaining; which I (...) over the Divisor, thus, 1/7, and signifies
that there is (...) Seventh of a Week, or 1 Day, more than just 52 (...) in a
Year, or 365 Days; which is easily to be foun^ (...) ^^^lecting the Days of
each Calendar Month as they stand (...) the Almanac.

You may Note, That the said 1/^ one Seventh is properly (...) is called a
Fraction, or a Piece or Segment of the (...); but of this hereafter.

^ote also, That if there had been more Figures or (...) in the Dividend, they
must have all been brought (...), one by one at a time (and never but one at a
time) (...) (after Substraction) set to the Remainder; and if there (...) 0,
you must still bring down but one Figure or (...) at a time; and for every
Figure or 0 so brought down, (...) must be a Figure or 0 placed in the
Quotient, according (...) times you can take the Divisor out of the several
^^^^viduals you make, by drawing down a Figure or Cipher (...) Time out of the
Dividend, till all be brought down, (...) the Work ended.

(...) a Specimen, let us divide 8060 Pounds of Tobacco (...) among 8 Men.

^ Here I say the Eights in 8 once; which I put in the Quotient, then the
Eights in 0, 0 times; which I likewise put in the Quotient; then the Eights in
6, 0 times again; which is also (...) in the Quotient, and there remains 6; to
which I (...) down 0, the last of the Dividend, and it makes 60; (...), the
Eights in 60 7 times, and 7 times 8 is 56, from (...) and there remains 4; so
the Quotient shows that each (...) must have 1007 Pounds of Tobacco for his
Share in (...) Dividend 8060, and there remains 4 Pounds over and (...), which
makes Half a Pound more due to each Man, (...) 4 the Remainder is Half of 8 the
Divisor; and so (...) Work is Done, the Quotient giving to each Man 1007 (...)
and a Half for his equal Share.

Note, That in the Operation, every time that you bring (...) a Figure or
Cipher, you are to make a Point under it the Dividend, to signify that such a
Figure or Cipher (...) been b^ought down and done with, as may be observed the
foregoing Example.

Though this Way of Working is plain, and easy to be ^^^erstood, yet it is
somewhat tedious; and therefore I show ^uicker Way for Dispatch, when the
Divisor is a single Figure; as shall be made conspicuous in these Examp^^
following, viz.

^

In the first of these Examples I say, the 4's in 7, (...) and there remains 3,
which makes 8, the next Figure (...) the Dividend 38; then the 4's in 38, 9
times; 9 times 4 (...) 36, from 38, and there remains 2; which makes 9 the
(...) Figure in the Dividend, 29; then the 4's in 29, 7 time^ 7 times 4 is 28,
from 29, and there rests 1; which makes* the next of the Dividend, 10, and the
4's in 10 twic^ twice 4 is 8, from 10, and there remains 2; which make^ 6, the
last of the Dividend, 26; lastly, the 4's in 26, (...) times; and 6 times 4 is
24, from 26, and there rests 2 (...) Remainder; and so for the other two
Examples. And (...) Proof of the Work, (or of any other Example) multipl^ the
Quotient by the Divisor, and take in the Remainder (...) the first Place, or
Place of Units; and if the Product (...) the same with the Dividend, the
Division is right; for (...) say, 4 times 6 is 24, and 2 the Remainder makes
26; (...) and go 2, etc.

More Examples by a single Figure.
^

This is the shortest Way of Division that can be by a (...) Figure.

As it is necessary for Expedition to multiply by 11 and 1^ as by a single
Figure, to have the Product in one Line; (...) divide as in these Examples, viz.

^

(...) of these Examples, I say, the 11's in 72, (...), etc. In the second, I
say, the 12's in 76, (...), etc. In the third, the 11's in 47, 4 times* (...)
44, from 47, and there rests 3, etc. In the (...) say, the 12's in 42, ^ times;
3 times 12 is 36, (...)* and there remains 6, etc.

(...) being ready and dextrous in the Examples above, you (...) expeditiously
divide by these Numbers, viz. 110, 120, ^^00, or 1200; etc. for it is but
cutting off, or separating (...) Ciphers from 11 and 12, (when these Numbers
happen (...) be Divisors) and cutting off and separating the like Num^ers of
Figures or Ciphers from the Right Hand of the Di^^dend, and then divide the
other Figures or Ciphers to^ards the Left Hand, by 11 or 12, as it shall
happen; as (...) the Examples following, viz.

Divide 34567 by 110, and 890123 by 120, and 98765 (...) 1100, and 678901 by
1200.

^

^hen you divide by 10, 100, 1000 or 10000, etc. you (...) nothing more to do
than to cut off, or to separate so (...) Figures or Ciphers of the Dividend
toward the Right-(...), as you have Ciphers in the Divisor, and those Figures
toward the Left make your Quotient; and those cut (...) toward the Right, is
the Remainder.

Examples.

Divide 123456789 by 10, 100, 1000, or 10000.

By 10 the Quotient is 12345678, and the Remainder 9*

By 100 the Quotient is 1234567, and Remainder 89.

By 1000 the Quotient is 123456, and Remainder 789.

By 10000 the Quotient is 12345, and Remainder 678^*

When the Divisor consists of several Figures, (...) there arises a little
more Difficulty in the Work, but if (...) following Directions are heedfully
attended to, the seemi^^ Difficulty is easily overcome; as in the succeeding
Exampl^ viz.

Suppose I am to divide 78901 Pounds among 32 Parish^^ or suppose an Assessment
of so much Money was laid on (...) many Parishes; what must each Parish pay by
an equal P^^^portion toward the raising such a Supply?

Divisor 32) 78901 (.... Quotient.

The Example thus set out, I begin at the Left Hand, see^ing how often I can
take 32 out of 78; or more easy, (...) many times 3 there is in 7, and the
Answer is two tim^^ which I place in the Quotient thus 32) 78901 (2, and (...)
according to the General Rule of Working, I multiply (...) Divisor 32, by the
two placed in the Quotient, sayin^ twice 2 is 4, and twice 3 is 6; so there is
64 to be taken (...) of 78, and stands thus: ^

Then I make a Point under 9, the third Figure of (...) Dividend, and bring it
down to the Remainder 14, and (...) the Work appears thus: ^

Then I seek again, asking how many times 32 in 149 which is not readily to be
answered; but how many times (...) the first Figure of the Divisor, is there in
14, the two (...) Figures of the Dividual 149, and the Answer is 4 time^
wherefore* after placing 4 in the Quotient, I multiply, ((...) in the General
Rule) the Divisor 32 by the said (...) ^^ying, 4 times 2 is 8, placing it under
9 in the Dividual; (...) 4 times 3 is 12, and set down under 14; so there is
128 (...) be taken out of 149, and then the Work appears thus:

^ And after Substraction there remains 21; then I make a Point under 0 in the
Divividend, and bring it down to the Right of the Remainder 21; and then there
is 210 for a new Dividual; then as the general Rule directs, I seek again,
saying, how many times 32, the Divisor, (...) there in 210, the Dividual? or
easier, how many times 3 (...) 21? For observe well, That when ever you have a
(...) more in the Dividual than in the Divisor, then always (...) how often you
can take the first Figure of the Divisor (...) of the two first of the
Dividual) and the Answer is 7 (...) but it will not bear 7 times, for 7 times
32 is 224, (...) you cannot take 224 out of 210; or rather, you cannot (...) 22
out of 21; wherefore try in your Mind before you (...) down the Answer, or
Figure in the Quotient, whether (...) will go to the Number of Times as is most
easily suggested; (...) here the Question or Demand is readily answered 7
times; (...) so many times 3 may be taken in 21; but when you (...) to multiply
the whole Divisor by the times you place (...) the Quotient, you begin at the
Right Hand, and go to^ards the Left, carrying the Tens that arise to the next
^lace, which increases the Product so, that sometimes Sub^^raction cannot be
made, because the under Line is greater (...) the upper, or that which you
should substract from; therefore first try in your Mind as abovesaid; and since
it will ^ot bear 7 times, try if it will go 6 times; saying, 6 times (...) is
12, 2 and carry 1, and 6 times 3 is 18, and 1 is 19; and 19 may be taken out of
21, therefore set down 6 in (...) Quotient next to the 4, and multiply the
Divisor 32 by (...), and the Work will stand thus:

^ Here the Divisor 32 multiplied by 6, gives 192 to be taken out of 210, and
the Remainder is 18; to which, after a Point made under it, I bring down the 1,
the last Figure of the Dividend, and then there is 181 for a new Dividual; then
according to the Rule, I seek again (for you are to note, That the aforesaid
General Rule for working must be as often repeated as you bring down a Figure
or Cipher from the Dividend, to make a new Dividual; and also, that for every
Figure or Cipher brought down, there must likewise be a Figure or Cipher placed
in the Quotient, how many times 32 the Divisor may be taken out of 181 the
Dividual; or how many times 3 in 18, and the ready Answer is 6 times, but on
the Trial I find it will not go 6 times, wherefore I try a (...) less by ^,
viz. 5 times, and find ^ it will bear it; and setting 5 in the Quotient next to
the 6, I multiply the Divisor 32 by it; and it produces 160; which subtracted
from 181, the last Remainder is 21, and the Quotient or Answer is 2465; and
shows that 32 is contained in 78901, 2465 times, and 21 over, as per Work,

Again, admit a Nobleman has 30,000 l. per Annum what is his daily Income?

If you divide 30000 by 365 (the Days in a Year) (...) Quotient will be the
Answer. Set it down for working thus

^

First, seek how many times 365 can be taken in 300, ((...) equal Number of
Places with the Divisor) answer 0 times wherefore I go a Place farther to the
Right Hand, in the Dividend (for 0 must never begin the Quotient, as was said
before) and make a Point under it, viz. under the last 0 bu^ one, as may be
seen in the Example; and there being (...) Place more in this pointed out
Dividual than in the Divisor* I seek how often the first Figure of the Divisor,
viz. 3, is co^^tained in the two first Figures or Places of the Dividend, viz.
30, and the Answer is 10 times; but you are never to tak^ above 9 times at
once, in any of these Examples of Divi^sion, wherefore try in your Mind whether
it will bear ^ times, before you set it down in the Quotient (as was sai^
before) saying to yourself, or in your Mind, 9 times 5 (...) 5 and go 4; 9
times 6 is 54, and 4 is 58; 8 and go 5; (...) 9 times 3 is 27, and 5 is 32; now
32 cannot be taken (...) of 30, wherefore take a time less by a Unit or One,
vi^* (...) ^imes; and finding it will go 8 times, set down 8 in the ^^otient;
and then say, 8 times 5 is 40; 0 and carry 4; (...) 8 times 6 in 48, and 4 is
52; 2 and carry 5; and 8 (...) 3 is 24, and 5 is 29; and then there is 2920 to
be (...) from 3000; and after Substraction, the Work appears (...). ^

Then to the Remainder 80, I bring down 0, the last of (...) Dividend, and then
there is 800 for a new Dividual; (...) you must try how often you can take 365
out of the said (...) 800, and the Number of Places being equal to (...) in
Divisor and Dividual, to wit, 3, ask how often three ^^8; answer twice; so put 2
in the Quotient, and say, twice (...) 10; 0 and carry 1; and twice 6 is 12, and
1 is 13; 3 (...) carry 1; and twice 3 is 6, and 1 is 7; so there is 730 (...)
be deducted from 800, and the Remainder is 70, as in (...) whole Work may be
seen, viz.

^ Thus by the Work the Nobleman has Eighty-two Pounds per Diem, and 70 Pounds
over; which if multiplied by 20, the Shillings in a Pound, would produce 1400
Shillings; which if divided per said Divisor 365, there would (...) out 3 s. a
Day more, and there will be a Remainder of ^^5, which multiplied by 12, the
Pence in a Shilling, pro^^ces 3660; which divided still per 365, gives 10 Pence
a (...) more: So that 30000 l. a Year is l. 82 -- 3 -- 10 a Day.

Once more; Divide 46242 Gallons of Canary by 252, (...) Gallons in a Tun, thus
set down: ^

In this Example, after Enquiry I find that it will not go twice; therefore I
set down 1 in the Quotient, and place 352 under 462 of the Dividend, and after
Substraction the Remainder is 210; to which I bring down 4 from the Dividend,
and the Dividual is 2104; and then seeking again, find it will bear 8 times;
which (...) in the Quotient, and the Divisor 252 multiplied by it, the Product
is 2016 to be subtracted from 2104, whi^^ being done, the Remainder is 88; to
which 2, the last F^^gure of the Dividend being brought down, there is 88^ for
the last Dividual; and then seeking again, I find it (...) go 3 times; and the
Product of the Divisor multiplied by 3^^ is 756; which subtracted from 882,
there remains 126 (...) the last, or true Remainder: So that by this Division,
(...) find there are 183 Tuns in 46242 Gallons, and 126 Gallon^ remaining, or
over and above; which being Half of 25^ the Divisor, the Remainder is therefore
Half a Tun more.

When you have a Cipher or Ciphers in the Divisor, (...) the First, Second, or
Third Place, etc separate such Cipher or Ciphers with a Dash of the Pen, from
the rest of the Divisor; and also cut off as many Figures or Ciphers from the
Right of the Dividend, as you cut off Ciphers from the Divisor, and divide the
remaining Figures toward the Lef^ hand by the remaining significant Figures of
the Divisor.

Example.

Divide 42952 Square Poles of Land by 160, the Squar^ Poles in an Acre of Land.

^ Here the Cipher is cut off from the Divisor, and 2 from the Dividend; then I
ask how often 16 in 42; answer twice; then the 16's in 109, answer 9 times; the^
16's in 135, answer 8 times. So there are 268 Acres, and 7 remains that is in
268 Acres, 7/16 or 70/160 or almost Half an Acre.

^

In this Example, two Ciphers are separated from the Divisor and also two
Places from the Dividend, and then 62746 is divided only by 27. See the Work.

When the Divisor is 3, 4, 5, 6, or more Figures, there (...) a sure and easy
Way of performing the Work truly, by making a Table of the Divisor; which may
be done by Addition, or by multiplying the Divisor by 2, 3, 4, etc. ^dmit you
are to divide 987654321 by 123456.

^

Times 1 123456 2 246912 3 370368 4 493824 5 617280 6 740736 7 864192 8 987648
9 1111104

Here having noted the ^umber of Figures in the ^ivisor, which here is 6, make
a Point under the ^^xth Figure, or Place of (...) Dividend, etc.

The foregoing Table is made by doubling the first Line, which makes 246912;
which added to the first or uppermost ^ine gives the 3d Line 370368, which also
added to the (...) first Line, makes 493824 for the 4th Line or Product; and so
of the rest; still remembering to add the subsequent (...) or Product to the
first or uppermost Line, till you come (...) the last Line of 9 times, which is
1111104; the Truth (...) which may be proved by multiplying the first or
uppermost ^ine by 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. and if you commit an Error by ^ddition, it
may be found or corrected by Multiplication.

The Use of the said Table.
When you have pointed out your Number of Places in (...) Dividend, cast your
Eye on the Table, and at the first ^iew you may know how many times you can
take, as in ^his Example, 7 times is too little, and 9 times too much;
therefore I set down 8 in the Quotient, and then multiply and substract, and
the Remainder is 6; to which I bring ^own 3, and put 0 in the Quotient, then to
the 63, I bring down 2, and place 0 in the Quotient; then to 632 I bri^^ down
1, the last Figure of the Dividend: But still it (...) not bear any Times or
Time, wherefore I put another 0 (...) the Quotient; and so the Work is done,
and the Quotien^ (...) ^000, and the Remainder 6321 as in the Work.

Thus having plainly, fully, and pertinently shown, (...) verbal Di^ections,
the Method of Working Division; I thi^^ it unnecessary to give any more
Examples in that Manne^ but shall leave some few Examples for Practice sake,
(...) Quotients and Remainders are expressed, but the Operat^^^ omitted, to
save Room, and for Trial of the Ingenuity (...) Practitioners.

7400690042 divided by 987, the Quotient is 749816^ and Remainder 200.

479679002742 divided by 4689, the Quotient is 102298^^^ and the Remainder 4566.

7969767002 divided by 976294, the Quotient is 8^^^3 and the Remainder 279080.

456789012345, divided by 9876543, the Quotient (...) 46249, and the Remainder
8775138.

764697 by 4500 Quotes 16993, and Remainder 1249. (...) 8092320000 by 345000,
quotes 23456, and remains (...)

The Proof of Multiplication and Division.
THese two Rules reciprocally prove each other; for (...) proving
Multiplication, if you divide the Product (...) the Multiplier, the Quotient
will be like the Multiplica^^ or if the Multiplicand, the Quotient will be the
same (...) the Multiplier.

^

To prove Division.
Division may be proved by Division thus:

If you divide the Dividend by the Quotient, the Quo^ient will be your former
Divisor.

Example.

Divide 8280 by 345.

^

Here the Working again is needless, it being in the Page ^oregoing; and shows
the Truth of the Assertion, that Di^ision may be proved by Division, as
aforesaid.

But the most usual Way of proving Division is by Multi^lication in this
Manner, viz. multiply the Quotient by the Divisor, and the Product will be
equal to the Dividend, ^xample of 1, in the foregoing Page.

^

Note, That when there is any Remainder, such Remainder must be taken in or
added to the Product.

As in Multiplication, I gave some Examples of its Utility (...) Money, so
likewise I shall give a few Examples of Divi^^on of Money; whereby may be seen
how expeditiously ^ome Things may be done, without having Recourse to
Re^uction, the Rule of Three, etc. viz.

Example 1.

Divide 26 l. 12 s. 6 d. equally among Five Men. For Disposition of working,
set it down as follows.

^

In the Working of this, I say, the 5's in 26, 5 times; 5 times 5 is 25, from
26, and there remains 1, or 1 Pound, or 20 Shillings; which with the 12 s. in
the Place of Shillings, makes 32 s. then the 5's in 32, 6 times; 6 times 5 is
30, from 32, and ^here remains 2 s. or 24 d. which with the 6 d. in the Place
^f Pence, makes 30; then the 5's in 30, 6 times; and so ^he Work is done, and
the Answer is that each Man must have l. 5 -- 00 -- 6 for his equal Share (...)
said Division l. 26 -- 12 -- 6 amongst 5 Persons; (...) the Truth of it proved
by Multiplication of Money, (...) shown the Rule of Multiplication; as here, 5
(...) 6 is 30; 6 (...); and 5 times 6 is 30, and 2 is 32; 12 and carr^ (...) 5
times 5 is 25, and 1 is 26, etc.

Example 2.

Divide the Charges of a Country Feast, amounting (...) l. 246 -- 13 -- 4
equally among 12 Stewards, to know wha^ each Steward must pay.

^

Here I say the 12's in 2 twice, and the 12's in 6, ^ times, and there remains
6^^ or 120 s. and 13 s. make 13^ and then 12's in 13 once, and there remains 1
s. or 12 d. the 12 and 4 is 16; and the 12's in 16 once, and 4 remains; (...)
that each Steward must pay l. 20 -- 11 -- 1 4/2 or four Twelft^ of a Penny,
something more than a Farthing; and this man be proved as that above.

When any Quantity is such a Number that any two Di^gits of the
Multiplication-Table, multiplied together, mak^ the said Quantity or Number,
then the Quotient may (...) very expeditiously found at two Divisions, and
sooner tha^ at one. Example: Divide 7872 by 32. In this Exampl^ the Digits,
component Parts, or Ratio's, which multiply'^ together, make the Divisor 32,
and 4 and 8, or 8 and 4 for it matters not which of the Ratio's you divide by
first for either of which Divisions give a true, and the same Quotient; as may
be seen by the different Methods of the following Work.

^

Here though the Operations are diverse, yet the Quotient^ are one and the same.
Again, divide 44184 by 56.

Example 2.

^

Here the Divisors are 7 and 8, or 8 and 7* for either* (...) both, will give
the same Quotient.

And thus may above Forty Examples be wrought by Numbers out of the
Multiplication-Table, with great Dis^atch and Expedition, as by 15, 18, 25, 35,
64, 72, 96, etc.

When it happens there is any Remainder in the first Divi^^on, or the last, or
in both; to know the true Remainder as (...) you divided by the common Way,
take this Method, viz. ^ultiply the first Divisor by the last Remainder, and to
take (...) in or add the first Remainder, if there be any, and the ^roduct will
be the true or same Remainder as if you divided (...) the long Way. Example:
Divide 4567, by 15.

^

Here I multiply 3, the first Divisor, by 2, the last Remainder, and take in 1,
the first Remainder, and it makes 7 for the true Remainder, as may be proved at
Leisure, by the other Way.

The same Observation and Method must be taken with re^pect to component Parts
mentioned before, in Division of Money, as in Divisio^ of simple Numbers.

Example.

^

By this Method of Division of Money (if the Quantity be (...) aforesaid made
by even component Parts) you may, by ^aving the Price of several Things, know
the Price or Value of one Thing, at the said Rate, as well as by the Rul^ of
Three: So does Multiplication of Money answer Questions (...) the Rule of
Three, when the first Number is a Unit or One*

Example by Division.

If 84 lb. of Coffee cost ^ what is that a lb?

As in the Multiplication of Money, to have an Answer, you multiply the Price
by the Quantity, so in Division of Money, you divide the Price by the Quantity,
to ha^^ your Answer.

I could speak more largely, if I had Room, of the e^cellent Uses that may be
made of Multiplication and Div^^sion only; but their various Uses will be
better understood by their Application in the following Rules of Arithmetic
particularly in the next Rule, called,

REDUCTION.
WHICH is an Application of Multiplication and Di^vision, showing how to reduce
Numbers of one Denomination to another, thereby discovering the same Value*
though in different Terms.

1. As first, All Great Names are brought into Smaller by Multiplication, as
Pounds i^to Shillings, Pence, or Farthings, by multiplying 20, 12, and 4. Or
Hundreds Weight into Pounds Weight, by multiplying by 4 and by 28, or by 112;
or lower, into Ounces or Drams, by multiplying by 16 and 16.

2. And on the contrary, All Small Names are brought into greater by Division;
as Farthings into Pounds, by dividing by 4, 12, and 20; and Pounds Weight into
Hundreds Weight, by dividing by 28 and 4; and Drams into Pounds, by dividing by
16 and 16.

But you may Note, That Pounds only are brought into Pence, by multiplying by
240; or into Farthings, by mul^^^lying by 960; and just the contrary by
Division.

And for Weight, as expressed above.

The Sense, Meaning and Use of Reduction, is expressed the following Verses.

Reduction shows how we of Names in Use,
May Great to Small, and Small to Great, reduce;
So that the Answer which shall thence arise,
The given Sum in Value equalize;
Multiply, or divide it, back you must;
Which makes again your given Number just.
Example 1.

^

Example 2.

^

These foregoing Examples are Great Names to be brought into Small (as may
easily be observed and understood;) therefore, as the first Rule directs, it
is done by Multiplication, by multiplying the greater Name by the Number of the
next lesser Name that makes one of the said greater; as in the last Examples
the lesser Name to Pounds is Shillings* wherefore I multiply by 20, because 20
of that lesser Name makes one of the said greater Name, i. e. 20 Shillings make
a Pound. And the same Regard is had, and Method observed in the Example of
Weight; as is very plain to be seen in the Work, and is called Reduction
Descending, because it brings Higher or Greater Denominations into Lower or
Lesser.

Example 3.

^

In the first Way, I divide the Farthings by 4, because 4 of them make a Penny,
and the Quotient is Pence; the^ these Pence I divide by 12, because 12 of them
make (...) Shilling, and that Quotient is Shillings; which Shillings (...)
divide by 20, to bring it into Pounds, thus* I* cut off the Cipher in the
Dividend toward the Right, for the Cyphe^ that is in the Divisor 20, which is
also separated from 2 with a Dash of the Pen, ( as may be seen in the Work)
the^ I halve the Figures one by one, as they are united with the Remainder in
the Dividend; which Half is Pounds, and is a short Way of dividing by 20; in
the Example I say, the Half of 10 (because I must not set down 0 at the
Beginning is 5, and the Half of 3 is 1, and there remains 1; which makes the
next, which is 0, 10; and the half of 10 is (...) So that 10300 Shillings makes
515 Pounds, or there are (...) many Pounds in 494400 Farthings

Note, In dividing by 20, as above, if any Thing remains it must be joined or
annexed to the Figure or Cipher cut off; as suppose there had in halving the
last Figure excepting that you cut off, remained 1, which there does never
more, and then neither, but when the Figure halve (...) (...); I say, if there
had remained 1, then it must have been ^ined to the Cipher separated or cut
off, and then there ^ould have been 10 Shillings.

Example 4.

^

In the first of the two foregoing Examples I divide the ^ounds by 28 to bring
them into Quarters; then I divide ^^ose Quarters by 4, to bring them into
Hundreds Weight, (...) in the Work.

In the second Way, I divide the Pounds Weight by 112, (...) Pounds in a C.
Weight, and it brings the Pounds Weight into Hundreds Weight at once.

The said Examples are of small Denominations to be ^rought into greater; and
therefore according to the se^ond Rule of Direction, it is done by Division, by
dividing (...) lesser Name by as many of them as make the next ^reater Name;
that is, by 28, because 28 of them make one (...) the next greater Name, viz. a
Quarter of a Hundred; and this Reduction is called Reduction Ascending, because
it ^rings low or small Names to higher or greater Denominati^ns. -- By which
may be observed, that all Questions in ^eduction, whether Ascending or
Descending, are answered ^ither by Multiplication or Division, or by both; as
will ^lainly appear in the sundry ^^amples of Reducing of diverse Denominations
to others.

When it is required to redu^e Numbers of several Deno^inations by Reduction
Descending, or by Multiplication, you ^re to work as before; but you must
always remember to ^ake in such Numbers as stand (...) the Place of the next
inferior Denomination; as when you multiply the Pounds by 20, if there be any
Shillings in the Denomination or Plac^ of Shillings, you must take them in. So
likewise when you multiply the Shillings by 12, if there be any Pence in the
Place of Pence, you must also take them in. And so when you multiply the Pence
by 4, to bring them into Farthings you must take in the Farthings, if there be
any, in ^ne Place of Farthings, as in the following Work.

Example 5.

^

The Example is so plain in the Work that it hardly need^ any Explanation; but
I begin to say, 0 is 0, but 6 in the Units of Shillings is 6; then twice 6 is
12; and 1 in the Tens of Shillings is 13; 3 and carry 1; and twice 4 is 8, and
1 is 9; twice 3 is 6; then by 12, saying 12 times 6 is 72, and 9 d. (in the
Place of Pence) is 81; 1 and carry 8? and 12 times 3 is 36, and 8 is 44; 4 and
carry 4; and 12 times 9 is 108, and 4 is 112; 2 and carry 11; and 12 times 6 is
72, and 11 is 83, etc.

Example 6.

^

In the foregoing Work, I first multiply the 56 C. by 4* (...) take in the two
Quarters; and then I multiply the 226 (...). by 28, saying, 8 times 6 is 48,
and 6 (the Unit Figure (...) the odd Pounds) 1^ 54; 4 and carry 5, etc. Then I
^ultiply by 2, saying, twice 6 is 12, and 1 (that stands in (...) Place of Tens
in the odd Pounds) is 13: 3 and carry 1, ^c. Then adding the two Products
together, they make ^44 Pounds contained in 56 C. 2 qrs. 16 lb. as in the ^ork
is conspicuous. Or the Example may be sooner done (...) multiplying the 56 C.
by 112, the Pounds in a C. With. (...) taking in the odd Weight, viz. 2 qrs. 16
lb. or 72 ^ounds at once, thus:

^

I say here, 12 times 6 is 72; 2 and carry 7; and 12 times 5 is 60, and 7 is
67; then once 6 is 6, setting it down in the third Place, because by
multiplying by 12 at once, two Places are taken up; See the Work.

Or, still briefer thus, by setting down the 56 C. four ^^veral times, in the
following Manner; taking in the odd ^eight, as before.

The same as above, viz. ^

Reduction Ascending.
Is the bringing Numbers from a lesser Denomination to a ^reater, and is the
Reverse of Reduction Descending; and ^ach may serve as a Proof to the other,
one being per^ormed by Multiplication, and the other by Division.

And Note, That when at any Time in Reduction De^cending you take in, or add
to, the odd Money, Weight, (...) Measure, as you multiply the several
Denominations, such Quantities will be Remainders in Reduction Ascending.

Example by the two foregoing Sums.

^

So that in 332966 Farthings, there are 346 l. 16 s. 9 d. and is a sure Proof
of the foregoing Work descending.

Again, in 6344 Pounds Weight, how many Hundre^^ Weight? ^

So that in 6344 Pounds Weight, there is 56 C. 2 qrs. 16 and proves the
foregoing Example descending to be right.

Now follow promiscuous Examples of both Kinds of R^^duction, one proving the
other.

^

In 47964 Grains how many Pounds Troy?

^

In ^ of Cotton Wool, how many Pounds?

In 456 C. 3 qrs. 27 lb. of Copper, how many Pounds? (...) what comes it to, at
21 d. per lb. ^ Pence; which bring into Pounds by Division, or Reduction
Ascending, as before shown, and it will amount to l. 4478: 10: 3.

Bring ^ Else Flemish into Else English; multiply by 3. and divide by 5,
because 3 Quarters make an Ell Flemish, and 5 an Ell English.

Reduce 456 Else English into Yards; multiply by 5, and ^^vide by 4, thus: ^

^

And so the contrary by Division*

^

Answer, 42 Lasts, 3 Quarters, 5 Bushels, and 2 Peck^

Thus by the two foregoing Examples it is seen, that ^^duction Ascending and
Descending mutually prove each other as was said before; and is no more, than
that Multiplicati^^ and Division prove one another.

By Reduction also,
Foreign Coins or Exchanges may be reduced to Sterli^^ Money; and on the
contrary, Sterling Money to Foreign.

Example.

Reduce 246 Venetian Ducats de Banco into Sterling M^^ey, the Exchange at 52 d.
Sterling per Ducat, thus: ^

To reduce Flemish Money into Sterling Money, divide (...) Pence Flemish by the
Par of Exchange, viz. 33 s. 4 d. (...) the Quotient will be the Sterling Money;
and what (...), multiply by 20, etc. Example.

^

By the Work it appears that 145 l. 12 s. Sterling ^^swers or is equivalent to
242 l. 13 s. 4 d. Flemish, (...) 4 d. Flemish, per Pound Sterling.

Thus Flemish Money may be reduced to Sterling Money, though the Par of
Exchange be at any other (...) of Shillings and Pence Flemish; but when at the
(...) above, viz. 33 s. 4 d. (the common Par) then the (...) sooner found by
multiplying by 3, and dividing by (...) 400 d. Flemish is the same to 240 d.
(...) Pound) as 3 is to 5; for if you divid^ (...) by (...) quotes ^0: So 400
divided by 5, quote^ (...).

The foregoing Example done by the last proposed Way.

^

Note, French Mone^ is reduced to Sterling, viz. Livre^ Sols, and Deniers (or
^rench Pence) as Sterling and Flemi^^ Money is by multiplying by 20 and by 1^.
Also Proclam^^tion Money is reduced (...) Sterling, if you multiply by 3, an^
divide by 4.

In 436 French (...), each 54^. Sterling, how man^ Pounds, etc. Sterling?

^ In this Example, the Num^ber of Crowns is multiplie^ by 54 d and for that I
take (...) 4th Part of 246, which is 106 2/4 of a Penny, or ^ Half penny; which
added (...) the other Pence, gives for (...) 23110 d. which divided (...) 12,
quotes 1925, and (...) d. remains: so the Answe^ (...) l. 5 s* (...) Answer l.
96: 5: 10 (...) Work.

Again, bring 1600 (...) or Eight (...)* at 54 d. (...) into Pounds, etc.
Sterling?

^

Here the 1600 Pieces of Eight are multiplied by 54, to bring them into Pence;
and for the 2/^ I take the ^/^ of 1600 twice, etc. as in the Work. And the
Answer is l. 361: 13: 4.

This Method is of Use in reducing the Exchanges of Cadiz, Leghorn, and Genoa.
Or when the Exchange is at so many Pence, and Eighths of a Penny, (as often the
Exchanges run) then multiply the given Number to reduce it into Pence, by the
Pence contained in a Piece of Eight; and also multiply the said given Number
apart, by the Numerator or upper Figure of the Fraction, and divide by the
^enominator, or under Figure of the Fraction, and the Quo^ient will be Pence;
which add to the other Pence produced by multiplying the given Number by the
Pence contained in one of the Pieces for Exchange; then divide the total Pence
by 12, etc.

Example.

Bring 296 Dollars, at 52 d. ^/8 Sterling* into Pounds, etc. Sterling? ^

But Ducats, Dollars, Crowns, Millreas, etc. are (...) expeditiously cast up by
the Rules of Practice hereafter (...) be shown.

And so much for Red^ction. The next Rule in Ari^^^metick is

The GOLDEN RULE: Or RULE of THREE.
IT is called the Golden Rule from its excellent Performances in Arithmetic,
as in other Parts also of Mathemical Learning.

And the Rule of Three, because from three Numbers given, proposed, or known,
we find out a fourth Number required, or unknown, which bears such Proportion
to the third at the second does to the first Number. From whence also it is
called, The Rule of Proportion.

And of this Proportion there are two sorts; one calle^ Direct, and the other
Indirect or Reverse.

Direct Proportion is, when the second and third Numbers are multiplied
together, and their Product is divided by the first.

Indirect or Reverse Proportion is, when the first and second Numbers are
multiplied together, and their Product is divided by the first.

In Direct Proportion, the fourth Number, or Answer to the Question, contains
the third Number as often (or as many times) as the second contains the first.

But in Indirect Proportion, the greater the third Number is, the less is the
fourth; and the lesser the third Number is, the greater is the fourth.

The Stating the Question.
The chiefest Difficulty that occurs in the Rule of Three, is the right placing
the Numbers, or s^^ting the Question; for when that is done, you have nothing
more to do, but to multiply and divide, and the Work is done.

And to this End, we are to remember, that of the three given Numbers, two of
them are always of one Name or Denomination; and the other Number is ever of
the same Name with the fourth Number or Answer required; and must always be the
second or middle Number; and the Number that asks the Question, must still
possess the third or last Place; and the other Number of the same Name with the
third, must be the first Number; for, the first and third Numbers must always
be of one Name, viz. both Money* both Weight, both Time, or both Measure. And
though ^^ey be of one Kind, yet if one of them is altered, by Re^uction, from a
high to a lower Name, then the other must (...) reduced to the same Name. For
you must particularly note, That if either the first or third Numbers consist
of several Denominations, that is of Pounds and Shillings; or Pounds,
Shillings, and Pence; or of Pounds, Shillings, Pence, and Farthings; or of
Tons, Hundreds, Quarters and Pounds, etc. then must they be reduced to the
lowest Name mentioned. And if one happen to be of diverse Denominations, and the
other but of one Name; then the Number of one Name must be reduced as low, or
into the same Name with the other; as sup^ose the first Number is brought into
Farthings, then the third Number, though but Pounds, must be brought into
Farthings also. Then you are to multiply the second and third Numbers together
(when the Proportion is Direct) and divide the Product by the first Number, and
the Quotient thence arising will be the Answer to the Question, and in the same
Nam^ with the Middle Number: And if in a small D^nomination, it must be ^rought
by Division to the highest Name, for the better understanding the Answer. You
must also Note, That if the middle Number be of several Denominations, it must
be brought unto the lowest mentioned.

Example 1.

If 12 Gallons of Brandy cost 4 l. 10 s. what will 134 Gallons cost at that
Rate?

Stated for Working thus*

^

Here the first and third Numbers are of like Names, viz. both Gallons; and 134
being the Number that asks the Question, it has the third Place, as it
always must, as before asserted; and 4 l. 10 s. the second Number, being of two
Denominations, viz. Pounds and Shillings, it is reduced into the lowest
mentioned, viz. Shillings, as before directed, and then the three Numbers are
these, viz. 12 -- 90 -- 134; and 134 the third Number, being multiplied by 90,
the second Number, produces 12060; which divided by 12, the first Number,
quotes 1005 Shillings, the Name of the middle Number 90; and 1005 Shillings,
divided by 20, gives 50 l. 5 s. for the Answer; And for the Proof of its truth,
state it back again thus: ^ (90 s. Answer, or 4 l. 10 s. the Cost of 12
Gallons, and is a sure Proof of the (...) Work; and the back stating and
working the Proof is a much a Question in the Rule of Three as the first.

By the foregoing Rules and Directions, and these tw^ Operations, you may
understand the Nature of the (...) and Method of working, and with Ease and
Certainty a^^swer any Example proposed in the Rule of Three direct And
therefore, I shall omit what I can of verbal Direction^ and abate as much of
Figure-Work as is consistent with Di^^patch, and of not leaving the Work too
obscure; to sav^ Room, and not to be too prolix; and to this End I shall onl^
give the Examples stated, and a little of the Work, and the Answers to the
Questions, leaving most of the Operations (...) be performed by the ingenious
Practitioners.

Example 3.

If 56 lb. of Indigo cost 11 l. 4 s. what will 1008 lb cost at that Rate?

^

Example 4.

If half a C. With. of Rose Copper cost 4 l. 18 s. what Quantity will 14 s. buy
at that Rate?

^

Example 5.

If 4 C. 3 qrs. of Sugar cost 5 l. 15 s. 7 d. what will Hogsheads come to,
weighing 42 C. 1 qr. 14 l.

^ 11 s. 1 d. And the Remainder 266; multiplied by 4, gives 1064; which also
divided by the first Number 532, gives a Halfpenny more; so the whole is 51 l.
11 s. 1 d. ^/2.

Any of these Examples, or any other, may be proved by a Back-stating,
according as the first Example was proved? And each Proof becomes another
Question in the Rule of Three, as was said before.

Example 6.

If I have 50 l. a Year Salary, how much is due to me for 144 Days Service at
that Rate?

^

In this Example, the Product of the third by the second Number is 7200; which
divided by the first 365, (according to the Rule) quotes 19 Pounds, the Name of
the middle Number, and there is a Remainder of 265; which multiplied by 20
according to Reduction, and the Product (...) divided by 365, there comes out
14 Shillings; and yet (...) is a Remainder of 190, which multiplied by 12,
(...) the Product divided by 365, gives 6 d. and there is a Remainder of 90;
which multiplied by 4 (the last inferior Name) and divided by 365, yet it would
not come to a Farthing more; so that the Answer is as above, 19 -- 14 -- 6
90/365.

You are to note always, That when any thing remains that is reducible to an
inferior or lower Name; after multiplied as above, it must continually be
divided by the first Number.

Note also, when the first of the three given Numbers is an Unit, or One, the
Work is performed, or Answer found by Multiplication.

Example 7.

If I am to give 17 s. for 1 lb. of Balladine Silk, what must I give for 264
lb. at that Rate?

^

Example 8.

If I buy 49 Bags of Hops, at 12 l. 12 s. 6 d. per Bag, what come they to at
that Rate?

^

The foregoing Work is performed by the component Parts of Multiplication of
Money, as taught in that Rule.

When the Th^rd or Last of the three given Numbers is an Unit or One, then the
Work is performed by Division.

Example 9.

If 12 Else of Holland cost 3 l. 6 s. what is the Price of 1 Ell at that Rate?

^

Example 10.

If 56 Yards of Broadcloth cost 40 l. 12 s. what comes (...) Yard to at that
Rate?

^

This Example is wrought by Division of Money (...) by Component Parts; as
before taught in the Rule of Division

Example 11.

If A owes B 296 l. 17 s. and compounds at 7 s. 6 d. it the Pound; what must B
take for his Debt?

^

Example 12.

If a Gentleman has an Estate of 500 l. a Year, (...) may he expend daily, and
yet lay up 12 l. 15 s. per Month^

First multiply 12 l. 15 s. per 12, the Months in a Year, (...) it makes 153 l.
which deducted from 500 l. the Re^ainder is 347 l. Then say, ^

After you have reduced the Pounds into Shillings, which make 6940; you divide
them by 365, and the Quotient is ^9 s. per Day.

The Rule of Three Reverse, or of Indirect Proportion.
WHAT Indirect Proportion is, has been hinted already.

In Direct Proportion, the Product of the First and Fourth Numbers, is equal to
the Product of the Second and Third.

But in this Proportion, the Product of the Third and ^ourth Numbers, is equal
to the Product of the First and ^econd.

The Method of stating any Question in this Rule, is the (...) with that of the
Direct Rule.

For the First and third Numbers must be of one Name, (...) so reduced, as in
that Rule; and the Number that moves (...) Question must possess the Third
Place; and the Middle Number will be of the same Name with the Answer, as it
(...) there.

To know when the Question belongs to the Direct, and when (...) the Reverse
Rule.

When the Question is stated as abovesaid, consider whether the Answer to the
Question ought to be more or less ^han the Second Number; if more, then the
lesser of the first and Third Numbers must be your Divisor.

But if Less, then the Bigger of the two extreme Num^ers must be your Divisor.

And if the First Number of the Three is your Divisor, ^hen the Proportion is
Direct; but if the last of the Three ^iven Numbers is your Divisor, the
Proportion is Indirect (...) Reverse.

Or without Regard, either to Direct, or Reverse: If more is required, the
Lesser is Divisor. If less, the Greater is Divisor.


Example 1.

If 4 Men plain 250 Deal-boards in 6 Days? how many Men will plain them in 2
Days?

If 6 Days require 4 Men, what a Days? Answer 12 Men.

^

Example 2.

If a Board be 9 Inches Broad, how much in Length will make a Square Foot?

^

In this Example, the first and second Numbers are mu^^tiplied together, (as
they always must be) and their Produc^ is divided by the Third; as in the
Example above it, an^ agreeable to the aforesaid Assertion; for in the first
Example it is most certain, that 2 Days will require more Hands (...) perform
the Work than 6 Days, therefore the Lesser of (...) extreme Numbers is the
Divisor; and declares the Quotien^ is in the Indirect Proportion.

Likewise in the Second Example, 9 Inches in Breadth must needs require more in
Length to make a Foot, than 12 Inches in Breadth; wherefore it is in the same
Proportion with the first Example, because the Divisor is the Third Number.

Example 3.

How many Pounds of Coffee, at 5 s. 9 d. per lb. is equivalent in Value with
246 Pounds of Tea, at 13 s. 4 d. per lb.

^

Here it is manifest that there must be more Pounds of the Coffee than the Tea;
therefore 69 is the Divisor, which is the Third Number, etc.

Example 4.

How many Yards of Sarcenet, of 3 qrs. wide, will line (...) Yards of Cloth, of
8 qrs. wide?

^

Here the narrower the Silk the more in Length is required.

Example 5.

If a Quartern Loaf weigh 4 lb. when Wheat is 5 s. 6 d. (...) Bushel; what must
it weigh when Wheat is 4 s. the Bushel?

^

Example 6.

If in 12 Months 100 l. Principal gain 5 l. Interest; what ^^^ncipal will gain
the same Interest in 5 Months?

^

The Double Rule of Three Direct.
^N this Rule there are Five Numbers given to find out a (...) Sixth, in
Proportion to the Product of the Fourth and (...) Numbers, as the Third Number
(...) to the Product (...) the First and Second Numbers.

Questions in this Kind of Proportion, are wrought either (...) two Operations
in the Single Rule of Three Direct, or by (...) Rule composed of the Five given
Numbers, and the one (...) be a Proof to the other; as may be seen in the
Example (...).

Example 1.

If 100 Pounds Principal, in 12 Months, gain 5 Pound^ Interest; what will 246
Pounds Principal gain in 7 Months

^

In the first Stating, the Answer is, that if ^00 l. (...) 5 Pounds, the 246 l.
will gain 12 Pounds 6 Shillings.

Then I say in the next Stating; If 12 Months gain 12^ 6 s. what will 7 Months
gain? And the Answer of the Work is, l. 7 -- 3 -- 6. And so much will 246
Pounds gai^ in 7 Months, if 100 Pounds gain 5 Pounds in 12 Months.

You must particularly note* That in all Operations where the Answer to the
Question is found by two Rules of Thre^, the Answer of the first Stating is
ever the middle Number of the second Stating or Work; as in the preceding
Examples is plainly seen.

The foregoing Question answered by a Rule compo^^ of the five given Numbers,
thus: ^

In this Work, in stating the Question, the first and fourth Numbers are made
of one Name, and the second and fifth; then the two first Numbers are
multiplied together for a Divisor, and the ^ast three Numbers are multiplied
together for a Dividend, and the Quotient or Answer as in the same Name with
the middle Number, viz. Pounds Interest; as in the Work I find the first
Quotient 7 Pounds Interest; and so I proceed from one Denomination to another,
^ill I find the same Answer as in the Work at two Statings, viz l. 7 -- 3 -- 6.

This Method of Operation serves to answer all Questions (...) the Double Rule
of Three Direct.

The Double Rule of Three Reverse.
IN this Rule you must place your Numbers in such Order, that your second and
fourth Numbers may be of one Name or Denomination, and your third and fifth.

Example.

If 100 l. Principal, in 12 Months, gain 6 l. Interest; what Principal will
gain 20 l. Interest in 8 Months?

Stated thus: ^

In this Work, the third and fourth Numbers are multiplied together for a
Divisor; and then the first is multiplied by the second, and that Product by
the fifth Number, an^ the Product 24000 is divided by 48, and the Quotient
(...) 500 l. Principal; which is what will gain 20 l. Interest, in 8 Months,
and the Answer to the Question, as may be seen in the Work.

Rules of Practice.
THESE Rules are so called from their frequent Use and Brevity in casting up
most Sorts of Goods in Merchandise.

Note, That any Question in the Rule of Three, when the first Number in Stating
is 1, it is most briefly done by these Rules called Practice.

But previous to these Rules, it is necessary to have the following Tables by
Heart.

Parts of a Shilling. Of a Pound. Parts of a Pound. d. s. d. 6 is 1/40 10 0 is
4 1/60 6 8 3 1/80 5 0 2 1/120 4 0 1 3 4 1 1/12 2 6 2 0 1/10 1 8 1/12 1 0 ^/20

^ Example 1.

Here 6 d. being the Price of each lb. and the Half of a ^hilling; therefore
the Half of 426 is taken, and gives ^3 s. or 10 l. 13 s.

Example 2.

^

Here 4 d. is of a Shilling; therefore the Third Part of ^2 is 170 s. and of a
Shilling, or 8 d. remains.

Note, Always what remains is of the same Name with (...) Dividend, which here
is Groats, for the Pounds of Cheese (...) at a Groat each.

Example 3.

^

Here the Yards are divided by 4* because 3 d. is the 4th (...) a Shilling; and
it quotes 61 Shillings, and 2 remains, (...) two 3 Pences; so the Answer is l.
3 -- 1 -- 6.

And thus may any proposed Question be answered, (...) to the first Table, or
Parts of a Shilling; that is, (...) dividing the given Number by the
Denominator of the ^^^ction, and the Quotient will always be Shillings, which
(...) Remainders being known as above) bring into Pounds, (...) dividing by 20,
etc.

When the Price of the Integer is at a Farthing, a Half-^^nny, or three
Farthings more than the Price of Pence men^^^ned, then for those Farthings take
their even Part of the ^^^egoing Quotient taken for the even Part of a
Shilling, (...) add, etc.

Examples.

^

In this Example I divide by 3 for the Groats, as being the Third of one
Shilling, and it quotes 83 s. then I consider that a Halfpenny is the Eighth
of 4 d. therefore I take the Eighth Part of the Groat Line, or 83 s. and that
produces 10 s. and 3/^; of a Shilling, or 4 d.; then the two Line being added
together, make 93 s. 4 d., or 4 l. 13 s. 4 d, (...) as in the Work.

^

Here the Half of 254 is taken, because 10 s. is the Hal^ of a Pound.

^

Here the third Part is taken, because 6 s. 8 d. is the Third of a Pound; and
the Answer is l. 324.

And thus may any Question proposed be answered belonging to the second Table,
or Parts of a Pound; that is by dividing the given Number by the Denominator of
the Fraction, and the Quotient will always be Pounds; and if any thing remains,
it is always so many Halves, Thirds, Fourths, or Fifths, etc. of a Pound,
according to the Denominator that you divide by.

If the Price be Shillings and Pence, or Shillings, Pence, and Farthings, and
no even Part of a Pound; then multiply the given Number by the Shillings in the
Price, and take even Parts for the Pence, or Pence and Farthings, and add the
several Lines together, and they will be Shillings; which Shillings bring into
Pounds, as before.

Examples.

^

When the Price is 10 d. only annex 0 to the Right of the given Number (which
is multiplying by 10) and they are Pence; which divide by 12, and by 20.

Example; 426 lb. of Hops at 10 d. per lb.

^

When the Price is 11 d. set down the Quantity twice in the Form of
Multiplication, and add the two Lines together, then divide by 12, and by 20.
Example.

^

If the Price be 11 d., take Half the uppermost Line, etc.

Example.

^

When the Price is 1 s. only divide by 20.

Example.

^

When the Price is 2^ ^t is done at Sight, by doublin^ the last Figure toward
the Right Hand, and setting it apa^^ for Shillings; and the Figures toward the
Left are Pounds.

Example.

^ Here the Double of 6 is 12 s. and the 59 are Pounds.

From this Method of working by 2 s. a Multitude of Examples may be most
expeditiously wrought, viz.

Else. Yards. 444 Cambrick. 426 at 3 s. 6 d -- at 5 s. 9 d. -- per Yard, 44 --
8 at 2 s. 42 -- 12 at 2 s. 44 -- 8 at 2 s. 1 s. 2 s. 21 -- 6 at 1 s. 1 s. of 2
s. 22 -- 4 at 1 s. 6 d. ^/^ 1 s. 10 -- 13 at 6 d. 6 d. of 1 s. 11 -- 2 at 6 d 3
d. of 6 d. 5 -- 11 at 3 d. Answer. l. 74 -- 11 at 3 s. 6 d. Answer, 127 -- 13
-- (...) ^ -- 9 d.

The Operation of these two Examples is so intelligibl^ wrought, that there is
(...) ^eed of verbal Explanation.

^

Note, That 13 l. 14 s. is the fourth Part of 54 l. 16 s, the two Shilling Lin^.

Or multiply by 12 s. and take Half of the given Number for the 6 d. thus: ^

When the Price is an even Number of Shillings, multi^ly the Number of Integers
by Half the Price, and double (...) first Figure of the Product for Shillings,
and carry as is ^sual in Multiplication, and the other Figures toward the ^eft
will be Pounds.

Example.

^

Here 7 times 6 is 42; the Double of 2 s. is 4 s. etc.

When the Price is an odd Number of Shillings, work for (...) even Number as
above; and for the odd Shillings, take (...) 1/20 of the given Number, and add
them together.

Example.

^

In this Example I say, 8 times 6 is 48; the Double of 8 is 16 s. and carry 4,
then 8 times 9 is 72, and 4 is 76; 6 and carry 7; and 8 times 4 is 32, and 7 is
^9: then the Half of 4 is 2, etc.

Even Parts of a Pound.
^

In all these Examples of Practice, I divide by the Deno^minator of the
Fraction, and what remains is always of the same Name with the Denominator; as
one Half, Third^ Fourths, Sixths, or Eighths of a Shilling, or of a Pound^ etc.

If the Price be Half a Crown, divide by 8; if at 20^ or 1 s. 8. divide by 12,
etc.

When the Price is Shillings and Pence, and no even (...) of a Pound; multiply
the given Number by the Shilling^ and take Parts of it for the Pence, as
directed before,

Example.

^

But this Example may be sooner done by multiplying (...) given Number by 2,
and dividing that Product by 3 (be^^use a Mark is two Thirds of a Pound) thus; ^

I have not here Room to speak of the various and almost ^^finite Methods and
Rules of Practice (having several other ^^bjects and Things to treat on) but
shall leave some general ^ules, which if ^eedfully noted, will be of great Use
to ^earners; and are these, viz.

1. When the Price is Parts of a Farthing; or of a Penny* (...),,, etc. then
multiply the Integers by the Numera^^r, and divide by the Denominator, and the
Result will be ^ther Farthings or Pence; which reduce to Pounds, etc.

2. When the Price is Pence, and no even Part of a Shil^^ng; as suppose 5 d. 7
d. 8 d. or 9 d. then it may be done (...) taking their Parts, as 3 d. and 2 d.
is 5 d. and 4 d. and ^ d. is 7 d. and 4 d. and 4 d. is 8 d. and 6 d. and 3 d.
is 9 d. (...) it is an easy and sure Way to multiply the given Number ^^ 5, 7,
8, or 9, and then the Product is Pence; which ^^duce to Pounds by Reduction.

3. When the Price is Pence, and Parts of a Penny: as ^ d., 2 d. or 6, then
work for the Penny by taking the (...); for 2 d. the; and for 6 d. the: Then
for the ^^rthings, take the of the Penny Line, and for,, of the ^wo-penny Line;
and for, take of the 6 Penny Line; (...) add their Results together; and the
total will be Shil^^ngs, which reduce to Pounds by dividing by 20. Or by (...)
sure Way of bringing the mixed Number into the lowest ^enomination; as 1 d.,
into 5 Farthings, 2 d., into 5 ^alfpence, and 6 d., into 27 Farthings; then
multiply (...) Integers by 5, and the Product is Farthings; or by 5 ^alfpence,
and the Product will be Halfpence; or by 27 ^arthings, and the Product will be
Farthings; which, whe^^er Farthings or Pence, reduce to Pounds, etc.

4. When the Price is Shillings and Pence, or Shillings, ^ence, and Farthings,
multiply the Integers by the Shillings (...) the Price, and take Parts for the
Pence, or Pence and ^arthings, etc,

5. If the Price be Pounds and Shillings, or Pounds, Sh^^^lings, Pence and
Farthings; multiply by the Shillings in (...) Price, that is, in the Pounds and
Shillings, and take Part for the Pence and Farthings.

6. When the Number of Integers has a Fraction annexed or belonging to them;
as,,, etc. then take,, or of the Price of one of the Integers, and add that to
the other Results.

TARE and TRETT, etc.
Gross Weight is the Weight of the Goods in Hundred^ Quarters and Pounds, with
the Weight of the Hogshead^ Cask, Chest, Bag, Bale, etc. that contains the
Goods.

Tare is allowed to the Buyer for the Weight of the Hogshead, Cask, Chest, Bag,
Bale, etc.

Trett is an Allowance made for Waste, Dust, etc. in sudry Sorts of Goods, as
Tobaccoes, Cottons, Peppers, Spice, etc. and is always 4 lb. per 104 lb.
Subtle, and found (...) dividing the Subtle Pounds by 26, because 4 times 26
mak^ 104 lb. When the Gross Weight is brought into Pound^ and before the Tare
is deducted, they are called Poun^^ Gross; and after the Tare is subtracted,
the remainin^ Pounds are called Pounds Subtle; which divided by 26 ((...) said
before) quotes Pounds Trett, etc.

Tare at so much per Cask, Hogshead, Bag, etc.
The Allowances for Tare are variously wrought; as by the following Examples.

In 12 Casks of Indigo, containing 45 C. 1 qr. 14 lb. Gros^ Tare 30 lb. per
Cask, how many Pounds Nett?

^

In this Example, the lbs. Tare of one is multiplied by the Number of Casks,
and the Product is 360 Pounds Tare and the Gross Weight is reduced into Pounds
by the Meth^^ (...) in Reduction of Weight; and then the Pounds Tare (...)
deducted from the Pounds Gross, and the Remainder are (...) Nett, viz. 4722, as
in the Work.

When the Tare is at so much per C. with. multiply the ^^mber of Hundreds by the
Tare, and take Parts for the (...) Weight, and add it to the Tare found by
Multiplica^^^n, and divide it by 112, to bring it into Gross Weight, (...)
order for Substraction. Example.

What is the Nett With. of 12 Casks of Argol, With. Gross.

^

The Tare in the last Example is to be found by the fore^^^ng Directions, 10 C.
2 qrs. 8 lb., which subtracted as ^he Work, leaves 74 C. ^ qrs. 5 lb. for the
Nett With.

^ut the foregoing Example may be sooner done by (...) thus: ^

^n this Method, the Gross Weight is divided by 8, be^^^se 14 lb. is one Eighth
of 112 lb. and the Remainder is (...) into the next inferior Name, and still
divided by 8, (...) End, and then deducted as above, and the Nett ^ight is the
same as by the other Way. And so may any (...) per Ct. be found, if the Tare be
an even Part of 112 lb. ^4 is one Eighth, and 7 lb. is the Half of that, and 16
lb. ^ne Seventh, and 8 lb. is Half of that, etc. that is, if (...) Tare be at 7
lb. per C. find it for 14 lb. as before, and (...) take the Half of that for 7
lb per C. Tare, the like for 8 lb. per C. Tare; take one Seventh for 16 lb. and
then (...) Half of that for 8 lb. per C. Tare.

Of TRETT.
What Trett is, when allowed, and how found, has been said already; now I
shall give an Example for Explanation as follows.

Bought Six Hogsheads of Tobacco, containing Gross and Tare as follows; viz.

^

There are some few other Rules, such as Barter, or (...) changing Goods for
Goods; also Exchange for Coin, Profi^ Loss, etc. but all of them being done
either by the Rule (...) Three, or by Rules of Practice, it is therefore here
unne^cessary to enlarge upon them.

Of FRACTIONS Vulgar and Decimal.
WHAT Fractions are, has already been hinted in the Rule of Division, from
whence they arise; for the Re^mainder is a supposed Part of the Divisor; as
admit 54 l. (...) divided into twelve equal Parts, the Quotient is 4: and the
Remainder 6: So that here 6 is six Parts of 12, or (...) Twelfths, equal to a
Half; for 6 is the of 12; and set do^^ in this Form 6/12 and understood by
these Names, (...)

^

The Numerator is above the short Line, and shows the Number of Parts; and
the Denominator stands under the l^ne, and declares the Number of equal Parts
the Integer or whole Number is divided into; as above 54 l, is divided into 12
Parts, and the Quotient says there are 4 of those 12 Parts contained in 54, and
6 remains, or 6 Twelfths of a Pound, or 10 s. as above said.

Fractions are thus set down and read, viz., or one Fourth;, one Half,, one
Third, one Fifth;, one Sixth; two Thirds; 2/4, two Fourths; 2/6, two Sixths;
5/7, five Sevenths, etc.

Fractions are either proper or improper. A proper Fraction has its Numerator
less than the Denominator; as, five Eighths; 24/56, twenty-four Fifty-Sixths,
etc.

An improper Fraction has its Numerator greater than the Denominator; as 7/3,
seven Thirds; 48/15, forty-eight Fifteenths, etc.

Again, Fractions are either Simple or Compound; simple, when Part of an
Integer or Thing has but one Numerator, and one Denominator; as of a Pound
(...) of a C. Weight, of a Ton, of a Gallon, etc. Compound* is a Fraction of a
Fraction, as the of a of a Pound Sterling ^s equal to a Half a Crown; or when
one is divided into any Number of Parts, and those Parts again subdivided into
Parts, etc.

Fractions are of two Kinds, viz. Vulgar and Decimal. Vulgar Fractions are as
declared before. Decimal Fractions are artificially expressed by setting down
the Numerators only, the Denominators being understood, and are always a Unit
with as many Ciphers annexed as there are Places in the Numerator, and
therefore must be either 10, or some Power of 10, as 100, 1000, 10,000, or
100,000, etc.

Decimal Fractions appear as whole Numbers, (and in the general so wrought) but
are distinguished from them by a Point or a Comma prefixed thus,,5, and is read
five Tenths; ^32, thirty-two Hundredths;,256, two Hundred 56 Thou^andths: But
of Decimal Fractions and their Use hereafter.

Reduction of Vulgar Fractions, is to fit or prepare them ^or Addition,
Substraction, etc.

1. To Reduce a mixed Number to ^n i^proper Fraction.
Rule.

Multiply the Integer by the Denominator, and take the Numerator.

Example.

^

2. To reduce an improper Fraction to a whole or mixed Number.
Rule. Divide the Numerator by the Denominator.

Example.

Reduce the last Example to a whole or mixed Number, viz.

^

Here 12 Gallons is the whole Number, and the Fraction, the same with 3 Quarts.

3. To reduce Fractions to a common Denominator.
Rule.

Multiply the Numerator of each Fraction into all the Denominators, e^^ept its
own, and the Product will be a Numerator to that Fraction; and then do so by
the next, etc.

Example.

Reduce 2/^, and of 20^* or any other Integer, or Thing, to a common
Denominator; say twice 4 is 8, and 6 times 8 is 48, for a new Numerator to 2/^;
then say, 3 times 3 is 9, and 6 times 9 is 54* for a new Numerator to; lastly,
say, 5 times 4 is 20, and 3 times 20 is 60, the Numerator to 5/^* Then, to find
the common Denominator, say 3 times 4 is 12, and 6 times 12 is 72, the common
Denominator: So that 48/72 is equal to, 54/72 to. and 60/72 to. And thus
proved* ^

Here the several Numerators are added together, and they make 162, which
placed over the common Denominator 72, make the Improper Fraction 162/73; and
its Value is found as before directed. To reduce an improper Fraction to a
whole or mixed Number; as may be seen in the foregoing Page.

4 To reduce a Fraction into its lowest Terms.
Rule.

If there are even Numbers, take Half of the Numerator and Denominator as long
as you can; and their divide them by any Digit Number ( i. e. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.)
that will leave no Remainder in either.

Example.

Reduce 56/84 into its lowest Terms; say, the of 56 is 28, and the of 84 is 42;
and then, the of 28 is 14, and the of 42 is 21. So the Fraction 56/84 is
reduced to 14/2^. And since they both are not to be halved any longer; for
though you can halve 14, yet you cannot 21, without Remainder; try therefore to
divide them by some other Digit Number, and you will find, that 7 will divide
both Numerator and Denominator without any Remainder; then say, the 7's in 14,
twice; and the 7's in 21, three times: So is the Fraction 56/84 reduced into
its lowest Terms, two Thirds; and is the same in Value with 56/84, and done in
this Form; ^

And the Certainty that is the same in Value with 56/^4 is found by multiplying
any Integer by the Numerator of each Fraction, and dividing by the Denominator
of each Fraction.

Example.

Let the Integer be 1 l. Sterling, or 20 s.

^

Here it is manifest, that by working by a Fraction in it^ lowest Terms, much
Time and Figures are saved In one Operation, 20, the Integer, is multiplied by
2, and the Product 40 divided by 3, and there remains 1, or of a Shilling, or a
Groat, as in the other Work.

There are other Methods of reducing a Fraction into it^ lowest Terms; but in
my Opinion, none so ready as the foregoing.

5. To reduce a compound Fraction into a simple One of the same Value.
Rule. Multiply the Numerators together for a Numerator, and the Denominators
together for a Denominator.

Example.

Reduce of of of a Pound Sterling into a simple Fraction. Say twice 3 is 6, and
5 times 6 is 30, the Numerator: Then 3 times 4 is 12: and 6 times 12 is 72, the
Denominator^ So 30/72 of a Pound is equivalent to 2/6 of of 5/^ of a l. Thus
proved, ^/^ of a l. is 16 s. 8 d. and of ditto, or 16 s. 8 d. is 12 s. 6 d. and
of 12 s. and 6 d. in 8 s. 4 d. the Answer. And multiplying 20 by 30, and
dividing by 72, gives the same Answer, as in the following Work is plain.

^

6. To find the Value of any Fraction, whether of Coins Weight or Measure.
Rule. Multiply the Integer by the Numerator, and divide by the Denominator;
and if any Thing remains* mul^iply it by the Number of Units of the next
inferior De^omination.

Example.

What is 30/72 of a Pound, or 20 s.? the foregoing Ex^mple of Proof to the
Compound Fraction of of, and ^s it is worked there, it need not again be
repeated.

Again, What is of a Ton Weight?

^

Here the Integer 20 C. is multiplied by the Numerator 5, and the Product 100
divided by the Denominator 6, and the Remainder 4 is multiplied by the Parts of
the next inferior Denomination, etc. and the Answer is 16 C. 2 qrs. 18 lb. 4/6
or of a Pound Weight, as in the Work.

Addition of Vulgar Fractions.
IF the Fractions to be added have a common Denominator, add the Numerators
together for a Numerator, and place it over the common Denominator,

Example.

Add,, and of a Pound Sterling together. Say, 2 and 3 is 5, and 4 is 9, the
Numerator; which place over 5, the common Denominator, thus, 9/5, and this
improper ^ Fraction 9/5 is in Value 36 s. for 9 times 4 s. (the 5th of a Pound)
is 36 s. thus: Here is 16 s. I say the 5's in 9, once, and 4 remains, which is
of a Pound.

But if the Fractions to be added have unequal Denominators, then they must be
reduced to a common Denominator by a Rule before shown, before Addition can be
made; an^ then proceed as above.

2. When mixed Numbers are to be added, work with the fractional Parts as
before, and carry the fractional Value (...) the whole Numbers,

Example.

Add 25 l. to 12, thus: ^

Here 1 and 3, the Numerators, make 4; and 4/4 is 1, an^ 2 is 3, and 5 makes 8;
and 1 and 2 is 3, and the Answe^ is 38.

Or they may be reduced to improper Fractions thus: ^

Here the Numerators are added, and their Total is 15^ which divided by 4, the
common Denominator, (...) 38 Pounds, the same Answer as above.

3. When Compound Fractions are to be added to Simple Ones, reduce the Compound
Fraction to a Simple One, as ^^fore directed; and then proceed as above.

Example.

Add 2/^ and to of 2/4 of a Pound; thus, once 2 is 2, and ^wice 4 is 8, the
compound Fraction; then add, saying, 2 and 3 is 5, and 2 is, equal in Value to
17 s. ^ d.

Substraction of Vulgar Fractions.
IN this Rule, the Fractions must have a common Denominator, or be reduced to
one, before Deduction can be ^ade.

Example.

What is the Difference between and? Answer 2/4; and ^roved by Addition; for
and 2/4 makes or 3 Quarters.

Note, The Difference between the Numerators is the Dif^erence of the Fractions.

Again, from of a Pound, take 5/12; Here the Fractions ^re to be reduced to a
common Denominator; 36 the first Numerator, and 20 the second Numerator, and
their Dif^erence is 16; and 48 is the common Denominator; so that ^6/^8, or in
its lowest Terms, is the Difference between of (...) Pound, and 5/12 of a
Pound, that is, 6 s. 8 d.

To substract a Compound Fraction from a Simple one.

Rule. Reduce the Compound Fraction to a Simple One, and then work as before.
Example.

From ^3/1^ take of 8/9; say twice 8 is 16, and 3 times 9 is ^6/^7, the
Compound Fraction: Then 13/14 and 16/27 must be re^uced to a common
Denominator, thus; 13 times 27 is 351, ^he first Numerator; and 14 times 16 is
224, the second Nu^erator; and 14 times 27 is 378, the common Denominator. Then
substract 224, the second Numerator, from 351, the ^^rst Numerator, and the
Remainder is 127, which place over ^78, the common Denominator, thus, 127/^78
Answer.

When a Simple Fraction is to be deducted from a whole Number.

Rule. Substract the Numerator of the Fraction from the Denominator, and place
the Remainder over the Denomi^ator, and carry 1 to substract from the whole
Number, etc.

Example.

From 12 l. take thus; say 5 (the Numerator) from 8 the Denominator) and there
remains 3, which place over the De^ominator 8, thus,; then 1 from 12, and there
remains 11; (...) the Answer is, l. 11, or 11 -- 7 -- 6, as may be proved by
whole Numbers.

Multiplication of Vulgar Fractions.
Rule. MUltiply the Numerators into one another for a Numerator of the Product;
and then do the same by the Denominators, for a Denominator of the Product

Example.

Multiply of a Pound, by of ditto; say 3 times 5 is 15, the Numerator; and 4
times 6 is 24, the Denominator; so the Answer is 15/24, or in its lowest Terms.

You are to Note, That Multiplication in Fractions lessens the Product, though in
whole Numbers it augments it; as above, or 12 s. 6 d. is less than or 16 s. 8
d. and also less than the other Fraction or 15 s. The Reason of which I have
not here Room to insist on; but it is given in my Arithmetic in Multiplication
of Vulgar Fractions; to which Book I refer the Reader for that, and sundry
Enlargements in the several Rules in the Science of Arithmetic.

2. To multiply a whole Number by a Fraction.
Rule. Multiply the Integer by the Numerator of (...) Fraction, and place the
Product over the Denominator.

Example.

Multiply 56 l, by ^

This improper Fraction 168/4 reduced according to Rul^ makes but 42 l. which
is less than 56; and confirms wha^ was before asserted, viz. that
Multiplication of Fractio^ lessens the Product, etc.

3. To multiply a Simple by a Compound Fraction.
Rule. Reduce the Compound Fraction to a Simple On^ as before taught, and Work
as above.

Example.

Multiply 6/8 of a Pound, by of of a Pound: Say, ^ times 6 is 36, and 8 times
12 is 96 So that the Answer (...) 36/96, or 3/^ in its lowest Terms; equal to 7
s. 6 d.

Division of Vulgar Fractions.
Rule. MUltiply the Numerator of the Divisor into (...) Denominator of the
Dividend, and the Pr^^duct is the Denominator of the Quotient; and then (...)
the Den^^inator of the Divisor into the Numerator of (...) Dividend, and the
Product will be the Numerator of the ^uotient.

Example.

Divide 15/16 by;) 15/1^ (45/32 Quotient.

Here 16 multiplied by 2, gives 32; and 15 by 3, gives ^5; so that the Quotient
is 45/32, equal (...) 13/45, (...) ^ork.

Again, Suppose 24/36 was divided by (...) Q^o^ient will be (...) equal to 1
Integer, or whole (...) And so any other ^^ample.

Reduction of Decim^^ Fractio^*
WHAT a Decimal Fracti^^ (...) shown. The next Step is (...) ^^action into a
Decimal; which is no (...) at Discretion (that is, 2, (...) or (...) Nu^^rator,
and then divide it by the (...)

Example

Reduce of a Pound (...) ^ that is, 75 Hundre^ (...) 3 qrs. (...) any Thing,
whether (...) etc. being of 100; and so, 2 (...), Quarter of any Thing, (...)
being (...) five (...) expresses the Half of any (...) (...) 10.

^n Reduction of Decimals, so (...) a (...) or Ciphers must (...) the ^^^imal,
to supply (...) the ^^^tient of (...) the Product of (...) Decimals. -- In
(...) ^lways (...) so (...) Ciphers (...) you (...) the (...) Fraction, so
(...) the ^^^tient toward the (...) Places to point off, (...) by (...) 0 to
the Left of the (...)

Example 2.

^educe 9 d. or 9/240 to the Decimal of a Pound Sterling, ^

(...) i^ but three Places in the Quotient viz. 375; and therefore I cannot
point (...) 4 for the four Ciphers annexed (...) I prefix 0 to the Left of
(...) 375, thus, 0375, and then i^ is the Decimal of 375 ten thousandth Parts
(...)* an Integer in the Work.

The more Ciphers you (...), the nearer you bring (...) Decimal to the Truth^
But in most Cases, four Cyphe^ annexed is sufficient. But when (...) are to
reduce,, (...) (as above) of an Integer to ^ ^ecimal, or any Number (...)
Shillings to the Decimal of a (...), two Ciphers are (...). One Example more
(...) Example 3.

Reduce 3 Farthings to the (...) of a Pound, tha^ is 3/960 vulgarly, 960
Farthings being a (...) therefore so expressed, and with the same (...) as
(...) before 240 Pence being a Pound.

960) 3000000 (,003125. The Work being perform^^ according to the Division,
with two Ciphers prefix^^ quotes,, 003125, or 3125 Millionth Parts of a Pound
by the same Method, the Vulgar Fraction of Weig^^ Measure, etc. are reduced to
Decimals.

Example 4.

(...) is 12 (...)* Weight (...) ^ The Remainder 48 is not (...) Notice, being
less than (...) 10000th Part of an Unit, (...)

Example 5.

How is 73 Days brought to the Decimal of a Yea^ garly thus expres^^d 73/7^5.

^

Here 565, the Days in a Y^ar, is divided by 10 (...) and the Quotients added
toget^er, and they make 73 (...)

Valuation of Decimals.
TO find the Value of a Decimal Fraction, whether of Coin, Weight, Measure, etc.

Rule. Multiply the Decimal given by the Units contained ^ne of the next
inferior Denomination, and point off as any Place from the Right Hand, as you
have in your Deci^^^; so those Figures toward the Left of those pointed off,
(...) Integers or whole Numbers; and those on the other (...) toward the
Right Hand are Parts of 1 or Unity; that (...) so many Tenths, Hundredths,
Thousandths, or Ten ^^ousandths of one of those Integers, whether a Pound,
^hilling, or a Penny, etc. or of a Ton, a Hundred, a (...), or a Pound Weight,
etc. and so of any other (...), of what Kind or Quality soever.

Examples.

^ (...) the Example of Money, I multiply the Fraction by 20, (...) off 520 for
the three Places in the Decimal, etc. (...) Answer is 9 s. 6 d. *

(...) Example of Weight, I proceed as in that of (...) ^^action being the
same) but with different Respect to the inferior Denominations; and the Answer
is 9 C. 2 qr^ 2 lb. 240/1000 of a Pound Weight.

To find the Value of a Decimal in Money in a brief Method, viz.

Rule. Always account the Double of the first Figure (to the Left Hand) for
Shillings; and if the next to it is 5, reckon 1 s. and whatever is above 5,
call every One Ten and the next Figure so many Ones as it contains, which (...)
and Ones call Farthings; and for every 25, abate one* (...) admit the last
Example of Money, viz. 476; the Double 4 is 8; and there being one five in 7,
(the next Figure^ reckon 1 s. more, which makes 9 s. and there being 2 i^ above
5, they are to be accounted two Tens or 20; (...) with the next Figure 6 being
so many Ones, make (...) Farthings; and abating 1 for 24, give 6 d. and almost*
Farthing more, for the Fraction 960 Thousandths of a (...) wants but 40 of a
Farthing.

Addition of Decimals.
IS the same in Practice as in whole Numbers; only in se^^ting down, Care must
be taken that the Decimal (...) stand respectively under their Parts; that is,
Primes und^^ Primes, Seconds under Seconds, Thirds under Thirds, and^ and the
Integers stand as in whole Numbers.

Example.

^

Note, There must be as many Places pointed off, as (...) are in the biggest
Number.

The casting up of the foregoing Examples is the same (...) Addition of one
Denomination in whole Numbers: (...) To^al of the first (supposing them Pound^
Sterling) is 4^ an^, 705 Parts. The second is 1 l. and, 4760 Parts. (...) the
third is 2 l. and, 14982 Parts.

Substraction of Decimals.
THE Numbers must be placed as before in Addition, and then proceed as in
Substraction of one Denomination of Numbers.

Examples.

^

Multiplication of Decimals.
HERE the placing the Numbers and Operation is the very same as in Whole
Numbers; and only remember to point off toward the Right hand so many Places
for Decimals as you have Decimal Places in both Multiplicand and Multiplier.

Examples.

^

Note, That where there are not a competent Number of ^^gures, or Places to
point off, such Defect is supplied with ^^yhers to the Left Hand; as in the 4th
and 5th Examples, ^^cording to what was before hinted in reducing a Vulgar
^^action to a Decimal.

Division of Decimals.
IS the same in Operation as in whole Numbers. The onl^ Difficulty is to know
how many Decimal Places to poin^ off toward the Left Hand of the Quotient; to
which End, remember this Rule; Observe how many Decimal Places there are both
in the Divisor and Dividend, and note the Difference; and whatsoever it is, so
many Places must (...) pointed off to the Right Hand of the Quotient.

Examples.

^

In this Example, the Dividend has three Decimal Places more than the Divisor,
wherefore I point off three Places to the Right Hand of the Quotient, viz. 818;
so the Quotient is 1 Integer, and,818 Parts.

^

Here the Difference between the Divisor and Dividend is three Places; as in
the foregoing Example; therefore,813 is pointed (...) the Decimal Fraction; and
the Quotient is 2 Integers, and,813 Thousandths of an Integer, or 1.

Thus much for Fractions Vulgar and Decimal; when I have been as concise as
possible, and worked with as mu^^ Plainness as I could invent.

BOOK-KEEPING.
THE next Qualification to fit a Man for Business, after Arithmetic, is the
Art of Book Keeping, or Mer^hants Accounts, after the Italian Manner, by Way of
Double Entry.

It is not without good Reason that most People of Business and Ingenuity, are
desirous to be Masters of this Art; for if we consider the Satisfaction that
naturally arises from (...) Account well kept; the Pleasure that accrues to a
Person by seeing what he gains by each Species of Goods he deals (...), and his
whole Profit by a Year's Trade; and thereby also to know the true State of his
Affairs and Circumstances; (...) that he may, according to Discretion, retrench
or enlarge his Expenses, etc. as he shall think fit.

This Art of Book-Keeping, or Merchants Accounts, (...) ^alked of by many, but
truly understood but by very (...): For every petty Schoolmaster in any
By-Corner, will be sure to have Merchants Accounts expressed on his Sign, as a
principal Article of his Ability, in Teaching; though, strictly ^peaking, for
want of the Practical Part, knows hardly any Thing of the Matter, and
consequently incapable of teach^ng it.

Instructions, Notes, Rules, and Directions for the right ordering and keeping
Merchants Accounts, by the excellent Order of Charge and Discharge, commonly
called Debtor and Creditor.
Of the Books in Use.
THE Books of principal Use, are the Waste-Book, (or by some called the
Memorial) Journal, and Leidger.

Waste-Book.
IN this Book must be daily written whatever occurs in the way of Trade; as
buying, Selling, Receiving, Delivering, Bargaining, Shipping, etc. without
Omission of any one Thing, either bought or sold, etc. as Money lent, or
received at Interest. But not Money received or paid for Goods sold or bought
at Times; for that will come of course, and must be entered into the Cash-Book,
from whence it is posted into the Leidger.

The Waste-Book is ruled with one Marginal Line, and three Lines for Pounds,
Shillings, and Pence, and the Day of the Month, and Year of our Lord, is
inserted in the Middle of the Page. In this Book any One may write, and, on
Occasion, any Thing may be blotted out, if not well ^ntered, or any Error be
made.

JOURNAL.
INTO this Book every Thing is posted out of the Waste-Book, but in other
Terms, in a better Style, and in a fairer Hand, without any Alteration of
Ciphers or Figures; and every Parcel, one after another, promiscuously set
without Intermission, to make the Book, or several Entries of it, of more
Credit and Validity, in case of any Law Dispute, or any other Controversy that
may happen between Merchant and Merchant. In this Book you are to distinguish
the Debtor and Creditor (or in quainter Terms, the Debit and Credit.) And to
this Book you must have Recourse for the Particulars of an Account, which in
the Leidger are entered in Gross, that is, in one Line. In this Book also, the
Day of the Month must be placed in the middle of the Page; and is ruled with
double marginal Lines, for References to the Leidger; and with three Lines for
l. s. d. as the Waste-Book.

Of the Leidger.
FROM the Journal or Day-Book (as derived from the French) all Matters or
Things are posted into the Leidger, which by the Spaniards are called El Libro
Grande, a^ being the biggest Book, or Chief of Accounts. The Left Hand Side of
this Book is the Debtor, and the Right the Creditor; and the Numbers and Folios
of each Side must be alike, as 45 Debtor, and also 45 Creditor. The Day of the
Month (in this Book) by most is set in a narrow Column on the Left Hand, and
the Month on the Left of that: But where I kept Books, the Number in the narrow
Column referred to the Journal Page, and the Month and Day was placed in the
broad Column, to the Right of that; and at the Head of each Folio is the Name
of the Place of Residence, and the Year of our Lord; as thus:

London, Anno -- 1753.

But the examples of the several Books hereafter following* will make the
foregoing Hints of them much more intelligible. -- And as I am upon the
Doctrine of Book-keeping I Will take this as an universal Text (for so it is) viz.

All Things received, or the Receiver, are Debtors to the Delivered, or the
Deliverer.
Waste-Book Entry. London, January 1, 1753. l. s. d. Bought of William Wilkins,
of Norton-Falgate, 120 Yards of white Sarcenet, at 2 s. 3 d. per Yard, to pay
in two Months. 13 10 The Journal Entry of the same. 1 2 Wrought Silk, Debtor to
William Wilkins, l. 13 -- 10 for 120 Yards of white Sarcenet, at 2 s. 3 d. per
Yard, to pay in two Months. 13 109 In this Example, the Account of Wrought
Silks is the Receiver, and therefore Debtor to William Wilkins the Deliverer.
Again, Waste-Entry Book. January 4. Sold Henry Hartington 246lb. nett of Indico
Lahore, at 6 s. 6 d. per lb. to pay in 3 Months. 79 19 Journal Entry. 3 4 Henry
Hartington Dr. to Indico, for 246lb. nett, at 6 s. 6 d. per lb. to pay in 3
Months. 79 19 Once more. Waste-Book Entry. Bought of George Goodinch, Sen. viz.
Ch^sh. Cheese 430 C., at 23 s. 4 d. per C. -- l. 502 -- 5 Butter, 50 Firkins,
qt. nett 2800lb. at 3 d. per lb to pay in 6 Months. 35 -- 0 537 05 Journal
Entry. 5 Sundry Accounts Dr. to Geo. Goodinch. l. 537 -- 05 -- viz. 4 Cheese of
Cheshire, for 430 C. 23 s. 4 d. per C l. 502 -- 5 5 Butter, for 50 Firkins, qt.
nett 2800lb. at 3 d per lb. 35 -- 0 537 05 Waste-Book. l. d. Sold James
Jenkins, viz. White Sarcenet 50 Yards, at 3 s. per Yard 7 10 0 Indico Lahore 50
Pounds, at 7 s. per Pound. 17 10 0 25 Journal Entry of the last. 6 James
Jenkins Debtor to sundry Accounts, viz. 7 To white Sarcenet for 50 Yards, at 3
s. per Yard -- 7 10 0 8 To Indico Lahore for 50 lb. at 7 s. per lb. 17 10 0 25

From these few Examples of Entry, it may be observed, that an experienced
Person in Accounts, and a good Writer, may keep a Journal without a Waste-Book,
or a Waste-Book without a Journal, since they both import one and the same
Thing, though they differ a little in. Words, or expressing; for the Leaves of
both are numbered by Pages, or Parcels, as some do.

But however, I shall give Methods of keeping each as far as Room will give me
Leave.

(1) The Waste-Book.
London, January 1. -- 1753. An Inventary of all my Effects of Money, Goods,
and Debts, belonging to me A. B. of London, Merchant, viz. In Cash for trading
Occasions 3500, --, -- In Tobacco 4726 lb. at 9 d. per lb. 177, 4, 6 In
Broadcloth 6 Pieces, at 50 s. per Piece -- 15, --, -- Dowlas 1000 Else, at 2 s.
4 d. per Ell -- 116, 13, 4, Canary Wines, 9 Pipes, at 20 l per Pipe -- 270, --,
-- Due to me from Henry Bland, per Bond -- 60, --, -- 4138 17 10

(1)
Journal. Inventary, etc. as above. l. s. d. 1 Sundry Acct^. Dr. to Stock --
4138, 17, 10 viz. 1 Cash for trading Occasions -- 3500, --, -- Tobaccoes 4626
l. at 9 d. per lb. -- 177, 4, 6 1 Broadcloths, 6 Pieces, at 50 s. per Piece --
15, --, -- 1 Dowlas 1000 Else, at 2 s. 4 d. per Ell -- 116, 13, 4 1 Canary
Wines 9 Pipes, at 30 l. per Pipe -- 270, --, -- 3 Henry Bland due on Bond 68,
--, -- 4138 17 10

I shall make one Page serve for Wast^ Book and Journal Entries, to save Room,
and also to have both Methods of Entry under Eye, to make them more
intelligibly useful to the Reader, he hereby being not obliged to turn over
Leaf to see their Difference of Entry.

1 Waste-Book.
London, January 1, -- 1753. Owing to William Webb, by Note of my Hand -- 50 --
l. s. d. Ditto to Roger Ruff, to Balance of his Account -- 16 12 4 Ditto to
Henry Hern, due the 4th of May next -- 62 -- 128 12 4 Journal. 1 Stock Debtor
to sundry Accounts, l. 128 -- 12 -- 4 -- viz. 3 To William Webb, by Note of my
Hand -- 50 -- 4 To Roger Ruff for Balance of his Account -- 16 12 4 5 To Henry
Hern, due the 4th of May next -- 62 -- ^78

Waste-Book.
London, Feb. 2 d. -- 1753. Sold Thomas Townsend, viz. l. s. d. 246 lb. of
Virginia Cut Tobacco, at 14 d. per lb. 14 07 -- 460 Else of Dowlas, at 3 s. per
Ell -- 69 -- 83 07 Feb. 2. Journal. 6 Thomas Townsend, Debtor to Sundries, viz.
1 To Tobacco, for 246 lb. at 14 d. per lb. -- 14 07 -- 1 To Dowlas, for 460
Else, at 3 s. per Ell. -- 69 -- 83 07 Waste-Book. Ditto 24th. Bought of Leonard
Leg, 4 Pipes of Canary, at 28 l. per Pipe. -- To pay in 6 Months. 112 Ditto
24th. Journal. 1 2 Canary Wine, Debtor to Leonard Leg, for 4 Pipes, at 28 l.
per Pipe. -- To pay in 6 Months. 112

The short Lines ruled against the Journal Entries are, or may be, termed
Posting Lines, and the Figure on Top of the Lines denotes the Folio of the
Leidger where the Debtor is entered; and the Figure under the Line shows the
Folio of the Leidger where the Credit is entered; and the other smaller Figures
against the sundry Debtors, or sundry Creditors (whether Goods or Persons) show
also in what Folios of the Leidger they are posted. And the Figures in the
narrow Column toward the Left Hand of the Pounds, Shillings, and Pence Lines,
direct to the Folio in the Leidger where the Debit or Credit is posted, that
is, to the Account of Goods, or of the Person immediately following the Words
To or By; the first being proper to the Left or Debit Side in the Leidger; and
the other used always on the Right or Credit Side of the Folio's in the Leidger.

There are several other Books used by Merchants besides those three
beforementioned; as the Cash-Book, which is ruled as the Leidger, and folio'd
likewise, wherein all Receipts of Money are entered on the Left Hand Folio, and
Payments on the Right; specifying in every Entry the Day of the Month (the Year
being set on the Top) for what, and for whose Account the Money was received,
or paid; and the Total Debit or Credit of each Side is to be posted into the
Leidger, to the Account of Cash therein, in one Line of either Side, viz. to or
by sundry Accounts, as per Cash-Book, Folio, etc. which is to be done once a
Month, or at Discretion; and the Particulars of each Side, Article by Article,
are to be posted into the Leidger to the proper Accounts unto which they
belong; with References in the Cash-Book to the several Folio's in the Leidger;
and carry the Balance over Leaf in the Cash Book; by which you may know at any
time what Cash you have, or ought to have, (...) you.

Another Book, is a Book of Charges of Merchandise, wherein is to be entered
the Custom and petty Charges of any shipped Goods; as Porterage, Wharfage,
Warehouse room, etc. and once a Month is transferred into the Cash Book on ^he
Credit Side, making Reference to the Book of Charges of Merchandise; and
likewise the same in the Debtor Side ^f the same Account in the Leidger for the
Particulars ^hereof.

The next Book I shall name, is the Invoice Book, or Book of Factories: In this
Book is to be copied all Invoices or Cargaisons of Goods shipped, either for
Accounts proper or partable; and also of Goods received from Abroad, which must
always be entered on the Left-side, leaving the Right-side Blank; and on the
Advice of the Disposal of Goods sent Abroad, and also on the Sale of Goods
received from Abroad, enter them on the Blank or Right-side; so that (...)
first View may be seen how the Account stands, etc.

The next a Bill-Book, wherein is entered Bills of Ex^hange accepted, and when
they become due; and when said, made so in the Margin.

The next is a Book of Household Expenses, for the Monthly Charge spent in
Housekeeping; likewise Apparel, House-rent, Servants Wages, and Pocket
Expenses; and this may be monthly summed up, and carried to the Credit of Cash.

Besides the above mentioned, there must be a Book to copy all Letters sent
Abroad, or beyond the Seas; wherein the Name of the Person or Persons to whom
the Letter is sent, must be written pretty full, for the readier finding the
same.

The next is (and what is very necessary) a Receipt Book, wherein is given
Receipts for Money paid, and expressed for whose Account or Use, or for what it
is received; to which the receiving Person must set his Name for himself, or
some other, with the Year and Day of the Month on the Top.

Lastly, A note or Memorandum Book, to minute down Affairs that occur, for the
better Help of Memory; and is of great Use where there is Multiplicity of
Business.

Having given an Account of the several Books, and their Use, the next Thing
necessary will be, to give some few Rules of Aid to enable the Book-keeper to
make proper Entries; and to distinguish the several Debtors and Creditors, viz.

First, For Money received make Cash Dr. to the Party that paid it (if for his
own Account) and the Party Cr.

Secondly, Money paid make the Receiver Dr. (if for his own Account) and Cash
Cr.

Thirdly, Goods bought for ready Money, make the Goods Dr. to Cash, and Cash
Cr. by the Goods.

Fourthly, Goods sold for ready Money, just the contrary, i. e. Cash Dr. and
the Goods Cr.

Fifthly, Goods bought at Time; Goods bought are Dr. to the Seller of them, and
the Seller Cr. by the Goods.

Sixthly, Goods sold at Time, just the contrary, i. e. the Party that bought
them is Dr. to the Goods, and the Goods Cr. by the Party.

Seventhly, Goods bought Part for ready Money, and the rest at Time. First,
make the Goods Dr. to the Party for the Whole. Secondly, make the Party Dr* to
Cash for the Money paid him in Part of those Goods.

Eighthly, Goods sold, Part for ready Money, and the rest at Time. First, make
the Party Dr. to the Goods for the whole. Secondly, Cash Dr. to the Party
received of him in Part of those Goods. -- Or either of these two last Rules
may be made Dr. to Sundries; as Goods bought, Dr. to the selling Man for so
much as is left unpaid, and to Cash for so much paid in ready Money. And so on
the contrary for Goods sold.

Ninthly, When you pay Money before it is due, and are to have Discount allowed
you, make the Person Dr. to Cash ^or so much as you pay him, and to Profit and
Loss for the Discount; or make the receiving Man Dr. to Sundries as before.

Profit and Loss is Dr.
To Cash for what Money you p^y and have nothing for it, as Discount of Money
paid you before due, and to Abatement by Composition, Household Expenses, etc.

Per Contra Dr.
By Cash for all you receive, and deliver nothing for it; as Discount for
prompt Payment, any Legacy left you, Money received with an Apprentice, and by
the Profit of every particular Commodity you deal in, by Ships, in Company, by
Voyages, etc.

To balance or clear an Account when full written.
1. FIRST, if the Dr. Side be more than the Credit, make the Old Account Cr. by
the New; and if the contrary, make the new Account Dr. to the Old: But if the
Debtor Side be less than the Credit, then make the Old Account Dr. to the New,
and the New Accomp^ Cr. by the Old, for such a Rest or Sum as you shall find in
the Account.

2. An Account of Company, wherein you have placed more received of another
than his Stock; then add as much on the Debit Side as you find on the Credit
Side; to the End that, in the new Account, you may have so much Debit as you
put in, and so much Credit as you have received.

3. In Accounts of Merchandise, you must enter the Gain, or Loss, before you
make the Old Account Cr. by the New, and the New Dr. to the Old, for the
Remainder of Goods (...) sold.

4. In the Foreign Accounts, which you are to keep with (...) double Margin, or
Column, for Dollars, for Crowns, or any Foreign Coins whatsoever, which have
been received or said by Bills of Exchange for Goods sold by Factors or
Correspondents, or bought by them for the Accounts before here you must first
balance the said inward Margin of Dollars, Crowns, etc.

To remove an Account full written to another Folio.
Sum or add up, the Dr. and Cr. Sides, and see the Difference, which place to
its opposite; as, admit the Cr. Side exceeds the Dr. then you are to write the
Line in the Old Account to balance on the Dr. Side, to answer the Line on the
Cr. Side of the New Account.

How to balance at the Year's End, and thereby to know the State of your
Affairs and Circumstances.
YOU must make Account of Balance on the next void Leaf or Folio of your
Leidger to your other Accounts; but after so done, do not venture to draw out
the Account of Balance in the said Folio, till you have made it exact on a
Sheet of Paper, ruled and titled for that Purpose; because of Mistakes or
Errors that may occur or happen in the Course of balancing your Leidger; which
are to be rectified, and will cause Erasements or Alterations in that Account,
which ought to be very fair and exact; and after you have made it to bear in
the said Sheet, copy fair the said Account or Balance in the Leidger.

The Rules for Balancing are these, viz.

1 st, Even your Account of Cash, and bear the Nett Res^ to balance Dr.

2 dly, Cast up all your Goods bought, and those sold, o^ what kind soever, in
each Account of Goods; and see whether all Goods bought, be sold or not; and if
any remain unsold, value them as they cost you, or according to the present
Market Price, ready Money; and bear the Nett Re^^ to balance Dr.

3 dly, See what your Goods or Wares severally cost, and also how much they
were sold for, and bear the Nett Gain or Loss to the Account of Profit and Loss.

4 thly, Even all your Drs. and all your Crs. in order as they lie, and bear
the Nett Rest of every Dr. and Cr. to Balance.

5 thly, Even your Voyages, your Factors Accounts, wherein is either Gain or
Loss, and bear the Nett Gain or Loss to the Account of Profit and Loss, and the
Goods unsold to Balance.

6 thly, Even the Account of Profit and Loss, and bear the Nett Rest to Stock
or Capital, as an Advance to your Stock or Capital.

7 thly, Even your Stock, and bear the Nett Rest to balance Cr.

Then cast up the Dr. and Cr. Sides of your Balance; and if they come out both
alike, then are your Accounts well kept; otherwise you must find out your Error
by pricking over your Books again, to see whether you have entered every Dr.
and Cr. in the Leidger as you ought.

Note, By pricking over the Book is meant, an Examining every Article of the
Journal, against the Leidger, and marking it thus, -- or thus; and upon the
second Examination thus and upon a third Examination thus; or any other Mark.

Note also, in all Accounts of Goods, you must keep a Column in the Middle of
the Leaf, of each Side, for Number, Weight or Measure.

And also Note, That the Money, Wares, or Goods remaining in your Hands, and
the Debts owing to you, must ever balance with the Nett Stock and Debts owing
by you.

Though all that has been said in relation to Book-keeping, and the several
Rules thereunto belonging, may seem a little abstruse to the altogether
Unlearned therein, yet there is no such mighty Difficulty to instruct them as
they may imagine* for these following Hints may render what has been already
said intelligible to an ordinary Capacity.

1 st, Stick close to the Text, or general Rule beforementioned, viz. That all
Things received, or the Receiver, are Debtor to all Things delivered, or the
Deliverer; for this Rule holds good in all Cases.

2 dly, When the Dr. (whether Person or Goods) is known, the Cr. is easily
understood, without mentioning it: For if A be Dr. to B, then B is Cr. by A,
for what Sum soever it be; also, if Goods be Dr. to C. then C is Cr. by those
Goods for the Sum they amount to -- This I mention, because that most Authors
(if not all) that I have met with on the Subject of Book-keeping, spend a great
many Words, which I think (begging their Pardon if I err) might be saved, in
declaring the Creditor, as well as showing the Debtor, when it may be
understood, as aforesaid.

3 dly, This Art of Italian Book-keeping, is called Book-keeping by double
Entry, because there must be two Entries; the first being a Charging of a
Person, Money, or Goods; and the second a Discharging of a Person, Money or
Goods.

4 thly, Strictly note, That if the first Entry be on the Dr. or Left Hand Side
of your Leidger; the next or second Entry, must always be made on the Right or
Credit Side of your Leidger; for when ever one Person or Thing is charged, then
always another Person or Thing is discharged for the Sum, let it be what it
will.

And so it is on balancing or evening an Account, and carrying it to another
Folio; for if the old Account be evened by Balance on the Credit Side, then the
new Account must be debited or charged on the Debit Side, for the Sum that
balanced the old Account.

Much more might be said to this Art of Book-keeping, if I had Room; but I have
plainly spoke to the principal Fundamentals thereof, which I hope may be
sufficient for the Instruction and Improvement of any intelligent Reader.

The next Matter I shall go upon, is to show, or give Examples of various Kinds
of Receipts and promissory Notes; also Bills of Parcels in different Trades;
likewise Bills of Book-Debts, Bills of Exchange, with Remarks on them; and some
other Precedents of Writings in Trade and mercantile Affairs*

And first of Receipts of different Forms.
l. s. d. REceived, September 23, 1752, of Mr. Anthony Archer, the Sum of Six
Pounds, Nine Shillings, on Account for my Master Bryan Murray, per me 6 09 00
Caleb Catchmoney. London, September 23, 1752. REceived of Mr. Kendrick
Keeptouch, Ten Pounds Eleven Shillings and Six Pence, in full, per me 10 11 06
Henry Hasty.

Note, the Sum received must always be expressed in (...) at Length, and not in
Figures, in the Body of a Receipt; bu^ may and ought to be expressed in Figures
behind a Brace ((...) the two foregoing Examples, or under the Left Hand (...)
the Receipt, as in the following) as well as in the Body of(...) Receipt.

When a Receipt is given in a Book, there is no Occasion to mention the Man's
Name of whom you receive the Money; because that is implied, he being the Owner
of the Book.

A Receipt in Part of Goods sold.
REceived the 24th of September, 1752, of Mr. Timothy Trustlittle, Fifty Pounds
in Part of Indico sold him the the 22d Instant per me L.50 -- 00 -- 0

Lawrence Lovemoney.

A Receipt given in a Receipt Book.
REceived the 26th of September, 1753, the Sum of Forty-five Pounds, by the
Order, and for the Account of George Greedy, Esquire per L.45 -- 0 -- 0

Timothy Trusty.

REceived the 27th of September, 1753, of Mr. Daniel Davenport, and Company,
One Hundred Pounds, on Account of Self and Partner, per L.100 -- 0 -- 0

James Jenkins.

REceived of Mr. Timothy Tennant this 25th D^y of October, 1753, Six Pounds,
for a Quarter's Rent, due at Michaelmas last, for my Master Lancelot Letfarm,
per me L.6 -- 0 -- 0

Francis Faithful.

REceived August 14, 1753, of Mr. Peter ^ish^p, Twenty-nine Pounds Six
Shillings, in Part of a Bill of Sixty Pounds, due the 3d of Xber next, to Mr.
Samps^n ^huffle, per L.29 -- 6 -- 0

Francis Fidal.

A Receipt on the Back of a Bill of Exchange.
SEptember 30th, 1753, received the full Contents of the within mentioned,
being 500 Pieces of ^ight, per

Nathaniel Needy.

Promissory Notes.
I Promise to pay to Mr. Timothy Teazer, Sixty Sounds, on the 20th of this
Instant September; witness my Hand this 15th of September, Anno 1741. L.60 --
00 -- 00

Daniel Dilatory.

I Promise to pay to Mr. Christopher Cash, or his Order, five Pounds for Value
received; witness my Hand this 26th Day of October, 1753. L.5 -- 00 -- 00

Robin Ruck

A Note given by Two.
WE, or either of us, promise to pay to Mr. Matthew Mistrust, or his Order, Six
Pounds Sterling, on Demand, for Value received: Witness our Hands this 27th of
September* 1753. L6 -- 00 -- 00

Witness, Nicholas Notice.

Nathan Needy, Samuel Surety.


A Bill of Debt.
MEmorandum, That I William Want, of London, Weaver, do owe and am indebted
unto Mr. Timothy Trust, of Westminster, Watchmaker, the Sum of Twenty five
Pounds Six Shillings of lawful Money of Great Britain; which Sum I promise to
pay to the said Timothy Trust, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, on or
before the 10th Day of December next ensuing. Witness my Hand this 22d Day of
October, 1753.

Witness, Titus Testis.

William Want.

A Bill of Parcels.
IT is usual when Goods are sold, for the Seller to deliver to the Buyer, with
the Goods, a Bill of Parcels; which is a Note of their Contents and Prices,
with a Total of their Value cast up, etc. -- These Bills ought to be handsomely
writ, and in methodical Order, according to the best and customary Way of each
particular Trade.

I shall therefore show (...) of Bills of Parcels in some Trades and (...)
shortest Methods of casting up the several (...).

(...) Bill.
(...), 1752.
Bought of (...). Burdett, viz.

12 Yds of (...), at 12 s. 6 d. per Yd. 8 Yds of (...) 6 s. 3 d. per Yd. 5 Yds
of (...)* 8 d. per Yd. 6 Yds of (...) 2 d. per Yd. 17 Yds of (...), at 3 s. 4
d. per Yd. 16 -- 7 -- 8
Sometimes the Money is (...) ^resently, then the Receip^ is made as follows.

REceived the 26th of September, 1753, Sixteen Pounds, seven Shillings, and
eight Pence, in full of this Bill, for my Master Abel Atlas, and Company, per me

Francis Fairspoken.

A Woollen Draper's Bill. London, September 24, 1753.
Bought of Benjamin Broadcloth, 22d of September 1753. viz.

s. d. 7 Yards of fine Spanish Black, at 18 4 per Yd. 5 Yds of Ditto, at 12 4
ditto. 6 Yds of fine mixed Cloth, at 15 9 ditto. 16 Yds of Frize, at 3 6 ditto.
4 Yds of Drap-de-berry, at 13 5 ditto. 5 Yds of superfine Spanish Cloth, at 18
10 ditto,

A Linen Draper's Bill, September 26, 1753.
Bought of Marmaduke Muslin, viz.

16 Else of Dowlas, at 1 s. 4 d. per Ell. 14 Else of Lockram, at 1 s. 3 d. per
Ell. 22 Else of Holland, at 3 s. 4 d. per Ell. 1 Piece of Cambrick, at 15 s. 85
Yards of Diaper, at 1 s. 10 d. per Yd. 19 Yds. of Damask, at 4 s. 3 d. per Yd.
2 Pieces of Muslin, at 18 s. 10 d. per Piece.
The several Articles of these Bills are purposely omitted being cast up, for
the Exercise of the Reader in the Rules for Practice; or by the Rules of
Multiplication of Money, before shown; which indeed is the best Method of all,
for the ^eady casting up the diverse and sundry Articles contained in any Bill
of Parcels whatsoever.

Example.

We'll take the last Article of the Woollen-Draper's Bill, ^iz. 5 Yds, etc. at
18 s. 10 d. per Yard.

^

In this Example the Price is multiplied by the Quantity, ^iz. 5 Yards,
according to the Rules delivered in Multiplication of Money; and the Product by
5 is l. 4 -- 14 -- 2. Then for the of a Yard, I multiply the Price of the
Integer, viz. 18 s. 10 d. by the Numerator of the Fraction, viz. 7, and divide
by the Denominator 8, and the Quotient is 16 s. 5 d* agreeable with the Rule
spoke to in the Doctrine of Fractions. -- Which 16 s. 5 d. added to the Product
of 18 s. 10 d. multiplied by 5, gives l. 5 -- 10 -- 7 as in the Operation above.

A Grocer's Bill.
Bought of Robert Raisin, and Peter Plumb, October the 4th, 1753, viz.

C. qrs. lb. l. s. d. l. Sugar 2 Hhds qt. 17 2 17 at 1 10 6 per C. Raisins 3
Barrels 6 1 19 at 1 14 5 Tobacco 1 Hhd 4 0 12 at 4 19 4 Rice 1 Barrel 1 0 15 at
2 16 4 Pepper 1 Bag 1 3 19 at 3 12 4 Brimstone 2 1 19 at 1 19 1

A Hosier's Bill.
Bought of Silvester Slipstocking, October. 5th, 1753. viz.

5 Pair of Women's mixed Worsted Hose, at 5 s. 7 d. 3 Pair of Women's Silk Hose,
at 9 s. 4 d. 22 Pair of Men's Woollen ditto, at 3 s. 2 d. 8 Pair Women's ditto,
at 2 s. 2 d. 21 Yards of Flannel, at 1 s. 11 d. 8 Pair of Thread Hose, at 3 s.
4 d.

The best and most expeditious Way of casting up these several Articles is by
the Method shown in Multiplication of Money.

A Fishmonger's Bill.
Bought of Leonard Ling, 6th of October, 1753. l.

3 C. of Haberdine, at l. 7 10 6 per C. 1 of Ling, at 8 2 6 1 of Stock Fish, at
4 10 6 6 Barrels of White Herrings, 3 10 2 1 Barrel of red Herrings, at 2 12 6
95 dried Salmon, at 0 01 2

The Amount of each Article is purposely omitted for the young Man's Exercise
in Arithmetic.

Note, Haberdine or Ling, 124 is a Hundred: Stock (...) and Herrings, 120 to
the Hundred, 1200 to a Thousand, 12 Barrels a Last.

A Leather-seller's Bill.
Bought of Henry Hide, the 7th of October, 1753. viz.

s. d. l. ^ Large oil'd Lamb Skins, at 1 3 per Skin. 3 Kipp of Goat Skins, at 3
4 37 Allom'd Sheep Skins, at 1 3 9 Calf Skins, at 4 3 ^ Oil'd Buck Skins, at 12
9 ^ Russia Hides, at 12 9 ^ Dicker of Hides, at -- l. 15 11 6

Note, 50 Goat Skins make a Kipp; and other Skins, five-^core to the Hundred. A
Dicker is 10 Hides or Skins; and 20 Dicker a Last.

A Pewterer's Bill.
Bought of Andrew Antimony, October the 7th, 1753, viz.

l. s. d. 9 Hard Metal Dishes, with. 42 lb. at 14 d. per lb. 2 19 1 Dozen of
ditto Plates, 0 17 1 Chamber Pot of ditto, 0 4 1 Standish of ditto, 0 4 2
Tankards of ditto, 0 5 10 18 Best Spoons, 0 4 6 ^ Hard Metal Porringers, 0 3 1
Salt of ditto, 0 1 10 1 Set of Castors, 0 10 4 19 2

Examples of Casting.

^

Bills on Book Debts. A Woollen Draper's Bill.
1753. Mr. Francis Frize, Dr. s. d. l. April 20 To 16 Yds. of Black (...) at 3
per Yd. ditto 24 To 4 Yds of Drap-(...), at 15 6 May 4 To 35 Yds mixed gray
Cloth, at 10 5 17 To 9 Yds of fine ditto, at 17 3 June 12 To 12 Yds of fine
Broad Cloth, at 17 3

If the Gentleman pays the whole Bill, then make the Receipt thus:

Received the 19th of Octo. 1753. of Mr. Francis Frize, the Sum of Fifty-four
Pounds, etc. in full of this Bill, and of all Accounts, for my Master, David
Draper, per Michael Measurewell. l. 54, etc.

A Mercer's Bill.
1753. Madam Dinah Dilatory, Dr* to Bryan Brocade, viz. Yards. s. d. Mar. 16 To
16 of flowered Satin, at 14 9 per Yd. April 14 To 14 of Venetian Silk, at 11 8
ditto 16 To 99 of Mohair, at 6 3 May 16 To 14 of flowered Damask, at 9 7 June 7
To 5 of Genoa Velvet, at 21 9 ditto 26 To of Lutestring, at 4 7

If Part of this Bill is paid, write thus: Received of Madam Dinah Dilatory,
Twelve Pounds Ten Shillings, in Part of Payment for my Master, Bryan Brocade,
per Henry Hunter. l. s. d. 12 10 00

A Corn Chandler's Bill.
1753. Mr. Robert Racer, Dr. to Lional Livery. s. d. April 14 To 5 Quarters of
Oats, at 2 3 per Bush. May 16 To 9 Bushels of Beans, at 4 10 June 12 To 7
Bushels of Bran, at 1 10 To 19 Bushels of Oats, at 1 11 ditto 14 To 16 Bushels
of Beans, at 3 11

A Tobacconist's Bill.
1753. Mr. Francis Fume, Dr. to Richard Raisecloud, viz. d. May 1 To 1 Hhd of
Tobacco, qt. nett, 569 lb. at 10 per lb. ditto 25 To 1 Box qt. 75 lb. nett, 11
June 4 To 5 Bags of Old Spanish, qt. nett, 671 lb. at 3 July 12 To Hhd, qt. 334
Gross, Tare 42 nett, 293 lb. at 5 7 ber 7 To 2 Rolls of Tobacco, qt. 94 lb. 9

A Stationer's Bill.
1753 Mr Siscera Scribler, Dr. to Phineas Foolscap, viz. Reams s. d. l. July 12
To 57 of Demi Paper, at 10 9 per R. ditto 13 To 195 of 2d Foolscap, at 6 3
August 24 To 375 of 2d Demi, at 8 2 ^ ber 6 To 95 of French Royal, at 2 6 ^ ber
29 To 26 Rolls of Parchment, at 15 11

Note, A Roll of Parchment is 60 Skins: A Ream of Paper 20 Quires; and a Bale
of Paper 10 Reams.

A Bricklayer's Bill.
^753. Mr. Martin Message, Dr. to Peter Pantile, viz. Mar. 27 To 25 Thousand
of Bricks, at 16 s. per M. ^itto 30 To 11 Thousand Plain Tiles, at 20 s. 6 d.
per M. April 1 To 28 C of Lime, at 12 s. per C. ^itto 9 To 20 Load of Sand, at
3 s. 6 d. per Load. May 20 To 140 Ridge Tiles, at 8 s. 6 d. per C. ^une 24 To
90 Days Work my self, at 3 s. per Day. To 90 Days my Man, at 2 s. 6 d. per Day.
To 90 Days another Bricklayer at 2 s. 6 d. To 90 Days for two Laborers, at 20
d. per Day each.

Note, 1000 plain Tiles is 1 Load; and 25 Bags or Bushels (...) Lime 1 C. A
Brick must be 9 Inches long, and 4 Inches ^oad. Bricks are of three Sorts,
Plaice Bricks, Red and ^rey Stock Bricks. --

Here it is necessary to give a general Rule for the casting (...) any Thing
sold by the Thousand; as Bricks, Tiles, Clinkards, or Flanders Paving Bricks,
and several other Things mentioned in the Book of Rates, viz. Barrel Hoops,
Goose Quills, Oranges and Lemons, Squirrel Skins, Billets, etc.

And the easy Rule is this, viz.

Multiply the given Number by the Shillings in the Price, (if the Price be at
so many Shillings per M) and always cut off three Figures or Places toward the
Right hand; and the Figures toward the Left Hand are Shillings, which divide
by 20, to bring them into Pounds; and those Figures separated toward the
Right Hand, multiply by 12, the next inferior Denomination; and still cut off,
or separate three Places toward the Right Hand, and the Figures toward the
L^st are Pence; and the three last Figures cut off, multiply by 4; and still
separate three Places toward the Right Hand, and the Figures toward the Left
are Farthings. -- And if the Pri^e be Shillings and Pence per Thousand, then
reduce the Price into Pence, and multiply the given Number by the Pence
contained in the Price, cutting off three Places toward the Right as aforesaid,
and the Figures toward the Left ^re Pence, which bring into Pounds, according
to Rule; and multiply the Remainder, or Fi^ures cut off by 4, etc.

Example.

^

When Things bought by the Thousand, and retailed by the Hundred, as
particularly Dutch and English Pantiles; then follow this Rule, viz.

Multiply the given Quantity by the Price, whether Shillings, or Shillings and
Pence. If Shillings, multiply by the Number of Shillings, and cut off two
Figures or Places toward the Right Hand, and those toward the Left are
Shillings; which reduce to Pounds as usual; and what remains, that is, the
Figures cut off, multiply by 12; and again cut off two Places more toward the
Right Hand, and the Figures ^o the Left are Pence; and what remains multiply by
4, etc.

Example.

^

If the Price be Shillings and Pence, multiply by the Pence ^^ntained in the
Price, and proceed as before; and then the ^^gures toward the Left Hand will be
Pence; which reduce (...) Pounds, according to Rule.

Example.

^

This Method is preferable to Practice, because of its (...) for the odd Number
above Thousands or (...), which would be ^uzzling to be very exact as to the
(...) Number; but (...) is Method, the Question is solved (...) the 1000 or 100
Parts of a Farthing; as may be seen by (...) foregoing Examples of the
Operation.

Of Bills of Exchange.
BILLS of Exchange are either Inland, or Foreign* The Inland Bills are drawn by
one Trader in one City or Town, upon another of another City or Town in the
same Kingdom; as London upon Bristol, or Exeter upon London, etc. and these
chiefly concern our Shopkeepers, and wholesale Traders, either of Town or
Country, and the Foreign more immediately concern the Merchant.

Bills of Exchange, if handsomely drawn, must be written in a fair Hand, on a
long Piece of Paper, about thre^ Inches broad; and writ in Form after the
following Precedents*

A Bill payable at Sight.
Philadelphia, 6 th October, 1753.
AT Sight hereof, pay to Mr. George Greedy, or his Order, the Sum of Fifty
Pounds, New York Currency, for Value received of Christopher Cash; and place it
to the Account, as per Advice, of

To Mr. Peter Punctual, Merchant in New York.
Your humble Servant, Daniel Drawbill.
Note, A Bill at Sight is payable three Days after the A^^ceptor sees it.



New York, November 4th, 1753.
SEven Days after Sight hereof, pay to Mr. Nathan Nee^^ or his Order,
Twenty-four Pounds, Ten Shillings, Ne^ England Currency, old Tenor, for Value
received here (...) Mr. Timothy Transfer, and place it to Account, as (...)
Advice from

To Mr. Simon Certain, Hatter, in Milk-Street, Boston.
Your Friend and Serva^^ Michael Moneyman^

If Mr. Needy sends his Servant, Andrew Benson, to re^ceive the Money; after he
has writ his Name on the Back o^ the Bill, (which is his Order) the Servant
must write a Re^ceipt to his Masters Name, thus:

REceived, November 17, 1753* the full Contents of (...) within mentioned Bill,
being Twenty-four Pounds, (...) Shillin^s.

Witness, Andrew Benson. Nathan Needy.

A Foreign Bill of Exchange.
Philadelphia, May 1st. 1753. Sir,
AT thirty Days after Sight of this my first of Exchange, my second, third or
fourth, of the same Tenor and Date, not being paid, pay to Mr. Stephen Emerson,
or Order, the Sum of One Hundred and Sixty Five Pounds Sterling, Value received
here, and place the same to Account, as per Advice from

To Mr. Simon Surepay, Merchant in London.
Your humble Servant, Ebenezer Reynolds.
The Acceptance is thus wrote under the Bill; Accepted this 16th Day of
November, 1753.

per Simon Surepay.



Notes on Bills of Exchange.
1. THE Acceptor of any Bill is become absolute Dr. to the Person to whom the
Bill is payable for the Contents thereof.

2. The Person to whom the Bill is payable, must demand the Money the very Day
it becomes due, and if the Acceptor die before it becomes due, it must be
demanded of the Executor ^r Administrator.

3. The Drawer of any Bill must always give his Corre^^ondent a Letter of
Advice, that he has drawn such a Bill (...) him for such a Sum, etc.

4. None may pay a Bill without such a Letter of Advice.

5. A Bill is due the third Day after the Expiration of the Time mentioned in
the Bill.

Of Endorsing.
IT frequently happens, that between the Acceptance of a Bill, and the Time of
Payment, the Party to whom it ^s first made payable, has Occasion to pay it
away; if so, he ^rites his Name on the back of the Bill, which is his Order,
^as said before) and gives it to the Person he is indebted to, and then he is
empowered to receive the Money: And it may be, the second Person also wants to
pay it away; and ^hen he writes his Name likewise under the other, and delivers
it to a third Person to receive the Money; and it may be, the third does the
same, and delivers it to a fourth Person, etc. All that do so are Endorsers;
and he that last has the Bill, if the Acceptor will not pay it, may sue him,
or the Endorsers, or Drawer, or any of them, for the Money.

An Endorsement is generally in these Words, viz. Pay the Contents of the
within mentioned Bill to Henry Hasty,

George Greedy.

But many times the Name only is accounted sufficient.

Of Protesting.
WHEN a Bill is to be protested, the Party that has the Bill must go to a
Public Notary (not a Common Scrivener) whose Business it is, and he goes with
you to the Acceptor's House and demands Payment, etc. and then he draws up a
Protest according to Law; which is to be returned to the Drawer within the Time
limited, etc.

It is needless to give here the Form of a Protest, because no Man can do it of
himself.

Another Bill of Debt.
KNOW all Men by these Presents, that I Lawrence Lackcash, of Boston Vintner,
do owe and am indebted unto Charles Creditman, of the same Place Salter, the
Sum (...) One Hundred and Fifty Pounds lawful Money of Boston, (...) Tenor,
which said Sum I promise to pay unto the said Charle^ Creditman, his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, on (...) before the 24th of December next ensuing
the Date hereof* Witness my Hand and Seal, this 6th Day of October, 1753.

Sealed and Delivered,

Lawrence Lackcash.

A Bill for Money borrowed.
REceived and borrowed of Oliver Overcash, of Philadelphia, Merchant, Fifty
Pounds, which I do hereby promise to pay on Demand. W^^ness my Hand this 6th
Day of ^ctober, 1753. l. 50

Peter Penury.

The Form of an Invoice.
Port Royal, in Jamaica, July 24 th, Anno 1753.

INVOICE of five Barrels of Indico, five Hhds. of Sugar, and five Hhds. of
Pymento, shipped on board the George of London, George Jones, Commander, for
Account and Risque of Messrs. John and Thomas Fisher, of London, Merchants,
being marked and numbered, as per Margent; Contents, Costs and Charges, viz.

I F Indico 5 Barrels l. s. d. 143 lb. No. 1a 5 412 146 152 173 756 lb. nett,
at 2 s. 2 d. per lb. 81 18 Sugar. 5 Hhds Tare C. qr. lb. C. qrs. lb. C. qr. lb.
11-3-27 -- 1-2-19 Gross 68-0-00 12 2-19 -- 1-3-00 Tare 8-3-12 13-2-13 -- 1-2-16
1a 5 14-1-15 -- 1-3-11 Nett 59-0-16 15-1 10 -- 1 3-22 at 24 s per C. 70 19 5
68-0-00 -- 8-3-12 Pymento lb. 5 Hhds. Tare 2026 Gross lb. lb. 389 Tare. 432 --
84 396 -- 72 Nett 1637 at 11 d. 76 14 8 1a 5 410 -- 81 per lb. 376 -- 70
Charges 412 -- 82 To Cost of 5 Barrels and 10 Hhds. 4-7-9 2026 -- 389 To
Storage -- 1-0-0 5 7 9 234 19 10 To Commission at 5 per C. 11 14 11 Errors
excepted, per A. B. 246 14 10

The Form of an Account of Sales.
1753 AN Account of Sales of 2756 Else of brown Oznabrigs; 1112 Yards of blue
Linen; 2 Pieces of blach Cloth, qt. 39 Yards; 40 Pair of Thread Stockings; and
175 Else of Bag Holland; received from on board the Ship Good Success, Samuel
Sharp, Commander, for Account of Mr. Lawrence Lucky, of London, Merchant. Dr.
l. s. d. 1746. Contra Cr. l. s. d. March 17 To Porteridge of ditto, 0 17 6
March 2 By Cash, for 2765 Else of brown Oznabrigs, making 3456 Yards, sold at 8
d. per Yard, 22 8 2 To Commissions on Sales, at 5 per C. 12 16 9 To Storage, at
2 per Cent, 6 8 4 ditto 29 By Benja. Baker, sold him 1112 Yds. of blue Linen,
at 7 d. per Yard, 34 15 0 20 2 7 ditto 31 By James Smart, for 39 Yards of black
Cloth, sold him at 15 s. per Yard, 29 5 0 To your Account Current for the Nett
Proceed, bad Debts excepted, 236 12 7 April 2 By Lawrence Monk, sold him 40
Pair of Stockings, at 7 s. 10 d. per Pair, 15 13 4 l. 256 15 3 ditto 8 By ditto
for 175 Else of Bag Holland, at 6 s. 3 d. per Ell, 54 13 9 l. 256 15 3
Philadelphia, April 13, 1753. Errors excepted, per Charles Careful.

The Extraction of the Square and Cube Roots, of great Use in Measuring,
Gauging, etc.
The Square Root.
1 st. A Square Number is any Digit, or any other Number, which being
multiplied into itself, produces a Square Number; as 4 multiplied by 4,
produces 16; so 16 is the Square Number, and 4 is said to be the Root of 16,
because it grows from, or is produced of 4; so 4 is the Spuare of 2, for twice
2 is 4, and 9 is the Root of 81, for 9 times 9 is 81, etc.

2 dly, To extract the Square Root of any Number, is to find another Number,
which multiplied by (or into) itself, produces the Number given, and is a Proof
of the Work.

3 dly, Square Numbers are either single or compound.

4 thly, All single Square Numbers, with their respective Roots, are contained
in the following Table, viz.

Roots. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Squares. 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81

5 thly, When the Root of any Square Number is required ^ess than 100, and yet
not exactly a single Square expressed ^n the Table above; then you are to take
the Root of the Square Number expressed in the Table, which (being less) ^omes
the nearest to the given Number to be squared: As ^uppose 60, the nearest Root
to it (as being less) is 7, and 12 being given, the Root belonging to it is 3.

6 thly, A compound Square Number is that which is produced of a Number
consisting of more Places than one, mul^iplied by itself, and never less than
230: So 459 is a com^ound Square Number, produced by the multiplying 27 in^o
itself.

7 thly, The Root of any Number under 100 may be ea^^ly known by the foregoing
Table of single Squares: But to ^xtract the Root of a compound Number of
several Places, ^bserve the following Directions, in Relation to the Finding
^he Root of this Square Number 45796.

1. Set a Point over the Place of Units thus, 45796, and so successively over
every second Figure toward the Left Hand, as thus, 45796; and again thus,
45796. Thus must your Number be prepared for Extraction in Natural Numbers: But
in the Decimals you must point from the Place of Primes toward the Rig^^-hand,
omitting one Place, as above; and if the Decimals are odd, affix a Cipher
toward the Right Hand of them to make them even. Your Number thus prepared,
draw a crooked Line on the Right of the Number, as in Division; and indeed the
Operation of the Square Root is not much unlike Division; only there the
Divisor is fixed, and in the Square Root we are to find a new One for each
Operation. I say having made a crooked Line thus, 45796 (seek the nearest Root
in the foregoing Table, to the first Point on the Left Hand, which here is 4,
the Root of which is 2, which Place behind the crooked Line thus: ^ and
substract it, and there remain 0: Then to the Remainder bring down the next
Point 57 thus: ^ which call the Resolvend; then double the Root of the fir^^
Point, and place it on the Left Hand of the Resolvend ((...) proper enough the
Dividend) thus; ^ The 4, the double of the Root 2 on the Left Hand of the
crooked Line, call the Divisor, then seek how often 4, the Divisor, can be
taken in 5, the first Figure of the Resolve^^ ^7) for you are to omit the last
Figure toward the Right-^and) which here is one, which 1 place behind the Root
2, and also behind the Divisor 4 thus: ^

Then multiply the Divisor (now) 41, by the Figure last ^laced in the Root,
viz. 1, and place it under the Resol^end thus, and substract it therefrom.

^

Then bring down the next Point, viz. 96, and place it (...) the Right of the
Remainder 16 for a new Resolvend or ^ividend thus; next double ^ ^he Quotient,
or Part of the Root, viz. 21, and place it for a new Divisor to the new
Resolvend 1696, thus:

Then seek how often 42 in 169? (still reserving or omitting the unit Figure of
the Resolvend or Dividend, as aforesaid) and I find I can have it 4 times,
which I place in the Quotient, or Place of the Root, and then the Work appears
thus: ^

In the last Step, I place 4 in the Root, and likewise 4 behind the Divisor 42,
which makes the new Divisor 424 to the Resolvend 1696; which Divisor multiplied
by 4, the Figure last placed in the Root, produces 1696; equal with the
Dividend or Resolvend aforesaid, as in the Operation may be seen. So that the
Square Root of 45796 is 214; for 214, multiplied into intelf, produces 45796,
the Number given, whose Square Root was sought,

More Examples.

^

Note, That when the Divisor cannot be had in the Resolvend, then place a
Cipher in the Quotient, and also in the Right of the Divisor, and bring the
Resolvend a Step lowe^, and then bring down the next Square, etc. as in the
Example ^bove may be seen.

Note further, If any Remainder happen to be after Extrac^ion, you may proceed
by annexing Pairs on Ciphers to the Left (...) the given Number, and so come to
what Exactness you please.

Note also, Such Numbers given Extraction that leave Remainders, are by some
called Irrationals, because their Roots cannot be exactly discovered, but still
there will be something ^emaining, though you work by whole Numbers or
Fractions: As in the Example above, where the Remainder is 2799.

The Extraction of the Cube Root.
TO extract the Cube Root of any Number, is to find another Number, which
multiplied by itself, and that ^^oduct by the Number found, produces the Number
given for Extraction.

From the foregoing Table for Extraction of the Square Root, proceed the
several Squares of the Cube Root, viz.

Roots, 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Squares, 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 Cubes, 1 8 27 64 125
216 343 512 729

1 st, To prepare any Number for Extraction, make a ^oint over Unity, and so
successively over every third Figure, ^issing two between each Point; but in
Decimals, you must ^oint from the Place of Units to the Right Hand, etc.

Example.

Extract the Cube Root of 46656, prepared thus, as above ^irected.

^

Here are but two Points, therefore the Root will have (...) two Places.

2 dly, The Number being prepared, seek in the foregoing (...) the nearest Root
to the first Point or Period 46, (...) you will find to be 3, which place in
the Quotient (...) 46656 (3 the Cube or Triple whereof, viz. 3, is 27, which
place under your first Point 46, as in ^ the Margent; the which substract from
46, and there rests 1^; this is your first Work, and no more repeated. Then to
the Remainder 19, bring down the next Period, viz. 656 (which is the last) and
place it on the Right of (...) Remainder 19, thus; ^

Then draw a Line under the Resolvend; next square (...) 3 placed in the
Quotient; which makes 9, which multipli^^ by 300 makes 2700 for a Divisor,
which place according thus; ^

Then seek how often 2 in 19? Answer, but 6 times, ^^^cause of the Increase
that will come from the Quotient, (...) multiply the Divisor by 6, and the
Product will be 1620^ which place orderly under the Dividend thus; ^

Then proceed to find the Increase coming from the Qu^^tient thus; Square your
last Figure 6, and it makes 3^ which multiply by 3, the other Figure of the
Quotient, gives 108; which multiplied by 30, makes 3240. (...) place also
orderly under the last Number before set (...) viz. 16200, and the Work will
appear thus; ^

Then (...) Figure last placed in the Q^otie^t, viz 6, (...) makes 216; which
place orderly likewise under the (...) 3240, as above, then add ^he three Lines
together, (...) they make 19056 (for so many yo^ always have after (...) first
Operation.) And seeing the Total to be equal to the ^^vidend above, viz. 19656
and no more Periods to bring ^wn, I see the Work is finished, and find the Cube
Root (...) 46656 to be 36.

Some Geometrical Problems useful in Mensuration.
Upon a right Line given to ^rect a Perpendicular, as in Figure 1.
LET CD be the Line given to have a Perpendicular raised on it from B, with the
Compasses (opened at a (...) convenient Distance) place one Foot in the Point
B, (...) with the other m^ke two marks E and F, on either Side ^ B; then open
the Compasses to a more large and conve^^ent Distance, and make the Arch GG, by
setting one Foot ^ E, and as near as you can over the Point B, then (the
^ompasses being open at the same Distance) place on^ Foot (...) the Point F,
and describe the Arch HH, crossing the (...) at the Point A; through which
Intersection with a Ruler ^raw the Line from A to B, which will be
perpendicular to ^he Line CD.

How to raise a Perpendicular on the End of a Line.
This is effected several Ways; but I shall instance only ^wo, which are very
easy. -- See Figure 2.

First Method.
Suppose the Line AB be given to raise a perpendicular ^^wards the End.

First open your Compasses to any small Distance, and set (...) Foot in the
Point A; and with the other, describe the (...) FED; then with one Foot of the
Compasses in D (...) being opened to the same Distance) cross the Arch in ^;
(...) then setting on^ Foot in E, with the other make the (...) AFG, crossing
^he first Arch in ^. Again, set one ^hot in F, and with the other describe the
small Arch HH, ^^^ssing the former in the Point C; so the Line AC being (...)
the Perpendicular required.

The Second Method.
Admit B be the Point given on which to draw the Perpe^^dicular BY. Open the
Compasses to any small Distance; an^ setting one Foot in the Point B, pitch
down the other Foo^ at Random, as suppose at K; then the Foot resting in K turn
the other about till it cross the Line AB in L; the^ draw the Line KL, and set
the same Distance KL (at which the Compasses already stand from K to M; so a
Line drawn from B, through M, is the Perpendicular on the End of the Line AB.

How to divide a Right Line into two equal Parts, an^ at Right Angles; as in
Figure the 3d.
Suppose the Line AB be given to be divided into 2 equal Parts, at Right
Angles. Take in the Compasses any Distance above Half the Length of AB, and
setting one Foot in the Point A, with the other draw the Arch CDE; then (the
Compasses unaltered) set one Foot in B, and with the other cross the former
Arch both above and below the Line, in the Points F and G; then a Line drawn
from F to G shall intersect, ot cut the given Line in H, and divide the Line AB
into two equal Parts, and at Right Angles.

Of Parallel Right Lines
Right lined Parallels, are Lines drawn on a Plane (...) equal Length and
Distance; and though infinitely extende^ will never meet, and in all Parts retain
an equal Distance such as these underneath.

B -- C C -- D
To draw a Right Line Parallel to another Right Lin^ at a Distance given; as in
Figure the 4th.
Take in your Compasses the given Distance GH, the^ setting one Foot in E, draw
the Arch IK; then moving to F, describe the Arch LM; then laying a Ruler on the
Top of the two Arches, just touching them, draw the Line NO, which will be
parallel to the given Line OF.

To bring any three Points (not in a strait Line) into a Circle by finding the
Center, so that the Circle shall pass thr^ those Points; as in Figure the 5th.
Let the three Points given be AB and C, through which it is required that a
Circle be drawn. First, set one Foot (...) the Compasses in one of the given
Points, as suppose in A, and extend the other Point to B, another of the
Points, and draw the Arch of a Circle GFD; then (the Compasses not altered) set
one Foot in B, and with the other cross the said Arch with two small Arches, in
the Points D and E, and draw the Line DE. Thirdly, set one Foot in C, (the
Compasses being at the same Distance) and with the other Foot cross the first
Arch GFD in the Points F and G, and draw the Line FG, crossing the Line DE in
the Point O, which is the Center sought for; in which, place one Foot of the
Compasses, and describe the Circle at the Distance OA, and it passes through
all the given Points AB and C

How to make a Line of Chords Geometrically, to any assigned Length or Radius.
Since in the Art of Dialling, there is frequent Use made of the Line of
Chords, it is proper here to show the Making thereof.

A Line of Chords is 90 Degrees of the Arch of a Circle, transferred from the
Limb of the Circle to a straight Line; now every Circle, whether great or
small, is divided (or supposed to be divided) in 360 equal Parts, called
Degrees: So the Semi or Half Circle contains 180, the Quadrant or Quarter 90,
and the Radius or Semi-diameter (which is that Line on which the Circle or Semi
circle is drawn or described) noted in Figure the 6th of the Line of Chords,
with the Letters AB, is always equal to 60 Degrees of that Circle which it
describes, and therefore 60 Degrees of a Line of Chords is called the R^dius
thereof.

To make the Line of Chords; as in Figure the 6th.
First, draw a Line of any Length, as CBD, and on the Middle thereof draw the
Perpendicular AB; next open ^our Compasses to the Radius or Length that you
would have ^our Line of Chords be of; which admit AB, and with that Distance on
B as the Center, describe or draw the Semi-^ircle CAD, which is divided into
two equal Parts, or Quadrants, by the pe^pendicul^r Line AB; thirdly, divide
the Arch or Quadrant ARD, into 90 equal Parts or Degrees; which is done by
taking the Length of the Line AB, and ^e^ting that Distance on the Quadrant AD,
and from D to ^; so is DR ^0 Degrees, and AR 30 Degrees; then take (...)
Distance AR, and set it from D to S, so is the Quadrant ^ivided into three
equal Parts, at the Poi^t S, and R, each containing 30 Degrees; this done,
divide the several Spaces between AR, RS, and SD, into three equal Parts, each
of which will be 10 Degrees, according as the Numbers are seen and set apart to
them: And these again divided into two equal Parts, each Part contains 5
Degrees; and every of those into 5 smaller, as in the Rep^esentation; and so
the whole Quadrant is divided into 90 Degrees. Fourthly, The Quadrant ARSD
being thus divided into 90 Degrees, set one Foot of the Compasses in D, and
open the Foot to A, and describe the Arch AEF, touching the Line CD (...) F, so
is the Point F, upon the Right Line CD, the Chord of 90 Degrees. Fifthly, open
the Comp^sses from D to 80 Degrees, and describe the Arch 80 GH; so shall the
Point H be the Chord of 80 Degrees. Sixthly, Open the Comp^sses from D to 70,
describe the Arch 70 IK, so is K the Chord of 70 Degrees. Again, Open the
Comp^sses from D to R, the Radius of 60 Degrees, and describe the Arch RLB, so
is B the Chord of 60 Degrees, equal to the Radius. Do the same by 50, 40, 30,
20, and 10, and then you will have the Line DF divided into 90 unequal Parts,
called Chords, as in Figure 6.

Thus much for the Line of Chords, frequently made use of in Dialling, where
there is not the Convenience of having a Mathematical Instrument-maker near at
hand.

Note, A Degree is the 360 th Part of any Circle, and every Degree is supposed
to be divided into 60 equ^l Parts, called Minutes; and every Minute is supposed
to be subdivided into 60 equal Parts called Seconds, etc.

Of Mensuration of Plains and Solids.
THE several Kinds of Measuring are three, viz.

1 st, Lineal, by some called Running Measure, and is taken by a Line, and
respects Length without Breadth; the Parts of which are,

12 Inches 1 Foot, 3 Feet 1 Yard, 16 Feet and Half 1 Rod, Pole, or Perch.

All Kinds of ornamental Work, such as Cornice Freeze, etc. are measured by
Running Measure.

2 dly, Superficial, or flat square Measure is that which respects Length and
Breadth; and the Parts are, viz.

144 Inches one Foot, 72 Inches Half a Foot, 36 Inches one Quarte^ of a Foot,
18 Inches Half a Quarter of a ^oot, 272 Inches and a Quarter one Rod, 136 Feet
Half a Rod; 1296 Inches, or 9 Feet, one superficial square Yard.

3 dly, Solid, or Cube Measure, which respects Length, Breadth and Depth, or
Thickness; and the Parts are, viz.

1728 Inches 1 Foot, 1296 Inches three Quarters of a Foot, 864 Inches Half a
Foot, 432 Inches one Quarter of 1 Foot, and 27 Feet 1 solid Yard.

Superficial Measure.
TO measure Things that have Length, and Breadth, such as Board, Glass,
Pavement, Wainscoat, and Land, is to take the Dimensions of the Length and
Breadth, according to the customary Method used in each Particular; as Board
and Glass are measured by the Foot, but the Dimensions are taken in Feet and
Inches, and the Content given in Feet.

Wainscoat and Pa^ing by the Yard, as are also Plaistering and Paint^ng, and
the Dimensions are taken in Feet and Inches, and the Content given in Yards.

Dimensions of Land are taken by the Pole or Chain, of 4 Poles in Length; all
which is taken in square Measure superficial, that is, an Inch, Foot, Yard, or
Pole; which is not only sometimes in Length, but also as much in Breadth too;
or if it wants of it one Way, it must be made up the other.

Of the Square.
The squaring of any Number, is multiplying it into itself, as 12 Inches
multiplied by 12 Inches, make 144 Inches square, on the Flat. The Square of any
Thing is found four several Ways, viz. by whole Numbers, by Decimals, by
Practice, and by Cross Multiplication; in each of which Methods I shall give
Examples of Operation.

When any Thing is to be measured, it must be considered what Form or Fashion
it is of: and then it must be measured according to the several Rules for each
Figure.

First, If it be a Square of equal or unequal ^ides, that is, one Way longer or
wider than the other (as Boards are almost always much longer than they are
broad) then the Length and Breadth must be multiplied one by the other, which
makes it square Measure, as was hinted before; and if that Product be divided
by its proper Divisor, as 144 is the Divisor, for flat or superficial Measure,
and 1728 the Divisor for cube or solid Measure; the first being the square
Inches in a superficial square Foot, and the other the cubick square Inches in
a solid Foot square.

Example.

Admit a Board be 12 Inches broad, and 8 Feet, or 96 Inches long, how many
square superficial Feet does it contain?

^

Here the Length in Inches is multiplied by the Breadth in Inches, and the
Product 1152 divided by 144, the square I^ches in a Foot, quotes 8 ^eet square
for the Contents of the Board.

A General Rule for Dispatch.
If the Length of a Board, or Piece of Glass, be given in Fee^, and the Breadth
in Inches, multiply one by the other (without any Reduction) and d^vide the
Product by 12, and the Quotient will be the Answer in Feet, and the Remainder
w^ll be Parts of a Foot. So the foregoing Example might have been sooner done
by dividing 96 the Length, by 12 the Breadth, and it quotes 8 Feet for the
Content, as by the former Way.

Example.

Suppose a Board be 14 Feet long, and 15 Inches broad, what is the Content in
square Feet?

^

So the Answer is 17 Feet and. And so for any other Example of this Kind.

Here 3 Inches is the of 2 Foot, wherefore of 14 is taken, and added to 14, and
it makes 17 Feet and 2/4, equal to.

If a Board be wider at one End than the other, then take the Breadth in the
Middle, or add the Measure of both Ends together, and take the Half for the
mean Breadth, which multiply by the Length.

Example.

Suppose a Board to be 120 Inches long, and the narrowest End 10 Inches wide,
and the broadest End 24 Inches wide; what is its Content in superficial Feet?

^

If a Board or Piece of Glass be ever so irregular, it may be measured very
near, by taking the Breadth in 5 or 6 Places, and add the several Breadths
together, dividing the Total by the Number of Places, and the Quotient will be
the mean Breadth; which multiply by the Length, etc.

Having the Breadth in Inches of any Board, or Piece of Glass, to know how much
in Length of that Board or Piece of Glass, will make a Foot Superficial.

Rule. Divide 144 by the Inches in Breadth, and the Quotient will be the Length
of that Board that will make a Foot.

Example.

If a Board be 9 Inches broad, what Length of that Board will make a
superficial Foot?

Or by the Rule of Three Reverse, thus, ^

If a Board be 12 Feet long, and 15 Inches broad, ho^ many square Feet does it
contain?

^

^

Here the Content is found four several Ways, viz. by multiplying the Inches
together, and divi^ing by 144, etc. The next Work is performed ^ecimally; the
third Method is by cross Multiplication; and the last and best is by Practice.

Any of these Methods may be easily understood by the Use of the Arithmetical
Part of this Book, except the Method by Cross Multiplication, which, I think,
has not been shown; wherefore I shall explain it here.

In the Example, 1 Foot 3, stands under 12 Feet 6; and having drawn a Line,
say, once 12 is 12; th^n I say Crossway, ^ times 1 is 6 Inches; so that Line is
0 Feet, ^ Inches; Then Cross ways again, I say 3 times 12 is 36 I^ches, the
12's in 36 is 3 times, or 3 Feet; so that Line is 3 Feet 0 Inches: Lastly, I
multiply the Inches together, saying, 3 times 6 is 18, the 12's in 18 once, and
there remains 6, or 6/^^, equal to, as in the Work.

Proper Directions for Joyners, Painters, Gl^siers, etc.
Ro^ms being generally various in their Forms, take this general R^le in all
Cases, viz.

Take a Line, and apply one End of it to any Corner of the Room; then measure
the Room, going into every Cor^^r with the Line, till you come to the Place
where you (...) began; then see how many Feet and Inches the String (...), and
set it down for the Compass or Round; then t^ke the Height by the same Method.

Glasie^s are to take the Depth and Breadth of their Work, and multiply one by
the other, dividing by 144; Glass being measured as Board.

Having thus shown the Methods of casting up Dimensions, I come now to
Particulars; and the first of

Glasiers Work, by the Foot.
If the Windows be square, multiply the Length by the Breadth, which will
produce the Content, as abovesaid.

Examples.

A Window glaized By Cross Multiplication. ^

If the Windows are arched, or have a curved Form, no Allowance is made by
reason of the extraordinary Trouble, and Waste of Time. Expense or Waste of
Glass, etc. And the Dimensions are taken from the highest Part of the Arch down
to the Bottom of the Window, for the Height (...) Length; which multiply by the
Breadth, and the Produ^^ will be the Answer in Feet, etc.

Glasiers are often so very nice, as to take their Dimensions, and to measure
to a Quarter of an Inch.

^

Glass is measured by the Foot, as said before; and the Price of Work in
England, in Sterling Money is as follow^ viz.

^nglish Glass per Foot 0 -- 5 ^rench and Crown Glass 1 -- 0 Common Work,
Leading included, for every Foot square 0 -- 6 New Leading old Glass per Foot 0
-- 3 Common Diamond Squares, each 0 -- 1
Painters Work by the Yard.
WHEN the Wainscoat of a Room is painted, you are to measure round the Room
with a Line, as hinted before, without girting the Mouldings, which are to be
^easured by a String, and added to the other; then multi^ly the Compass by the
Height, with the addition of the ^ouldings, etc. and you have the Content in
Feet and In^hes, which reduced to Fee^, bring into square Yards by ^ividing by
9.

Example 1.

^

Example 2.

If the Height of a Room painted be 12 Feet 4, and the ^ompass 84 Feet 11; what
square Yards does it contain? ^nswer, 116 Yards 3 Feet 3.

^ Note, Double Work is allowed in Window-Shutters; Sash-Frames and
Mantlepieces are reckoned by themselves, unless the Mantlepieces stand in the
Wainscoat, and then they are to be measured as plain Work, deducting nothing
for the Vacancy.

Prices in England. s. d. Common colored, 3 Coats in Oil, per Yard 0 ^ On old
Color 0 ^ Walnut-tree Color 1 ^ Marble Color, from 16 d. to 2 ^ Sash-Frames,
each 1 ^ Sash-Lights, each 0 ^ Window-Lights, one with another 0 ^ Iron (...) 0
^

Joiners Work.
WAINSCOATING, the Dimensions are taken as (...) Painting, viz by measuring the
Height (indentin^ the String where ever the Plane goes, as well as the Painter
do where ever the Brush goes) and then the Comp^ss; which m^ltiply one into the
other, dividing ^he Product by 9, and the Quotient is the Answer in square
Yards.

Example.

What is the Content of a Piece of Wainscoating that is 9 Feet 3 Long, and 6
Feet 3 broad?

^ The Length and Breadth being multiplied together, brings it into square Feet
which divided by 9, (the square Feet in a Yard) pro^duces 6 Yards for the
A^^swer, as per Margin.

Once more.

There is a Room wainscoate^, ^he Compass of which is 47 (...) 3 Inches, and
^he Height 7 Feet 6 Inches; what is the (...) in Yards squ^re? Answer 39 Yards.

^

The Prices per Yard. s. d. (...) good Wainscoat 6 0 ^ainscoating, not finding
S^uff, etc. 2 0 ^arse Wainscoating 1 0 (...) Wainscoat, finding Stuff 3 0 (...)
finding Stuff 1 6

Carpenters Work.
ROOFING, Flooring and Partitioning* the principal Ca^pentry in modern
Building, are measured by the ^^uare of 10 Feet each Way, that is 100 square
Feet.

For Roofing, multiply the Depth and half Depth, by the (...); or the Front and
half Front by the Depth, and (...) have the ^ontents.

The Dimensions are taken in Feet and Inches.

Example.

How many Squares does that Piece of Work contain that ^easures 199 Feet 10
Inches in Length, and 10 ^eet 7 Inch^^ in Height? Answer 21 Squares, 14 Feet,
10 Inches ^/6.

^

This Work is done by cutting off two Places toward the right Hand, and the
Number on the Left are Squares, etc.

Again.

If a Floor be 49 Feet 7 Inches 4 Parts long, and 26 Fee^ 6 Inches broad; how
many square Feet?

The Operation by Cross Multiplication.
Feet. In. Parts. 49 7 4 26 6 0 294 0 0 980 0 0 15 2 0 24 6 0 3 ^ 8 8 0 2 13 14
8 4 Answer 13 Squ. 14 Feet, 8 In. 4 Fts*

Note, In measuring Roofing, no Deduction is made (...) Sky-Lights, Chimney
Shafts, etc.

In measuring Flooring, take the Dimensions of the (...) Floor at once in Feet,
and then measure the Content in ^^^perficial Feet of the Vacancy for the
Stairs, Hearths, etc which deduct from the whole Floor, and the Remainder the
true Content; which bring into Squares as before.

Note, In Partitioning, you must measure the Doors, Do^^^cases and Windows, by
themselves, and deduct their (...) out of the Whole; except by Agreement they
are included; (...) then you must mention in the written Agreement, Doors,
Do^^^cases and Windows, included.

There are diverse Sorts of Carpenters Work belonging to Building, viz.
Cantaliver-Cornice, Modilion-Cornice, Plai^ Cornice, Guttering, Rail and
Ball^sters, Lint^le, Penthouse Cornice, Timber-front, Story, Breast-sommers,
Shelvin^ Dressering, etc all which are measured by Li^eal, or Run^ning Measure.
There are also ^oors and Door-cases, Lant^horn-Lights, with their Ornaments,
Balcony-Doors an^ Cases, Cellar-Doors and Curbs, Columns and Pilasters,
Cupo^la's, etc. all which are valued by the Piece.

Carpenters Wo^k in England is done at the followin^ Sterling P^ices, viz. l.
s. ^ Flooring, finding Boards, the Square 1 15 ^ Not finding Boards, from 2 s.
6 d. to 0 ^^ ^ Roofing with Oak 2 00 0 Not finding Timber 0 12 0 Partitioning
per Square 0 15 0 Not finding Timber 0 07 6 Stairs with Rails and Ballusters
complete 1 10 0 Sawing of Oak and Elm per 100 Feet 0 02 6 Trees for Fences 0 02
0

Oak Timber is commonly sold for 40 s. p^r Tun that is 40 Feet square in the
Place; Ash 30 s. and Elm 28 s. per Tun.

Note, Carpenters measure the Timber Frames of any Building (which they call
the Carcass) by the Square of 10 superficial Measure, or 100 square Feet, as
hinted before.

Bricklayers and Tylers Work. Of Walling.
WALLING is measured by the Rod Statute-Measure, being, 272 Feet and
superficial. The Me^hod of taking their Dimensions is thus: For a Wall round
(...) Orchard or the like, they measure the Length by a Line going over the
Buttresses; and for the Height, they measure over the Mouldings (pressing the
Line into them) even to ^he Middle of the Coping: They likewise take Notice
(...) the Thickness of the Wall, that is, how many half ^ricks in Length the
Wall is in Thickness; for three half ^ricks, that is, a Brick in Length, and
one in Breadth, is ^tandard Thickness; And all Walls, whether less or more,
^ust be reduced to that Thickness, by this Rule, viz. Mul^iply the Product of
the Length and Height, by the Num^er of half Bricks that the Wall is in
Thickness; which Product divide by 3, and then the Quotient by 272 (the ^eing
generally neglected in Vulgar Working) and the Quo^^ent will be Rods, at a
Brick and half thick Standard ^easure.

Example.

Admit the Face of the Wall measure 4085 Feet, and the ^hickness be two Bricks
and a Half, or five half Bricks ^hick, how many Rods does it contain?

^

When the Work is wrought Decimally, then you divide by 272, or 272, 25, which
gives the Quotient somewhat less. But the Measuring of Brick-Work may be
shortened by having the Rod of 16 Feet centesimally divided into 100 equal
Parts, with which you take the Dimensions, and the Length of the Wall in those
Rods; and 100 Parts multiplied by the Height, give the Content in Rods, of any
Wal^ that is a Brick and half Thick. Deduction must be made for Doors, Windows,
etc.

A Table to reduce Brick-Work to Standard Measure, i. ^. ^ Brick and a Half
Thick.

^

Example.

Suppose a Garden-Wall to be 254 Feet round, and 12 Feet 7 Inches high, and
three Bricks thick; how many Rods does it contain?

^ In this Operation, the Aggregate, or Total, is multiplied by 2, because
twice 3 is 6, the Number of half Bricks; and that reduces the Work to
Standard-Measure, as by the Table above.

Of Chimnies.
This Brick Work is commonly agreed for by the Hearth, and also sometimes by
the Rod; and the Method of taking Dimensions is thus: If the Chimney stands
singly, not leani^g against, or being in a Wall, and worked upright over the
Mantle-tree to the next Floor; it is girt about the Breast for the Length, and
the Height of the Story is taken for the Breadth, and the Thickness of the
Jaumbs for the Thickness. But if the Chimney stands against, or in a Wall,
which is before measured with the rest of the Building; then the Breadth of the
Breast or Front, together with the Depth of the two Jaumbs, is the Length; the
Height of the Story the Breadth, and the Thickness of the Jaumbs the Thickness;
but if the Chimney stands in the Corner of a Room, and have no Jaumbs, then the
Breadth of the Breast is the Breadth, the Height of the Story the Length, and
the Thickness the Thickness. And for the Shaft it is commonly girt (...) the
smallest Part, for the length* and the Thickness of ^oth Sides, for the
Thickness; in Consideration of the Widths, Pargiting, Scaffolding, etc.

Note, There is nothing to be deducted for the Vacancy be^ween the Hearth and
the Mantle-tree, because of the Widths and the Thickening for the next Hearth
above.

Arches are measured by taking the Breadth and half the Breadth of the Arch,
and add them together; and then to multiply the total by the Length, for the
Content in Thick^ess of the Arch.

Gable Ends.
Take half the Perpendicular for the Breadth, and the Width of the House for
the Length, or half the Width of ^he House for the Breadth, and the
Perpendicular for the Length; which brings the Measure to an Oblong, which is
easily measured by multiplying the Length by the Breadth, etc.

Note, A Perpendicular is a down or upright Line in the ^ork thus; There are
several other Things in Bricklayers Work; (...) Cornice, Facias, Straight
Arches, Scheme Arches, Hips and ^^lleys in Tiling, and Water-Courses^ All which
are measured (...) the Foot-Lineal, or Running Measure. Also Peers, Pilaste^^^
R^stick Work, etc. which are valued by the Piece. Eng^ish ^rices in Sterling
Money.

l. s. d. ^or Walls, finding Materials 5 00 0 per Rod, Not finding Materials 1
10 0 ditto, For Tyling, finding Materials 1 05 0 per Square. Not finding
Materials 0 05 0 ditto. For Tyling, finding Materials (except Tiles) that is 15
Feet square 0 10 0 per Rod, For stripping without taking down 0 05 6 ditto.
With taking down 0 07 0 ditto. For Pointing 0 02 0 ditto.

Paving.
Pavement for Cellars, Wash-ho^^es, etc. is measured by the Square Yard.

Example.

If a Cellar, Wash-house or Courtyard, be paved with Bricks, or pitched with
Pebble, being 9 Yards 2 Feet long, and 6 Yards 2 Feet broad; how many Yards
square does it contain? Answer, 64 Yards 1 and 4 Feet, as by the following Work.

^

Here the Answer is found by three different Operations, and the Resul^ of
each, to the same Amount, viz. by Cross Multiplication, by Practice, etc.

Slating.
Is valued by the Square of 10; in some Places by the Rod of 18 Feet square;
that is 36 square Yards, or 324 Feet.

In Tyling and Slating, where there are Gutters and Valleys, there is commonly
Allowance, which is to take the Length of the Roof all along upon the Ridge,
which makes the Gutter double Measure; which in some Places is allowed, in
others not. Sometimes there is an Addition for hollow Ware, that is, Ridge
Tiles, Gutter Tiles, Corner and Dormer Tiles; and here Customs differ: For in
some Places they account one superficial Foot for every Foot lineal or running
Measure; then 100 Feet lineal is reckoned a Square. In other Places, for every
100 of such Tiles they reckon one Square.

Plaistering.
Is of two Kinds, viz. First, Work lathed and plaistered, sometimes called
Ceiling. Secondly, Plaistering upon Brick-Work, or between the Quarters in
Partitioning, by some called Rendering; both which are measured by the (...)
square, as the Joiners and Painters do. In taking Di^^nsions of Ceiling, if the
Room be wainscoated, they consider how far the Cornice bears into the Room, by
putting up a Stick perpendicular to the Ceiling, close to the Edge of the
uppermost Part of the Cornice; and measure the Distance from the perpendicular
Stick to the Wainscoat; twice which Distance must be deducted from the Length
and Breadth of the Room taken upon the Floor, and the Remainder is the true
Length and Breadth of the Ceiling: As suppose a Floor is 24 Feet long, and 18
Feet broad, and the Cornice shoots out 6 Inches; deduct a Foot for both Ends,
and the Length of the Ceiling is 23 Feet; and the same for the Breadth; it
leaves 17 Feet broad; which (if the Room be square) multiplied together, the
Content is 391 Feet, or 43 Yards and a Half. ^

If the Ceiling of a Room be 19 Feet 10 one Way, and 17 ^eet 6 the other, how
many square Yards does it (...)

^

Example 2.

How many Yards square are there in a Piece of Plaistering (...) is 47 Feet 4
Inches 7 Parts long, and 18 Feet broad ^

In measuring Partitioning for Doors, Windows, and other Vacancies, there must
be an Allowance or Deduction made they being Deficiencies.

Prices per Yard in England. s. d. For every Yard of common Plaistering,
finding Laths, Nails, etc. 0 9 Not finding Laths 0 4 For White-washing with
Size 0 1 Partitioning, finding all Materials 0 8

Masons Work.
THE Masons Work, consisting of Stone, is of two Sorts viz. Superficial and
Solid. Pavement, and the Face of Stone Walls, Houses, etc are measured as Brick
work If the Work have Ornaments, as Capitals, Pilasters, Rails and Ballusters,
etc. then they are valued by the Piece.

English Prices. s. d For every Foot of Plain Work in Walls, etc. 0 8 For plain
Cornice, about 1 ^ For rough Stone Wall, with Lime, 16 Feet long and 1 Foot
high per Rod 1 2 Without Lime, per Rod 0 3 Paving, digging the Stone, and all
Workmanship, per square Foot 0 3

Prices of Stone and Urns.
Rough Paving 1 d. per Foot; Rough Asher, or Coping, 1 d per Foot; Fine Asher 3
d. per Foot; Base per Foot 4 d. Carbe per Foot, 6 d. Urns 3 Feet high, 1 l 4
Feet high 1 l. 10 s. 5 Feet high 2 l. and 6 Feet 3 l.

Glaziers Work.
IT may be done thus; Multiply the Length in Inches and Parts, by the Breadth
in Inches and Parts, and separate the Decimals (if any) as before shown,

Example.

^

So the Content is 1 f. 5 and of an Inch.

Here, after the two Places are separated by a Comma, the Remainder is divided
by 144, and then what remains by 12, etc.

Or thus, as if Shillings and Pence.

^

An Expeditious Way.
When the Length of any Superficies, either of Board or Glass, is given in
Feet, and the Breadth in Inches, then only multiply the one by the other, and
divide by 12, and the Quotient will be the Answer in Feet, and the Remainder
will be the Parts of a Foot; as has been spoken of before.

Example.

Admit a Window to be 15 Feet long, and 12 Inches broad.

^

Of Board Measure.
WHENEVER the Breadth is given in Inches, an^ the Length of the Board in Feet,
then only multi^ply one by the other, and divide the Product by 12, and the
Quotient will be the Answer in square Feet: But if the Breadth and Length be
given both in Inches, then multiply one by the other, and divide by 144, and
the Quotien^ will be the Answer in square Feet.

Example 1.

Suppose a Board (or any other thing of flat Measure) be 15 Inches broad, and
16 Feet long, what is the Content in square Feet?

^

Here the Example is wrought both Ways, as abovesaid, and the Answers are both
alike.

Example 2.

Suppose a Board be 8 Inches and in Breadth, and 16 Feet long; what is the
Content in square Feet? The (...) follows.

^

In this Example, I multiply by 4 and 4, the componen^ Parts of the Ratio's of
16 the Length.

Example 3.

Again, admit a Board 17 Inches broad, and 28 Feet (...), what is the Content?

^

This Example is multiplied by 7 and 4, the Ratio's of 28 the Length.

Once more by the other Way. Suppose a Board be 32 ^nches broad, and 37 Feet,
or 444 Inches in Length; what (...) the Content? ^

The Parts of a Superficial Foot is 144 square Inches, Inches.

72 half a Foot 108 three Quarters. 126 three Quarters and half a Quarter. 36 a
Quarter of a Foot. 18 half a Quarter.
In the last Work, I multiply 444, the Inches of the Length, by 4 and 8, the
component Parts of 32, the Inches (...) the Breadth; and then divide the last
Product by 144, (...) the Answer is 98 Feet, and 96 square Inches remain, which
is two Thirds of a Foot.

Mr. Darling, In his Treatise of the Carpenter's Rule, has (...) great Pains,
(and no doubt with as great Care) given a ^^eat many Tables for the Answer of
sundry Dimensions in ^^ard and Timber Measure; but he measures best, that does
(...) experimentally by Arithmetic, by those short and easy Rules before and
hereafter mentioned, and takes not Things upon trust; for though Tables may be
right, so perhaps they may be also wrong (for Error is endless) and then to be
wholly guided by such Tables, it would be of sad and very pernicious
Consequence; and if the Artist is ignorant of Arithmetic, he will be
bewildered and plunged into inextricable Difficulties. -- I must confess that
Tables are of considerable Help in case of Expedition; but then you must be
very well acquainted with them; otherwise I can in much less time cast up the
Dimensions, than you shall be in finding out your se^veral Numbers, and adding
or substracting them, etc. No Man that is wise, ought to depend upon any Table
for his Government, till he has proved the Truth of every Line, and he that is
able to do that, is capable of making any Table for his own Use; which if he
takes care that it be correct, he is well provided, and need not be led into
Erro^ or Confusion by false Tables.

Of Land Measure.
LAND is usually measured by the Acre; the Dimensions are taken with a Pole of
16 Feet and a Half; or a Chain called Gunter's Chain, consisting of 4 Poles in
Length, and is divided into 100 equal Parts, called Links, answering to Decimal
Arithmetic.

Note, 1 Acre contains 160 square Poles; 1 Rod or Quarter of an Acre, 40 square
Poles.

Note also, In any Number of Chains are so many 10^ Links, as 4 Chains are 400
Links, and 6 Chains is 600 Link^ etc. In a square Chain are 16 square Poles;
and if you divide 160 (the square Poles in one Acre) by 16 (the square Poles in
a Chain) the Quotient is 10, the square Chains in 1 Acre.

A square Chain contains 10,000 square Links, (or 100 multiplied by 100) and
consequently 1 Acre contains 100,000 square Links.

To measure a Geometrical, or True Square.
A Square is contained under 4 Equal Sides, and 4 Right Angles.

Let Figure 7, represent a square Piece of Land to be measured, every Side
whereof is 20 Poles; multiply 20 by 20, being both the Length and Breadth, and
the Product (...) 400, for the Content in square Poles, which divide by (...)
(the square Poles in 1 Acre) and the Remainder 80 by (...) (the square Poles in
1 Rod) quotes 2 Acres, and 2 ^ods for the Content, as in the Operation.

^

Note, The square Root of the Area of any Square is the (...) thereof; as in
Fig. 7, the Area or Content is 400, whose ^^uare Root is 20, the Side of the
Square.

To measure a Parallelogram, or Long Square.
A Parallelogram, is contained under 4 Right-angles, but (...) 4 equal Sides;
yet the opposite Sides are equal.

Admit Figure 8, to be a Parallelogram, or Long-Square, ^^ose Length is 21
Chains, 36 Links, and Breadth 11 ^^ains, 64 Links; what is the Content of that
Piece of (...)?

The Method of casting up the Contents of any Dimen^^^ns taken with Gunter's
Chain, is to multiply the Chains (...) Links together, and cutting off 5
Figures toward the ^^ght-hand, the Remainder on the Left Hand will be Acres;
(...) multiply those Figures toward the Right Hand by 4, (...) from that
Product cut off 5 Figures as before; so will (...) Figure on the Left Hand be
Rods: Again multiply the ^^mainder last cut off by 40, cutting off also from
the Pro^^ct 5 Figures to the Right Hand, and the Figures toward (...)
Left Hand will be Poles; and if there be any Remainder will be Decimal Parts of
a Pole. So in the present Ex^^ple, the Answer is 24 Acres, 3 Rods, 18 Poles,
and ^^/^^ Parts of a Pole.

^

To measure a Rhombus.
A Rhombus or Diamond like Figure, is contained (...) 4 equal Sides, but not
Right-Angles; yet the (...) Angles are equal.

Admit Figure 9 to be a Rhombus, whose Side is 16, (...) Perpendicular 14;
which multiplied together, the Product^ 224, for the Area.

To measure a Rhomboides.
A Rhomboides is contained under 4 Lines, whose oppos^^^ Sides are equal, and
opposite Angles equal; yet not all (...) Sides, nor any Right-Angles.

Admit Figure 10, to be a Rhomboides, whose Length 22, and perpendicular, or
parallel Distance, 8, which m^^^tiplied together, the Product is 176, for the
Area.

To measure any Manner of Triangle.
Every Triangle is half that Long-square, whose Leng^^ and Breadth is equal to
the Perpendicular and Base. Ther^^fore from the greatest Angle, draw a Line
perpendicular (...) the Base, which multiply by half the Base, and the Prod^^^
is the Area.

Admit Figure 11 to be a Triangle, whose Base or long Side is 26 Poles, and the
Perpendicular 16 Poles, (...) multiply together, and the Product is 416, for
the Area of the Long-square EFCB, half of which is 208, the Area of the
Triangle ABC.

Or if you multiply the Base 26, by 8 the half Perpendicular, the Product is
208, the Area as before.

Or else multiply half the Base 13, by the whole Perpendicular 16, the Product
is 208 as before.

To measure a Trapezium.
A trapezium is contained under 4 unequal Sides, and 4 unequal Angles.

Admit Figure 12 represent a Field; to measure which draw the Diagonal DB; so
is the Figure divided into two Triangles, which you may measure according to
the last Example, by letting Perpendiculars fall from the Angles A and C, upon
the Diagonal DB, which will be the Base Line ^o each Triangle.

But with more Brevity, you may add the two Perpendiculars together, and
multiply the Sum of them by half the ^a^e, and the Product will be the Area of
the Trapezium.

Suppose the Sum of the two Perpendiculars is 22 Poles, and ^alf the Base is 14
Poles, which multiplied together, the Product is 308, the Area in square Poles;
or 1 Acre, 3 Rods, and 28 Poles.

To measure any irregular Piece of Land.
First, take care that the whole Plot be divided into Trapeziums and Triangles,
according to your own Fancy, and the Nature of the Thing will bear; then
measure those Trapeziums and Triangles, as is before directed, and add the
^^veral Contents together; so will the Sum be the Content (...) that irregular
Figure.

Admit Figure 13 represent a Field to be measured, which (...) divided into one
Trapezium, and two Triangles, as the ^igure directs.

Now to find the Content of this Figure, measure the ^rapezium and Triangles as
before directed, and add them ^^gether as follows.

Trapezium FBCE 234 Triangles ABF 69 Triangles ECD 46
The Area of the Figure ABCDEF, 349 square Poles.

Of a Circle.
Figure the Fourteenth.
A Circle is contained under one Line, called the Circumference or Periphery;
as ABC. All right Lines drawn from the Center E to the Circumference, are
equal, and called Radius's, or half Diameters; and the long Line through the
Center from A to C, is the Diameter.

To divide a Circle into 6 equal Parts, extend the Compasses to half the
Diameter, as from A to the Center E and the Extent will do it.

Half the Semicircle of the Circle, that is, half of the Half of the Circle,
is called a Quadrant, or Quarter.

If the Diameter of a Circle be 7 Inches, or 7 Feet in Length; then is the
Periphery or Compass 22 Inches, or 22 Feet about.

Example 1.

If the Compass of a Circle be 66 Feet, what is the Diameter?

Multiply 66 by 7, and divide the Product by 22, and the Quotient gives the
Diameter.

^

Example 2.

If the Diameter be 21 Inches, what is the Circumference?

The Operation is just the Reverse, viz.

^

If a Globe be 31 Inches 3/7 in Compass, what is the Diameter?

Worked Fractionally thus:

Say 7 times 1 is 7, and 3 the Numerator makes 10, 0 and carry 1; then 7 times
three is 21, and 1 carried is 22: So the Product is 220 the Dividend; which
divide by 22, agreeable to the Proportion before mentioned.

Example of Operation.

^

Example 3.

Contra. If a Circle be 10 Inches Diameter, what is the Circumference?

^

To measure the superficial Content of a Circle, either in ^^ches or Feet.

Rule, Multiply half the Periphery or Compass, by half (...) the Diameter, and
the Product will be the Content.

Example.

Admit a round Table to be 14 Inches Diameter, and 44 ^^tto in Compass; what is
the superficial Content in square ^^ches?

^

Or if the Diameter be squared or multiplied into itself, (...) that Product
multiplied by 11, and the Result thereof ^^vided by 14, gives the same Content.

Example. ^

Figure the Fifteenth.
To measure half a Circle or round Table, viz.

Rule. Square the Semidiameter GD, and that Product multiply by 22, and divide
by 14; so the Answer is 77 square superficial Inches. ^

To measure the Quarter or Quadrant of a Circle.
Rule. Multiply the Line CE into itself, and proceed as before; but multiply
the first Product by the Half of 22, viz. 11

Decimally ought to be thus.

^

The Decimal Work produces ^ equal to half an the same Answer as the other
Inch, and 7/14 or viz. -- half of half an Inch.

By these Methods may a Piece of Timber, that is half round, or a Quarter
round, at the Base or End, be measured; that is, by multiplying the square
Inches at the End by the Inches of the Length.

Solid Measure.
IS that which has Length, Breadth, and Thickness, as Timber, Stone, and such
like, which are measured by the Foot; and herein you are to observe, that a
Foot of Timber or Stone, is accounted a Foot square every Way, in the Form of a
Dye, which has six Sides.

The Rule for working is to multiply the Length and Breadth together, and that
Product by the Depth or Thickness, and the last Product will be the Content in
Cubick Inches; which if Timber or Stone, divide by 1728, (the Cubick Inches in
a solid Foot) and the Quotient gives the Content in solid Feet.

Example.

Admit Figure the 16th to represent a Solid in Form of a Cube; whose Length,
Breadth and Thickness, is 12 Inches; multiply 12 by 12, and the Product is 144,
which multiplied by 12, the Product is 1728, for the Content in Cubick Inches:
Hence it appears that a Cubick Foot is 12 Times more than a Superficial Foot;
so that a Superficial Foot is 144 Inches, and a Cubick Foot 1728 Inches.

The Dimensions of Timber are considered in Breadth, Thickness and Length; the
Breadth and Thickness are commonly called the Square.

Note, The Parts of a Solid Foot, being 1728 Inches, Three Quarters Half A
Quarter Half a Quarter.
of a Foot is 1296 8^4 432 216
Inches.

^0 ^0
Solid Feet of round hewn
Timber is a Tun or Load.

Example.

If a Tree be 16 Feet long, and 18 Inches square, how many solid Feet does it
contain?

^

Example 2.

Suppose there is given a Square Piece of Timber, (...) Bread^h is 2, 25, and
Thickness 1, 64 Feet, and Length ^ Feet, how many solid Feet are contained
therein?

^

Example.

Suppose a Piece of Timber be 15 Inches square; that is, 15 Inches broad, and
15 Inches thick, and 16 Feet, or 192 Inches long; what is the Content of that
Piece of Timber or Stone (or any other thing that is to be measured by Cube or
solid Measure) in solid Feet?

^

So the Answer is 25 Feet of solid Timber in such a Piece, or in such a Stone
of such Dimensions. --

Or if you multiply the Content of the Square by the Length in Feet, and divide
that Product by 144, the Quotient will give the same Content or Answer as
before, Se^ the following Work.

^

A second Example in this, may be after the second Example in Board Measure.
That is, suppose a Piece to be Inches one Quarter Square, and the Length 192
Inche^ what is the Content?

^

Answer, 7 Feet and half, and 108 Cubic Inches.

Decimally.

^

Another Example. Suppose a Piece of Timber to be ^ Inches three Quarters
Square, and 28 Foot long, what is (...) Content?

17 Inches three Quarters multiplied into itself Decimall^ the Product will be
315, 0625; which multiplied by (...) Length 336, the Product will be 105861,
cutting off (...) four Ciphers, and the Answer will be 61 Feet, and 45 remains,
being one Fourth of a Foot, and 21 Inches.

In superficial or flat Measure, having the Breadth of Board, or Piece of Glass
given, to find what Quantity (...) Length it will take to make a Foot square.

Rule. Only make the Breadth in Inches Divisor to 14* the square Inches in a
superficial Foot, and the Quotie^^ will be the Length in Inches that will make
a Foot.

Example.

If a Board be 8 Inches broad, what Length of that (...) (or Piece of Glass)
will make a Foot?

^

Again, If a Board be 16 Inches broad, what Length (...) will make a Foot?

^

This Method is manifestly true, from this Observation; tha^ Board a Foot, or
12 Inches broad, will require a Foo^ (...) 12 Inches in Length, to make it
exactly square, or 14 ^^ches. And this is known without Operation. By this
Me^^^od, may a Table of Board or Glass Measure be proved (...) Likewise in
solid Measure to know what Length of the ^^ece of Timber will make a Foot
solid, you must make the ^^ches squared Divisor to 1728, (the square Inches in
(...) solid) and the Quotient will be the Answer in Inches (...) ^ength, that
will make a Foot solid.

Example.

If a Piece of Timber be 8 Inches square, what Lengt^ (...) it will make a Foot?

^

Here the Square of 8 is 64, etc.

Again, Suppose a Piece be 18 Inches square, what Length (...) make a Foot?
Answer, 5 Inches and one Third.

^

Once more: Admit a Piece of Timber be 2 Feet, 2 Inches (...), i. e. 26 Inches
square, which is, etc.

^

So if a Piece be 10 Inches square, the Answer will be, that 17 Inches and
28/100 of an Inch is required for the Length. And thus may a Table of square
Timber be proved.

In measuring of round Timber, the common Way is to take of the Circumference
for the true Square, but it is erroneous, and gives the Solidity some what less
than the true Content: But the true Way is to multiply half the Diameter by
half the Compass, and then that Product multiply by the Length, which divide by
1728, and the Quotient is the Content. If you cannot come to measure the End of
the Piece, you may know the Diameter ^ by this Proportion, viz. as 22 is to 7,
so is the Compass to the Diameter. Or you may find the Square of a round Piece
of Timber by this Rule, viz. multiply 3182 by the Inches of the Compass, and
cut off 4 Figures to the Right Hand.

Having the Breadth and Depth of a Piece of Timber (...) Stone, to know how
much in Length of it will make a so^^d Foot; multiply one by the other, and let
it be a Divisor to 1728, thus: ^

And thus you may make a Table to serve all Breadths and Depths, by which much
Labor may be saved in multiplyin^ and dividing, and yet measure any Piece of
Timber thereby very exactly.

The usual Way for tapering Timber, is by this Method, viz. take the Dimensions
in the Middle, and multiply that by the Length; which, though somewhat false,
yet, i^ done at several Lengths, as at every 5 or 6 Feet, it will b^ very near*

Digging.
IS measured by the solid Yard of 27 Feet; that is, 3 times 3 is 9, and 3 times
9 is 27; by which are mea^^red Vaults, Cellars, Clay for Bricks, etc. Other
Things ^re measured by the Flore of 324 solid Feet.

Example.

If a Vault or Cellar be dug 9 Feet deep, 4 Feet long, and 3 Feet 9 Inches
broad; what is its Content in solid Yards?

^

Example 2.

How many Yards of Digging will there be in a Vault that 25 F. 4 long, 15 F. 8
broad, and 7 F. deep.

^

Example 3.

There is a Mote that is 648 Feet long, 24 Feet broa^ and 9 Feet deep; how many
Flores?

^

Solid Bodies being frequently painted, it is necessary (...) know how to find
their Superficiality. To find the (...) Content of a Square, or many sided or
round (...) multiply the Sum of the Sides or Circumference by (...) Height in
Feet; and the Product divided by 9, the (...) will be all square Yards.

Of a Globe.
Multiply the Circumference in Feet by itself, and (...) that Product by this
Decimal,0354, and this last (...) will be the Content in Yards.

Note, A solid Yard square of Clay will make about 7 800 Bricks; and the Price
of making is 7 or 8 s. Sterli^^ Thousand, 3 Bags (or Bushels) and half of Lime,
and (...) a Load of Sand, to laying 1000 Bricks.

500 Bricks make a Load. 1000 Plain Tiles make a Load. 25 Bags 1 C. of Lime.
To measure a Pyramid.
IF a Piece of Timber be right-lined, having but one (...) which is square, and
ends in a Point, it is called a Py^^^mid; the solid Content of which is found
by multiplying (...) superficial Content or Area of the Base, by one third
(...) the Length. Or one third Part of the Area of the (...) multiplied by the
whole Length, gives the Content also.

Example.

Suppose Figure the 17th, represent a Pyramid to be measured, whose Breadth at
the Base is 5 Feet, and the Length 15 Feet; what is the Content in solid Feet?

^

To measure a Cone.
IF a Piece of Timber be right-lined, having Length, and only one Base, which
is round, equally decreasing, and ^nds in a Point, it is called a Cone; the
solid Content of which is found, by multiplying the Area of the Base, by ^ne
third Part of the Length; where Note (and likewise in ^he Pyramid) the true
Length is from the Center of the Base (...) the terminating Point.

Admit Figure the 18th, represent a Cone, whose Dia^eter at the Base is 5 Feet,
and the Length 15 Feet; what (...) the solid Content?

^

This Method may serve for tapering Timber, or of any (...) Thing of the Shape
represented in Figures 17 and 18. The next necessary Qualification that I shall
touch upon, (...) introduce a young Man into the Knowledge of Business, is
(...) say something in Relation to the Art.

Of Gauging.
THERE is a near Sort of Kindred or Affinity between the Art of Measuring of
Timber, and that of Gauging or Measuring of Liquors; for both are performed by
cube or solid Measure, and therefore not improper closely to follow one
another: For as often as there are found 172^ solid or cubick Inches in a Piece
of Timber (of what form soever) so many solid Feet is it said to contain. So
likewise in the Art of Gauging, so many Times as 282 (the solid Inches in a
Beer, or Ale Gallon) are found in any Vessel o^ such Liquor, so many Gallons is
such a Vessel said to hold. And so of Wine; but in that the Divisor alters, it
being 231 solid or cubic Inches.

And the Gallon of Dry Measure, contains 271 cubica^ Inches.

Note, Every cubical-Foot in Beer or Ale Measure, co^tains 6 Gallons, and
almost a Pint.

The same in Wine Measure, is 7 Gallons, 2 Quarts, and almost a Pint.

A cubical Foot of dry Measure contains 6 Gallons, and somewhat above half a
Gallon.

For 141 Inches make 2 Quarts of Beer or Ale; 70 Inche^ one Quart, and 35
Inches a Pint.

To find the Content of any Vessel that has the Form (...) a Cube, that is, a
Figure whose Breadth, Depth, an^ Length, are all equal, and is very well
represented by the Shape of a Dye commonly played withal.

Rule. Multiply the Side into itself, and then again tha^ Product by the Side;
which last Product, if for Beer or Ale, divide by 282, the Inches in a Beer or
Ale Gallon; and for Wine, Brandy, etc. by 231, the cubical square Inches
contained in a Wine Gallon.

Example.

Suppose a Cube, whose Side is 79 Inches, I demand the solid Content in Beer
and Wine Gallons?

^

To find the Content of a Parallelopipedon, which is a ^igure contained under 6
Sides, of which the Opposites are ^arallel, and of the Form of Figure the 19th.

Rule. Multiply the Length by the Breadth, and that Pro^uct by the Depth; and
then divide by 282 for Beer or Ale, (...) 231 for Wine. Example

Admit the Length of a Cistern to be 95 Inches; and the ^readth 62 Inches, and
the Depth 23 Inches; what is the ^ontent in Beer and Wine Gallons?

^

To Gauge a Back, or Square Tun.
Example.

Suppose its Length 112 Inches, Breadth 72 Inches, and its Depth 48 Inches;
what is its Content in solid Inches, and also in Beer Gallons?

^

To bring these Gallons into Barrels divide them by 36, the Gallons in a Barrel
of Beer, thus.

^ Answer, 38 Barrels and 4/3^ or ^/9 of a Barrel; and as for the Remainder
168, it i^ something above half (...) Gallon.

To find the Content of any Right Cylinder in Gallons that is, to compute the
Content of any round Tun, Tub etc. whose Diameters at Top and Bottom are equal,
and at Right Angles with its Sides.

Rule. Square the Diameter, which Product multiply al^ways by 11, and divide
the Product by 14, and the Quotient will give the Content of the Tub at one
Inch deep* then multiply the Quotient by the perpendicular Height of the Cask,
and the Product is the Content in solid Inches.

Example.

Let Figure the 20th, represent a round Tub, whose Di^ameter is 72 Inches, and
the Height 56 Inches, what is the Content in Beer Gallons?

^

The aforesaid solid Inches brought into Gallons, make ^08, and 232 solid
Inches remain, something above three Quarters of a Gallon; in all 22 Barrels,
16 Gallons, and ^f Beer.

^o find the Content of any round Tun, or Tub, whose Diameters at top and
Bottom are parallel, but unequal.
Rule. First square the two Diameters, then multiply the ^reater Diameter by
the lesser, and to the Produ^t add the (...) former Squares; multiply the Sum
of these three by 1/^ (...) the Depth, and divide the Product by 359 for Beer
Gal^^ns, or by 294 for Wine Gallons.

Example.

Suppose the Diameter at the Top be 30 Inches, the Dia^^ter at the Bottom 36
Inches, and the Depth 24 Inches, ^^at is the Content in Beer Gallons?

^

To gauge a Butt, Pipe, Hogshead, Barrel or any other close Cask.
In order to perform this difficult Part of Gauging, (...) three following
Dimensions of the proposed Cask must (...) truly taken in Inches, and decimal
Parts of an Inch, viz.

1. The Diameter at the Bung within the Cask.

2. Either of the Head Diameters, supposing them both equal.

3. The Length of the Cask within.

In taking of these Dimensions, it must be carefully ob^served, that the
Bung-hole be in the Middle of the Cas^ and that the Heads of the Cask are equal
and truly circula^ if so, the Distance between the Inside of the Chine, an^ the
Outside of its opposite Staff, will be the Head Diamet^^ within the Cask, very
near.

Having taken the Dimensions, the next Thing is to (...) such a mean Diameter,
as will reduce the proposed Cask to a Cylinder, which may be found by the
following Rules.

Substract the Head Diameter from the Bung Diameter, an^ multiply the
Difference by 0, 7, or by 0, 65, or by 0, 6, or by 0, 55, according as the
Staves are more or less arching add the Product to the Head Diameter, and the
Sum will be the mean Diameter required.

Note, The first of these four Rules, ( viz 0, 7) is commonl^ used among^t
Gaugers for all Sorts of Casks, but there ar^ very few Cask^ that will contain
quite so much as this Rul^ will make it. But if the second and third of these
Rul^ viz. 0, 65 and 0, 6) be duly applied, they will answer very ^ear amongst
the common Sort of English made Casks; and the ^ourth Rule ( viz. 0* 55) will
come pretty near the Truth in computing the Contents of Casks whose Staves are
almost strait betwixt the Head and the Bung, viz. such as Wine Pipes, etc.
Having found the mean Diameter, the Content of the Cask may be computed by
either of the two following Rules.

Rule 1. Multiply the Square of the mean Diameter by the Length of the Cask,
and divide the Product by 359 for Beer Gallons, or by 294 for Wine Gallons. Or
thus,

Rule 2. Multiply the Square of the mean Diameter by 11, and divide the Product
by 14; then multiply the Quotient by the Length of the Cask, and divide the
Product by 282, for Beer Gallons; or by 231 for Wine Gallons.

Example.

Admit Figure 20, represent a Hogshead to be gauged, whose Bung Diameter is 31,
5, Head Diameter 24, 5 and its Length 42 Inches, what is the Content in Beer
and Wine Gallons.

^

Or thus, by the second Rule.

^

To find the Quantity of Liquor remaining in a spheroidical Cask standing on
its Head.
From the Area of the Bung Diameter, substract the Area of the Head Diameter,
and multiply the Remainder by the Square of the Difference between the wet
Inches and the Semi-length, and this Product divide by the triple Square o^ the
half Length, and substract the Quotient from the Are^ of the Bung Diameter;
then multiply the Remainder by the Difference between the wet Inches and the
Semi-length, and the Product will be how much Liquor is contained in the Vessel
above, or under its half Content,

Example.

Suppose the Bung 40, 8 the Heads 35, 3 the Length 61, 8 the Wet Inches 41, 9
what is the Content in Beer Gallons?

^

131, 25 the half Content of the Vessel. 50, 45 the Liquor qt. above the half
Content. 181, 70 the Quantity of Liquor qt. in the Vessel.
^o gauge any thing that has the Shape of a wooden Hand-Bowl, as the Bottom of
a round Copper, etc,

Admit the Bowl to be full of Water; the first Thing is (...) measure the
Surface of the Water; that is done by multi^^ying half the Circumference by
half the Diameter, and (...) gives the Content in superficial square Inches.
Then and the Depth of the Water in different Places; then add those Different
Depths together, and divide the Total by the Number of Depths that you take,
and the Quotient gives ^he mean Depth: When you have found the mean Depth,
multiply it by the Number of Inches that you found on the Surface of the Water,
and the Product gives the solid Square Inches, which reduce to Gallons, as
taught before.

Example.

Suppose the Circumference be 120 Inches, the half of which is 60 Inches, and
the Diameter admit to be 60 Inches, the half of which is 30 Inches; and suppose
the several Depths to be 7, 8, 9 and 10, which put together make 34 Inches;
which divide by 4, the Number of Depths quotes the mean Depth, viz. 8 ^

Some Uses of the Square and Cube Roots.
Rule. THE Root of the Product of any given Number, is the mean Proportional
sought; so the mean Proportional between 16 and 64, will be 32; this is of good
Use in finding the Side of a Square equal to any Parallelogram, Rhombus,
Rhomboides, Triangle, or regular Polygon.

e. To find the Side of a Square equal to the Area of a given Superficies.
Rule. The square Root of the Content of any given Superficies is the Side of
the Square. -- So if the Content of a given Circle be 160, the Side of the
Square equal will be 12 32/4^, or in Decimals 12, 6411.

3. The Area of a Circle being given, to find the Periphery.
Rule. Say as 113 to 1420, or 1 to 12, 56637; so is the Area to the Square of
the Periphery -- So if the Area of a Circle be 160, the Periphery will be found
to be 44, 84.

4. The Area of a Circle being given, to find the Diameter.
Rule, As 355 to 452, or as 1 to 1, 273239, so is the Area to the Square of the
Diameter.

5. Any two Sides of a Right Angl^d Triangle being ^iven, to find the third
Side.
In this useful Problem lies hid a great Part of the Mathematics; it being
asserted and proved, that the Square of ^he Hypothenuse, or longest Side of a
Right Angled Triangle, (...) equal to the Sum of the Squares of the Base and
Perpen^icular, that is, the other two Sides.

Example by the Adjacent Figure.

Let the Base or Ground BA represent the Breadth of a Moat or Ditch, and the
Perpendicular BC represent the Height of a Castle, Tower, or City ^all; and the
Hypothenuse, or longest Side, represent the ^ength of a Scaling Ladder.

In this Figure, the Base AB is supposed to contain 40 ^ards; and the
Perpendicular, or Height of the Tower or ^all, 30 Yards; What length will the
Hypothenuse BC, (...) the Scaling Ladder, be?

Rule. The Square Root of the Sum of the Squares of the (...) and
perpendicular, is the Leng^h of the Hypothenuse, (...) per Work.

^

And if the Length of the Base, or Breadth of the Ditch, ^ere required; then
the Square Root of the Difference of the ^quares of the Hypothenuse and
Perpendicular is the Length (...) the Base, or Breadth of the Ditch or Moat.
Example (...) Work.

^

And if the Height of the Tower or Perpendicular B were required; then the
Square Root of the Difference (...) the Distance of the Square of the
Hypothenuse and Base, the Height of the Perpendicular BC, representing a (...)
a Wall, a Steeple, or any thing else.

Again, Any Number of Men given to be formed into Spuare Battalia, to find the
Number of Rank and File.

Rule. The Square Root of the Number of Men give^ will be the Number of Men to
be placed in Rank and File.

Example. Admit an Army of 32400 Men were to (...) formed into a Square
Battalia; the square Root of 32400 (...) be found 180; and so many Men must be
placed in (...) and also in File.

The Uses of the Cube Root are to find out a Proportion between like Solids, as
Globes, Cylinders, Cubes, etc.

Example.

Suppose a Bullet of 8 Inches Diameter weigh 72 Pound^ what will a Bullet weigh
whose Diameter is 4 Inches?

Rule. Since like Solids are in triple Proportion to the Sides, Diameters,
Lines, etc. it holds; as the Cube of the Diameter given is to the Weight
thereof, so is the Cube o^ the Diameter sought to the Weight thereof; as per
Work, ^

Example 2.

If a Ship of 100 Tons be 44 Feet long at the Keel, of what Length must the
Keel be of a Ship that carries 220 Tons?

Say, as 100 is to the Cube of 44, that is, 85184; so is 120 to 187404, 8;
whose Cube Root is 57, 225 the Length of the Keel sought.

Example 3.

There is a Cubical Vessel whose Side is 12 Inhces, and it is required to find
the Side of a Vessel that holds three times as much. Here the Cube of 12 is
1728, which multiplied by ^ and the Cube Root of which is 17, 306 the Answer
required, or Side sought.

An easy Rule to find the Length of the Masts of a Ship, viz.

Two Thirds of the Length of the Keel, and the Breadth of the Beam, is the
Length of the Main mast; and the Rule is therefore, to multiply the Length of
the Keel by 2, and to divide the Product by 5, and then to the Quotient add the
Breadth of the Beam, and the Total is the Length of the Mainmast.

Example.

Suppose a Ship to be 108 Feet by the Keel, and 40 Feet by the Beam, what is
the Length of her Main mast?

^

Answer, The Length of her Mainmast is 112 Feet as in the Work.

Again.

Admit a Ship to be 84 Feet by the Keel, and 31 Feet by the Beam, what is the
Length of her Mainmast?

^

If you divide first by 3, and then multiply the Quotient by 2, it gives the
two Thirds of any Thing as well as the other Way.

Another Way to find the Length and Thickness of Masts in Yards, viz.
The Way to find the Length of the Main Mast, is to add the Breadth of the
Beam, and the Depth of the Hold together, and divide the Total by 1, 5 and the
Quotient will be the Length of the Mainmast in Yards.

Example.

Admit a Ship whose Keel in Length is 73 Feet, and the Breadth of the Beam 28,
5 Feet, and the Depth of the Hold 12 Feet, what is the Length of the Mainmast?

^

Answer, 27 Yards, or 81 Feet, as per Work.

Or if, instead of Dividing, you multiply by this Mul^^plier, viz.,6666 and
point off the Decimals, you will have the same Answer.

^ Here the Answer is 26 Yards and 99/100 of a Yard, not wanting one Second to
make it 27 Yards, as before.

I here multiply the under by the upper Number to save both Figures and Room.

To find the Thickness of the Mast, having the Length* say, by the Rule of
Proportion (or Rule of Three) If 8^ Feet long require 28 Inches thick, what 81
Feet long? (...) in the following Work.

^

By Trigonometry, or the Doctrine of Triangles, are a Multitude of Questions
solved, relating to Sailing on the Seas; to give one Instance. Suppose two
Ships set Sail at one time, from one Place, the one sailing directly East 48
Leagues, as from C to B; and the other directly North, as from C to A, 36
Leagues; the Question is, how many Leagues are they distant or asunder one from
the other? ^ which two Numbers added, give for Total the square Root of which
is 60; and so many Leagues are the two Ships asunder or distant one from the
other.

Here the Distance of each Ship's Sailing is squared, and their Squares added
together, and the Total is 3600; the square Root of which is 60, and the Answer
to the Question, as in the Work.

And being here speaking something relating to Sea Affairs, it may not be
improper to say something concerning the Mariner's Compass.

Before the Invention of this excellent and most useful Instrument, it was
usual in long Voyages to sail by, or keep along the Coast, or at least to have
it in Sight; as is manifest and plainly evident, by the Voyages of St. Paul,
Acts xx.12; and 27; which Course made their Voyages long, and very dangerous,
by being so near the Shore. But now, by the Help of a Needle touched by the
Magnet or Loadstone, which by a wonderful and hidden Quality, inclines its
Point always Northerly, the ingenious Mariner is directed in his proper Course
of Sailing, through the vast Ocean, and unfathomable Depths, to his intended
Port* And if the Wind is favorable, can sail near 333 League^ or 1000 Miles in
a Week, though in the darkest Weather, (...) darkest Night, when neither Land,
Moon, nor Stars, are to be seen; which before, were the only Guide; and, (...)
not seen, the Sailors were at great Loss, and exposed to the most imminent
Danger.

Behold the Figure or Representation of the said Compass, with the Cardinal and
other Winds that follows.



The Description.
1 st, The Cardinal Points are, the North, South, East (...) West Points of the
Horizon. The Needle in the (...) points with its principal End to the
Flower-de-luce, (...) shows its Direction Northerly: And the said Flower-de
(...) is also placed in Maps to the same intended Purpose.

2 dly, The Letters N by E on the Right of the said ^lower-de-luce, signifies,
and is to be read North by East; and the next after it NNE* that is, North
North East; and the next NE by N. to be read North East by North; (...) so
round the Circumference, which Mariners usually h^ve by Heart, particularly the
Pilot, who guides the Ship ^ccordingly; and sometimes he is helped by the Sight
of ^he North Pole Star when on this Side the Equator; and by ^he South Pole, on
the other Side.

The next Thing I shall proceed to, is to give the Sense and Meaning of some
few Terms used in Dialing, Geogra^hy, etc.

A small Representation of the Globe.


The Poles of the Equinoctial (commonly called the Poles (...) the World) are
two fixed Points in the Heavens, op^osite one to the other, one pointing to the
North, which therefore called the North, or Artic Pole, marked with (...)
Letters N. P. and the other pointing Southward, and ^^erefore is called the
South, or Antartic Pole, marked with (...) P.

The Axis of the World, is a Line imagined to pass through the Center of the
Earth from one Pole to the other, as the Line N. P. S. P.

The Equinoctial in the Heavens, or Equator on the Earth, is an imaginary great
Circle of the Sphere, which divides it into two equal Parts, to which the Sun
apparently comes the 10th of March and 12th of September, and then makes equal
Day and Night; it is noted by the Letters AE. Q.

The Ecliptic is a great Circle intersecting the Equinoctial in two opposite
Points, the Beginning of Aries, and the Beginning of Libra, and makes an Angle
therewith of 23 Degrees. 29 Min. represented by the Line: It is divided into 12
equal Parts called Signs, each containing 30 Degrees. which are as follow, Aries
Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo
called Northern Signs. Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricornus Aquarius Pisces
called Southern Sign^.

The Zodiac is a Zone or Gird^^, having about 9 De^rees in Breadth on each
Side of the Ecliptic, and limits ^he Latitudes of the Planets in their
Revolutions.

The Meridian, from Meridies, Noon or Mid day, is a ^ircle passing through the
Poles of the World, exactly in ^he Middle between the East and West; to which
when the ^un comes every Day it is Noon. The Stars are also sai^ ^o be South,
when they are upon the Meridian.

The Tropicks are two Circles parallel to the Equinoctial, and 23 Degrees 29
Min. distant therefrom, being the Bound^ of the Sun's greatest Declination
North and South. The North Tropic is marked with C, called the Tropic of
Cancer; and the South Tropic with B, called the Tropic of Capricorn.

The Zenith or Vertex is an imaginary Point in the Heavens directly over our
Heads, as Z.

The Nadir is the Point opposite to the Zenith, and directly under our Feet, as
N.

The Horizon is a great Circle 90 Degrees. distant from the Zenith and Nadir, which
encompasses the Earth exactly in the Middle, and appears to every One standing
in an open Plain, to divide the visible from the invisible Part of the Heavens.
It determines the Rising and Setting of the Sun* Moon, and Stars, in any
particular Latitude; as H. O.

The Latitude in Geography, or on the Earth, is the Height of the Pole of the
World above the Horizon, which is always equal to the Arch of the Meridian
between the Zenith and Equinoctial.

Longitude on the Earth, is an Arch of the Equator, contained between the
Meridian of the Place where the Longitude is assigned to begin, and the
Meridian of any other Place, and is accounted Easterly and Westerly.

Every Circle circumscribing the Earth, or Terrestrial Globe, is supposed to be
divided into 360 equal Parts, called Degrees; each of which is accounted 60
Miles; and if you multiply 90 the Quadrant or Quarter of the Globe, by 60, the
Product will be 5400, which multiplied by 4, gives 21600 Miles for the
Circumference of the Earth and Sea.

The next Thing I shall proceed to, is to say something in relation to the Art
of making Dials: But it may, and is very proper, to describe and speak of the
Use of a very necessary Instrument called a Quadrant, the Shape of which is
here represented.



This Quadrant, or Quarter of a Circle, is variously useful, on sundry
Accounts, viz. to take Heighths and Distances, whether accessible or
inaccessible; to find the Hour of the Day, etc.

Its Description.
The outward Arch is divided into 90 Parts or Degrees, (being the fourth Part
of the Circle of the Sphere) an^ figured from 10, 20, etc. to 90; above which
Figures, are Letters signifying the 12 Calender Months of the Year, as J. for
January, F. for February, etc. And again, over those Letters for the Months are
Lines to know the Hour of the Day; And upon the Line CD, are Sights of thin
Brass to be spied through, or for the Sun to shine through, from one to the
other. Lastly, in the Middle, or Point of the Quadrant, viz. at A, is a Line or
Thread of Silk fixed through a Hole, with a Plummet of Lead at the End of it
and also a small Bead in the Middle.

Some of the many Uses of this Instrument are as follow*

Of Heighths.
Suppose you would know the Height of a Steeple, Tower, or Tree; hold up the
Quadrant, and view through the Sights the Top of the Steeple, Tower or Tree,
and then step forwards or backwards, till you find the Plummet hang at Liberty
just at 45 Degrees, that is, just in the Middle of the Quadrant; then is the
Height of the Steeple, Tower, or Tree, equal to the Distance of your
Standing-place from the Bottom of the Steeple, adding for the Height that you
hold the Quadrant from the Ground.

If the Plummet intersect one Quarter of the Quadrant, or 22 Degrees and a
Half, then twice the Distance of your Standing is the Height; and if three
Quarters of the Quadrant, or 67 Degrees and a Half, then Half the Distance of
your Standing is the Height.

To find the Hour of the Day.
Lay the Thread just upon the Day of the Month, then hold it till you slip the
small Bead or Pins-head to rest on one of the 12 a Clock Lines; then le^ the
Sun shine from the Sight at C to the other at D, the Plummet hanging at
Liberty, the Bead will rest on the Hour Line of the Day.

To find the Latitude of a Place.
Hold up the Quadrant, and through the Sights thereof (or along the Edge) spy (in
a clear Star light Night) the North Pole Star; the Plummet hanging at Liberty,
the Thread ^ill rest on the Degrees of Latitude of the Place you be in, (...)
where you take your Observation. If at London, you ^ill find it 51 Degrees and
32 Minutes. If at Bristol, 51 Degrees 27 Minutes. If at York, 53 Degrees 58
Minutes; and if at Berwick, 55 Degrees 54 Minutes, etc.

When it is said that such a Kingdom, Country, City, Town, or Place, lies from
40 to 50 Degrees North Latitude, it is to be understood, that it lies on the
North Side of the Tropic of Cancer, or North Boundary of the Sun toward
England, to which the Sun comes about the 10th or 11th of June, and makes our
Days the longest. And about the 10th or 11th Day of December, the Sun enters
the Tropic of Capricorn, its South Boundary, and is then the ^arthest from us,
and makes our Days the shortest.

Of Dialling.
Dialling is a very ancient Art, even as old as the Time of King Hezekiah,
where mention is made of the Dial of Ahaz, in the 2d Book of Kings, Chap. xx.
Verse 11.

The Gnomon or Substile of a Post or Horizontal Dial, should point directly
South, and its Back will be then di^ectly North. The South may be truly known
by a good Watch or Clock, just at Noon; for then the Sun is always ^t the
Meridian; and makes just 12 o'Clock; so that know^ng the South, it will not be
difficult to find the North, it ^eing its Opposite.

To fix a Dial North and South.
Fasten your Board on the Top of a Post, and then with your Compasses make 4,
or 5, or 6 Circles, one within ^he other, from the Center or Middle, where
place a large (...) perpendicular or upright, and nicely observe when the ^un
shines in the Forenoon, on which Circle the Head of ^he Pin shadoweth; then
there make a Mark; and do the ^ame in the Afternoon, when the Shade of the
Pin's Head ^omes on the same Circle; and from the Midway of the ^wo Marks,
draw a Line to the Center, on which place ^our Meridian or 12 o'Clock Line; so
will the Post Dial print North and South.

By the Meridian Line, you may also know when the Moon, or a Star of Magnitude,
comes to the South; which when they do, they are always at the highest, whether
by Night or Day.

But to proceed to Dialling, the following Figure 1 presents an Horizontal
Dial, described for the Latitu^^ of Philadelphia, 40 degrees. 00m. North.



First, Draw the Meridian or 12 of Clock Line BA* and cross the same with the
Line DE, at right Angles the Point A, which must be the Center of your Dial,
(...) the Line DE, is the 6 of Clock Line; then take (...) your Compasses 60
Degrees from a Line of Chords, (...) with that Extent, setting one Foot in the
Center at A, (...) the other describe the Circle DO, which done, take from the
same Line of Chords, all the Hour-Arches in the f^^^lowing Table; and placing
one Foot of your Compasses in (where the Circle crosses the Meridian) with the
other, off the Hour Arches both Ways upon the Circle DO^

Latitude 40 Degrees North.
Hours. Hour. Forenoon. Afternoon. Arches D.M. 11 1 9 46 10 2 20 22 9 3 32 44 8
4 48 4 7 5 67 22

Against 11 and 1, is 9 Degrees and 46 Minutes, (...) with your Compass from
the Line of Chords, and set^^^g one Foot in the 12 of Clock Line at O, with the
other ^ake a Mark in the Circle both Ways; then draw straight Lines from the
Center A, crossing the Circle in those two ^arks, and you will have the true
Hour Lines of 11 o'Clock the Forenoon, and one in the Afternoon. Then to draw
(...) Hour Lines of 10 and 2 of Clock, look in the Table (...) 10 and 2 Hours,
against which you will find 20 De^^ees and 22 Minutes, which take from the Line
of Chords, (...) mark as the other from the 12 of Clock Line both ^ays on the
Circle. The same is to be done for 9 and 3 ^^Clock; and also for 8 and 4 of
Clock; and the like for and 5 of Clock.

Note, For 5 o'Clock in the Morning, and 7 in the Af^^rnoon, which are below
the 6 of Clock Line, set off the (...) Distance as 5 and 7 above it.

Lastly, For the Height of the Gnomon or Style, take (...) the Scale of Chords
the Poles Elevation, which at ^^iladelphia is 40 Degrees, and set that Distance
from O^P on the Circle, then draw the dotted Line APH, which (...) represent
the upper Edge or Height of the Style, to be (...) over the 12 of Clock Line,
and so your Dial is (...).

Of Upright Planes.
THOSE Planes are said to be Erect or Upright which stand perpendicular to the
Horizon of the Place, ^^ose upper Part points to the Zenith, and their lower
(...) to the Nadir; and such are the Walls of Houses, (...), Steeples, etc.
against which Dials are commonly (...).

Of Upright or Erect Planes, there are two Sorts, viz. ^^^ect and Declining.

How to d^aw the Hour Lines on a Direct South Plane, in (...) latitude of 40
Degrees, as described in the following presentation.



First, draw the Meridian or 12 o'Clock Line AB, (...) cross it with the Line
DE, for the 6 o'Clock-Line, (...) with your Compasses take 60 Degrees from a
Scale Chords, and placing one Foot at A, (where the 6 of(...) Line crosses the
Meridian) with the other draw the (...) Circle DO.

Next for the Hour-Arches, you must take them (...) the following Table, and
project them into the Dial, (...) the same Manner as in the Horizontal, only in
this (...) must insert but 12 Hours.

Latitude 40 Degrees North.
Hours. Hour. Forenoon. Afternoon. Arches D. M. 11 1 11 28 10 2 23 51 9 3 52 33
8 4 37 00 7 5 19 17

Lastly, for the Height of the Style* take from the Scale of Chords 50 Degrees
(the Compliment of the Poles Elevation at Philad^^^hia) and setting that
Distance from O to P, on the Semicircle, draw the dotted Line APH, which shall
represent the Height of the Style as in the Figure.

In making this Dial, you make two Dials; for the Erect Direct North Dial, is
but the Backside of the South; for as this beholds the South Part of the
Meridian; so the other faceth the North Part of the Meridian; and as the
Meridian Line in the South Dial shows when it is 12 a Clock at Noon, so the
Backside thereof, viz. the North-side, represents the Hour Line at 12 a Clock
at Midnight, and therefore not expressed, nor the Hour Lines of 8, 9, 10, 11 at
Night, or of 1, 2, 3, or 4 in the Morning, the Sun being never seen by us above
the Horizon at those Hours* So that the North Dial is capable of only receiving
the Hours of 5, 6, and 7 in the Morning, and 5, 6, and 7 in the Afternoon, and
(in this Latitude) not all of them neither; for (...) shines not in this Plane
at 8 a Clock in the Morning, nor (...) 4 in the Afternoon.

An Erect Direct North Dial.


To draw Hour-line^ on an Erect Direct East or West Plane -- Hour Lines in
these Dials must be parallel to one another, and the Dial not have any Center,
but drawn as follows.

An East Direct Dial, in Latitude 40 Degrees.


Let ABCD be the Dial Plane, on which is to be draw^ a Direct East Dial, upon
the Point D, if an East Dial; an^ on the Point C, if a West. With the Radius
(or 60 Degree^^ of the Line of Chords, describe the obscure Arch OF; the^ from
your Chords take 50 Degrees, the Compliment of the Latitude of the Place, and
set them from E to F, and dra^ the Line DF quite through the Plane; then that
you may pro^portion the Style to the Plane, so that you may bring on (...) the
Hours from Sunrising to 11 a Clock, assume two Poin^^ in the Line FD, one
toward the End D (as the Point G for the Hour Line of 11, and another at H,
for the Hou^ Line of 6; and through the Points G and H, draw the Lines 1^ G 11,
and 6 H 6, then set one Foot of the Compasses at (...) (opened to 60 Degrees)
and describe the obscure Arch I^ from your Scale of Chords take 15 Degrees, and
set the^ from I to K, and draw the Line GK, extending it to the a Clock Line in
the Point L; so shall LH be of the Heigh^ of the Perpendicular Style
proportioned to this Plane.

For the drawing of the Hour Lines, set one Foot of the Compasses (opened to 60
Degrees of the Chords) in L, and with the other describe the Arc^ MN, between
the Hour-line (...) and the Line GL; which divide into five equal Parts in the
Points and a Ruler laid from the Point I to each of these Points etc. will cut
the Equinoctial Line HI in the Points * * * * *; through which Points draw Lines
parallel to 6 H 6, as the Lines 7 * 7, 8 * 8, etc. as may be seen in the Figure.

And thus you have made two Dials, viz. a West Dial as well as an East; only
the Arch OF, through which the Equinoctial passes in the East Dial, is drawn
on the Right Hand of the Plane; but in the West it must be drawn on the Left;
and the Hour Lines 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 in the Forenoon, on the East Dial,
must be 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 in the Afternoon, upon the West Dial, as in the
Figure.

An Erect and Direct West-Dial.


The Style of the East or West-Dials, may be either a ^^reight Pin of the just
Length of the Line HO in the other ^igure, which is equal to HL in the
East-Dial fixed in the ^oint H, on the Hour Line of 6, and exactly
perpendicular (...) the Plane, showing the Hours by the Shadow of the Apex,
(...) very near the Top thereof: Or it may be a Plate of Brass (...) the same
Breadth with the Distance of the Hour Lines of 6 and 3; which Plate must be set
perpendicular upon the Hour Line of 6, and so it will show the Hour by the
Shadow of the upper Edge thereof, as in the foregoing West Dial.

An easy Way how to fix a Dial North and South.
Fix a square Piece of Board like a Trencher on the Top of a Post, and with
your Compasses draw 4, 5 or 6 Circles, one within another from the Center; in
which Center fix a large Pin perpendicularly, and when the Sun shines in the
Forenoon, note which Circle the Pin's Head shadeth, and there make a Mark: Do
so in the Afternoon, when the Shadow of the Pin's Head comes on the same Line;
and from the Midway of those two Marks, draw a Line to the Center; upon which
Line lay your 12 a Clock or Meridian line of your Post Dial, because it
directly points North and South. Thus by this plain Way, without any other
Instrument, find the Situation of your Dwelling, whether full North or South,
or whether it declines East or West, etc.

Of Beautifying and Coloring Dials.
FIRST, the Boards are to be brushed over with Linseed Oil, thinly ground with
Spanish Brown, done over three or four times (drying between each time) a
little thicker each time with the Color; and this is called Priming.

To make the Fat Oil for Dials.
Boil Red Lead, and Linseed Oil, and a little Litherage (...) Gold (about a
Pennyworth) together, till almost as thick (...) Syrup; and when cold, and well
settled, pour the clearest into a Bottle or Bladder for Use.

The Gold Size for Dials.
Mix fine ground yellow Oker with the aforesaid fat Oil to such a Consistency,
as when used, it may settle smooth of itself.

A Mixture for Hour Lines.
Grind Vermilion or Lamp-Black with the fat Oil.

To draw Golden Letters or Figures for the Hours.
First draw them with a Pencil dipped in the Gold Size before mentioned* which
when so dry as just to stick to your Fingers, then with a smooth-edg'd
Penknife shape your Leaf-Gold to your Mind; take it up with a Piece of Cotton
Cloth fixed to the End of a Stick, and lay it on the Size* pressing it down with
the same Cotton, and when dry, brus^ off the loose Gold with a Feather, and
smooth the rough Edges of the Letters with a Pencil dipped in red or black
Color.

Of the Dial Plane.
Let the Board be of the best seasoned, finest, clearest Oak, one, two or more
Feet square, and about three Inches thick. Take two Boards, and get them planed
on both Sides, and then laid in the Sunshine, or near a moderate Fire 2 or 3
Days together; then plane them again, and fix them with good Joints; and fasten
them in gluing with wooden Pegs, as I have seen Coopers fix their Pieces of
Heading for their Casks; and when thus glued and dried, plane them again, and
then fasten them, by nailing two small Plates of Iron or Tin on the Back. If
you cannot get seasoned Wood, but green, then boil it about an Hour in Water,
to make it tough, and keep it from warping. In the general, Wood is accounted
better than Stone, because it keeps the Coloring more stanch or firm.

Before you color your Dial-plate or Board, fix your Iron Style, and having
marked your Hour Lines with Ink, and fastened a Nail at the End of each
Hour-line, that the Head of each Nail may shadow or direct you to the Center
when it is colored; and as it may happen that Golden Letters or Figures may
decay in a few Years, you may on that Account make them with White-lead Paint,
pointed with Red in a Black Margin. -- When your Dial is finished, and dry, dip
a Feather in your Oil, and anoint it thinly; for the finer you mix or grind the
Coloring with the Oil, the more beautiful it appears, though not so lasting.

These Hints of Coloring Dials, puts me in mind of some other necessary
Touches, relating to sundry Mixtures (...) Colors and dying of Stuffs, etc.
collected from Mr. Salm^n'^ Polygraphy.

Of Colors and Dying.
Whites, are Ceruse, Flake-white, and White-lead.

Blacks, are Lampblack, burnt Cherry-stones, and old Ivory burnt

Reds, are Red-lead, Vermilion, Red Oker, and Indian Lake.

Greens, are Verdigrease, Verditer, and Sap-green, made of the Juice of
Buckthorn Berries.

Yellows, are Saffron, yellow Pink, and Gambogia.

Brown, is Umber burnt.

Gold Color, is Orpiment.

Again, Verdigrease, with a little Sap-green, makes a good and a right Green.

Blues, are Ultamarine, Smalt, Indigo, and Blue Bice.

Of mixing Colors.
Colors are mixed by being ground on a Stone with fair Water, severally, and
dried and kept in Paper Bags for Use; except Lamp-black, Saffron, Smalt,
Gambogia, and Sap-green.

Blue; to compound, temper a little Indigo and Smalt with Oil.

A light Blue; mix Smalt and White-lead together.

Red Color, mix Lamp-black, and White-lead together on a Marble.

A Fox Color, is Umber burnt.

Gold Color, is Orpiment mixed with fat Oil, by a Knife on an Earthen Plate, or
Gally-Tile rather.

To hinder Colors from cracking, put Oil of Walnuts to them.

Yellow Color; beat Saffron to Powder, and steep it in Vinegar. -- Or take the
Yellow Chives in white Lillies and Gum Water mixed for Writing.

Red; Vermilion with Gum-Water mixed for Writing.

Golden Letters; to write, mix Vermilion and Gum-Armonaick with Yolks of Eggs.

Of Dying Wool, Stuffs, etc.
To die Blue, Take Woad 1 Pound, and mix it with 4 Pints of boiling Water, and
dip Whites in it 24 Hours.

To die Red of a clear Color, take 60 Pints of Water wherein Brann has been
steeped 24 Hours, and when strained, dissolve 2 Pound of Allom, and 1 Pound of
Tartar; in which Water boil what you have to dye for 2 Hours; then take it out,
and boil it in half as much fresh Water made of Brann, viz. 30 Pints; to which
add Madder 3 Pound, and so perfect the Color with moderate Warmth* without
Boiling.

To die Green, First make a Yellow by the Direction un^derneath; then take 60
Pints of Water wherein Brann hat^ been so^ked, as aforesaid, then strain it,
let 3 Pound (...) ^llom be dissolved in it, and then boil what you have to dy^

To dye Yellow, Take Woad 2 Pound, of the said Water of Brann, and boil till
the Color is good.

And if you would have the said Yellow to be Green, put the Stuff into the
aforesaid Blue Lie.

To dye a Sad Color, add Logwood to the Black Dye before mentioned.

To dye Linen or Thread, etc. like Red: Take Powder of Brazil and Vermilion, of
each 1 Ounce, boiled in Allom-water.

To dye Linen or Thread Yellow; dissolve Gambogia in Allom Water, etc.

To stain Skins blue; Boil Eldern Berries, and with the Liquor brush over the
Skins, and wring them; then boil the Berries in Allom-water, and wet them twice
over.

A Hint of Generals, or Things proper to be known and remembered on proper
Occasions.
A Ream of Paper 20 Quires.

A Quire of Paper, 24 or 25 Sheets.

A Bale of Paper, 10 Reams.

A Roll of Parchment, 5 Dozen, or 60 Skins.

A Dicker of Hides, 10 Skins.

Ditto of Gloves, 10 Dozen Pair.

A Last of Hides, 20 Dickers.

A Load of Timber unhewed, 40 Feet.

A Chaldron of Coals, 36 Bushels.

A Hogshead of Wine, 63 Gallons.

Ditto of Beer, 54 Gallons.

A Barrel of Beer, 36 Gallons.

Ditto of Ale, 32 Gallons.

A Gross, 144, or 12 Dozen.

A Weigh of Cheese 256 Pounds.

Days in a Year, 365. Weeks, 52, and Hours, 8766.

Pence in a Pound 240, Farthings 960.

An Acre of Land, 160 Square Poles or Perches.

A Last of Corn or Rape-seed, 10 Quarters.

Ditto of Pot Ashes, Cod-fish, White herrings, Meal, Pitch* and Tar, 12 Barrels.

Ditto of Flax and Feathers 17 C. of Gunpowder 24 Barrels, or 2400 lb. of Wool
4368 lb.

A Tun of Wine, 252 Gallons, Oil of Greenland, 252 Gallons; and sweet Oil of
Genoa, 236 Ga^lons.

A Tun in Weight, 20 C. of Iron, etc. but of Lead there is but 19 C. and a
Half, called a Fodder or Fother.

A Todd of Wool, 28 Pounds.

A Pack of ditto, 364 Pounds.

A Load of Bricks 500; and of Plain-Tiles, 1000.

A Stone of Fish, 8 lb. and of Wool 14 lb. the same for Horseman's Weight, and
also Hay; but Pepper, Cinnamon, and Allom, have but 13 lb. to the Stone.

Ditto of Glass, 5 Pounds; and a Seam of ditto, 24 Stone.

A Truss of Hay, 56 Pounds, and a Load of ditto, 39 Trusses.

Note, New Hay in June and August ought to be 60 Pounds to the Truss; as per
Statute of 2 of William an^ Mary, 1693.

A Cade of Red Herrings, 500; and of Sprats, 1000.

Iron and Shot, 14 lb. to the Stone.

Barrels of sundry Commodities.
Anchovies, 30lb. A double Barrel, 60lb: Nuts or Apples, 3 Bushels. Pot-Ash or
Barrilla, 200lb. White or Black Plates, 300. Candles 10 doz. lb. Salmon or
Eels, 42 Gall. Figs, 3 qrs. 14lb. to 2 C. Raisins, 1 C. with. Oil, 31 Gallons and
Half. Spanish Tobacco, 2 C. to 3 C. Gun Powder, 1 C. with. Soap, 240lb. Butter,
224lb. Herrings, 32 Gallons.
Things in Wholesale Trade, bought and sold by the Thousand.
Cuttle Bones. Oranges and Lemmons. Chair Nails. Tacks and Tenter-Hooks.
Pomgranates and Tazels. Goose Quills and Thimbles. Pins and small Needles, by
the 1000 Dozen. Bricks. Clinkers, or Flanders Tiles Billets and Leaves of Horn
Barrel Hoop^. Squirrel Skins. Slat and Hilling Stones.
Things sold and bought at Six Score to the Hundred.
Bauks and Barlings, Barrel and Pipe Boards. Bomspars and Bow-staves. Canspars
and Caprevans. Herrings and Deal Boards. Nails, Eggs, and Cod-fish, Cole, Ling,
and new Land-fish, Stock Fish of all Sorts. Else of Canvas, and most Foreign
Linnens. And Hhd Staves.
Of Money.
THE Current Coin of England, is made either (...) Copper, Silver, or Gold. Of
Copper is made the Farthings and Halfpence. Of Silver, the Pennies,
Two-pences, Three pences, Groats, Six-pences, Shillings, Half crowns, and
Crowns: But there is very little Silver coined below the Sixpence. Of Gold is
made the Half-Guinea, the Guinea, and the 5 Guinea Piece: Besides, there are
Foreign Pieces of Gold, that pass, though with some Scruple, as the Portuguese
Moidore, at 27 s. and the Milled or French Pistole at 18 s. There are also some
few ancient Pieces of Gold of a pale Color, as being alloyed with Silver, and
therefore may be reckoned the best, and sometimes c^lled Angel or Crown Gold;
whereas the old Gold or Broad Pieces are mostly alloy'd with Copper, which
makes them of a reddish Color.

Imaginary Money.
We appropriate several Names to Money, of which there is no Coin; as, s. d.
The Pound of 20 0 The Mark 13 4 The Noble, or half Mark 06 8 The Angel, or 10 0

In England and its Colonies, Accounts are kept in Pounds, Shillings, and
Pence; and their Marks are derived from their Names in Latin, viz. l. for
Librae or Pounds, s. for Solidi or Shillings, d. for Denarii or Pence, qr. for
Quadrantes or Farthings, 4 making a Penny; and expressed or ^et down thus. ^

^ut better thus, the Mark for Pound stand^ng before the Sum denominates the
first Number, and the others are known of course; for after Pounds follow
Shillings, and after Shillings succeed Pence, etc. When the Price of any Thing
is Shillings and Pence, it is set down thus; s. d. 4 6


(...) thus, 4 s6: And when Shillings and Pence, and Parts of (...) Penny,
expressed thus, s. d. 4 6
(...) thus, 4 s6. The latter Way by some is accounted the ^^eater, and best
Method to express Parts of a Penny or ^arthings; thus, a Farthing, or one
fourth Part of what it follows. a Halfpenny, or one Half of what it follows.
three Farthings, or 3-4ths, or qrs. of what it follows.


And being thus set Fraction-wise the under Figure shows how many Parts the
Quantity before it is divided into, and the upper Figure shows how many of
those under Parts the Fraction stands for; as thus, of an Ell, of a Foot or 9
Inches, and the same of a Shilling is 9 Pence; of a Pound is 15s. If you are to
set down 6 Yards and a Half, write thus, 6 Yds. Nineteen Hundred three Quarters
thus, 19 C. Sixteen Pounds and a Quarter thus, 16 lb
or else thus, 16 C., 16 lb., 5 Feet, 14 Days. Here the Name is put between the
whole Number and the Fraction, which I think is the plainer and better Way: For
Example, 6 Hhd may through Ignorance or Wilfulness, be read. 6 Half Hhds, as
well as 6 Hhds and a Half; and at (...) certain Place where I have had
Business, the Wharfinge^^ Clerks express^d their half Hhds in this Manner.

A Table of the Value of Gold and Silver.
l s. d. Gold 1 Pound is worth 48 0 0 1 Ounce 4 0 0 1 Penny Weight 0 4 0 1
Grain 0 0 2 Silver. 1 Pound is worth 3 0 0 1 Ounce 0 5 0 1 Penny Weight 0 3 1
Grain 0 0 1/^

Instrumental Arithmetic.
AS Problems or Questions in Measurement, etc. are solved or answered
arithmetically by the Pen, so ar^ they also instrumentally taken by Compasses
from certai^ Lines, etc. or Rules made for that Purpose, for the Hel^ of those
that are deficient in Arithmetic, or for a quicke^ Dispatch of Business; and
such Performances are called in^strumental Arithmetic; and of the Instruments,
the most (...) Vogue or Use, are these Three: 1. The Carpenter's Plain Rule. 2
Gunter's Line. 3. Coggeshall's Sliding Rule.

1. The Carpenter's Plain Rule.
I shall describe and say something of the Carpenter's Plain Rule in relation
to its Uses, etc.

Its Description.

This Rule is made use of in measuring Board and Timber, being two Foot in
Length, and divided into twenty four Parts (...) Inches, and every one of those
Parts or Inches subdivided unto half Inches, and each of those Halves into
Quarters, and each Quarter into two Parts; so that every Inch is divided unto
eight Parts, and the whole Length into 192 Parts.

This Rule is well known, and therefore not absolutely ne^essary of
Representation, but however, for the better un^erstanding it, I shall give one
thus;

Under Board Measure thus described.

1 2 3 4 5 6 17 12 6 4 3 2 2 0 0 0 0 4 0

This Line begins at 6, and goes on to 36, within 4 Inches (...) the End of the
Rule on the Right Hand.

Its Use.
In. deep. Feet. In. Pts. ^ Board be 1 12 0 0 in Length make a Foot Square. 2 6
0 0 3 4 0 0 4 3 0 0 5 2 4 5 6 2 0 0

(...) this Table it is manifest, and easily understood, That a ^oard of 4
Inches requires 3 Feet in Length to make a Foot ^quare, and a Piece of 3 Inches
broad will require 4 Feet in ^ength to make a Foot Square, etc.

At the other End of this Rule is a Table called Under ^imber Measure; and thus
described.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 144 36 16 9 5 4 2 2 0 0 0 0 9 0 11 3

This Line begins at 8 and a Half, and goes on (by Divisions) to 36.

In. Square. Feet. If a Piece of Timber be 1 144, 0 in Length make^ solid Foot.
2 36, 0 3 16, 0 4 9, 0 5 5, 9 6 4, 0 7 2, 11 8 2, 3

By this Table it is plain, That if a Piece of Timber be 6 Inches Square, then
4 Feet in Length of that Piece will make a solid Foot.

It is a common Method with Carpenters, to add the Breadth and Thickness of a
Piece of Timber in Inches together, and call the Half thereof the Square of
that Piece^ but this Method gives the Content more than it is; and the greater
the Difference, the larger the Error: But the true Square may be found in
Gunter's Line, thus; place one Point of the Compasses upon the Line for the
Thickness, half Way of that Extent, and that will be the true Square in Inches.

2. Gunter's Line.
This Line is commonly set on the Carpenter's plain Rule, and consists of two
Lines, one set at the End of the other, and Distances taken by Compasses, as
aforesaid; and it is somewhat of the following Form.

Gunter's Line.


To prove the Line by the Compasses, observe, 1 to 2 equal 2 to 4 5 to 10
Distance 4 to 8 4 to 8 to 3 to 6

To number on the Line.
Observe, That the Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, sometimes signify
themselves simply or alone; at other Times 10, 20, 30, 40, etc. Again, at other
Times, 100, 200, 300, or 1000, etc.

To find a Number on the Line, as suppos^ 34.
For the Figure 1, account 1 on the Line; and for 3, take 3 of the large
Divisions; and for 4 take 4 of the smaller Divisions; and that is the Point.
Again, to find 750 on the Line; for 7 take 7 on the Line, for 50 take 5 of the
great Divisions, and that is the Point.

To find a small Number on the Line, as suppose 12.
For 1, take 1 as before, and for 2, take 2 of the large Divisions, and that is
the Point.

In measuring Board or Timber, it is best to have a Line of 2 Foot long, and
Compasses one Foot long.

No^e, Let the Measurement be by the Inch, Foot, Yard, Pole, Rod, etc. it is
best to have it deci^^ally divided, or so supposed, that is, into 10 Parts, as
^he Measurement should require, and on the Carpenter's Rule, ^he Foot so
divided.

Note also, That if the Point of the Compasses fall off the Line in the Work,
remove it to the same Figure or Place on ^he other Line; and the lesser Extent
you take with the Com^asses is frequently the best.

Multiplication by the Line.
To multiply 5 by 7, set one ^oot of the Compasses in 1, and extend the other
to 5 upwards, and with the same Ex^ent place one Foot in 7, and the other Foot
will fall on ^5, the Answer.

Division by the Line.
Example 1. Divide 63 by 3; extend from 3 to 1 downwards, and the Extent will
reach the same Way from 63 to ^1, the Quotient.

N. B. In multiplying you must always extend upwards, that is, from 1, to 2, 3,
to 4, etc. and on the contrary, in dividing extend downwards.

Example 2. Divide 288 l. equally among 16 Men: Extend from 16 to 1 downwards;
and that Extent will reach the same Way, from 288 l. to 18 l. for each Man.

Again.

Example 3. Suppose 750 l. were to be divided among 25 Men; extend from 23 to 1
downwards; and that Extent will reach the same Way, from 750 to 30 l. each
Man's Share.

The Rule of Three Direct.
Example 1. If a Bushel of Barley cost 3 s. what will ^^ Bushels cost? Extend
from 1 to 3 upwards, and that Extent will reach the same Way from 40 to 120
Shillings, the Answer.

Example 2. If one Ell of Holland cost 3 s. 6 d. what will 40 Else cost? Extend
from 1 to 3 and a Half upwards and that Extent the same Way will reach from 42
to 140 s. the Answer.

Rule of Three Inverse.
Example 1. Admit the Bushel of Wheat to be worth 3 ^ 4 d. or 40 d. and then
the Two-penny Loaf to weigh 20 (...) what shall the said Two-penny Loaf weigh
when Wheat (...) worth 5 s. the Bushel? Extend from 60 to 20 downward^ and that
Extent the same Way will reach from 40 to 1^ Ounces and for the Answer.

Example 2. If 136 Workmen fortify a Place in a Mont^ or 28 Days, how many must
be employed to do it in eigh^ Days? Extend from eight downwards, to 136, and
tha^ Extent the same Way will reach from 28 to 476 Workmen, the Answer.

The Use in Board Measure.
Example. If a Board be 9 Inches broad, and 19 Fee^ long, what is the Content
in superficial Square Feet? E^^tend from 12 (the Center of Foot Measure) to 9
downwards, and that Extent the same Way will reach from 19 to (...).

In Timber Measure.
^^^mple: A Piece of Timber 24 Inches square, and 8 (...), what is the Content
in solid Feet? Extend from (...) to 24 upwards, and that Extent twice ^he same
(...) reach from 8 to 32 Feet, the Content.

Brick Work.
How many Rods of Work are there in 4085 Feet? Extend from 272 downwards to 1,
and that Extent the same Way from 4085, will reach to 15 Rods, the Answer.

3. Coggeshall's Sliding Rule.
The next Instrument I shall speak of, is that which goes by the Name of
Coggeshall's Sliding Rule. And first of

Its Description.
This Rule is framed 3 Ways, sliding by one another as ^he Glasiers Rule;
sliding on one Side of a two Foot Joint Rule; and one Part sliding on the
other, in a Foot of Length; the back Part being flat, on which are sundry Lines
and Scales.

Upon the aforesaid sliding Side of the Rule, are four ^ines of Numbers, three
are double Lines; and one a sin^le Line of Numbers, marked (as in the
Representation by and by annexed) with ABC and D, the three marked A^ and C,
are called double Line^ of Numbers, and figured ^, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Then
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 at the End. That marked D, is the single Line
(...) Numbers, and figured 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 20, 30, and (...) the End 40,
even with and under 10, in the doubl^ ^ine next to it, and that is called the
Girt Line, and so ^arked in the Figure.

The Figures on the three double Lines of Numbers, may (...) increased or
decreased at Pleasure; thus one at the Be^^^ning may be called 10, 100, 1000;
the 2 is 20, 200, 12000; so that when 1 at the Beginning is 10, then 1 in (...)
Middle is 100, and 10 at the End is 1000; but if 1 at (...) Beginning is
counted for 1, then 1 in the Middle is 10, (...) 10 at the End is 100.

And as the Figures are altered, so must the Strokes or ^ivisions between them
be altered in their Value, according to the Number of the Parts they are
divided into; (...) thus from 1 to 2, it is divided into 10 Parts, and each
Tenth is divided into 5 Parts; and from 2 to 3, it is divided into 10 Parts,
and each Tenth into 2 Parts, and so on from 3 to 5; then from 5 to 6 it is
divided into 10 Parts only; and so on unto 1 in the Middle of the Rule, or the
first Part of the double Line of Numbers. The second Part or Radius is divided
into the like Radius.

The Girt-line marked D, is divided from 4 to 5 into 10 Parts, and each Tenth
into 2 Parts, and so on from 5 (...) 10; and then from 10 to 20, it is divided
into 10 Parts and each Tenth into 4 Parts; and so on all the Way from 20 to 40
at the End, which is right against 10 at the En^ of the double Line of Numbers.

The Lines on the back Side of this Rule that slide on one Side, are these,
viz. a Line of the Inch Measure from 1 to 12, each divided into Halves,
Quarters, and Half Quarters; another Line of Inch Measure from 1 to 12, each
divided into 12 equal Parts, and a Line of Foot Measure, being 1 Foot divided
into 100 equal Parts, and figured 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, and 100,
even with 12 ^n Inch Measure.

And the back Side of the sliding Piece is divided into Inches, Halves,
Quarters, and Half Quarters, and figure^ from 12 to 24, so that it may be slid
out to 2 Foot, (...) measure the Length of a Tree, or any Thing else you ha^^
Occasion to measure.

The Use of the Double Scale.
Example 1.

Suppose there is a Geometrical Square, whose Sides ar^ 3 Feet each; set one
Foot on the Line B, to 3 on the Line A; and then against 3 on the Line B, is 12
Fee^ on the Line A, which is the Content of such a Square.

^

In this Work by Arithmetic I multiply 3 F. 6 Parts by (...), and it produces
10 Feet 6 Inches; then I take the Half of 3 F. 6 for the 6 Inches (by the Way
of Practice) because 6 Inches is the of 12, etc. Again, suppose there (...) a
Board 27 Feet and long and 16 Feet wide, what is (...) Content?

^

Suppose the Side of a Rhombus to be 8 Feet 6 Inches, and the Breadth, or Line
AB, 8 F. 4, what is the Con^ent? Set 1 Foot on the Line B, to 8 Feet 52/100 on
the Line (...), then against 8 Feet 52/100 on the Line B, is 71 Feet 40/^00
Parts, or a Foot on the Line A. And to know the (...) of the Decimal, or Part
of the Foot, look for 40/100 on ^he Rule, and you will find against it 4
Inches, so that ^he Content of this Rhombus is 71 Feet 4 Inches.

Again, Suppose the Length of a Rhomboides to be 17 ^* 3, or 17 2^/1^^, and the
Breadth 8 F. 7, or 8 58/100 what is ^he Content? Set 1 Foot on the Line B, to
17, 25 on the ^ine A, then against 8, 58 on the Line B, is 148 Feet on ^he Line
A. The Figure has been presented before, and ^^perated arithmetically,
therefore here unnecessary.

To measur^ (...) by the Rule.
Every Triangle is (...) that long Square, whose Length and Breadth are equal
to the Perpendicular and Base; therefore from the greatest Angle or Corner let
fall a per^endicular Line to the opposite Side (as has been said before) of
the Base, and to find its Content take Half the ^ength of the Base, and the
whole Perpendicular, or the ^ength of the Perpendicular, and the whole Base,
and then ^ultiply, etc.

Example.

Let the Base of a Triangle be 4 Feet 1 Inch, and the Perpendicular 2 Feet 1;
the Half of the one, is 2 Feet ^ Parts; and of the other, 1 Feet 7 Parts. Set
one on the Line B, to 4, 15 on the Line A; then against 1, 07, Half ^he
Perpendicular on the Line B, is 4 Feet, and almost a Foot, for the Content. Or
if you set 1 on the Line B, to 1, 07 on the Line A, against 4, 15 on the Line
B, is 4, and almost a Foot on the Line A.

Again, another Way. If you set one on the Line B, to 4, 1 on ^he Line A, then
against 2, 15 on the Line B is 8 Feet, 9/1^ (which is about 11 Inches) on the
Line A, the Half whereof is 4 Feet 5 Inches, which is the Content of the
Triangle.

Of the Girt Line.
Suppose the Diameter of a Circle be 2 Feet 25/100 what i^ its Content? Set 11
on the Girt-line D, to 95 on the double Line C; then against 2 Feet 25/100 on
C, the Girt-line is 3 Feet 95/100 on the double Scale of Numbers D, which is
the Content.

Board Measure.
Suppose a Board be 27 Inches broad, and 15 Feet ^/^ long, what is its Content?
Set 12 on the double Scale B, to 27 on the double Scale A; then against 15 Feet
on the double Scale B, is ^5 Feet, the Content on the double Scale A.

When Dimensions are Feet and Parts, and the Content required in Feet and Parts.
Admit a Board be 24 long, and 1 Foot broad what in the Content? Set 1 on the
double Scale to 1 on the double Scale A; then against 24 on the double Scale B,
is 37 Feet 1/10 on the double Scale A, and is the Content.

Suppose a Piece of Glasing be 29 Inches long, and 7 Inches broad, what is the
Content? Set 144 (represented by 1, 44) on the Line B, to 7 Inches on the Line
A; then against 29 on the Line B, is 1 Foot and almost 1/^ on the Line A.

Suppose a Room Wainscotted be 44 Feet in Compass, and 9 Feet high, what is the
Content? Set one on the double Scale B, to 44 Feet on the double Scale A; then
against 9 Feet ^/4; on the double Scale B is 433 Feet ^/^^ on the double Scale
A, the Content.

Admit a Piece of Painting be 13 Feet broad, and 2^ Feet long, what is the
Content? Set 9 on the doubl^ Scale B, to 13 on the double Scale A, then against
^^ on the double Scale B, is 35 Yards on the double ^^ A, and is the Content.

Of Bonds, and Conditions of Bonds.
A BOND is a Writing Obligatory, for Payment of Money, etc. consisting of two
Parts. 1st* The Obligation, wherein are inserted the Names of the Parties and
their Additions, the Penalty, Date, etc. And 2dly, The Condition, which
expressly mentions what Money (...) to be paid, or Thing to be performed, and
the limited Time for Performance thereof; for which the Obligation (...)
peremptorily binding.

When the Matter or Thing to be done, or not to be ^one, by a Condition, is
unlawful or impossible, or the ^ondition is repugnant, insensible or uncertain,
it is void: And if a Thing be possible at the Time of making the Ob^^gation,
but afterward become^ impossible by the Act of God, or of the Law, or of the
Obligee, it will be void. Also if a Man or Woman is compelled, for Fear of
Impri^onment, to enter into a Bond, etc. such Compulsion will ^rustrate the
Bond, Co. Lit.

But an Obligation may be good, although it contains false ^atin, or false
English, if the Intent of the Parties appears, and may be made certain.

Where no Place is mentioned for the Payment of Money (...) a Bond, the Obliger
is to find out the Obligee. And if (...) Day is not set for the Payment of
Money, the Debt is (...) presently; but if it be on a Mortgage, the Party shall
^ave Time during Life, unless hastened by Request. 1 Inst. ^08, 209.

In Obligations, he to whom the Obligation is made is ^alled the Obligee, and
he who is bound is called the Obli^or. In other Writings the Parties are styled
according to ^he legal Terms, as Vendor, Vendee, Lessor, Lessee, Mortgagor,
Mortgagee, Grantor, Grantee, Donor, Do^ee, etc. But all Parties must be of the
full Age of Twenty-^ne Years; for Infants cannot make any Obligation or
Co^enant, etc. unless it be for Necessaries, Apparel, Schooling, etc. Persons
of full Age must also be of sound Mind, and (...) Lunaticks, Idiots, etc. Co.
Lit. 171. 4 Rep. 126.

A Bond from one to one.
KNOW ALL MEN by these Presents, That I John ^* of the Township of, etc. in the
County of, etc. Gentleman, am held and firmly bound unto William B of, etc. in
the County of, etc. Esquire, in One Hundred Pounds of good and lawful Money of
Great Britain, to be paid to the said William B. or to his certain Attorney,
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns; for which Payment well and truly to
be made, I bind myself, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators, firmly by these
Presents, sealed with my Seal: Dated this fifth Day of October, in the 27th
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord George the Second, by the Grace of God,
of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. and in
the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty Three.

THE CONDITION of this Obligation is such, That if the Above-bound J. A. his
Heirs, Executors or Administrators, do well and truly pay or cause to be paid
unto the above named W. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the full
Sum of Fifty-two Pounds and Ten Shillings, of lawful Money of Great Britain, on
or before the fifth Day of January next ensuing the Date hereof; then this
Obligation shall be void, otherwise it shall remain in full Force and Virtue.

Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of

A Bond wherein two Persons are bound to one.
KNOW ALL MEN by these Presents, that we William A. of, etc. in the County of,
etc. Gentleman, and John B. of, etc. in the County of, etc. Yeoman, are held
and firmly bound to Thomas C. of, etc. Esquire, in Two Hundred Pounds of good
and lawful Money of Great Britain, to be paid to the said Thomas C. or his
certain Attorney, Executors, Administrators or Assigns; for which Payment to be
well and truly made, we bind ourselves and each of us, jointly and severally,
for, and in the whole, our, and each of our Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, firmly by these Presents, sealed with our Seals; dated the Day
of, etc. in the Year of the Reign, etc.

THE CONDITION of this Obligation is such, That if the Above-bound W. A. and J.
B. or either of them, their, or either of their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, do and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the
said T. C. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of One Hundred
Pounds of lawful Money of America, with Interest for the same, after the Rate
of, etc. per Cent. Ann. on the Day, etc. which will be in ^he Year of our Lord,
etc. Then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition of a Counter Bond, or a Bond of Indemnity, where one Man is bound
for another.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the Abovenamed A. B.
at the Request, and for the only proper Debt and Duty of the Above-bound C. D.
with him the said C. D. is in and by one Bond or Obligation, bearing equal Date
with the Obligation above writ^en, held and firmly bound unto E. F. of etc. in
the penal Sum of Five Hundred Pounds of lawful Money of America, conditioned
for the Payment of Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, with legal Interest for the
same, on, etc next en^uing the Day of the Date of the said recited Obligation,
(...) in and by the said Obligation and Condition thereof may more fully and at
large appear. If therefore the said C. D. ^is Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, do and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the
said E. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said Sum of Two
Hundred and Fifty Pounds, with legal Interest on the said Day, etc. next
ensuing the Date of the said recited Obligation, according to the true Intent
and Meaning, and in full Discharge and Satisfaction of the said recited
Obligation; Then, etc. or else, etc.

A Condition to perform Covenants in a Deed.
THE CONDITION of this Obligation is such, That if the Above-bound A. B. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do and shall in all
Things well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, accomplish, pay and keep all
and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles, Clauses, Provisoes, Payments,
Conditions and Agreements, which on the Part and Behalf of the said A. B. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, are, or ought to be observed, performed,
fulfilled, accomplished, paid and kept, comprised or mentioned, in certain
Indentures, bearing even Date with the above-written Obligation, made, or
mentioned to be made, between the said A. B* of the one Part, and the
Abovenamed C. D. of the other Part [or in one Pair of Indentures of Lease made
between, etc.] according to the true Intent and Meaning of the same Indentures;
Then, etc.

A Condition of an Arbitration Bond, with an Umpirage.
THE CONDITION of this Obligation is such, That if the Above-bound A. B. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do and shall, for his
and their Parts and Behalfs, in all Things well and truly stand to, obey,
observe, perform, fulfill and keep the Award, Abitrament, Order and
Determination of E. F. of, etc. and G. H. of, etc. Arbitrators indifferently
chosen, as well on the Part of the said A. B. as on the Part and Behalf of the
Abovenamed C. D. to arbitrate, award, judge of, determine and agree for, upon,
touching and concerning all, and all Manner of Action and Actions, Cause and
Causes of Action and Actions, Debts, Accounts, Differences, Quarrels, Disputes,
Reckonings, Agreements, and all Dues and Demands whatsoever, both in Law and
Equity, or otherwise howsoever, which between them the said A. B. and C. D. or
either of them, at any Time heretofore have been, or at the Time of the Sealing
hereof had, moved, stirred up, or in any wise depending, so always as the said
Award, Abitrament, Judgment, final End, Determination and Agreement, between
the said Parties, be made in Writing, indented under the Hands and Seals of the
said Arbitrators, ready to be delivered to the said Parties at, or in, etc.
next ensuing the Date of the above-written Obligation; Then, etc.

The Umpirage.
And if the said Arbitrators shall not make and draw up the said Award in
Writing, as aforesaid, on or before, etc. and the same deliver to the said
Parties, as aforesaid; If then the said A. B. his Executors and Administrators,
and every of them, do and shall stand to, abide, observe, perform and keep the
Award, Umpirage, final End and Judgment of L. M. of, etc. Umpire indifferently
elected between the said Parties, for ending and composing of all the
Differences aforesaid, so as the said Umpire do make and draw up his said
Award, Umpirage and Determination, in Writing, indented under his Hand and
Seal, ready to be delivered to the Parties, on or before, etc. Then, etc. or
else, etc.

Of Releases of Rights, Actions, Claims and Demands.
A Release is the Discharge of a Right or Action, Debt, Duty or Demand; and all
Actions, real, personal and mixed, may be discharged by Release; also all
Debts, Legacies, and other Duties, Annuities, Lands, Rights and Titles, to
Lands, etc.

A Release of all Actions or Suits bars all Actions and ^uits, and Bonds and
Statutes, where the Cause of Action is ^ubsisting at the Time of the Release. A
Release of all Quarrels, discharges all Actions real and personal, and the
Causes of such Actions. A Release of all Debts discharges ^ll Debts then owing
from the Relessee upon Specialties, Executions, etc. A Release of all Duties
bars all Actions, ^udgments, Executions, Obligations, Rents, etc. and by a
^elease of all Demands, all Rights and Titles to Lands, ^onditions, Bonds,
Statutes, Recognizances, Contracts, ^ovenants, and all Manner of Actions, real
and personal, ^ebts, Duties, Judgments, Executions, Rents, Annuities, ^c. are
released and discharged. Co. Lit. 286, 291, 292, etc.

By a Release of all a Man's Right to Lands, all Actions, ^ntry, Title of
Dower, Rents, etc. are discharged; but a ^ight descending to the Relessor
afterward, it is not there^^ released. A Release of Title to Lands is equally
ex^^nsive to a Release of Right; and a Release of all Entries, (...) Right of
Entry, bars all Right or Power of Entry into ^ands. Co. Lit. 289, 345.

If a Creditor be made Executor by his Debtor, or if the ^reditor, being a
Woman, marries her Debtor, these are ^eleases in Law of the Debts. Co. Lit. 264.

A General Release of all Demands.
KNOW ALL MEN by these Presents, That I A. B. of, etc. Gent. have remised,
released, and for (...) quit-claimed, and by these Presents do for me, my
^eirs, Executors and Administrators, remise, release, and (...) ever quit-claim
unto C. D. of, etc. Gent. his Heirs, Ex^^utors and Administrators, all and all
Manner of Action and ^ctions, Cause and Causes of Action* and Actions, Suits,
(...), Bonds, Wr^tings, Obligations, Debts, Dues, Duties, ^eckonings, Accounts,
Sum and Sums of Money, Judg^ents, Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies,
Tres^^sses, Damages and Demands whatsoever, both at Law (...) in Equity, or
otherwise howsoever, which, against him (...) said C. D. I ever had, now have,
or which I, my ^eirs, Executors and Administrators, shall or may have, (...),
challenge or demand, for or by Reason or Means of any Act, Matter, Cause or
Thing, from the Beginning of the World to the Day of the Date of these
Presents. In Witness whereof, I the said A. B. have hereunto put my Hand and
Seal, the Day of, etc. in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Fifty Four.

A Release of Personal Actions.
KNOW ALL MEN by these Presents, That (...) A. B. of, etc. have remised,
rel^^sed and quit-claim^ed, and by these Presents do for (...). Executor^ and
Administrators, and every (...), releas^ and for ever quit-claim unto C. D. of,
etc. his Heirs, Ex^^cutors and Administrators, and every of them, all and (...)
Manner of Personal Actions, Suits, Debts, Duties, (...) and Sums of Money,
Claims and Demands Personal whatsoever, from the Beginning of the World until
the Day (...) the Date hereof. In Witness, etc.

Of Letters of Attorney, and other Authorities, etc.
A Letter of Attorney is an Authority given to anoth^^ to do some Act, or
perform some Thing, in (...) Manner as the Person authorizing might do the
same. (...) what a Man may do by himself he may generally do (...) another.

But the Attorney must not exceed his Power; if he doe^ what he transacts will
be void. If a Man makes a Let^^^ of Attorney to another to deliver Livery and
Seisin in (...) a Place, and he does it elsewhere; or at such a Time, (...) he
does it before or after, the Act of the Attorney will (...) void. Ploved. 475.

In other Cases it is the same; and a Man may limit (...) Authority as strictly
as he pleases.

A Letter of Attorney.
KNOW all Men by these Presents, That I Charl^^ Careful, of Lewis, in the
County of Sussex, Apoth^^cary (for diverse Considerations and good Causes me
(...) unto moving) have made, ordained, constituted and appoin^^ed, and by
these Presents do make, ordain, constitute (...) appoint, my trusty Friend
William Wagstaff, of ^emsey, the County aforesaid, Gent. my true and lawful
Attorne^ for me, in my Name, and to my Use, to ask, demand, (...) cover, or
receive, of and from A. B. of ^ye, in the (...) County, the Sum of Forty
Pounds; giving, and by these Presents granting to my said Attorney, my sole and
full Power and Authority, to take, pursue, and follow such legal Courses, for
the Recovery, receiving and obtaining of the same, as I myself might or could
do, were I personally present; and upon the Receipt of the same Acquittance^
and other sufficient Discharges, for me, and in my Name make, sign, seal and
deliver; as also one more Attorn^y or Attorneys under him, to substitute or
appoint, and again at his Pleasure to revoke, and further to do, perform, and
finish for me, and in my Name, all singular Thing or Things, which shall or may
be necessary touching and concerning the Premises, as fully, thoroughly, and
entirely, as (...) the said Charles Careful, in my own Person ought or could
do, in and about the same: Ratifying, allowing, and confirming, whatsoever my
said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, in and about the
Execution of the Premises, by Virtue of these Presents. In Witness whereof, I
have hereunto set my Hand and Seal, the Sixth Day of May, in the Twenty-sixth
Year of our Sovereign Lord George II. by the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, etc. (...) the Year of our Lord God, 1753.

A Letter of Attorney by a Seaman.
KNOW all Men by these Presents, That I Timothy Tarpaulin, Mariner, now
belonging to his Majesty's Ship (...) Rye; for diverse good Causes and
Considerations me there^nto moving, have, and by these Presents do make my
trusty ^riend [or beloved Wife] Henry Hearty, Citizen and Baker of London, my
true and lawful Attorney, for me, and in my Name, and for my Use, to ask,
demand, and receive, of and from the Right Honorable the Treasurer or Pay
master of his Majesty's Navy, and Commissioners of Prize Money, and whom else
it may concern, as well all such Wages, and ^ay, Bounty Money, Prize Money, and
all other Sum and ^uins of Money whatsoever, as now are, and which here^fter
shall and may be due or payable unto me; also all such ^ensions, Salaries,
Smart Money, or all other Money and Things whatsoever, which now are, or at any
Time here^fter shall or may be due to me, for my Service, or otherwise, in any
one of his Majesty's Ship or Ships, Frigates or Vessels; Giving and hereby
granting, unto my said Attorney, full and whole Power, to take, pursue and
follow, such legal Ways and Courses, for the Recovery, receiving and obtaining,
and discharging upon the said Sum or Sums of Money, or any of them, as I myself
might or could do, were I personally present; and I do hereby ratify, allow and
confirm, all and whatever my said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be
done, in and about the Execution of the Premises, by Virtue of these Presents.
In Witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal, this 22d Day of
January, etc. Timothy Tarpaulin, ^

Of Articles of Agreement.
ARTICLES of Agreement are mutual Covenants entered into by Parties, where both
of them are obliged to do something, one in Return to the other.

They are of various Kinds, as Business falls out; and some of them are the
following.

Articles for the taking down an old House, and building up a new One, for a
certain Sum of Money.
Articles of Agreement made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. and C. D. of, etc.
FIRST, The said C. D. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said A. B. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, by these Presents, in Manner following (that is to
say) That he the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some
of them, for the Considerations herein after mentioned, shall and will
forthwith take down, or cause to be taken down, the now Dwelling House of the
said A. B. situate, etc. and in the Room and Stead thereof shall, on or before,
etc. next, make, erect, build and set up, in a Workman-like Manner, one new
Tenement or Dwelling House, Thirty Feet wide in Front, Fifty Feet long or deep
Backwards, and Three Story high, etc. each Story being, etc. Feet; together
with a Cellar of the Dimensions of, etc. And shall also make four Rooms, etc.
on each Floor. And also that he the said C. D. his, etc. shall find and
provide, at his or their own Charges and Expense, all Manner of Tiles, Bricks,
Laths, Nails, Lead, Iron, Sand and Lime, Timber, and all other Material^
whatsoever, which shall be fit and necessary to be used in or about the said
Building, and shall carry away all Rubbish that shall any way arise by Reason
of the said Building.

And the said A. B. for himself, his Executors and Administrators, in
Consideration of the said Building so to be built and finished in Manner
aforesaid, by the said C. D. his, etc. does covenant and grant to and with the
said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these Presents, That
he the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some of them,
shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of 300l. of, etc. at three
several Payments; viz. 100l. thereof on, etc. (or in Hand at his Beginning of
the Work, etc.) 100l. more when the Roof of the said Building is framed,
timbered and tiled; and 100l. more, Residue, and in full Payment of the said
Sum of 300l when the whole Building is fully completed in a Workman-like
Manner, as aforesaid.

And for the Performance of all and every the Articles and Agreements above
mentioned, the said A. B. and C. D. do hereby bind themselves, their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, each to the other, in the Penal Sum of 600l. of,
etc. firmly by these Presents.

In Witness, etc.

Of Bills of Sale, and Bargains and Sales.
A Bill of Sale is an Instrument used for the Transferring of the Property of
Goods; but a Bargain and Sale transfers Lands, Tenements, Rents, Advowsons,
Tithes, etc in Fee simple, Fee tail, for Life or Years, as well as Goods, and
Chattels.

A Man may bargain and sell his Goods at any Time; and (...) the Bargain is,
that you shall give me so much for a Horse, and you give me a Shilling or a
Penny in Earnest, which I accept, this is a perfect Sale. Nay. Max. 87.

Where Lands are conveyed by Bargain and Sale, there must be a good
Consideration given; and where the Freehold (...) to pass, Inrollment is
necessary (within six Months) as it (...) provided by Stat. 27. H. 8. and it
needs no Livery of Seisin, etc. to perfect it. But a Bargain and Sale may be
made of Goods and Chattels, Leases, etc. without Consideration or Inrollment,
with Livery and Seisin. 5 Co. 1 2 ^ro. 240.

A Bill of Sale of Goods.
KNOW all Men, etc. That I I. K. of, etc. for and in Consideration of the Sum
of, etc. to me in Hand paid at and before the Sealing and Delivery of these
Presents by T. S. of, etc. the Receipt whereof I do hereby acknowledge, have
bargained and sold, (...) these Presents (...) bargain and sell, unto the said
T. S. all the Goods, Household Stuff and Implements of Household, and all other
Goods what^soever, mentioned in the Schedule hereunto annexed, nor remaining
and being in, etc. in the Possession of, etc (...) have and to hold all and
singular the said Goods, Household stuff and Implements of Household, and every
of them, (...) these Presents bargained and sold unto the said T. S. hi^
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, for ever. And the said I. K for myself,
my Executors and Administrators all and singular, the said Goods and
Household Stuff unto the said T. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
against me the said I. K. my Executors, Administrators and Assign^ and against
all and every other Person and Persons whatsoeve^ shall and will warrant, and
for ever defend by these Present^ Of which Goods, I the said I. K. have put the
said T. S in full Possession, by delivering him one Silver Tankard, etc at the
Sealing hereof. In Witness, etc.

A Bill of Sale of Part of a Ship, with its Furniture, etc
TO all People, etc. I H. I. of, etc. send Greeting Know ye, that I the said H.
I. for and in Considera^tion of the Sum of, etc. to me in Hand paid by T. S.
(...) etc. the Receipt whereof I do hereby acknowledge, and^ have granted,
bargained and sold, and by these Presents the said H. I. do grant, bargain and
sell, unto the said T. S one Eighth Part (the whole in eight equal Parts to
(...) divided) of the Ship called, etc. of the Port of, etc. an^ Burden of,
etc. now lying and being within the Harbor of etc. together with one full
Eighth Part of all the Masts Sails, Sail-yards, Anchors, Cables, Ropes, Cords,
Boats, Oars, Pieces of Ordnance, Guns, Gunpowder, Shot Tackle, Apparel,
Ammunition, and Furniture to the said Ship belonging, or appertaining: To have
and to hold the said Eighth Part of the said Ship, and all other the Premises
hereby granted, with the Appurtenances, unto the said T. S his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, as his and their ^wn proper Goods, and to his and
their own proper Use and Uses for ever. And I the said H. I. do for myself, my
^eirs, Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant (...) and with the said
T. S. his Executors, and Assigns, by ^hese Presents, that I the said H. I. at
the Time of Seal^^g and Delivery of these Presents, am the true and lawful
Owner and Proprietor of the said Eighth Part of the said ^hip, and Premises
hereby granted, with the Appurtenances. and that I have full Power and
Authortiy to grant, bargain and sell the said Eighth Part of the said Ship,
with the ^remises hereby mentioned to be granted, with the Appur^enances, unto
the said T. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in Manner aforesaid:
And also, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. S. his
Executors and Assigns, from Time to Time, and at all Times hereafter, ^uietly
and peaceably to have, hold, possess and enjoy, the (...) Eighth Part of the
said Ship, and all other the Premises ^ereby granted or mentioned, or intended
to be granted, ^ith the Appurtenances, without the Let, Trouble, Denial,
^olestation, Hindrance or Disturbance, whatsoever, of me ^he said H. I. my
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or (...) any other Person or Persons
whatsoever, lawfully claim^^g, or to claim from, by or under me, them, or any
of (...), and that freed and discharged of and from all former and ^ther
Bargains, Seals and Encumbrances, whatsoever made, ^one, or committed by me the
said H. I. etc. In Witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Lands.
THIS Indenture made, etc. between H. I. of, etc. of the one Part, and T. R.
of, and^ of the other Part* ^itnesseth, That the said H. I. for and in
Consideration of ^he Sum of, etc. to him in Hand paid by the said T* ^ the
^eceipt whereof the said H. I. does hereby acknowledge, he ^he said H. I. has
granted, bargained and sold, allened and confirmed, and by these Presents does
grant, bargain and sell, alien and confirm unto the said T. R. his Heirs and
^ssigns, for ever, all that Message, etc. and all that Piece (...) Parcel of
Land, etc. situate, etc. and also all Trees, Woods, Under-woods, Tithes,
Commons, Common of ^asture, Profits, Commodities, Advantages, Hereditaments,
Ways, Waters and Appurtenances, whatsoever, to the said Message and Lands
abovementioned belonging, or any wise appertaining: And also the Reversion and
Reversion^ Remainder and Remainders, Rents and Services, of the said Premises,
and of every Part thereof; and all the Estate Right, Title, Interest, Claim and
Demand, whatsoever (...) him the said H. I. of, in and to the said Message,
etc. and Premises, and every Part thereof. To have and to hold (...) said
Message or Tenement, and all and singular the Premis^^ abovementioned, and
every Part and Parcel thereof, (...) the Appurtenances, unto the said T. R. his
Heirs and A^^signs, to the only proper Use and Behoof of the said T. R his
Heirs and Assigns, for ever. And the said H. I. for hi^ and his Heirs, the said
Message or Tenement, and Premises and every Part thereof, against him and his
Heirs, and a^gainst all and every other Person and Persons whatsoever, (...)
the said T. R. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will warrant and for ever
defend by these Presents. In Witness, etc.

Of Gifts, Grants, Exchanges, etc.
A Deed of Gift may be made of Lands or Goods; (...) Care must be taken that it
be not fraudulent; for (...) Deed of Gift made with Intent to defraud Creditors
of (...) just Debts, as against such Creditors, etc. is void. (...) 27 El.

When a Woman is married, all her Goods and Chatte^ become the Goods of the
Husband by Gift in Law; but (...) is liable to the Payment of her Debts. And
when a Man made Executor, the Law gives the Goods and Chattels (...) the
Testator to the Executor; but subject to Payment of the Testator's Debts, 3
Rep. 27.

All Grants must be of Things certain; and Office, or (...) Goods or Chattels
personal, may be granted by Word, with^out Deed. And if a Man make Apparel for
another, an^ put it upon him to use and wear, this amounts to a Gift or Grant
in Law, of the Clothes itself. 1. H. 4.31.

A Deed of Gift of Goods and Chattels.
TO all People, etc. I AB. of, etc. send Greeti^^ Know ye, That I the said A.
B. for and in Co^^sideration of the natural Love and ^ffection which I (...)
and bear unto C. D. etc. and also for other good Causes an^ Considerations me
thereunto moving, have given and gran^^ed, and by these Presents do give, grant
and confirm unto (...) (...) C. D. all my Goods, Chattels, Lease^, Debts,
Plate, (...), etc. and all my other Substance whatsoever, move^^le and
immovable, of what Kind, Nature and Quality (...) the same are, and in what
Place or Places soever the (...) shall be found, as well in my own Custody or
Possession, (...) the Possession, Hands, Power and Custody of any other ^^rson
or Persons whatsoever (or all those Goods and Chat^^^s in the Schedule hereunto
annexed mentioned) To have (...) to hold all and singular the said Goods,
Chattels, ^eases, Debts, and all other the aforesaid Premises unto the (...) C.
D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to his (...) their own proper Use
and Uses for ever. And I the said ^. B. all and singular the aforesaid Goods,
Chattels and ^^emises to the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators (...)
Assigns, against all Persons, do Warrant, and do for (...) Defend by these
Presents. In Witness, etc.

Livery and Seisin must be endorsed thus: Memorandum (...) Day, etc. Livery and
Seisin was delivered by the within (...) AB. unto the said C. D. of one Piece
of Plate, etc. (...) the Name of all the Goods and Chattels within mentioned,
(...) hold to him the said C. D. his Executors, etc. for ever, ^^cording to the
within written Deed.

A Deed of Gift of Lands, etc.
THIS Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. of the one Part, and C. B.
of, etc. Son of the said ^* B. of the other Part, witnesses, that the said A.
B. (...) and in Consideration of the natural Love and Affection (...) he has
and bears unto the said C. B. And for (...) better Maintenance and Livelihood
of him the said C. B. (...) given, granted, aliened, infeoffed and confirmed;
and (...) these Presents does give, etc. unto the said C. B. his ^eirs and
Assign, All that Message or Tenement, situate, (...) and also all those Pieces
or Parcels of Land lying, etc. ^^^taining, etc. in the Tenure and Occupation
of, etc. and (...) and singular the Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, (...),
Courts, Gardens, Orchards, Feedings, Woods, ^^der-woods, Commons, Common of
Pasture, Ways, (...), Passages, Waters, Watercourse, Easements, Profits,
^^mmodities, Advantages, Hereditaments, and (...) whatsoever to the said
Message or Tenement, Lands (...) Premises abovementioned, or any Part
thereof, belong^^^, or in any ways appertaining, or therewithal commonly used,
occupied or enjoyed, or accepted, reputed, taken (...) known as Part, Parcel,
or belonging of or to the same: And the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remainders Rent and Services of all and singular the said Premises; and all the
Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Property, Claim and Demand whatsoever, of him
the said A. B. of, in and (...) the said Message, Lands and Premises, and of,
in and to every Part and Parcel thereof, with their and every of their
Appurtenances, and all Deeds, Evidences and Writings con^cerning the said
Premises only, or only any Part thereon now in the Hands or Custody of the said
A. B. To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, Lands, Here^ditaments,
and all and singular the Premises hereby grante^ and conveyed, or mentioned or
intended to be granted an^ conveyed, with their Appurtenances, unto the said C.
B* his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper Use and Behoof (...) him the said
C. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever: And the said A. B. for himself, his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and
with the said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns, by these Presents, that (...) the
said C. B. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and lawfully may, from henceforth for
ever hereafter, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy, possess and
enjoy the said Message or Tenement, Lands and Premises abovementioned to
(...) hereby granted, with their and every of their Appurte^nances, free, clear
and discharged, or well and sufficientl^ saved and kept harmless of and from
all former and other Grants, Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Jointures, Feoffments
Leases, Dowers, Estates, Entails, Rent Charges, Arrear ages of Rents, Statutes,
Judgments, Recognizances, Exe^cutions, and of and from all other Titles,
Trouble^ Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, com^mitted, done or
suffered, or to be had, made, etc. by hi^ the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors
or Administrators, (...) any other Person or Persons lawfully claiming or to
claim^^ by, from or under him, them, or any, or either of them In Witness, etc.

Of Indentures.
INDENTURES are Deeds indented, cut at the Top (...) into the other, and are
sometimes of many Parts. When a Deed is of two Parts, it is called Bipartite;
when the^^ are three Parts, Tripartite; when there are four Part ^uadrupartite;
when five Parts, Quinquepartite; and when (...) of six Parts, Sixtipartite. And
every Party to the Deed (...) to have a Part of it: The Grantor, etc. signs the
Ori^^nal, and the rest are Counterparts.

There are other Indentures, smaller in their Nature, as ^^dentures of
Apprentiship, Partition, etc.

An Indenture for placing forth an Apprentice.
THIS ^ndenture made, etc. witnesses, That A. B. Son of, etc. has of his own
free and voluntary Will (...) by and with the Consent of his Father) placed and
bound ^^mself Apprentice unto D. E. of, etc Pewterer, to be ^^ught in the said
Trade, Science or Occupation of a Pew^^rer, which he the said D. E. now uses,
and with him as (...) Apprentice to dwell, continue and serve from the Day of
(...) Date hereof unto the full End and Term of Seven Years (...) thence next
ensuing, and fully to be complete and (...); During all which Term, the said
Apprentice his said ^aster well and faithfully shall serve, his Secrets keep,
his ^^wful Commands gladly do, Hurt to his said Master he shall (...) do, nor
wilfully suffer to be done by others, but of the (...) to his Power shall
forthwith give Notice to his said Master. ^he Goods of his said Master he shall
not imbezle or waste, (...) them lend without his Consent to any; at Cards,
Dice, (...) any other unlawful Games he shall not play; Taverns or ^^ehouses he
shall not frequent; Fornication he shall not ^^mmit; Matrimony he shall not
contract; from the Service his said Master he shall not at any Time depart or
absent ^^mself without his said Master's Leave; but in all Things, (...) a good
and faithful Apprentice, shall and will Demean and (...) have himself toward
his said Master, and all his, during the (...) Term. And the said Master his
said Apprentice the said ^^ade, Science, or Occupation of a Pewterer, with all
things thereunto belonging, shall and will teach and instruct, (...) cause to
be well and sufficiently taught and instructed, (...) the best Way and Manner
that he can; and shall and (...) also find and allow unto his said Apprentice,
Meat, (...), Washing, Lodging, and Apparel, both Linen and ^oollen, and all
other Necessaries fit and convenient for (...) an Apprentice during the Term
aforesaid. And at the (...) of the said Term shall and will give to his said
Ap^^entice one new Suit of Apparel, etc. In Witness, etc.

License.
A License is a Power to do and execute some Act or Thi^^ or to enjoy some
Benefit, or Privilege, or Protecti^^

A License to a Debtor.
TO all People, etc. We A. B. C. D. E. F. etc. wi^^ Names are here under
written, and Seals affixed, C^^^ditors of L. M. of, etc. Merchant, send
Greeting. (...) as the said L. M. on the Day of the Date hereof, is indeb^ unto
us his said Cre^^^ors in diverse Sums of Money, (...) by Reason of great Losses
and Mi^fortunes, he is not (...) present able to pay unto us without Respite of
Time to (...) given for that Purpose: Know ye therefore, that we (...) said
Creditors do, by these Presents, give and grant unto (...) said L. M. free
License, and our sure and safe Conduct (...) come and go, and resort unto us,
and every of us, to co^^pound and take Order with us, and every one of us, for
(...) and every of our said Debts; and also to go about his or (...) Business
and Affairs at his free Will and Pleasure, from (...) Day of the Date hereof
unto the full End and Term of (...) whole Year next coming, without any Let,
Suit, Troub^^ Arrest, Attachment or other Disturbance to be offered (...) done
unto him the said L. M. his Wares, Goods, Money (...) Merchandises whatsoever,
by us, or any of us, or by (...) Heirs, Executors, Administrators, Partners or
Assigns of (...) or any of us, or by our or any of our Means and Procureme^^
And we the said Creditors severally and respectively, e^ch (...) himself, his
Executors and Administrators, does severally (...) apart, and not jointly
covenant and grant to and with these L. M. by these Presents, That if any
Trouble, Vexation, (...) Damage, or Hindrance shall be done unto him the said
L. ^ either in his Body, Goods or Chattels, within the said (...) of one whole
Year from the Date hereof, by us, or any (...) us, the said Creditors, or by
any Person or Persons, by (...) through the Commandment, Procurement or Consent
of (...) or any of us, against the Tenor and Effect of this our (...), that
then he the said L. M. by Virtue of the Presents, shall be discharged and
acquitted for ever towa^^ and against him and them of us, his and their
Executo^ Administrators, Partners and Assigns, and every of them, (...) whom,
and by whose Means he shall be vexed, arrest^^ (...), ^mprisoned, attached,
grieved, or damnified, of (...) Manner of Actions, Suits, Quarrels, Debts,
Duties and ^^mands, either is Law or Equity whatsoever, from the ^^^inning of
the World to the Day of the Date of these ^^^sents. In Witness, etc.

Of Leases, Distress for Rent, etc.
A Lease is a Deed whe^eby Lands and Tenements, etc. are demised and letten for
a less Time than he that (...) let them has therein: And Leases are either
for Li^e (...) for Years: Leases for Life are called Freehold, and (...) Livery
of Seisin: Leases for Years are called Chattels, (...) are not inheritable by
Heirs, but go to the Executors, etc. (...) a Lease for a Thousand Years is but
a Chattel.

A Lease may be made for Weeks, Months, Quarters, (...) until such a Term is
expired: But in every Lease for (...) the Term must have a certain Commencement
and De^^mination, or by Reference to a Certainty be made certain* (...) a
Tenant for Year^ set up Wainscoat, Doors, Windows, (...), etc. they may be
taken down by such Tenant, so (...) be done before the End of the Term, and he
leave the ^ehold in as good Condition as he found it. Co. Lit. 55.272. Tenants
in Tail, Bishops, etc. may make Leases for (...) or Years upon certain
Conditions; they are to be made (...) Deed indented, to begin from the making;
they are not ^xceed three Lives, or Twenty one Years; they must be (...) Lands
commonly let to Farm; and the accustomed yearly (...), or more, is to be
reserved. Stat. 32. H. 8.

A Lease of a House for a Term of Years.
^HIS Indenture made the fifth Day of October, in the Year of our Lord One
thousand seven hundred and three, and in the Twenty-seventh Year, of the Reign
of (...) Sovereign Lord George the Second (by the Grace of (...)) King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender ^he Faith, etc. between A. B. of
the Parish of, etc. in the (...) of, etc. Gentleman, of the one Part, and C. D.
of, (...) in the County of, etc. Mercer, of the other Part, (...), That the
said A. B. for and in Consideration of the (...) Rent and Covenants herein
after reserved and (...), on the Part and Behalf of the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to be paid, observed an^ performed, has
demised, granted, and to Farm letten, an^ by these Presents does demise, etc.
unto the said C. D. (...) that Message or Tenement called, etc. now in the
Possessi^^ of, etc. situate and lying in, etc. with all and singular Way^
Waters, Lights, Easements and Appurtenances, to the (...) Message or Tenement
belonging, or in any ways app^^^taining; together with the Use of the Goods in
the Schedu^^ hereto annexed mentioned; to have and to hold the (...) Message
or Tenement and Premises abovementioned, (...) the Appurtenances, unto the said
C. D. his Executors, A^^ministrators and Assigns, from, etc. next, for and
during (...) Term of seven Years thence next ensuing, and fully to (...)
complete and ended; Yielding and Paying therefore (...) during the said Term
unto the said A. B. his Heirs and A^^signs, the yearly Rent of 30l. of, etc. in
and upon the Fea^ of, etc. by even and equal Portions. And if it shall happ^^
the said yearly Rent above reserved, or any Part thereof, (...) be behind and
unpaid in Part or in All, by the Space (...) Twenty-one Days next after any or
either of the said Day appointed for Payment thereof; then and from thencefor^
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. B. his He^^^ and Assigns,
into the said Premises to re-enter, and the (...) to have again, repossess and
enjoy, as in his and their first (...) former Estate, Right and Title; any
Thing herein (...) to the contrary thereof in anywise notwithstanding. And
(...) said C. D. for himself, his Executors, Administrators (...) Assigns, does
covenant and grant to and with the said A. ^ his Heirs and Assigns, that he the
said C. D. his Execut^^^ Administrators and Assigns, shall and will well and
truly (...) or cause to be paid unto the said A. B. his Heirs and Assig^^ the
said yearly Rent above reserved, at the Days and Tim^ and in Manner and Form
above expressed, clear of, and (...) and above all Taxes, Rates and Payments
whatsoever (exce^^ etc.) and also that he the said C. D. his Executors,
Ad^^^nistrators and Assigns, shall and will from Time to Time, (...) at all
Times during the said Term hereby granted, well (...) sufficiently repair,
maintain, sustain, uphold, amend and (...) the said demised Premises, and every
Part thereof, with (...) Appurtenances, in, by and with all and all Manner of
need and necessary Reparations whatsoever, when and as often Need shall
require; And the same so (...) and sufficien^ repaired, maintained, sustained,
upheld and kept, at (...) and of the said Term unto the said A. B. his Heirs
and As^^gns shall and will peaceably and quietly leave and yield up; and also
shall and will then leave unto the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, All such
Goods as are mentioned in the ^chedule hereto annexed, in as good Condition as
they are ^ow in (reasonable Usage of them, and the Casualty of Fire (...) the
mean Time excepted.) And the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs and Assigns,
does covenant and grant to and ^ith the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, that he the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators and As^^gns, shall and may, by and under the yearly Rent and
Cove^ants herein before reserved and contained, peaceably and ^uietly have,
hold, occupy, possess and enjoy, All and singu^^r the said Message or Tenement
and Premises above-men^^oned, with the Appurtenances, for and during the said
Term ^ereby granted, without the Let, Trouble, Hindrance, ^olestation,
Interruption and Denial of him the said A. B. ^is Heirs and Assigns, or of any
other Person or Persons claim^^g, or to claim by, from or under him. In Witness
whereof (...) Parties first above named, have to these present Indentures
^^terchangeably set their Hands and Seals, the Day and Year ^^ove written.

Of Assignments.
AN Assignment is the setting over all a Man's Right, in Land or Goods, to
another Person. There is an As^^gnee in Deed, and an Assignee in Law: An
Assignee in ^eed, is he to whom a Lease, Estate or Interest, is assigned (...)
Deed: And an Assignee in Law, is such as the Law ap^^inteth without Deed, as an
Executor is an Assignee in (...), Die. 5.

If a Lessee for Years assign over his Term, the Landlord (...) charge which of
them he will; but an Acceptance of (...) Rent from the Assignee (knowing of the
Assignment) de^^^mines the Election. 3 Co. 24.

An Assignment of a Bond.
WHEREAS A. B. of, etc. in and by one Bond or Obligation, bearing Date, etc.
became bound to C. D. (...) etc. in the Penal Sum of 500l. conditioned for the
Pay^ent of 250l. and Interest, at a Day since past, as by the (...) Bond and
Condition thereof may appear. And whereas there now remains due to the said C.
D. for Principal and Interest on the said Bond, the Sum of 275l. of, etc. Now
know all Men by these Presents, that the said C. D. for and in Consideration of
the said Sum of, etc. to him in Hand paid by E. F. of, etc. the Receipt whereof
the said C. D* does hereby acknowledge, he the said C. D. has assigned and set
over, and by these Presents does assign and set over unto the said E. F. the
said recited Bond or Obligation, and the Moneys thereupon due and owing. And
all his Right and Interest of, in and to the same. And the said C. D. for the
Considerations aforesaid, has made, ordained, const^^tuted and appointed, and
by these Presents does make, and^ the said E. F. his Executors and
Administrators, his (...) and lawful Attorney and Attorneys irrevocable, for
him an^ in his Name, and in the Name and Names of his Executo^^ and
Administrators, but for the sole and proper Use and Benef^^ of the said E. F.
his Executors, Administrators and Assign^ to ask, require, demand, and receive
of the said A. B. (...) Heirs, Executors and Administrators, the Money due on
the said Bond; and on Nonpayment thereof, him, hi^ Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, to sue for, recove^ and receive the same. And on Payment
thereof, to delive^ up and cancel the said Bond, and give sufficient Releases
an^ Discharges thereof; and one or more Attorney or Attornie^ under him to
constitute; and whatsoever the said E. F. (...) Attorney, shall lawfully do in
the Premises, the said C. D does hereby allow and confirm. And the said C. D.
do^^ covenant with the said E. F. That he the said C D. hat^ not received, nor
will receive the Moneys due on the sai^ Bond, or any Part thereof, neither
shall or will release (...) discharge the same, or any Part thereof, but will
own an^ allow of all lawful Proceedings for Recovery thereof, he (...) said E.
F. saving the said C. D. harmless of and from an^ Costs that may happen to him
thereby. In Witness, etc.

Of Mortgages, etc.
A Mortgage is defined to be a Pawn of Lands, Tene^ments, etc. for Money
borrowed: And may be (...) by Lease for a long Term of Years (the usual Way)
Lea^^ and Release, Assignment, etc. It is a Deed upon Condition and until
Failure in Payment of the Money borrowed, (...) Mortgagor is to enjoy the
Lands; and though Failure be (...) he has a Right of Redemption.

If any Person, who has once mortgaged Lands, mortgage the same to any other
Person, without discovering to ^he second Mortgagee the prior Mortgage, the
Mortagor shall forfeit his Right of Equity of Redemption; and the second
Mortgagee may redeem. Stat. 4 and 5. W. and M.

Besides Mortgages of Lands, Goods may be granted on Condition, in the Nature
of Mortgage.

A Mortgage of Goods.
THIS Indenture made, etc. between L. M. of, etc. of the one Part, and W. H.
of, etc. of the other Part, witnesses, That the said L. M. for and in
Consideration of ^he Sum of, etc. to him in Hand paid by the said W. H. at and
before the Sealing and Delivery of these Presents, the ^eceipt whereof the said
L. M. does hereby acknowledge; He the said L. M. has bargained and sold, and
by these ^resents does bargain and sell unto the said W. H. One Wag^on, with
the Horse-Tackle and other Appurtenances (...) belonging, etc. To have and to
hold the said Wagon, and all other the Goods and Chattels above, by these
^resents bargained and sold unto the said W. H. his Exe^utors, Administrators
and Assigns for ever. Provided al^ays, and upon Condition, That if the said L.
M. his Exe^utors, Administrators and Assigns, do and shall well and ^^uly pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said W. H. his Exe^utors, Administrators and
Assigns, the full Sum of, etc. in and upon, etc. next coming, That then these
Presents, and ^very Thing herein contained, shall cease, determine, and (...)
void; any Thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.
And the said L. M. for him^^lf, his Executors and Administrators, does covenant
and (...) to and with the said W. H. his Executors, Admi^^strators and Assigns,
that he the said L. M. his Exe^^tors, etc. shall and will well and truly pay,
or cause to (...) paid unto the said W. H his Executors, etc. the said (...)
of, etc. at the Day and Time, and in Manner and (...) aforesaid, according to
the true Intent and Mean^^g of these Presents. In Witness, etc.

A Mortgage of Lands.
THIS Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. of the one Part, and C. D.
of, etc of the other Part, ^itnesseth, that the said A. B. for and in
Consideration of the Sum of, etc. to him in Hand paid by the said C. D. the
Receipt whereof the said A. B. does hereby confess and acknowledge; he the said
A. B. has granted, bargained and sold, and by these Presents does grant,
bargain and sell unto the said C. D. All that Message or Tenement, etc.
situate, lying and being, etc. And also the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder
and Remainders, Rents and Services of all and singular the said Premises
abovementioned, and of every Part and Parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances.
To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, Lands and Pr^^mises
abovementioned, and every Part and Parcel thereon with the Appurtenances, unto
the said C. D. his Executor^ Administrators and Assigns, for and during the
Term of 50^ Years next and immediately ensuing and following, and fu^^ly to be
complete and ended: Yiel^ing and paying there^fore yearly during the said Term,
one Pepper Corn in an^ upon the Feast of, etc. if demanded. Provided always,
and upon Condition, that if the said A. B. his Heirs, and Assigns, do and shall
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said C. D. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the Sum of, etc. with legal Interest for the same,
in and upon, etc. next ensuing the Date hereof; then these Presents, and every
Thing herein contained, shall cease determine, and be void; any Thing herein
contained (...) the contrary notwithstanding. And the said A. B. for him^self,
his Heirs and Assigns, does covenant and grant to an^ with the said C. D. his
Executors, Administrators and As^signs, that he the said A. B. his Heirs and
Assigns, shall an^ will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the sai^
C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said (...) Sum of, etc. in
and upon the said, etc. next coming, accordi^^ to the true Intent and Meaning
of these Presents. And also in case Failure shall be made, that he the said C.
D. his Ex^^cutors, etc. shall and may at all Times after Default, in
Pe^^formance of the Proviso or Condition herein containe^ peaceably and quietly
enter into, have, hold, occupy, po^^sess and enjoy all and singular the said
Message, Lands (...) Premises abovementioned, and every Part and Parcel
ther^^of, with the Appurtenances, for and during the Remaind^^ of the said Term
of 500 Years hereby granted, which shall (...) then to come and unexpired,
without the Let, Hindranc^ Molestation, Interruption and Denial of him the
said A. ^ his Heirs and Assigns, and of all and every other Person (...)
Persons whatsoever. And further, That he the said A. B. and his Heirs, and all
and every other Person and Persons, and his and their Heirs, any Thing having
or claiming in the said Message or Tenement and Premises above mentioned, or
any Part thereof, shall and will at any Time or Times, after Default shall be
made in Performance of the Proviso or Condition aforesaid, make, do and
execute, or cause or procure to be made, etc. All and every such further and
other lawful and reasonable Grants, Acts and Assurances in the Law whatsoever,
for the farther, better and more perfect granting and assuring of all and
singular the said Premises abovementioned, with the Appurtenances, unto the
said C. D. To hold to him the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, for and during all the Rest and Residue of the said Term of five
hundred Years abovementioned, which shall be then to come and unexpired, as by
the said C. D. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or his or their
Counsel learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised and required.
And lastly, It is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed upon by and between
the said Parties to these Presents, That until Default shall be made in
Performance of the Proviso or Condition herein contained, he the said A. B. his
Heirs and Assigns, shall and may hold and enjoy the said Message or Tenement
and Premises abovementioned, and receive and take the Rents, Issues and
Profits thereof to his and their proper Use and Benefit; any Thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness, etc.

Of Conveyances, Feoffments, Wills.
THE usual Conveyance of Lands at this Time, is by Lease and Release. A Lease
for a Year, or a Bargain and Sale, is first drawn to give Possession, by Force
of the Statute 27 H. 8. and then the Release is made to convey the Fee of the
Premises to the Person intended.

A Release made by one that has no Right to the Lands, ^void: And a Release to
one, that at the Time of the Release had nothing in the Lands, is also void;
for he o^ght to have a Freehold, Possession or Privity. A Release of a Man's
Right in Fee-simple, is not sufficient to pass the same; but a Release to a Man
and his Heirs, will pass as a Fee-simple, and to the Heirs of his Body, as in
Estate Tail. Co. Lit.

A Feoffment was our ancient Conveyance of Lands; to which Livery and Seisin is
necessary, the Possession being thereby given to the Feoffee: And this Deed is
said to excel a Fine or Recovery, it clearing all Disseisins, and other
wrongful Estates, which no other Conveyance does; and for that it is so
solemnly and publicly made, it has been of all other Conveyances the most
observed. Plowd. 554.

By Lease and Release, Feoffment to Uses, Fine and Recovery of Lands, etc.
Marriage Settlements and Jointures are made to Women (in Consideration of their
Fortunes which the Law is ever careful to preserve; and whereof the Woman may
not be divested, but by her own Fine. 2 (...) Rep.

All Grants, Conveyances, etc. made of Lands or Tene^ments, to defraud any
Purchaser of the same for valuable Consideration as against such Purchaser, and
all claiming under him, shall be void. Stat. 27 Eliz.

A Lease or Bargain and Sale for a Year, as the Foundation of a Release.
THIS Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. of the one Part, and C. D.
of, etc. of the other Part, witnesses, That the said A. B. for and in
Consideration of the Sum of Five Shillings of, etc. to him in Hand paid by the
said C. D. the Receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged he the said A. B. has
granted, bargained and sold, and by these Presents does grant, etc. unto the
said C. D. all tha^ Message, etc. and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainde^
and Remainders, Rents and Services of the said Premise^ above mentioned, and of
every Part and Parcel thereof with the Appurtenances; To have and to hold the
said Mes^suage or Tenement, Lands, Hereditaments and Premises a^bovementioned,
and every Part and Parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances, unto the said C. D.
his Executors, Admini^strators and Assigns, from, etc. for and during unto the
(...) End and Term of one whole Year from thence next and im^mediately ensuing
and following, fully to be complete an^ ended; Yielding and Paying therefore
one Pepper Corn (...) and upon the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel (if
de^manded) To the Intent that by Virtue of these Presents and by Force of the
Statute for transferring of Uses into Po^^session, he the said C. D. may be in
the actual Possession (...) ^ll and singular the said Premises abovementioned,
with the Appurtenances, and be thereby enabled to accept and take (...) Grant
and Release of the Reversion and Inheritance thereof to him and his Heirs, to
the only proper Use and Behoof of him the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, for
ever. In Witness, etc.

A Release or Conveyance of Lands.
THIS Indenture made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. of the one Part, and C. D.
of, etc. of the other Part, witnesses, That the said A. B. for and in
Consideration of the Sum of, etc. to him in Hand paid by the said C. D. the
Receipt whereof the said A. B. does hereby confess and acknowledge, and for
diverse other good Causes and Considerations him thereunto moving; he the said
A. B. has granted, bargained and sold, aliened, released and confirmed, and by
these Presents does fully, freely and absolutely grant, bargain, etc. unto the
said C. D. (in his actual Possession now being, by Virtue of a Bargain and Sale
to him thereof made for one whole Year, by Indenture bearing Date the Day next
before the Day of the Date of these Presents, and by Force of the Statute for
transferring of Uses into Possession) and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
all that Message or Tenement, situate, etc. with the Rights, Members and
Appurtenances thereof, and all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Orchards, Gardens,
Lands, Meadows, Commons, Pastures, Feedings, Trees, Woods, Under-Woods, Ways,
Paths Waters, Watercourse, Easements, Profits, Commodities, Advantages,
Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or which now are, or formerly have been
accepted, reputed, taken, known, used, or occupied or enjoyed to or with the
same, or as Part, Parcel or Member thereof, or of any Part thereof, situate,
lying and being in, etc. aforesaid: And also the Reversion and Reversions,
Remainder and Remainders, Rents and Services, of all and singular the said
Premises abovementioned, and of every Part and Parcel thereof, with the
Appurtenances: And also all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Claim and
Demand whatsoever, as well in Equity as in Law of him the said A. B. of, in and
to all and singular the said Premises above mentioned, and of, in and to every
Part and Parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances* and also all Deeds, Evidences
and Writings, touching or concerning the said Premises only, or only any Part
thereof, together with true Copies of all other Deeds, Evidences and Writings,
which concern the said Pre^mises, or any Part thereof, jointly with any other
Lands or Tenements, now in the Custody or Possession of him the said A. B. or
which he can or may get or come by without Suit in Law; the same Copies (...)
be made and written at the Request, Costs and Charges, (...) the said C. D. his
Heirs and Assigns: To have and to hol^ the said Message or Tenement, Lands,
Hereditament and all and singular the Premises abovementioned, and eve^ry Part
and Parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances, un^to the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns, to the only prope^ Use and Behoof of the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assign^, for ever. And the said A. B. for himself, his Heirs and Assigns, does
covenant and grant to and with the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, That he
the said A. B. now is the true, lawful and rightful Owner of all and singular
the said Message, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises
abovementioned, and of every Part and Parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances:
And also, that he the said A. B. now is lawfully and rightfully seized, in his
ow^ Right, of a good, sure, perfect, absolute and indefeasib^^ Estate of
Inheritance in Fee-simple, of and in all an^ singular the said Premises
abovementioned, with the Ap^purtenances, without any Manner of Condition,
Mortgage, Limitation of Use or Uses, or other Matter, Caus^ or Thing, to alter,
change, charge or determine the same And also, that he the said A. B. now has
good Right^full Power, and lawful Authority, in his own Right (...) grant,
bargain, sell and convey, the said Message, Lands Tenements, Hereditaments and
Premises abovementioned with the Appurtenances, unto the said C. D. his Heirs
an^ Assigns, to the only proper Use and Behoof of him the said C. D. his Heirs
and Assigns, for ever, according (...) the true Intent and Meaning of these
Presents; and als^ that he the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and
(...) at all Times for ever hereafter, peaceably and quietly have hold, occupy,
possess and enjoy, all and singular the sai^ Message, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Pre^mises abovementioned, with the Appurtenances, without
(...) Let, Hindrance, Molestation, Interruption and De^ial, of him the said A.
B. his Heirs or Assigns, and of all and every other Person or Persons
whatsoever; and that ^reed and discharged, or otherwise well and sufficiently
^aved and kept harmless and indem^ified, of and from all ^ormer and other
Bargains, Sales, ^^fts, Grants, Leases, Mortgages, Jointures, Dowers, Uses,
Wills, Entails, Fines, Post-fines, Issues, Amerciaments, Seizures, Bonds,
Annuities, Writings Obligatory, Statutes Merchant, and of the Staple,
Recognizances, Extents, Judgments, Executions, Rents and A^earages of Rents,
and of and from all other Charges, Estates, Rights, Titles, Troubles and
Encumbrances whatsoever; had, made committed, done or suffered, or to be had,
made, etc. by the said A. B. or any other Person and Persons whatsoever,
claim^ng or to claim, by, from or under him, them or any of them; and further,
that he the said A. B. and his Heirs, and all and every other Person and
Persons, and his and their Heirs, any Thing having or claiming in the said
Premises above mentioned, or any Part thereof, by, from or under him, shall and
will, from Time to Time, and at all Times hereafter, upon the reasonable
Request, and at the Costs and Charges of the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns,
make, do and execute, or cause or procure to be made, etc. all and every such
farther and other lawful and reasonable Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Device
and Devices, Conveyance and Conveyances, in the Law whatsoever, for the
further, better and more perfect granting, conveying and assuring of all and
singular the said Premises abovementioned, with the Appurtenances, unto the
said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper Use and Behoof of the said
C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, for ever, as by the said C. D. his Heirs or
Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised, or advised and required. And lastly, It is covenanted, granted and
agreed upon, by and between the said Parties to these Presents, and the true
Meaning hereof also is, and it is hereby so declared, that all and every Fine
and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries, Assurance and Assurances, Conveyance and
Conveyances, in the Law whatsoever, already had, made, levied, suffered,
executed and acknowledged, or at any Time hereafter to be had, made, etc. by or
between the said Parties to these Presents, or either of them, or by or between
them, or either of them, and any other Person or Persons whatsoever, of the
said Message, Tenement, Lands and Premises abovementioned, with the
Appurtenances, either alone by itself, or jointly with any other Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, shall be and enure, and shall be adjudged,
esteemed and taken to be and enure, as for and concerning all and singular the
said Premises abovementioned, with the Appurtenances, to and for the only
proper Use and Behoof of the said C. D. his Heirs and, Assigns, for ever,
according to the true Intent and Meaning of these Presents, and to and for none
other Use, Intent or purpose, whatsoever. In Witness, etc.

A Deed of Feoffment of a Message.
THIS Indenture made, etc* between H. I. of, etc. of the one Part, and K. L.
of, etc. of the other Part, witnesses, that the said H. I. for and in
Consideration of the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds of lawful Money of
Great Britain, to him in Hand paid by the said K. L. the Receipt whereof the
said H. I. does hereby confess and acknowledge, and for other good Causes and
Considerations him thereunto moving, he the said H. I. has granted, bargained
and sold, aliened, enfeoffed, released and confirmed, and by these Presents
does grant, etc. unto the said K. L. All that Message, etc. now in the
Possession of, etc. situate and lying, etc. and also the Reversion and
Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, Rents and Services thereof; and also all
the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Claim and Demand, whatsoever of him the
said H. I. of, in and to the same Premises, and of, in and to every Part and
Parcel thereof; To have and to hold the said Message, etc. and Premises above
mentioned, with the Appurtenances, unto the said K. L. his Heirs and Assigns,
to the only proper Use and Behoof of him the said K. L. his Heirs and Assigns,
for ever, under the yearly Rent of Four Pence; ( or to be holden of the Chief
Lord or Lords of the Fee of the Premises, by the Rents and Services therefore
due, and of Right accustomed.) And the said H. I. for himself, his Heirs and
Assigns, does covenant and grant to and with the said K. L, his Heirs and
Assigns, that he the said H. I. now is lawfully and rightfully, seized in his
own Right of a good, sure, perfect, absolute and indefeasible Estate of
Inheritance in Fee-simple, of and (...) all and singular the said Message and
Premises abovementioned, and of every Part thereof, with the Appur^enances,
without any Manner of Condition, Mortgage, Limitation of Use or Uses, or other
Matter, Cause or Thing, to alter, change, charge or determine the same: And
also that he the said H. I. now has good Right, full Power, and lawful
Authority, in his own Right, to grant, ^argain, sell and convey, the said
Message and Premises abovementioned, with the Appurtenances, unto the said K.
L. his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper Use and Behoof of the said K. L.
his Heirs and Assigns, for ever, according to the true Intent and Meaning of
these Presents. And also, that he the said K. L. his Heirs and Assigns, shall
and may, from Time to Time, and at all Times hereafter peaceably and quietly
have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy, all and singular the said Premises
abovementioned to be hereby granted, with the Appurtenances, without the Let,
Trouble, Hindrance, Molestation, Interruption and Denial, of him the said H. I.
his Heirs or Assigns, and of all and every other Person and Persons whatsoever,
claiming or to claim by, from or under him, them, or any of them. And further,
that he the said H I. and his Heirs, and all and every other Person and
Persons* and his and their Heirs, any Thing having or claiming in the said
Message and Premises abovementioned, or any Part thereof, by, from or under
him, shall and will at all Times hereafter, at the Request and Costs of the
said K.L. his Heirs or Assigns, make, do and execute, or cause or procure to be
made, done and executed, all and every further and other lawful and reasonable
Grants, Acts and Assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further, better, and
more perfect granting, conveying and assuring of the said Premises hereby
granted, with the Appurtenances, unto the said K. L. his Heirs and Assigns, to
the only proper Use and Behoof of the said K. L. his Heirs and Assigns, for
ever, according to the true Intent and Meaning of these Presents, and to and
for none other Use, Intent or Purpose whatsoever. And lastly, the said H I.
has made, ordained, constituted and appointed, and by these Presents does
make, ordain, constitute and appoint, M. N. of, etc. and O. P. of, etc. his
true and lawful Attorneys jointly* and either of them severally, for him, and
in his Name, into the said Message and Premises, with the Appurtenances,
hereby granted and conveyed, or mentioned to be granted and conveyed, or into
some Part thereof, in the Name of the whole, to enter, and full and peaceable
Possession and Seisin thereof for him, and in his Name, to take and have, and
after such Possession and Seisin so thereof taken and had, the like full and
peaceable Possession and Seisin thereof, or of some Part thereof, in the Name
of the whole, unto the said K. L. or to his certain Attor^ney or Attorneys, in
that Behalf, to give and deliver; (...) hold to him the said K. L. his Heirs
and Assigns, for eve^^ according to the Purport, true Intent and Meaning of
the^^ Presents; ratifying, confirming and allowing all and wha^^soever his said
Attorneys, or either of them, shall do (...) the Premises. In Witness, etc.

A Will with Devise of Lands, Goods and Chattels.
IN the Name of God, Amen. I H. I. of, etc, being weak in Body, but of sound
Memory (blessed be God) do this Day, etc. in the Year, etc. make and publish
this my last Will and Testament in Manner following; (that is to say) First I
give to my Son K. I. the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds. Also I give and bequeath
to my Daughter M. I. the Sum of Four Hundred Pounds. Also I give to my dear
Wife E. I. the Sum of Three Hundred Pounds. Also I give to my Brother T. I. and
Cousin L. I. each the Sum of One Hundred Pounds, to be paid within Six Months
next after my Decease. Also I give all that Message or Tenement, situate, etc.
wherein I now live, to my said Son K. I. to hold to him during his Life; and
after his Decease I give the same to my Daughter M. I. during the Remainder of
my Estate and Interest therein. Also I give all my Lands in the Parish of, etc.
to my Wife E. I. to hold to her during her natural Life, she making no Waste or
Destruction thereupon; and from and after her Decease, I give and devise the
same to my said Son K. I. for the Term of his natural Life; and after his Death
I devise the same to my Daughter M. I. during her natural Life; and after the
Determination of that Estate, I give and devise the same to my loving Friends
C. D. and E. F. and their Heirs, during the Life of my said Daughter M. to the
Intent to preserve and support the contingent Uses and Remainders herein after
limited; but nevertheless, in Trust to permit my Daughter M. to receive the
Rents and Profits thereof during her Life; And from and after the Decease of my
said Daughter M. then to (...) to the first Son of my said Daughter M. and the
Heirs of the Body of such first Son lawfully issuing; And for Default of such
Issue, then to the Use and Behoof of the second, third, fourth, fifth, and all
and every other Son and Sons of my said Daughter M. begotten; the elder of such
Son and Sons, and the Heirs of his Body, lawfully issuing, to be always
preferred, and to take before the Younger of such Sons, and the Heirs of his
Body: And for Default of such Issue, then I give the same to, etc. for and
during the Term of his natural Life; And after his Decease, to remain to his
Issue in Tail, in such Manner as I have limited the same to my Daughter M. and
for Default of such Issue, then to remain to, etc. and the Heirs Male of his
Body begotten, etc. And for Default of such Issue, to remain to my own right
Heirs for ever. All the rest of my Lands and Tenements whatsoever, whereof I
shall die seized, in Possession, Reversion or Remainder, I give to my said Son
K. I. his Heirs and Assigns, for ever. Also, I give to, etc. Eight Guineas a
Piece to buy them Mourning, etc. Also, I give to my Servant Man, etc. and the
two Servant Maids that shall be living with me at the Time of my Decease, Ten
Pounds a Piece. Also, I give to the Poor of the Parish of, etc Fifty Pounds.
Also, I give my Wife E. I. during her Life, the Use of all my Plate and
Household stuff; And after her Death the same to remain to, etc. Also, All the
Rest and Residue of my Goods, Chattels, and personal Estate whatsoever, I give
to my said Wife E. I. And I make and o^dain her my said Wife sole Executrix of
this my Will, in Trust for the Intents and Purposes in this my Will contained.
And I make my loving Friends, etc. Overseers of this my Will, to take care and
see the same performed according to my true Intent and Meaning; and for their
Pains, I give each of them, etc. In Witness whereof, I the said H. I. have to
this my last Will and Testament set my Hand and Seal, the Day and Year above
written. Signed, sealed and delivered by the said H. I. as and for his last
Will and Testament, in the Presence of us, who were present at the Signing and
Sealing thereof.

A Will gives and conveys Estates, and alters the Property of Lands and Goods,
in like Manner as a Deed executed (...) a Man's Lifetime. It was ordained by
Statute 32 H. 8 and by 29 Ca^. 2. all Devises of Lands, etc. are to be made in
Writing, and signed by the Devisor in the Presence of three Witnesses.

Wills are to be governed by the Intention; and the Intent in Devises may
sometimes make Estates to pass contrary to the Rules of the Law, with Respect
to other Deeds. The first Grant and last Will stand in Force. Co. Lit. 25.
Plowd. 162.

There must be three Witnesses to the Signing and Sealing of a Will.

A short, but comprehensive Account of all Arts and Sciences.
ALCHYMY, is that sublime Part of Chemistry, which teaches the Art of
transmuting Metals, and making the Grand Elixir, or Philosopher's Stone, as
some are weak enough to believe. But the best Definition of it is, that it is
an Art without Art, which begins with Lying, is carried on with Labor, and
ends with Beggary.

ALGEBRA, commonly called the Analytick Art, because it teaches how to resolve
Questions, and demonstrate Theorems, by searching into the fundamental Nature
and Frame of the Thing. It is the Science of Quantity in General, or a peculiar
Method of Reasoning, which takes the Quantity sought, as if it were known, and
then by the Help of another, or more Quantities given, proceeds by undeniable
Consequences, till at length the Quantity first only supposed to be known, is
found to be equal to some Quantity or Quantities certainly known.

ANATOMY, is that Art which teaches to dissect or take to Pieces any Animal
Body, in a curious and dexterous Manner, in order to discover and explain the
Original, Nature and Use, of its several Part^, for the Improvement of Physic
and natural Philosophy.

ARCHITECTURE, is the Art of erecting Edifices proper for Habitation. The
Ancients have established five Orders of Architecture, called the Tuscan, the
Dorick, the Ionick, the Corinthian, and the Composite, or Roman Order, the
Difference between which Orders consists in the Column, with its Base and
Capital, and the Entablature, that is, the Architrave, Frise and Cornice; for
these are the Parts which constitute the Order, and each One has its proper
and peculiar Measures. The Rules of Architecture require Solidity, Convenience
and Beauty, Solidity implies the Choice of a good Foundation, and good sound
Materials to work with. Convenience consists in so ordering and disposing the
Parts of an Edifice, that they may not hinder or embarrass one another. Beauty
is that due ranging and agreeable Union and Symmetry of all the Parts, which,
upon the Whole, exhibits to the Eye of the Spectators a beautiful Form and
Appearance. Architecture may likewise be divided into Civil, Military and
Naval. Civil Architecture teaches to contrive and erect commodious Buildings
for the Uses of Civil Life; such as Churches, Palaces and private Houses.
Military Architecture shows the best Way of raising Fortifications about
Cities, Towns, Camps, Sea Ports, etc. Naval Architecture is employed about the
Building of Ships, Galleys, and other Vessels for the Water, together with
Ports, Moles, Docks, etc. on Shore.

ARITHMETIC, is the Art of numbering truly, and of finding all the Properties
and Powers of Numbers.

ASTROLOGY, is that foolish Science which pretends to foretell future Events
from the Motions of the heavenly Bodies, and their Aspects one to another* or
from some imaginary, hidden Qualities, which the weak Admirers of this Cheat
will have to be in the Stars.

ASTRONOMY, is a mathematical Science, which teaches us the Knowledge of the
Stars or heavenly Bodies, viz. Their Magnitudes, Distances, Motions and
Eclipses.

BOOK-KEEPING, is the Art of keeping so distinctly all the Transactions of a
Man's Business, that he may know at any Time the true State of his Affairs with
Ease and Certainty.

BOTANY, as it relates to the Science of Medicine, teaches to discover and
enumerate the several Virtues of Plants and Simples: As it relates also to
Natural History, it teaches to distinguish the several Kinds and Species of
Plants, Trees, Shrubs, etc. one from another, and to give just Descriptions of
them.

CHEMISTRY teaches how to separate the different Substances that are found in
mixed Bodies, as Animals, Plants or Minerals, and to reduce them to their first
Principles.

CHIROLOGY, the Art of dumb Language, or a Method of talking by Signs made with
the Hands.

SURGERY (or, as it is commonly written and pronounced, Surgery) is the
third Branch of the curative Part of Medicine, and teaches how several Disease^
and Accidents, incident to the Body of Man, may be cured by manual Operation.
It is divided by some into five Parts. 1. Synthesis, a setting together Things
that are separated. 2. Diaeresi, a separa^ing Things that were before
connected. 3. Diorthosis, a correcting of Things squeezed together and
contorted. 4. Exaeresis, the taking away of Supe^fluities. 5. Anaplerosis, the
restoring of that which was deficient. It is a common Saying, that a good
Surgeon should have an Eagle's Eye, a Lion's Heart, and a Lady's Hand.

CHRONOLOGY, is the Art of computing Time from the Creation of the World for
historical Uses, and preserving an Account of remarkable Transactions, so as to
date truly the Beginnings and the Ends of Reigns of Princes, the Revolutions of
Kingdoms and Empires, signal Battles, etc.

COSMOGRAPHY, teaches to describe the whole Frame of the Universe, with the
several Parts thereof, according to their Number, Positions, Motions,
Magnitudes, Figures, etc. The Sciences of Astronomy and Geography are
comprehended in this.

DIALING, is the Art of drawing Lines on a given Plane, in such a Manner as to
show the Hour of the Day when the Sun shines. Papyrius Cursor set up the first
Sun-dial in Rome, about the Year of the City 447; and before that, according to
Pliny, there was no Account of Time, but the Sun's rising and setting.

ETHICS, is the Science of Morality, by which we are taught the Rules and
Measures of human Action; the Writers upon it usually divide it into two Parts:
The first contains an Account of the Nature of moral Good and Evil: The other
enumerates the several Virtues in which the Practice and Exercise of Morality
consists, and which are the proper Means for us to obtain true Felicity, the
End of all Moral Actions.

GEOGRAPHY, teaches to describe the whole Globe of the Earth, and all its
Parts. It is usually divided into General and Particular. General, or Universal
Geography, considers the whole entire Globe of Earth and Water, as to its
Figure, Magnitude, Motions, Land, Sea, etc. without any Regard to particular
Countries. Particular, or Special Geography, considers the Constitution of the
several Countries, or Regions, their Figure, Bounds, Parts, etc. The Forests,
Mountains, Mines, Rivers, Animals, Plants, etc. As also the Climate, Seasons,
Weather, Heat, Cold, Distance from the Equinoctial, etc. the Inhabitant^ Arts,
Communities, Cities, Commodities, Foods, Language, Customs, Policy, Religion,
etc.

GEOMETRY, originally signifies the Art of measuring the Earth, or any
Distances or Dimensions on, or be^onging to it; but it is now used for the
Science of Quantity, Extension or Magnitude, abstractedly considered, without
any Regard to Matter. Geometry may be divide^ unto four Parts, 1. Planimetry,
or the Mensuration of plai^ ^urfaces. 2. Altimetry, or the taking and measuring
of He^^hts, whether accessible or inaccessible. 3. Longimetry, or the Art of
taking the Distances of Things afar off, as Steeples, Houses, Trees, etc. 4.
Stereometry, or the Art of measuring solid Bod^es.

GRAMMAR, is the Art of Speaking or Writing properly, or of expressing the
Relation of Things in Construction, with due Accent in Speaking, and
Orthography in Writing, according to the Custom of those whose Languague we
learn.

HERALDRY, is the Art of (...), or Blazoning. It consists in the Knowledge of
what (...) royal Solemnities, Cavalcades and Ceremonies at (...), Interviews of
Kings, Instalments, Creation (...). Funerals, Marriages, etc. and also in
giving the (...) Coat Armor to all Persons, regulating their Right of
Pr^ced^^cy in Point of Honor, and restraining those from bearing Coat armor
that have not a just Claim thereto, etc The Herald's College is a Corporation
established by Richard III. consisting of Kings at Arms, Heralds, and
Pursuivants, who are employed to denounce War, proclaim Peace, etc.

HUSBANDRY, is the Art of tilling or cultivating the Earth, in order to render
i^ fertile, and to assist Nature in bringing to greater Perfection the Products
thereof.

HYDRAULICKS, the Art of making all Sorts of Engines to carry or raise Water,
or which are moved by Water, and serve for other Uses.

HYDROGRAPHY, is that Part of Geography which considers the Sea, and teaches
the Art of making Sea Charts, measuring and describing the Sea, accounting for
its Tides, Counter-tides, Currents, Bays, Soundings, Gulfs; also its Sands,
Shallows, Shelves, Rocks, Promontories, Distances from Port to Port, with
whatsoever i^ remarkable either out at Sea, or on the Coast.

HYDROSTATICKS, is the Doctrine of Gravitation in Fluids, or that Part of
Mechanics that consi^ders the Weight or Gravity of fluid Bodies, especially
Wa^ter, and also of solid Bodies immerged therein.

LAW, applied to the several Policies and States (...) People, is the Maxims
and Rules they have agreed upon, (...) received from their Magistrates, in
order to live in Peace and mutual Society; or it is a Command or Precept co^ing
from some superior Authority, which an inferior is obliged to obey. Aristotle
defines it to be a Declaration determined by the Common Council of a City,
showing in what Manner Things are to be done: But Chambers, in his Dictionary,
thinks this is not so properly a Law as a Covenant.

LOGIC, is the Art of conducting the Understanding in the Knowledge of Things,
and the Discovery of Truth. It may be divided into four Parts, Apprehension,
Judgment, Discourse, and Method; as in order to think aright it is necessary to
apprehend, judge, discourse and methodize rightly. My Lord Bacon divides Logic
into some Branches, according to the Ends proposed in each; for a Man reasons
either to find what he seeks, or to judge of what he finds, or to retain what
he judges of, or to teach what he retains; and from hence arise so many Arts of
Reasoning, viz. The Art of Inquisition or Invention, the Art of Examining or
Judgment, the Art of Preserving, or of Memory, and the Art of Elocution or
Delivering.

MATHEMATICS, is the Science of Quantity, and comprehends whatever is capable
of being numbered or measured. It may be divided into Speculative, which re^^s
in the bare Contemplation of the Properties of Things; and Practical, which
applies the Knowledge of those Properties to some Uses in Life, as in
Astronomy, Architecture, Geography, Mechanics, Music, Optics, Perspective,
etc.

MECHANICS, is a mixed mathematical Science, which considers the Nature and
Laws of Motion and moving Powers, with the Effects thereof in Machines, etc.

METAPHYSICS, may be called the Science of natural Theology; it considers
Being in general, abstracted from all Matter, viz. The Essence of it, which
seems to have a real Being, though it does not exist, as a Rose in the Depth of
Winte^. It is so sublime, or rather so abstruse a Science, that there is a
great Difference among Authors about its Nature and Ideas.

MUSIC, is the Science of Sound, or the Art of disposing and conducting
Sounds, of proportioning them among themselves, and separating them by just
Intervals in such a Manner, as to produce Harmony and Melody.

NAVIGATION, is the Art of sailing or conducting a Ship or Vessel from one
Place to another, the shortest and most commodious Way. It likewise comprehends
the Art of building and loading of Ships.

OPTICS, is a mixed, mathematical Science, which explains the Manner wherein
Vision is p^^^ormed in the Eye; treats of Sight in general, gives the Reasons
of the several Modifications or Alterations which the Rays of Light undergo in
the Eye; and shows why Objects at different Distances, and in different
Situations, appear greater, smaller, more distinct, more confused, nearer, or
more remote.

PAINTING, is the Art of representing natural Bodies, and giving them the
Appearance of Life. It may be divided into four Parts, Invention, Design,
Disposition, and Coloring.

PERSPECTIVE, is that Part of the Mathematics which gives Rules for the
representing of Objects on a plain Superficies, after the same Manner as they
would appear to our Sight, if seen through that Plain, it being supposed as
transparent as Glass,

POETRY, is the Art of inventing and composing Fables, Stories, Allegories,
etc. in Verse. It is related to Painting, as it describes the Passions and
Manners of Men; and to Music, as its Style consists of Numbers and Harmony.

PHILOSOPHY, is the Knowledge or Study of Nature and Morality, founded on
Reason and Experience. Philosophy owes its Name to the Modesty of Phythagoras,
who refused the Title of Wise given to his Predecessors, and contented himself
with the Appellation of a Friend, o^ Lover of Wisdom.

PHYSIC or MEDICINE, is the Art of healing Diseases. According to Boerhaave,
it consists in the Knowledge of those Things by whose Application Life is
either preserved healthy and sound; or when disordered, again restored to its
Health and Vigor.

PHYSIOGNOMY, is the Art of knowing (or rather guessing) the Humor, Temper, or
Disposition of a Person, by the Lines and Characters of his Face.

RHETORIC, is the Art of speaking in the most elegant and persuasive Manner;
or as my Lord Bacon defines it, the Art of applying and addressing the Dictates
of Reason to the Fancy, and of recommending them there so as to attract the
Will and Desires.

SCULPTURE, is the Art of cutting or carving Wood, Stone, Marble, etc. and of
forming various Figures and Representations therein, particularly of Men,
Beasts, Birds, etc.

THEOLOGY or DIVINITY, is that Science which instructs us in the Knowledge of
God and divine Things. It is generally divided into five Parts. 1. Natural
Theology, is the Knowledge we have of God from his Works by the Light of Nature
and Reason. 2. Supernatural Theology, is that which we learn from Revelation.
3. Positive Theology, is the Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures* and of the
Signification thereof, conformably to the Opinions of the Fathers and Councils,
without the Assistance of any Argumentation. 4. Moral Theology, is that which
teaches the divine Laws relating to our Manners and Actions. 5. Scholastic
Theology, is that which proceeds by Reasoning, and taking certain established
Principles of Faith for granted, from thence deduces Abundance of strange
Things, and has made a fine Piece of Work of it indeed. The Ancients had a
Threefold Theology. The first Fabulous, which flourished among the Poets, and
was chiefly employed in the Genealogies of the Gods, etc. The second Political,
which was embraced by the Politicians, Priests and People, as most suitable and
expedient to the Safety, Quiet, and Prosperity of the State. The third,
Natural, chiefly cultivated by the Philosopers, as most agreeable to Nature and
Reason. This last acknowledged only one Supreme God.

Of the Seven Wonders of the World.
THE Pagans did commonly boast of seven stately Structures, that were named,
The Seven Wonders of the World.

I. The greatest Wonder, and most incomparable Work, was the Temple of Ephesus,
dedicated to Diana. It was first begun by Ctesiphon, and seated (for Fear of
Earthquakes) in marish Ground; it was 425 Feet long, and 220 Feet broad; it had
in it 127 stately Marble Pillars, e^ch of which had been the sole Enterprise
and Work of a King who was resolved to make his Piety and Magnificence appear
upon his Pillar. It was 200 Years in building, though many Thousands of Men
were employed in the Work; it was rebuilt at the Command of Alexander the
Great, by Dinocrates, his Engineer.

II. The Walls of Babylon, and the pleasant Gardens which Queen Semiramis
planted; about this Work 300,000 Men were continually employed many Years.
These Walls were 300, or 350 Stadia about, which make about 22 English Miles;
they were 50 Cubits high, and so broad, that two or three Chariots might go
upon them abreast, without any Danger.

III. The Lybyrinth of Egypt, built by Mar^s, or Menis, for his Tomb, in which
16 large Apartments, or sumptuous Palaces, were built, to equal the 16
Governments, or Provinces of Egypt; there were in it so many Ways and
artificial Walks, that it was no easy Matter to find the Way out of it.
Daedalus took his Model from this, to build his Labyrinth in Crete.

IV. The Pyramids of Egypt, which remain to this Time; there were three of
them; the greatest was built by Chemnis, King of Egypt, as a stately Monument
of his Power, and to be his Sepulcher after his Death: It was placed about 16
English Miles from Memphis, or Grand Cairo, and was about 1440 Feet in Height,
about 143 Feet long on each Side of the square Basis, and 600,000 Men were
employed in building it, during the Space of 20 Years. It is built of hard
Arabian Stones, every one about 30 Feet long. Chemnis was torn in Pieces in a
Mutiny of his People, and could never obtain the Honor of being interred in
this Sepulcher. Cephus, his Brother, succeeded him, and imitated his vain
glorious Actions, in erecting another less than the former. The last was built
by King Mycerinus, or (as some say) by the famous Strumpet Rhodope; upon this
appears a great Head of black Marble, of 102 Feet round about the Temples, and
about 60 Feet high from the Chin to the Crown of the Head.

V. The Mausolaeum of Caria, which Queen Artemisia built, as a Sepulcher for
her deceased Husband Mausolus; she enriched it with so many rare Ornaments,
that it was esteemed one of the greatest Wonders of the World; and all
Monuments of this Kind have since been called Mausolaea. This Queen did love
her Husband so much, that besides this Edifice, which she erected for him, she
caused the Ashes of his consumed Body to be put into a Cup of Wine, and drank
it, to give him a Lodging next to he^ Heart.

VI. The C^lossus of Rhodes was made by Chares, of As^a Minor, of Brass, in the
Space of 12 Years, and was dedicated to the Sun. It cost about 44000 l. English
Money, and was placed at the Entrance of the Harbor of the City, with the
right Foot standing on one Side of the Land, and the Left on the other; between
the Legs the tallest Ships, with their Masts, did enter into the Haven. When it
fell to the Ground by an Earthquake, few Men were able to embrace the little
Finger of this prodigious Statue. It was 800 Feet high, and of a proportionable
Bigness; and when broken down and beat to Pieces by the Saracens, that took the
Island, Anno Dom. 684, they loaded above 900 Camels with it.

VII. The Statue of Jupiter Olympius was the neatest (...) all these Works; it
was erected by the Eleens, a People of Greece, and placed in a Temple dedicated
to Jupiter, which was enriched afterward with many curious Representations,
and excellent Statues: This of Jupiter was sitting in a Chair half naked, but
from the Girdle downwards he was covered; in the right Hand he held an Eagle,
and in the Left a Scepter. Caligula endeavored to transport it to Rome, but
those that were employed about it were frighted from their Enterprise, by some
unexpected Accident. This Statue was made by Phidias, and was 150 Cubits high;
the Body was of Brass, but the Head was of pure Gold.

Among the many renowned Buildings and Erections of the Ancients, the Capitol
at Rome may justly claim a Place; it was consecrated to Jupiter Imperator; upon
Mount Tarp^ia (...) was built, and was a famous Edifice, the richest and most
^oted in all Italy. It was beautified with the Statues and ^mages of all the
Gods, with the Crowns of Victory, and ^ith the Spoils of the Nations conquered
by the Romans. It was seated in the most eminent Place of the City, by
^arquinius Priscus, and Servius Tullius, two Kings of Rome, and afterward
mightily enlarged by the following Genera^ions. The Temples of Neptune, Vulcan,
Saturn, Mars, Aesculapius, Hercules, Vesta, and Janus, are noted by Au^hors to
have been brave Structures, worthy of the Roman Grandeur; as also the Pantheon,
dedicated to all the Gods.

To these may be added, the Royal Palace of Cyrus, King of Media, built in a
very grand and extravagant Manner, by Menon, who cemented the Stones with Gold;
also the Temple built at Athens to Minerva, and another in the same City to
Mars, where the Judges met to examine Causes of Life and Death; with the
glorious Temple, or Fabric, at Delphos, where Apollo gave Oracles. This Temple
was enriched with innumerable Gifts, which came from every Part of the World^.
In it was a Woman Priest ^amed Phoebas, otherwise Pythia, or Pythonissa, that
re^eived the Enthusiasm, sitting upon a little Table supported with three Feet;
it was called Tripous, or Cortina, because ^t was covered with the Skin of the
Serpent Python, whom Juno had sent to distress Latona, Apollo's Mother, in the
Island of Del^s; when Apollo came of Age, he killed this Serpent with his Bow
and Arrows, after a long and grievous Combat; during which these Words, Io
Poean, were frequently heard in the Air, and which afterward were frequently
used in public Rejoicings.

Of the MUSES.
THE Muses had several Names given them by the ancient Poets, according to the
several Places where ^hey dwelt; sometimes they were called Pierides, on
account of the Forest Pieris, in Macedonia, where they were said to be born;
sometimes Heliconiades, from Mount Heli^^n, which was near their beloved
Parnassus, and sometimes (...) other Names, according to the Pleasure of the
Mytho^ogists, in their fabulous Accounts of the Heathen Deities.

They were supposed to be the Daughters of Jupiter and Memory, which Fiction
was introduced, because Jupiter was supposed to be the first Inventor of
Disciplines, which are necessary in order to a regular Life.

These Muses, by the Assistance of Apollo, invented Music; their chief Office
was to be present at solemn Festivals, and sacred Banquets, and there to sing
the Praises (...) famous Men, that they might encourage others to under^take
glorious Actions, as D'Assigny observes.

They were represented as Women, because Disciplines and Virtues have feminine
Names assigned to them; they were painted young, handsome and modest; agreeably
dressed and crowned with Flowers; they were much esteemed for their Chastity,
and it is written of them, that when Adonis ^he Favorite of Venus, offered to
stir up in them some Inclinations to Love, they fell upon him* and killed him.

They were at first but three, and called Melete [Meditation] Mneme [Memory]
and Aonide [Singing] but (...) certain Carver of Sycion, having Orders to make
three Statues of the three Muses for the Temple of Apollo, mistook his
Instructions, and made three several Statues of each Muse; and these happening
to be very curious and beautiful Pieces, they were all set up in the Temple,
and from thence began to be reckoned nine Muses; afterward Hes^^d named them,
Calliope, Clio, Erato, Thalia, Melpomen^, Terpsichore, Euterpe, Polyhymnia, an^
Urania.

Calliope was supposed President of Heroic Poetry, Clio of History, Erato of
the Lute, Thalia of Comedy, Melpome^^ of Tragedy, Terpsichore of the Harp,
Euterpe of Wind Music, Polyhymnia, of Music, Urania of Astronomy.

Alexander Ross says, there were at first three Muses, to show the three Sorts
of Music, ^inging, Blowing, and Playing; the first in the Throat, the second
in Wind-Instruments, and the third upon Strings: Or to show the Threefold
chief Learning in the World, Philosophy, Rhetoric and Mathematics: Philosophy
is Threefold, rational, moral and natural; there are three Parts in Rhetoric,
the Demonstrative, the Deliberative, and the Judicial; there are also three
Parts of Mathematick^, Arithmetic, Geometry, and Music. ^fterwards the Number
of Muses increased to seven, either because of seven Holes in Wind Instruments,
of seven Strings on other Instruments, of the seven liberal Sciences, or of the
seven Planets. Lastly, they came to be nine in Number, from the nine Spheres,
which they held made a musical Harmony. They were called the Daughters of
Jupiter and Mnemosyne, to show that Learning cannot be had without the
Intellect and Memory, which are most eminent in learned Men; or rather that GOD
is the Author of Learning, and Memory the Mother or Nurse thereof; therefore
the Poet ascribes to the Muses, Memory, and Utterance; by the one they are
preserved, by the other they are heard.

They are called Musae from Maiosthai, to enquire; this belongs to Invention;
and from Muesthai, to initiate into sacred Mysteries, by which is meant
Judgment; so that the Muse^, or Learning, consists in Invention and Judgment.

The Muses were winged, to show the Nimbleness of good Wits, and the Quickness
of Poetry and Music, in moving the Affections; they bore Palms in their Hands,
to show that they conquer Men's Passions; they did all dance in a Ring to show
the Agreement and Harmony among the liberal Sciences; and the Graces were
joined with them, to show the solid Joy that is the constant Attendant on
Learning and Virtue.

They had diverse Names from diverse Occasions, as Nymphs and Goddesses of Water,
to show the Clearness of Poetry; Parnassides, Heliconides, Pierides, Aonides,
Pegasides, Aganippides, Libethrides, Thespiades, etc. to show the various Kinds
of Learning, and the many Labors the Scholar must undergo, before he can
attain unto Excellency. The particular Names of the Muses are also very
significant, as Clio, from Cleous [Glory] because great is the Glory of
Learning, though Ignorance be its Enemy; Euterpe, from Euterpus [delightful]
because there is no Delight comparable to that of virtuous, learned Men; Thalia
from Thalein [to grow green] for Learning will still flourish, and never
wither; Melpomene, from Meletenpoiomene [making Melody] for the Life of a
Scholar is still cheerful and melodious; Terpsichore, from Terpo and Choria [to
d^light in Singing or Dancing] for the Mirth of learned Men is within
themselves; E^ato, from Eratus [Love] for the more a Man knows Learning, the
more he loves it; Polyhymnia, or Polymnia, from Polus and Umnos; no Men's Minds
are so full of Melody and spiritual Comfort, as the Minds of learned Men;
U^ania, from Uranos [the Heaven] for Learning came from thence; Caliope, from
Cales opos [a good Voice] there is no outward Voice so charming and melodious
as the inward Voice of Knowledge in the Mind, by which a Man discourses with
himself, and is never less alone than when he is alone.

The Ancients built Temples to the Muses remote from Cities, and described them
sitting on the Top of Parnassus, to show Learning has its Seat in the Head,
which is the Top and Capital of Man's Body; and as all Gods and Goddesses had
their Birds dedicated to the^, so had the Muses the laborious Bees, who very
much resemble Scholars in their Providence, Industry, Labor, Order and
Harmony; they are content with little, yet afford much Benefit to the Owner; so
do Scholars to the State; neither is there any Creature, to which learned Men
and Students are more beholden, than to the Be, which both affords them Food
and Physic in its Honey, and Light in their Lucubrations in its Wax.

Of HERCULES.
THERE has been no King, nor other Person, that we read of in profane History,
that has rendered his Name more famous than Hercules, who, for his noble Acts,
and glorious Deeds, was deified and placed among the Stars.

His Father is said to be Jupiter, and his Mother Alcmena; when his Mother was
big with Child with him, Sthelenus, King of Mycene, was in great Hopes of
obtaining speedily a Son, afterward named Eurystheus. Jupiter took an Oath,
that he that should be born first, should be King, and have an absolute Command
over the other; which when Jun^ (Jupiter's Wife, the sworn Enemy of all her
Husband's Concubines, and of all the Children that were born of them) had
accidentally heard, she caused Eurystheus to come forth of his Mother's Womb,
at the End of seven Months, and by that Means procured unto him the Scepter
with the Sovereign Command.

It Is said that when Jupiter lay with Hercules's Mother, he spent three Nights
(which he caused to be joined together) in begetting him; his Body and Stature
were answerable to the Pains and Power of his Father, for he was seven Feet
high, had three Ranks of Teeth in his Mouth, and out of his Eyes Sparkles of
Fire and Light did sometimes proceed.

Juno, at the Intercession of Pallas, seemed to be reconciled to Hercules; as a
Testimony of her Good Will to him, when in his Infancy, she gave s^^ck to him
of her own Breast; by that Means it happened, that the little Hercules, having
spilt some of the Milk out of his Mouth, he whited that Part of the Sky that is
called the Milky Way. This Kindness was only feigned to satisfy the Request of
Pallas; for a while after, when he was yet in his Cradle, she sent two dreadful
Serpents to devour him, which did not however answer her Expectation; for the
Child, without any Show of Fear, caught them in his Hands, and tore them in
Pieces.

When he came to Years of Understanding, he was put under the Tuition of such
Masters as did excel in many Arts and Sciences, to learn of them the Things
that were required to make him accomplished He was taught by Te^tare^, a
Scythian, to handle the Spear and Dart; Lucius, the Son of Apollo, taught him
the Rudiments of Learning, and because he had chastised him with a Rod,
Hercules killed him ^hen he came to be of Age; from Eumolpus he learned the Art
of playing upon Instruments of Music; Chiron ga^^ him an Insight into
Astrology, and Harpolicus made him understand the other Sciences that were
necessary (...) accomplish a Man of his Birth and Valor.

He was scarce eighteen Years of Age, when Eurystheus ^^g^ged him in the most
difficult Enterprises, and exposed (...) to all Manner of Dangers to make him
perish; so that (...) he took a Resolution to obey him no longer; but the (...)
informed him, that it was the Will of the Gods, that he should pass twelve
Times more through Dangers, in Obedience to the Commands of this Tyrant. These
are named the twelve Adventures or Labors of Hercules.

1. He was appointed to destroy a great ^ion of the Forest of Nemea, that was
fallen from the Moon, and spoiled the Country round about; he discharged all
his Arrows at this wild Beast to little Purpose, and then encountered it with
his Club only in his Hand, but the Skin was so tough and hard that no Weapon
could enter it, which when Hercules perceived, he caught hold of the raging
Lion, and tore him in Pieces with his Hands. Ever after he delighted in wearing
the Skin of this Lion about him, as a Token of his Victory, and in Imitation of
him all Heroes have Skins of Lions, or other wild Beasts upon their Bucklers;
and some say, this is the Lion that was placed among the twelve Signs of the
Zodiac.

2. He was sent to the Lake of Lerna, near Argos, to encounter with an Hydra, a
notable Serpent, or Dragon of a strange Nature; for it had seven Heads, and
when one was cut off, many others did immediately burst forth, so that it was
not possible to overcome this Monster, unless all his Heads were cut off at one
Time, and the rest of his Body destroyed by Fire and Sword, which was executed
by Hercules.

3. Eurystheus sent him to Mount Erymanthus, in Arcadia, where a wild Boar of
extraordinary Bigness destroyed all the neighboring Fields: Hercules dragged
him alive to Eurystheus, who was almost frighted out of his Wits when he beheld
him.

4. He got hold of the Stag of the Mountain Menelaus, whose Feet were of Brass,
and Horns of Gold, when he had pursued it a whole Year.

5. He put to Flight the Birds of the Lake S^^mph^lus, that were so numerous,
and of such a prodigious Greatness, that they darkened the Air, and hindered the
Sun from shining upon Men, when they flew over them; besides they did often
take up some, and carry them away to devour them. But these Encounters were not
worthy to be compared with his Combat against,

6. The Amazons, who were Women of Scythia, dwelling upon the Coasts of the
Hircanian Sea, who having followed their Husbands in the War, and seeing them
all cut off by the Enemy, near the River Thermodon, in Cappadocia, they
resolved to maintain the War themselves, and not to suffer any Man to have
Command in the Army, or Kingdom, or to live among them. They went among their
Neighbors to fetch from them Children; the Males they destroyed, but kept the
Females, and brought them up in a warlike Manner; and that they might be more
ready to handle the Bow and Arrows, they burnt their right Paps in their
Infancy. They behaved gallantly in the Siege of Troy under the Conduct of
Penthesilea; but were forced to yield to the Valor of Hercules, who being
accompanied by Theseus, went against them, according to the Command of
Eurystheus, and took their Queen Hippolite, who was afterward married to
Theseus.

7. He undertook to cleanse the Stables of Auge^^, King of Elis, in which
Thousands of Oxen had been daily fed, so that the Dung, by a long Continuance,
was much increased, and filled the Air with Infection; Hercules therefore
turned the Current of the River Alpheus from its ordi^ary Course, and caused it
to pass through the Stables; thus (...) carried away the Filth in one Day,
according to his Bargain; but Augeas was not grateful to him for his Pains* for
he denied him the tenth Part of the Oxen that were kept there; this caused the
Death of Augeas, and the Loss of his Goods.

8. He seized upon a Bull, that did breathe nothing but Fire and Flame, which
Neptune had sent into Greece, to punish some Disgraces and Affronts, which he
had received from that Country.

9. He passed into Thracia, where he caused the Tyrant Diomedes to endure in
his own Person, that which he made others to suffer, which was, he gave all
Strangers that he could catch in his Kingdom to be devoured by his Horses.
Hercules served Busiris King of Egypt, in the same Manner, because he was so
cruel to all Strangers, as to cut their Throats upon the Altars of Jupiter,
that he might cloak his Cruelty by a Pretense of Piety.

10. Geryon, King of Spain, who was reported to have three Bodies, because he
commanded three Kingdoms, was no less cruel than the former; he fed some Oxen,
which he highly esteemed, as Diomedes did his Horses, and to keep them, he had
a Dog with three Heads, and a Dragon with Seven. When Hercules was sent thither
by Eurystheus, he treated him as he had formerly done Diomedes.

11. He was required to put into the Possession of Eurystheus, certain Golden
Apples belonging to Juno, that were in the Custody of some Nymphs, the
Hesperides, Daughters of Hesperus, the Brother of Atlas; but before any one
could come at them, a great Dragon that was at the Entry of the Gardens where
they grew, was to be first overcome. He found Means to accomplish this
Enterprise also; some say he made Use of Atlas, who went to gather them, while
he took his Burden upon him, and bore up the Heavens with his Shoulders.

12. The last Injunction which he received from Eurystheus, was to fetch from
Hell the Dog Cer^erus, from whence he brought also Theseus, that was gone down
to keep Company with his dear Friend Pirathous.

These glorious Actions made Hercules dreadful to Eurystheus, and to all
Princes in the World. Afterward there was no Tyrant, nor Monster known, but he
undertook to destroy them; thus he put to Death Cacus (the Son of Vulcan, who
had three Heads) because he was a notable Robber, who did spoil and destroy all
that came near the Mount Aventin. From thence he went to Mount Caucasus, where
he delivered Prometheus, and killed the Eagle that devoured his Liver. He had
also an Encounter with Antaeus, the Son of the Earth, who was of a prodigious
Bigness and did commit all Manner of Cruelties; Hercules lifted him up in his
Arms, and pressed the Breath out of his Body.

But as Hercules was big, and of an high Stature, a small Matter was not
sufficient to nourish him, for as he walked in the Fields, one Day when he was
hungry, he met Theodamus tilling the Ground, he snatched from him one of hi^
Oxen, which he laid upon his Shoulders, and devoured every Bit of it before
Theodamus, who loaded him all the while with Curses and Imprecations.

He made a Journey into Spain, where he separated the two Mountains, Calpe and
Abyla, to let the main Ocean into the Land, by the Straits of Gibraltar; these
two Mountains situated one against another, Calpe in Spain, and Abyla in
Mauritania, do appear afar off as two Pillars, they are said to be the two
Pillars of Hercules, where he engraved these Words, Non plus ultra; as if these
were the (...) ^ounds of the World, beyond which he could not enlar^^ (...)
Dominions. In all his Conquests, he made Use of a (...) of an Olive Tree, which
at last he dedicated to Mercury, the God of Eloquence, whose Virtue he
acknowledged to be more profitable than the Power of Arms.

To re-count all that the Ancients have recorded of this famous Man, would make
a pretty large Volume, and perhaps not be so agreeable to some Persons as this
Epitome* therefore we will just hint at the Catastrophe of Hercules, and
conclude our Narrative.

Like the Heroes of old, he was enamored with Women; he married Megara, the
Daughter of Cr^on, King of Thebes, whom he afterward killed; then he became a
Slave to Omphale, Queen of Lydia, for whom he changed his Club for spinning
Instruments, and his Lion's Skin for the Garments of a waiting Maid. Afterward
he became amorous of Dejanira, for whom he was to fight A^helous, the Son of
^^etys, whom he conquered; and returning with her to a River^s Side, where
Nessus the Centaur offered his Service to carry her behind him to the other
Side; when the Traitor came over, he would have abused her, had not Hercules
pierced* him with an Arrow to the Heart; when he was ready to expire, he
resolved to revenge himself in this Manner: He gave his Garment dropping with
his Blood to Dejanira, persuading her, that if her Husband did wear it but
once, he would never have Love for other Women. The silly Creature believes
him, therefore she sent it to him by Lychas his Man, when he was sacrificing
upon Mount Oeta; but it fell not out as she had imagined, for as soon as he had
put on this Coat, the Blood of Nessus, which was a most powerful Poison, caused
so great a Burning all over his Body, that in Despair he cast himself into a
flaming Pile of Wood, and there was consumed to Ashes.

His Servant Lychas was drowned in the Sea, where he was changed into a Rock,
and Dejanira, for Grief, killed herself, with a Blow of her Husband's Club.

Hercules, before he died, obliged Philoctetes, the Son of Pean, his Companion
and Friend, to swear unto him never to discover the Place where his Ashes and
Bones were buried* he then delivered unto him his Arrows, colored with the
Blood of the Hydra, which were afterward carried to the Siege of Troy.

A short Historical Table of the most remarkable Events, that happened in the
World, from the Creation to the Death of Julius Caesar.
THE most ancient History we have, is the Bible; from that we learn, that it is
now upwards of 5700 Years since the World was created. But the Account which
Moses gives is so very concise, that for the first 2000 Years we have very
little Information what was done amongst Mankind, save that they were so
exceeding wicked, that in all the World only Noah, and his Family, found Favor
with God, and were preserved from that Deluge which destroyed the whole Earth
besides.

The Building of Babel (or Babylon) The Division of Languages, and the
Dispersion of Mankind.

(...) the Son of C^sh founds the Babylonian Empire, Assure the Son of Shem
builds a City (which was afterward called Nineveh) and founds the Assyrian
Empire.

The Monarchy of Egypt established by Misraim, the Son of Ham.

Fohi first King of China.

The Arabians Pastoral Kings of Egypt.

The Death of Noah in the 950th Year of his Age, 350 Years after the Flood.

The Birth of Abraham.

The Kingdom of the Argives, established under Inachus.

The Chaldeans take Babylon.

Joseph sold into Egypt.

The Birth of Moses.

A Colony from Eg^pt, under the Command of Cecrops, build the City of Athens.

The Chaldeans drove out of Babylon by the Arabians.

The Israelites delivered from Egypt by Moses.

Sesostris, King of Egypt, conquers Arabia, Persia, India, Scythia, Thrace,
Asia the Less, Syria, in about nine Years.

The famous Philosopher Hermes Trismegistus, was Privy Counselor to this
Monarch.

The Destruction of Troy.

Aeneas flies into Italy, kills Turnus King of the Rutuli, in a single Combat;
marries Lavinia, Daughter of Latinus, and builds the City of Lavinium. The
Aeneid of Virgil is built upon this Story.

The Temple of Jerusalem built by Solomon.

The Olympic Games, which were first instituted by Hercules, at the Foot of
Mount Olympus, in Honor of his Father Jupiter, are revived in Peloponnesus by
Iphytus. From hence the Greeks begin the Epoch of their Olympiads.

Rome built by Romulus, first King of Rome.

About this Time lived Homer and Hesiod, Greek Poets.

^^danapalus having provoked his Subjects by his Effeminacies to rebel against
him, and being besieged in Nineveh by Nabonasar and Arbaces, his
Lieutenants-General, burns himself, his Wives, hi^ Children, and all his
Treasures*

^^curgus persuades the Lacedaemonians to change their Form of Government, which
was monarchial, to a mixed Form of Monarchy and Aristocracy.

^orinth, about 600 Years after its first Building, alters its Form of
Government from Monarchial to a Republic.

^uma Pompilius, second King of Rome, begins to reign, divides the Year into
twelve Months.

The Destruction of the first Temple of Jerusalem, by Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon.

About this Time lived Daniel the Prophet; Arion, Alceus, Epimenides, Greek
Poets; Sappho the Poetess, and Pythagoras the Philosopher.

^^oesus, the last King of Lydia, defeated and taken Prisoner by Cyrus.

About this Time lived the seven wise Men of Greece, viz. Thales the Milesian,
Chilon the Lacedem^^^^^, Cleobulus of Corinth, By^^ of Prye^^^ Pittacus of
Mytilene, and (...) of Salamis.

Cyrus sets the Jews at Liberty.

Now sung the merry Poet Anacreon.

Tarquin the Proud, the seventh and last King of Rome, expelled. Rome had now
been governed by Kings 245 Years. Afterward two Consuls were annually elected
in their Place.

Rome besieged by Porsenna, King of the Tuscans, in Favor of Tarquin.

Darius King of Persia, sends to demand Earth and Water, as Homage from the
Grecian Cities in Europe; and having sent a great Army against the Grecians,
they win the famous Battle of Marathon, by the Conduct of Miltiades the
Athenian General.

Tribunes established for the Roman People.

Quintus Cincinnatus the first Dictator chose by the Romans.

Leonidas, at the Streights of Thermopilae, with 300 Lacedaemonians, who all
died upon the Spot, kills 2000 Persians.

Pindar and Symonides, Lyrick Poets, and Sophocles and Eurypides, Tragic
Poets, flourished about this Time.

The Jews finish the Building of their Temple, from whence they begin their
seventy Weeks*

About this Time lived Aeschylus the Poet, Herodotus and Thucydides the
Historians, and Isocrates the Orator.

The Peloponnesian War began between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians.

Themistocles banished by the Athenians.

Aristophanes the Poet, Socra^es the Philosopher, and Alcibiades the Athenian
General, lived about this Time.

Alexander the Great born.

Plato dies.

Demosthenes the Athenian Orator, Diogenes the Cynick, and Aristotle the
Philosopher, lived about this Time. Alexander, after having reigned 12 Years,
in which Time he co^^quered the greatest Part of the know^ world, dies in the
32d Year of his Age.

Now flourished Heraclitus, Democritus, Zeno, Euclid, and Epicurus.

Arsaces frees the Parthians from the Macedonian Yoke, and lays the Foundation
of the Parthian Empire.

About this Time lived Berosus the Chaldean, who writ the History of Assyria
and Babylon, and Plautus the Poet at Rome.

The first Punick War begun.

The second Punick War begun by Hannibal.

Scipio vanquishes Hannibal in Africa.

About this Time lived Ennius and Terence, Roman Poets.

Divisions at Rome between the Senate and People. Marius sides with the People.
Sylla ^pposes and kills him. This was the first Civil War among the Romans.

^^^odorus Siculus, the Greek Historian, flourished about this Time, and Cicero
the Roman Orator. Cato being besieged by Caesar at Utica, kills himself.

(...) this Time the Julian Account came in Use, Caesar, as sovereign Priest,
having reformed the Calendar.

(...) returning to Rome, celebrates five Triumphs, for Gaul, Egypt, Pontus,
Africa and Spain.

^he great Power and Honors given to Caesar by the Romans, alarm some of the
chief Nobility, and occasion the Conspiracy against him by Brutus, Cassius,
Trebonius, Casca, and others, who kill him in the Senate House

^he Senate and People of Rome, by general Consent, confer on Octavianus the
whole Monarchy of the Roman Empire, with the Name of Augustus, which he and his
Successors ever after bore.

The Glory of the Romans was now at its full Height. At this Time flourished
Dionysius Halicarnasseus the Greek, and Titus Livius the Roman Historian;
together with the Poets, (...) Horace, Ovid, Cornelius, Gallus, (...)
Propertius, with many others of great Note* In fine, all Kinds of polite
Learning and Science, did never so universally flourish, as in the Augustan Age.

A short Abstract of the History of England.
JULIUS CAESAR invaded Britain, and made it tributary to the Romans in the Year
of ^he World 3945. About 100 Years after,

Claudius Caesar made an Expedition into Britain, and conquered Part of the
Island.

Nero succeeding in the Empire, sent his Lieutenant (...) nius Paulus into
Britain; but the Britons set upon ^im, and ^lew 70,000 Romans; but in the next
En^^unter 80,000 Britons were slain.

Titus Vespasian sent his Deputy, Julius Agricola, who victoriously extended
the Roman Province in Britain beyond all his Predecessors.

And thus the Romans for the Space of 500 Years reigned in Britain: At last the
Britons elected themselves several Kings to manage their Wars against the Picts
and Scots, and being deserted by the Romans, they invited the Saxons to their
Assistance, who accordingly landed in the Island under the Conduct of two
Brothers, Hengist and Horso, who advancing as far as Stamford in Lincolnshire,
gave Battle to the Scots and Picts, and vanquished them.

The Saxons by Degrees overrun the whole Island, and divided it into seven
Kingdoms (called the Heptarchy.) The Island continued in this State upwards of
360 Years, when Egbert King of the West Saxons reduced all the contending Kings
under his Subjection, and gave the Name of England to the Kingdom, from the
Angles whence he came. He was the first sole Monarch of England, and having
reigned 17 Years died.

In his Reign the Danes first invaded England with 32 Ships, consisting of
23000 Men, but were put to Flight.

Ethelwolf, Egbert's eldest Son, succeeded and reigned 20 Years.

Ethelbald, eldest Son of Ethelwolf, succeeded his Father, and reigned two
Years.

Ethelbert, his Brother, succeeded, and ^^igned seven Years.

Ethelred, third Son of Ethelwolf, succeeded; and hav^ng reigned seven Years,
was slain in Battle against the Danes, who were now very numerous in the
Kingdom.

Alfred, fourth Son of Ethelwolf, succeeded; he fought nine Battles with the
Danes in one Year, and forced them to depart the Kingdom. He first put the
English upon building Ships, and so securing themselves by Sea* He cleared the
Land of Thieves and Robbers: And for the better Administration of Justice, he
divided the Kingdom into Shires, Hundreds and Tithes. He founded the first
College in Oxford, now called University College. For his Vir^^es, Learning and
Abilities, he was honored with ^he Title of Alfred the Great, and may justly
be called the first Civilizer of the English Nation. He reigned 20 Years.

Edward the elder succeeded his Father, and reigned 23 Years.

Ethalstan, Edward's eldest Son, succeeded, and reigned 16 Years. He caused the
Bible to be translated into English.

Edmund succeeded his Brother Ethalstan, and reigned 6 Years.

Eldred reigned 9 Years.

(...) reigned 4 Years, and was deposed by the Monks.

Edgar his Brother succeeded; he cleared the Land of Wolves and wild Beasts. He
reigned 16 Years.

Edward the Younger reigned 3 Years.

Ethelred reigned 38 Years, in his Reign there was a great Massacre of the
Danes, who were become intolerable to the English. He dying,

Edmond Ironside, the Son of Ethelred, succeeded; bu^ (...) was rivalled by
Canute the Dane, with whom he (...) to share the Government; and after his
(...) ^he Danes became sole Masters of the (...) it had been in Possession of
the Saxons (...) continued their Sovereignty about 24 (...) 3 Kings, viz.

(...) 14 Years.

(...) 7 Years, and

(...) 3 Years.

The (...) the Confessor, the 7th Son (...) collected all the Laws of his
(...), which is the Origin of ou^ (...). He was the first of our Kings that
attempted to cure the King's Evil with a Touch, and the first that signed (...)
^atents with the Seal now called the King's Broad Seal. He reigned 24 Years.

After his Decease, Harold, Son (...) Godwin, Earl of Kent, was chose King; but
before (...) had reigned a Year, William Duke of Norman^ p^^^ending a Right to
the Crown of England, (...) Sussex on the 8th of September 1066, and (...) of
October following was fought (...) Battle of Hastings, in which was kille^
(...) and his two Brothers, most of the ^nglish Nobility, and 97974 common
Soldiers.

WILLIAM the Conqueror,
Was crowned King of England on Christmas Day.

He built the Tower of London.

He caused a Survey to be taken of the whole Kingdom (which is still to be seen
in the Book called Doomsday Book, kept in the Tower of London) and raised from
every Hide of Land (or 100 Acres) Six Shillings.

He first appointed Justices of the Peace and Juries, ordained the Courts of
Chancery and Exchequer.

He pulled down 36 Parish Churches, and dispeopled the Country in Hampshire for
30 Miles in Compass, to make a Chase for hunting, now called the New-Forest.

In the Year 1072, Waltheof, Earl of Huntington, was beheaded, the first
Nobleman that ever was beheaded in England.

He reigned 21 Years, and was crowned every Year a new.

He appointed, by his Will, his second Son,

WILLIAM RUFUS,
To succeed him, who was crowned.

Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, is banished the Kingdom, for maintgining the
Pope's Supremacy against the King's Prerogative.

Malcolm, King of Scotland, invades England, and is killed by King William.

In this King's Reign the Holy War was first undertaken, which continued near
300 Years.

He built Westminster Hall, which is 270 Feet long* and 74 broad.

The Sea overflowed its Banks, and drowned 4000 Acres of Land, which had been
Earl Godwin's, now called Godwin's Sands in Kent.

Having reigned near 13 Years, he was shot by Sir Walter Tyrrel, levelling an
Arrow at a Deer.

HENRY I.
The youngest Son of the Conqueror succeeded.

In this Reign St. Bartholomew's Hospital, in Smithfield, was founded by a
Jester of the King's, named Rejor. Before this, Smithfield was the Place where
all Malefactors were executed. Now lived Jeoffroy of Monmouth the Historian.
The first Parliament of England was summoned by this King at Salisbury. He died
by a Surfeit of Lampreys, after he had reigned 35 Years.

STEPHEN,
Grandson of the Conqueror, by Alice his Daughter, succeeded to the Crown.

He granted to his Subjects a Charter of some Immunities, dated under his Hand
at Oxford.

In this Reign great Part of the Cities of London, York and Rochester, were
destroyed by Fire.

He reigned 18 Years and 10 Months.

HENRY II.
Son to Maud the Empress, sole Daughter of Henry I. succeeded.

Coaches were now first used in England.

Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, murdered in the Church. London Bridge
built of Wood.

The City of Leicester was burnt by the King's Command.

He divided the Kingdom into six Circuits, and appointed three itinerant
Justices for each of them.

He kept the famous Rosamond, Daughter of Lord Clifford, in a secret Bower at
Woodstock; but being discovered by Queen Eleanor, she was poisoned.

He reigned 35 Years, and was succeeded by his Son

RICHARD I.
He was surnamed for his Courage, Coeur de Lion.

On his Coronation Day, the 3d of September, was a great Slaughter of the Jews.

About this Time lived Robin Hood and Little John.

In this Reign was the first Lord Mayor chosen, named Henry Fitz Alwyn, who was
Mayor 24 Years together. London before was always governed by a Magistrate
called the Port Shreve, or Provost*

He reigned upwards of 9 Years, and was succeeded by his Brother

JOHN.
He had like to have lost his Kingdom to the French.

The Barons Wars begun.

King John submits himself, and his Kingdom, to the Pope's Legate.

He grants Letters Patents to the Citizens to choose a Mayor Yearly.

In the Year 1209, London Bridge (which before was made of Wood) was built of
Stone, by three Merchants, viz. Mercer, Alman and Boetwright.

He reigned about 17 Years, and was succeeded by his Son

HENRY III.
This King confirmed the Statute of Magna Charta.

Made his eldest Son Prince of Wales, which Title the King's eldest Son has
retained ever since.

He fortified the Tower of London with a Bulwark, which was built twice, and
twice overthrown in one Year's Time.

He caused a Chest of Gold to be made for laying up the Relics of King Edward
the Confessor, in the Church of Westminster.

He reigned 56 Years, and was succeeded by his Son

EDWARD I.
This King first ordered Farthings and Halfpence

In his Reign Corn was first sold by Weight.

His Consort Queen Eleanor, dying near Lincoln, was brought up to be buried at
Westminster, and at every Place where the Corpse rested he built a magnificent
Cross, with her Image upon it. Coventry Cross, Cheapside Cross, and Charing
Cross, were three of them.

In the Year 1294, was the first Alderman chose, being Nicholas Farringdon.

He reigned upwards of 34 Years, and was succeeded by his Son

EDWARD II.
Who rendered himself hateful to his Subjects, by Pierce, Gaviston, and the
Spencers; and having reigned upwards of 19 Years was deposed by the Parliament,
and forced to resign his Kingdom to his Son.

In his Reign lived Sir John Mandeville, the greatest Traveller, and the
greatest Liar in the World.

EDWARD III.
This was one of the greatest Princes that ever sat on the English Throne; he
subdued Scotland, conquered France, and appointed himself to be called King of
England and France, quartering the Arms of the two Kingdoms together.

He instituted the Order of the Garter; his Son the Black Prince took the King
of France Prisoner, and brought him to England.

He commanded all Pleas to be made in English, and not in French, as had been
used from the Conquest.

He built the Castle of Windsor.

Fifty Thousand died in London of the Plague in one Year.

About this Time lived Wickliffe, one of the first who ventured to expose the
Errors of the Church of Rome, and Dr. Orum of Oxford, who wrote an Epistle from
Lucifer to the Clergy, thanking them for sending so many Souls to Hell.

He reigned 50 Years, and was succeeded by his Grandson

RICHARD II.
In his Reign, Powder, and the Use of Guns, were first found out.

The Rebellion of Wat Tyler and Jack Straw.

Chaucer the Father of English Poetry lived now.

Richard II. For many Enormities, was deposed, after he had reigned 22 Years,
and was afterward murdered in Pomfret Castle.

HENRY IV.
Son of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, succeeded him, being chosen by the
Consent of the People.

In this King's Reign, at Skinnerswell, near Clerkenwell, was a great Play
which lasted seven Days, con^aining a Representation of several Things from the
^^eation of the World: Most of the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom were
present at it; and afterward began a royal Tournament in Smithfield.

He reigned 13 Years, and was succeeded by his Son

HENRY V.
Who, though during his Father's Reign, he lived dissolutely, robbing upon the
Highway, and associating only with Whores and Villains, yet when he came to the
Crown, proved one of the wisest and most valiant Kings the English ever had.

In his Reign Sir John Oldcastle, Sir Roger Acton, and 28 more, were hanged and
burnt at Smithfield, for maintaining Dr. Wickliffe's Opinions.

He reigned upwards of nine Years, and was suc^eeded by his Son

HENRY VI.
In his Reign was paid the first Custom for all Merchandises imported and
exported out of the Realm, settled by an Act of Parliament but for three Years,
in which was a Proviso, that it should never be made a Precedent for the like
to be do^^ after that Term was expired: But all his Successors have had it for
Life, so forcible is a Precedent once fixed in the Crown.

Eleanor Cobham, Duchess of Gloucester, is accused and convicted of
Witchcraft, and obliged to do public Penance for the same.

In 1450 was Jack Cade's Rebellion.

Printing first invented.

After he had reigned 38 Years he was deposed by

EDWARD IV.
Who after nine bloody Battles was quietly seated in his Dominions.

This King sat in Person three Days together, to see how hi^ Laws were executed*

In this King's Reign, George Nevill, Archbishop of York, made a (...), an
Account of which is among the Records of the Tower, viz. 300 Q^^^ters of W^eat,
3^0 Tons of Ale, 100 Tons of Wine, 104 Oxen, 6 Wild B^lls, 100 Sheep, 608
Calve^, 400 Swine, 30^0 Geese, 1000 Capons, 3000 Pigs, 400 Plovers, besides
Quails, Bees, Peacocks, Mallards, ^eals, Cranes, Kids, and above 20 other
several ^orts of Things, each in proportionable Numbers to what is above.

He reigned 22 Years, and was succeeded by his Son

EDWARD V.
Who was but 13 Years old, and before his Coronation was murdered in the Tower
of London by his unnatural Uncle.

RICHARD III.
The English Nero, who to make his Way clear to the Crown, murdered, 1. King
Henry VI. 2. Prince Edward his Son. 3. George Duke of Clarence his Brother. 4.
Hastings, a faithful Servant to King Edward IV. 5. Rivers. 6. Vaughan. 7. Gray.
Three of the Queen's Kindred. 8. Edward V. his Sovereign, with, 9. his young
Cousin Richard. 10. Henry Duke of Buckingham his dear Friend, and great
Coadjutor in these impious Practices. And, 11. his Wife Anna, in order to make
Way to an incestuous Match with his Cousin Elizabeth.

There was at this Time, at the French Court, Henry Earl of Richmond, of the
House of Lancaster; to him the Crown of England was proposed, with this
Proviso, that he should marry Elizabeth eldest Daughter of King Edward IV. and
thereby unite the two Houses of York and Lancaster. Upon this the Earl makes*
Haste into England, and being still reinforced as he advanced, he at last
encounters King Richard at Bosworth in Leicestershire; in which Battle King
Richard was killed, and the Crown conferred upon the Earl.

And thus an End was put to the Wars between the two Houses of York and
Lancaster, which began upon the Intrusion of King Henry IV. and in which was
fought 12 pitched Battles, and two Kings, 1 Prince, 10 Dukes, 2 Marquisses, 21
Earls, 27 Lords, 2 Viscounts, 1 Lord Prior, 1 Judge, 139 Knights, 441 Esquires,
and 84998 private Soldiers were slain.

King Richard having thus tyrannized upwards of two Years,

HENRY VII.
Son to Edmond Tudor, Earl of Richmond, and Grandson to John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, was crowned King of England.

He called a Parliament, in which an Act was passed for settling the Crown upon
the Person of King Henry, and the Heirs of his Body successively for ever.

He first appointed the Band of tall Men to attend him, called Yeomen of the
Guard, which no King before, but all the Kings and Queens since, have kept
under that Denomination.

In this King's Reign happened that strange Disease called the Sweating
Sickness, which lasted about a Month, and killed many Thousands of People; two
Lord Mayors died of it in one Week.

About this Time the Pox was first known in England.

In 1491, Ferdinand V. King of Spain, took the City and Country of Granada from
the Moors, which they had been possessed of above 700 Years, on which Account
the Pope gave him the Title of the Most Catholic King.

Henry VII. reigned 23 Years and 8 Months, and was succeeded by his Son

HENRY VIII.
This King began the first Reformation of Religion, banishing the Pope's
Supremacy out of England, though formerly he himself had wrote a Book against
Martin Luth^r, for which Pope Leo X. entitled him, Defender of the Faith, etc.

He built St. James's House, and converted the Meadows about it into a Park,
called St. James's Park.

In his Time Beef and Mutton were first ordered to be sold by Weight, viz. Beef
at a Halfpenny a Pound, and Mutton at three Farthings.

The principal Favorite, and first Minister of this King, was the famous
Cardinal Woolsey, who built Whitehall; and, though but the Son of a Butcher,
rose to a greater Power, and was invested with more Honor than any Subject of
England, either before or since.

King Henry VIII. having reigned 37 Years, died, and was succeeded by his Son

EDWARD VI.
Who pursued the Reformation begun by his Father, and, in 1548, the Church
Service was first sung in English.

Having reigned upwards of six Years, he died, and appointed for his Successor
the Lady Jane Gray, Daughter of the Duchess of Suffolk, who was accordingly
proclaimed Queen of England; but,

Queen MARY,
Asserting her Right, as King Edward's Sister by Queen Catharine, the first
Wife of Henry VIII. and coming to London with some Forces, was proclaimed Queen
of England, and crowned.

In her Reign died 3 Dukes, 3 Lords, the Lady Jane Gray, and several others who
professed the Reformation.

In her Time a Barrel of Beer, with the Cask, cost ^ut Sixpence, and four
great Loaves of Bread were ^old for a Penny.

Queen Mary reigned but five Years, and was succeeded by her Sister

ELIZABETH.
She again encouraged the Reformation, which Queen Mary had discountenanced:
She was, perhaps, ^he greatest and most powerful Monarch that ever sat on the
English Throne. She succored the Scots against the French, the French
Protestants against the Papists, and both against the Spaniards. She commanded
the whole Ocean, and destroyed the Spanish Armada, which was thought to be
invincible.

In her Reign Sir Thomas Gresham, built the Royal Exchange.

Tobacco was first brought into England. Sir Wal^^r Raleigh first discovered
Virginia, so called by ^im in Honor of his Virgin Mistress Queen Eliza^eth.

In her Reign lived the great Poets Spencer and ^hakespear; Likewise Lord
Bacon, Sir Philip Sidney, (...) Walter Raleigh, Sir Francis Drake, and several
^ther great Men.

Queen Elizabeth reigned upwards of 44 Years, and was succeeded by

JAMES I.
Of the Family of the Stuarts (the Name of the Tudors expiring in Queen
Elizabeth) Kings of Scotland. He united the Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
which then took the Denomination of Great Britain.

He caused the Bible to be new translated from the Original Languages, which is
the Translation now used.

In this Reign the English Plantations were first settled in the West Indies.

In the Year 1605 was a terrible Plague in London, of which died near 100,000
Persons.

Silk Worms first brought into England.

King James reigned 22 Years, and was succeeded by his Son

CHARLES I.
This unhappy King, though a weak Man, had some Virtues, but endeavoring to
extend the Prerogative of the Crown too far, and in some Instances exercising
an arbritary Power, he was accused by his own Subjects of High Treason against
the Laws of the Land; and, after a troublesome Reign of near 24 Years, was
beheaded on a Scaffold before the Gates of his own Palace.

But though King Charles was generally for extending the Royal Power beyond its
legal Bounds, yet in his Reign several excellent Laws were made for the
Security of the Subjects Liberties; particularly, in his third Year the
Petition of Rights was made into a Law, in which it is enacted, That no Subject
shall be compelled to any Gift or Contribution to the King, but by Consent of
Parliament: Soldiers are forbidden to be quartered in private Houses, and
Martial Law is annulled. In his 16th Year was passed, what was then called the
Triennial Act, entitled, A Bill to prevent Inconveniences from long
Intermission of Parliament. By this Act, if the King should refuse to summon a
Parliament at the End of three Years, the Chancellor or Keeper might issue out
Writs to summon the Peers, and elect the Commons: If the Chancellor or Keeper
should ne^ect this, any 12 of the Peers might summon the ^arliament: If the
Peers should not send out their Summons, the Sheriffs in Counties, and other
Magi^trates, might cause Election to be made; and i^ these should omit their
Duty, the Electors might assemble themselves, and choose Members.

After the Death of King Charles, the Government of England was changed from
Monarchial to a Commonwealth, in which

OLIVER CROMWELL
Presided by the Title of the Lord Protector, and continued to direct the
Affairs of the Nation for the Space of 12 Years

At this Time, and in the preceding Reign, the whole People of England were
stark mad with Bigot^y and Enthusiasm.

Some Time after the Death of Oliver Cromwell, ^he Nation weary with perpetual
Changes of Government and Religion recalled the Son of their ^ate Monarch from
Banishment, and accordingly on ^he 23d of April

CHARLES II.
Was crowned King of Great Britain. He was a Man of much Wit and Gallantry* and
in his Reign ^he Manners of the People were quite changed: For whereas before,
it would have been esteemed pro^ane and irreligious, even to have eat an Oyster
without a long Prayer or a Psalm; it was now ^hought almost superstitious to
believe in God.

In the 5th Year of his Reign happene^ ^ dreadful Fire in London, which in the
Space o^ (...) Days ^urnt 78 Parish Churches, and 13000 Houses*

King Charles II. reigned 36 Years including the Protectorship of Cromwell, and
was succeeded by his Brother

JAMES II.
Who endeavoring to introduce the Roman Catho^^ck Religion, was obliged to
quit his Dominions; which brought about the Revolution under

WILLIAM III.
In which the Civil and Religious Liberties of the ^^ople of England were fixed
upon better Principles, and a surer Foundation, than they ever had been before.

Queen ANNE
Was proclaimed on the 8th of March, 1701. She was the youngest Daughter of
King James II. by the Lady Hide, Daughter of the Earl of Clarendon. She reigned
in the Hearts and Affections of her Subjects 12 Years, 4 Months, and died,
universally lamented, on August 1, 1714, leaving the Throne to

GEORGE I.
Who reigned 12 Years 4 Months, and died at Hanover, leaving the Imperial Crown
of these Realms to his Son

GEORGE II.
Our most gracious Sovereign now reigning; whom God long preserve*

To innoculate FRUIT TREES.
ABOUT Midsummer, or a Month before or after, take off a vigorous Shoot from a
Tree you would propagate; then make Choice of a Stock about three o^ four Years
Growth, and in a smooth Part of it make a downright Slit in the Bark, a little
above an Inch long, and another crosswise at the Bottom of that, to give Way to
the Opening of the Bark; then with your Penknife gently loosen the Bark from
the Wood on both Sides, beginning at the Bottom; next prepare your Bud, by
cutting it off with your Knife, entering pretty deep into the Wood as much
above as below the Bud, to the Length of the Slit in the Stock; after the Bud
is thus prepared, with the Point of your Knife and your Thumb take out the
woody Part of it, carefully preserving the Eye of the Bud; the^^ put your Bud
in between the Bark and the Wood of the Stock at the cross Slit, leading it
upward by the Stalk* where the Leaf grew, till it exactly closes; then bind it
a^bout with coarse Woollen Yarn, the better to make al^ Parts of it close
regularly, and the Bud incorporate with the Stocks, and the Operation is done.

The Bud will be incorporated in about three Week^ Time, and then you must
loosen the Yarn, that it may no^ gall the Place too much; the quicker this is
done the bet^ter. You may put two or three Buds into one Stock of Peaches and
Nectarines, that if one don^^ succeed another may; and if your Buds inoculated
in the Month of June, or before, don't hit, you may make a second Attempt the
same Year, and on the same Stock, with better Success. Let all Buds be taken
off of the vigorous growing Shoot, and used immediately.

To graff FRUIT TREES.
Graffing (or Ingraffing, or Grafting) is of four Sorts. 1. In the Cleft. 2. In
the Bark. 3. By Approach. And 4. Whip-Graffing. Of each of these in order. 1.
Graffing in the Cleft, or Slit Graffing. This is performed on the Pear, Cherry
and Plumb Stocks. After you have chose your Stock, cut off the Head in a smooth
Place, sloping; then even the Top horizontally with your Knife; this being
done, make a Slit near two Inches deep down the Middle of the Stock, with a
large strong Penknife; then prepare your Cyon (taken from a vigorous Shoot of
the foregoing Year, which was prepared in January) sloping it on each Side,
from a Bud or Eye, but leaving it thiner on that Side which goes into the Stock
than on the Outside, so that it may conform itself to the Slit in the Stock;
then place the Cyon in the Stock, and close the Bark of both exactly. After
this is done, temper Clay and short Hay together, and putting it round the
Stock and the lower Part of the Cyon, but so as not to disturb the Cyon, which
must be left with more than three or four Eyes above the Stock. In case the
Stock be large, you may put two Cyons in the Cleft; one on each Side. If the
Stock be very large, use a Mallet and large Knife to make a Slit or Cleft. Let
not your Cyons be loose nor pinched.

2. To graff in the Bark. This is only used for Apples; and you are to cut the
Head of the Stock as in the former, and instead of slitting the Stock, slit
only the Bark a little more than an Inch on the South-West Side, as long as the
sloped Part of the Cyon; at the Top of the Slit loosen the Bark with your
Knife, then with a smooth Instrument of Ivory or hard Wood cut sloping as the
Cyon, make Room for the Cyon, by thrusting it down between the Bark and the
Wood of the Stock, where it was slit; next take your Cyon (being prepared with
a flat Slope about an Inch long, ending in a Point, and begun from the Back of
an Eye) and put it into the Stock, thrusting the Top of the Slope as low as the
Top Surface of the Stock; then order the Bark on each Side the Cyon, that it
may fall close to the Stock (...) then clay it over as before.

3. Graffing by Approach or Inarching. This is performed where the Stock grows
so near another Tree whose Fruit you would propagate, that it may be joined
with a Branch of that Tree, by cutting the Sides of the Branch and Stock about
three Inches long, and so fitting them, that the Passages of the Sap may meet;
in which Posture let them be bound and clayed. When they are cemented, cut off
the Head of the Stock, about four Inches above the Binding, and in March
following cut off the Stub that was left of the Stock, and then close the
graffed Place, that it may subsist by the Stock only. This Graffing is also
performed by cutting off the Head of the Stock at first, slopping it about two
Inches long, and joining the Cyon thereto. This Manner of Graffing agrees best
with Vines, Oranges, Pomegranates, and such like.

4. Whip Graffing. This is where the Stock and Cyon are of the same Bigness;
the Stock must be sloped an Inch or more, and also the Cyon; and then one is
tied upon the other; or else a Shoulder may be mad^ on the Cyon, to suit with
which, the Top of the Stock should be cut; then bind them together, and clay
them.

All these four Kinds of Graffing are performed chiefly in the Month of
February.

Of Pruning FRUIT TREES.
When a Tree is planted, and has produced two well disposed Branches, with some
weak Ones intermixed, they are all to be shortened equally, to the Length of
five or six Inches; and if the Position of the two Branches be irregular, there
must be only one left to begin the Formation of the Figure of the (...) It
sometimes happens, that a Tree will shoot five, six, or seven Branches, the
first Year, in which Case three or four only of the best Branches are to be
preserved. A Multitude of Branches the first Year; is not always a Sign of
Vigor; for they sometimes prove weak, occasioned by the Infirmity of the
Roots: But in the (...), generally a vigorous Tree cannot have too many (...),
if they are well disposed; nor a weak Tree have too few. The Sap of all Trees
must be kept in due ^^unds, and a greater Liberty is to be allowed to stro^^
Trees than weak Ones: For which Reason, strong, vigorous Branches, are left a
greater Length than feebl^ Ones, and it is best to prune weak, sickly Trees,
early, tha^ the Sap may not waste itself too much.

The most seasonable Time for this Work, is about the Month of February; but
the more luxuriant a Tree is, the later it is pruned the better; and in such a
Case, it is not too late to do it after the Tree has begun to shoot. Some Trees
(...) the Vine) require several Prunings in the (...)

(...) Sort of Melasses made of Apples; the Account com^unicated to the Royal
Society, by Paul Dudley, Esquire of New England, and published in the Philosophical
Transactions, Numb. 374.
THE Apple that produces the Melasses is a Summer Sweeting of a middling Size,
pleasant to the Taste, and full of Juice, so that 7 Bushels will make a Barrel
of Cider.

The Manner of making it is thus; you must grind and press the Apples, and then
take the Juice and boil it in a Copper till three Quarters of it is wasted,
which will be done in about 6 Hours gently boiling, and by that Time it comes
to be of the Sweetness and Consistency of Melasses.

Some of our People scum the Cider as it boils, others do not, and yet there
seems to be no great Difference in the Goodness.

This new Melasses answers all the Ends of that made of the sweet Cane imported
from beyond Sea. It serves not only for Food and Brewing, but is of great Use
also in preserving of Cider; two Quarts of it put into a Barrel of racked
Cider, will both preserve, and give it a very agreeable Color.

The Apple Melasses was discovered a few Years since, by a Gentleman of my
Acquaintance, at Woodstock, in this Province, a Town remote from the Sea, and
where the West India Melasses is dear and scarce; he ingenuously confesses the
Discovery was purely accidental, but ever since he has supplied his Family with
Melasses out of his Orchard, and his Neighbors also now do the like, to their
great Advantage.

Our Country Farmers run much upon planting Orchards with these Sort of
Sweetings, for fattening their Swine, and assure me it makes the best Sort of
Po^k. And I know the Cider made of them to be better than that of other Fruit,
for Taste, Color and Keeping.

A short Account of the British Plantations.
HUDSON's BAY,
A Very cold Country, and but thinly peopled with Indians. The English have a
^ort or two on the Bottom and West Side of the Bay, for the Sake of Trade with
the Natives for Skins, which are chiefly Beaver, value about 200,000 L.
Sterling per Annum.

NEWFOUNDLAND,
A large Island, cold and barren; the Settlements and Fortresses few, and made
only for the Sake of the Fishery upon the Coasts, which is the greatest in the
World; the English, French, etc. loading near 600 Sail yearly with Codfish,
which is carried to the Mediterranean, and other Parts of Europe. The Fishery
in these Seas is an inexhaustible Fund of Wealth, and the P^^^ession of it
deemed preferable to the Mines of Peru: It breeds great Numbers of hardy Seamen.

NOVA SCOTIA, or ACADIA,
A fine, fertile Country, but not hitherto much cultivated. Its Coasts have
many good Harbors, and Plenty of Fish, The Government is English, but most of
the Inhabitants French, who submitted in the last War, on Condition of
retaining their Possessions, and remaining Neuter in all future Wars between
the two Nations. Annapolis Royal was the Capital, a fortified Town, with an
English Garrison. The Islands of Cape-Breton, belonging to this Territory, were
given to France at the Peace of Utrecht, on which they built Louisburg, and
fortified it with incredible Art and Expense; but in the late War, it was
reduced and taken, by the Wisdom of Governor SHIRLEY, and the Bravery of his
New England Troops, under General PEPPERRELL, countenanced by a Squadron of
British Ships, commanded by the late active, vigilant and successful Commodore
WARREN. At the Peace it was restored to France, and the English have since
built Halifax on Chebouctou Harbor.

NEW ENGLAND
Comprehends four several Governments, or Colonies; 1. The Massachusetts. 2.
New Hampshire. 3. Connecticut. 4. Rhode Island. The Climate is healthful; the
People hardy, industrious and sober; the Laws and Government good; but the Soil
generally not very fertile, and there being no Staple Commodity for
Exportation, the Country is poor, and under great Difficulties to pay for what
it wants from abroad. There are many fine Harbors and Plenty of Fish on the
Coasts, a great Number of pretty Towns, in every one of which is a Free School;
BOSTON, the Capital, is esteemed at present the greatest Town in North America,
and the best governed. Portsmouth is the chief Town in New Hampshire. Newport
the Capital of Rhode Island Government; and Hartford of Connecticut. In the two
last named Governments they annually elect their Governors, etc. In the two
former the Governors are appointed by the Crown. In Rhode Island there is the
greatest Liberty in Matters of Religion. Their Money is Paper, continually
decreasing in Value; Silver and Gold, when any appears among them, is bought up
and remitted to England. Their first Settlement began about 1620. It Is supposed
the disciplined Militia in the four Governments make near 100,000 Men.

NEW YORK,
Is a Royal Government; both Governor and Council being appointed by the Crown.
The People choose the Assembly. It has not much Territory, and does not people
very fast, being hindered, some say, by the exorbitant Grants of Lands made to
particular Persons, who will not divide and sell, but keep it for their
Posterity. The Capital NEW YORK, is seated at the Mouth of Hudson's River, very
convenient for Trade, and makes a beautiful Appearance. The Inhabitants, a
Mixture of En^lish, Low Dutch, and French Protestants, and are a genteel,
generous People The Produce Wheat, Bread, and Flour. The Money Gold and Silver,
mixed with Paper. The first Settlement by the Dutch about the same Time with
that of New England by the English.

NEW JERSEY,
A flourishing Colony, situated between New York and Pennsylvania. The Soil is
in many Parts very fertile, producing all Sorts of Grain, etc. The Government
like that of New York. The chief Towns, are Burlington, Ambo^, Brunswick and
Trenton. The Country in general well timber'd and watered, and inhabited by a
very good Sort of People.

PENNSYLVANIA.
One of the happiest Countries at this Time in the World; God grant it may long
so continue.

MARYLAND and VIRGINIA,
Pleasant and fertile Countries. Their chief Produce Tobacco. The People
remarkable for their Hospitality. The Settlement of Maryland began about 1631;
that of Virginia 30 or 40 Years before. -- The Governments of both Colonies are
by Governor, Council and Assembly, but the Laws of Virginia, are said to be the
most favorable for the People. No Countries in the World are better
accommodated with navigable Waters.

NORTH and SOUTH-CAROLINA'S,
Are yet but thinly peopled. The Climate temperate; but the Air, in the low,
flat Country, where the principal Settlements have hitherto been made, not
healthful. Their chief Produce is Rice, Pitch, Tar and Turpentine. Back toward
the Mountains the Land is said to be equally fertile, and the Air more
wholesome, so that a fine Country may be expected there in Time. The first
Settlement of the Carolina's was about the Year 1680.

GEORGIA,
A new, but declining Colony. There are few Inhabitants at present besides the
Soldiery, who are maintained there by Great Britain.

BERMUDAS,
First settled in 1612. No Part of the World enjoys a purer Air, or more
temperate Climate than these Islands, so that for Health they are reckoned the
Monspelier of America. They are situated in Lat. 32. Degrees. 30. Min. N. above ^00
Leagues from the Continent.

JAMAICA,
Was taken from the Spaniards in 1655. A wealthy Island, but unhealthy, and
subject to Earthquakes.

LEE^ARD ISLANDS,
Were settled by the English, viz. Antigua in 1666. Montserrat in 1632. Nevis
in 1628. St. Christophers in 1626* Bar^uda in 1627. Anguilla in 1630. The chief
Island and Seat of Government is ANTIGUA.

BARBADOS,
Was settled about the Year 1625. The Produce of this and the other West India
Islands is chiefly Sugar, Rum, etc. The Labor chiefly done by Slaves, as in
Maryland, Virginia and Carolina: Their Governments generally much like, by a
Governor, Council and Assembly. The People rich, genteel, generous and
hospitable. The Trade ^f the Colonies with one another and Great Britain,
em^loys a vast Number of Ships and Seamen. And most of those on the Continent
increase continually in People, parti^ularly Pennsylvania.

The FAMILY'S BEST COMPANION; giving instructions how to pickle and preserve;
to make diverse Sorts of Wines of our Product; together with many excellent and
approved Medicines, Salves, etc. necessary in all Families.
Of Pickling, Preserving, Candying, etc.
To Pickle Cucumbers.
WASH them and dry them in a Cloth; then take Water, Vinegar, Salt, Fennel
Tops, some Dill Tops, and a little Mac^; make it sharp enough to the Taste;
then boil it a while; then take it off, and let it ^tand till cold; then put in
the Cucumbers, and stop them down close; and within a Week they will be fit to
eat.

To pickle Cucumbers green.
Take two Quarts of Verjuice or Vinegar, and a Gallon of fair Water, a Pint of
Bay salt, a Handful of green F^nnel or Dill; boil it a little, and when cold,
put it into a Barrel, and then put the Cucumbers to the Pickle, and you may
keep them all the Year.

To pickle French Beans.
Take them before they are ripe, and cut off the Stalks; then take good Wine
Vinegar, and boil with Pepper and Salt; season them to your Palate, and let it
stand till cold; then take the Beans, and put them into a Pot, placing Dill
between the Layers, and then put in the Pickle, and cover them close for three
Weeks; then take the Pickle, and boil and put it to the Beans boiling hot;
cover them close again, and, when cold, they will be sit to eat.

Or French Beans may be pickled thus: Take your Beans and string them, boil
them tender, then take them off, and let them stand till cold; then put them
into Pickle of Beer, Vinegar, Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, and a little Ginger.

To pickle Eldern, or any other Buds of Trees.
Give them one or two Walms with Vinegar, Salt, whole Pepper, long Mace, and a
little Lemon Peel in Pieces; then drain them, and let the Buds and Liquor cool
separately; afterward put them into a Pot, and cover them with your Pickle.

To pickle Walnuts to eat like Mangoes.
Take green Walnuts before the Shell is grown to any Hardness in them; pick
them from the Stalks, and pu^ them into cold Water, and set them on a gentle
Fire till the outward Skin begins to Peel off; then with coarse Cloth^ wipe it
off; then put them into a Pot, and put Water an^ Salt therein, shifting it once
a Day for ten Days, till the Bitterness and Discoloring of the Water be gone;
the^ take a good Quantity of Mustard Seed, which beat up wit^ Vinegar, till it
becomes coarse Mustard; then take s^m^ Cloves of Garlic, some Ginger, and a
little beaten Clove^ and Mace; make a Hole in each Nut, and put in a little of
this; then take White Wind Vinegar, and boil them to^gether, which put to the
Nuts boiling hot, with some Pep^per, Ginger, Cloves and Mace, as also some of
the M^^stard and Garlic, which keep close stopped for Use.

To pickle Mushrooms.
First blanch them over the Crowns, and barb them b^^neath, then put them into
a Pan of boiling Water, th^^ take them forth, and let them drain; when they are
col^ put them into your Pot or Glass, and put to them Clove^ Mace, Ginger,
Nutmegs and whole Pepper; then ta^^ White Wind, a little Vinegar and Salt: So
pour the L^^quor into the Mushrooms, and stop them close for Use.

To pickle any Sort of Flowers for Sallads, as Clove-Gil^ Flowers, etc.
Put them into a Gally-pot, with as much Sugar as (...) weigh; fill them with
Wine Vinegar: To a Pint of V^^negar, a Pound of Sugar.

To pickle Samphire, Broom Buds, Ashen-Keys, Purslain, and^
Take Samphire, and pick the Branches from the (...) Leaves; then lay it in a
Pot, and make a strong Brine (...) Water, or Bay Salt; in the Boiling scum it
clean; bei^^ boiled* and cold, put it to the Samphire; cover it, (...) keep it
for all the Year; and when there is Occasion (...) use it, take and boil it in
fair Water, but the Water (...) boil before you put it in; when it is boiled,
and beco^^ green, let it cool; then take it out, and put it into a (...)
mouthed Glass, and put strong Wine Vinegar to it, (...) keep it close for Use.

To pickle Lemon and Orange Peel.
Boil them in Vinegar and Sugar, and put them into the same Pickle; Observe to
cut them in small long Thongs, the Length of Half the Peel of your Lemon; it
ought to be boiled in Water before it is boiled in Vinegar and Sugar.

To preserve green Apricots.
Take them when they are small and tender; peel them and put them in hot Water,
but let them not boil; let them lie there till they begin to be green, then
take them out, and put them in cold Water, then boil your Sugar, and let your
Apricots run a little of the Water from them; then put them into the Sugar, and
let them boil till the Syrup becomes thick; then put them into an Earthen Pan,
and let them remain there a Week; then put them into a Preserving Pan, and make
them boil again till the Syrup grows thick; then put them once more into an
Earthen Pan, and let them stand till they are cold; then take them out of their
Syrup, and lay them on your Ardoise; then dry them in your Stove, and turn them
often till dry; then put them in Boxes on Paper.

To preserve Fruit Green.
Take Pippins, Apricots, Pears, Plumbs or Peaches, when they are green; scald
them in hot Water, and peel them; then put them into another Water, not so hot
as (...) first; then boil them very tender, and take the Weight of (...) in
Sugar, and put to them as much Water as will make a Syrup to cover them; then
boil them somewhat leisurely and take them up; then boil the Syrup till it be
somewhat thick, and, when cold, put them together.

To preserve Rasberries.
Take good Rasberries that are not too ripe, but very whole; take away the
Stalks, and put them into a flat bottomed Earthen Pan; boil Sugar, and pour it
over your Rasberries, then let them stand to be cool, and when they are cold
pour them softly into your Preserving Pan, and let them boil till their Syrup
be boiled pretty thick; scum them very well in the boiling; this done, put them
in Pots, and, when cold, cover them up close for Use.

To preserve Barberries.
Take one Pound of Barberries picked from the Stalks, put them into a Pottle
Pot, and set it in a Brass Pot full of hot Water, and when they be stewed,
strain them, and put to the Barberries one Pound of Sugar, and to them put Pint
of red Rose Water, and boil them a little; then tak^ Half a Pound of the
fairest Clusters of Barberries you ca^ get, and dip them in the Syrup while it
is boiling; the^ take the Barberries out, and boil the Syrup till it is thick
and, when cold, put them into Gally-pots or Glasses wit^ the Syrup.

To preserve Currants.
Lay a Layer of Currants, and then a Layer of Sugar, and so boil as before
prescribed for Rasberries; scum the^ in boiling till the Syrup is pretty thick;
then take the^ off, and, when they are cold, put them in Gally-pots or Glasses
closely stopped.

To preserve Walnuts Green.
Boil the Walnuts till the Water tastes bitter, then ta^^ them off, and put
them in cold Water; peel off the Bark, and weigh as much Sugar as they weigh,
and a little more Water than will wet the Sugar; set them on the Fire, and when
they boil up, take them off, and let them stand two Days, and then boil them
again once more.

To preserve Grapes.
Stamp and strain them; let them settle a while; before you wet a Pound of
Sugar, or Grapes with the Juice, stone the Grapes, and save the Juice in the
Stoning; take them off, and put them up.

To preserve Cherries.
First take some of the worst Cherries, and boil them in fair Water, and when
the Liquor is well colored, strain it; then take some of the best Cherries,
with their Weight in beaten Sugar; then lay one Layer of Sugar, and another of
Cherries, till all are laid in the Preserving Pan; then pour a little Liquor of
the worst Cherries into it, and boil the Cherries till they are well colored;
then take them up, and boil the Syrup till it will button on the Side of a
Plate, and when they are cold, put them up in a Glass close covered for Use.

To candy Cherries.
Take Cherries before they be full ripe, and take out the Stones; then take
clarified Sugar boiled to a Height, and pour it on them.

To candy Pears, Plumbs, Apricots, etc.
Take them and give every one a Cut Half through; then cast Sugar on them, and
bake them in an Oven, as hot as (...) Manchet, close stopped; let them stand
Half an Hour, (...) lay them one by one upon Glass Plates to dry, and (...)
will appear very fine and clear: In this Manner you (...) candy any other Fruit.

To candy Flowers.
Pick them very clean, and to every Ounce of Flowers, (...) two Ounces of hard
Sugar, and one Ounce of Sugar-^^ndy, and dissolve them in Rose Water; then boil
them, (...) they come to Sugar again, and when it is almost cold, ^ut in your
Flowers, and stir them together, etc.

Of making sundry Sorts of Wines.
Current Wine.
PICK the Curants (when they are full ripe) clean from the Stalks, then put
them into an Earthen Vessel, and ^our on them fair and clean hot Water, that
is, a Quart of Water to a Gallon of Currants; then bruise or mash them
together, and let them stand and ferment; then cover them ^or twelve Hours,
strain them through fine Linen into a large ^arthen Crock (as they say in
Sussex) and then put the Li^uor into a Cask, and thereto put a little Ale-Yest,
and ^hen worked and settled, bottle it off: This is exceeding ^leasant, and
very wholesome for cooling the Blood: In a Week's Time it will be fit for
bottling.

Artificial Claret.
Take six Gallons of Water, two Gallons of the best Cider, and thereto put
eight Pounds of the best Malaga Rai^^ns bruised; let them stand close covered
in a warm Place ^or two Weeks, stirring them every two Days well together; ^hen
press out the Liquor into the Vessel again, and add to ^t a Quart of the Juice
of Barberries, and a Pint of the Juice of Bramble-berries, or Rasberries (which
perhaps is ^he best) to which put a Pint of the Juice of Black Cherries; work
it up with Mustard Seed covered with Bread Paste for three or four Days by the
Fireside; after which let it stand a Week, then bottle it off, and it w^ll
become near as good as, if not exceed, common Claret.

Goosberry Wine.
The best Way is to take to every three Pounds of Fruit, one Pound of Sugar,
and a Quart of fair Water; boil the Water very well, but you must put the
aforesaid Quantity of Sugar when it is boiled; bruise the Fruit, and steep it
Twenty-four Hours in the Water, stir it sometimes, then strain it off, and put
the Sugar to it, and let it stand in a Runlet close stopped for a Fortnight;
then draw it off, and set it up in a cool Cellar, and in two Months it will be
fit to drink.

Rasberry Wine.
Take the Rasberries clear from the Stalks; to a Gallon of which put a Bottle
of White Wine, and let them infuse in an Earthen Vessel two or three Days close
covered; then bruise the Berries in the Wine, and strain through fine Linen
gently; then let it simmer over a moderate Fire, scum off the Froth, and then
strain it again, and with a Quarter of a Pound of Loaf Sugar, to a Gallon, let
it settle; then in Half a Pint of White Wine boil about an Ounce of
well-scented Cinnamon, and a little Mace, and put the Wine strained from the
Spice into it, and bottle it up.

Damson Wine.
Dry the Damsons in an Oven after you have drawn your Bread; then to every
Quart of Damsons put three Quarts of fair Water, but first boil it very well;
then put the Water and Damsons into a Runlet, with Sugar; and having stood a
Time sufficient, bottle it off.

Wine of Grapes.
When they are fully ripe, in a dry Day, pick off those Grapes that are ripest,
and squeeze them in a Fat or Press made for that Purpose, in which must be a
fine Canvas Bag to contain the Grapes; and when in the Press, do not squeeze
them so hard as to break the Stones, if you can help it, because the bruised
Stones will give the Wine a disagreeable Taste; then strain it well, and let it
settle on the Lees, in such a Cask or Vessel as you may draw it off without
raising the Bottom; then season a Cask well with some scalding Water, and dry
it, or scent it with a Linen Rag dipped in Brimstone, by fixing it at the
Bouge, by the Bung or Cork; then put the Wine into it, and stop it close for 48
Hours; then give it Vent at the Bouge, with a Hole made with a Gimblet; in
which put a Peg or Faucet, that may easily be moved with the ^ingers; then in
about two Days Time close it up; and in about two or three Months Time it will
be fit for drinking, and prove almost as good as French Wine.

Wine of Strawberries or Rasberries.
Mash the Berries, and put them into a Linen Bag, as abovesaid for the Grapes,
and squeeze them into a Cask, and then let it work as aforesaid in the Grape
Receipt, etc. In this Manner may Cherry Wine be made; but then you must break
the Stones, contrary to what was said before concerning the Grapes.

A short Way for Cherry Wine.
Squeeze the Juice of Cherries into a Cask, and thereto put a small Quantity of
Sugar corresponding to the Quantity of Juice; and, when stood a Month, it will
be pleasant Liquor.

Black Cherry Wine.
In the same Manner, take a Gallon, or more, of the Juice of Black Cherries,
and keep it in a Vessel close stopped till it works; and, after it is fine, add
an Ounce of Sugar to each Quart, and a Pint of White Wine.

To make Cider.
Grind, stamp or pound your Apples, and put them into a Press, and Squeeze them
through Hair Bags into a Tub; then let it settle, and, according to your
Quantity of Juice, put in some Sugar at Discretion; then work it up with
Ale-Yest, and let it stand a Week; then prepare your Vessels according to the
Quantity, clean and dry; then put it up; after which put into a Bag two Pounds
of stoned Raisins, two Ounces of whole Ginger, and two Ounces of Isingglass,
and see it tied tight with a strong String fixed without-side the Barrel, that
the Bag may sink to the Bottom; and after two Months it will be fit for Use.

Mead.
Take six Gallons of Water, and thereto put six Quarts of Honey, stirring it
till the Honey be thoroughly mixed; then set it over the Fire, and, when ready
to boil, scum it very well, then put to it one Quarter of an Ounce of Mace, and
as much Ginger, and Half an Ounce of Nutmegs, some Sweet Marjoram, Thyme, Sweet
Briar, together a Handful, then boil them in the Liquid, then let it stand by
till cold, and then barrel it up for Use.

Of Jellies.
Let them be of Apples, Currants, Rasberries, etc. Take out the clear Liquor
(when squeezed) and boil it with Sugar till it is as thick as a Jelly, then put
it up in Glasses.

Every Man his own DOCTOR: Or the POOR PLANTER's PHYSICIAN.
[Wrote by a Gentleman in Virginia, and first printed there]
THE most acceptable Service we can render to GOD is Beneficence to Man. There
are three Ways of benefiting our Fellow Creatures. We may be useful to their
Souls by good Instruction, and good Example: We may be helpful to their Bodies,
by feeding the Hungry, clothing the Naked, and prescribing easy Remedies to
the Sick: We can aid them in their Fortunes, by encouraging of Industry, by
relieving the Distressed, and doing all the kind Offices we are able to our
Neighbors. These are the several Ways of improving the Talents our Maker has
entrusted us with; and we must every one expect hereafter to give an Account
how we have employed them.

I wish it were in my Power to serve Mankind, more than I do, in each of these
Particulars; but the gracious Acceptance of the Widow's Offering, encourages me
also to cast in my Mite into the Treasury. I publish this Treatise to lead the
poorer Sort into the pleasant Paths of Health; and when they have the
Misfortune to be sick, to show them the cheapest and easiest Ways of getting
well again.

Our Country is unhappily subject to several very sharp Distempers. The
Multitude of Marshes, Swamps, and great Waters, send forth so many Fogs, and
Exhalations, that the Air is continually damp with them: This, in Spite of all
our Precautions, is apt to shut up the Pores at once, and hinder insensible
Perspiration. From hence proceed Fevers, Coughs, Quinsies, Pleurisies and
Consumptions, with a dismal Train of other Diseases, which make as fatal Havoc
here, in Proportion to our Number, as the Plague does in the Eastern Parts of
the World.

In the mean Time, this is a cruel Check to the Growth of an Infant Colony,
which otherwise, by the Fruitfulness of our Women, and the great Number of
Recruits sent from our Mother Country, would, in a few Years, grow populous,
and consequently considerable.

It is impossible to see these Calamities return every Year, without the
tenderest Commiseration. Certainly nothing can be more melancholy, than to have
so many poor People perish, purely for want of using timely Means for their
Preservation. They neglect to take any Remedy till their Case is grown
desperate, and Death begins to glare them in the Face. They consider not, that
a moderate Skill may recover a Patient in the Beginning of a Distemper, while
he has Strength to go through all the necessary Operations, when the whole
College would not be able to save him, after his Spirits are sunk, and all the
Principles of Life near extinguished.

This unhappy Temper occasions a great deal of Mortality: And what makes the
Misfortune the greater, is, that it falls heaviest on the Younger Sort, who are
most liable to hurrying Distempers. Indeed, some would be glad of Assistance,
if they did not think the Remedy near as bad as the Disease: For our Doctors
are commonly so exorbitant in their Fees, whether they kill or cure, that the
Patient had rather trust to his Constitution, than run the Risque of beggaring
his Family.

These Considerations made me account it a Work of great Charity and public
Spirit, to communicate to the poor Inhabitants of this Colony, a safe Method of
curing themselves, when they shall be so unhappy as to fall into any of our
common Maladies. And for their greater Encouragement, the Remedies I shall
prescribe, may be procured with little Trouble and Expense, being, for the most
Part, such as grow at their own Doors, or may be easily propagated.

But notwithstanding this well-meaning Essay has really no other View than the
Love of Mankind, yet it could not escape being grossly attacked by some Fysts
of the Faculty. However like Aesop's Viper, while they endeavor to make a
venomous Impression on the File, they only broke their own Teeth. In the mean
Time, whatever my Obligations may be to 'em for their Scurrility, the honest
Pri^^er has reason to thank them, because nothing contributes so certainly to
the quick Sale of any Performance, as a stupid Answer to it.

Providence has been so good, as to furnish almost every Country with Medicines
proper for the Distempers incident to the Climate; and such domestic Remedies
are always sufficient for the Poor, who live upon homely Fare, and for the
Temperate, who make a right Use of GOD's, Blessings. Their Cases are seldom
complicated, and proceed, for the most Part, from Cold, or some slight
Transgression. In such Ailments, the Symptoms cannot easily be mistaken, nor is
the Cure difficult; all the Secret lies in taking the Distemper in Time: And
this will be the more necessary, because most Diseases that happen from Cold,
(...) exceedingly violent, and call aloud for speedy Assistance.

I must therefore conjure my dear Countryfolks to begin with themselves as soon
as they can distinguish what Sickness they have, while Nature is strong and
able to co^operate with the Medicines they take. Nor can we hope, that Heaven
will assist us in our Calamities, unless we endeavor, at the same time, to
assist ourselves.

In setting down the following Prescriptions, I have been cautious of talking
like an Apothecary; that is, of using hard Words, that perhaps neither my
Patient, nor I myself understand. Nor have I taken them lightly upon Trust, but
am able to recommend most of them upon more than Twenty Years Experience; and
for the rest, I have credible Authority. In the mean time, I hope none will
object, like Naaman, the Syrian, to the Easiness of any of these Remedies; but
rather rejoice, that they can have the greatest of all Blessings so very cheap.
And in Truth, People must love Difficulty extremely, to slight Health, as they
would a Mistress, for being gained with little Trouble.

That this Treatise may be as useful as possible, I have made some small
Additions here and there in this Edition, but so as neither to swell the Book,
or enhance the Price. And as the whole is designed for those who cannot afford
to die by the Hand of a Doctor, I hope the Legitimate Sons of Esculapius will
be the more merciful. But as for the spurious Breed, they have no Right to find
Fault with what they cannot mend, and it will be prudent to make a Secret of
their own Ignorance.

Before I mention the Cure, I shall endeavor to describe the Symptoms of each
Distemper, in so plain a Manner, that any Person may be Master of his own Case,
if he will but attend carefully to what he feels; otherwise he might mistake
his Illness, and apply an improper Remedy. I shall also recommend the Diet
fittest to be used in each Case; which often contributes more to the Patient's
Recovery, than his Physic: At the same time, he shall have my best Advice, to
prevent every Particular Ailment; which will be happier for him, than to know
how to cure it.

COUGH.
I SHALL begin with a Cough, which is the Foundation of many bad Distempers,
and therefore should be ^^ken Care of as soon as possible. It may be cured in
the ^eginning with riding moderately on Horseback every Day, and only taking a
little Ground Ivy Tea sweetened with Syrup of Horehound, at Night when you go
to Bed. But in case it be violent, it will be proper to bleed eight Ounces, and
be constant in the Use of the other Remedies. In the mean while, you must use a
spare and cooling Diet, without either Flesh or strong Drink. Nor should you
stove yourself up in a warm Room, but breathe as much as possible in the open
Air. And to prevent this Mischief, don't make yourself tender, but wash every
Day in cold Water, and very often your Feet.

WHOOPING COUGH.
The Whooping Cough (often fatal to Children) is attended with a stronger
Convulsion than ordinary, which causes the Whooping.

For this, boil Hysop and Elicampane, a Handful of each, in 2 Quarts of Water,
strain it off, and adding 1 Pound of clean Muscovado Sugar, boil it again, and
give the Patient 2 Spoonfuls every 3 Hours.

This same Remedy is good for a Shortness of Breath, and a Hoarseness, only in
these Cases, Linseed Tea sweetened with Honey, should be the constant Drink,
and a spare and cooling Diet punctually observed.

PLEURISY.
A common Consequence of a violent Cough is a Pleurisy; which discovers itself
by a brisk Fever, and sharp Pain, pretty low in one of the Sides, shooting now
and then into the Breast, and sometimes quite back into the Shoulder Blades: It
is uneasy every Time the Patient draws his Breath, and more so when he coughs;
which is generally the Case in this Disease.

The Moment any Person finds these Tokens upon him, he must, without Loss of
Time, take away 10 Ounces of Blood, and repeat the same 3 or 4 Days
successively, if the Pain go not away before. On the third Day, he may vomit
with 80 Grains of Indian Physic (Virginian Ipecacuanna) and every Night drink
7 Spoonfuls of Pennyroyal Water, or the Decoction of it, moderately sweetened.
In the mean Time, let him every three Hours, take Half a Spoonful of Honey and
Linseed Oil mixed together. He should also strew Indian Pepper upon Pennyroyal
Plaist^r, and apply it very hot to the Place where the (...) and be sure to
keep himself warm, and abstain from (...) Water: Though if the Distemper should
prove obstinate, you must (...) a Blister to his Neck, and one to each Arm, on
the fleshy Part above the Elbow.

The Patient's Diet should be light and cooling; and his constant Drink, either
Linseed or Balm Tea, a little sweetened.

The best Way to prevent this Distemper, will be, to bleed in the Beginning of
any great Hoarseness, or Cough, and also to forbear swilling great Quantities
of Water, or Small Beer, in ordinary Life.

FEVER, Pain in the Head, Eye, or Ear.
Something akin to this, is a Fever, accompanied with a violent Pain in the
Head, Neck, or Shoulder, or with an Inflammation in the Eye or Ear. In all
these Cases, you must, without Loss of Time, bleed 10 Ounces. The next Day
purge with the Decoction of (...), and three Spoonfuls of Syrup of Peach
Blossoms. If the (...) continue, you must bleed again the third Day, (...)
Morrow following repeat the Purge: And if the Pain be still obstinate, you must
renew both Bleeding and Purging a third Time. In the very Beginning, apply the
following ^oul^is to the Part where the Pain lies: Boil the Leaves (...) Sage,
Wormwood and Rue together, and having beat them soft, grate Nu^meg thick upon
them, and bind them or warm, renewing the same Night and Morning: And (...)
case the Disease hold out against all this, your last (...) must be a Blister,
near the Place where the Pain (...).

Your Diet should be moist and cooling, such as thin Hominy, Chicken-Broth, or
^ater Gruel; and your Drink Linseed (...) Ground Ivy T^a, moderately sweetened.

Thi^ Disease will be also best prevented by Bleeding in a^ny violent Cold.

But when there happens a violent Pain in the Breast, wit^ cold Flesh* and a
low, quick and uneven Pulse, and an ex^c^ssive We^kness from the very Begin^ing
of the Distem^per, you must forbear Bleeding by all Means, till you have warmed
the Flesh, and raised the Fever. In order to which, give him a Decoction of
Snakeroot and Pennyroyal, and endeavor to raise a Sweat between 2 Blankets, if
possible. And because the Case is very dangerous, apply a Blister to the Breast
where the Pain is, in the very Beginning.

Let his Diet be thin Hominy enriched with grated Nutmeg, and taken often to
recruit the Spirits.

QUINSEY.
Another Distemper consequent to a Cold is a Quinsey, known by a Fever, with an
Inflammation of the Glands about the Throat, and of the Uvula, to that Degree
as to render all Swallowing difficult, and painful. For this, bleed immediately
10 Ounces, rather in the Jugular Vein, than in the Arm; and for Safety apply a
Blister to the Neck. If the Inflammation should continue, bleed again next Day.
The Morning after take a Purge of the Decoction of Mallows, with Syrup of Peach
Blossoms, repeating the same three several Times, resting one Day between. From
the Beginning, gargle with Dr. Papa's Liquor hereafter described; and if the
Uvula be much relaxed, drink Half a Pint of the same, Night and Morning, when
you don't purge.

SORE-THROAT.
But in case it prove no more than a common Sore Throat, purge only once, and
gargle with Papa's Liquor, or Sage Tea, sharpened with a little Allom.

In both Cases, your Diet ought to be moist and cooling; and your Drink
Cinquefoil Tea.

In order to prevent these Complaints, remember to wash your ^^eck, and behind
your Ears, every Morning, in cold Water; nor muffle up yourself too warm,
either Night or Day.

CONSUMPTION.
Next follows a Consumption, a Distemper slow and sure, that i^ lately grown
very common amongst us. Here young P^^ple are more in Danger than their Elders,
because more (...) to Inflammations. It is ushered in by a Cough of long
C^^tinuance, which, by Degrees, inflames and ulcerates the (...), brings on a
Hectic ^ever, with a Spitting of bloody an^ corrupted Matter, and is generally
attended with (...), and Night sweats. In the mean Time, the Patient will waste
in Strength and in Flesh, while perhaps he may eat rather more than he used to
do when he was well*

After the Ulcer comes to be formed in the Lungs, it will be difficult for
inward Remedies to reach it. They may before that, perhaps, cool the
Inflammation, as well as sweeten and diminish the sharp Defluxion, so as to
prevent an Ulcer, but can rarely heal it. So likewise, Blisters and Issues may
revulse the Humor, and prevent the Mischief, if seasonably made use of.

Therefore all the Good we can hope for, in this melancholy Case, must be done
while the Consumption is apprehended only, and not actually begun. I would then
recommend Bleeding 2 or 3 Ounces every third Day, with a constant Riding about
on Horseback, and Change of Air. This will help Nature to throw off the Evil
that threatens her, by calming the Blood, opening the Pores, and promoting
insensible Perspiration. It may also enable her to make a vigorous Effort, by
Means of a seasonable Boil, or Imposthume, on the outward Parts of the Body.
For that Intention, I would also advise the Patient to shave under the Arms,
and apply strong Poultises, in order to draw the Mischief, if possible, that
Way. And for inward Medicines, let him only chew Sassafras Root every Morning
fasting. I would likewise entreat him, before he goes to Bed, to take 3 Pills,
made of Turpentine and Deers Dung, in equal Quantities: And, besides these, let
him once a Week take a Purge of Mallows, and Syrup of Peach Blossoms.

Let his Diet be without Meat, and mixed with Abundance of Turnips, roasted
Apples, Raisins, and Liquorice; and let his Drink be Beer brewed with
Ground Ivy; avoiding strong Liquors of every Sort, as he would Poison.

The Way to prevent this wasting Disease, is never to suffer a Cough to dwell
upon you; but bleed in Time, and purge gently once a Week. In the mean while
eat not one Morsel of Meat, nor drink any Thing stronger than a little sound
Cider: And, to make the Game sure, ride every fair Day, and breathe as much as
possible in the open Air.

BLOODY FLUX.
Another mischievous Distemper is the Bloody Flux; the Signs of which are, a
small Fever, and grievous Griping. The Patient will also void slimy Excrements
streaked with Blood; and, at the same Time, be cruelly tormented in his Bowels.

Upon the first Appearance of these Symptoms, part with 8 Ounces of Blood. The
next Day take 80 Grains of Indian Physic, by Way of Vomit, and work it well
with 2 Quarts of warm Water. The third Day, take 70 Grains of the same Indian
Physic, in hot Broth, made pretty salt; and then 'twill go off by Way of
Stool, and strengthen the Bowels.

In the mean time let the Food he takes be either poach'd Eggs, Mutton or
Chicken-Broth, and his constant Drink, a Decoction of calcined Deers Horn, with
a Plantain Leaf boiled in it.

To prevent this Disease, avoid sleeping on the cold Ground, and wading in cold
Water: Never eat immoderately of any Sort of Fruit, nor venture to drink new or
foul Cider by any Means.

And because some People, by fancying this Distemper catching, are fearful of
going near those unhappy Persons that have it, by which they often want the
Assistance that is necessary; I may venture to assure them, their Apprehensions
are groundless; and the Reason this Disease goes sometimes round a Family, is,
because they live on the same Diet, and breathe in the same Air; and then no
wonder if they fall into the same Disorders, one after another, without any
Manner of Infection.

WHITE-FLUX.
There is also a Kind of White-Flux, that will hurry a strong Man out of his
Life in a short Time. In this Case the Stools are frequent, without Gripes or
Blood, but flowing from the Patient like Water, and having a small Fever
attending it.

Lose no Time in this hasty Disease, but vomit with Indian Physic, and purge
the next Day with the same. In the mean while, you will do well to wear some
Skin girt tight on your Stomach and Belly, with the Fur next you, or else a
Piece of soft Flannel.

Let your Food be Hasty-pudding, ^anada, or Broth thickened with Flour, grating
Nutmeg into every Thing you eat; and let your Drink be a Decoction of Deers
Horn, made with a Leaf of Plantain.

In order to prevent this Disorder, avoid walking and riding in the Night Air,
guzzling huge Draughts of cold Water, and devouring unreasonable Quantities of
Fruit, especially of that which is not ripe.

LOOSENESS.
A Common Looseness needs no Description; and may be easily stopped in the
Beginning; though some People husband it so well, as to keep it running for many
Years: So that all the Humors of the Body taking that Turn, make it difficult
to cure.

Therefore, to check this Ailment in Time, you must vomit with Indian Physic;
then live three or four Days upon new Milk boiled thick with Flour, or
Tuckahoe, and drink the abovementioned Deers Horn Decoction.

Or mix an equal Quantity of Decoction of Mint Roots and Brandy, with the Yolks
of two Eggs. This drink warm three Nights together at going to Bed.

Then, to prevent it, eat not intemperately; nor drink windy or foul Liquors,
or too much cold Water.

There is an easy Remedy for all Sorts of Fluxes, used by some Doctors of Negro
Ships, with great Success. They boil one Ounce of Beeswax in Rice, or Hasty
Pudding, sufficient for one Meal. They continue this a few Days, and suffer the
Patient to drink very little Water, enlivened with about a fourth Part of Rum.
This Method seldom fails, even in Bloody-Fluxes, as well as Others, and is the
more valuable for being neither dear nor disagreeable.

GRIPING.
But in case of an ordinary Griping in the Belly, or Wind in the Stomach, drink
a Gallon of warm Whey, and if that cannot be had, a Gallon of warm Water, as
fast as you can swallow it; and afterward purge with Mallows, and Syrup of
Peach Blossoms, once or twice.

For a few Days content yourself with a moderate and easy Diet; and let your
Drink be Balm Tea.

It may be prevented by keeping your Backdoor constantly open, abstaining from
windy Meats, and fermented Drinks, and being always careful not to overload
your Stomach.

CHOLICK.
The Cholick is lately grown a very common Distemper, and begins generally with
a grievous Pain in the Bowels; and, by being neglected, fixes at length in the
Pit of the Stomach, where it seems to bore like an Augre: The Patient
frequently vomits every Thing he swallows, and can hardly go to Stool, even
with the Help of purging Medicines.

People thus afflicted are apt to fly to Drams for Relief; but with lamentable
Success. These may ease a Fit sometimes; but are sure to add Fuel to the Fire,
and make the Disease return with more Violence. Besides, these Cordials have
another bad Consequence; they are apt to make People soberly enough inclined,
by Degrees, grow too fond of their Physic. To cure all which bad Effects at
once, I would recommend this certain and easy Remedy: Let him leave off all
strong, windy and fermented Liquors, and drink nothing but Water, enriched with
a brown Toast.

But if this Remedy should be esteemed worse than the Disease, I would,
however, for the easing a particular Fit, recommend two or three Quarts of warm
Water. And to force a Passage, you must take three or four Spoonfuls of Bears
Oil, which will seldom fail; or else drink a Quarter of a Pint of the Decoction
of Peach Leaves, with two Spoonfuls of Syrup of Peach Blossoms; and this Purge
you ought to repeat two or three Times to carry off all Remains. But if you
would root out the Distemper for ever, take the same Medicines every full Moon;
and drink every Morning, for some Time, Sassafras Tea; and, at Night, take as
much Snakeroot Powder as will lie upon a Six pence, in Mint-water, or Decoction.

The Food proper in this Distemper, is Chicken or Mutton Broth; and the Drink
Balm Tea, sweetened with Syrup of Mallows.

And to prevent it, eat sparingly, forbearing every Thing that is salt and
windy; and never drink Spirits, one Drop of Green Tea, or brewed Liquor of any
Kind.

DRY-GRIPES.
The Dry-Gripes are now (blessed be God) grown much rarer than formerly. This
is the cruellest Kind of Cholick, called in Europe, the Cholick of Poitiers;
though here it might be called the Caribbee Cholick, because very common in
those Islands; and I wish we may not have derived it from thence, by too
liberal an Use of their Commodities.

It makes itself known by a most tormenting Pain in the Pit of the Stomach, and
the adjacent Parts. The Guts feel as if they were twisted, and all Motion
downward is interrupted; by this Misfortune, the unhappy Patient is inclined to
vomit up every Thing; insomuch, that sometimes his very Excrements are cast out
at his Mouth. In the first Place, a Thoroughfare must by all Means be
attempted, by 3 Spoonfuls of Bears Oil, or by the Decoction of Peach Leaves,
above mentioned. If these Remedies should fail, you must submit to a Tobacco
Glister, performed by blowing the Smoke through a Pipe into the Fundament. And
if the first Operation should happen to fail, it must be repeated, till a
Passage be opened. At the same time, make a strong Infusion of Tobacco, and
therewith anoint the lower Region of the Belly.

After the Passage is perfectly cleared, your Diet, for some Days, ought to be
either Mutton or Chicken Broth, in which Mallows have been boiled; and your
Drink Balm Tea.

Some have unadvisedly, in this Distemper, ventured also to drink Rum, and
other Spirits, to ease their Pains; but this has cost them dear, by taking away
the Use of their Hands, and other Paralytick Misfortunes; to cure which, the
same Remedies must be used, as are prescribed hereafter for the Palsy.

The best Way to prevent the Dry Gripes, is to get rid of Agues and Cholicks as
soon as you can; to eat sparingly of Fruit, and forbear all foul and windy
Liquors; nor meddle with Rum, or other Spirit, after it has been poisoned with
foul Sugar and Lime-juice.

HEART-BURN.
The Heart-burn is an uneasy Heat at the Mouth of the Stomach, accompanied with
sour Belchings, and sometimes a Hiccup.

This is removed by chewing Sassafras Bark, or by a Decoction of it.

It is prevented by forbearing Spirits and foul Liquors, and also the Use of
high seasoned and sour Things, which kindle too sharp an Acid in the Stomach.

PALSY.
A Palsy comes suddenly upon us, with dreadful Symptoms, not easy to be
mistaken. We are bereft of Sense and Motion, either in one, or more Parts of
the Body; or a^ least we find them numbed and disabled; and where the Disease
is extreme, one Side is taken quite motionless, and insensible.

At the first Appearance of these melancholy Tokens purge with Indian Physic
every other Day, for 3 Times The Mornings you don't purge, cause yourself to be
plung'^ over Head and Ears into cold Water; and this should b^ repeated thrice
every Week, for 3 Months together. You (...) to mix equ^l Quantities of Spirit
of Scurvy Grass, and Hungary Water, and dipping a stiff Comb-brush therein,
cause your Head, being close shas'd, to be well brushed with it several Times a
Day; likewise let the Palms of your Hands, the Soles of your Feet, and Nape of
your Neck, be often rubbed with the same Mixture. After this has put some Sense
and Motion into your Limbs, beat Rosemary in a Mortar, and make a little Ball
of it, which you must roll and work about in your Hands continually, renewing
the same every Day; now and then too, put Tobacco up your Nostrils, l^tting it
lie there for some Time, in order to drive the clammy Phlegm from your Brain.
These easy Remedies will, by the Grace of GOD, do great Good in the Beginning
of this Disease, by restoring the Nerves to their natural Tone, and giving new
Vigor to the Animal Spirits, which have been clogged and obstructed.

The Patient's Food should be dry, and of easy Digestion, with Mustard and
Horseradish mixed with it; and let Sage or Balm Tea be his constant Drink.

To prevent this Distemper, feed seldom on salt or high seasoned Dishes, nor
eat much Milk, or other phlegmatic Food; never sleep in the dangerous Dew, or
on the moist Ground, or continue long in a Cellar; or other damp Situation. Use
much Exercise, and let your Motion be always nimble, in order to quicken the
Circulation, and frisk your sluggish Spirits.

EPILEPSY.
Another Disease of the Head, is an Epilepsy, or Falling Sickness, not unusual
in this Country. It discovers itself by very terrible Symptoms; the unhappy
Person falls down suddenly, deprived of all Sense and Understanding. No sooner
is he fallen, but he is immediately shaken with strong Convulsions, grinds his
Teeth, rolls his Eye Balls, and foams at the Mouth in a most frightful Manner.
So soon as the Fit is over, his Senses return, but commonly a Pain in the Head,
and great Depression of the Spirits remain upon him for some Time after. The
Return of these melancholy Fits is uncertain, though, for the most Part, they
come near the Full or Change of the Moon.

In the first Place, Care should be taken to calm the Spirits of the Patient,
and keep them from running Riot in this unhappy Manner. For that Intention,
bleed him, and then burn Feathers often under his Nose, or else Leather, or the
Hoofs of any Animal.

Four Days before the Full Moon, let him take a Vomit of Indian Physic; and
four Days after the Full Moon, let him take a Purge of the same; and be sure to
do the like again before and after the Change: And this must be repeated for
seven Months together. On the Mornings when he takes no Physic, he must
swallow as much Powder of Misleto, as will lie upon a Shilling, in a Spoonful
of the Decoction of Pennyroyal.

For this Purpose, the Leaves and tender Twigs of Misleto must be gathered in
January (being then in their Prime) dried over an Oven moderately warm, and
kept all the Year for the Use above mentioned.

Let the Patient's Head be shaved, and a Plaster made of the Juice of Rue,
Sage, and Pennyroyal, worn on the back Part of it.

Let him often put Tobacco up one of his Nostrils, keeping it there as long as
it has any Strength, to clear the Head of cold and clammy Phlegm. And let him
now and then, besides, chew a Stick of Misleto, and swallow the Juice.

These Directions must be pursued seven Months, or more, to cure any Person
entirely of this Distemper; and, if it be taken in Time, there will be great
Probability of Success, at least in young People.

Let his Victuals be sparing, and easy of Digestion; and his constant Drink,
either Sage or Balm Tea.

As People commonly fall first into this Misfortune while they are Children,
so, in order to prevent it, Care should be taken never to fright, or strike
them violently on the Head, Backbone, or Nape of the Neck.

LETHARGY.
A Lethargy, commonly called the Sleepy Disease, is an excessive Drowsiness,
attended with a Fever, in which the Patient is lightheaded when awake. But he
is apt to fall into a deep Sleep, from which it is no easy Matter to awake him.

In this Case mix Rennet with very strong Vinegar, and force it down the
Patient's Throat. This must be repeated 3 or 4 Times, and it will generally
recover him from his State of Forgetfulness, and by Degrees get the better of
the Distemper, especially if you add a perpetual Blister between the Shoulders.
A very spare Diet, and living on dry Food as much as possible, will prevent the
Return of this Disease.

FEVER, with violent Purging and Vomiting.
^ Fever, with violent Purging and Vomiting, cannot easily be mistaken. The
Stools, though frequent, are with great Pain and Difficulty; both the Stomach and
Bowels feel exceeding uneasy, and the whole Frame is in universal Disorder.

As this Disease will hurry a Man soon to his long Home, without speedy Help,
you must forthwith make 2 Gallons of thin Broth, either of Half a Fowl, or a
small Chicken, and drink it all in the Space of 2 or 3 Hours; some of this will
come up, and some go down, and cleanse your Stomach and Bowels in such a
Manner, as to make you well before you expect it.

Only be careful to live some Days upon light and innocent Fare, boiling Mint
in every Thing you eat, and grating Nutmeg into all your Drink.

Would you prevent this boisterous Illness, forbear all Kind of Surfeiting and
Excess, never exposing yourself to be wet to the Skin, if possible.

I must not omit a Fever and Ague, which is an Epidemick Distemper in this
moist and variable Climate. It Is true, it seldom kills now a Days; but if
neglected too long, corrupts all the Juices of the Body, and ends either in a
Jaundice, Dropsy, Dry-gripes, or Cachexy. Therefore I conjure all my good
Patients, as they tender their Health and good Looks, to dispossess this Devil
as soon as they can.

AGUE.
An Ague returns either every Day, every third, or every fourth Day; and the
Way to know which of these any Person has, is only to abide two Fits. If it
come eve^^ Day, it will be often accompanied with a Pain in the Head; in which
Case, after the second Fit, you must bleed 8 Ounces. The next Day purge with
Indian Physic, and two Days after that, repeat the same again. This must be
followed, by taking every Morning and Evening 20 Grains of the Powder of
Sassafras Root, mixed with 10 Grains of Snake Root, in two Spoonfuls of the
Decoction of Wormwood.

If the Fit return every third Day, omit Bleeding, in case there be no Pain.
After the second Fit, vomit one Day with Indian Physic, and purge with the
same the next. If these should not master the Distemper, you must complete the
Cure with the Powders of Sassafras and Snake-root, taken in the Manner
aforesaid.

But in case the Return should be every fourth Day, you must after the Vomit
and Purge, take a Cold Water Sweat; That is, so soon as the cold Fit is off,
and the Fever begins to come on, go into naked Bed, and drink a Pint of cold
Water; then cover yourself up, and, in a little Time, the Disease will be
driven all out at your Pores. However, take the Powders after this Operation
for some Time, that you may make sure Work of it.

Your Diet should be moist and temperate, and drink Cinquefoil Tea.

It would be difficult to prescribe Rules to prevent a Distemper, to which our
Situation is so unhappily subject; however, Prudence may be useful even in this
Case. Ride therefore a great deal in the hot Months, to sweat out all
indigested Humors; and don't chill your Bowels too much with cold Water.
Avoid, as much as may be, being abroad in the Rain, or in the Dews of the
Night. Be cautious too of sleeping on the Ground, or with your Windows or Doors
open, to let the Wind blow upon you.

CONTINUAL FEVERS.
In case of a Continual Fever, bleed immediately ten Ounces. The Day following,
vomit with Indian Physic; and the Morning after, purge with the same. And if
you should be lightheaded, be convulsed, or incline too much to Sleep, lay a
large Blister to the Neck, and to the fleshy Parts of each Arm; and take a
Glister every Night of Mallows and Syrup of Peach Blossoms, to abate the Heat
of the Distemper.

It matters not how little People eat in one of these Fevers, because the
Spirits requisite for Digestion, are employed in struggling with the Disease;
But what little Sustenance they do take, should be moist and cooling; and their
Drink a Decoction of Cinquefoil, taken plentifully.

To prevent this furious Malady, avoid all Excesses of strong Drink, especially
of Spirits, which inflame the Blood, at the same time that they vitiate the
Ferment of the Stomach; upon which all Digestion, and consequently all Health,
depends.

SLOW FEVER.
But there is a Slow Fever, more difficult to manage than all the rest, which
is the true Scorbutic Fever. The Signs of it are a low, but quick Pulse, a
constant Thirst, a Falling away of the Flesh, and a sallow Complexion. There
will be sometimes too, a hard Swelling on one Side of the Belly, that seems to
move about.

As this lurking Disorder comes by a long Course of ill Management, so it will
need some Time to root it out. For that End, take a Vomit of Indian Physic,
and the next Morning a Purge of the same; which Purge ought to be repeated once
a Week for six Times at least. The Mornings you don't take Physic, drink
constantly a Quarter of a Pint of Sassafras Tea fasting; and every Night, as
much Powder of Snake-root as will lie upon a Shilling, in three Spoonfuls of
Decoction of Dittany. And if you should be costive, take a Glister every other
Day of Decoction of Mallows, with Syrup of Peach Blossoms. This Method
faithfully pursued for two Months, with moderate Riding, and a proper Diet,
will go near to finish the Cure.

In the mean time eat no Milk, nor any Thing salt or hard of Digestion; but let
your Sauce be Mustard, Garden Cresses, and Horseradish in Abundance; and your
best Drink will be sound Cider, with an hot Iron quenched in it, or Beer brewed
with Sorrel Tree Leaves.

Then, to prevent this Illness, you must indulge no slothful Inclination, but
stir about your Business briskly, and ride as often as you can; never drink
more than a Pint of Water, or other Drink, in 24 Hours. Breathe as much as
possible in the open Air in the Day Time, and avoid it in the Night.

WORM FEVER.
There is besides, another Kind of Fever hard to be distinguished, especially
among Children, and that is a Worm Fever. There will be a quick Pulse, and
often a Pain in the Side, in the Stomach, or Bowels, and all occasioned by
Worms Now and then too, there will be the Symptoms of the Flux, and even
Convulsions; so that like the Devil it appears in all Manner of Shapes. The
only Way I know of discerning it, is by a swelled Body, a tainted Breath, or a
greedy Appetite, beyond what is usual in other feverish Disorders.

Give a Vomit of Indian Physic one Day, and a Purge of the same the next. Beat
the Seed of Jerusalem Oak, and take a Spoonful of it, mixed with the Juice of
Ru^ or Wormwood, for three Mornings. From the Beginning, soak a cured Leaf of
Tobacco in Vinegar, and apply it wa^^ to the Stomach or Belly; and it will make
the Worms much sicker than it does the Patient.

Let his Food be seasoned with a great deal of Salt; and his Drink, Beer brewed
pretty bitter, with Wormwood instead of Hops.

It is difficult to hinder Worms from hatching and harboring in our Bodies,
because we swallow their eggs almost with every Thing we eat; especially such
as live much upon Pulse and Indian Corn will be full of them. So that I may
venture to say, three Fourths of the Children that die in these Parts of the
World, die of Worms.

The best Way to prevent them, is to make Use of a great deal of Pepper and
Salt with your daily Food, and as little Vinegar as possible, which is full of
small Insects, to be seen by Millions with a Glass.

CACHEXY.
I took Notice that a Cachexy was one of the Consequences of letting a Fever
and Ague continue too long; though the same is produced likewise by an unwholesome
Diet, by a slothful Habit, and drinking Abundance of cold Water. The Signs of
it are a slow Fever of the Hectic Kind, a continual Thirst, a Shortness of
Breath, and a very cadaverous Complexion.

For the Cure of this lazy Distemper, you must proceed in the same Method as is
directed in the Case of slow Fevers; only I would advise the Patient, over and
above, to take every Day, at Ten in the Morning, and Four in the Afternoon, a
Dram of Rum, wherein the Flowers and Tops of Centory have been infuss'd* and
during the whole Course of the Cure, the Patient must, by all Means, shake off
his lazy Disposition, rise early in a Morning, and stir about as briskly as his
strength and Breath will permit.

His Food should be fresh, and easy of Digestion; and his Drink Beer brewed
with Wormwood, and the Leaves of the Sorrel Tree.

To prevent falling into it, never suffer Agues or slow Fevers to taint your
Blood; be nimble in your Motion, and drench not yourself with cold Water
between Meals.

YELLOW JAUNDICE.
Another bad Effect of keeping an Ague too long, is the Yellow Jaundice. This
discovers itself by the yellow Hue of the Face and other Parts of the Body; nay
the Whites of the Eyes and Urine will be also tinged with it.

For this Illness take a Purge of Indian Physic, and re^eat it the third Day
again. After that drink every Morning and Evening, for six Weeks, a Quarter of
a Pint of Decoction of the inner Ba^k of Elder, and the Root of Sassafras, in
equal Quantities. In the mean time, force yourself to stir about, and ride on
Horseback every fair Day.

Let all your Victuals be light and temperate; and your Drink Beer brewed with
Sorrel Leaves, Pine Tops, Root of Ash, and a little old Iron.

To ward off this ungracious Disease, cure your Agues in the Beginning,
lingering Fevers as soon as possible, and use Agility in your Motion.

DROPSY.
But the most fatal Consequence of keeping an Ague or Jaundice too long, is a
Dropsy. This dire Calamity befalls ancient People sometimes, by Means of natural
Decay; and sometimes those that are young, when they have made too bold with
their Constitution. It Is also apt to follow too great a Loss of Blood, or too
long a Familiarity with Opiates.

A Dropsy first shows itself by the Swelling of the Legs about the Ancles, in
such a Manner as to retain the Impression of your Finger. This Swelling appears
most at Night, and is usually attended with a Shortness and Difficulty of
Breath, ever most troublesome when the Patient lies down.

He must therefore resolve upon proper Remedies, before the Waters rise high
enough to drown him; and if he have but the Gift of Self-denial, he may, by
GOD'S Help, get the better of this mortal Enemy; provided there be no universal
Decay, no Depravation of the Liver, or other Organs, necessary for Blood-mak^ng.

Now I cannot recommend the Remedies for this Disease better, than by giving
three remarkable Instances of Persons of an advanced Age, who have been
perfectly cured by them.

The first was Sir Thomas Millington, an eminent Physician, who fell into a
Dropsy, at near 70 Years of Age. After draining the Water, by two or three
smart Purges, he performed the rest of the Cure by a resolute S^^f-denial. He
eat nothing but what was light and nourishing; and for his Drink, confined
himself rigorously to a Quarter of a Pint of Rhenish Wine in 24 Hours (and hard
Cider would have done the Business as well.) The first Week his Thirst was
hardly to be endured; but after that grew more tolerable. He continued this
Course for two Months, and recovered completely.

The Second was the late Earl of Orford, who had this Distemper in ^his grand
Climacteric. He purged two or three Times, drank sparingly of Canary and Water,
thickened with the Yolk of a new-laid Egg; and all his Victuals besides were
cooked with Abundance of Garlic and Horseradish. This Method was pursued with
great Constancy for three Months, and blessed with entire Success.

The last Instance is an ancient Gentleman who trusted to the Remedies of our
own Country, with the like happy Effect. He drank the Decoction of Sassafras as
soon as he get up, and chewed the Root of it all the rest of the Morning till
Dinner; then observed a light and nourishing Diet; and drank moderately of
clear sound Cider, wherein an hot Iron had been plentifully quenched, and a
little Allom dissolved.

Of these several Remedies you may please to take your Choice; or, instead of
Sassafras, you may hold the Seeds of Pelitary of Spain in your Mouth, which
will salivate still more powerfully.

The rest of the ^ure must be completed with restorative Meats, and a very
short Allowance of Drink. For your Diet* I would recommend Poach'd Eggs, thin
Hominy, Hogs Feet, Cow Heel, and Jelly Broth; all which will renew and enrich
the Blood, without provoking too much Thirst; and for Drink use none but Sorrel
Beer, or sound Cider, wherein an hot Iro^ has been quenched several (...)

To guard yourself against this wretched (...) be cautious of scorching your
Liver with Spirits, or (...) of other strong Drink. In case you be troubled
with Breeding, stop it as soon as you can. By no Means accustom yourself to
Opiates, or suffer an Ague, the Jaundice, or lingering Fevers, to dwell long
upon you.

Because I mentioned Loss of Blood to be one Cause of the Dropsy, I will hint
at some Means to stanch those Bleedings that threaten the most Danger.

BLEEDING PILES.
In Men the excessive Flux of the Bleeding Piles sometimes ends in a Dropsy, if
not stopped in Time, in that Case purge with Indian Physic two or three Times;
and the Mornings you don't take that, drink the Expressed Liquor of fresh Ass
Dung, sweetened with Syrup of Quinces, to be repeated three Times. In the mean
while, take an Ounce of Conserve of Roses, twice or thrice a Day; and after
every Stool, wash your Fundament clean with Decoction of Comfry Leaves, made
very warm.

Live all the Time upon a cooling Diet, without Meat; and only drink Burnet or
Yarrow Tea, sweetened with Syrup of Quinces.

Those that are liable to this, or the like Infirmities, should avoid heating
themselves with strong Drink, or too boisterous Motion; nor must they fall into
violent Passions, either of Love or Anger.

FLOODING.
In Women a Dropsy is often caused by Flooding, or the immoderate Flowing of
their Courses. Let them for this, in the first Place, take away eight Ounces of
Blood, and then proceed as in the foregoing Case; only they must inject the
Decoction of Comfry Leaves, and govern their Passions if they can; nor must any
Part of them, not so much as their Tongue, be allowed to have too much Motion.

This Infirmity comes upon the Sex about 50 Years of Age; and after Bleeding
and Vomiting, nothing cures it better than the Use of the Cold Bath.

BLEEDING at the NOSE.
The Bleeding at the Nose must be treated just in the same Manner, except the
Decoction of Comfry Leaves should be often snuffed up the Nose* and a Tent
soaked in the same frequently thrust into the Nostrils; and if a little Allom
were dissolved in the Decoction, it would be so much the better.

SPITTING or PISSING of BLOOD.
Then for Spitting or Pissing of Blood, bleed eight Ounces. The next Morning
purge with Indian Physic; and drink nothing but Tea made of Comfry Leaves or
Root, and sweetened with Syrup of Quinces. But whenever a Fever produces Loss
of Blood, the Heat of that must be taken off by cooling Medicines, before the
Bleeding will cease,

WHITES.
In the Whites too I would recommend Bleeding in the Beginning, and Purging two
or three Times with Indian Physic. When she don't purge, let her Night and
Morning drink Half a Pint of Papa's Liquor, with an Ounce of Conserve of Roses
dissolved in it; and often inject the same. For the rest, she must use the same
Diet, the same Drink, the same moderate Motion, and Freedom from Passion, as
are mentioned before.

GLEET.
A Gleet, or Running of the Reins, in Men, must be treated in all Respects as
the foregoing Weakness in the other Sex; provided always it be not Venereal.

DIABETES.
A Diabetes discovers itself plainly, by making Water abundantly, which has
commonly a greasy Skim upon it. It Is also attended with a low sneaking Fever,
and much stronger Inclination to drink than eat. At the same Time the Patient
finds himself weak and low spirited, with a Listlessness to all Manner of
Motion.

For this bad Distemper there is this easy and cheap Remedy, which rarely
fails. Dissolve as much Allom in a Pint of Posset Drink as will fit on the
Patient's Stomach without vomiting. Of this let him sip now and then two or
three Spoonfuls, till all the Symptoms go off.

In the mean time, let his Food be easy of Digestion, and his Drink Balm Tea,
moderately taken, or Bristol Water, if it can be got.

And the Way to avoid this Disease is, by a temperate Use of such Meat and
Drink as breed good Blood.

VAPORS.
There is no Disease puzzles Physicians more than the Vapors, and Hysteric
Fits. These Complaints are produced by so many Causes, and appear in so many
various Shapes, that it is no easy Matter to describe them. However, some of the
Symptoms are a Thumping at the Heart, a Croaking of the Guts, and a Fullness of
the Stomach, which the Patient endeavors to ease, as much as she can, by
Belching; every now and then too, something seems to rise up to her Throat,
that almost stops her Breath; she has moreover, a great Heaviness and Dejection
of Spirit, and a Cloud seems to hang upon all her Senses. In one Word, she has
no Relish for any Thing, but is continually out of Humor, (...) knows not why,
and out of Order, she knows not where.

This is certainly a miserable Condition, and the more so, because the Weakness
of the Nerves makes the Cure exceeding difficult.

Because the Stomach is suspected to be much in Fault, I would have that
cleansed in the first Place, with a Vomit of Indian Physic; the next Day
purify the Bowels by a Purge of the same; which must be repeated two Days
after. The rest of the Cure must be performed by the exact Observation of the
following Rules. Endeavor to preserve a cheerful Spirit, putting the best
Construction on every Body's Words and Behavior; plunge three Mornings every
Week into cold Water over Head and Ears; which will brace the Nerves, and rouse
the sluggish Spirits surprisingly. Observe a strict Regularity and Temperance
in your Diet; and ride every fair Day small Journeys on Horseback. Stir nimbly
about your Affairs, quick Motion being as necessary for Health of Body, as for
Dispatch of Business. In the mean while, I absolutely forbid all Sorts of
Drams, which will raise the Spirits only to sink them lower; nor do I allow her
one Pinch of Snuff, or one Drop of Bohea Tea, which make People very lumpish
and miserable.

Her Food must be fresh and easy of Digestion, neither salt nor windy, nor may
she eat one Morsel of Beef, which affords a gross Nourishment, and inclines
People too much to hang themselves. And for her Drink, she must forbear Beer,
with all windy and fermented Liquors; and stick to Balm Tea entirely.

To escape this Disorder, she must suffer none of the idle Disturbances, or
Disappointments of an empty World, to prey upon her Mind, or ruffle her sweet
Temper. Let her use just Exercise enough to give a gentle Spring to her
Spirits, without wasting them; and let her be cheerful in spite of a churlish
Husb^nd, or cloudy Weather.

UPPRESSION of the COURSES.
Now I am upon Female Infirmities, it will not be unseasonable to touch upon a
common Complaint among unmarried Women, n^mely, The S^ppressi^n of the Cou^^es.
This don't only disparage their Complexions, but fills them besides with sundry
^isorders. For this Misfortune, you must purge with Highland Flagg (commonly
called Belly ach Root) a Week before you expect to be out of Order; and repeat
the same two Days after; the next Morning drink a Quarter of a Pint of
Pennyroyal Water, or Decoction, and as much again at Night when you go to Bed.
Continue this 9 Days running; and after resting 3 Days, go on with it for 9
more. Ride out every fair Day, stir nimbly about your Affairs, and breathe as
much as possible in the open Air.

You must feed upon a warm and cordial Diet, enriched with a great dea^ of
(...), Nutmeg, Horseradish and Garden Cresses (...) time avoiding every Thing
that is (...) and windy. And let your Drink be (...) Leaves, or else Ground Ivy
Tea.

To prev^^t this (...), young Women must shake off Sloth, and make (...) as
well as their Hands. They should be cautiou^ of taking Opiates too often, or
Jesuits Bark, except in Cases of great Necessity; nor must they long for pretty
Fellows; or any other Trash whatsoever.

STONE in the BLADDER.
Heaven be praised there is little Occasion to say any Thing of the S^one in
the Bladder, there being few Instances of it in this Colony. Among the Gentry,
the Madeira Wine, which has but little Tartar in it, and the Melasses Beer,
being soft and cleansing, are happy Defenses against this Scourge of Luxury and
Laziness: And then, for the common Planters, their Pone, and other Preparations
of Indian Corn, being smooth and slippery, are likewise excellent Preservatives.

GRAVEL.
Nevertheless, some few of us, by sitting too long either at our Book or our
Bottle, have, now and then, some Touches of the Gravel, or Stone in the
Kidneys. This makes itself known by a Pain across the Loins, by Urine tinged
with Blood, and mixed with Sand, and jagged little Stones; the Stomach too is
sometimes affected, and inclined to vomit.

When you find these concurring Symptoms, drink 3 or 4 Quarts of Whey as fast
as you can, wherein the Root of Prickly Pear has been boiled. When that has all
past, squeeze the Juice of Wild Garlic into clean sound Cider, and drink a
moderate Glass of it Night and Morning for 6 or 7 Days.

In the mean time, let your Food be thin Hominy, or Broth, with a few Mallows
boiled in it; and your Drink, (...) Decoction of Mallows, sweetened with Syrup
of Violets.

And the Way to ward off this painful Disease, is to be temperate in all your
Enjoyments, to eat a great Deal of ^ilk, and Meats made of Indian-Corn; but
above all Things, be cautious of sitting still too much.

SUPPRESSION of URINE.
A Common Consequence of the Gravel, is a Suppression of Urine, occasioned,
sometimes, by small Stones lodging in the narrow Passages, that lead from the
Kidneys to the Bladder. The Signs of this Complaint are too plain to any One
who has his Feeling; and to cure it, you must proceed in much the same Method
as for the Gravel; only you should add Parsley Tea to your Drink, sweetened
with Syrup of Violets.

But if the Suppression arise from an Ulcer, or Inflammation in the Neck of the
Bladder, then the Sypmtoms are a great Heat and Pain in that Part, with an
urgent Need to make Water, but a Disability to do it at all, or, at most, not
faster than Drop by Drop.

For this, boil one Part of Oil with two Parts of good Cider, and thereof
swallow a Spoonful or two Night and Morning.

Let your Diet all the while be cooling and easy of Digestion; and your Drink,
Parsley Tea or Cider, with a Plantain Leaf boiled in it.

To prevent this Ailment, eat seldom of peppered or high seasoned Meats; and
drink moderately of hot Liquors: Though, above all Things, you must forbear using
artificial ^^^vocatives to recommend you to the delightful Sex* but, ^or that,
let Nature be your only Prompter.

BLIND PILES.
The Symptoms of the Blind Piles, are little painful Swellings* appearing just
without the Fundament. They are occasioned by the Flowing of corrupted Blood
into the Vessels thereabouts, which sometimes creates so much Anguish, as to
put the Patient into a Fever, and render every Postur^ uneasy.

For this Complaint, take every Morning fasting, in the Y^lk of a new laid Egg,
12 Grains of Brimstone, finely powdered; and wash it down with a small Draught
of Decoction of Mallows* And to assuage the Pain, make Use of this outward
Application: Stamp a roasted Onion, with a little Ointment of James-Town Weed;
which must be laid on warm, and renewed twice a Day.

In the mean time the afflicted Person's Diet ought to be moderate and cooling,
without Meat of any Kind; and his constant Drink, Milk and Water.

But, in order to prevent this Affliction, and root it out for ever, use the
following Remedy. Boil a Handful of Mullein Leaves in a Pint of new Milk, and
sweeten it with Syrup of Violets. Drink this every Night, for 6 Weeks together,
just before you go to Rest.

RUPTURE.
A Rupture is a common Misfortune, especially among Children. The Tokens of it
are a painful Swelling and Inflammation in the Cods, occasioned by a Fall, or
other Violence, that forces down the Guts into that Part, and is most painful
when the Accident first happens.

For this, let the Patient immediately have a Truss made, that may hold the
Part suspended. Then apply fresh Cow Dung, which must be renewed Night and
Morning, till the Pains are assuaged. After that, put on another Poultis, made
of the Roots of Swamp Lillies, and Sumack Berries, boiled and beat well
together; which must also be refreshed twice a Day, till the Swelling
disappears. From the Beginning, let him gird a Belt tight about his Loins, and
wear it continually, till the Bowels are drawn up to their natural Situation.

Let his Diet be cooling, and easy of Digestion; and his constant Drink, a
Decoction of Garden Cresses, sweetened with Syrup of Quinces.

In order to prevent this Disaster, Care must be taken never to over-strain
yourself, use too v^^^ent Motion, or fall in such a Manner as to injure
yourself in those sensible and tender Parts.

KING's EVIL.
The King's Evil proceeds from a foul and obstina^e Humor in the Body that
breaks out into Swellings and (...) and is often derived from our Parents.

For this great Misfortune take a clean Sponge, (...) well in an Earthen Pot,
and having reduced it to (...), take as much as will lie upon a Shilling,
Morning and Evening, in warm Asses Milk. This must be ^^ntinued for three
Months to complete the Cure* (...) time* Care should be taken never to scorch
the Sponge. While this Remedy is taken inwardly, apply a Poultis of Sassafras
to the Sores that are broke, which will both draw and heal them.

A Spare Diet should be used all the while, without Salt Meat, or strong Drink.

The best Way to prevent this impure Distemper, is for those that have it never
to marry, nor do worse, that they may not transmit their Misfortunes to
Posterity.

YAWS.
The Yaws, or Country Distemper, is very bad to cure perfectly, especially when
grown inveterate. This is the highest Kind of Scurvy; and the Symptoms of it
are, eating Ulcers in the Throat, or Palate, and filthy Sores in other Parts of
the Body, having near Resemblance to those of the Pox.

This unclean Disease often yields to Dr. Papa's Remedy; or at least may be
kept under by it.

PAPA's REMEDY.
Take 1 Ounce of the Bark of Sumack Root, 1 Ounce of the inner Bark of Spanish
Oak; boil these together in a Quarts of Water, till the Decoction be very
strong. Of this Liquor drink a full Pint, Milk-warm, and immediately after it
Half a Pint, quite cold: and it will give you a powerful Vomit.

The next Morning take Half a Pint of the same Drink warm, and the same
Quantity again in the Evening; and continue so doing for 6 Weeks or 2 Months;
only the Vomit must be repeated every seventh Day. In the mean time gargle your
Throat, and wash all your Sores and Ulcers with the same warm Liquor, which
ought to be made fresh every 2 Days. Besides all this, you must chew the Sumack
Root very often, and swallow the healing Juice.

Every Night, before you go to rest, take 2 Pills, made of Turpentine and Deers
Dung, in equal Quantities.

POX.
The Pox may be cured exactly in the same Manner; and, because the Symptoms are
much the same, it is very probable the One was a Graft of the other. The pious
Spaniards caught it from their Negroe Mistresses in the West Indies, and had
the Honor of propagating it from thence to all the rest of the World.

In both Cases, confine yourself altogether from eating Flesh, and from strong
Drink, and be very careful of catching Cold.

To avoid this Misfortune, eat seldom of fresh Pork, which breeds very gross
Humors; live not too near a Swamp; nor ever venture upon strange Women,
especially not on Ethiopians.

CANCER.
Another woeful Case is a Cancer, which some despairingly imagine to be
incurable; though blessed be GOD, there have been some Instances of Success, by
the Method hereafter mentioned. In the mean time, it usually begins with little
hard Lumps, or Swellings in the Breast, Lip, or other glandulous Part of the
Body. These afterward break into painful Sores, which eat farther and farther,
till at last they reach some large Vessel, or mortal Part.

In this Case, the Patient must submit, in the first Place, to have the hard
Lump cut clean out, so soon as he is convinced it is a Cancer. And, for curing
the Wound, he cannot do better than make Use of the following Balsam: He must
boil 6 Ounces of Sassafras Root, and as much Dogwood Root in a Gallon of Water,
till it be wasted to a Pint, and having strained it off* must drench a Pledget
therein, and apply it warm to the ^ore, renewing it every Day: And if he will
have the Patience to continue this for some Time, I can assure him he will not
be the first that has been blessed with Success.

Let him drink Sassafras Tea every Morning, live temperately upon light and
innocent Food, and abstain entirely from strong Liquor.

The Way to prevent this Calamity, is to be very sparing in eating fresh Pork,
to forbear all salt and high seasoned Meats, and live chiefly upon the Garden,
the Orchard, and the Hen-house.

RHEUMATISM.
A Rheumatism is a wandering Pain that shifts from one Joint or Part of the
Body to another, and is generally accompanied with a small Fever.

For this bleed 10 Ounces, the next Day vomit with Indian Physic, and the Day
after that take a Purge of the same. After all this, boil a Shin of Beef in a
Gallon of Water, till one Half be wasted. Put into what remains a Pound of
Garlic, and stew it till it comes to 3 Pints. Then strain it again, and take a
Quarter of a Pint, blood warm, Morning and Evening for 3 Days, and you will
find Relief.

As this Distemper happens by a violent cold, great Care should be taken to
prevent the unhappy Cause.

GOUT.
I shall next say something of the Gout, which I observe with Pleasure to be
grown less frequent in the Country, than in the Time of our Fathers. It makes
itself known with a Vengeance, by a painful Inflammation in some of the Joints,
especially of the Hands and Feet.

It would be great Presumption, after so many vain Attempts, for me to
recommend any other Remedy for this obstinate Distemper, than a strict and
severe Temperance, both in Eating and Drinking. Nevertheless, I am not so hard
hearted, as to deny my Patient any Kind of fresh and plain Food, that agrees
with his Stomach: All I entreat of him, is to confine himself religiously to a
moderate Quantity. Nor can he do better, than to follow the Example of Cornara,
a noble Venetian, who tied himself down to 12 Ounces of Eatables, including
Bread, and 14 Ounces of Drink, in the 24 Hours. He stuck close to this short
Allowance, using moderate Exercise; and, from being a Cripple by the Gout,
recovered his Health, and his Strength, to a Wonder: And having found so much
Benefit by these Rules, pursued them strictly to the End of a very long and
happy Life.

Nor are these Weights so scanty as they may seem to be to some keen Stomachs;
but, upon a fair Trial, they will be found sufficient to give Strength to the
Body, Cheerfulness to the Heart, and Vigor to all the Faculties of the Soul.
And, besides these happy Effects, they will do more: They will place you above
the Influence of the Stars; and make you able to subdue your Passions, to the
Empire of a cool and unclouded Understanding.

The same Temperance that cures this Distemper, will certainly not fail to
prevent it; make you live a great while, and very easy while you do live.

BITE of a RATTLE SNAKE.
If any One should have the Misfortune to be bit by a Rattle Snake, let him
kill the Viper immediately, and apply its Fat to the Wound. This will sheathe
the Poison, and give Time for other Remedies to expel it out of the Blood. The
readiest Cure I know, is St. Andrew's Cross, which grows providentially all
over the Woods, during the whole Season that the Snakes are mischievous.

Let him take 60 Grains of the Root reduced to Powder, or a strong Decoction of
the Leaves and tender Branches, and if one Dose should not finish the Cure, he
must take a Second. There are other Plants growing in this Country that will
answer the same Intention, such as the Fern Rattle-snake Root, Ginger
Snake-root, the smaller Assa Rebecca, Oak of Jerusalem, and Dittany; but St.
Andrew's Cross is as powerful as any, and much easier procured, being the
Growth of every Soil, that has not been cleared through the whole Colony. Nor is
there any Indian Trader, but can bear Witness to its Virtue in this Particular.

BITE of a MAD DOG.
For the Bite of a Mad Dog, which may be reckoned among the greatest of
Calamities, Dr. Mead has communicated the following Remedy to the World which
he had tried on more than 500 Persons, with great (...) constan^ Success.

The Patient, as soon as possible after his Misfortune* should bleed about 10
Ounces. Then let him take of Ash-colored Ground Liver Wort, dried and
powdered, Half an Ounce; which grows on moist sandy barren Soils. He must mix
with this two Drachms of powdered black Pepper. Divide those into Four Doses,
and let him take one every Morning fasting in Half a Pint of warm Milk. After
this, the Patient must be plunged over Head and Ears in very cold Water every
Morning fasting, for a Month together, never staying longer than Half a Minute
at a Time. When he has bathed in this Manner so long, he need go in no more
than three Times a Week for a Fortnight longer, by which Time the Cure, by the
Grace of GOD, will be happily completed.

The Liverwort should be gathered in October, and dried carefully in the Shade.

FILM.
In case a Film should grow over the Sight of the Eye, occasioned by a Blow, a
sharp Humor, or other Accident, you may take it off with this easy and cheap
Remedy. Dry Human Dung in the Sun that is yellow, and of a good Consistence,
and having reduced it to a very fine Powder, blow it through a Quill two or three
Times a Day into the Eye, and your Sight will be happily restored in a short
Time.

SORE EYES.
Common Sore Eyes may be cured by washing them with Breast Milk, warm Sage Tea,
or with Rose Water, taking Care in the mean time not to rub them if they itch,
or expose them to the cold Air.

SPRAIN.
If by any Fall, or False Step, you should happen to sprain a Joint, clap it
into cold Water as soon as possible, and keep it there for several Minutes.
Then cover the Part all over with a Poultis of Clay well tempered with strong
Vinegar, which must be bound on securely. When the first grows dry, apply
another, which will probably finish the Cure without the Expense of a Surgeon.

And now I mention Surgeons, by the good Leave of those Gentlemen, I will
recommend to my poor Countrymen an easy Remedy for some little Complaints that
fall within their proper Province. Nor will they take it amiss, I hope, (...)
endeavor to help such indigent Persons as cannot purchase their Assistance.

BROKEN SHIN.
If any One therefore should break a Shin, or have any other green Wound
(which, by being neglected, often comes to be very troublesome) let him only
make use of that Balsam, which the compassionate Samaritan applied to the
Wounds of the poor Israelite who fell amongst Thieves. Boil Oil Olive and Wine
in equal Quantities (and if you add a little clean Muscovado Sugar, it will be
so much the better) Drench a Pledget well in this Balsam, with which cover the
whole Sore, and keep it on with any sticking Plasters, and it will be healed
in one or two Dressings. I have likewise cured very bad Ulcers with it, but
then I kept the Patient to a spare and cooling Diet, making him drink Papa's
Liquor all the Time, and cleanse the Sore with the same every Time it was
dressed. In these Cases, it need not be dressed more than once in two Days,
because it should be exposed as seldom as possible to the cold Air.

SWELLING to DISCUSS.
If you have a Swelling in any Part which you would discuss, mix powdered
Brimstone, with the Juice of James Town Weed, and thereof make an Ointment with
fresh Hogs Lard. Anoint with this twice or thrice a Day, keeping the Part warm,
and you will rarely fail of Success.

SWELLIG to BREAK.
But if you would draw a Swelling to a Head, chew Sassa^fras Root, and apply it
by Way of Poultis, and it will no^ only break the Swelling, but cure it also in
a short ^ime without any other Application.

SEAR CLOTH.
If you should have a Pain in the Back, Loins, or (...) Part, that requires a
Sear Cloth to assuage it, the most effectual One I can recommend to you, is
made after the following Manner. Powder the Root of Assa Rebecca, Comfry and
Snake Root, then mix them with as much common Turpentine as will make a large
Plaster, which apply hot to the Part, and it will give speedy Relief.

DEAFNESS.
If any one should by Cold or other Accident become Deaf, let him take the Bulb
of a large Onion, and scoop out a pretty deal of the Inside. Then let him fill
the hollow Part Half full of Rattle Snake Oil, and (...) it on a Grid-Iron over
live Coals, till the Pulp of the Onion incorporate with the Oil. Then strain
it, and going to Bed, drop two Drops into the Patient's Ear very warm.
Afterward stop it with Cotton, and repeat it six or seven Times, and you will
have Reason to applaud the Medicine.

Thus I have run through most of the common Complaints, to which the
Inhabitants of this Colony are subject; and prescribed such innocent Cures, as
will generally succeed, if timely made Use of; yet am far from pretending that
any of them are infallible; We all know that Death strikes so home in some
Cases, that all Physic is vain. There are many Instances too, where the
Diseases of our Climate have a little Dash of the Pox, the Scurvy, or the Gout;
and then they need a RATCLIFF or a FRIEND to get the better of them.

In the mean time, it may seem strange, that, among the Remedies I have
prescribed, no honorable Mention is made of Mercury, Opium, or the Peruvian
Bark, which have almost obtained the Reputation of Specificks. I acknowledge
the powerful Effects of these Medicines, but am persuaded they ought to be
administered with the greatest Skill and Discernment. And, as I write only for
the Service of the Poor, who are wholly left to judge for themselves, I was
fearful of putting such dangerous Weapons into their Hands.

If those of better Circumstances find any Thing here that may, in any Manner,
deserve their Attention, I should be exceeding glad; though I own these
Directions* were not designed for such as are in Condition to purchase more
learned Advice. It was only to those whom Fortune has placed below the Regard
of our Doctors, that I address this short Essay; and if one single Person shall
be recov^^^d thereby, or receive the least Relief, I shall account my Pains
happily bestowed.

In the mean Time, there is no Question, but some of my Brother Quacks will
make themselves merry with these Prescriptions. Let them shoot their harmless
Bolts. I by no Means envy those Gentlemen the only Way they have of appearing
wiser than their Neighbors. Though after all, it is not impossible, but they may
do by some of these, just as the good People of England do by the French
Fashions, laugh at them first, and then have the Humility to follow them.

An Index of Diseases mentioned in Every Man his own Doctor.
AGue, Page 357 Bite of a Rattle Snake, Page 371 Bite of a Mad Dog, Page 372
Bleeding at the Nose, Page 363 Bleeding Piles, Page 363 Blind Piles, Page 367
Bloody Flux, Page 350 ^roken Shin, Page 373 ^achexy, Page 360 ^ancer, Page 370
^holick, Page 352 ^onsumption, Page 349 ^ough, Page 347 ^eafness, Page 374
^iabetes, Page 364 ^ropsy, Page 361 ^ry Gripes, Page 353 ^pilepsy, or Falling
Sickness, Page 355 Fever continual, Page 358 Fever, with violent Purging and
Vomiting, Page 357 Fever, Pain in the Head, Eye, or Ear, Page 348 Film on the
Eyes, Page 372 Flooding, Page 363 Flux immoderate of the Courses, Page 363
Gleet, or Running of the Reins, Page 364 Gout, Page 371 Gravel, Page 366 Green
Wound, Page 373 Griping, Page 352 Heart-burn, Page 354 King's Evil, Page 368
Lethargy, Page 356 Looseness, Page 352 Palsy, Page 354 Pissing of Blood, Page
363 Pl^^risy, Page 347 Pox, Page 369 Quinsey, Page 349 Rheumatism, Page 370
Rupture, Page 368 Slow Fever, Page 359 Sore Eyes, Page 373 Sore Throat, Page
349 Spitting of Blood, Page 363 Sprain, Page 373 Stone in the Bladder, Page 366
Stone in the Kidneys, Page 366 Strangary, Page 367 Suppression of the Courses,
Page 365 Suppression of Urine, Page 367 Swelling to break, Page 374 Swelling to
discuss, Page 37^ Vapors, or Hysteric Fits, Page 364 Vomiting and Purging,
Page 357 Whites, Page 364 White Flux, Page 351 Whooping Cough, Page 347 Worm
Fever, Page 359 Yaws, Page 369 Yellow Jaundice, Page 361
The foregoing Distempers are the most fatal and troublesome we are afflicted
with in this Country. I have been (...) short as I could, lest I might lose the
Benefit of the Pro^verb, which says, The shortest Follies are the best. The
Remedies I have prescribed, are almost all of our own Growth, there being no
more than 5 or 6 foreign Medicines; and they so very cheap, that if I happen
not to cure my Patient, I am sure I shall not ruin him. And surely, no Man can
say, he dies very unfairly, when there is so little to pay, either to the
Doctor or the Apothecary* Besides, I have another Thing to recommend me, that I
don't cram my Patients with too much Physic. My Prescriptions are generally
single, and not compounded, like a Spanish Oleo, of all Sorts of Ingredients,
which must cer^tainly confound and defeat the Virtues of each other. Neither do
I ransack the Universe for outlandish Drugs, which must waste and decay in a
long Voyage; nor import the Sweepings of the Shops, which I am sure are
decayed; bu^ am content to do my Execution with the Weapons of ou^ own Country.

An Index of Ingredients made use of.
ALom, Page 362, 363 Ash root, Page 361 Ass dung, Page 363 Assa-Rebecca, Page
372, 37^ Bawm, Page 348, 352, 353, 355, 356, 36^ Bears-on, Page Brandy, Page
353, 354 Breast-milk, Page 352 Brimstone, Page 373 Burnet, Page 363 Centory
Page 360 Clay, Page 373 Cold-bath, Page 363 Comfry, Page 363 Cow Dung, Page 368
Cresses, Page 359, 366, 368 Cinquefoil, Page 349, 358 Deers dung, Page 350, 369
Deers horn, Page 351, 352 Dittany, Page 359 Dogwood Page 370 Elder, Page 361
Elicampane Page 347 Fern Rattle snake-root, Page 372 Garlic, Page 362, 366
Ginger Snake-root, Page 372 Ground Ivy, or Aloff, Page 348, 350, 366
Highland-flag, or Bellyach-root, Page 365 Honey, Page 348 Horehound, Page 347
Horseradish, Page 355, 359, 362, 366 Human dung, Page 372 Hungary-water, Page
355 James town-weed, Page 368, 373 Jerusalem oak, Page 360 Indian Physic, Page
347, 351, 354, 456, 357, 358, 359, 361, 363, 364, 365 Indian Pepper, Page 348
Iron, Page 359, 361, 362 Linseed, Page 348 Liquorice, Page 350 L^ver wort, Page
372 Mallows, Page 348, 349, 350, 352, 353, 358, 359 Mint, Page 357 Misleto,
Page 356 Mullein, Page 368 Mustard, Page 355, 359, 366 Nutmeg, Page 351, 357,
366 Oil, Page 367 (...) Page 373 Oil of Rattle-snake, Page 374 Parsley, Page
367 Peach Blossoms, Page 348, 349, 350, 351, 358, 359 Peach Leaves, Page 353
Pennyroyal, Page 348, 356, 366 Pine Page 361 Pelitary of Spain, Page 362
Plantain, Page 351, 367 Prickly Pea^* Page 366 Quince, Page 363, 368 Raisins,
Page 350 Rennet, Page 356 Roses, Page 363, 364 Rosemary, Page 355 Rue, Page
348, 356, 360 Sage, Page 348, 355, 356 St. Andrew's cross, Page 371, 372
Sassafras, Page 350, 353, 357, 361, 362, 370 Scurvy Grass, Page 355 Sn^ke root,
Page 353, 357, 359, Spanish-flies, Page 348, 349, 350 Spanish-oak, Page 369
Sorrel, Page 359, 360, 361, 366 Sponge, Page 368 Sumac, Page 368, 369
Swamp-lillies, Page 368 Tobacco, Page 354, 355, 360, Tuckahoe, Page 352
Turpentine, Page 350, 369 Vinegar, Page 356, 360, 373 Violets, Page 367, 368
Wax, Page 352 Whey, Page 352, 366 Wormwood, Page 348, 357, 360 Yarrow, Page 363
These Ingredients every Master of a (...) may easily provide himself with; as
he should als^ ^ith a Lancet, a Glyster-pipe, and a Syringe, that he (...) not
be at a Loss in his Distress; and spend that (...) in running after Remedies
that ought to be made (...) of in applying them; Delays being never so
da^^erous, as in the Care we ought to take of the Sick.

The Printer to the Reader wishes Health.
THIS Book, entitled, Every Man his own Doctor, was first printed in Virginia,
for the Use of which Colony it was written by a Gentleman residing there. Great
Numbers have been distributed among the People both in Virginia and Maryland,
and it is generally allowed that Abundance of Good has been thereby done. And as
some Parts of Pe^nsylvania, the Jerseys, and the Lower Counties on Delaware, by
the Lowness and Moistness of their Situation, are subject to the same Kind of
Diseases, I have been advised to reprint this Book here, for the Use and
Benefit of those People in these Countries, as live at too great a Distance
from good Physicians. It is necessary, however, to give the Reader this one
Caution, that the Ipecacuana or Indian Physic, so frequently prescribed by the
Author, is much weaker in Virginia, than that which grows in Pennsylvania; so
that whereas he prescribes 80 Grains for a Vomiting Potion, and 70 for a Purge;
12 Grains of our Indian Physic, or Ipecacuana, will be sufficient for a Vomit,
and 10 for a Purge: There is another Sort which comes to us from Europe, and is
to be found in the Apothecaries Shops, of which 30 or 32 Grains is commonly
gi^ven for a Vomit, and 27 for a Purge, which will work mos^ Constitutions
sufficiently.

POSTSCRIPT.
A Physician in Virginia has lately published an Essay or the Pleurisy; in
which he discovers a Method (...) treating that fatal Distemper, that he says
he always found to succeed. The principal Part of the Cure depends on the Use
of a Simple that begins to be known in this Coun^try by the Name of Rattle
^^ake Root, being the sam^ which the Indians use in curing the Bite of that
venomou^ Reptile. The Method which the Author practices and recommends, is as
follows*

"Let the Patient first have 10 Ounces of Blood taken from the Arm of the well
Side or Foot, if both Sides are affected; and every six Hours 3 Spoonfuls of
the following Tincture is to be given, the first Dose immediately after, and
continued till the Symptoms abate.

Take of the Rattle Snake Root, 3 Ounces, wild Valerian Root, an Ounce and a
Half, let them be well bruised in a Mortar, then mix them with a Quart of old
Canary, and digest in a proper Vessel in a Sand Heat for six Hours, afterward
decant for Use.

Let fifteen Drops of Balsam Capivi, and as many of Sal Vola^ile Oleosum, be
given in a little ordinary Drink, twice between each Dose of the Tincture,
beginning with the first Dose two Hours after the Tincture; and give the second
Dose two Hours after.

Let the ordinary Drink be a Tea made of Marshmallow (...), always given warm.

If the Patient has been ill some Days before any Thing administered, the Balsam
is to be continued for some Days after a considerable Amendment.

Blood-letting is to be repeated the second Day, and in the same Quantity as
the first, if the Patient is not much better, or the same Day, unless something
better in four Hours: But such is the Efficacy of this Medicine, that there is
seldom Occasion. The Symptoms generally abate considerably in 24 Hours, and the
Recovery certain.

But because every One may not have Convenience for preparing this Tincture,
nor have the other Medicines mentioned at Hand, and don't live within Reach of
a Physician, it is necessary to acquaint the Reader with what the Author adds
further, viz.

A Decoction of the Rattle Snake Root alone in Spring Water, three Ounces to
about one Quart; together with Pectoral Teas sweetened with Honey, will (...)
effectual without any thing else, if the Patient has been let Blood as soon as
taken, and this Decoction immediately given afterward.

This is to be understood of the genuine Pleurisy or Peripneumony attended with
a Fever.

As for the other Disease, which often personates a Pleurisy in these Parts,
the Symptoms of which are, that the Patient is cold in a somniferous State, and
sometimes convulsed.

In this Case the Author omits Blood-letting as pernicious; but says the
Tincture aforesaid is as effectual here as in the genuine Pleurisy, only
advises that the Rattle Snake Root and Valerian be in equal Quantites.

We have not Room to add more out of the abovementioned Essay; and indeed the
greatest Part of it being taken up in abstracted Reasonings on the Texture of
the Blood, and the Operations of different Medicines, etc. to make a larger
Extract would be of little Use to the unlearned Reader, for whom this Book was
originally intended; and it is supposed that in Cases of Danger, the Patient
will always consult a skilful Physician w^ere it can possibly be done.

But while we are solicitous about the Health of the Body, let us not forget,
that there are also Diseases of the Mind, which concern us no less to be
thoroughly cured of. The divine Assistance and Blessing on our Endeavors is
absolutely necessary in both Cases; which we ought therefore piously and
devoutly to request. And being healed, let us gratefully bless and praise that
GREAT PHYSICIAN, from whose Goodness flows every Virtue, and the Discovery of
every useful Medicine.

An Addition of some farther RECEIPTS.
BRUISE or SCALD outward.
TAKE a Quart of Neats-foot Oil, Half a Pound of Red-lead, two Ounces of
Beeswax; boil them together three Hours, and stir them well. -- Or, Oil of
Eldern bathed or rubbed on the Place will have the same Effect.

BRUISES INWARD.
Drink the Decoction of Comfry with Bread and Butter.

BOUND in the BODY.
Take Cream of Tartar mixed with Honey very frequently.

CANKER in the MOUTH.
Take the Juice of Plantain and Rose Water mixed, and with it frequently wash
your Mouth.

For a COUGH.
When you are going to Bed, drink Brandy, Treacle and Sallad Oil, mixed: Or,
take a Mixture of Butter and brown Sugar.

CONVULSIONS in CHILDREN.
Take unslacked Lime one Quart, and put to it five Quarts of Spring Water; let
it stand 24 Hours, in which Time stir it three times, scum it, and take the
clear Water and let it stand 12 Hours more, and strain it through a Cloth; and
being put into an Earthen-pot, put to it Anniseed and Fennel Seeds, of each a
Quarter of a Pound; Liquorice bruised and Sassafras, of each an Handful; let
them stand four or five Days, and then let the Child drink a Quarter of a Pint,
Morning and Evening, as long as it lasts.

For the Stone or Stoppage in the Urine.
Take a Quantity of Thyme, Parsley, Tops of Fennel, and Cinquefoil a like
Quantity, five or six Cloves of Garlic; and stamp them all together, and
strain them into White Wind or Ale, and drink of it Morning and Evening.

To make Melilot excellent for Plasters.
Take Melilot, Pimpernel and Scabious, of each two Handfuls; cut them small,
then beat them in a Mortar with two Pounds of Hog's Lard; let it stand in the
Sunshine seven or eight Days (it being usually made in June) then melt and
strain it well; then add as many more fresh Herbs, and set it in the Sun as
before, and then melt and strain it again; then boil it till the Juice is
consumed; then take it off the Fire, and put to it beaten Rosin, Beeswax, and
fine Turpentine, of each one Ounce; when cold, put it up in Pots, or make it up
in Rolls.

Advice to a young Tradesman, written by an old One.
To my Friend A. B.
As you have desired it of me, I write the following Hints* which have been of
Service to me, and may, if observed, be so to you.

REMEMBER that TIME is Money. He that can earn Ten Shillings a Day by his
Labor, and goes abroad, or sits idle one Half of that Day, though he spends but
Sixpence during his Diversion or Idleness, ought not to reckon that the only
Expense; he has really spent, or rather thrown away, Five Shillings besides.

Remember that CREDIT is Money. If a Man lets his Money lie in my Hands after
i^ (...) due, he gives me the Interest, or so much as I can make of it during
that Time* This amounts to a considerable Sum where a Man has good and large
Credit, and makes good Use of it.

Remember that Money is of a prolifick generating Nature. Money can beget
Money, and its Offspring can beget more, and so on. Five Shillings turned, is
Six* Turned again, it is Seven and Threepence; and so on till it becomes an
Hundred Pound. The more there is of it, the more it produces every Turning, so
that the Profits rise quicker and quicker. He that kills a breeding Sow,
destroys all her Offspring to the Thousa^dth Generation. He that murders a
Crown, destroys all (...) have produced, even Scores of Pounds.

Remember that Six Pounds a Year is but a (...) a Day. For this little Sum
(which may be daily wasted either in Time or Expense unperceived) a Man of
Credit may, on his own Security, have the constant Possession and Use of an
Hundred Pounds. So much in Stock briskly turned by an industrious Man, produces
great Advantage.

Remember this saying, That the good Play Master is Lord of another Man's Purse.
He that is known to pay punctually and exactly to the Time he promises, may, at
any Time, and on any Occasion, raise all the Money his Friends can spare. This
is sometimes of great Use; therefore never keep borrowed Money an Hour beyond
the Time you promised, left a Disappointment shut up your Friend's Purse for
ever.

The most trifling Actions that affect a Man's Credit, are to be regarded. The
Sound of your Hammer at Five in the Morning, or Nine at Night, heard by a
Creditor, makes him easy six Months longer. But if he sees you at a Bil^^ard
Table, or hears your Voice in a Tavern, when you should be at Work, he sends
for his Money the next Day. Finer Clothes than he or his Wife wears, or greater
Expense in any Particular than he affords himself, shocks his Pri^e, and he
duns you to humble you. Creditors are a Kin^ of People, that have the sharpest
Eyes and Ears, as well as the best Memories of any in the World.

Good-natured Creditors (and such one would always choose to deal with if one
could) feel Pain when they are obliged to ask for Money. Spare 'em that Pain,
and they will love you. When you receive a Sum of Money, divide it among 'em in
Proportion to your Debts. Don't b^ ashamed of paying a small Sum because you
owe a greater^ Money, more or less, is always welcome; and your Creditor had
rather be at the Trouble of receiving Ten Pounds voluntarily brought him, though
at ten different Times or Payments, than be obliged to go ten Times to demand
it before he can receive it in a L^mp. It shows, besides, that you are mindful
of what you owe; it makes you appear a careful as well as an honest Man; and
that still increases your Credit.

Beware of thinking all your own that you possess, and of living accordingly.
'Ti^ a Mistake that many People who have Credit fall into. To prevent this,
keep an exact Account, for some ^ime, of both your Expenses and your Incomes.
If you take the Pains at first to mention Particulars, it will have this good
Effect; you will discover how wonderfully small trifling Expenses mount up to
large Sums, and will discern what might have been, and may, for the future, be
saved, without occasioning any great Inconvenience.

In short, the Way to Wealth, if you desire it, is as plain as the Way to
Market. It depends chiefly on two Words, INDUSTRY and FRUGALITY; i. e. Waste
neither Time nor Money, but make the best Use of both. He that gets all he can
honestly, and saves all he gets (necessary Expenses excepted) will certainly
become RICH: If that Being who governs the World, to whom all should look for a
Blessing on their honest Endeavors, does not in his wise Providence otherwise
determine.

An Explanation of Mr. J. B's Twelve Ciphers.
By practicing which, the young Writer may more speedily acquire a perfect Idea
of the Proportions of the Roundhand Letters, and their Relations to each other,
than by any other Method yet known.

THESE Twelve Ciphers are contrived, to let the Writer see, by inverting them,
whether he has given his Letters their true Form. He must make Allowances for
the Dots, and also for the beginning and ending Turns of n or u, being alike in
this Example, the common Rule being to make the beginning Turns sharper, and
then the Explanation of the Ciphers will be as follows: No. 1. Is hu together,
or hi separate; being inverted, it is ny together, or nj separate. 2. Is ny
together, or nj separate; being inverted, it is hu together, or hi separate;
the Reverse of No. 1. 3. Is hy together, or hj separate; and the same when
inverted. 4. Is hu, and when in^^rted, ny together, or mj separate. 5. Is No.
4. inverted. 6. Is mu together, or mi separate; being inverted, it is nu. 7. Is
nu together, or mi separate (...) being inverted, it is the same. 8. Is only y
and h both Ways; but by Inversion, changed one for the other. 9. Is h and y
alike each Way. 10. Is made of two contrary c's. 11. Is made of two contrary
e's. 12. Is s either End upward.


FINIS.
Lately published, and to be sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
New-Printing-Office, the following BOOKS, viz.
I. MEDICINA BRITANNICA: Or, a TREATISE on such Physical Plants, as are
generally to be found in the Fields or Gardens in Great Britain. Containing a
particular Account of their Nature, Virtues and Uses. Together with the
Observations of the most learned Physicians, as well ancient as modern,
communicated to the late ingenious Mr. Ray, and the learned Dr. Sim. Pauli.
Adapted more especially to the Occasions of those, whose Condition or Situation
of Life deprives them, (...) a great Measure, of the Helps of the Learned. By
^HOMAS SHORT, of Sheffield, M. D. To which (...) added, an APPENDIX: Containing
the true Preparation, Preservation, Uses and Doses of most Forms of Remedies
necessary for private Families. The Third Edition. With a PREFACE by Mr. John
Bartram* Botanist of Pennsylvania, and his Notes throughout the Work, showing
the Places where many of the described Plants are to be found in these Parts of
America, their Differences in Name, Appearance, and Virtue, from those of the
same Kind in Europe; and an APPENDIX, containing a Description of a Number of
Plants peculiar to America, their Uses, Virtues, etc. (Price Eight Shillings.)

II. A TOKEN for CHILDREN. Being an exact Account of the Conversion, holy and
exemplary Lives, and joyful Deaths of several young Children. By JAMES JANEWAY,
Minister of the Gospel. To which is added, A TOKEN for the CHILDREN of
New England; or, Some Examples of Children, in whom the Fear of GOD was
remarkably budding before they died, in several Parts of New England. Preserved
and published for the Encouragement of Piety in other Children. With new
Additions. (Price Eighteen Pence.)

III. The ECONOMY of HUMAN LIFE. In two Parts. Translated from an Ind^an
Manuscript, written by an ancient BRAMIN. To which is prefixed, an Account of
the Manner in which the said Manuscript was discovered. In two LETTERS from an
English Gentleman, now residing in China, to the Earl of * * * * *. The Sixth
Edition. (Price Three Shillings.)

This little beautiful Piece of Morality has met with universal Acceptance and
Approb^tion in England, no less than five Editions having been printed and sold
there in a few Months.

IV. A PRESENT for an APPRENTICE: Or, a Sure Guide to gain both Esteem and
Estate. With Rules for his ^onduct to his Master, and in the World. By a late
LORD MAYOR of London. (...) Fourth Edition. (Price One Shilling.)

V. The FRENCH CONVERT: Being a true Relation of the Happy Conversion of a
Noble French Lady from the Errors and Superstitions of Popery to the Reform^d
Religion, by Means of a Protestant. Gardener, her Servant. Wherein is shown,
her great and unparallelled Sufferings on the Account of her said Conversion;
as also her wonderful Deliverance from two Assassines, hired by a Popish Priest
to murder her; and of her miraculous Preservation in a Wood for two Years; and
how she was at last providentially found by her Husband, who, together with her
Parents, were brought over by her Means to the Embra^ing of the true Religion,
as were diverse others, also. To which is added, A brief Account of the present
severe Persecutions of the French Protestants. The E^^venth Edition. (Price One
Shilling.)

VI. The FRIENDLY INSTRUCTOR; Or, A Companion for young Ladies, and young
Gentlemen; In which their Duty to God, and their Parents, their Carriage to
Superiors and Inferiors, and several other very useful and instructive Lessons
are recommended. In plai^ and familiar Dialogues. With a recommendatory
Preface, by the late Rev. Dr. DODDRID^E. The Sixth Editi^^. (Price Eight pence.)

VII. ^IVINE SONGS, attempted in easy Language, for the Use of CHILDREN. By the
late (...) WATTS, D. D. The Eleventh Edition. (Price Six-pence^

VIII. The VALUE of a CHILD; or (...) to the good Education of CHILDREN. In a
Letter to a DAUGHTER. Prove. xxii.6. Tr^^n up a Child in (...) he should go; and
when he is old, he will not depa^t sin it. (Price Sixpence.)

IX. A DIALOGUE between a Blind (...) and Death. Translated out of the British
Language (...) rendered into familiar English Verse. By PHILIP JAMES. The Third
Edition. (Price Four Pence.)


