A careful and strict ENQUIRY INTO The modern prevailing Notions OF THAT
FREEDOM of WILL, Which is supposed to be essential TO Moral Agency, Virtue and
Vice, Reward and Punishment, Praise and Blame.

By JONATHAN EDWARDS, A.M. Pastor of the Church in Stockbridge.

Romans ix.16. It is not of him that wills --

BOSTON, N. E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. MDCCLIV.

THE PREFACE.
MANY find much Fault with the calling professing Christians, that differ one
from another in some Matters of Opinion, by distinct Names; especially calling
them by the Names of particular Men, who have distinguished themselves as
Maintainers and Promoters of those Opinions: as the calling some professing
Christians Arminians, from Arminius; others Arians, from Arius; others
Socinians, from Socinus, and the like. They think it unjust in it self; as it
seems to suppose and suggest, that the Persons marked out by these Names,
received those Doctrines which they entertain, out of Regard to, and Reliance
on those Men after whom they are named; as though they made them their Rule: in
the same Manner, as the Followers of CHRIST are called Christians; after his
Name, whom they regard and depend upon, as their great Head and Rule. Whereas,
this is an unjust and groundless Imputation on those that go under the
forementioned Denominations. Thus (say they) there is not the least Ground to
suppose, that the chief Divines, who embrace the Scheme of Doctrine which is by
many called Arminianism, believe it the more* because Arminius believed it: and
that there is no Reason to think any other, than that they sincerely and
impartially study the holy Scriptures, and enquire after the Mind of Christ,
with as much Judgment and Sincerity, as any of those that call them by these
Names; that they seek after Truth, and are not careful whether they think
exactly as Arminius did; yea, that in some Things they actually differ from
him. This Practice is also esteemed actually injurious on this Account, that it
is supposed naturally to lead the Multitude to imagine the Difference between
Persons thus named and others, to be greater than it is; yea, as though it were
so great, that they must be as it were another Species of Beings. And they
object against it as arising from an uncharitable, narrow, contracted Spirit;
which, they say, commonly inclines Persons to confine all that is good to
themselves and their own Party, and to make a wide Distinction between
themselves and others, and stigmatize those that differ from them with odious
Names. They say moreover, that the keeping up such a Distinction of Names has a
direct Tendency to uphold Distance and Disaffection, and keep alive mutual
Hatred among Christians, who ought all to be united in Friendship and Charity,
however they cannot in all Things think alike.

I confess, these Things are very plausible. And I will not deny, that there
are some unhappy Consequences of this Distinction of Names, and that Men's
Infirmities and evil Dispositions often make an ill Improvement of it. But yet
I humbly conceive, these Objections are carried far beyond Reason. The
Generality of Mankind are disposed enough, and a great Deal too much, to
Uncharitableness, and to be censorious and bitter toward those that differ
from them in religious Opinions: which evil Temper of Mind will take Occasion
to exert it self, from many Things in themselves innocent, useful and
necessary. But yet there is no Necessity to suppose, that the thus
distinguishing Persons of different Opinions by different Names, arises mainly
from an uncharitable Spirit. It may arise from the Disposition there is in
Mankind (whom God has distinguished with an Ability and Inclination for Speech)
to improve the Benefit of Language, in the proper Use and Design of Names,
given to Things which they have often Occasion to speak of, or signify their
Minds about; which is to enable them to express their Ideas with Ease and
Expedition, without being encumbered with an obscure and difficult
Circumlocution. And the thus distinguishing Persons of different Opinions in
religious Matters, may not imply, nor infer any more than that there is a
Difference, and that the Difference is such as we find we have often Occasion
to take Notice of, and make Mention of. That which we have frequent Occasion to
speak of (whatever it be, that gives the Occasion) this wants a Name: and it is
always a Defect in Language, in such Cases, to be obliged to make use of a
Description, instead of a Name. Thus we have often Occasion to speak of those
who are the Descendants of the ancient Inhabitants of France, who were Subjects
or Heads of the Government of that Land, and spoke the Language peculiar to it;
in Distinction from the Descendants of the Inhabitants of Spain, who belonged
to that Community, and spoke the Language of that Country. And therefore we
find the great Need of distinct Names to signify these different Sorts of
People, and the great Convenience of those distinguishing Words, French, and
Spaniards; by which the Signification of our Minds is quick and easy, and our
Speech is delivered from the Burden of a continual Reiteration of diffuse
Descriptions, with which it must otherwise be embarass'd.

That the Difference of the Opinions of those, who in their general Scheme of
Divinity agree with these two noted Men, Calvin, and Arminius, is a Thing there
is often Occasion to speak of, is what the Practice of the latter, it self
confesses; who are often, in their Discourses and Writings, taking Notice of
the supposed absurd and pernicious Opinions of the former Sort. And therefore
the making Use of different Names in this Case cannot reasonably be objected
against, or condemned, as a Thing which must come from so bad a Cause as they
assign. It is easy to be accounted for, without supposing it to arise from any
other Source, than the Exigence and natural Tendency of the State of Things;
considering the Faculty and Disposition God has given Mankind, to express
Things which they have frequent Occasion to mention, by certain distinguishing
Names. It is an Effect that is similar to what we see arise, in innumerable
Cases which are parallel, where the Cause is not at all blameworthy.

Nevertheless, at first I had Thoughts of carefully avoiding the Use of the
Appellation, Arminian, in this Treatise. But I soon found I should be put to
great Difficulty by it; and that my Discourse would be so encumbered with an
often repeated Circumlocution, instead of a Name, which would express the Thing
intended, as well and better, that I altered my Purpose. And therefore I must
ask the Excuse of such as are apt to be offended with Things of this Nature,
that I have so freely used the Term Arminian in the following Discourse. I
profess it to be without any Design, to stigmatize Persons of any Sort with a
Name of Reproach, or at all to make them appear more odious. If when I had
Occasion to speak of those Divines who are commonly called by this Name, I had,
instead of styling them Arminians, called them these Men, as Dr. Whitby does
Calvinistic Divines; it probably would not have been taken any better, or though it
to show a better Temper, or more good Manners. I have done as I would be done
by, in this Matter. However the Term Calvinist is in these Days, among most, a
Term of greater Reproach than the Term Arminian; yet I should not take it at
all amiss, to be called a Calvinist, for Distinction's Sake: though I utterly
disclaim a Dependence on Calvin, or believing the Doctrines which I hold,
because he believed and taught them; and cannot justly be charged with
believing in every Thing just as he taught.

But lest I should really be an Occasion of Injury to some Persons, I would
here give Notice, that though I gerally speak of that Doctrine, concerning
Free Will and moral Agency, which I oppose, as an Arminian Doctrine; yet I
would not be understood, that every Divine or Author whom I have Occasion to
mention as maintaining that Doctrine, was properly an Arminian, or one of that
Sort which is commonly called by that Name. Some of them went far beyond the
Arminians: And I would by no Means charge Arminians in general with all the
corrupt Doctrine, which these maintained. Thus for Instance, it would be very
injurious, if I should rank Arminian Divines in general, with such Authors as
Mr. Chubb. I doubt not, many of them have some of his Doctrines in Abhorrence;
though he agrees, for the most Part, with Arminians, in his Notion of the Freedom
of the Will. And on the other Hand, though I suppose this Notion to be a leading
Article in the Arminian Scheme, that which, if pursued in it is Consequences,
will truly infer, or naturally lead to all the rest; yet I don't charge all
that have held this Doctrine, with being Arminians. For whatever may be the
Consequences of the Doctrine really, yet some that hold this Doctrine, may not
own nor see these Consequences; and it would be unjust, in many Instances, to
charge every Author with believing and maintaining all the real Consequences of
his avowed Doctrines. And I desire it may be particularly noted, that though I
have Occasion in the following Discourse, often to mention the Author of the
Book entitled, An Essay on the Freedom of the Will, in God and the Creature, as
holding that Notion of Freedom of Will, which I oppose; yet I don't mean to
call him an Arminian: however in that Doctrine he agrees with Arminians, and
departs from the current and general Opinion of Calvinists. If the Author of
that Essay be the same as it is commonly ascribed to, he doubtless was not one
that ought to bear that Name. But however good a Divine he was in many
Respects, yet that particular Arminian Doctrine which he maintained, is never
the better for being held by such an One: nor is there less Need of opposing it
on that Account; but rather is there the more Need of it; as it will be likely
to have the more pernicious Influence, for being taught by a Divine of his Name
and Character; supposing the Doctrine to be wrong, and in it self to be of an
ill Tendency.

I have Nothing further to say by Way of Preface; but only to bespeak the
Reader's Candor, and calm Attention to what I have written. The Subject is of
such Importance, as to demand Attention, and the most thorough Consideration.
Of all Kinds of Knowledge that we can ever obtain, the Knowledge of God, and the
Knowledge of our selves, are the most important. As Religion is the great
Business, for which we are created, and on which our Happiness depends; and as
Religion consists in an Intercourse between our^selves and our Maker; and so
has it is Foundation in God's Nature and our's, and in the Relation that God and
we stand in to each other; therefore a true Knowledge of both must be needful
in Order to true Religion. But the Knowledge of our selves consists chiefly in
right Apprehensions concerning those two chief Faculties of our Nature, the
Understanding and Will. Both are very important: yet the Science of the latter
must be confessed to be of greatest Moment; in as much as all Virtue and
Religion have their Seat more immediately in the Will, consisting more
especially in right Acts and Habits of this Faculty. And the grand Question
about the Freedom of the Will, is the main Point that belongs to the Science of
the Will. Therefore I say, the Importance of this Subject greatly demands the
Attention of Christians, and especially of Divines. But as to my Manner of
handling the Subject, I will be far from presuming to say, that it is such as
demands the Attention of the Reader to what I have written. I am ready to own,
that in this Matter I depend on the Reader's Courtesy. But only thus far I may
have some Color for putting in a Claim; that if the Reader be disposed to pass
his Censure on what I have written, I may be fully and patiently heard, and
well attended to, before I am condemned. However, this is what I would humbly
ask of my Readers; together with the Prayers of all sincere Lovers of Truth,
that I may have much of that Spirit which Christ promised his Disciples, which
guides into all Truth; and that the blessed and powerful Influences of this
Spirit would make Truth victorious in the World.

A General TABLE Of the CONTENTS.
PART I. Wherein are explained various Terms and Things belonging to the
Subject of the ensuing Discourse.
SECT. I. Concerning the Nature of the Will. Page 1, etc. SECT. II. Concerning
the Determination of the Will. Page 5. SECT. III. Concerning the Meaning of the
Terms Necessity, Impossibility, Inability, etc. and of Contingence. Page 13.
SECT. IV. Of the Distinction of natural and moral Necessity and Inability. Page
20. SECT. V. Concerning the Notion of Liberty, and of moral Agency. Page 27.
PART II. Wherein it is considered, Whether there is, or can be any such Sort
of FREEDOM OF WILL, as that wherein Arminians place the Essence of the Liberty
of all moral Agents; and whether any such Thing ever was, or can be conceived
of.
SECT. I. Showing the manifest Inconsistence of the Arminian Notion of Liberty
of Will, consisting in the Will's self-determining Power. Page 31. SECT. II.
Several supposed Ways of evading the foregoing Reasoning considered. Page 35.
SECT. III. Whether any Event whatsoever, and Volition in particular, can come
to pass without a Cause of it is Existence. Page 41. SECT. IV. Whether Volition
can arise without a Cause, through the Activity of the Nature of the Soul. Page
47. SECT. V. Showing that if the Things asserted in these Evasions should be
supposed to be true, they are altogether impertinent, and cannot help the Cause
of Arminian Liberty; and how this being the State of the Case, Arminian Writers
are obliged to talk inconsistently. Page 51. SECT. VI. Concerning the Will's
determining in Things which are perfectly indifferent, in the View of the Mind.
Page 55. SECT. VII. Concerning the Notion of Liberty of Will consisting in
Indifference. Page 63. SECT. VIII. Concerning the supposed Liberty of the Will,
as opposite to all Necessity. Page 73. SECT. IX. Of the Connection of the Acts
of the Will with the Dictates of the Understanding. Page 76. SECT. X. Volition
necessarily connected with the Influence of Motives. With particular
Observation of the great Inconsistence of Mr. Chubb's Assertions and
Reasonings, about the Freedom of the Will. Page 84. SECT. XI. The Evidence of
God's certain Foreknowledge of the Volitions of moral Agents. Page 98. SECT.
XII. God's certain Foreknowledge of the future Volitions of moral Agents,
inconsistent with such a Contingence of those Volitions, as is without all
Necessity. Page 117. And infers a Necessity of Volition, as much as an absolute
Decree. Page 122. SECT. XIII. Whether we suppose the Volitions of moral Agents
to be connected with any Thing antecedent, or not, yet they must be necessary,
in such a Sense, as to overthrow Arminian Liberty. Page 131.
PART III. Wherein is enquired, Whether any such Liberty of Will as Arminians
hold, be necessary to moral Agency, Virtue and Vice, Praise and Dispraise, etc.
SECT. I. God's moral Excellency necessary, yet virtuous and Prais^-worthy.
Page 135. SECT. II. The Acts of the Will of the human Soul of JESUS CHRIST
necessarily holy, yet virtuous, praiseworthy, rewardabl^, etc. Page 139. SECT.
III. The Case of such as are given up of God to Sin, and of fallen Man in
general, proves moral Necessity and Inability to be consistent with
Blame-worthiness. Page 153. SECT. IV. Command, and Obligation to Obedience,
consistent with moral Inability to obey. Page 159. SECT. V. That Sincerity of
Desires and Endeavors, which is supposed to excuse in the Nonperformance of
Things in themselves good, particularly considered. Page 170. SECT. VI. Liberty
of Indifference, not only not necessary to Virtue, but utterly inconsistent
with it: and all, either virtuous, or vicious Habits and Inclinations,
inconsistent with Arminian Notions of Liberty, and moral Agency. Page 178.
SECT. VII. Arminian Notions of moral Agency inconsistent with all Influence of
Motive and Inducement, in either virtuous or vicious Actions. Page 185.
PART IV. Wherein the chief Grounds of the Reasonings of Arminians, in Support
and Defense of their Notions of Liberty, moral Agency, etc. and against the
opposite Doctrine, are considered.
SECT. I. The Essence of the Virtue and Vice of the Dispositions of the Heart,
and Acts of the Will, lies not in their Cause, but their Nature. Page 192.
SECT. II. The Falseness and Inconsistence of that metaphysical Notion of Action
and Agency, which seems to be generally entertained by the Defenders of the
forementioned Notions of Liberty, moral Agency, etc. Page 198. SECT. III. The
Reasons why some think it contrary to common Sense, to suppose Things which are
necessary, to be worthy of either Praise or Blame. Page 206. SECT. IV. It is
agreeable to common Sense, and the natural Notions of Mankind, to suppose moral
Necessity to be consistent with Praise and Blame, Reward and Punishment. Page
212. SECT. V. Concerning those Objections, That this Scheme of Necessity
renders all Means and Endeavors for the avoiding of Sin, or the obtaining
Virtue and Holiness, vain and to no Purpose; And that it makes Men no more than
mere Machines, in Affairs of Morality and Religion. Page 220. SECT. VI.
Concerning that Objection against the Doctrine which has been maintained, That
it agrees with the Stoical Doctrine of Fate, and the Opinion of Mr. Hobbes.
Page 227. SECT. VII. Concerning the Necessity of the divine Will. Page 230.
SECT. VIII. Some further Objections against the moral Necessity of GOD'S
Volitions, considered. Page 239. SECT. IX. Concerning that Objection against
the Doctrine which has been maintained, That it makes GOD the Author of Sin.
Page 252. SECT. X. Concerning Sin's first Entrance into the World. Page 268.
SECT. XI. Of a supposed Inconsistence of these Principles with GOD'S moral
Character. Page 270. SECT. XII. Of a supposed Tendency of these Principles to
Atheism, and Licentiousness. Page 274. SECT. XIII. Concerning that Objection
against the Reasoning by which the Calvinistic Doctrine is supported, That it
is metaphysical and abstruse. Page 278.
The CONCLUSION.
WHAT Treatment this Discourse may probably meet with, from some Persons. Page
285. Consequences concerning several Calvinistic Doctrines; such as an
universal, decisive Providence. Page 286. The total Depravity and Corruption of
Man's Nature. Page 287. Efficacious Grace. Page 288. An universal and absolute
Decree; and absolute, eternal, personal Election. Page 289. Particular
Redemption. Page 290. Perseverance of Saints. Page 291. Concerning the
Treatment which Calvinistic Writers and Divines have met with. Page 292. The
Unhappiness of the Change lately in many Protestant Countries. Page 293. The
Boldness of some Writers. Ibid. The excellent Wisdom appearing in the holy
Scriptures. P. ult.
PART I. Wherein are explained and stated various Terms and Things belonging to
the Subject of the ensuing Discourse.
SECTION I. Concerning the Nature of the Will.
IT may possibly be thought, that there is no great Need of going about to
define or describe the Will; this Word being generally as well understood as
any other Words we can use to explain it: And so perhaps it would be, had not
Philosophers, Metaphysicians and Polemic Divines brought the Matter into
Obscurity by the Things they have said of it. But since it is so, I think it
may be of some Use, and will tend to the greater Clearness in the following
Discourse, to say a few Things concerning it.

And therefore I observe, that the Will (without any metaphysical Refining) is
plainly, That by which the Mind ch^ses any Thing. The Faculty of the Will is
that Faculty or Power or Principle of Mind by which it is capable of choosing:
An Act of the Will is the same as an Act of Choosing or Choice.

If any think it is a more perfect Definition of the Will, to say, that it is
that by which the Soul either chooses or refuses; I am content with it: though I
think that it is enough to say, It Is that by which the Soul chooses: For in every
Act of Will whatsoever, the Mind chooses one Thing rather than another; it
chooses something rather than the Contrary, or rather than the Want or
Nonexistence of that Thing. So in every Act of Refusal, the Mind chooses the
Absence of the Thing refused; The Positive and the Negative are set before the
Mind for it is Choice, and it chooses the Negative; and the Mind's making it is
Choice in that Case is properly the Act of the Will: The Will's determining
between the two is a voluntary determining; but that is the same Thing as
making a Choice. So that whatever Names we call the Act of the Will by,
Choosing, Refusing, Approving, Disapproving, Liking, Disliking, Embracing,
Rejecting, Determining, Directing, Commanding, Forbidding, Inclining or being
averse, a being pleased or displeased with; all may be reduced to this of
Choosing. For the Soul to act voluntarily, is evermore to act electively.

Mr. Lock Human Understanding. Edit. 7. Vol. I. P. 147.
says, The Will signifies Nothing but a Power or Ability to prefer or choose.
And in the foregoing Page says, The Word Preferring seems best to express the
Act of Volition; But adds, that it does it not precisely; For (says he) though a
Man would prefer Flying to Walking, yet who can say he ever wills it? But the
Instance he mentions don't prove that there is any Thing else in Willing, but
merely Preferring: For it should be considered what is the next and immediate
Object of the Will, with respect to a Man's Walking, or any other external
Action; which is not his being removed from one Place to another; on the Earth,
or through the Air; these are remoter Objects of Preference; but such or such an
immediate Exertion of himself. The Thing nextly chosen or preferred when a Man
wills to walk, is not his being removed to such a Place where he would be, but
such an Exertion and Motion of his Legs and Feet etc. in order to it. And his
willing such an Alteration in his Body in the present Moment, is nothing else
but his choosing or preferring such an Alteration in his Body at such a Moment,
or his liking it better than the Forbearance of it. And God has so made and
established the human Nature, the Soul being united to a Body in proper State,
that the Soul preferring or choosing such an immediate Exertion or Alteration of
the Body, such an Alteration instantaneously follows. There is nothing else in
the Actings of my Mind, that I am conscious of while I walk, but only my
preferring or choosing, through successive Moments, that there should be such
Alterations of my external Sensations and Motions; together with a concurring
habitual Expectation that it will be so; having ever found by Experience, that
on such an immediate Preference, such Sensations and Motions do actually
instantaneously, and constantly arise. But it is not so in the Case of Flying:
Though a Man may be said remotely to choose or prefer Flying; yet he don't choose
or prefer, incline to or desire, under Circumstances in View, any immediate
Exertion of the Members of his Body in order to it; because he has no
Expectation that he should obtain the desired End by any such Exertion; and he
don't prefer or incline to any bodily Exertion or Effort under this apprehended
Circumstance, of it is being wholly in vain. So that if we carefully distinguish
the proper Objects of the several Acts of the Will, it will not appear by this,
and suchlike Instances, that there is any Difference between Volition and
Preference; or that a Man's choosing, liking best, or being best pleased with a
Thing, are not the same with his willing that Thing; as they seem to be
according to those general and more natural Notions of Men, according to which
Language is formed. Thus an Act of the Will is commonly expressed by it is
pleasing a Man to do thus or thus; and a Man's doing as he wills, and doing as
he pleases, are the same Thing in common Speech.

Mr. Lock says, Hum. Und. Vol. I. P. 203.204.
The Will is perfectly distinguished from Desire; which in the very same Action
may have a quite contrary Tendency from that which our Wills set us upon. A Man
(says he) whom I cannot deny, may oblige me to use Persuasions to another,
which, at the same Time I am speaking, I may wish may not prevail on him. In
this Case it is plain the Will and Desire run counter. I don't suppose, that
Will and Desire are Words of precisely the same Signification: Will seems to be
a Word of a more general Signification, extending to Things present and absent.
Desire respects something absent. I may prefer my present Situation and
Posture, suppose sitting still, or having my Eyes open, and so may will it. But
yet I cannot think they are so entirely distinct, that they can ever be properly
said to run counter. A Man never, in any Instance, wills any Thing contrary to
his Desires, or desires any Thing contrary to his Will. The forementioned
Instance, which Mr. Lock produces, don't prove that he ever does. He may, on
some Consideration or other, will to utter Speeches which have a Tendency to
persuade another, and still may desire that they may not persuade him: But yet
his Will and Desire don't run counter at all: The Thing which he wills, the
very same he desires; and he don't will a Thing, and desire the contrary in any
Particular. In this Instance, it is not carefully observed, what is the Thing
willed, and what is the Thing desired: If it were, it would be found that Will
and Desire don't clash in the least. The Thing willed on some Consideration, is
to utter such Words; and certainly, the same Consideration so influences him,
that he don't desire the contrary; all Things considered, he chooses to utter
such Words, and don't desire not to utter 'em. And so as to the Thing which Mr.
Lock speaks of as desired, viz. that the Words, though They tend to persuade,
should not be effectual to that End, his Will is not contrary to this; he don't
will that they should be effectual, but rather wills that they should not, as
he desires. In order to prove that the Will and Desire may run counter, it
should be shown that they may be contrary one to the other in the same Thing,
or with respect to the very same Object of Will or Desire: But here the Objects
are two; and in each, taken by themselves, the Will and Desire agree. And it is
no Wonder that they should not agree in different Things, however little
distinguished they are in their Nature. The Will may not agree with the Will,
nor Desire agree with Desire, in different Things. As in this very Instance
which Mr. Lock mentions, a Person may, on some Consideration, desire to use
Persuasions, and at the same Time may desire they may not prevail; But yet no
Body will say, that Desire runs counter to Desire; or that this proves that
Desire is perfectly a distinct Thing from Desire. -- The like might be observed
of the other Instance Mr. Lock produces, of a Man's desiring to be eased of
Pain etc.

But not to dwell any longer on this, whether Desire and Will, and whether
Preference and Volition be precisely the same Things or no; yet, I trust it
will be allowed by all, that in every Act of Will there is an Act of Choice;
that in every Volition there is a Preference, or a prevailing Inclination of
the Soul, whereby the Soul, at that Instant, is out of a State of perfect
Indifference, with respect to the direct Object of the Volition. So that in
every Act, or going forth of the Will, there is some Preponderation of the Mind
or Inclination, one Way rather than another; and the Soul had rather have or d^
one Thing than another, or than not to have or do that Thing; and that there,
where there is absolutely no preferring or choosing, but a perfect continuing
Equilibrium, there is no Volition.

SECTION II. Concerning the Determination of the Will.
BY determining the Will, if the Phrase be used with any Meaning, must be
intended, causing that the Act of the Will or Choice should be thus, and not
otherwise: And the Will is said to be determined, when, in Consequence of some
Action, or Influence, its Choice is directed to, and fixed upon a particular
Object. As when we speak of the Determination of Mot^on, we mean causing the
Motion of the Body to be such a Way, or in such a Direction, rather than
another.

To talk of the Determination of the Will, supposes an Effect, which must have
a Cause. If the Will be det^rmined, there is a Determiner. This must be
supposed to be intended even by them that say, the Will determines itself. If
it be so, the Will is both Determin^r and determined; it is a Cause that acts
and produces Effects upon it self, and is the Object of its own Influence and
Action.

With respect to that grand Enquiry, What determines the Will, it would be very
tedious and unnecessary at present to enumerate and examine all the various
Opinions, which have been advanced concerning this Matter; nor is it needful
that I should enter into a particular Disquisition of all Points debated in
Disputes on that Question, Whether the Will always follows the last Dictate of
the Understanding. It is sufficient to my present Purpose to say, -- It is that
Motive, which, as it stands in the View of the Mind, is the strongest, that
determines the Will -- But it may be necessary that I should a little explain
my Meaning in this.

By Motive, I mean the whole of that which moves, excites or invites the Mind
to Volition, whether that be one Thing singly, or many Things conjunctly. Many
particular Things may concur and unite their Strength to induce the Mind; and
when it is so, all together are as it were one complex Motive. And when I speak
of the strongest Motive, I have Respect to the Strength of the whole that
operates to induce to a particular Act of Volition, whether that be the
Strength of one Thing alone, or of many together.

Whatever is a Motive, in this Sense, must be something that is extant in the
View or Apprehension of the Understanding, or perceiving Faculty. Nothing can
induce or invite the Mind to will or act any Thing, any further than it is
perceived, or is some Way or other in the Mind's view; for what is wholly
unperceived, and perfectly out of the Mind's view, cannot affect the Mind at
all. It Is most evident, that nothing is in the Mind, or reaches it, or takes
any Hold of it, any otherwise than as it is perceived or though it of.

And I think it must also be allowed by all, that every Thing that is properly
called a Motive, Excitement or Inducement to a perceiving willing Agent, has
some Sort and Degree of Tendency, or Advantage to move or excite the Will,
previous to the Effect, or to the Act of the Will excited. This previous
Tendency of the Motive is what I call the Strength of the Motive. That Motive
which has a less Degree of previous Advantage or Tendency to move the Will, or
that appears less inviting, as it stands in the View of the Mind, is what I
call a weaker Motive. On the contrary, that which appears most inviting, and
has, by what appears concerning it to the Understanding or Apprehension, the
greatest Degree of previous Tendency to excite and induce the Choice, is what I
call the strongest Motive. And in this Sense, I suppose the Will is always
determined by the strongest Motive.

Things that exist in the View of the Mind, have their Strength, Tendency or
Advantage to move or excite its Will, from many Things appertaining to the
Nature and Circumstances of the Thing viewed, the Nature and Circumstances of
the Mind that views, and the Degree and Manner of its View; which it would
perhaps be hard to make a perfect Enumeration of. But so much I think may be
determin^d in general, without Room for Controversy, that whateve^ (...)
perceived or apprehended by an intelligent and voluntar^ (...), which has the
Nature and Influence of a Motive to Voli^ion or Choice, is considered or viewed
as good; nor has it any Tendency to invite or engage the Election of the Soul
in any further Degree than it appears such. For to say otherwise, would be to
say, that Things that appear have a Tendency by the Appearance they make, to
engage the Mind to elect them, some other Way than by their appearing eligible
to it; which is absurd. And therefore it must be true, in some Sense, that the
Will alway^ is as the greatest apparent Good is. But only, for the ri^ht
understanding of this, two Things must be well and inst^nctly observed.

1. It must be observed in what Sense I use the Term Good; namely, as of the
same Import with Agreeable. To appear good to the Mind, as I use the Phrase, is
the same as to appear agreeable, or seem pleasing to the Mind. Certainly,
nothing appears inviting and eligible to the Mind, or tending to engage it is
I^c^ination and Choice, considered as evil or disagreable; nor indeed, as
indifferent, and neither agreeable nor disagreable. But if it tends to draw the
Inclination, and move the Will, it must be under the Notion of that which suits
the Mind. And therefore that must have the greatest Tendency to attract and
engage it, which, as it stands in the Mind's View, suits it best, and pleases
it most; and in that Sense, is the greatest apparent Good: to say otherwise, is
little, if any Thing, short of a direct and plain Contradiction.

The Word Good, in this Sense, includes in its Signification, the Removal or
Avoiding of Evil, or of that which is disagreable and uneasy. It Is agreeable and
pleasing, to avoid what is disagreable and displeasing, and to have Uneasiness
removed. So that here is included what Mr. Lock supposes determines the Will.
For when he speaks of Uneasiness as determining the Will, he must be understood
as supposing that the End or Aim which governs in the Volition or Act of
Preference, is the Avoiding or Removal of that Uneasiness; and that is the same
Thing as choosing and seeking what is more easy and agreeable.

2. When I say, the Will is as the greatest apparent Good is, or (as I have
explained it) that Volition has always for its Object the Thing which appears
most agreeable; it must be carefully observed, to avoid Confusion and needless
Objection, that I speak of the direct and immediate Object of the Act of
Volition; and not some Object that the Act of Will has not an immediate, but
only an indirect and remote Respect to. Many Acts of Volition have some remote
Relation to an Object, that is different from the Thing most immediately willed
and chosen. Thus, when a Drunkard has his Liquor before him, and he has to
choose whether to drink it, or no; the proper and immediate Objects, about which
his present Volition is conversant, and between which his Choice now decides,
are his own Acts, in drinking the Liquor, or letting it alone; and this will
certainly be done according to what, in the present View of his Mind, taken in
the whole of it, is most agreeable to him. If he chooses or wills to drink it,
and not to let it alone; then this Action, as it stands in the View of his
Mind, with all that belongs to its Appearance there, is more agreeable and
pleasing than letting it alone.

But the Objects to which this Act of Volition may relate more remotely, and
between which his Choice may determine more indirectly, are the present
Pleasure the Man expects by drinking, and the future Misery which he judges
will be the Consequence of it: He may judge that this future Misery, when it
comes, will be more disagreable and unpleasant, than refraining from drinking
now would be. But these two Things are not the proper Objects that the Act of
Volition spoken of is nextly conversant about. For the Act of Will spoken of is
concerning present Drinking or Forbearing to drink. If he wills to drink, then
Drinking is the proper Object of the Act of his Will; and drinking, on some
Account or other, now appears most agreeable to him, and suits him best. If he
chooses to refrain, then Refraining is the immediate Object of his Will, and is
most pleasing to him. If in the Choice he makes in the Case, he prefers a
present Pleasure to a future Advantage, which he judges will be greater when it
comes; then a lesser present Pleasure appears more agreeable to him than a
greater Advantage at a Distance. If on the contrary a future Advantage is
preferred, then that appears most agreeable, and suits him best. And so still the
present Volition is as the greatest apparent Good at present is.

I have rather chosen to express my self thus, that the Will always is as the
greatest apparent Good, or as what appears most agreeable, is, than to say that
the Will is determined by the greatest apparent Good, or by what seems most
agreeable; because an appearing most agreeable or pleasing to the Mind, and the
Mind's preferring and choosing, seem hardly to be properly and perfectly
distinct. If strict Propriety of Speech be insisted on, it may more properly be
said, that the voluntary Action which is the immediate Consequence and Fruit of
the Mind's Volition or Choice, is determined by that which appears most
agreeable, than the Preference or Choice it self; but that the Act of Volition
it self is always determined by that in or about the Mind's View of the Object,
which causes it to appear most agreeable. I say, in or about the Mind's View of
the Object, because what has Influence to render an Object in View agreeable, is
not only what appears in the Object viewed, but also the Manner of the View,
and the State and Circumstances of the Mind that views. -- Particularly to
enumerate all Things pertaining to the Mind's View of the Objects of Volition,
which have Influence in their appearing agreeable to the Mind, would be a Matter
of no small Difficulty, and might require a Treatise by it self, and is not
necessary to my present Purpose. I shall therefore only mention some Things in
general.

I. One Thing that makes an Object proposed to Choice agreeable, is the apparent
Nature and Circumstances of the Object. And there are various Things of this
Sort, that have an Hand in rendering the Object more or less agreeable; as,

1. That which appears in the Object, which renders it beautiful and pleasant,
or deformed and irksom to the Mind; viewing it as it is in it self.

2. The apparent Degree of Pleasure or Trouble attending the Object, or the
Consequence of it. Such Concomitants and Consequents being viewed as
Circumstances of the Object, are to be considered as belonging to it, and as it
were Parts of it; as it stands in the Mind's View, as a proposed Object of
Choice.

3. The apparent State of the Pleasure or Trouble that appears, with Respect to
Distance of Time; being either nearer or farther off. It Is a Thing in it self
agreeable to the Mind, to have Pleasure speedily; and disagreable, to have it
delayed: So that if there be two equal Degrees of Pleasure set in the Mind's
View, and all other Things are equal, but only one is beheld as near, and the
other far off; the nearer will appear most agreeable, and so will be chosen.
Because, though the Agreableness of the Objects be exactly equal, as viewed in
Themselves, yet not as viewed in their Circumstances; one of them having the
additional Agreableness of the Circumstance of Nearness.

II. Another Thing that contributes to the Agreableness of an Object of Choice,
as it stands in the Mind's View, is the Manner of the View. If the Object be
something which appears connected with future Pleasure, not only will the
Degree of apparent Pleasure have Influence, but also the Manner of the View,
especially in two Respects.

1. With respect to the Degree of Judgment, or Firmness of Assent, with which
the Mind judges the Pleasure to be future. Because it is more agreeable to have
a certain Happiness, than an uncertain one; and a Pleasure viewed as more
probable, all other Things being equal, is more agreeable to the Mind, than that
which is viewed as less probable.

2. With respect to the Degree of the Idea of the future Pleasure. With Regard
to Things which are the Subject of our Thoughts, either past, present or
future, we have much more of an Idea or Apprehension of some Things than
others; that is, our Idea is much more clear, lively and strong. Thus, the
Ideas we have of sensible Things by immediate Sensation, are usually much more
lively than those we have by mere Imagination, or by Contemplation of them when
absent. My Idea of the Sun, when I look upon it, is more vivid, than when I
only think of it. Our Idea of the sweet Relish of a delicious Fruit is usually
stronger when we taste it, than when we only imagine it. And sometimes, the
Ideas we have of Things by Contemplation, are much stronger and clearer, than
at other Times. Thus, a Man at one Time has a much stronger Idea of the
Pleasure which is to be enjoyed in eating some Sort of Food that he loves, than
at another. Now the Degree, or Strength of the Idea or Sense that Men have of
future Good or Evil, is one Thing that has great Influence on their Minds to
excite Choice or Volition. When of two Kinds of future Pleasure, which the Mind
considers of, and are presented for Choice, both are supposed exactly equal by
the Judgment, and both equally certain, and all other Things are equal, but
only one of them is what the Mind has a far more lively Sense of, than of the
other; this has the greatest Advantage by far to affect and attract the Mind,
and move the Will. It Is now more agreeable to the Mind, to take the Pleasure it
has a strong and lively Sense of, than that which it has only a faint Idea of.
The View of the former is attended with the strongest Appetite, and the
greatest Uneasiness attends the Want of it; and it is agreeable to the Mind, to
have Uneasiness removed, and it is Appetite gratified. And if several future
Enjoyments are presented together, as Competitors for the Choice of the Mind,
some of them judged to be greater, and others less; the Mind also having a
greater Sense and more lively Idea of the Good of some of them, and of others a
less; and some are viewed as of greater Certainty or Probability than others;
and those Enjoyments that appear most agreeable in one of these Respects,
appears least so in others: In this Case, all other Things being equal, the
Agreableness of a proposed Object of Choice will be in a Degree some Way
compounded of the Degree of Good supposed by the Judgment, the Degree of
apparent Probability or Certainty of that Good, and the Degree of the View or
Sense, or Liveliness of the Idea the Mind has, of that Good; because all
together concur to constitute the Degree in which the Object appears at present
agreeable; and accordingly Volition will be determined.

I might further observe, the State of the Mind that views a proposed Object of
Choice, is another Thing that contributes to the Agreableness or
Disagreableness of that Object; the particular Temper which the Mind has by
Nature, or that has been introduced and established by Education, Example,
Custom, or some other Means; or the Frame or State that the Mind is in on a
particular Occasion. That Object which appears agreeable to one, does not so to
another. And the same Object don't always appear alike agreeable to the same
Person, at different Times. It is most agreeable to some Men, to follow their
Reason; and to others, to follow their Appetites: To some Men, it is more
agreeable to deny a vicious Inclination, than to gratify it; Others it suits
best to gratify the vilest Appetites. It Is more disagreable to some Men than
others, to counter-act a former Resolution. In these Respects, and many others
which might be mentioned, different Things will be most agreeable to different
Persons; and not only so, but to the same Persons at different Times.

But possibly it is needless and improper, to mention the Frame and State of the
Mind, as a distinct Ground of the Agreableness of Objects from the other two
mentioned before; viz. The apparent Nature and Circumstances of the Objects
viewed, and the Manner of the View: Perhaps if we strictly consider the Matter,
the different Temper and State of the Mind makes no Alteration as to the
Agreableness of Objects, any other Way, than as it makes the Objects themselves
appear differently beautiful or deformed, having apparent Pleasure or Pain
attending them: And as it occasions the Manner of the View to be different,
causes the Idea of Beauty or Deformity, Pleasure or Uneasiness to be more or
less lively.

However, I think so much is certain, that Volition, in no one Instance that
can be mentioned, is otherwise than the greatest apparent Good is, in the
Manner which has been explained. The Choice of the Mind never departs from that
which, at that Time, and with Respect to the direct and immediate Objects of
that Decision of the Mind, appears most agreeable and pleasing, all Things
considered. If the immediate Objects of the Will are a Man's own Actions, then
those Actions which appear most agreeable to him he wills. If it be now most
agreeable to him, all Things considered, to walk, then he now wills to walk. If
it be now, upon the whole of what at present appears to him, most agreeable to
speak, then he chooses to speak: If it suits him best to keep Silence, then he
chooses to keep Silence. There is scarcely a plainer and more universal Dictate
of the Sense and Experience of Mankind, than that, when Men act voluntarily,
and do what they please, then they do what suits them best, or what is most
agreeable to them. To say, that they do what they please, or what pleases them,
but yet don't do what is agreeable to them, is the same Thing as to say, they do
what they please, but don't act their Pleasure; and that is to say, that they
do what they please, and yet don't do what they please.

It appears from these Things, that in some Sense, the Will always follows the
last Dictate of the Understanding. But then the Understanding must be taken in
a large Sense, as including the whole Faculty of Perception or Apprehension,
and not merely what is called Reason or Judgment. If by the Dictate of the
Understanding is meant what Reason declares to be best or most for the Person's
Happiness, taking in the whole of his Duration, it is not true, that the Will
always follows the last Dictate of the Understanding. Such a Dictate of Reason
is quite a different Matter from Things appearing now most agreeable; all Things
being put together which pertain to the Mind's present Perceptions,
Apprehensions or Ideas, in any Respect. Although that Dictate of Reason, when it
takes Place, is one Thing that is put into the Scales, and is to be considered
as a Thing that has Concern in the compound Influence which moves and induces
the Will; and is one Thing that is to be considered in estimating the Degree of
that Appearance of Good which the Will always follows; either as having its
Influence added to other Things, or subducted from them. When it concurs with
other Things, then its Weight is added to them, as put into the same Scale; but
when it is against them, it is as a Weight in the opposite Scale, where it
resists the Influence of other Things: yet it is Resistance is often overcome by
their greater Weight, and so the Act of the Will is determined in Opposition to
it.

The Things which I have said may, I hope, serve, in some Measure, to
illustrate and confirm the Position I laid down in the Beginning of this
Section, viz. That the Will is always determined by the strongest Motive, or by
that View of the Mind which has the greatest Degree of previous Tendency to
excite Volition. But whether I have been so happy as rightly to explain the
Thing wherein consists the Strength of Motives, or not, yet my failing in this
will not overthrow the Position it self; which carries much of its own Evidence
with it, and is the Thing of chief Importance to the Purpose of the ensuing
Discourse: And the Truth of it, I hope, will appear with greater Clearness,
before I have finished what I have to say on the Subject of human Liberty.

SECTION III. Concerning the Meaning of the Terms Necessity, Impossibility,
Inability, etc; and of Contingence.
THE Words Necessary, Impossible etc. are abundantly used in Controversies
about Free Will and moral Agency; and therefore the Sense in which they are
used, should be clearly understood.

Here I might say, that a Thing is then said to be necessary, when it must be,
and cannot be otherwise. But this would not properly be a Definition of
Necessity, or an Explanation of the Word, any more than if I explained the Word
must, by there being a Necessity. The Words must, can, and cannot, need
Explication as much as the Words necessary, and impossible; excepting that the
former are Words that Children commonly use, and know something of the Meaning
of earlier than the latter.

The Word necessary, as used in common Speech, is a relative Term; and relates
to some supposed Opposition made to the Existence of the Thing spoken of, which
is overcome, or proves in vain to hinder or alter it. That is necessary, in the
original and proper Sense of the Word, which is, or will be, notwithstanding
all supposable Opposition. To say, that a Thing is necessary, is the same Thing
as to say, that it is impossible should not be: But the Word impossible is
manifestly a relative Term, and has Reference to supposed Power exerted to
bring a Thing to pass, which is insufficient for the Effect; As the Word unable
is relative, and has Relation to Ability or Endeavor which is insufficient;
and as the Word Irresistible is relative, and has always Reference to
Resistance which is made, or may be made to some Force or Power tending to an
Effect, and is insufficient to withstand the Power, or hinder the Effect. The
common Notion of Necessity and Impossibility implies something that frustrates
Endeavor or Desire.

Here several Things are to be noted.

1. Things are said to be necessary in general, which are or will be
notwithstanding any supposable Opposition from us or others, or from whatever
Quarter. But Things are said to be necessary to us, which are or will be
notwithstanding all Opposition supposable in the Case from us. The same may be
observed of the Word impossible, and other such like Terms.

2. These Terms necessary, impossible, irresistible etc. do especially belong
to the Controversy about Liberty and moral Agency, as used in the latter of the
two Senses now mentioned, viz. as necessary or impossible to us, and with
Relation to any supposable Opposition or Endeavor of ours.

3. As the Word Necessity, in it is vulgar and common Use, is relative, and has
always Reference to some supposable insufficient Opposition; so when we speak
of any Thing as necessary to us, it is with Relation to some supposable
Opposition of our Wills, or some voluntary Exertion or Effort of ours to the
contrary. For we don't properly make Opposition to an Event, any otherwise than
as we voluntarily oppose it. Things are said to be what must be, or necessarily
are, as to us, when they are, or will be, though we desire or endeavor the
contrary, or try to prevent or remove their Existence: But such Opposition of
ours always either consists in, or implies Opposition of our Wills.

It Is manifest that all such like Words and Phrases, as vulgarly used, are used
and accepted in this Manner. A Thing is said to be necessary, when we cannot
help it, let us do what we will. So any Thing is said to be impossible to us,
when we would do it, or would have it brought to pass, and endeavor it; or at
least may be supposed to desire and seek it; but all our Desires and Endeavors
are, or would be vain. And that is said to be irresistible, which overcomes all
our Opposition, Resistance, and Endeavor to the contrary. And we are to be
said Unable to do a Thing, when our supposable Desires and Endeavors to do it
are insufficient.

We are accustomed, in the common Use of Language, to apply and understand
these Phrases in this Sense: We grow up with such a Habit; which by the daily
Use of these Terms, in such a Sense, from our Childhood, becomes fixed and
settled; so that the Idea of a Relation to a supposed Will, Desire and
Endeavor of ours, is strongly connected with these Terms, and naturally
excited in our Minds, whenever we hear the Words used. Such Ideas, and these
Words, are so united and associated, that they unavoidably go together; one
suggests the other, and carries the other with it, and never can be separated
as long as we live. And if we use the Words, as Terms of Art, in another Sense,
yet, unless we are exceeding circumspect and wary, we shall insensibly slide
into the vulgar Use of them, and so apply the Words in a very inconsistent
Manner: this habitual Connection of Ideas will deceive and confound us in our
Reasonings and Discourses, wherein we pretend to use these Terms in that
Manner, as Ter^^ of Art.

4. It follows from what has been observed, that when these Terms necessary,
impossible, irresistible, unable etc. are used in Cases wherein no Opposition,
or insufficient Will or Endeavor, is supposed, or can be supposed, but the
very Nature of the supposed Case it self excludes and denies any such
Opposition, Will or Endeavor; these Terms are then not used in their proper
Signification, but quite beside their Use in common Speech. The Reason is
manifest; namely, that in such Cases, we cannot use the Words with Reference to
a supposable Opposition, Will or Endeavor. And therefore if any Man uses these
Terms in such Cases, he either uses them nonsensically, or in some new Sense,
diverse from their original and proper Meaning. As for Instance; If a Man
should affirm after this Manner, That it is necessary for a Man, and what must
be, that a Man should choose Virtue rather than Vice, during the Time that he
prefers Virtue to Vice; and that it is a Thing impossible and irresistible,
that it should be otherwise than that he should have this Choice, so long as
this Choice continues; such a Man would use these Terms must, irresistible etc.
with perfect Insignificence and Nonsense, or in some new Sense, diverse from
their common Use; which is with Reference, as has been observed, to supposable
Opposition, Unwillingness and Resistance; whereas, here, the very Supposition
excludes and denies any such Thing: for the Case supposed is that of being
willing, and choosing.

5. It appears from what has been said, that these Terms necessary, impossible
etc. are often used by Philosophers and Metaphysicians in a Sense quite diverse
from their common Use and original Signification: For they apply them to many
Cases in which no Opposition is supposed or supposable. Thus they use them with
Respect to God's Existence before the Creation of the World, when there was no
other Being but He: so with regard to many of the Dispositions and Acts of the
divine Being, such as his loving Himself, his loving Righteousness, hating Sin
etc. So they apply these Terms to many Cases of the Inclinations and Actions of
created intelligent Beings, Angels and Men; wherein all Opposition of the Will
is shut out and denied, in the very Supposition of the Case.

Metaphysical or Philosophical Necessity is nothing different from their
Certainty. I speak not now of the Certainty of Knowledge, but the Certainty
that is in Things themselves, which is the Foundation of the Certainty of the
Knowledge of them; or that wherein lies the Ground of the Infallibility of the
Proposition which affirms them.

What is sometimes given as the Definition of Philosophical Necessity, namely,
That by which a Thing cannot but be, or whereby it cannot be otherwise, fails
of being a proper Explanation of it, on two Accounts: First, the Words Can, or
Cannot, need Explanation as much as the Word Necessity; and the former may as
well be explained by the latter, as the latter by the former. Thus, if any one
asked us what we mean, when we say, a Thing cannot but be, we might explain our
selves by saying, we mean, it must necessarily be so; as well as explain
Necessity, by saying, it is that by which a Thing cannot but be. And Secondly,
this Definition is liable to the forementioned great Inconvenience: The Words
cannot, or unable, are properly relative, and have Relation to Power exerted,
or that may be exerted, in order to the Thing spoken of; to which, as I have
now observed, the Word Necessity, as used by Philosophers, has no Reference.

Philosophical Necessity is really Nothing else than the full and fixed
Connection between the Things signified by the Subject and Predicate of a
Proposition, which affirms Something to be true. When there is such a
Connection, then the Thing affirmed in the Proposition is necessary, in a
Philosophical Sense; whether any Opposition, or contrary Effort be supposed, or
supposable in the Case, or no. When the Subject and Predicate of the
Proposition, which affirms the Existence of any Thing, either Substance,
Quality, Act or Circumstance, have a full and certain Connection, then the
Existence or Being of that Thing is said to be necessary in a metaphysical
Sense. And in this Sense I use the Word Necessity, in the following Discourse,
when I endeavor to prove that Necessity is not inconsistent with Liberty.

The Subject and Predicate of a Proposition, which affirms Existence of
Something, may have a full, fixed, and certain Connection several Ways.

(1.) They may have a full and perfect Connection in and of themselves; because
it may imply a Contradiction, or gross Absurdity, to suppose them not
connected. Thus many Things are necessary in their own Nature. So the eternal
Existence of Being generally considered, is necessary in it self: because it
would be in it self the greatest Absurdity, to deny the Existence of Being in
general, or to say there was absolute and universal Nothing; and is as it were
the Sum of all Contradictions; as might be shown, if this were a proper Place
for it. So God's Infinity, and other Attributes are necessary. So it is
necessary in its own Nature, that two and two should be four; and it is
necessary, that all right Lines drawn from the Center of a Circle to the
Circumference should be equal. It is necessary, fit and suitable, that Men
should do to others, as they would that they should do to them. So innumerable
Metaphysical and Mathematical Truths are necessary in Themselves; The Subject
and Predicate of the Proposition which affirms them, are perfectly connected of
themselves.

(2.) The Connection of the Subject and Predicate of a Proposition, which
affirms the Existence of Something, may be fixed and made certain, because the
Existence of that Thing is already come to pass; and either now is, or has
been; and so has as it were made sure of Existence. And therefore, the
Proposition which affirms present and past Existence of it, may by this Means
be made certain, and necessarily and unalterably true; the past Event has fixed
and decided the Matter, as to it is Existence; and has made it impossible but
that Existence should be truly predicated of it. Thus the Existence of whatever
is already come to pass, is now become necessary; it is become impossible it
should be otherwise than true, that such a Thing has been.

(3.) The Subject and Predicate of a Proposition which affirms Something to be,
may have a real and certain Connection consequentially; and so the Existence of
the Thing may be consequentially necessary; as it may be surely and firmly
connected with something else, that is necessary in one of the former Respects.
As it is either fully and thoroughly connected with that which is absolutely
necessary in its own Nature, or with something which has already received and
made sure of Existence. This Necessity lies in, or may be explained by the
Connection of two or more Propositions one with another. Things which are
perfectly connected with other Things that are necessary, are necessary
Themselves, by a Necessity of Consequence.

And here it may be observed, that all Things which are future, or which will
hereafter begin to be, which can be said to be necessary, are necessary only in
this last Way. Their Existence is not necessary in it self; for if so, they
always would have existed. Nor is their Existence become necessary by being
made sure, by being already come to pass. Therefore, the only Way that any
Thing that is to come to pass hereafter, is or can be necessary, is by a
Connection with something that is necessary in it is own Nature, or something
that already is, or has been; so that the one being supposed, the other
certainly follows. And this also is the only Way that all Things past,
excepting those which were from Eternity, could be necessary before they came
to pass, or could come to pass necessarily; and therefore the only Way in which
any Effect or Event, or any Thing whatsoever that ever has had, or will have a
Beginning, has come into Being necessarily, or will hereafter necessarily
exist. And therefore this is the Necessity which especially belongs to
Controversies about the Acts of the Will.

It may be of some Use in these Controversies, further to observe concerning
metaphysical Necessity, that (agreeable to the Distinction before observed of
Necessity, as vulgarly understood) Things that exist may be said to be
necessary, either with a general or particular Necessity. The Existence of a
Thing may be said to be necessary with a gen^ral Necessity, when all Things
whatsoever being considered, there is a Foundation for Certainty of their
Existence; or when in the most general and universal View of Things, the
Subject and Predicate of the Proposition, which affirms its Existence, would
appear with an infallible Connection.

An Event, or the Existence of a Thing, may be said to be necessary with a
particular Necessity, or with Regard to a particular Person, Thing or Time,
when Nothing that can be taken into Consideration, in or about that Person,
Thing or Time, alters the Case at all, as to the Certainty of that Event, or
the Existence of that Thing; or can be of any Account at all, in determining
the Infallibility of the Connection of the Subject and Predicate in the
Proposition which affirms the Existence of the Thing; so that it is all one, as
to that Person, or Thing, at least, at that Time, as if the Existence were
necessary with a Necessity that is most universal and absolute. Thus there are
many Things that happen to particular Persons, which they have no Hand in, and
in the Existence of which no Will of theirs has any Concern, at least, at that
Time; which, whether they are necessary or not, with Regard to Things in
general, yet are necessary to them, and with Regard to any Volition of theirs
at that Time; as they prevent all Acts of the Will about the Affair. -- I shall
have Occasion to apply this Observation to particular Instances in the
following Discourse. -- Whether the same Things that are necessary with a
particular Necessity, be not also necessary with a general Necessity, may be a
Matter of future Consideration. Let that be as it will, it alters not the Case,
as to the Use of this Distinction of the Kinds of Necessity.

These Things may be sufficient for the explaining of the Terms Necessary and
Necessity, as Terms of Art, and as often used by Metaphysicians, and
controversial Writers in Divinity, in a Sense diverse from, and more extensive
than their original Meaning, in common Language, which was before explained.

What has been said to show the Meaning of the Terms Necessary and Necessity,
may be sufficient for the Explaining of the opposite Terms, Impossible and
Impossibility. For there is no Difference, but only the latter are negative,
and the former positive. Impossibility is the same as negative Necessity, or a
Necessity that a Thing should not be. And it is used as a Term of Art in a like
Diversity from the original and vulgar Meaning, with Necessity.

The same may be observed concerning the Words Unable, and Inability. It has
been observed, that these Terms, in their original and common Use, have
Relation to Will and Endeavor, as supposable in the Case, and as insufficient
for the bringing to pass the Thing willed and endeavored. But as these Terms
are often used by Philosophers and Divines, especially Writers on Controversies
about Free Will, they are used in a quite different, and far more extensive
Sense* and are applied to many Cases wherein no Will or Endeavor for the
bringing of the Thing to pass, is or can be supposed, but is actually denied
and excluded in the Nature of the Case.

As the Words necessary, impossible, unable etc. are used by polemic Writers,
in a Sense diverse from their common Signification, the like has happened to
the Term Contingent. Any Thing is said to be contingent, or to come to pass by
Chance or Accident, in the original Meaning of such Words, when its Connection
with its Causes or Antecedents, according to the established Course of Things,
is not discerned; and so is what we have no Means of the Foresight of. And
especially is any Thing said to be contingent or accidental with regard to us,
when any Thing comes to pass that we are concerned in, as Occasions or
Subjects, without our Foreknowledge, and beside our Design and Scope.

But the Word Contingent is abundantly used in a very different Sense; not for
That whose Connection with the Series of Things we cannot discern, so as to
foresee the Event; but for something which has absolutely no previous Ground or
Reason, with which it is Existence has any fixed and certain Connection.

SECTION IV. Of the Distinction of natural and moral Necessity, and Inability.
THAT Necessity which has been explained, consisting in an infallible
Connection of the Things signified by the Subject and Predicate of a
Proposition, as intelligent Beings are the Subjects of it, is distinguished
into moral and natural Necessity.

I shall not now stand to enquire whether this Distinction be a proper and
perfect Distinction; but shall only explain how these two Sorts of Necessity
are understood, as the Terms are sometimes used, and as they are used in the
following Discourse.

The Phrase, moral Necessity, is used variously: sometimes it is used for a
Necessity of moral Obligation. So we say, a Man is under Necessity, when he is
under Bonds of Duty and Conscience, which he cannot be discharged from. So the
Word Necessity is often used for great Obligation in Point of Interest.
Sometimes by moral Necessity is meant that apparent Connection of Things, which
is the Ground of moral Evidence; and so is distinguished from absolute
Necessity, or that sure Connection of Things, that is a Foundation for
infallible Certainty. In this Sense, moral Necessity signifies much the same as
that high Degree of Probability, which is ordinarily sufficient to satisfy, and
be relied upon by Mankind, in their Conduct and Behavior in the World, as they
would consult their own Safety and Interest, and treat others properly as
Members of Society. And sometimes by moral Necessity is meant that Necessity of
Connection and Consequence, which arises from such moral Causes, as the
Strength of Inclination, or Motives, and the Connection which there is in many
Cases between these, and such certain Volitions and Actions. And it is in this
Sense, that I use the Phrase, moral Necessity, in the following Discourse.

By natural Necessity, as applied to Men, I mean such Necessity as Men are
under through the Force of natural Causes; as distinguished from what are
called moral Causes, such as Habits and Dispositions of the Heart, and moral
Motives and Inducements. Thus Men placed in certain Circumstances, are the
Subjects of particular Sensations by Necessity: They feel Pain when their
Bodies are wounded; they see the Objects presented before them in a clear
Light, when their Eyes are opened: so they assent to the Truth of certain
Propositions, as soon as the Terms are understood; as that two and two make
four, that black is not white, that two parallel Lines can never cross one
another: so by a natural Necessity Men's Bodies move downwards, when there is
nothing to support them.

But here several Things may be noted concerning these two Kinds of Necessity.

1. Moral Necessity may be as absolute, as natural Necessity. That is, the
Effect may be as perfectly connected with its moral Cause, as a naturally
necessary Effect is with it is natural Cause. Whether the Will in every Case is
necessarily determined by the strongest Motive, or whether the Will ever makes
any Resistance to such a Motive, or can ever oppose the strongest present
Inclination, or not; if that Matter should be controverted, yet I suppose none
will deny, but that, in some Cases, a previous Bias and Inclination, or the
Motive presented, may be so powerful, that the Act of the Will may be certainly
and indissolubly connected therewith. When Motives or previous Bias are very
strong, all will allow that there is some Difficulty in going against them. And
if they were yet stronger, the Difficulty would be still greater. And
therefore, if more were still added to their Strength, to a certain Degree, it
would make the Difficulty so great, that it would be wholly impossible to
surmount it; for this plain Reason, because whatever Power Men may be supposed
to have to surmount Difficulties, yet that Power is not infinite; and so goes
not beyond certain Limits. If a Man can surmount ten Degrees of Difficulty of
this Kind, with twenty Degrees of Strength, because the Degrees of Strength are
beyond the Degrees of Difficulty; yet if the Difficulty be increased to thirty,
or an hundred, or a thousand Degrees, and his Strength not also increased, his
Strength will be wholly insufficient to surmount the Difficulty. As therefore
it must be allowed, that there may be such a Thing as a sure and perfect
Connection between moral Causes and Effects; so this only is what I call by the
Name of moral Necessity.

2. When I use this Distinction of moral and natural Necessity, I would not be
understood to suppose, that if any Thing comes to pass by the former Kind of
Necessity, the Nature of Things is not concerned in it, as well as in the
latter. I don't mean to determine, that when a moral Habit or Motive is so
strong, that the Act of the Will in^allibly follows, this is not owing to the
Nature of Things. But these are the Names that these two Kinds of Necessity
have usually been called by; and they must be distinguished by some Names or
other; for there is a Distinction or Difference between them, that is very
important in its Consequences. Which Difference does not lie so much in the
Nature of the Connection, as in the two Terms connected. The Cause with which
the Effect is connected, is of a particular Kind; viz. that which is of a moral
Nature; either some previous habitual Disposition, or some Motive exhibited to
the Understanding. And the Effect is also of a particular Kind; being likewise
of a moral Nature; consisting in some Inclination or Volition of the Soul, or
voluntary Action.

I suppose, that Necessity which is called natural, in Distinction from moral
Necessity, is so called, because mere Nature, as the Word is vulgarly used, is
concerned, without any Thing of Choice. The Word Nature is often used in
Opposition to Choice; not because Nature has indeed never any Hand in our
Choice; But this probably comes to pass by Means that we first get our Notion
of Nature from that discernable and obvious Course of Events, which we observe
in many Things that our Choice has no Concern in; and especially in the
material World; which, in very many Parts of it, we easily perceive to be in a
settled Course; the stated Order and Manner of Succession being very apparent.
But where we don't readily discern the Rule and Connection, (though there be a
Connection, according to an established Law, truly taking Place) we signify the
Manner of Event by some other Name. Even in many Things which are seen in the
material and inanimate World, which don't discernably and obviously come to
pass according to any settled Course, Men don't call the Manner of the Event by
the Name of Nature, but by such Names as Accident, Chance, Contingence etc. So
Men make a Distinction between Nature and Choice; as though they were completely
and universally distinct. Whereas, I suppose none will deny but that Choice, in
many Cases, arises from Nature, as truly as other Events. But the Dependence
and Connection between Acts of Volition or Choice, and their Causes, according
to established Laws, is not so sensible and obvious. And we observe that Choice
is as it were a new Principle of Motion and Action, different from that
established Law and Order of Things which is most obvious, that is seen
especially in corporeal and sensible Things; And also that Choice often
interposes, interrupts and alters the Chain of Events in these external
Objects, and causes 'em to proceed otherwise than they would do, if let alone,
and left to go on according to the Laws of Motion among themselves. Hence it is
spoken of, as if it were a Principle of Motion entirely distinct from Nature,
and properly set in Opposition to it. Names being commonly given to Things,
according to what is most obvious, and is suggested by what appears to the
Senses without Reflection and Research.

3. It must be observed, that in what has been explained, as signified by the
Name of Moral Necessity, the Word Necessity is not used according to the
original Design and Meaning of the Word: For, as was observed before, such
Terms necessary, impossible, irresistible etc. in common Speech, and their most
proper Sense, are always relative; having Reference to some supposable
voluntary Opposition or Endeavor, that is insufficient. But no such
Opposition, or contrary Will and Endeavor, is supposable in the Case of moral
Necessity; which is a Certainty of the Inclination and Will it self; which does
not admit of the Supposition of a Will to oppose and resist it. For it is
absurd, to suppose the same individual Will to oppose it self, in its present
Act; or the present Choice to be opposite to, and resisting present Choice: as
absurd as it is to talk of two contrary Motions, in the same moving Body, at
the same Time. And therefore the very Case supposed never admits of any Trial,
whether an opposing or resisting Will can overcome this Necessity.

What has been said of natural and moral Necessity, may serve to explain what
is intended by natural and moral Inability. We are said to be naturally unable
to do a Thing, when we cannot do it if we will, because what is most commonly
called Nature don't allow of it, or because of some impeding Defect or Obstacle
that is extrinsic to the Will; either in the Faculty of Understanding,
Constitution of Body, or external Objects. Moral Inability consists not in any
of these Things; but either in the Want of Inclination; or the Strength of a
contrary Inclination; or the want of sufficient Motives in View, to induce and
excite the Act of the Will, or the Strength of apparent Motives to the
contrary. Or both these may be resolved into one; and it may be said in one
Word, that moral Inability consists in the Opposition or Want of Inclination.
For when a Person is unable to will or choose such a Thing, through a Defect of
Motives, or Prevalence of contrary Motives, it is the same Thing as his being
unable through the Want of an Inclination, or the Prevalence of a contrary
Inclination, in such Circumstances, and under the Influence of such Views.

To give some Instances of this moral Inability. -- A Woman of great Honor and
Chastity may have a moral Inability to prostitute her self to her Slave. A
Child of great Love and Duty to his Parents, may be unable to be willing to
kill his Father. A very lascivious Man, in Case of certain Opportunities and
Temptations, and in the Absence of such and such Restraints, may be unable to
forbear gratifying his Lust. A Drunkard, under such and such Circumstances, may
be unable to forbear taking of strong Drink. A very malicious Man may be unable
to exert benevolent Acts to an Enemy, or to desire his Prosperity: Yea, some
may be so under the Power of a vile Disposition, that they may be unable to
love those who are most worthy of their Esteem and Affection. A strong Habit of
Virtue and great Degree of Holiness may cause a moral Inability to love
Wickedness in general, may render a Man unable to take Complacence in wicked
Persons or Things; or to choose a wicked Life, and prefer it to a virtuous Life.
And on the other Hand, a great Degree of habitual Wickedness may lay a Man
under an Inability to love and choose Holiness; and render him utterly unable
to love an infinitely holy Being, or to choose and cleave to him as his chief
Good.

Here it may be of Use to observe this Distinction of moral Inability, viz. of
that which is general and habitual, and that which is particular and
occasional. By a general and habitual moral Inability, I mean an Inability in
the Heart to all Exercises or Acts of Will of that Nature or Kind, through a
fixed and habitual Inclination, or an habitual and stated Defect, or Want of a
certain Kind of Inclination. Thus a very ill-natured Man may be unable to exert
such Acts of Benevolence, as another, who is full of good Nature, commonly
exerts; and a Man, whose Heart is habitually void o^ Gratitude, may be unable
to exert such and such grateful Acts, through that stated Defect of a grateful
Inclination. By particular and occasional moral Inability, I mean an Inability
of the Will or Heart to a particular Act, through the Strength or Defect of
present Motives, or of Inducements presented to the View of the Understanding,
on this Occasion. -- If it be so, that the Will is always determined by the
strongest Motive, then it must always have an Inability, in this latter Sense,
to act otherwise than it does; it not being possible, in any Case, that the
Will, should, at present, go against the Motive which has now, all Things
considered, the greatest Strength and Advantage to excite and induce it. -- The
former of these Kinds of moral Inability, consisting in that which is stated
habitual and general, is most commonly called by the Name of Inability; because
the Word Inability, in its most proper and original Signification, has Respect
to some stated Defect. And this especially obtains the Name of Inability also
upon another Account: -- I before observed, that the Word Inability in its
original and most common Use, is a relative Term; and has Respect to Will and
Endeavor, as supposable in the Case, and as insufficient to bring to pass the
Thing desired and endeavored. Now there may be more of an Appearance and
Shadow of this, with Respect to the Acts which arise from a fixed and strong
Habit, than others that arise only from transient Occasions and Causes. Indeed
Will and Endeavor against, or diverse from present Acts of the Will, are in no
Case supposable, whether those Acts be occasional or habitual; for that would
be to suppose the Will, at present, to be otherwise than, at present* it is.
But yet there may be Will and Endeavor against future Acts of the Will, or
Volitions that are likely to take Place, as viewed at a Distance. It Is no
Contradiction, to suppose that the Acts of the Will at one Time, may be against
the Acts of the Will at another Time; and there may be Desires and Endeavors
to prevent or exci^^ future Acts of the Will; But such Desires and Endeavors
a^e, in many Cases, rendered insufficient and vain, through Fixedness of Habit:
When the Occasion returns, the Strength of Habit overcomes, and baffles all
such Opposition. In this Respect, a Man may be in miserable Slavery and Bondage
to a strong Habit. But it may be comparatively easy to make an Alteration with
Respect to such future Acts, as are only occasional and transient; because the
Occasion or transient Cause, if foreseen, may often easily be prevented or
avoided. On this Account, the moral Inability that attends fixed Habits,
especially obtains the Name of Inability. And then, as the Will may remotely
and indirectly resist it self, and do it in vain, in the Case of strong Habits;
so Reason may resist present Acts of the Will, and it is Resistance be
insufficient; and this is more commonly the Case also, when the Acts arise from
strong Habit.

But it must be observed concerned moral Inability, in each Kind of it, that
the Word Inability is used in a Sense very diverse from its original Import.
The Word signifies only a natural Inability, in the proper Use of it; and is
applied to such Cases only wherein a present Will or Inclination to the Thing,
with Respect to which a Person is said to be unable, is supposable. It cannot be
truly said, according to the ordinary Use of Language, that a malicious Man,
let him be never so malicious, cannot hold his Hand from striking, or that he is
not able to show his Neighbor Kindness; or that a Drunkard, let his Appetite
be never so strong, cannot keep the Cup from his Mouth. In the strictest
Propriety of Speech, a Man has a Thing in his Power, if he has it in his
Choice, or at his Election: And a Man cannot be truly said to be unaable to do a
Thing, when he can do it if he will. It Is improperly said, that a Person cannot
perform those external Actions, which are dependent on the Act of the Will, and
which would be easily performed, if the Act of the Will were present. And if it
be improperly said, that he cannot perform those external voluntary Actions,
which depend on the Will, it is in some Respect more improperly said, that he is
unable to exert the Act, of the Will themselves; because it is more evidently
false, with Respect to th^se, that he cannot if he will: For to say so, is a
downright Contradiction: It is to say, he cannot will, if he does will. And in
this Case, not only is it true, that it is easy for a Man to do the Thing if he
will but the very willing is the doing; when once he has willed, the Thing is
performed; and nothing else remains to be done. Therefore, in these Things to
ascribe a Nonperformance to the want of Power or Ability, is not just; because
the Thing wanting is not a being able, but a being willing. There are Faculties
of Mind, and Capacity of Nature, and every Thing else, sufficient, but a
Disposition: Nothing is wanting but a Will.

SECTION V. Concerning the Notion of Liberty, and of moral Agency.
THE plain and obvi^^^ Meaning of the Words Freedom and Liberty, in common
Speech, is Power, Opportunity, or Advantage, that any one has, to do as he
pleases. Or in other Words, his being free from Hindrance or Impediment in the
Way of doing, or conducting in any Respect, as he wills. I say not only doing,
but conducting; because a voluntary forbearing to do, sitting still, keeping
Silence etc. are Instances of Person- Conduct, about which Liberty is
exercised, though they are not so properly called doing.
And the contrary to Liberty, whatever Name we call that by, is a Person's
being hindered or unable to conduct as he will, or being necessitated to do
otherwise.

If this which I have mentioned be the Meaning of the Word Liberty, in the
ordinary Use of Language; as I trust that none that has ever learned to talk,
and is unprejudiced, will deny; then it will follow, that in Propriety of
Speech, neither Liberty, nor it is contrary, can properly be ascribed to any
Being or Thing, but that which has such a Faculty, Power or Property, as is
called Will. For that which is possessed of no such Thing as Will, cannot have
any Power or Opportunity of doing according to it is Will, nor be necessitated
to act contrary to its Will, nor be restrained from acting agreably to it. And
therefore to talk of Liberty, or the contrary, as belonging to the very Will it
self, is not to speak good Sense; if we judge of Sense, and Nonsense, by the
original and proper Signification of Words. For the Will it self is not an
Agent that has a Will: The Power of choosing, it self, has not a Power of
choosing. That which has the Power of Volition or Choice is the Man or the Soul,
and not the Power of Volition it self. And he that has the Liberty of doing
according to his Will, is the Agent or Doer who is possessed of the Will; and
not the Will which he is possessed of. We say with Propriety, that a Bird let
loose has Power and Liberty to fly; but not that the Bird's Power of flying has
a Power and Liberty of flying. To be free is the Property of an Agent, who is
possessed of Powers and Faculties, as much as to be cunning, valiant,
bountiful, or zealous. But these Qualities are the Properties of Men or
Persons; and not the Properties of Properties.

There are two Things that are contrary to this which is called Liberty in
common Speech. One is Constraint; the same is otherwise called Force,
Compuls^on, and Coaction; which is a Person's being necessitated to do a Thing
contrary to his Will. The other is Restraint; which is his being hindered, and
not having Power to do according to his Will. But that which has no Will, cannot
be the Subject of these Things. -- I need say the less on this Head, Mr. Lock
having set the same Thing forth, with so great Clearness, in his Essay on the
human Understanding.

But one Thing more I would observe concerning what is vulgarly called Liberty;
namely, that Power and Opportunity for one to do and conduct as he will, or
according to his Choice, is all that is meant by it; without taking into the
Meaning of the Word, any Thing of the Cause or Original of that Choice; or at
all considering how the Person came to have such a Volition; whether it was
caused by some external Motive, or internal habitual Bias; whether it was
determined by some internal antecedent Volition, or whether it happened without
a Cause; whether it was necessarily connected with something foregoing, or not
connected. Let the Person come by his Volition or Choice how he will, yet, if
he is able, and there is Nothing in the Way to hinder his pursuing and
executing his Will, the Man is fully and perfectly free, according to the
primary and common Notion of Freedom.

What has been said may be sufficient to show what is meant by Liberty,
according to the common Notions of Mankind, and in the usual and primary
Acceptance of the Word: Put the Word, as used by Arminians, Pelagians and
others, who oppose the Calvinist^, has an entirely different Signification. --
These several Things belong to their Notion of Liberty. 1. That it consists in
a Self-determining Power in the Will, or a certain Sovereignty the Will has
over it self, and it is own Acts, whereby it determines it is own Volitions; so
as not to be dependent in it is Determinations, on any Cause without it self,
nor determined by any Thing prior to it is own Acts. 2. Indifference belongs to
Liberty in their Notion of it, or that the Mind, previous to the Act of
Volition be, in iquilibrio. 3. Contingence is another Thing that belongs and is
essential to it; not in the common Acceptance of the Word, as that has been
already explained, but as opposed to all Necessity, or any fixed and certain
Connection with some previous Ground or Reason of it is Existence. They suppose
the Essence of Liberty so much to consist in these Things, that unless the Will
of Man be free in this Sense, he has no real Freedom, how much soever he may be
at Liberty to act according to his Will.

A moral Agent is a Being that is capable of those Actions that have a moral
Quality, and which can properly be denominated good or evil in a moral Sense,
virtuous or vicious, commendable or faulty. To moral Agency belongs a moral
Faculty, or Sense of moral Good and Evil, or of such a Thing as Desert or
Worthiness of Praise or Blame, Reward or Punishment; and a Capacity which an
Agent has of being influenced in his Actions by moral Inducements or Motives,
exhibited to the View of Understanding and Reason, to engage to a Conduct
agreeable to the moral Faculty.

The Sun is very excellent and beneficial in it is Action and Influence on the
Earth, in warming it, and causing it to bring forth it is Fruits; but it is not
a moral Agent: It Is Action, though good, is not virtuous or meritorious. Fire
that breaks out in a City, and consumes great Part of it, is very mischievous
in its Operation; but is not a moral Agent: what it does is not faulty or
sinful, or deserving of any Punishment. The brute Creatures are not moral
Agents: the Actions of some of 'em are very profitable and pleasant; others are
very hurtful: yet, seeing they have no moral Faculty, or Sen^e of Desert, and
don't act from Choice guided by Understanding, or with a Capacity of reasoning
and reflecting, but only from Instinct, and are not capable of being influenced
by moral Inducements, their Actions are not properly sinful or virtuous; nor
are they properly the Subjects of any such moral Treatment for what they do, as
moral Agents are for their Faults or good Deeds.

Here it may be noted, that there is a circumstantial Difference between the
moral Agency of a Ruler and a Subject. I call it circumstantial, because it
lies only in the Difference of moral Inducements they are capable of being
influenced by, arising from the Difference of Circumstances. A Ruler acting in
that Capacity only, is not capable of being influenced by a moral Law, and it is
Sanctions of Threatenings and Promises, Rewards and Punishments, as the Subject
is; though both may be influenced by a Knowledge of moral Good and Evil. And
therefore the moral Agency of the Supreme Being, who acts only in the Capacity
of a Ruler toward his Creatures, and never as a Subject, differs in that
Respect from the moral Agency of created intelligent Beings. God's Actions, and
particularly those which he exerts as a moral Governor, have moral
Qualifications, are morally good in the highest Degree. They are most perfectly
holy and righteous; and we must conceive of Him as influenced in the highest
Degree, by that which, above all others, is properly a moral Inducement; viz.
the moral Good which He sees in such and such Things: And therefore He is, in
the most proper Sense, a moral Agent, the Source of all moral Ability and
Agency, the Fountain and Rule of all Virtue and moral Good; though by Reason of
his being Supreme over all, it is not possible He should be under the Influence
of Law or Command, Promises or Threatenings, Rewards or Punishments, Counsels or
Warnings. The essential Qualities of a moral Agent are in God, in the greatest
possible Perfection; such as Understanding, to perceive the Difference between
moral Good and Evil; a Capacity of discerning that moral Worthiness and
Demerit, by which some Things are Praiseworthy, others deserving of Blame and
Punishment; and also a Capacity of Choice, and Choice guided by Understanding,
and a Power of acting according to his Choice or Pleasure, and being capable of
doing those Things which are in the highest Sense Praiseworthy. And herein
does very much consist that Image of God wherein he made Man, (which we read of
Genesis I.26, 27. and Chap. IX.6.) by which God distinguished Man from the Beasts,
viz. in those Faculties and Principles of Nature, whereby He is capable of
moral Agency. Herein very much consists the natural Image of God; as his
spiritual and moral Image, wherein Man was made at first, consisted in that
moral Excellency, that he was endowed with.

PART II. Wherein it is considered whether there is or can be any such Sort of
FREEDOM OF WILL, as that wherein Arminians place the Essence of the Liberty of
all moral Agents; and whether any such Thing ever was or can be conceived of.
SECTION I. Showing the manifest Inconsistence of the Arminian Notion of
Liberty of Will, consisting in the Will's self-determining Power.
HAving taken Notice of those Things which may be necessary to be observed,
concerning the Meaning of the principal Terms and Phrases made use of in
Controversies concerning human Liberty, and particularly observed what Liberty
is, according to the common Language, and general Apprehension of Mankind, and
what it is as understood and maintained by Arminians; I proceed to consider the
Arminian Notion of the Freedom of the Will, and the supposed Necessity of it in
Order to moral Agency, or in Order to any One's being capable of Virtue or
Vice, and properly the Subject of Command or Counsel, Praise or Blame, Promises
or Threatenings, Rewards or Punishments; or whether that which has been
described, as the Thing meant by Liberty in common Speech, be not sufficient,
and the only Liberty, which makes, or can make any one a moral Agent, and so
properly the Subject of these Things. In this Part, I shall consider whether
any such Thing be possible or conceivable, as that Freedom of Will which
Arminians insist on; and shall enquire whether any such Sort of Liberty be
necessary to moral Agency etc. in the next Part.

And First of all, I shall consider the Notion of a Self-determining Power in
the Will: wherein* according to the Arminians, does most essentially consist
the Will's Freedom; and shall particularly enquire, whether it be not plainly
absurd, and a manifest Inconsistence, to suppose that the Will it self
determines all the free Acts of the Will.

Here I shall not insist on the great Impropriety of such Phrases, and Ways of
speaking, as the Will's determining it self; because Actions are to be ascribed
to Agents, and not properly to the Powers of Agents; which improper Way of
speaking leads to many Mistakes, and much Confusion, as Mr. Lock observes. But
I shall suppose that the Arminians, when they speak of the Will's determining
it self, do by the Will mean the Soul willing. I shall take it for granted,
that when they speak of the Will, as the Determiner, they mean the Soul in the
Exercise of a Power of Willing, or acting voluntarily. I shall suppose this to
be their Meaning, because Nothing else can be meant, without the grossest and
plainest Absurdity. In all Cases, when we speak of the Powers or Principles of
Acting, as doing such Things, we mean that the Agents which have these Powers
of acting, do them, in the Exercise of those Powers. So when we say, Valor
fights courageously, we mean, the Man who is under the Influence of Valor
fights courageously. When we say, Love seeks the Object loved, we mean, the
Person loving seeks that Object. When we say, the Understanding discerns, we
mean the Soul in the Exercise of that Faculty. So when it is said, the Will
decides or determines, the Meaning must be, that the Person in the Exercise of
a Power of Willing and Choosing, or the Soul acting voluntarily, determines.

Therefore, if the Will determines all its own free Acts, the Soul determines
all the free Acts of the Will in the Exercise of a Power of Willing and
Choosing; or, which is the same Thing, it determines them of Choice; it
determines it is own Acts by choosing it is own Acts. If the Will determines the
Will, then Choice orders and determines the Choice: and Acts of Choice are
subject to the Decision, and follow the Conduct of other Acts of Choice. And
therefore if the Will determines all it is own free Acts, then every free Act of
Choice is determined by a preceding Act of Choice, choosing that Act. And if
that preceding Act of the Will or Choice be also a free Act, then by these
Principles, in this Act too, the Will is Self-determined; that is, this, in
like Manner, is an Act that the Soul voluntarily chooses; or which is the same
Thing, it is an Act determined still by a preceding Act of the Will, choosing
that. And the like may again be observed of the last mentioned Act. Which
brings us directly to a Contradiction: for it supposes an Act of the Will
preceding the first Act in the whole Train, directing and determining the
rest; or a free Act of the Will, before the first free Act of the Will. Or else
we must come at last to an Act of the Will, determining the consequent Acts,
wherein the Will is not self-determined, and so is not a free Act, in this
Notion of Freedom: But if the first Act in the Train, determining and fixing
the rest, be not free, none of them all can be free; as is manifest at first
View, but shall be demonstrated presently.

If the Will, which we find governs the Members of the Body, and determines and
commands their Motions and Actions, does also govern it self, and determine
it is own Motions and Acts, it doubtless determines them the same Way, even by
antecedent Volitions. The Will determines which Way the Hands and Feet shall
move, by an Act of Volition or Choice: and there is no other Way of the Will's
determining, directing or commanding any Thing at all. Whatsoever the Will
commands, it commands by an Act of the Will. And if it has it self under it is
Command, and determines it self in it is own Actions, it doubtless does it the
same Way that it determines other Things which are under it is Command. So that
if the Freedom of the Will consists in this, that it has it self and it is own
Actions under it is Command and Direction, and it is own Volitions are determined
by it self, it will follow, that every free Volition arises from another
antecedent Volition, directing and commanding that: And if that directing
Volition be also free, in that also the Will is determined; that is to say,
that directing Volition is determined by another going before that; and so on,
'till we come to the first Volition in the whole Series: And if that first
Volition be free, and the Will self-determined in it, then that is determined
by another Volition preceding that Which is a Contradiction; because by the
Supposition, it can have none before it, to direct or determine it, being the
first in the Train. But if that first Volition is not determined by any
preceding Act of the Will, then that Act is not determined by the Will, and so
is not free, in the Arminian Notion of Freedom, which consists in the Will's
Self-determination. And if that first Act of the Will, which determines and
fixes the subsequent Acts, be not free, none of the following Acts, which are
determined by it, can be free. -- If we suppose there are five Acts in the
Train, the fifth and last determined by the fourth, and the fourth by the
third, the third by the second, and the second by the first; If the first is
not determined by the Will, and so not free, then none of them are truly
determined by the Will: that is, that each of them are as they are, and not
otherwise, is not first owing to the Will, but to the Determination of the
first in the Series, which is not dependent on the Will, and is that which the
Will has no Hand in the Determination of. And this being that which decides
what the rest shall be, and determines their Existence; therefore the first
Determination of their Existence is not from the Will. The Case is just the
same, if instead of a Chain of five Acts of the Will, we should suppose a
Succession of Ten, or an Hundred, or ten Thousand. If the first Act be not
free, being determined by something out of the Will, and this determines the
next to be agreeable to it self, and that the next, and so on; They are none of
them free, but all orignally depend on, and are determined by some Cause out of
the Will: and so all Freedom in the Case is excluded, and no Act of the Will
can be free, according to this Notion of Freedom. If we should suppose a long
Chain, of ten Thousand Links, so connected, that if the first Link moves, it
will move the next, and that the next; and so the whole Chain must be
determined to Motion, and in the Direction of it is Motion, by the Motion of the
first Link; and that is moved by something else: In this Case, though all the
Links, but one, are moved by other Parts of the same Chain; yet it appears that
the Motion of no One, nor the Dir^^tion of it is Motion, is from any Self-moving
or Self-^e^^^mining Power in the Chain, any more than if every Link were
immediately moved by something that did not belon^ ^o the Chain. -- If the Will
be not free in the first Act, which causes the next, then neither is it free in
the next, which is caused by that first Act: for though indeed the Will caused
it, yet it did not cause it freely; because the preceding Act, by which it was
caused, was not free. And again, if the Will ben't free in the second Act, so
neither can it be in the third, which is caused by that; because, in like
Manner, that third was determined by an Act of the Will that was not free. And
so we may go on to the next Act, and from that to the next; And how long soever
the Succession of Acts is, it is all one; if the first on which the whole Chain
depends, and which determines all the rest, ben't a free Act, the Will is not
free in causing or determining any one of those Acts; because the Act by which
it determines them all, is not a free Act; and therefore the Will is no more
free in determining them, than if it did not cause them at all. -- Thus, this
Arminian Notion of Liberty of the Will, consisting in the Will's
Self-Determination, is repugnant to itself, and shuts it self wholly out of the
World.

SECTION II. Several supposed Ways of evading the foregoing Reasoning,
considered.
IF to evade the Force of what has been observed, it should be said, that when
the Arminians speak of the Will's determining it is own Acts, they don't mean
that the Will determines it is Acts by any preceding Act, or that one Act of
the Will determines another; but only that the Faculty or Power of Will, or the
Soul in the Use of that Power, determines it is own Volitions; and that it does
it without any Act going before the Act determined; such an Evasion would be
full of the most gross Absurdity. -- I confess, it is an Evasion of my own
inventing; and I don't know but I should wrong the Arminians, in supposing that
any of them would make use of it. But it being as good a (...) as I can invent,
I would observe upon it a few Things.

First, If the Faculty or Power of the Will determines an Act of Volition, or
the Soul in the Use or Exercise of that Power, determines it, that is the same
Thing as for the Soul to determine Volition by an Act of Will. For an Exercise
of the Power of Will, and an Act of that Power, are the same Thing. Therefore
to say, that the Power of Will, or the Soul in the Use or Exercise of that
Power, determines Volition, without an Act of Will preceding the Volition
determined* is a Contradiction.

Secondly, If a Power of Will determines the Act of the Will, then a Power of
Choosing determines it. For, as was before observed, in every Act of Will, there
is Choice, and a Power o^ Willing is a Power of Choosing. But if a Power of
Choosing determines the Act of Volition, it determines it by choosing it. For
it is most absurd to say, that a Power of Choosing determines one Thing rather
than another, without choosing any Thing. But if a Power of Choosing determines
Volition by choosing it, then here is the Act of Volition determined by an
antecedent Choice, choosing that Volition.

Thirdly, To say, the Faculty, or the Soul, determines it is own Volition, but
not by any Act, is a Contradiction. Because for the Soul to direct, decide, or
determine any Thing, is to act; and this is supposed; for the Soul is here
spoken of as being a Cause in this Affair, bringing something to pass, or doing
something; or, which is the same Thing, exer^ing it self in order to an Effect,
which Effect is the Determination of Volit^on, or the particular Kind and
Manner of an Act of Will. But certain^y, this Exertion or Action is not the
same with the Effect, in order to the Production of which it is exerted; but
must be something prior to it.

Again, The Advocates for this Notion of the Freedom of the Will, speak of a
certain Sovere^gnty in the Will, whereby it has Power to determine it is own
Volitions. And therefore the Determination of Volition must itself be an Act of
the Will; for otherwise it can be no Exercise of that supposed Power and
Sovereignty.

Again, If the Will determines it self, then either the Will i^ active in
determining it is Volitions, or it is not. If it be active in it, then the
Determination is an Act of the Will; and so there is one Act o^ the Will
determining another. But if the Will is not acti^e in the Determination, then
how does it exercise any Liberty in it? These Gentlemen suppose that the Thing
wherein the Will exercises Liberty, is in it is determining it is own Acts. But
how can this be, if it ben't active in determining? Certainly the Will, or the
Soul, cannot exercise any Liberty in that wherein it don't act, or wherein it
don't exercise it self. So that if either Part of this Dilemma be taken, this
Scheme of Liberty, consisting in Self-determining Power, is overthrown. If
there be an Act of the Will in determining all it is own free Acts, then one
free Act of the Will is determined by another; and so we have the Absurdity of
every free Act, even the very first, determined by a foregoing free Act. But if
there be no Act or Exercise of the Will in determining it is own Acts, then no
Liberty is exercised in determining them. From whence it follows, that no
Liberty consists in the Will's Power to determine it is own Acts: Or, which is
the same Thing, that there is no such Thing as Liberty consisting in a
Self-determining Power of the Will.

If it should be said, That although it be true, if the Soul determines it is own
Volitions, it must be active in so doing, and the Determination it self must be
an Act; yet there is no Need of supposing this Act to be prior to the Volition
determined; But the Will or Soul determines the Act of the Will in Willing; It
determines it is own Volition, in the very Act of Volition; It directs and
limits the Act of the Will, causing it to be so and not otherwise, in exerting
the Act, without any preceding Act to exert that. If any should say after this
Manner, they must mean one of these three Things: Either, (1.) That the
determining Act, though it be before the Act determined in the Order of Nature,
yet is not before it in the Order of Time. Or (2) That the determining Act is
not before the Act determined, either in the Order of Time or Nature, nor is
truly distinct from it; But that the Soul's determining the Act of Volition is
the same Thing with it is exerting the Act of Volition: The Mind's exerting such
a particular Act, is it is causing and determining the Act. Or, (3.) That
Volition has no Cause, and is no Effect; but comes into Existence, with such a
particular Determination, without any Ground or Reason of it is Existence and
Determination* -- I shall consider these distinctly.

(1.) If all that is meant, be, that the determining Act is not before the Act
determined in Order of Time, it will not help the Case at all, though it should
be allowed. If it be before the determined Act in the Order of Nature, being
the Cause or Ground of it is Existence, this as much proves it to be distinct
from it, and independent on it, as if it were before in the Order of Time. As
the Cause of the particular Motion of a natural Body in a certain Direction,
may have no Distance as to Time, yet cannot be the same with the Motion effected
by it, but must be as distinct from it, as any other Cause, that is before it is
Effect in the Order of Time: as the Architect is distinct from the House which
he builds, or the Father distinct from the Son which he begets. And if the Act
of the Will determining be distinct from the Act determined, and before it in
the Order of Nature, then we can go back from one to another, 'till we come to
the first in the Series, which has no Act of the Will before it in the Order of
Nature, determining it; and consequently is an Act not determined by the Will,
and so not a free Act, in this Notion of Freedom. And this being the Act which
determines all the Rest, none of them are free Acts. As when there is a Chain
of many Links, the first of which only is taken hold of and drawn by Hand; all
the rest may follow and be moved at the same Instant, without any Distance of
Time; but yet the Motion of one Link is before that of another in the Order of
Nature; the last is moved by the next, and that by the next, and so 'till we
come to the first; which not being moved by any other, but by something
distinct from the whole Chain, this as much proves that no Part is moved by any
Self-moving Power in the Chain, as if the Motion of one Link followed that of
another in the Order of Time.

(2.) If any should say, that the determining Act is not before the determined
Act, either in the Order of Time, or of Nature, nor is distinct from it; but
that the Exertion of the Act is the Determination of the Act; That for the Soul
to exert a particular Volition, is for it to cause and determine that Act of
Volition: I would on this observe, that the Thing in Question seems to be
forgotten, or kept out of Sigh^, in a Darkness and Unintelligibleness of
Speech; unless such an Objector would mean to contradict himself. The very Act
of Volition it self is doubtless a Determination of Mind; i. e. it is the
Mind's drawing up a Conclusion, or coming to a Choice between two Things, or
more, proposed to it. But determining among external Objects of Choice, is not
the same with determining the Act of Choice it self, among various possible
Acts of Choice. The Question is, What in^^uenc^^, directs, or determines the
Mind or Will to come to such a Conclusion or Choice as it does? or what is the
Cause, Ground or Reason, why it concludes thus, and not otherwise? Now it must
be answered, according to the Arminian Notion of Freedom, that the Will
influences, orders and determines it self thus to act. And if it does, I say,
it must be by some antecedent Act. To say, it is caused, influenced and
determined by something, and yet not determined by any Thing antecedent, either
in Order of Time or Nature, i^ a Contradiction. For that is what is meant by a
Thing* being prior in the Order of Nature, that it is some Way the Cause or
Reason of the Thing, with Respect to which it is said to be prior.

If the particular Act or Exertion of Will, which comes into Existence, be any
Thing properly determined at all, then it has some Cause of it is existing, and
of it is existing in such a particular determinate Manner, and not another; some
Cause, whose Influence decides the Matter: which Cause is distinct from the
Effect, and prior to it. But to say, that the Will or Mind orders, influences
and determines it self to exert such an Act as it does, by the very Exertion it
self, is to make the Exertion both Cause and Effect; or the exerting such an
Act, to be a Cause of the Exertion of such an Act. For the Question is, What is
the Cause and Reason of the Soul's exerting such an Act? To which the Answer
is, the Soul exerts such an Act, and that is the Cause of it. And so, by this,
the Exertion must be prior in the Order of Nature to it self, and distinct from
it self.

(3.) If the Meaning be, that the Soul's Exertion of such a particular Act of
Will, is a Thing that comes to pass ^f it self, without any Cause; and that
there is absolutely no Ground or Reason of the Soul's being determined to exert
such a Volition, and make such a Choice, rather than another; I say, if this be
the Meaning of Arminians, when they contend so earnestly for the Will's
determining it is own Acts, and for Liberty of Will consisting in
Self-determining Power; they do nothing but confound Themselves and others with
Words without a Meaning. In the Question, What determin^s the Will? and in
their Answer, that the Will determines it self, and in all the Dispute about
it, it seems to be taken for granted, that something determines the Will; and
the Controversy on this Head is not, whether any Thing at all determines it, or
whether it is Determination has any Cause or Foundation at all: But where the
Foundation of it is, whether in the Will it self, or somewhere else. But if the
Thing intended be what is abovementioned, then all comes to this, that Nothing
at all determines the Will; Volition having absolutely no Cause or Foundation
of it is Existence, either within, or without. There is a great Noise made about
Self-determining Power, as the Source of all free Acts of the Will: But when
the Matter comes to be explained, the Meaning is, that no Power at all is the
Source of these Acts, neither Self-determining Power, nor any other, but they
arise from Nothing; no Cause, no Power, no Influence, being at all concerned in
the Matter.

However, this very Thing, even that the free Acts of the Will are Events which
come to pass without a Cause, is certainly implied in the Arminian Notion of
Liberty of Will; though it be very inconsistent with many other Things in their
Scheme, and repugnant to some Things implied in their Notion of Liberty. Their
Opinion implies, that the particular Determination of Volition is without any
Cause; because they hold the free Acts of the Will to be Contingent Events; and
Contingence is essential to Freedom in their Notion of it. But certainly, those
Things which have a prior Ground and Reason of their particular Existence, a
Cause which antecedently determines them to be, and determines them to be just
as they are, don't happen contingently. If something foregoing, by a causal
Influence and Connection, determines and fixes precisely their coming to pass,
and the Manner of it, then it don't remain a contingent Thing whether They
shall come to pass or no.

And because it is a Question, in many Respects, very important in this
Controversy about the Freedom of Will, Whether the free Acts of the Will are
Events which come to pass without a Cause? I shall be particular in examining
this Point in the two following Sections.

SECTION III. Whether any Event whatsoever, and Volition in particular, can
come to pass without a Cause of it is Existence.
BEfore I enter on any Argument on this Subject, I would explain how I would be
understood, when I use the Word Cause in this Discourse: since, for want of a
better Word, I shall have Occasion to use it in a Sense which is more
extensive, than that in which it is sometimes used. The Word is often used in
so restrained a Sense as to signify only that which has a positive Efficiency
or Influence to produce a Thing, or bring it to pass. But there are many Things
which have no such positive productive Influence; which yet are Causes in that
Respect, that they have truly the Nature of a Ground or Reason why some Things
are, rather than others; or why they are as they are, rather than otherwise.
Thus the Absence of the Sun in the Night, is not the Cause of the falling of
the Dew at that Time, in the same Manner as it is Beams are the Cause of the
Ascending of the Vapors in the Daytime; And it is Withdrawment in the Winter,
is not in the same Manner the Cause of the Freezing of the Waters, as it is
Approach in the Spring is the Cause of their Thawing. But yet the Withdrawment
or Absence of the Sun is an Antecedent, with which these Effects in the Night
and Winter are connected, and on which they depend; and is one Thing that
belongs to the Ground and Reason why they come to pass at that Time, rather
than at other Times; though the Absence of the Sun is Nothing positive, nor has
any positive Influence.

It may be further observed, that when I speak of Connection of Causes and
Effects, I have Respect to moral Causes, as well as those that are called
natural in Distinction from 'em. Moral Causes may be Causes in as proper a
Sense, as any Causes whatsoever; may have as real an Influence, and may as
truly be the Ground and Reason of an Event's coming to pass.

Therefore I sometimes use the Word Cause, in this Enquiry, to signify any
Antecedent, either natural or moral, positive or negative, on which an Event,
either a Thing, or the Manner and Circumstance of a Thing, so depends, that it
is the Ground and Reason, either in Whole, or in Part, why it is, rather than
not; or why it is as it is, rather than otherwise; Or, in other Words, any
Antecedent with which a consequent Event is so connected, that it truly belongs
to the Reason why the Proposition which affirms that Event, is true; whether it
has any positive Influence, or not. And in an Agreableness to this, I sometimes
use the Word Effect, for the Consequence of another Thing, which is perhaps
rather an Occasion than a Cause, most properly speaking.

I am the more careful thus to explain my Meaning, that I may cut off Occasion,
from any that might seek Occasion to ^avil and object against some Things which
I may say concerning the Dependence of all Things which come to pass, on some
Cause, and their Connection with their Cause.

Having thus explained what I mean by Cause, I assert, that Nothing ever comes
to pass without a Cause. What is Self-existent must be from Eternity, and must
be unchangeable: But as to all Things that begin to be, they are not
Self-existent, and therefore must have some Foundation of their Existence
without themselves. -- That whatsoever begins to be, which before was not, must
have a Cause why it then begins to exist, seems to be the first Dictate of the
common and natural Sense which God has implanted in the Minds of all Mankind,
and the main Foundation of all our Reasonings about the Existence of Things,
past, present, or to come.

And this Dictate of common Sense equally respects Substances and Modes, or
Things and the Manner and Circumstances of Things. Thus, if we see a Body which
has hitherto been at Rest, start out of a State or Rest, and begin to move, we
do as naturally and necessarily suppose there is some Cause or Reason of this
new Mode of Existence, as of the Existence of a Body it self which had hitherto
not existed. And so if a Body, which had hitherto moved in a certain Direction,
should suddenly change the Direction of its Motion; or if it should put off
it is old Figure, and take a new one; or change it is Color: the Beginning of
these new M^des is a new Event, and the Mind of Mankind n^^essarily supposes
that there is some Cause or Reason of them.

If this grand Principle of common Sense be taken away, all Arguing from
Effects to Causes cease, and so all Knowledge of any Existence, besides what
we have by the most direct and immediate Intuition. Particularly all our Proof
of the Being of God ceases: We argue his Being from our own Being, and the
Being of other Things, which we are sensible once were not, but have begun to
be; and from the Being of the World, with all it is constituent Parts, and the
Manner of their Existence; all which we see plainly are not necessary in their
own Nature, and so not Self-existent, and therefore must have a Cause. But if
Things, not in themselves necessary, may begin to be without a Cause, all this
arguing i^ vain.

Indeed, I will not affirm, that there is in the Nature of Things no Foundation
for the Knowledge of the Being of God without any Evidence of it from his
Works. I do suppose there is a great Absurdity, in the Nature of Things simply
considered, in supposing that there should be no God, or in denying Being in
general, and supposing an eternal, absolute, universal Nothing: And therefore
that here would be Foundation of intuitive Evidence that it cannot be, and that
eternal infinite most perfect Being must be; if we had Strength and
Comprehension of Mind sufficient, to have a clear Idea of general and universal
Being, or, which is the same Thing, of the infinite, eternal, most perfect
divine Nature and Essence. But then we should not properly come to the
Knowledge of the Being of God by arguing; but our Evidence would be intuitive:
We should see it, as we see other Things that are necessary in themselves, the
Contraries of which are in their own Nature absurd and contradictory; as we see
that twice two is four; and as we see that a Circle has no Angles. If we had as
clear an Idea of universal infinite Entity, as we have of these other Things, I
suppose we should most intuitively see the Absurdity of supposing such Being
not to be; should immediately see there is no Room for the Question, whether it
is possible that Being, in the most general abstracted Notion of it, should not
be. But we have not that Strength and Extent of Mind, to know this certainly in
this intuitive independent Manner: But the Way that Mankind come to the
Knowledge o^ the Being of God, is that which the Apostle speaks of, Romans i.20.
The invisible Things of Him, from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen;
being understood by the Things that are made; even his eternal Power and
Godhead. We first ascend, and prove a Posteriori, or from Effects, that there
must be an eternal Cause; and then secondly, prove by Argumentation, not
Intuition, that this Being must be necessarily existent; and then thirdly, from
the proved Necessity of his Existence, we may descend, and prove many of his
Perfections a Priori.

But if once this grand Principle of common Sense ^e given up, that what is not
necessary in it self, must have a Cause; and we begin to maintain, that Things
may come into Existence, and begin to be, which heretofore have not been, of
themselves, without any Cause; all our Means of ascending in our arguing from
the Creature to the Creator, and all our Evidence of the Being of God, is cut
off at one Blow. In this Case, we cannot prove that there is a God, either from
the Being of the World, and the Creatures in it, or from the Manner of their
Being, their Order, Beauty and Use. For if Things may come into Existence
without any Cause at all, then they doubtless may without any Cause answerable
to the Effect. Our Minds do alike naturally suppose and determine both these
Things; namely, that what begins to be has a Cause, and also that it has a
Cause proportionable and agreeable to the Effect. The same Principle which leads
us to determine, that there cannot be any Thing coming to pass without a Cause,
leads us to determine that there cannot be more in the Effect than in the Cause.

Yea, if once it should be allowed, that Things may come to pass without a
Cause, we should not only have no Proof of the Being of God, but we should be
without Evidence of the Existence of any Thing whatsoever, but our own
immediately present Ideas and Consciousness. For we have no Way to prove any
Thing else, but by arguing from Effects to Causes: from the Ideas now
immediately in View, we argue other Things not immediately in View: from
Sensations now excited in us, we infer the Existence of Things without us, as
the Causes of these Sensations: And from the Existence of these Things, we
argue other Things, which they depend on, as Effects on Causes. We infer the
past Existence of our Selves, or any Thing else, by Memory; only as we argue,
that the Ideas, which are now in our Minds, are the Consequences of past Ideas
and Sensations. We immediately perceive nothing else but the Ideas which are
this Moment extant in our Minds. We perceive or know other Things only by Means
of these, as necessarily connected with others, and dependent on them. But if
Things may be without Causes, all this necessary Connection and Dependence is
dissolved, and so all Means of our Knowledge is gone. If there be no Absurdity
or Difficulty in supposing one Thing to start out of Nonexistence, into Being,
of it self without a Cause; then there is no Absurdity or Difficulty in
supposing the same of Millions of Millions. For Nothing, or no Difficulty
multiplied, still is Nothing, or no Difficulty: Nothing multiplied by Nothing
don't increase the Sum.

And indeed, according to the Hypothesis I am opposing, of the Acts of the Will
coming to pass without a Cause, it is the Case in Fact, that Millions of
Millions of Events are continually coming into Existence Contingently, without
any Cause or Reason why they do so, all over the World, every Day and Hour,
through all Ages. So it is in a constant Succession, in every moral Agent. This
Contingency, this efficient Nothing, this effectual No-Cause, is always ready
at Hand, to produce this Sort of Effects, as long as the Agent exists, and as
often as he has Occasion.

If it were so, that Things only of one Kind, viz. Acts of the Will, seemed to
come to pass of Themselves; but those of this Sort in general came into Being
thus; and it were an Event that was continual, and that happened in a Course,
wherever were capable Subjects of such Events; this very Thing would
demonstrate that there was some Cause of them, which made such a Difference
between this Event and others, and that they did not really happen
contingently. For Contingence is blind, and does not pick and choose for a
particular Sort of Events. Nothing has no Choice. This No-Cause, which causes
no Existence, cannot cause the Existence which comes to pass, to be of one
particular Sort only, distinguished from all others. Thus, that only one Sort
of Matter drops out of the Heavens, even Water, and that this comes so often,
so constantly and plentifully, all over the World, in all Ages, shows that
there is some Cause or Reason of the fa^ling of Water out of the Heavens; and
that something besides mere Contingence has a Hand in the Matter.

If we should suppose Nonentity to be about to bring forth; and Things were
coming into Existence, without any Cause or Antecedent, on which the Existence,
or Kind or Manner of Existence depends; or which could at all determine
whe^ther the Things should be; Stones, or Stars, or Beasts, or Angels, or human
Bodies, or Souls, or only some new Motion or Figure in natural Bodies, or some
new Sensations in Animals, or new Ideas in the human Understanding, or new
Volitions in the Will; or any Thing else of all the infinite Number of
Possibles; then certainly it would not be expected, although many Millions of
Millions of Things are coming into Existence in this Manner, all over the Face
of the Earth, that they should all be only of one particular Kind, and that it
should be thus in all Ages, and that this Sort of Existences should never fail
to come to pass where there is Room for them, or a Subject capable of them, and
that constantly, whenever there is Occasion for them.

If any should imagine, there is something in the Sort of Event that renders it
possible for it to come into Existence without a Cause; and should say, that
the free Acts of the Will are Existences of an exceeding different Nature from
other Things; by Reason of which they may come into Existence without any
previous Ground or Reason of it, though other Things cannot; If they make this
Objection in good Earnest, it would be an Evidence of their strangely forgeting
themselves: For they would be giving an Account of some Ground of the Existence
of a Thing, when at the same Time they would maintain there is no Ground of
it is Existence. Therefore I would observe, that the particular Nature of
Existence, be it never so diverse from others, can lay no Foundation for that
Thing's coming into Existence without a Cause; because to suppose this, would
be to suppose the particular Nature of Existence to be a Thing prior to the
Existence; and so a Thing which makes Way for Existence, with such a
Circumstance, namely without a Cause or Reason of Existence. But that which in
any Respect makes Way for a Thing's coming into Being, or for any Manner or
Circumstance of it is first Existence, must be prior to the Existence. The
distinguished Nature of the Effect, which is something belonging to the Effect,
cannot have Influence backward, to act before it is. The peculiar Nature of that
Thing called Volition, can do Nothing, can have no Influence, while it is not.
And afterward it is too late for it is Influence: for then the Thing has made
sure of Existence already, without it is Help.

So that it is indeed as repugnant to Reason, to suppose that an Act of the
Will should come into Existence without a Cause, as to suppose the human Soul,
or an Angel, or the Globe of the Earth, or the whole Universe, should come into
Existence without a Cause. And if once we allow, that such a Sort of Effect as
a Volition may come to pass without a Cause, how do we know but that many other
Sorts of Effects may do so too? It Is not the particular Kind of Effect that
makes the Absurdity of supposing it has being without a Cause, but something
which is common to all Things that ever begin to be, viz. that they are not
Self-existent, or necessary in the Nature of Things.

SECTION IV. Whether Volition can arise without a Cause, through the Activity
of the Nature of the Soul.
THE Author of the Essay on the Freedom of the Will in God and the Creatures,
in Answer to that Objection against his Doctrine of a Self-determining Power in
the Will, (P. 68, 69.) That Nothing is, or comes to pass, without a sufficient
Reason why it is, and why it is in this Manner rather than another, allows that
it is thus in corporeal Things, which are properly and philosophically speaking
passive Beings; but denies that it is thus in Spirits, which are Beings of an
active Nature, who have the Spring of Action within themselves, and can
determine themselves. By which it is plainly supposed, that such an Event as an
Act of the Will, may come to pass in a Spirit, without a sufficient Reason why
it comes to pass, or why it is after this Manner, rather than another; by
Reason of the Activity of the Nature of a Spirit. -- But certainly this Author,
in this Matter, must be very unwary and inadvertent. For,

1. The Objection or Difficulty proposed by this Author, seems to be forgotten
in his Answer or Solution. The very Difficulty, as he himself proposes it, is
this; How an Event can come to pass without a sufficient Reason why it is, or
why it is in this Manner rather than another? Instead of solving this
Difficulty, or answering this Question with Regard to Volition, as he proposes,
he forgets himself, and answers another Question quite diverse, and wholly
inconsistent with this, viz. What is a sufficient Reason why it is, and why it
is in this Manner rather than another? And he assigns the Active Being's own
Determination as the Cause, and a Cause sufficient for the Effect; and leaves
all the Difficulty unresolved, and the Question unanswered, which yet returns,
even, How the Soul's own Determination, which he speaks of, came to exist, and
to be what it was without a Cause? The Activity of the Soul may enable it to be
the Cause of Effects; but it don't at all enable or ^elp it to be the Subject
of Effects which have no Cause; which is the Thing this Author supposes
concerning Acts of the Will. Activity of Nature will no more enable a Being to
produce Effects, and determine the Manner of their Existence, within it self,
without a Cause, than out of it self, in some other Being. But if an active
Being should, through it is Activity, produce and determine an Effect in some
external Object, how absurd would it be to say, that the Effect was produced
without a Cause!

2. The Question is not so much, How a Spirit endowed with Activity comes to
act, as why it exerts such an Act, and not another; or why it acts with such a
particular Determination? If Activity of Nature be the Cause why a Spirit (the
Soul of Man for Instance) acts, and don't lie still; yet that alone is not the
Cause why it is Action is thus and thus limited, directed and determined. Active
Nature is a general Thing; it is an Ability or Tendency of Nature to Action,
generally taken; which may be a Cause why the Soul acts as Occasion or Reason
is given; but this alone cannot be a sufficient Cause why the Soul exerts such a
particular Act, at such a Time, rather than others. In order to this, there
must be something besides a general Tendency to Action; there must also be a
particular Tendency to that individual Action. -- If it should be asked, why
the Soul of Man uses it is Activity in such a Manner as it does; and it should
be answered, that the Soul uses it is Activity thus, rather than otherwise,
because it has Activity; would such an Answer satisfy a rational Man? Would it
not rather be looked upon as a very impertinent one?

3. An active Being can bring no Effects to pass by his Activity, but what are
consequent upon his acting: He produces Nothing by his Activity, any other Way
than by the Exercise of his Activity, and so Nothing but the Fruits of it is
Exercise: He brings Nothing to pass by a dormant Activity. But the Exercise of
his Activity is Action; and so his Action, or Exercise of his Activity, must be
prior to the Effects of his Activity. If an active Being produces an Effect in
another Being, about which his Activity is conversant, the Effect being the
Fruit of his Activity, his Activity must be first exercised or exerted, and the
Effect of it must follow. So it must be, with equal Reason, if the active Being
is his own Object, and his Activity is conversant about Himself, to produce and
determine some Effect in hi^^^lf; still the Exercise of his Activity must go
before the Effect, which he brings to pass and determines by it. And therefore
his Activity cannot be the Cause of the Determination of the first Action, or
Exercise of Activity it self, whence the Effects of Activity arise; for that
would imply a Contradiction; It would be to say, the first Exercise of Activity
is before the first Exercise of Activity, and is the Cause of it.

4. That the Soul, though an active Substance, cannot diversify it is own Acts, but
by first acting; or be a determining Cause of different Acts, or any different
Effects, sometimes of one Kind, and sometimes of another, any other Way than in
Consequence of it is own diverse Acts, is manifest by this; That if so, then the
same Cause, the same causal Power, Force or Influence, without Variation in any
Respect, would produce different Effects at different Times. For the same
Substance of the Soul before it acts, and the same active Nature of the Soul
before it is exerted (i. e. before in the Order of Nature) would be the Cause
of different Effects, viz. different Volitions at different Times. But the
Substance of the Soul before it acts, and it is active Nature before it is
exerted, are the same without Variation. For it is some Act that makes the first
Variation in the Cause, as to any causal Exertion, Force or Influence. But if
it be so, that the Soul has no different Causality, or diverse causal Force or
Influence, in producing these diverse Effects; then it is evident, that the Soul
has no Influence, no Hand in the diversity of the Effect; and that the
Difference of the Effect cannot be owing to any Thing in the Soul; or which is
the same Thing, the Soul don't determine the Diversity of the Effect; which is
contrary to the Supposition. -- It Is true, the Substance of the Soul before it
acts, and before there is any Difference in that Respect, may be in a different
State and Circumstances: But those whom I oppose, will not allow the different
Circumstances of the Soul to be the determining Causes of the Acts of the Will.
(...) being contrary to th^n Notion of Self-determ^natio^ and Self-motion.

5. Let us suppose, as these Divines do, that there are no Acts of the Soul,
strictly speaking, but free Volitions; Then it will follow, that the Soul is an
active Being in Nothing further than it is a voluntary or elective Being; and
whenever it produces Effects actively, it produces Effects voluntarily and
electively. But to produce Effects thus, is the same Thing as to produce
Effects in Consequence of, and according to it is own Choice. And if so, then
surely the Soul don't by it is Activity produce all it is own Acts of Will or
Choice themselves: For this, by the Supposition, is to produce all it is free
Acts of Choice voluntarily and electively, or in Consequence of it is own free
Acts of Choice, which brings the Matter directly to the forementioned
Contradiction, of a free Act of Choice before the first free Act of Choice. --
According to these Gentlemen's own Notion of Action, if there arises in the
Mind a Volition without a free Act of the Will or Choice to determine and
produce it, the Mind is not the active voluntary Cause of that Volition;
because it don't arise from, nor is regulated by Choice or Design. And
therefore it cannot be, that the Mind should be the active, voluntary,
determining Cause of the first and leading Volition that relates to the Affair.
-- The Mind's being a designing Cause, only enables it to produce Effects in
Consequence of it is Design; it will not enable it to be the designing Cause of
all it is own Designs. The Mind's being an elective Cause, will only enable it
to produce Effects in Consequence of it is Elections, and according to them; but
cannot enable it to be the elective Cause of all it is own Elections; because
that supposes an Election before the first Election. So the Mind's being an
active Cause enables it to produce Effects in Consequence of it is own Acts, but
cannot enable it to be the determining Cause of all it is own Acts; for that is
still in the same Manner a Contradiction; as it supposes a determining Act
conversant about the first Act, and prior to it, having a causal Influence on
it is Existence, and Manner of Existence.

I can conceive of Nothing else that can be meant by the Soul's having Power to
cause and determine it is own Volitions, as a Being to whom God has given a
Power of Action, but this; that God has given Power to the Soul, sometimes at
least, to excite Volitions at it is Pleasure, or according as it chooses. And
this certainly supposes, in all such Cases, a Choice preceding all Volitions
which are thus caused* even the very first of them. Which runs into the
forementioned great Absurdity.

Therefore the Activity of the Nature of the Soul affords no Relief from the
Difficulties which the Notion of a Self-determining Power in the Will is
attended with, nor will it help, in the least, it is Absurdities and
Inconsistences.

SECTION V. Showing, that if the Things asserted in these Evasions should be
supposed to be true, they are altogether impertinent, and cannot help the Cause
of Arminian Liberty; And how (this being the State of the Case) Arminian
Writers are obliged to talk inconsistently.
WHAT was last observed in the preceding Section may show, not only that the
active Nature of the Soul cannot be a Reason why any Act of the Will is, or why
it is in this Manner, rather than another; but also that if it could be so, and
it could be proved that Volitions are contingent Events, in that Sense, that
their Being and Manner of Being is not fixed or determined by any Cause, or any
Thing antecedent; it would not at all serve the Purpose of Arminians, to
establish the Freedom of the Will, according to their Notion of it is Freedom,
as consisting in the Will's Determination of it is self; whi^^ supposes every
free Act of the Will to be determined (...) Act of the Will going before to
determine it; in as ^^^ch as for the Will to determine a Thing, is the same as
for the Soul to determine a Thing by Willing; and there is no Way that the Will
can determine an Act of the Will, than by willing that Act of the Will, or,
which is the same Thing, choosing it. So that here must be two Acts of the Will
in the Case, one going before another, one conversant about the other, and the
latter the Object of the former, and chosen by the former. If the Will don't
cause and determine the Act by Choice, it don't cause or determine it at all;
for that which is not determined by Choice, is not determined voluntarily or
willingly: And to say, that the Will determines something which the Soul don't
determine willingly, is as much as to say, that something is done by the Will,
which the Soul don't do with it is Will.

So that if Arminian Liberty of Will, consisting in the Will's determining it is
own Acts, be maintained, the old Absurdity and Contradiction must be
maintained, that every free Act of Will is caused and determined by a foregoing
free Act of Will. Which don't consist with the tree Act's arising without any
Cause, and being so contingent, as not be fixed by any Thing fore-go^ng. So
that this Evasion must be given up, as not at all relieving, and as that which,
instead of support^ng this Sort of Liberty, directly destroys it.

And if it should be supposed, that the Soul determines it is own Acts of Will
some other Way, than by a foregoing Act of Will; still it will not help the
Cause of their Liberty of Will. If it determines them by an Act of the
Understanding, or some other Power, then the Will don't determine it self; and
so the S^lf-determining Power of the Will is given up. And what L^berty is
there exercised, according to their own Opinion of Liberty, by the Soul's being
determined by something besides it is own Choice? The Acts of the Will, it is
true, may be directed, and effectually determined and fixed; but it is not done
by the Soul's own Will and Pleasure: There is no Exercise at all of Choice or
Will in producing the Effect: And if Will and Choice are not exercised in it,
how is the Liberty of the Will exercised in it?

So that let Arminians turn which Way they please with their Notion of Liberty,
consisting in the Will's determining it is own Acts, their Noti^^ destroys it
self. If they hold every free Act of Will to (...) determined by the Soul's own
free Choice, or foregoing (...) Act of Will; foregoing, either in the Order of
Time, or Nature; It implies that gross Contradiction, that the first free Act
belonging to the Affair, is determined by a free Act which is before it. Or if
they say that the free Acts of the Will are determined by some other Act of the
Soul, and not an Act of Will or Ch^ice, This also destroys the^r Notion of
Liberty, consisting in the Acts of the W^ll being determined by the Will it
self; Or if they hold that the Acts of the Will are determined by Nothing at
all that is prior to them, but that they are contingent in that Sense, that
they are determined and fixed by no Cause at all; this also destroys their
Notion of Liberty, consisting in the Will's determining it is own Acts.

This being the true State of the Arminian Notion of Liberty, it hence comes to
pass, that the Writers that defend it are forced into gross Inconsistences, in
what they say upon this Subject. To instance in Dr. Whitby; he in his Discourse
on the Freedom of the Will, In his Book on the five Points. 2d Edit. P.
350.351.352.
opposes the Opinion of the Calvinists, who place Man's Liberty only in a Power
of doing what He will, as that wherein they plainly agree with Mr. Hobbes. And
yet he himself mentions the very same Notion of Liberty, as the Dictate of the
Sense and common Reason of Mankind, and a Rule laid down by the Light of
Nature; viz. That Liberty is a Power of acting from our Selves, or DOING WHAT
WE WILL. Ibid. P. 325.326.
This is indeed, as he says, a Thing agreeable to the Sense and common Reason of
Mankind; and therefore it is not so much to be wondered at, that he unawares
acknowledges it against himself: For if Liberty don't consist in this, what
else can be devised that it should consist in? If it be said, as Dr. Whitby
elsewhere insists, That it don't only consist in Liberty of doing what we will,
but also a Liberty of willing without Necessity; still the Question returns,
What does that Liberty of willing without Necessity consist in, but in a Power
of willing as we please, without being impeded by a contrary Necessity? or in
other Words, A Liberty for the Soul in it is willing to act according to it is
own Choice? Yea, this very Thing the same Author seems to allow, and suppose
again and again, in the Use he makes of Sayings of the Fathers, whom he quotes
as his Vouchers. Thus he cites these Words of Origin, which he produces as a
Testimony on his Side; Ibid. P. 342.
The Soul acts By HER OWN CHOICE, and it is free for her to incline to whatever
Part SHE WILL. And those Words of Justin Martyr; Ibid. P. 360.
The Doctrine of the Christians is this, That Nothing is done or suffered
according to Fate, but that every Man does Good or Evil ACCORDING TO HIS OWN
FREE CHOICE. And from Eusebius, these Words; Ibid. P. 3^3.
If Fate be established, Philosophy and Piety are overthrown. -- All these
Things depending upon the Necessity introduced by the Stars, and not upon
Meditation and Exercise PROCEEDING FROM OUR OWN FREE CHOICE. And again, the
Words of M^c^rius, Ibid. 369, 370.
God, to preserve the Liberty of Man's Will, suffered their Bodies to die, that
it might be IN THEIR CHOICE to turn to Good or Evil. -- They who are acted by
the Holy Spirit, are not held under any Necessity, but have Liberty to turn
themselves, and DO WHAT THEY WILL in this Life.

Thus, the Doctor in Effect comes into that very Notion of Liberty, which the
Calvinists have; which he at the same Time condemns, as agreeing with the
Opinion of Mr. Hobbes, namely, the Soul's Acting by it is own Choice, Men's
doing Good or Evil according to their own free Choice, Their being in that
Exercise which proceeds from their own free Choice, Having it in their Choice
to turn to Good or Evil, and doing what they will. So that if Men exercise this
Liberty in the Acts of the Will themselves, it must be in exerting Acts of Will
as they will, or according to their own free Choice; or exerting Acts of Will
that proceed from their Choice. And if it be so, then let every one judge
whether this don't suppose a free Choice going before the free Act of Will, or
whether an Act of Choice don't go before that Act of the Will which proceeds
from it. And if it be thus with all free Acts of the Will, then let every one
judge, whether it will not follow that there is a free Choice or Will going before
the first free Act of the Will exerted in the Case. And then let every one
judge, whether this be not a Contradiction. And finally, let every one judge
whether in the Scheme of these Writers there be any Possibility of avoiding
these Absurdities.

If Liberty consists, as Dr. Whitby himself says, in a Man's doing what He
will; and a Man exercises this Liberty, not only in external Actions, but in
the Acts of the Will themselves; then so far as Liberty is exercised in the
latter, it consists in willing what he wills: And if any say so, one of these
two Things must be meant, either 1. That a Man has Power to Will, as he does
will; because what he wills, he wills; and therefore has Power to will what he
has Power to will. If this be their Meaning, then all this mighty Controversy
about Freedom of the Will and Self-determining Power, comes wholly to Nothing;
all that is contended for being no more than this, That the Mind of Man does
what it does, and is the Subject of what it is the Subject of, or that what is,
i^: wherein None has any Controversy with them. Or, 2. The Meaning must be,
that a Man ha^ Power to will as he pleases or chooses to will: That is, h^ has
Power by one Act of Choice, to choose another; by an antecedent Act of Will to
choose a consequent Act; and therein to execute his own Choice. And if this be
their Meaning, it is Nothing but Shuffling with those they dispute with, and
baffling their own Reason. For still the Question returns, wherein lies Man's
Liberty in that antecedent Act of Will which chose the consequent Act. The
Answer according to the same Principles must be, that his Liberty in this also
lies in his willing as he would, or as he chose, or agreeable to another Act of
Choice preceding that. And so the Question returns in infinitum, and the like
Answer must be made in infinitum: In order to support their Opinion, there must
be no Beginning, but free Acts of Will must have been chosen by foregoing free
Acts of Will, in the Soul of every Man, without Beginning; and so before he had
a Being, from all Eternity.

SECTION VI. Concerning the Will's determining in Things which are perfectly
indifferent, in the View of the Mind.
A Great Argument for Self-determining Power, is the supposed Experience we
universally have of an Ability to determine our Wills, in Cases wherein no
prevailing Motive is presented: The Will (as is supposed) has it is Choice to
make between two or more Things, that are perfectly equal in the View of the
Mind; and the Will is apparently altogether indifferent; and yet we find no
Di^^iculty in coming to a Choice; the Will can instantly determine it self to
one, by a sovereign Power which it has over it self, without being moved by any
preponderating Inducement.

Thus the forementioned Author of an Essay on the Freedom of the Will etc. P.
25, 26, 27, supposes, That there are many Instances, wherein the Will is
determined neither by present Uneasiness, nor by the greatest apparent Good,
nor by the last Dictate of the Understand^ng, nor by any Thing else, but merely
by it self, as a Sovereign Self-determining Power of the Soul; and that the
Soul does not will this or that Action, in some Cases, by any other Influence,
but because it will. Thus (says he) I can turn my Face to the South, or the
North; I can point with my Fing^^ upward, or downward. -- And thus, in some
Cases, the Will determines it self in a very sovereign Manner, because it will,
without a Reason borrowed from the Understanding: and hereby it discovers it is
own perfect Power of Choice, rising from within it self, and free from all
Influence or Restraint of any Kind. And in Pages 66, 70, and 73, 74. This
Author very expressly supposes the Will in many Cases to be determined by no
Motive at all, and acts altogether without Motive, or Ground of Preference. --
Here I would observe,

1. The very Supposition which is here made, directly contradicts and
overthrows it self. For the Thing supposed, wherein this grand Argument
consists, is, That among several Things the Will actually chooses one before
another, at the same Time that it is perfectly indifferent; which is the very
same Thing as to say, the Mind has a Preference, at the same Time that it has
no Preference. What is meant cannot be, that the Mind is indifferent before it
comes to have a Choice, or 'till it has a Preference; or, which is the same
Thing, that the Mind is indifferent until it comes to be not indifferent. For
certainly this Author did not suppose he had a Controversy with any Person in
supposing this. And then it is Nothing to his Purpose, that the Mind which
chooses, was indifferent once; unless it chooses, remaining indifferent; for
otherwise, it don't choose at all in that Case of Indifference, concerning which
is all the Question. Besides, it appears in Fact, that the Thing which this
Author supposes, is not that the Will chooses one Thing before another,
concerning which it is indifferent before it chooses; but also is indifferent
when it chooses; and that it is being otherwise than indifferent is not 'till
afterward, in Consequence of it is Choice; that the chosen Thing's appearing
preferable and more agreeable than another, arises from it is Choice already
made. His Words are (P. 30.) Where the Objects which are proposed, appear
equally fit or good, the Will is left without a Guide or Director; and
therefore must make it is own Choice, by it is own Determination; it being
properly a Self-determining Power. And in suc^ Cases the Will does as it were
make a Good to it self by it is own Choice, i. e. creates it is own Pleasure or
Delight in this Self-chosen Good. Even as a Man by sei^^ng upon a Spot of
unoccupied Land, in an uninhabited Country, makes it his own Possession and
Property, and as such rejoices in it. Where Things were indifferent before, the
Will finds Nothing to make them more agreeable, considered merely in themselves;
but the Pleasure it feels ARISING FROM IT IS OWN CHOICE, and it is Perseverance
therein. We love many Things which we have chosen, AND PURELY BECAUSE WE CHOSE
THEM.

This is as much as to say, that we first begin to prefer many Things, now
ceasing any longer to be indifferent with Respect to them, purely because we
have preferred and chosen them before. -- These Things must needs be spoken
inconsiderately by this Author. Choice or Preference cannot be before it self,
in the same Instance, either in the Order of Time or Nature: It cannot be the
Foundation of it self, or the Fruit or Consequence of it self. The very Act of
choosing one Thing rather than another, is preferring that Thing, and that is
setting a higher Value on that Thing. But that the Mind sets an higher Value on
one Thing than another, is not, in the first Place, the Fruit of it is setting a
higher Value on that Thing.

This Author says, P. 36. The Will may be perfectly indifferent, and yet the
Will may determine it self to choose one or the other. And again in the same
Page, I am entirely indifferent to either; and yet my Will may determine it
self to choose. And again, Which I shall choose must be determined by the mere
Act of my Will. If the Choice is determined by a mere Act of Will, then the
Choice is determined by a mere Act of Choice. And concerning this Matter, viz.
that the Act of the Will it self is determined by an Act of Choice, this Writer
is express, in P. 72. Speaking of the Case, where there is no superior Fitness
in Objects presented, he has these Words: There it must act by it is own CHOICE,
and determine it self as it PLEASES. Where it is supposed that the very
Determination, which is the Ground and Spring of the Will's Act, is an Act of
Choice and Pleasure, wherein one Act is more agreeable, and the Mind better
pleased in it than another; and this Preference, and superior Pleasedness is
the Ground of all it does in the Case. And if so, the Mind is not indifferent
when it determines it self, but had rather do one Thing than another, had
rather determine it self one Way than another. And therefore the Will don't act
at all in Indifference; not so much as in the first Step it takes, or the first
Rise and Beginning of it is acting. If it be possible for the Understanding to
act in Indifference, yet to be sure the Will never does; because the Will's
beginning to act is the very same Thing as it is beginning to choose or pr^fer.
And if in the very first Act of the Will, the Mind prefers something, then the
Idea of that Thing preferred, does at that Time preponderate, or prevail in the
Mind; or, which is the same Thing, the Idea of it has a prevailing Influence on
the Will. So that this wholly destroys the Thing supposed, viz. That the Mind
can by a sovereign Power choose one of two or more Things, which in the View of
the Mind are, in every Respect, perfectly equal, one of which does not at all
preponderate, nor has any prevailing Influence on the Mind above another.

So that this Author, in his grand Argument for the Ability of the Will to
choose one of two, or more Things, concerning which it is perfectly indifferent,
does at the same Time, in Effect, deny the Thing he supposes, and allows and
asserts the Point he endeavors to ov^^^hrow; even that the Will, in choosing,
is subject to no prevailing Influence of the Idea, or View of the Thing chosen.
And indeed it is impossible to offer this Argument without overthrowing it; the
Thing supposed in it being inconsistent with it self, and that which denies it
self. To suppose the Will to act at all in a State of perfect Indifference,
either to determine it self, or to do any Thing else, is to assert that the
Mind chooses without choosing. To say that when it is indifferent, it can do as
it pleases, is to say that it can follow it is Pleasure, when it has no Pleasure
to follow. And therefore if there be any Difficulty in the Instances of two
Cakes, or two Eggs etc. which are exactly alike, one as good as another;
conc^rning which this Author supposes the Mind in Fact has a Choice, and so in
Effect supposes that it has a Preference; i^ as much concerned Himself to solve
the Difficulty, as it does those whom he opposes. For if these Instances prove
any Thing to his Purpose, they prove that a Man chooses without Choice. And yet
this is not to his Purpose; because if this is what he asserts, his own Words
are as much against him, and do as much contradict him, as the Words of those
he disputes against can do.

2. There is no great Difficulty in showing, in such Instances as are alleged,
not only that it must needs be so, that the Mind must be influenced in it is
Choice by something that has a preponderating Influence upon it, but also how
it is so. A little Attention to our own Experience, and a distinct
Consideration of the Acts of our own Minds in such Cases, will be sufficient to
clear up the Matter.

Thus, supposing I have a Chess-board before me; and because I am required by a
Superior, or desired by a Friend, or to make some Experiment concerning my own
Ability and Liberty, or on some other Consideration, I am determined to touch
some one of the Spots or Squares on the Board with my Finger; not being limited
or directed in the first Proposal, or my own first Purpose, which is general,
to any one in particular; and there being nothing in the Squares in themselves
considered, that recommends any one of all the sixty four, more than another:
In this Case, my Mind determines to give it self up to what is vulgarly called
Accident, I have elsewhere observed what that is which is vulgarly called
Accident; That it is Nothing akin to the Arminian metaphysical Notion of
Contingence, something not connected wi^h any Thing foregoing* But that it is
something that comes to pass in the Course of Things, in some Affair that Men
are concerned in, unforeseen, and not owing to their Design
by determining to touch that Square which happens to be most in View, which my
Eye is especially upon at that Moment, or which happens to be then most in my
Mind, or which I shall be directed to by some other suchlike Accident. Here
are several Steps of the Mind's proceeding (though all may be done as it were in
a Moment) the first Step is it is general Determination that it will touch one
of the Squares. The next Step is another general Determination to give it self
up to Accident, in some certain Way; as to touch that which shall be most in
the Eye or Mind at that Time, or to some other suchlike Accident. The third
and last Step is a particular Determination to touch a certain individual Spot,
even that Square, which, by that Sort of Accident the Mind has pitched upon,
has actually offered it self beyond others. Now it is apparent that in none of
these several Steps does the Mind proceed in absolute Indifference, but in each
of them is influenced by a preponderating Inducement. So it is in the first
Step; The Mind's general Determination to touch one o^ the sixty four Spots:
The Mind is not absolutely indifferent whither it does so or no: It is induced
to it, for the Sake of making some Experiment, or by the Desire of a Friend, or
some other Motive that prevails. So it is in the second Step, The Mind's
determining to give it self up to Accident, by touching that which shall be
most in the Eye, or the Idea of which shall be most prevalent in the Mind etc.
The Mind is not absolutely indifferent whether it proceeds by this Rule or no;
but chooses it, because it appears at that Time a conven^ent and requisite
Expedient in order to fulfill the general Purpose aforesaid. And so it is in the
third and last St^p, It Is determining to touch that individual Spot which
actually does prevail in the Mind's View. The Mind is not indifferent
concerning this; but is influenced by a prevailing Inducement and Reason; which
is, that this is a Prosecution of the preceding Determination, which appeared
requisite, and was ^ix'd before in the second Step.

Accident will ever serve a Man, without hindering him a Moment, in such a Case.
It will always be so among a Number of Objects in View, one will prevail in the
Eye, or in Idea beyond others. When we have our Eyes open in the clear
Sunshine, many Objects strike the Eye at once, and innumerable Images may be
at once painted in it by the Rays of Light; but the Attention of the Mind is
not equal to several of them at once; or if it be, it don't continue so for any
Time. And so it is with Respect to the Ideas o^ the Mind in general: Several
Ideas are not in equal Strength in the Mind's View and Notice at once; or at
least, don't remain so for any sensible Continuance. There is nothing in the
World more constantly varying, than the Ideas of the Mind: They don't remain
precisely in the same State for the least perceivable Space of Time: as is
evident by this, That all perceivable Time is judged and perceived by the Mind
only by the Succession or the successive Changes of it is own Ideas. Therefore
while the ^iews or Perceptions of the M^nd (...) precisely in the same State,
there is no perceivable Spac^ or Length of Time, (...) no sensible Succession
at all.

As the Acts of the Will, in each Step of the forementioned Proceedure, don't
come to pass without a particular Cause, every Act is owing to a prevailing
Inducement; so the Accident, as I have called it, or that which happens in the
unsearchable Course of Things, to which the Mind yields it self, and by which
it is guided, is not any Thing that comes to pass without a Cause; and the Mind
in determining to be guided by it, is not determined by something that has no
Cause; any more than if it determined to be guided by a Lot, or the casting of
a Die. For though the Die's falling in such a Manner be accidental to him that
casts it, yet none will suppose that there is no Cause why it falls as it does.
The involuntary Changes in the Succession of our Ideas, though the Cause may not
be observed, have as much a Cause, as the changeable Motions of the Mo^es that
float in the Air, or the continual, infinitely various, successive Changes of
the Unevennesses on the Surface of the Water.

There are two Things especially, which are probably the Occasions of Confusion
in the Minds of them who insist upon it, that the Will acts in a proper
Indifference, and without being moved by any Inducement, in it is Determinations
in such Cases as have been mentioned.

1. They seem to mistake the Point in Question, or at least not to keep it
distinctly in View. The Question they dispute about, is, Whether the Mind be
indifferent about the Objects presented, one of which is to be taken, touched,
pointed to etc. as two Eggs, two Cakes, which appear equally good. Whereas the
Question to be considered, is, Whether the Person be indifferent with Respect
to his own Actions; whether he don't, on some Consideration or other, prefer
one Act with Respect to these Objects before another. The Mind in it is
Determination and Choice, in these Cases, is not most immediately and directly
conversant about the Objects presented; but the Acts to be done concerning
these Objects. The Objects may appear equal, and the Mind may never properly
make any Choice between them: But the next Act of the Will being about the
external Actions to be performed, Taking, Touching etc. these may not appear
equal, and one Action may properly be chosen before another. In each Step of
the Mind's Progress, the Determination is not about the Objects, unless
indirectly and improperly, but about the Actions, which it chooses for other
Reasons than any Preference of the Objects, and for Reasons not taken at all
from the Objects.

There is no Necessity of supposing, that the Mind does ^ver at all properly
choose one of the Objects before another; either before it has taken, or
afterward. Indeed the Man chooses to take or touch one rather than another; but
not because it chooses the Thing taken, or touched; but from foreign
Considerations. The Case may be so, that of two Things offered, a Man may, for
certain Reasons, choose and prefer the taking of that which he undervalues, and
choose to neglect to take that which his Mind prefers. In such a Case, choosing
the Thing taken, and choosing to take, are di^erse: and so they are in a Case
where the Things presented are equal in the Mind's Esteem, and neither of them
preferred. All that Fact and Experience makes evident, is, that the Mind chooses
one Action rather than another. And therefore the A^guments which they bring,
in order to be to their Purpose* ought to be to prove that the Mind chooses the
Action in perf^^t Indifference, with Respect to that Action; and not to prove
that the Mind chooses the Action in perfect Indifference with Respect to the
Object; which is very possible, and yet the Will not act at all without
prevalent Inducement, and proper Preponderation.

2. Another Reason of Confusion and Difficulty in this Matter, s^^ms to be, not
distinguishing between a general Indifference, or an Indifference with Respect
to what is to be done in a more distant and general View of it, and a
particular. Indifference, or an Indifference with Respect to the next immediate
Act, viewed wit^ it is particular and present Circumstances. A Man may be
perfectly indifferent with Respect to his own Actions, in the former Respect;
and yet not in the latter. Thus, in the foregoing Instance of touching one of
the Squares of a Chess-board; when it is first proposed that I should touch one
of them, I may be perfectly indifferent which I touch; because as yet I view
the Matter remotely and generally, being but in the first Step of the Mind's
Progress in the Affair. But yet, when I am actually come to the last Step, and
the very next Thing to be determined is, which is to be touched, having already
determined that I will touch that which happens to be most in my Eye or Mind,
and my Mind being now fixed on a particular one, the Act of touching that,
considered thus immediately, and in these particular present Circumstances, is
not what my Mind is absolutely indifferent about.

SECTION VII. Concerning the Notion of Liberty of Will consisting in
Indifference.
WHAT has been said in the foregoing Section, has a Tendency in some Measure to
evince the Absurdity of the Opinion of such as place Liberty in Indifference,
or in that Equilibrium whereby the Will is without all antecedent Determination
or Bias, and left hitherto free from any prepossessing Inclination to one Side
or the other; that the Determination of the Will to either Side may be entirely
from it self, and that it may be owing only to it is own Power, and that
Sovereignty which it has over it self, that it goes this Way rather than that.
Dr. Whitby, and some other Arminians, make a Distinction of different Kinds of
Freedom; one of God, and perfect Spirits above* another of Persons in a State
of Trial. The former Dr. Whitby allows to consist with Necessity; the latter he
holds to be without Necessity: And this latter he supposes to be requisite to
our being the Subjects of Praise or Dispraise, Rewards or Punishments, Precepts
and Prohibitions, Promises and Threats, Exhortations and Dehortations, and a
Covenant-Treaty. And to this Freedom he supposes Indifference to be requisite.
In his Discourse on the five Points, P. 299, 300, he says; It is a Freedom
(speaking of a Freedom not only from Co-action, but from Necessity) requisite,
as we conceive, to render us capable of Trial or Probation, and to render our
Actions worthy of Praise or Dispraise, and our Persons of Rewards or
Punishments. And in the next Page, speaking of the same Matter, He says,
Excellent to this Purpose, are the Words of Mr. Thorndike: We say not, that
Indifference is requisite to all Freedom, but to the Freedom of Man alone in
this State of ^ravail and Proficience: the Ground of which is God's Tender of a
Treaty, and Conditions of Peace and Reconcilement to fallen Man, together with
those Precepts and Prohibitions, those Promises and Threats, those Exhortations
and Dehortations, it is enforced with.


But in as much as this has been of such long standing, and has been so
generally received, and so much insisted on by Pelagians, Semi-Pelagians,
Jesuits, Socinians, Arminians, and others, it may deserve a more full
Consideration. And therefore I shall now proceed to a more particular and
thorough Enquiry into this Notion.

Now lest some should suppose that I don't understand those that place Liberty
in Indifference, or should charge me with misrepresenting their Opinion, I
would signify, that I am sensible, there are some, who when they talk of the
Liberty of the Will as consisting in Indifference, express themselves as though
they would not be understood of the Indifference of the Inclination or Tendency
of the Will, but of, I know not what, Indifference of the Soul's Power of
Willing; or that the Will, with Respect to it is Power or Ability to choose, is
indifferent, can go either Way indifferently, either to the right Hand or left,
either act or forbear to act, one as well as the other. Though this seems to be a
Refining only of some particular Writers, and newly invented, and which will by
no Means consist with the Manner of Expression used by the Defenders of Liberty
of Indifference in general. And I wish such Refiners would thoroughly consider,
whether they distinctly know their own Meaning, when they make a Distinction
between Indifference of the Soul as to it is Power or Abi^ity of Willing or
Choosing, and the Soul's Indifference as to the Preference or Choice it self;
and whether they don't deceive themselves in imagining that they have any
distinct Meaning at all. The Indifference of the Soul as to it is Ability or
Power to Will, must be the same Thing as the Indifference of the State of the
Power or Faculty of the Will, or the Indifference of the State which the Soul
it self, which has that Power or Faculty, hitherto remains in, as to the
Exercise of that Power, in the Choice it shall by and by make.

But not to insist any longer on the Abstruseness and Inexplicableness of this
Distinction; let what will be supposed concerning the Meaning of them that make
Use of it, thus much must at least be intended by Arminians, when they talk of
Indifference as essential to Liberty of Will, if they intend any Thing, in any
Respect to their Purpose, viz. That it is such an Indifference as leaves the
Will not determined already; but free from actual Possession, and vacant of
Predetermination, so far, that there may be Room for the Exercise of the
Self-determining Power of the Will; and that the Will's Freedom consists in, or
depends upon this Vacancy and Opportunity that is left for the Will it self to
be the Determiner of the Act that is to be the free Act.

And here I would observe in the first Place, that to make out this Scheme of
Liberty, the Indifference must be perfect and abs^lute; there must be a perfect
Freedom from all antecedent Preponderation or Inclination. Because if the Will
be already inclined, before it exerts it is own sovereign Power on it self, then
it is Inclination is not wholly owing to it self: If when two Opposites are
proposed to the Soul for it is Choice, the Proposal don't find the Soul wholly
in a State of Indifference, then it is not found in a State of Liberty for mere
Self-determination. -- The least Degree of antecedent Bias must be inconsistent
with their Notion of Liberty. For so long as prior Inclination possesses the
Will, and is not removed, it binds the Will, so that it is utterly impossible
that the Will should act otherwise than agreably to it. Surely the Will cannot
act or choose contrary to a remaining prevailing Inclination of the Will. To
suppose otherwise, would be the same Thing as to suppose, that the Will is
inclined contrary to it is present prevailing Inclination, or contrary to what
it is inclined to. That which the Will chooses and prefers, that, all Things
considered, it preponderates and inclines to. It is equally impossible for the
Will to choose contrary to it is own remaining and present preponderating
Inclination, as it is to prefer contrary to it is own present Preference, or
choose contrary to it is own present Choice. The Will therefore, so long as it is
under the Influence of an old preponderating Inclination, is not at Liberty for
a new free Act, or any Act that shall now be an Act of Self-determination. The
Act which is a Self-determin'd free Act, must be an Act which the Will
determines in the Possession and Use of such a Liberty, as consists in a
Freedom from every Thing, which, if it were there, would make it impossible
that the Will, at that Time, should be otherwise th^n that Way to which it
tends.

If any one should say, there is no Need that the Indifference should be
perfect; but although a former Inclination and Preference still remains, yet, if
it (...) very strong and violent, possibly the Strength of the Will may oppose
and overcome it: --

This is grossly absurd; for the Strength of the Will. (...) it ^e never so
great, does not at all enable it to a^t one Way, and not the contrary Way, both
at the same Tim^* (...) gives it no such Sov^reign^^ and Command, ^s to (...)
self to prefer and not to prefer at the same Time, or to choose contrary to it is
own present Choice.

Therefore, if there be the least Degree of antecedent Preponderation of the
Will, it must be perfectly abolished, before the Will can be at Liberty to
determine it self the contrary Way. And if the Will determines it self the same
Way, it was not a free Determination, because the Will is not wholly at Liberty
in so doing: It Is Determination is not altogether from it self, but it was
partly determined before, in it is prior Inclination: And all the Freedom the
Will exercises in the Case, is in an Increase of Inclination, which it gives it
self, over and above what it had by foregoing Bias; so much is from it self,
and so much is from perfect Indifference. For though the Will had a previous
Tendency that Way, yet as to that additional Degree of Inclination, it had no
Tendency. Therefore the previous Tendency is of no Consideration, with Respect
to the Act wherein the Will is free. So that it comes to the same Thing which
was said at first, that as to the Act of the Will, wherein the Will is free,
there must be perfect Indifference, or Equilibrium.

To illustrate this; If we should suppose a sovereign Self-moving Power in a
natural Body: But that the Body is in Motion already, by an antecedent Bias;
for Instance, Gravitation toward the Center of the Earth; and has one Degree
of Motion already, by Virtue of that previous Tendency; but by it is self-moving
Power it adds one Degree more to it is Motion, and ^oves so much more swiftly
toward the Center of the Earth than it would do by it is Gravity only: It is
evident, that all that is owing to a self-moving Power in this Case, is the
additional Degree of Motion; and that the other Degree of Motion which it had
from Gravity, is of no Consideration in the Case, don't help the Effect of the
free self-moving Power in the least; the Effect is just the same* as if the
Body had received from it self one Degree of Motion from a State of perfect
Rest. So if we should suppose a self-moving Power given to the Scale of a
Ba^ance, which has a Weight of one Degree beyond the opposite Scale; and we
ascribe to it an Ability to add to it self another Degree of Force the same
Way, by it is self-^oving Power; This is ju^t the same Thing as to as^ribe to it
a Power to give it self one Degree of Preponderation from a (...) E^^ilibr^um;
and so much Power as the Scale has to give it self an Over-balance from a
perfect Equipoise, so much self-moving self-preponderating Power it has, and no
more. So that it is free Power this Way is always to be measured from perfect
Equilibrium.

I need say no more to prove, that, if Indifference be essential to Liberty, it
must be perfect Indifference; and that so far as the Will is destitute of this,
so far it is destitute of that Freedom by which it is it is own Master, and in a
Capacity of being it is own Determiner, without being at all passive, or subject
to the Power and Sway of something else, in it is Motions and Determinations.

Having observed these Things, let us now try whether this Notion of the
Liberty of Will consisting in Indifference and Equilibrium, and the Will's
Self-determination in such a State, be not absurd and inconsistent.

And here I would lay down this as an Axiom of undoubted Truth; That every free
Act is done in a State of Freedom, and not only after such a State. If an Act
of the Will be an Act wherein the Soul is free, it must be exerted in a State
of Freedom, and in the Time of Freedom. It will not suffice, that the Act
immediately follows a State of Liberty; but Liberty must yet continue, and
co-exist with the Act; the Soul remaining in Possession of Liberty. Because
that is the Notion of a free Act of the Soul, even an Act wherein the Soul uses
or exercises Liberty. But if the Soul is not, in the very Time of the Act, in
the Possession of Liberty, it cannot at that Time be in the Use of it.

Now the Question is, whether ever the Soul of Man puts forth any Act of Will,
while it yet remains in a State of Liberty, in that Notion of a State of
Liberty, viz. as implying a State of Indifference; or whether the Soul ever
exerts an Act of Choice or Preference, while at that very Time the Will is in a
perfect Equilibrium, not inclining one Way more than another. The very putting
of the Question is sufficient to show the Absurdity of the affirmative Answer:
For how ridiculous would it be for any Body to insist, that the Soul chooses one
Thing before another, when at the very same Instant it is perfectly indifferent
with Respect to each! This is the same Thing as to say, the Soul prefers one
Thing to another, at the very same Time that it has no Preference. -- Choice
and Preference can no more be in a State of Indifference, than Motion can be in
a State of Rest, or than the Preponderation of the Scale of a Balance can be in
a State of Equilibrium, Motion may be the next Moment a^te^ Re^^; but cannot
co-exist with it, in any, even the least Part of it. So Choice may be
immediately after a State of Indifference, but has no Co-existence wi^h it:
Even the very Beginning of it is not in a State of Indifference. And therefore
if this be Liberty, no Act of the Will, in any Degree, is ever performed in a
State of Liberty, or in the Time of Liberty. Volition and Liberty are so far
from agreeing together, and being essential one to another, that they are
contrary one to another, and one excludes and destroys the other, as much as
Motion and Rest, Light and Darkness, or Life and Death. So that the Will acts
not at all, does not so much as begin to act in the Time of such Liberty:
Freedom is perfectly at an End, and has ceased to be, at the first Moment of
Action; and therefore Liberty cannot reach the Action, to affect, or qualify it,
or give it a Denomination, or any Part of it, any more than if it had ceased to
be twenty Years before the Action began. The Moment that Liberty ceases to be,
it ceases to be a Qualification of any Thing. If Light and Darkness succeed one
another instantaneously, Light qualifies Nothing after it is gone out, to make
any thing lightsome or bright, any more at the first Moment of perfect
Darkness, than Months or Years after. Life denominates Nothing vital at the
first Moment of perfect Death. So Freedom, if it consists in, or implies
Indifference, can denominate Nothing free, at the first Moment of Preference or
Preponderation. Therefore it is manifest, that no Liberty which the Soul is
possessed of, or ever uses, in any of it is Acts of Volition, consis^s in
Indifference; and that the Opinion of such as suppose, that Indifference
belongs to the very Essence of Liberty, is to the highest Degree absurd and
contradictory.

If any one should imagine, that this Manner of arguing ing is Nothing but
Trick and Delusion; and to evade the Reasoning, should say, that the Thing
wherein the Will exercises it is Liberty, is not in the Act of Choice or
Preponderation it self, but in determining it self to a certain Choice o^
Preference; That the Act of the Will wherein it is free, and uses it is own
Sovereignty, consists in it is causing or determining the Change or Transition
from a State of Indifference to a certain Preference, or determining to give a
certain Turn to the Balance, which has hitherto been even; and that this Act
the Will exe^ts in a State of Liberty, or while the Will yet remains in
Equilibrium, and perfect Master of it self: -- I say, if any One chooses to
express his Notion of Liberty after this, or some such Manner, let us see if he
can make out his Matters any better than before.

What is asserted is, that the Will, while it yet remains in perfect
Equilibrium, without Preference, determines to change it self from that State,
and excite in it self a certain Choice or Preference. Now let us see whether
this don't come to the same Absurdity we had before. If it be so, that the
Will, while it yet remains perfectly Indifferent, determines to put it self out
of that State, and give it self a certain Preponderation; Then I would enquire,
whether the Soul don't determine this of Choice; or whether the Will's coming
to a Determination to do so, be not the same Thing as the Soul's coming to a
Choice to do so. If the Soul don't determine this of Choice, or in the Exercise
of Choice, then it don't determine it voluntarily. And if the Soul don't
determine it voluntarily, or of it is own Will, then in what Sense does it is
Will determine it? And if the Will don't determine it, then how is the Liberty
of the Will exercised in the Determination? What Sort of Liberty is exercised
by the Soul in those Determinations, wherein there is no exercise of Choice,
which are not voluntary, and wherein the Will is not concerned? -- But if it be
allowed, that this Determination is an Act of Choice, and it be insisted on,
that the Soul, while it yet remains in a State of perfect Indifference, chooses
to put it self out of that State, and to turn it sel^ one Way; then the Soul is
already come to a Choice, and chooses that Way. And so we have the very same
Absurdity which we had before. Here is the Soul in a State of Choice, and in a
State of Equilibrium, both at the same Time: the Soul already choosing one Way,
while it remains in a State of perfect Indifference, and has no Choice of one
Way more than the other. -- And indeed this Manner of talking, though it may a
little hide the Absurdity, in the Obscurity of Expression, is more nonsensical,
and increases the Inconsistence. To say, the free Act of the Will, or the Act
which the Will exerts in a State of Freedom and Indifference, does not imply
Preference in it, but is what the Will does in Order to causing or producing a
Preference, is as much as to say, the Soul chooses (for to Will and to Choose are
the same Thing) without Choice, and prefers without Preference, in order to
cause or produce the Beginning of a Preference, or the first Choice. And that
is, that the first Choice is exerted without Choice, in order to produce it
self.

If any, to evade these Things, should own, that a State of Liberty, and a
State of Indifference are not the same, and that the former may be without the
latter; But should say, that Indifference is still essential to the Freedom of
an Act of Will, in some Sort, namely, as it is necessary to go immediately
before it; It being essential to the Freedom of an Act of Will that it should
directly and immediately arise out of a State of Indifference: still this will
not help the Cause of Arminian Liberty, or make it consistent with it self. For
if the Act springs immediately out of a State of Indifference, then it does not
arise from antecedent Choice or Preference. But if the Act arises directly out
of a State of Indifference, without any intervening Choice to choose and
determine it, then the Act not being determined by Choice, is not determined by
the Will; the Mind exercises no free Choice in the Affair, and free Choice and
free Will have no Hand in the Determination of the Act. Which is entirely
inconsistent with their Notion of the Freedom of Volition.

If any should suppose, that these Difficulties and Absurdities may be avoided,
by saying, that the Liberty of the Mind consists in a Power to suspend the Act
of the Will, and so to keep it in a State of Indifference, 'till there has been
Opportunity for Consideration; and so shall say, that however Indifference is
not essential to Liberty in such a Manner, that the Mind must make it is Choice
in a State of Indifference, which is an Inconsistency, or that the Act of Will
must spring immediately out of Indifference; yet Indifference may be essential
to the Liberty of Acts of the Will in this Respect; viz. That Liberty consists
in a Power of the Mind to forbear or suspend the Act of Volition, and keep the
Mind in a State of Indifference for the present, 'till there has been
Opportunity for proper Deliberation: I say, if any one imagines that this helps
the Matter, it is a great Mistake: It reconciles no Inconsistency, and relieves
no Difficulty which the Affair is attended with. -- For here the following
Things must be observed,

1. That this suspending of Volition, if there be properly any such Thing, is
it self an Act of Volition. If the Mind determines to suspend it is Act, it
determines it voluntarily; it chooses, on some Consideration, to suspend it. And
this Choice or Determination, is an Act of the Will: And indeed it is supposed
to be so in the very Hypothesis; for it is supposed, that the Liberty of the
Will consists in it is Power to do thus, and that it is doing it is the very
Thing wherein the Will exercises it is Liberty. But how can the Will exercise
Liberty in it, if it ben't an Act of the Will? The Liberty of the Will is not
exercised in any Thing but what the Will does.

2. This determining to suspend acting is not only an Act of the Will, but it is
supposed to be the only free Act of the Will; because it is said, that this is
the Thing wherein the Liberty of the Will consists. -- Now if this be so, then
this is all the Act of Will that we have to consider in this Controversy, about
the Liberty of Will, and in our Enquiries, wherein the Liberty of Man consists.
And now the forementioned Difficulties remain: the former Question returns upon
us; viz. Wherein consists the Freedom of the Will in those Acts wherein it is
free? And if this Act of determining a Suspension be the only Act in which the
Will is free, then wherein consists the Will's Freedom with Respect to this Act
of Suspension? And how is Indifference essential to this Act? The Answer must
be, according to what is supposed in the ^vasion under Consideration, That the
Liberty of the Will in this Act of Suspension, consists in a Power to suspend
even this Act, 'till there has been Opportunity for thorough Deliberation. But
this will be to plunge directly into the grossest Nonsense: for it is the Act of
Suspension it self that we are speaking of; and there is no Room for a Space of
Deliberation and Suspension, in order to determine whether we will suspend or
no. For that supposes, that even Suspension it self may be deferred: Which is
absurd; for the very deferring the Determination of Suspension, to consider
whether we will suspend or no, will be actually suspending. For during the
Space of Suspension, to consider whether to suspend, the Act is ipso facto
suspended. There is no Medium between suspending to act, and immediately
acting; and therefore no Possibility of avoiding either the one or the other
one Moment; and so no Room for Deliberation before we do either of them.

And besides, this is attended with ridiculous Absurdity another Way: For now
it is come to that, that Liberty consists wholly in the Mind's having Power to
suspend it is Determination whether to suspend or no; that there may be Time for
Consideration, whether it be best to suspend. And if Liberty consists in this
only, then this is the Liberty under Consideration: We have to enquire now, how
Liberty with Respect to this Act of suspending a Determination of Suspension,
consists in Indifference, or how Indifference is essential to it. The Answer,
according to the Hypothesis we are upon, must be, that it consists in a Power
of suspending even this last mentioned Act, to have Time to consider whether to
suspend that. And then the same Difficulties and Enquiries return over again
with Respect to that; and so on forever. Which, if it would show any Thing,
would show only that there is no such Thing as a free Act. It drives the
Exercise of Freedom back in infinitum; and that is to drive it out of the World.

And besides all this, there is a Delusion, and a latent gross Contradiction in
the Affair another Way; in as much as in explaining how, or in what Respect the
Will is free with Regard to a particular Act of Volition, it is said, that it is
Liberty consists in a Power to determine to suspend that Act, which places
Liberty not in that Act of Volition which the Enquiry is about, but altogether
in another antecedent Act. Which contradicts the Thing supposed in both the
Question and Answer. The Question is, wherein consists the Mind's Liberty in
any particular Act of Volition? And the Answer, in pretending to show wherein
lies the Mind's Liberty in that Act, in Effect says, it don't lie in that Act
at all, but in another, viz. a Volition to suspend that Act. And therefore the
Answer is both contradictory, and altogether impertinent and beside the
Purpose. For it don't show wherein the Liberty of the Will consists in the Act
in Question; Instead of that, it supposes it don't consist in that Act at all,
but in another distinct from it, even a Volition to suspend that Act, and take
Time to consider of it. And no Account is pretended to be given wherein the
Mind is free with Respect to that Act, wherein this Answer supposes the Liberty
of the Mind indeed consists, viz. the Act of Suspension, or of determining the
Suspension.

On the whole, it is exceeding manifest, that the Liberty of the Mind does not
consist in Indifference, and that Indifference is not essential or necessary to
it, or at all belonging to it, as the Arminians suppose; that Opinion being
full of Nothing but Absurdity and Self-Contradiction.

SECTION VIII. Concerning the supposed Liberty of the Will, as opposite to all
Necessity.
IT IS a Thing chiefly insisted on by Arminians, in this Controversy, as a Thing
most important and essential in human Liberty, that Volitions, or the Acts of
the Will, are contingent Events; understanding Contingence as opposite, not
only to Constraint, but to all Necessity. Therefore I would particularly
consider this Matter. And

1. I would enquire, whether there is, or can be any such Thing, as a Volition
which is contingent in such a Sense, as not only to come to pass without any
Necessity of Constraint or Co-action, but also without a Necessity of
Consequence, or an infallible Connection with any Thing foregoing.

2. Whether, if it were so, this would at all help the Cause of Liberty.

I. I would consider whether Volition is a Thing that ever does, or can come to
pass, in this Manner, contingently.

And here it must be remembered, that it has been already shown, that Nothing
can ever come to pass without a Cause, or Reason why it exists in this Manner
rather than another; and the Evidence of this has been pa^ticularly applied to
the Acts of the Will. Now if this be so, it will demonstrably follow, that the
Acts of the Will are never contingent, or without Necessity, in the Sense
spoken of; in as much as those Things which have a Cause, or Reason of their
Existence, must be connected with their Cause. This appears by the following
Considerations.

1. For an Event to have a Cause and Ground of it is Existence, and yet not to
be connected with it is Cause, is an Inconsistence. For if the Event ben't
connected with the Cause, it is not dependent on the Cause; it is Existence is
as it were loose from it is Influence, and may attend it, or may not; it being a
mere Contingence, whether it follows or attends the Influence of the Cause, or
not: And that is the same Thing as not to be dependent on it. And to say, the
Event is not dependent on it is Cause, is absurd: It Is the same Thing as to say,
it is not it is Cause, nor the Event the Effect of it: For Dependence on the
Influence of a Cause, is the very Notion of an Effect. If there be no such
Relation between one Thing and another, consisting in the Connection and
Dependence of one Thing on the Influence of another, then it is certain there
is no such Relation between them as is signified by the Terms Cause and Effect.
So far as an Event is dependent on a Cause, and connected with it, so much
Causality ^s there in the Case, and no more. The Cause does, or brings to pass
no more in any Event, than is dependent on it. If we say, the Connection and
Dependence is not total, but partial, and that the Effect, though it has some
Connection and Dependence, yet is not entirely dependent on it; That is the
same Thing as to say, that not all that is in the Event is an Effect of that
Cause, but that only Part of it arises from thence, and Part some other Way.

2. If there are some Events which are not necessarily connected with their
Causes, then it will follow, that there are some Things which come to pass
without any Cause, contrary to the Supposition. For if there be any Event which
was not necessarily connected with the Influence of the Cause under such
Circumstances, then it was contingent whether it would attend or follow the
Influence of the Cause, or no; It might have followed, and it might not, when
the Cause was the same, it is Influence the same, and under the same
Circumstances. And if so, why did it follow, rather than not follow? There is
no Cause or Reason of this. Therefore here is something without any Cause or
Reason why it is, viz. the following of the Effect on the Influence of the
Cause, with which it was not necessarily connected. If there be a necessary
Connection of the Effect on any Thing antecedent, then we may suppose that
sometimes the Event will follow the Cause, and sometimes not, when the Cause is
the same, and in every Respect in the same State and Circumstances. And what
can be the Cause and Reason of this strange Phenomenon, even this Diversity,
that in one Instance, the Effect should follow, in another not? It Is evident by
the Supposition, that this is wholly without any Cause or Ground. Here is
something in the present Manner of the Ex^^^ence of Things, and State of the
World, that is absolutely without a Cause. Which is contrary to the
Supposition, and contrary to what has been before demonstrated.

3. To suppose there are some Events which have a Cause and Ground of their
Existence, that yet are not necessarily connected with their Cause, is to
suppose that they have a Cause which is not their Cause. Thus (...) the Effect
be not necessarily connected with the Cause, with it is Influence, and
influential Circumstances; then, as I observed before, it is a Thing possible
and supposable, that the Cause may sometimes exert the same Influence, under
the same Circumstances, and yet the Effect not follow. And if this actually
happens in any Instance, this Instance is a Proof, in Fact, that the Influence
of the Cause is not sufficient to produce the Effect. For if it had been
sufficient, it would have done it. And yet, by the Supposition, in another
Instance, the same Cause, with perfectly the same Influence, and when all
Circumstances which have any Influence, are the same, it ^as followed with the
Effect. By which it is manifest, that the Effect in this last Instance was not
owing to the Influence of the Cause, but must come to pass some other Way. For
it was proved before, that the Influence of the Cause was not sufficient to
produce the Effect. And if it was not sufficient to produce it, then the
Production of it could not be owing to that Influence, but must be owing to
something else, or owing to Nothing. And if the Effect be not owing to the
Influence of the Cause, then it is not the Cause. Which brings us to the
Contradiction, of a Cause, and no Cause, that which is the Ground and Reason of
the Existence of a Thing, and at the same Time is not the Ground and Reason of
it is Existence, nor is sufficient to be so.

If the Matter be not already so plain as to render any further Reasoning upon
it impertinent, I would say, that that which seems to be the Cause in the
supposed Case, can be no Cause; it is Power and Influence having, on a full
Trial, proved insufficient to produce such an Effect: and if it be not
sufficient to produce it, then it don't produce it. To say otherwise, is to
say, there is Power to do that which there is not Power to do. If there be in a
Cause sufficient Power exerted, and in Circumstances sufficient to produce an
Effect, and so the Effect be actually produced at one Time; These Things all
concurring, will produce the Effect at all Times. And so we may turn it the
other Way; That which proves not sufficient at one Time, cannot be sufficient
at another, with precisely the same influential Circumstances. And therefore if
the Effect follows, it is not owing to that Cause* unless the different Time be
a Circumstance which has Influence: But that is contrary to the Supposition;
for it is supposed that all Circumstances that have Influence, are the same. And
besides, this would be to suppose the Time to be the Cause; which is contrary
to the Supposition of the other Thing's being the Cause. But if merely
Diversity of Time has no Influence, then it is evident that it is as much of an
Absurdity to say, the Cause was sufficient to produce the Effect at one Time,
and not at another; as to say, that it is sufficient to produce the Effect at a
certain Time, and yet not sufficient to produce the same Effect at that same
Time.

On the whole, it is clearly manifest, that every Effect has a necessary
Connection with it is Cause, or with that which is the true Ground and Reason of
it is Existence. And therefore if there be no Event without a Cause, as was
proved before, then no Event whatsoever is contingent in the Manner that
Arminians suppose the free Acts of the Will to be contingent.

SECTION IX. Of the Connection of the Acts of the Will with the Dictates of the
Understanding.
IT is manifest, that the Acts of the Will are none of them contingent in such
a Sense as to be without all Necessity, or so as not to be necessary with a
Necessity of Consequence and Connection; because every Act of the Will is some
Way connected with the Understanding, and is as the greatest apparent Good is,
in the Manner which has already been explained; namely, that the Soul always
wills or chooses that which, in the present View of the Mind, considered in the
whole of that View, and all that belongs to it, appears most agreeable. Because,
as was observed before, Nothing is more evident than that, when Men act
voluntarily, and do what they please, then they do what appears most agreeable
to them; and to say otherwise, would be as much as to affirm, that Men don't
choose what appears to suit them best, or what seems most pleasing to them; or
that they don't choose what they prefer. Which brings the Matter to a
Contradiction.

As it is very evident in it self, that the Acts of the Will have some
Connection with the Dictates or Views of the Understanding, so this is allowed
by some of the chief of the Arminian Writers: Particularly by Dr. Whitby and
Dr. Samuel Clark. -- Dr. Turnbull, though a great Enemy to the Doctrine of
Necessity, allows the same Thing. In his Christian Philosophy (P. 196.) He with
much Approbation cites another Philosopher, as of the same Mind, in these
Words: No Man (says an excellent Philosopher) sets himself about any Thing, but
upon some View or other, which serves him for a Reason for wh^t he does; and
whatsoever Faculties he employs, the Understanding, with such Light as it has,
well or ill informed, constantly leads; and by that Light, true or false, all
her operative Powers are directed. The Will it self, how absolute and
incontroulable soever it may be thought, never fails in it is Obedience to the
Dictates of the Understanding. Temples have their sacred Images; and we see
what Influence they have always had over a great Part of Mankind; But in Truth,
the Ideas and Images in Men's Minds are the invisible Powers that constantly
govern them; and to these they all pay universally a ready Submission.

But whether this be in a just Consistence with Themselves, and their own
Notions of Liberty, I desire may now be impartially considered.

Dr. Whitby plainly supposes, that the Acts and Determinations of the Will
always follow the Understanding's Apprehension or View of the greatest Good to
be obtained, or Evil to be avoided; or in other Words, that the Determinations
of the Will constantly and infallibly follow these two Things in the
Understanding: 1. The Degree of Good to be obtained, and Evil to be avoided,
proposed to the Understanding, and apprehended, viewed, and taken Notice of by
it. 2. The Degree of the Understanding's View, Notice or Apprehension of that
Good or Evil; which is increased by Attention and Consideration. That this is
an Opinion he is exceeding peremptory in (as he is in every Opinion which he
maintains in his Controversy with the Calvinists) with Disdain of the contrary
Opinion, as absurd and self-contradictory, will appear by the following Words
of his, in his Discourse on the five Points. Edit. 2d P. 211, 212, 21^.


Now, it is certain, that what naturally makes the Understanding to perceive, is
Evidence proposed, and apprehended, considered or adverted to: for Nothing else
can be requisite to make us come to the Knowledge of the Truth. -- Again, what
makes the Will choose, is something approved by the Understanding; and
consequently appearing to the Soul as Good. And whatsoever it refuses, is
something represented by the Understanding, and so appearing to the Will, as
Evil. Whence all that God requires of us is, and can be only this; to refuse
the Evil, and choose the Good. Wherefore, to say that Evidence proposed,
apprehended and considered, is not sufficient to make the Understanding
approve; or that the greatest Good proposed, the greatest Evil threatened, when
equally believed and reflected on, is not sufficient to engage the Will to
choose the Good and refuse the Evil, is in Effect to say, that which alone does
move the Will to choose or to refuse, is not sufficient to engage it so to do;
which being contradictory to it self, must of Necessity be false. Be it then
so, that we naturally have an Aversation to the Truths proposed to us in the
Gospel; that only can make us indisposed to attend to them, but cannot hinder
our Conviction, when we do apprehend them, and attend to them. -- Be it, that
there is in us also a Renitency to ^he Good we are to choose; that only can
indispose us to believe it is, and to approve it as our chiefest Good. Be it,
that we are prone to the Evil that we should decline; that only can render it
the more difficult for us to believe it is the worst of Evils. But yet, what we
do really believe to be our chiefest Good, will still be chosen; and what we
apprehend to be the worst of Evils, will, whilst we do continue under that
Conviction, be refused by us. It therefore can be only requisite, in order to
these Ends, that the good Spirit should so illuminate our Understandings, that
we attending to, and considering what lies before us, should apprehend, and be
convinced of our Duty; and that the Blessings of the Gospel should be so
propounded to us, as that we may discern them to be our chiefest Good; and the
Miseries it threateneth, so as we may be convinced they are the worst of Evils;
that we may choose the one, and refuse the other.

Here let it be observed, how plainly and peremptorily it is asserted, that the
greatest Good proposed, and the greatest Evil threatened, when equally believed
and reflect^d on, is sufficient to engage the Will to choose the Good, and
refuse the Evil, and is that alone which does move the Will to choose or to
refuse; and that it is contr^dictory to it self, to suppose otherwise; and
therefore must of Necessity be false; and then what we do really believe to be
our chiefest Good will still be chosen, and what we apprehend to be the worst
of Evils, will, whilst we continue under that Conviction, be refused by us.
Nothing could have been said more to the Purpose, fully to signify and declare,
that the Determinations of the Will must evermore follow the Illumination,
Conviction and Notice of the Understanding, with Regard to the greatest Good
and Evil proposed, reckoning both the Degree of Good and Evil understood, and
the Degree of Understanding, Notice and Conviction of that proposed Good and
Evil; and that it is thus necessarily, and can be otherwise in no Instance:
because it is asserted, that it implies a Contradiction, to suppose it ever to
be otherwise.

I am sensible, the Doctor's Aim in these Assertions is against the Calvinists;
to show, in Opposition to them, that there is no Need of any physical Operation
of the Spirit of God on the Will, to change and determine that to a good
Choice, but that God's Operation and Assistance is only moral, suggesting Ideas
to the Understanding; which he supposes to be enough, if those Ideas are
attended to, infallibly to obtain the End. But whatever his Design was, Nothing
can more directly and fully prove, that every Determination of the Will, in
choosing and refusing, is necessary; directly contrary to his own Notion of the
Liberty of the Will. For if the Determination of the Will, evermore, in this
Manner, follows the Light, Conviction and View of the Understanding, concerning
the greatest Good and Evil, and this be that alone which moves the Will, and it
be a Contradiction to suppose otherwise; then it is necessarily so, the Will
necessarily follows this Light or View of the Understanding, not only in some
of it is Acts, but in every Act of choosing and refusing. So that the Will don't
determine it self in any one of it is own Acts; but all it is Acts, every Act of
Choice and Refusal, depends on, and is necessarily connected with some
antecedent Cause; which Cause is not the Will it self, nor any Act of it is own,
nor any Thing pertaining to that Faculty, but something belonging to another
Faculty, whose Acts go before the Will, in all it is Acts, and govern and
determine them every one.

Here, if it should be replied, that although it be true, that according to the
Doctor, the final Determination of the Will always depends upon, and is
infallibly connected with the Understanding's Conviction, and Notice of the
greatest Good; yet the Acts of the Will are not necessary; because that
Conviction and Notice of the Understanding is first dependent on a preceding
Act of the Will, in determining to attend to, and take Notice of the Evidence
exhibited; by which Means the Mind obtains that Degree of Conviction which is
sufficient and effectual to determine the consequent and ultimate Choice of the
Will; and that the Will with Regard to that preceding Act, whereby it
determines whether to attend or no, is not necessary; and that in this, the
Liberty of the Will consists, that when God holds forth sufficient objective
Light, the Will is at Liberty whether to command the Attention of the Mind to
it.

Nothing can be more weak and inconsiderate than such a Reply as this. For that
preceding Act of the Will, in determining to attend and consider, still is an
Act of the Will (it is so to be sure, if the Liberty of the Will consists in
it, as is supposed) and if it be an Act of the Will, it is an Act of Choice or
Refusal. And therefore, if what the Doctor asserts be true, it is determined by
some antecedent Light in the Understanding concerning the greatest apparent
Good or Evil. For he asserts, it is that Light which alone does move the Will
to choose or refuse. And therefore the Will must be moved by that in choosing to
attend to the objective Light offered, in order to another consequent Act of
Choice: so that this Act is no less necessary than the other. And if we suppose
another Act of the Will, still preceding both these mentioned, to determine
both, still that also must be an Act of the Will, and an Act of Choice; and so
must, by the same Principles, be infallibly determined by some certain Degree
of Light in the Understanding concerning the greatest Good. And let us suppose
as many Acts of the Will, one preceding another, as we please, yet they are
every one of them necessarily determined by a certain Degree of Light in the
Understanding, concerning the greatest and most eligible Good in that Case; and
so, not one of them free according to Dr. Whitby's Notion of Freedom. And if it
be said, the Reason why Men don't attend to Light held forth, is because of ill
Habits contracted by evil Acts committed before, whereby their Minds are
indisposed to attend to, and consider of the Truth held forth to them by God,
the Difficulty is not at all avoided: still the Question returns, What
determined the Will in those preceding evil Acts? It must, by Dr. Whitby's
Principles, still be the View of the Understanding concerning the greatest Good
and Evil. If this View of the Understanding be that alone which does move the
Will to choose or refuse, as the Doctor asserts, th^n every Act of Choice or
Refusal, from a Man's first Existence, is moved and determined by this View;
and this View of the Understanding exciting and governing the Act, must be
before the Act: And therefore the Will is necessarily determined, in every one
of it is Acts, from a Man's first Existence, by a Cause beside the Will, and a
Cause that don't proceed from, or depend on any Act of the Will at all. Which
at once utterly abolishes the Doctor's whole Scheme of Liberty of Will; and he,
at one Stroke, has cut the Sinews of all his Arguments from the Goodness,
Righteousness, Faithfulness and Sinc^rity of God, in his Commands, Promises,
Threatenings, Calls, Invitations, Expostulations; which (...) makes (...) of,
under the Heads of Reprobation, Election, Univer^^^ Redemption, sufficient and
effectual Grace, and the Freedom of the Will of Man; and has enervated and made
vain all those Exclamations against the Doctrine of the Calvinists, as charging
God with manifest Unrighteousness, Unfaithfulness, Hypocrisy, Fallaciousness,
and Cruelty; which he has over, and over, and over again, numberless Times in
his Book.

Dr. Samuel Clark, in his Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God,
Edit. 6. P. 93.
to evade the Argument to prove the Necessity of Volition, from it is necessary
Connection with the last Dictate of the Understanding, supposes the latter not
to be diverse from the Act of the Will it self. But if it be so, it will not
alter the Case as to the Evidence of the Necessity of the Act of the Will. If
the Dictate of the Understanding be the very same with the Determination of the
Will or Choice, as Dr. Clark supposes, then this Determination is no Fruit or
Effect of Choice: And if so, no Liberty of Choice has any Hand in it: As to
Volition or Choice, it is necessary; That is, Choice cannot prevent it. If the
last Dictate of the Understanding be the same with the Determination of
Volition it self, then the Existence of that Determination must be necessary as
to Volition; in as much as Volition can have no Opportunity to determine
whether it shall exist or no, it having Existence already before Volition has
Opportunity to determine any Thing. It is it self the very Ri^e and Existence
of Volition. But a Thing, after it exists, has no Opportunity to determine as
to it is own Existence; it is too late for that.

If Liberty consists in that which Arminians suppose, viz. in the Will's
determining it is own Acts, having ^ree Opportunity, and being without all
Necessity; This is the same as to say, that Liberty consists in the Soul's
having Power and Opportunity to have what Determinations of the Will it pleases
or chooses. And if the Determinations of the Will, and the last Dictates of the
Understanding be the same Thing, then Liberty consists in the Mind's having
Power to have what Dictates of the Understanding it pleases, having Opportunity
to choose it is own Dictates of Understanding. But this is absurd; for it is to
make the Determination of Choice prior to the Dictate of Understanding, and the
Ground of it; which cannot consist (...) the Dictate of Understanding's being
the Determination (...) Choice (...)*

Here is no Way to do in this Case (...) to the old Absurdity, of one (...)
another, and the Cause of it; and another before (...) determining that; and so
on in infinitum. If the last (...) of the Understanding be the Determination of
the Will it self, and the Soul be free with Regard to that Dictate, in the
Arminian Notion of Freedom; th^n the Soul, before that Dictate of it is
Understanding ex^sts, voluntarily and according to it is own Choice determines,
in every Case, what that Dictate of the Understanding shall be; otherwise that
Dictate, as to the Will, is necessary; and the Acts determined by it, must also
be necessary. So that here is a Determination of the Mind prior to that Dictate
of the Understanding, an Act of Choice going before it, choosing and determining
what that Dictate of the Understanding shall be: and this preceding Act of
Choice, being a free Act of Will, must also be the same with another last
Dictate of the Understanding: And if the Mind also be free in that Dictate of
Understanding, that must be determined still by another; and so on forever.

Besides, if the Dictate of the Understanding, and Determination of the Will be
the same, this confounds the Understanding and Will, and makes them the same.
Whether they be the same or no, I will not now dispute; but only would observe,
that if it be so, and the Arminian Notion of Liberty consists in a
Self-determining Power in the Understanding, free of all Necessity; being
independent, undetermined by any Thing prior to it is own Acts and
Determinations; and the more the Understanding is thus independent, and
sovereign over it is own Determinations, the more free. By th^s therefore the
Freedom of the Soul, as a moral Agent, must consist in the Independence of the
Understanding on any Evidence or Appearance of Things, or any Thing whatsoever
that stands forth to the View of the Mind, prior to the Understanding's
Determination. And what a Sort of Liberty is this! consisting in an Ability,
Freedom and Easiness of judging, either according to Evidence, or against it;
having a sovereign Command over it self at all Times, to judge, either agreably
or disagreably to what is plainly exhibite^ to it is own View. Certainly, it is
no Liberty that renders Persons the proper Subjects of persuasive Reasoning,
Argument* Expo^^ulations, and such like moral Means and Induceme^^* The Use of
which with Mankind, is a (...) Arminians, to defend their Notion of (...)
Necessity. For according to this, the more (...) they are under the Government
(...) subject to the Power of Evidence and (...) more independent on their
Influence, in their (...).

And whether the Understanding and Will are the same or no, as Dr. Clark seems
to suppose, yet in order to maintain the Arminian Notion of Liberty without
Necessity, the free Will is not determined by the Understanding, nor
necessarily connected w^t^ the Understanding; and the further from such
Connection, the greater the Freedom. And when the Liberty is full and complete,
the Determinations of the Will have no Connection at all with the Dictates of
the Understanding. And if so, in (...) are all Applications to the
Understanding, in order to induce to any free virtuous Act; and so in vain are
all Instructions, Counsels, Invitations, Expostulations, and all Arguments and
Perswasives whatsoever: For these are but Applications to the Understanding,
and a clear and lively Exhibit^on of the Objects of Choi^e to the Mind's View.
But if, after all, the Will must be self-determined, and independent on the
Understanding, to what Purpose are Things thus represented to the
Understanding, in order to determine the Choice?

SECTION X. Volition necessarily connected with the Influence of Motives; with
particular Observations on the great Inconsistence of Mr. Chubb's Assertions
and Reasonings, about the Freedom of the Will.
THAT every Act of the Will has some Cause, and consequently (by what has been
already proved) has a necessary Connection with it is Cause, and so is necessary
by a Nec^ssity of Connection and Consequence, is evident by th^s, That every
Act of the Will whatsoever, is ex^^ted by some Motive: Which is ^anifest,
because, if the Will or Mind, in willing and choosing after the Manner that it
does, is excited so to do by no (...) or Inducement, th^n it has no End which
it proposes (...) it self, or pursues in so doing; it aims at Nothing, and
(...) Nothing. And if it se^ks Nothing, then it don't go after any Thing, or
exert any Inclination or Preference toward any Thing. Which brings the Matter
to a Contradiction; Because for the Mind to will something, and for it to go
after something by an Act of Preference and Inclination, are the same Thing.

But if every Act of the Will is excited by a Motive, then that Motive is the
Cause or the Act of the Will. If the Acts of the Will are excited by Motives,
then Motives are the Causes of their being excited; or, which is the same
Thing, the Cause of their being put forth into Act and Existence. And if so,
the Existence of the Acts of the Will is properly the Effect of their Motives.
Motives do Nothing as Motives or Inducements, but by their Influence; and so
much as is done by their Influence, is the Effect of them. For that is the
Notion of an Effect, something that is bro't to pass by the Influence of
another Thing.

And (...) Volitions are properly the Effects of their Motives, then they (...)
necessarily connected with their Motives. Every (...) being, as was proved
before, necessarily (...) that which is the proper Ground and Reason (...).
Thus it is manifest, that Volition is necessary, and is not from any
Self-determining Power in the Will: The Volition which is caused by previous
Motive and Inducement, is not caused by the Will exercising a sovereign Power
over it self, to determine, cause and excite Volitions in it self. This is not
consistent with the Will's acting in a State of Indifference and Equilibrium,
to determine it self to a Preference; for the Way in which Motives operate, is
by biassing the Will, and giving it a certain Inclination or Preponderation one
Way.

Here it may be proper to observe, that Mr. Chubb, in his Collection of Tracts
on various Subjects, has advanced a Scheme of Liberty, which is greatly divided
against it self, and thoroughly subversive of it self; and that many Ways.

I. He is abundant in asserting, that the Will, in all it is Acts, is influenced
by Motive and Excitement; and that this is the previous Ground and Reason of
all it is Acts, and that it is never otherwise in any Instance. He says, (P.
262.) No Action can take Place without some Motive to excite it. And in P. 203.
Volition cannot take Place without some PREVIOUS Reason or M^tive to induce it.
And in P. 310. Action would not take Place without some Reason or Motive to
induce it; it being absurd to suppose, that the active Faculty would be exerted
without some PREVIOUS Reason to dispose the Mind to Action. So also P. 257. And
he speaks of th^se Things as what we may be absolutely certain of, and which
are the Foundation, the only Foundation we have of a Certainty of the moral
Perfections of God. P. 252, 253, 254, 255, 261, 262, 263, 264.

And yet at the same Time, by his Scheme, the Influence of Motives upon us to
excite to Action, and to be actually a Ground of Volition, is consequent on the
Volition or Choice of the Mind. For he very greatly insists upon it, that in
all free Actions, before the Mind is the Subject of those Volitions which
Motives excite, it chooses to be so. It chooses whether it will comply with the
Motive, which presents it self in View, or not; and when various Motives are
presented, it chooses which it will yield to, and which it will reject. So P.
256. Every Man has Power to act, or to refrain from acting agreably with, or
contrary to, any Motive that presents. P. 257. Every Man is at Liberty to act,
or refrain from acting agreably with, or contrary to, what each of these
Motives, considered singly, would excite him to. -- Man has Power, and is as
much at Liberty to reject the Motive that does prevail, as he has Power, and is
at Liberty to reject those Motives that do not. And so P. 310, 311. In order to
constitute a moral Agent, it is necessary, that he should have Power to act, or
to refrain from acting, upon such moral Motives as he pleases. And to the like
Purpose in many other Places. According to these Things, the Will acts first,
and chooses or refuses to comply with the Motive that is presented, before it
falls under it is prevailing Influence: And it is first determined by the Mind's
Pleasure or Choice, what Motives it will be induced by, before it is induced by
them.

Now, how can these Things hang together? How can the Mind first act, and by
it is Act of Volition and Choice determine what Motives shall be the Ground and
Reason of it is Volition and Choice? For this supposes, the Choice is already
made, before the Motive has it is ^ffect; and that the Volition is already
exerted, before the Motive prevails, so as actually to be the Ground of the
Volition; and makes the prevailing of the Motive, the Consequence of the
Volition, which yet it is the Ground of. If the Mind has already chosen to
comply with a Motive, and to yield to it is Excitement, it don't need to yield
to it after this: for the Thing is effected already, that the Motive would
excite to, and the Will is beforehand with the Excitement; and the Excitement
comes in too late, and is needless and in vain afterward. If the Mind has
already chosen to yield to a Motive which invites to a Thing, that implies and
in Fact is a choosing the Thing invited to; and the very Act of Choice is before
the Influence of the Motive which induces, and is the Ground of the Choice; the
Son is beforehand with the Father that begets him: The Choice is supposed to
be the Ground of that Influence of the Motive, which very Influence is supposed
to be the Ground of the Choice. And so Vice versa, The Choice is supposed to be
the Consequence of the Influence of the Motive, which Influence of the Motive
is the Consequence of that very Choice.

And besides, if the Will acts first toward the Motive before it falls under
it is Influence, and the prevailing of the Motive upon it to induce it to act
and choose, be the Fruit and Consequence of it is Act and Choice, then how is the
Motive a PREVIOUS Ground and Reason of the Act and Choice, so that in the
Nature of the Things, Volition cannot take Place without some PREVIOUS Reason
and Motive to induce it; and that this Act is consequent upon, and follows the
Motive? Which Things Mr. Chubb oft^n asserts, as of certain and undoubted
Truth. So that the very same Motive is both previous and consequent, both
before and after, both the Ground and Fruit of the very same Thing!

II. Agreeable to the forementioned inconsistent Notion of the Will's first
acting toward the Motive, choosing whether it will comply with it, in order to
it is becoming a Ground of the Will's acting, before any Act of Volition can
take Place, Mr. Chubb frequently calls Motives and Excitements to the Action of
the Will, the passive Ground or Reason of that Action. Which is a remarkable
Phrase; than which I presume there is none more unintelligible, and void of
distinct and consistent Meaning, in all the Writings of Duns, Scotus, or Thomas
Aquinas. When he represents the Motive to Action or Volition as passive, he
must mean -- passive in that Affair, or passive with Respect to that Action
which he speaks of; otherwise it is Nothing to his Purpose, or relating to the
Design of his Argument: He must mean (if that can be called a Meaning) that the
Motive to Volition is first acted upon or toward by the Volition, choosing to
yield to it, making it a Ground of Action, or determining to fetch it is
Influence from thence; and so to make it a previous Ground of it is own
Excitation and Existence. Which is the same Absurdity, as if one should say,
that the Soul of Man, or any other Thing should, previous to it is existing,
choose what Cause it would come into Existence by, and should act upon it is
Cause, to fetch Influence from thence, to bring it into Being; and so it is
Cause should be a passive Ground of it is Existence!

Mr. Chubb does very plainly suppose Motive or Excitement to be the Ground of
the Being of Volition. He speaks of it as the Ground or Reason of the EXERTION
of an Act of the Will, P. 391, and 392. and expressly says, that Volition cannot
TAKE PLACE without some previous Ground or Motive to induce it, P. 363. And he
speaks of the Act as FROM the Motive, and FROM THE INFLUENCE of the Motive, P.
352. and from the Influence that the Motive has on the Man, for the PRODUCTION
of an Action. P. 317. Certainly, there is no Need of multiplying Words about
this; It Is easily judged, whether Motive can be the Ground of Volition's being
exerted and taking Place, so that the very Production of it is from the
Influence of the Motive, and yet the Motive, before it becomes the Ground of
the Volition, is passive, or acted upon by the Volition. But this I will say,
That a Man who insists so much on Clearness of Meaning in others, and is so
much in blaming their Confusion and Inconsistence, ought, if he was able, to
have explained his Meaning in this Phrase of passive Ground of Action, so as to
show it not to be confused and inconsistent.

If any should suppose, that Mr. Chubb, when he speaks of Motive as a passive
Ground of Action, don't mean passive with Regard to that Volition which it is
the Ground of, but some other antecedent Volition* (though his Purpose and
Argument, and whole Discourse, will by no Means allow of such a Supposition)
yet it would not help the Matter in the least. For, (1.) If we suppose there to
be an Act of Volition or Choice, by which the Soul chooses to yield to the
Invitation of a Motive to another Volition, by which the Soul chooses something
else; both these supposed Volitions are in Effect the very same. A Volition, or
choosing to yield to the Force of a Motive inviting to choose something, comes to
just the same Thing as choosing the Thing which the Motive invites to, as I
observed before. So that here can be no Room to help the Matter, by a
Distinction of two Volitions. (2.) If the Motive be passive with Respect, not
to the same Volition that the Motive excites to, but one truly distinct and
prior; yet, by Mr. Chubb, that prior Volition cannot take Place, without a
Motive or Excitement, as a previous Ground of it is Existence. For he insists,
that it is absurd to suppose any Volition should take Place without some
previous Motive to induce it. So that at last it comes to just the same
Absurdity: for ^f every Volition must have a previous Motive, then the very
first in the whole Series must be excited by a previous Motive; and yet the
Motive to that first Volition is passive; but cannot be passive with Regard to
another antecedent Volition, because, by the Supposition, it is the very first:
Therefore if it be passive with Respect to any Volition, it must be so with
Regard to that very Volition that it is the Ground of, and that is excited by
it.

III. Though Mr. Chubb asserts, as above, that every Volition has some Motive,
and that, in the Nature of the Thing, no Volition can take Place without some
Motive to induce it; yet he asserts, that Volition does not always follow the
strongest Motive; or in other Words, is not governed by any superior Strength
of the Motive that is followed, beyond Motives to the contrary, previous to the
Volition it self. His own Words, P. 258, are as follows: Though with regard to
physical Causes, that which is strongest always prevails, yet it is otherwise
with regard to moral Causes. Of these, sometimes the stronger, sometimes the
weaker, prevails. And the Ground of this Difference is evident, namely, that
what we call moral Causes, strictly speaking, are no Causes at all, but barely
passive Reasons of, or Excitements to the Action, or to the refraining from
acting: which Excitements we have Power, or are at Liberty to comply with or
reject, as I have showed above. And so throughout the Paragraph, he, in a
variety of Phrases, insists, that the Will is not always determined by the
strongest Motive, unless by strongest we preposterously mean actually
prevailing in the Event; which is not in the Motive, but in the Will; but that
the Will is not always determined by the Motive which is strongest, by any
Strength previous to the Volition it self. And he elsewhere does abundantly
assert, that the Will is determined by no superior Strength or Advantage that
Motives have, from any Constitution or State of Things, or any Circumstances
whatsoever, previous to the actual Determination of the Will. And indeed his
whole Discourse on human Liberty implies it, his whole Scheme is founded upon
it.

But these Things cannot stand together. -- There is such a Thing as a
Diversity of Strength in Motives to Choice, previous to the Choice it self. Mr.
Chubb himself supposes, that they do previously invite, induce, excite and
dispose the Mind to Action. This implies, that they have something in
themselves that is inviting, some Tendency to induce and dispose to Volition,
previous to Volition it self. And if they have in themselves this Nature and
Tendency, doubtless they have it in certain limited Degrees, which are capable
of Diversity; and some have it in greater Degrees, others in less; and they
that have most of this Tendency, considered with all their Nature and
Circumstances, previous to Volition, they are the strongest Motives; and those
that have least, are the weakest Motives.

Now if Volition sometimes don't follow the Motive which is strongest, or has
most previous Tendency or Advantage, all Things considered, to induce or excite
it, but follows the weakest, or that which as it stands previously in the
Mind's View, has least Tendency to induce it; herein the Will apparently acts
wholly without Motive, without any previous Reason to dispose the Mind to it,
contrary to what the sam^ Author supposes. The Act wherein the Will must
proceed without previous Motive to induce it, is the Act of preferring the
weakest Motive. For how absurd is it to say, The Mind sees previous Reason in
the Motive, to prefer that Motive before the other; and at the same Time to
suppose, that there is Nothing in the Motive, in it is Nature, State, or any
Circumstances of it whatsoever, as it stands in the previous View of the Mind,
that gives it any Preference; but on the contrary, the other Motive that stands
in Competition with it, in all these Respects, has most belonging to it, that
is inviting and moving, and has most of a Tendency to Choice and Preference?
This is certainly as much as to say, there is previous Ground and Reason in the
Motive for the Act of Preference, and yet no previous Reason for it. By the
Supposition, as to all that is in the two rival Motives which tends to
Preference, previous to the Act of Preference, it is not in that which is
preferred, but wholly in the other: because appearing superior Strength, and
all appearing Preferableness is in that; and yet Mr. Chubb supposes, that the
Act of Preference is from previous Ground and Reason in the Motive which is
preferred. But are these Things consistent? Can there be previous Ground in a
Thing for an Event that takes Place, and yet no previous Tendency in it to that
Event? If one Thing follows another, without any previous Tendency to it is
following, then I should think it very plain, that it follows it without any
Manner of previous Reason why it should follow.

Yea, in this Case, Mr. Chubb supposes, that the Event follows an Antecedent or
a previous Thing, as the Ground of it is Existence, not only that has no
Tendency to it, but a contra^y Tendency. The Event is the Preference which the
Mind gives to that Motive which is weaker, as it stands in the previous View of
the Mind; the immediate Antecedent is the View the Mind has of the two rival
Motives conjunctly; in which previous View of the Mind, all the Preferableness,
or previous Tendency to Preference, is supposed to be on the other Side, or in
the contrary Motive; and all the Unworthiness of Preference, and so previous
Tendency to Comparative Neglect, Rejection or Undervaluing, is on that Side
which is preferred: And yet in this View of the Mind is supposed to be the
previous Ground or Reason of this Act of Preference, exciting it, and disposing
the Mind to it. Which, I leave the Reader to judge, whether it be absurd or
not. If it be not, then it is not absurd to say, that the previous Tendency of
an Antecedent to a Consequent, is the Ground and Reason why that Consequent
does not follow; and the Want of a previous Tendency to ^n Event, yea, a
Tendency to the Contrary, is the true Ground and Reason why that Event does
follow.

An Act of Choice or Preference is a comparative Act, wherein the Mind acts
with Reference to two or more Things that are compared, and stand in
Competition in the Mind's View. If the Mind, in this comparative Act, prefers
that which appears inferior in the Comparison, then the Mind herein acts
absolutely without Motive, or Inducement, or any Temptation whatsoever. Then,
if a hungry Man has the Offer of two Sorts of Food, both which he finds an
Appetite to, but has a stronger Appetite to one than the other; and there be no
Circumstances or Excitements whatsoever in the Case to induce him to take
either one or the other, but merely his Appetite: If in the Choice he makes
between them, he chooses that which he has least Appetite to, and refuses that
to which he has the strongest Appetite, this is a Choice made absolutely
without previous Motive, Excitement, Reason or Temptation, as much as if he
were perfectly without all Appetite to either: Because his Volition in this
Case is a c^mparative Act, attending and following a compara^ive View of the
Food which he chooses, viewing it as related to, and compared with the other
Sort of Food, in which View his Preference has absolutely no previous Ground,
yea, is against all previous Ground and Motive. And if there be any Principle
in Man from whence an Act of Choice may arise after this Manner, from the same
Principle Volition may arise wholly without Motive on either Side. If the Mind
in it is Volition can go beyond Motive, then it can go without Motive: for when
it is beyond the Motive, it is out of the Reach of the Motive, out of the
Limits of it is Influence, and so without Motive. If Volition goes beyond the
Strength and Tendency of Motive, and especially if it goes against it is
Tendency, this demonstrates the Independence of Volition or Motive. And if so,
no Reason can be given for what Mr. (...) so often asserts, even that in the
Nature of Things Volition cannot take Place without a Motive to induce it.

If the most High should endow a Balance with Agency or Activity of Nature, in
such a Manner, that when* unequal Weights are put into the Scales, it is Agency
could enable it to cause that Scale to descend which has the least Weight, and
so to raise the greater Weight; this would clearly demonstrate, that the Motion
of the Balance does not depend on Weights in the Scales, at least as much, as
if the Balance should move it self, when there is no Weight in either Scale.
And the Activity of the Balance which is sufficient to move it self against the
greater Weight, must certainly be more than sufficient to move it when there is
no Weight at all.

Mr. Chubb supposes, that the Will cannot stir at all without some Motive; and
also supposes, that if there be a Motive to one Thing, and none to the
Contrary, Volition will infallibly follow that Motive. This is vertually to
suppose an entire Dependence of the Will on Motives: If it were not wholly
dependent on them, it could surely help it self a little without them, or help
it self a little against a Motive, without help from the Strength and Weight of
a contrary Motive. And yet his supposing that the Will, when it has before it
various opposite Motives, can use them as it pleases, and choose it is own
Influence from them, and neglect the strongest, and follow the weakest,
supposes it to be wholly independent on Motives.

It further appears, on Mr. Chubb's Supposition, that Volition must be without
any previous Ground in any Motive, thus: If it be as he supposes, that the Will
is not determined by any previous superior Strength of the Motive, but
determines and chooses it is own Motive, then, when the rival Motives are exactly
equal in Strength and Tendency to induce, in all Respects, it may follow
either; and may in such a Case, sometimes follow one, sometimes the other. And
if so, this Diversity which appears between the Acts of the Will, is plainly
without previous Ground in either of the Motives; for all that is previously in
the Motives, is supposed precisely and perfectly the same, without any
Diversity whatsoever. Now perfect Identity, as to all that is previous in the
Antecedent, cannot be the Ground and Reason of Diversity in the Consequent.
Perfect Identity in the Ground cannot be a Reason why it is not followed with
the same Consequence. And therefore the Source of this Diversity of Consequence
must be sought for elsewhere.

And lastly, it may be observed, that however Mr. Chubb does much insist that
no Volition can take Place without some Motive to induce it, which previously
disposes the M^nd to it; yet, as he also insists that the Mind without
Reference to any previous superior Strength of Motives, picks and chooses for
it is Motive to follow; He himself herein plainly supposes, that with Regard to
the Mind's Preference of one Motive before another, it is not the Motive that
disposes the Will, but the Will disposes it self to follow the Motive.

IV. Mr. Chubb supposes Necessity to be utterly inconsistent with Agency; and
that to suppose a Being to be an Agent in that which is necessary, is a plain
Contradiction. P. 311. And throughout his Discourses on the Subject of Liberty,
he supposes, that Necessity cannot consist with Agency or Freedom; and that to
suppose otherwise, is to make Liberty and Necessity, Action and Passion, the
same Thing. And so he seems to suppose, that there is no Action strictly
speaking, but Volition; and that as to the Effects of Volition in Body or Mind,
in themselves considered, being necessary, they are said to be free, only as
they are the Effects of an Act that is not necessary.

And yet, according to him, Volition it self is the Effect of Volition; yea,
every Act of free Volition: and therefore every Act of free Volition must, by
what has now been observed from Him, be necessary. That every Act of free
Volition is it self the Effect of Volition, is abundantly supposed by Him. In
P. 341, he says, If a Man is such a Creature as I have above proved him to be,
that is, if he has in him a Power or Liberty of doing either Good or Evil, and
either of these is the Subject of his own free Choice, so that he might, IF HE
HAD PLEASED, have CHOSEN and done the contrary. -- Here He supposes, all that
is Good or Evil in Man is the Effect of his Choice; and so that his good or
evil Choice it self is the Effect of his Pleasure or Choice, in these Words, He
might if he had PLEASED, have CHOSEN the contrary. So in P. 356. Though it be
highly reasonable, that a Man should always choose the greater Good, -- yet he
may, if he PLEASE, CHOOSE otherwise. Which is the same Thing as if he had said,
He may, if he chooses, choose otherwise. And then he goes on, -- that is, he may,
if he pleases, choose what is good for himself etc. And again in the same Page,
The Will is not confined by the Understanding to any particular Sort of Good,
whether greater or less; but is at Liberty to choose what Kind of Good it
pleases. -- If there be any Meaning in these last Words, the Meaning must be
this, that the Will is at Liberty to choose what Kind of Good it chooses to
choose; supposing the Act of Choice it self determined by an antecedent Choice.
The Liberty Mr. Chubb speaks of, is not only a Man's having Power to move his
Body agreably to an antecedent Act of Choice, but to use or exert the Faculties
of his Soul. Thus, in P. 379. speaking of the Faculties of his Mind, he says,
Man has Power, and is at Liberty to neglect these Faculties, to use them
aright, or to abuse them, as he pleases. And that he supposes an Act of Choice,
or Exercise of Pleasure, properly distinct from, and antecedent to those Acts
thus chosen, directing, commanding and producing the chosen Acts, and even the
Acts of Choice themselves, is very plain in P. 283. He can command his Actions;
and herein consists his Liberty; He can give or deny himself that Pleasure a^
he pleases. And P. 377. If the Actions of Men -- are not the Produce of a free
Choice, or Election, but spring from a Necessity of Nature, -- he cannot in
Reason be the Object of Reward or Punishment on their Account. Whereas, if
Action in Man, whether Good or Evil, is the Produce of Will or free Choice; so
that a Man in either Case, had it in his Power, and was at Liberty to have
CHOSEN the contrary, he is the proper Object of Reward or Punishment, according
as he CHOOSES to behave Himself. Here in these last Words, he speaks of Liberty
of CHOOSING, according as he CHOOSES. So that the Behavior which he speaks of as
subject to his Choice, is his choosing it self, as well as his external Conduct
consequent upon it. And therefore it is evident, he means not only external
Actions, but the Acts of Choice themselves, when he speaks of all free Actions,
as the PRODUCE of free Choice. And this is abundantly evident in what he says
in P. 372, and 373.

Now these Things imply a twofold great Absurdity and Inconsistence.

1. To suppose, as Mr. Chubb plainly does, that every free Act of Choice is
commanded by, and is the Produce of free Choice, is to suppose the first free
Act of Choice belonging to the Case, yea, the first free Act of Choice that
ever Man excited, to be the Produce of an antecedent Act of Choice. But I hope
I need not labor at all to convince my Readers, that it is an Absurdity to say,
the very first Act is the Produce of another Act that went before it.

2. If it were both possible and real, as Mr. Chubb insists, that every free
Act of Choice were the Produce or the Effect of a free Act of Choice; yet even
then, according to his Principles, no one Act of Choice would be free, but
every one necessary; because, every Act of Choice being the Effect of a
foregoing Act, every Act would be necessarily connected with that foregoing
Cause. For Mr. Chubb himself says, P. 389. When the Self-moving Power is
exerted, it becomes the necessary Cause of it is Effects. -- So that his Notion
of a free Act, that is rewardable or punishable, is a Heap of Contradictions.
It is a free Act, and yet, by his own Notion of Freedom, is necessary; and
therefore by him it is a Contradiction, to suppose it to be free. According to
him, every free Act is the Produce of a free Act; so that there must be an
infinite Number of free Acts in Succession, without any Beginning, in an Ag^^t
that has a Beginning. And therefore here is an infinite Number of free Acts,
every one of them free; and yet not any one of them free, but every Act in the
whole infinite Chain a necessary Effect. All the Acts are rewardable or
punishable, and yet the Agent cannot, in Reason, be the Object of Reward or
Punishment, on Account of any one of these Actions. He is active in them all,
and passive in none; yet active in none, but passive in all, etc.

V. Mr. Chubb does most strenuously deny, that Motives are Causes of the Acts
of the Will; or that the moving Principle in Man is moved, or caused to be
exerted by Motives. His Words P. 388 and 389. are, If the moving Principle in
Man is MOVED, or CAUSED TO BE EXERTED, by something external to Man, which all
Motives are, then it would not be a Self-moving Principle, seeing it would be
moved by a Principle external to it self. And to say, that a Self-moving
Principle is MOVED, or CAUSED TO BE EXERTED, by a Cause external to it self, is
absurd and a Contradiction etc. -- And in the next Page, it is particularly and
largely insisted, that Motives are Causes in no Case, that they are merely
passive in the Production of Action, and have no Causality in the Production of
it, -- no Causality, to be the Cause of the Exertion of the Will.

Now I desire it may be (...) considered, how this can possibly consists with
what he says other Places. Let it be noted here.

1. Mr. Chubb abundantly speaks of Motives as Excitements of the Acts of the
Will; and says, that Motives do excite Volition, and induce it, and that they
are necessary to this End; that in the Reason and Nature of Things, Volition
cannot take Place without Motives to excite it. But now if Motives excite the
Will, they move it; and yet he says, it is absurd to say, the Will is moved by
Motives. And again (if Language is of any Significancy at all) If Motives
excite Volition, then they are the Cause of it is being excited; and to cause
Volition to be excited, is to cause it to be put forth or exerted. Yea, Mr.
Chubb says himself, P. 317. Motive is necessary to the Exertion of the active
Faculty. To exc^te, ^s positively to do something; and certainly that which
does something, is the Cause of the Thing done by it. To create, is to cause to
be created; to make, is to cause to be made; to kill, is to cause to be killed;
to quicken, is to cause to be quickened; and to excite, is to cause to be
excited. To excite, is to be a Cause, in the most proper Sense, not merely a
negative Occasion, but a Ground of Existence by positive Influence. The Notion
of exciting, is exerting Influence to cause the Effect to arise or come forth
into Existence.

2. Mr. Chubb himself, P. 317, speaks of Motives as the Ground and Reason of
Action BY INFLUENCE, and BY PREVAILING INFLUENCE. Now, what can be meant by a
Cause, but something that is the Ground and Reason of a Thing by it is
Influence, an Influence that is prevalent and so effectual?

3. This Author not only speaks of Motives as the Ground and Reason of Action,
by prevailing Influence; but expressly of their Influence as prevailing FOR THE
PRODUCTION of an Action, in the same P. 317: which makes the Inconsistency
still more palpable and notorious. The Production of an Effect is certainly the
Causing of an Effect; and productive Influence is causal Inf^uence, if any
Thing is; And that which has this Influence prevalently, so as thereby to
become the Ground of another Thing, is a Cause of that Thing, if there be any
such Thing as a Cause. This Influence, Mr. Chubb says, Motives have to produce
an Action* and yet he says, it is absurd and a Contradiction, to say they are
Causes.

4. In the same Page, He once and again speaks of Motives as disposing the
Agent to Action, by their Influence. His Words are these: As Motive, which
takes Place in the Understanding, and is the Product of Intelligence, is
NECESSARY to Action, that is, to the EXERTION of the active Faculty, because
that Faculty would not be exerted without some PREVIOUS REASON to DISPOSE the
Mind to Action; so from hence it plainly appears, that when a Man is said to be
disposed to one Action rather than another, this properly signifies the
PREVAILING INFLUENCE that one Motive has upon a Man FOR THE PRODUCTION of an
Action, or for the being at Rest, before all other Motives, for the Production
of the contrary. For as Motive is the Ground and Reason of any Action, so the
Motive that prevails, DISPOSES the Agent to the Performance of that Action.

Now, if Motives dispose the Mind to Action, then they cause the Mind to be
disposed; and to cause the Mind to be disposed, is to cause it to be willing;
and to cause it to be willing, is to cause it to will; and that is the same
Thing as to be the Cause of an Act of the Will. And yet this same Mr. Chubb
holds it to be absurd, to suppose Motive to be a Cause of the Act of the Will.

And if we compare these Things together, we have here again a whole Heap of
Inconsistences. Motives are the previous Ground and Reason of the Acts of the
Will; yea, the necessary Ground and Reason of their Exertion, without which
they will not be exerted, and cannot in the Nature of Things take Place; and
they do excite these Acts of the Will, and do this by a prevailing Influence;
yea, an Influence which prevails for the Production of the Act of the Will, and
for the disposing of the Min^ to it: And yet it is absurd, to suppose Motive to
be a Cause of an Act of the Will, or that a Principle of Will is moved or
caused to be exerted by it, or that it has any Causality in the Production of
it, or any Causality to be the Cause of the Exertion of the Will.

A due Consideration of these Things which Mr. Chubb has advanced, the strange
Inconsistences which the Notion of Liberty consisting in the Will's Power of
Self-determination void of all Necessity, united with that Dictate of common
Sense, that there can be no Volition without a Motive, drove him into, may be
sufficient to convince us, that it is utterly impossible ever to make that
Notion of Liberty cons^^^ent with the Influence of Motives in Volition. And as
it is in a manner self-evident, that there can be no Act of Will, Choice or
Preference of the Mind, without some Motive or Inducement, something in the
Mind's View, which it aims at, seeks, inclines to, and goes after; so it is most
manifest, there is no such Liberty in the Universe as Arminians insist on; nor
any such Thing possible, or conceivable.

SECTION XI. The Evidence of GOD's certain Foreknowledge of the Volitions of
moral Agents.
THAT the Acts of the Wills of moral Agents are not contingent Events, in that
Sense, as to be without all Necessity, appears by God's certain Foreknowledge
of such Events.

In handling this Argument, I would in the first Place prove, that God has a
certain Foreknowledge of the voluntary Acts of moral Agents; and secondly, show
the Consequence, or how it follows from hence, that the Volitions of moral
Agents are not contingent, so as to be without Necessity of Connection and
Consequence.

FIRST, I am to prove, that God has an absolute and certain Foreknowledge of
the free Actions of moral Agents.

One would think, it should be wholly needless to enter on such an Argument
with any that profess themselves Christians: But so it is; God's certain
Foreknowledge of the free Acts of moral Agents, is denied by some that pretend
to believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God; and especially of late. I
therefore shall consider the Evidence of such a Prescience in the most High, as
fully as the designed Limits of this Essay will admit of; supposing my self
herein to have to do with such as own the Truth of the Bible.

ARG. I. My first Argument shall be taken from God's Prediction of such Events.
Here I would in the first Place lay down these two Things as Axiom,.

(1.) If God don't foreknow, He cannot foretell such Events; that is, He cannot
peremptorily and certainly foretell them. If God has no more than an uncertain
Guess concerning Events of this Kind, then He can declare no more than an
uncertain Guess. Positively to foretell, is to profess to foreknow, or to
declare positive Foreknowlege.

(2.) If God don't certainly foreknow the future Volitions of moral Agents,
then neither can He certainly foreknow those Events which are consequent and
dependent on these Volitions. The Existence of the one depending on the
Existence of the other, the Knowledge of the Existence of the one depends on
the Knowledge of the Existence of the other; and the one cannot be more certain
than the other.

Therefore, how many, how great, and how extensive soever the Consequences of
the Volitions of moral Agents may be; though they should extend to an Alteration
of the State of Things through the Universe, and should be continued in a
Series of successive Events to all Eternity, and should in the Progress of
Things branch forth into an infinite Number of Series, each of them going on in
an endless Line or Chain of Events; God must be as ignorant of all these
Consequences, as He is of the Volition whence they first take their Rise: All
these Events, and the whole State of Things depending on them, how important,
extensive and vast soever, must be hid from him.

These Positions being such as I suppose none will deny, I now proceed to
observe the following Things.

1. Men's moral Conduct and Qualities, their Virtues and Vices, their
Wickedness and good Practice, Things rewardable and punishable, have often been
foretold by God. -- Pharaoh's moral Conduct, in refusing to obey God's Command,
in letting his People go, was foretold. God says to Moses, Exodus iii.19. I am
sure, that the King of Egypt will not let you go. Here God professes not only
to guess at, but to know Pharaoh's future Disobedience. In Chap. vii.4. God
says, But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you; that I may lay mine Hand upon
Egypt, etc. And Chap. ix.30. Moses says to Pharaoh, As for thee, and thy
Servants, I KNOW that y^ will not fear the Lord. See also Chap. xi.9. -- The
moral Conduct of Josiah, by Name, in his zealously exerting himself in
Opposition to Idolatry, in particular Acts of his, was foretold above three
Hundred Years before he was born, and the Prophecy sealed by a Miracle, and
renewed and confirmed by the Words of a second Prophet, as what surely would
not fail, 1 Kings xiii.1, -- 6, 32. This Prophecy was also in Effect a
Prediction of the moral Conduct of the People, in upholding their Schismatical
and Idolatrous Worship 'till that Time, and the Idolatry of those Priests of
the high Places, which it is foretold Josiah should offer upon that Altar of
Bethel. -- Micaiah foretold the foolish and sinful Conduct of Ahab, in refusing
to hearken to the Word of the Lord by him, and choosing rather to hearken to the
false Prophets, in going to Ramoth-Gilead to his Ruin, 1 Kings xxi.20, -- 22.
-- The moral Conduct of Hazael was foretold, ^n that Cruelty he should be
guilty of; on which Hazael says, What, is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do
this Thing! The Prophet speaks of the Event as what he knew, and not what he
conjectured. 2 Kings viii.12. I know the Evil thou will do unto the Children of
Israel: Thou will dash their Children, and rip up their Women with Child. --
The moral Conduct of Cyrus is foretold, long before he had a Being, in his
Mercy to God's People, and Regard to the true God, in turning the Captivity of
the Jews, and promoting the building of the Temple. Isai. xliv.28. and lxv.13.
Compare 2 Chronicles. xxxvi.22, 23. and Ezra i.1, -- 4. -- How many Instances of the
moral Conduct of the Kings of the North and South, particular Instances of the
wicked Behavior of the Kings of Syria and Egypt, are foretold in the xith
Chap. of Daniel? Their Corruption, Violence, Robbery, Treachery, and Lies. And
particularly, how much is foretold of the horrid Wickedness of Antiochus,
Epiphanes, called there a vile Person, instead of Epiphanes, or Illustrious. In
that Chapter, and also in Chap. viii. ver. 9, -- 14, 23, to the End, are
foretold his Flattery, Deceit and Lies, his having his Heart set to do
Mischief, and set against the holy Covenant, his destroying and treading under
Foot the holy People, in a mavelous Manner, his having Indignation against
the holy Covenant, setting his Heart against it, and conspiring against it, his
poll^^ing the Sanctuary of Strength, treading it under Foot, taking away the
daily Sacrifice, and placing the Abomination that makes desolate; his great
Pride, magnifying himself against God, and (...) mavelous Blasphemies against
Him, 'till God in Indignation should destroy him. Withal the moral Conduct of
the Jews, on Occasion of his Persecution, is predicted. It Is foretold, that he
should corrupt many by Flatteries, Chap. xi.3^, -- 34. But that others should
behave with a glorious Constancy and Fortitude, in Opposition to him, ver. 32.
And that some good Men should fall, and repent, ver. 35. Christ foretold
Peter's Sin, in denying his Lord, with it is Circumstances, in a peremptory
Manner. And so, that great Sin of Judas, in betraying his Master, and it is
dreadful and eternal Punishment in Hell, was foretold in the like positive
Manner. Matthew. xxvi.21, -- 25. and parallel Places in the other Evangelists.

2. Many Events have been foretold by God, which were consequent and dependent
on the moral Conduct of particular Persons, and were accomplished, either by
their virtuous or vicious Actions. -- Thus, the Children of Israel's going down
into Egypt to dwell there, was foretold to Abraham, Genesis xv. which was brought
about by the Wickedness of Ioseph's Brethren in selling him, and the Wickedness
of Ioseph's Mistress, and his own signal Virtue in resisting her Temptation.
The Accomplishment of the Thing prefigur'd in Ioseph's Dream, depended on the
same moral Conduct. Iotham's Parable and Prophecy, Judges ix.15, -- 20. was
accomplished by the wicked Conduct of Abimelech, and the Men of Shechem. The
Prophecies against the House of Eli, 1 Samuel Chap. ii. and iii. were
accomplished by the Wickedness of Doeg the Edomite, in accusing the Priests;
and the great Impiety, and extreme Cruelty of Saul in destroying the Priests at
Nob. 1 Samuel xxii. -- Nathan's Prophecy against David, 2 Samuel xii.11, 12. was
fulfilled by the horrible Wickedness of Absalom, in rebelling against his
Father, seeking his Life, and lying with his Concubines in the Sight of the
Sun. The Prophecy against Solomon, 1 Kings xi.11, -- 13. was fulfilled by
Ieroboam's Rebellion and Usurpation, which are spoken of as his Wickedness, 2 Chronicles. xiii.5, 6. compare ver. 18. The Prophecy against Ieroboam's Family, 1
Kings xiv. was fulfilled by the Conspiracy, Treason, and cruel Murders of
Baasha, 2 Kings xv.27, etc. The Predictions of the Prophet Iehu against the
House of Baasha, 1 Kings xvi. at the Beginning, were fulfilled by the Treason
and Parricide of Zimri, 1 Kings xvi.9, -- 13, 20.

3. How often has God foretold the future moral Conduct of Nations and Peoples,
of Numbers, Bodies, and Successions of Men; with God's judicial Proceedings,
and many other Events consequent and dependent on their Virtues and Vices;
which could not be foreknown, if the Volitions of Men, wherein they acted as
moral Agents, had not been foreseen? The future Cruelty of the Egyptians in
oppressing Israel, and God's judging and punishing them for it, was foretold
long before it came to pass. Genesis xv.13, 14. The Continuance of the Iniquity of
the Amorites, and the Increase of it until it should be full, and they ripe for
Destruction, was foretold above four Hundred Years beforehand, Genesis xv.16.
Act. vii.6, 7. The Prophecies of the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the Land of
Judah, were absolute; 2 Kings xx.17, -- 19. Chap. xxii.15, to the End. It was
foretold in Hezekiah's Time, and was abundantly insisted on in the Book of the
Prophet Isaiah, who wrote Nothing after Hezekiah's Days. It was foretold in
Iosiah's Time, in the Beginning of a great Reformation, 2 Kings xxii. And it is
manifest by innumerable Things in the Predictions of the Prophets, relating to
this Event, it is Time, it is Circumstances, it is Continuance and End; the Return
from the Captivity, the Restoration of the Temple, City and Land, and many
Circumstances, and Consequences of That; I say, these show plainly, that the
Prophecies of this great Event were absolute. And yet this Event was connected
with, and dependent on two Things in Men's moral Conduct: first, the injurious
Rapine and Violence of the King of Babylon and his People, as the efficient
Cause; which God often speaks of as what he highly resented, and would severely
punish; and 2dly, The final Obstinacy of the Jews. That great Event is often
spoken of as suspended on this. Ier. iv.1. and v.1. vii.1, -- 7. xi.1, -- 6.
xvii.24, to the End. xxv.1, -- 7. xxvi.1, -- 8.13. and xxxviii.17, 18.
Therefore this Destruction and Captivity could not be foreknown, unless such a
moral Conduct of the Chaldeans and Jews had been foreknown. And then it was
foretold, that the People should be finally obstinate, to the Destruction and
utter Desolation of the City and Land. Isai. vi.9, -- 11. Ier. i.18, 19.
vii.27, -- 29. Ezekiel. iii.7. and xxiv.13, 14.

The final Obstinacy of those Jews who were left in the Land of Israel, and who
afterward went down into Egypt, in their Idolatry and Rejection of the true
God, was foretold by God, and the Prediction confirmed with an Oath. Ier.
xliv.26, 27. And God tells the People, Isai. xlviii.3.4, -- 8. that he had
predicted those Things which should be consequent on their Treachery and
Obstinacy, because he knew they would be obstinate; and that he had declared
these Things beforehand, for their Conviction of his being the only true God,
etc.

The Destruction of Babylon, with many of the Circumstances of it, was
foretold, as the Judgment of God for the exceeding Pride and Haughtiness of
the Heads of that Monarchy, Nebuchadnezzar, and his Successors, and their
wickedly destroying other Nations, and particularly for their exalting
themselves against the true God and his People, before any of these Monarchs
had a Being; Isai. Chap. xiii, xiv, xlvii: Compare Habbak. ii.5, to the End,
and Ier. Chap. l. and li. That Babylon's Destruction was to be a Recompense,
according to the Works of their own Hands, appears by Ier. xxv.14. -- The
Immorality which the People of Babylon, and particularly her Princes and great
Men, were guilty of, that very Night that the City was destroyed, their
Revelling and Drunkenness at Belshazzar's Idolatrous Feast, was foretold, Ier.
li.39, 57.

The Return of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity is often very
particularly foretold, with many Circumstances, and the Promises of it are very
peremptory; Ier. xxxi.35, -- 40. and xxxii.6, -- 15, 41, -- 44. and xxxiii.24,
-- 26. And the very Time of their Return was prefixed; Ier. xxv.11, 12. and
xxix.10, 11. 2 Chronicles. xxxvi.21. Ezekiel. iv.6. and Dan. ix.2. And yet the
Prophecies represent their Return as consequent on their Repentance. And their
Repentance it self is very expressly and particularly foretold, Ier. xxix.12,
13, 14. xxxi.8, 9, 18, -- 31. xxxiii.8. l. 4, 5. Ezekiel. vi.8, 9,
10.vii.16.xiv.22, 23. and xx.43, 44.

It was foretold under the old Testament, that the Messiah should suffer
greatly through the Malice and Cruelty of Men; as is largely and fully set
forth, Psalm. xxii. applied to Christ in the New Testament, Matt. xxvii.35, 43.
Luke xxiii.34. Ioh. xix.24. Heb. ii.12. And likewise in Psalm. lxix. which, it
is also evident by the New Testament, is spoken of Christ; John xv.25. vii.5,
etc. and ii.17. Romans xv.3. Matt. xxvii.34, 48. Mark xv.23. John xix.29. The
same Thing is also foretold, Isai. liii. and l. 6. and Mic. v.1. This Cruelty
of Men was their Sin, and what they acted as moral Agents. It was foretold,
that there should be an Union of Heathen and Jewish Rulers against Christ,
Psalm. ii.1, 2. compared with Acts iv.25, -- 28. It was foretold, that the Jews
should generally reject and despise the Messiah, Isai. xlix.5, 6, 7. and liii.1
-- 3. Psalm. xxii.6, 7. and lxix.4, 8, 19, 20. And it was foretold, that the
Body of that Nation should be rejected in the Messiah's Days, from being God's
People, for their Obstinacy in Sin; Isai. xiix.4 -- 7. and viii.14, 15, 16.
compared with Romans x.19. and Isai. lxv. at the beginning, compared with Romans
x.20, 21. It was foretold, that Christ should be rejected by the chief Priests
and Rulers among the Jews, Psalm cxviii.22. compared with Matthew. xxi.42. Acts
iv.11. 1 Pet. ii.4, 7.

Christ himself foretold his being delivered into the Hands of the Elders,
chief Priests and Scribes, and his being cruelly treated by them, and condemned
to Death; and that he by them should be delivered to the Gentiles; and that He
should be mocked, and scourged, and crucified, (Matt. xvi.21. and xx.17, -- 19.
Luke ix.22. John viii.28.) and that the People should be concerned in and
consenting to his Death, ( Luke xx.13, -- 18.) especially the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem; Luke xiii.33, -- 35. He foretold, that the Disciples should all be
offended because of Him that Night that he was betrayed, and should forsake
Him; Matt. xxvi.31. John xvi.32. He foretold that He should be rejected of that
Generation, even the Body of the People, and that they should continue
obstinate, to their Ruin; Matt. xii.45. xxi.33, -- 42. and xxii.1, -- 7. Luke
xiii.16, 21, 24. xvii.25. xix.14, 27, 41, -- 44. xx.13, -- 18. and xxiii, 34,
-- 39.

As it was foretold in both old Testament and new, that the Jews should reject
the Messiah, so it was foretold that the Gentiles should receive Him, and so be
admitted to the Privileges of God's People; in Places too many to be now
particularly mentioned. It was foretold in the Old Testament, that the Jews
should envy the Gentiles on this Account; Deuteronomy. xxxii.21. compared with Romans
x.19. Christ Himself often foretold, that the Gentiles would embrace the true
Religion, and become his Followers and People; Matthew. viii.10, 11, 12. xxi.41,
-- 43. and xxii.8, -- 10. Luke xiii.28. xiv.16, -- 24. and xx.16. John x.16. He
also foretold the Jews Envy of the Gentiles on this Occasion; Matt. xx.12, --
^^. Luke xv.26, to the End. He foretold, that they should continue in this
Opposition and Envy, and should manifest (...) in cruel Persecutions of his
Followers, to their utter ^^struction; Matt. xxi.33, -- 42. xxii.6. and
xxiii.34, -- 39. Luke xi.49, -- 51. The Jews Obstinacy is also foretold, Acts
xxii.18. Christ often foretold the great Persecutions his Followers should meet
with, both from Jews and Gentiles; Matt. x.16, -- 18, 21, 22, 34, -- 36. and
xxiv.9. Mark xiii.9. Luke x.3. xii.11, 49, -- 53. and xxi.12, 16, 17. John
xv.18, -- 21. and xvi.1, -- 4. 20, -- 22, 33. He foretold the Martyrdom of
particular Persons; Matt. xx.23. Ioh. xiii.36. and xxi.18, 19, 22. He foretold
the great Success of the Gospel in the City of Samaria, as near approaching;
which afterward was fulfilled by the Preaching of Philip, Joh. iv.35, -- 38.
He foretold the Rising of many Deceivers, after his Departure, Matt. xxiv.4, 5,
11. and the Apostasy of many of his professed Followers; Matthew. xxiv.10, -- 12.

The Persecutions, which the Apostle Paul was to meet with in the World, were
foretold; Acts ix.16. -- xx.23. and xxi.11. The Apostle says to the Christian
Ephesians, Acts xx.29, 30. I know, that after my Departure shall grievous
Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock: Also of your own selves shall
Men arise, speaking perverse Things, to draw away Disciples after them. The
Apostle says, He knew this; but he did not know it, if God did not know the
future Actions of moral Agents.

4. Unless God foreknows the future Acts of moral Agents, all the Prophecies we
have in Scripture concerning the great Antichristian Apostasy; the Rise, Reign,
wicked Qualities and Deeds of the Man of Sin, and his Instruments and
Adherents; the Extent and long Continuance of his Dominion, his Influence on
the Minds of Princes and others, to corrupt them, and draw them away to
Idolatry, and other foul Vices; his great and cruel Persecutions; the Behavior
of the Saints under these great Temptations, etc. etc. I say, unless the
Volitions of moral Agents are foreseen, all these Prophecies are uttered
without knowing the Things foretold.

The Predictions relating to this great Apostasy are all of a moral Nature,
relating to Men's Virtues and Vices, and their Exercises, Fruits and
Consequences, and Events depending on them; and are very particular; and most
of them often repeated, with many precise Characteristicks, Descriptions, and
Limitations of Qualities, Conduct, Influence, Effects, Extent, Duration,
Periods, Circumstances, final Issue, etc. which it would be very long to
mention particularly. And to suppose, all these are predicted by God without
any certain Knowledge of the future moral Behavior of free Agents, would be to
the utmost Degree absurd.

5. Unless God foreknows the future Acts of Men's Wills, and their Behavior as
moral Agents, all those great Things which are foretold in both Old Testament
and New concerning the Erection, Establishment, and universal Extent of the
Kingdom of the Messiah, were predicted and promised while God was in Ignorance
whether any of these Things would come to pass or no, and did but guess at
them. For that Kingdom is not of this World, it don't consist in Things
external, but is within Men, and consists in the Dominion of Virtue in their
Hearts, in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and in these
Things made manifest in Practice, to the Praise and Glory of God. The Messiah
came to save Men from their Sins, and deliver them from their spiritual
Enemies; that they might serve Him in Righteousness and Holiness before Him: He
gave Himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto
Himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. And therefore his Success
consists in gaining Men's Hearts to Virtue, in their being made God's willing
People in the Day of his Power. His Conquest of his Enemies consists in his
Victory over Men's Corruptions and Vices. And such Success, such Victory, and
such a Reign and Dominion is often expressly foretold: That his Kingdom shall
fill the Earth; that all People, Nations and Languages should serve and obey
Him; and so, that all Nations should go up to the Mountain of the House of the
Lord, that He might teach them his Ways, and that they might walk in his Paths:
And that all Men should be drawn to Christ, and the Earth be full of the
Knowledge of the Lord (by which, in the Style of Scripture, is meant true
Virtue and Religion) as the Waters cover the Seas; that God's Law should be put
into Men's inward Parts, and written in their Hearts; and that God's People
should be all Righteous, etc. etc.

A very great Part of the Prophecies of the Old Testament is taken up in such
Predictions as these. -- And here I would observe, that the Prophecies of the
universal Prevalence of the Kingdom of the Messiah, and true Religion of Jesus
Christ, are delivered in the most peremptory Manner, and confirmed by the Oath
of God. Isai. xlv.22, to the End, Look to me, and be ye saved, all the Ends of
the Earth; for I am God, and there is none else. I have SWORN by my Self, the
Word is gone out of my Mouth in Righteousness, and shall not return, that unto
Me every Knee shall bow; and every Tongue shall swear. SURELY, shall one say,
in the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength: even to Him shall Men come etc.
But here this peremptory Declaration, and great Oath of the most High, are
delivered with such mighty Solemnity, to Things which God did not know, if He
did not certainly foresee the Volitions of moral Agents.

And all the Predictions of Christ and his Apostles, to the like Purpose, must
be without Knowledge: As those of our Savior comparing the Kingdom of God to a
Grain of Mustard Seed, growing exceeding great, from a small Beginning; and to
Leaven, hid in three Measures of Meal, 'till the whole was leavened, etc. --
And the Prophecies in the Epistles concerning the Restoration of the Nation of
the Jews to the true Church of God, and the bringing in the Fullness of the
Gentiles; and the Prophecies in all the Revelation concerning the glorious
Change in the moral State of the World of Mankind, attending the Destruction of
Antichrist, the Kingdoms of the World becoming the Kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ; and it is being granted to the Church to be arrayed in that fine
Linen, white and clean, which is the Righteousness of Saints, etc.

Corol. 1. Hence that great Promise and Oath of God to Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, so much celebrated in Scripture, both in the Old Testament and New,
namely, That in their Seed all the Nations and Families of the Earth should be
blessed, must be made on Uncertainties, if God don't certainly foreknow the
Volitions of moral Agents. For the Fulfillment of this Promise consists in that
Success of Christ in the Work of Redemption, and that Setting up of his
spiritual Kingdom over the Nations of the World, which has been spoken of. Men
are blessed in Christ no otherwise than as they are bro't to acknowledge Him,
trust in Him, love and serve Him, as is represented and predicted in Psalm.
lxxii.11. All Kings shall fall down before Him; all Nations shall serve Him.
With ver. 17. M^n shall be blessed in Him; all Nations shall call him Blessed.
This Oath to Jacob and Abraham is fulfilled in subduing Men's Iniquities; as is
implied in that of the Prophet Micah, Chap. vii.19, 20.

Corol. 2. Hence also it appears, That first Gospel-Promise that ever was made
to Mankind, that great Prediction of the Salvation of the Messiah, and his
Victory over Satan, made to our first Parents, Genesis iii.15. if there be no
certain Prescience of the Volitions of moral Agents, must have no better
Foundation than Conjecture. For Christ's Victory over Satan consists in Men's
being saved from Sin, and in the Victory of Virtue and Holiness, over that Vice
and Wickedness, which Satan by his Temptation has introduced, and wherein his
Kingdom consists.

6. If it be so, that God has not a Prescience of the future Actions of moral
Agents, it will follow, that the Prophecies of Scripture in general are without
Foreknowledge. For Scripture-Prophecies, almost all of them, if not
universally without any Exception, are either Predictions of the Actings and
Behaviors of moral Agents, or of Events depending on them, or some Way
connected with them; judicial Dispensations, Judgments on Men for their
Wickedness, or Rewards of Virtue and Righteousness, remarkable Manifestations
of Favor to the Righteous, or Manifestations of sovereign Mercy to Sinners,
forgiving their Iniquities, and magnifying the Riches of divine Grace; or
Dispensations of Providence, in some Respect or other, relating to the Conduct
of the Subjects of God's moral Government, wisely adapted thereto; either
providing for what should be in a future State of Things, through the Volitions
and voluntary Actions of moral Agents, or consequent upon them, and regulated
and ordered according to them. So that all Events that are foretold, are either
moral Events, or other Events which are connected with, and accommodated to
moral Events.

That the Predictions of Scripture in general must be without Knowledge, if God
don't foresee the Volitions of Men, will further appear, if it be considered,
that almost all Events belonging to the future State of the World of Mankind,
the Changes and Revolutions which come to pass in Empires, Kingdoms, and
Nations, and all Societies, depend innumerable Ways on the Acts of Men's Wills;
yea, on an innumerable Multitude of Millions of Millions of Volitions of
Mankind. Such is the State and Course of Things in the World of Mankind, that
one single Event, which appears in it self exceeding inconsiderable, may in the
Progress and Series of Things, occasion a Succession of the greatest and most
important and extensive Events; causing the State of Mankind to be vastly
different from what it would otherwise have been, for all succeeding
Generations.

For Instance, the coming into Existence of those particular Men, who have been
the great Conquerors of the World, which under God have had the main Hand in
all the consequent State of the World, in all after-Ages; such as
Nebuchadzezzar, Cyrus, Alexander, Pompey, Julius Caesar, etc. undoubtedly
depended on many Millions of Acts of the Will, which followed, and were
occasioned one by another, in their Parents. And perhaps most of these
Volitions depended on Millions of Volitions of Hundreds and Thousands of
others, their Contemporaries of the same Generation; and most of these on
Millions of Millions of Volitions of others in preceding Generations. -- As we
go back, still the Number of Volitions, which were some Way the Occasion of the
Event, multiply as the Branches of a River, 'till they come at last, as it
were, to an infinite Number. This will not seem strange, to any one who well
considers the Matter; if we recollect what Philosophers tell us of the
innumerable Multitudes of those Things which are as it were the Principia, or
Stamina Vitae, concerned in Generation; the Animalcula in Semine masculo, and
the Ova in the Womb of the Female; the Impregnation, or animating of one of
these in Distinction from all the rest, must depend on Things infinitely
minute, relating to the Time and Circumstances of the Act of the Parents, the
State of their Bodies, etc. which must depend on innumerable foregoing
Circumstances and Occurrences; which must depend, infinite Ways, on foregoing
Acts of their Wills; which are occasioned by innumerable Things that happen in
the Course of their Lives, in which their own, and their Neighbor's Behavior,
must have a Hand, an infinite Number of Ways. And as the Volitions of others
must be so many Ways concerned in the Conception and Birth of such Men; so, no
less, in their Preservation, and Circumstances of Life, their particular
Determinations and Actions, on which the great Revolutions they were the
Occasions of, depended. As for Instance, When the Conspirators in Persia,
against the Magi, were consulting about a Succession to the Empire, it came
into the Mind of one of them, to propose, that he whose Horse neighed first,
when they came together the next Morning, should be King. Now such a Thing's
coming into his Mind, might depend on innumerable Incidents, wherein the
Volitions of Mankind had been concerned. But in Consequence of this Accident,
Darius, the Son of His^aspes, was King. And if this had not been, probably his
Successor would not have been the same, and all the Circumstances of the
Persian Empire might have been far otherwise. And then perhaps Alexander might
never have conquered that Empire. And then probably the Circumstances of the
World in all succeeding Ages, might have been vastly otherwise. I might further
instance in many other Occurrences; such as those on which depended Alexander's
Preservation, in the many critical Junctures of his Life, wherein a small
Trifle would have turned the Scale against him; and the Preservation and
Success of the Roman People, in the Infancy of their Kingdom and Commonwealth,
and afterward; which all the succeeding Changes in their State, and the mighty
Revolutions that afterward came to pass in the habitable World, depended upon.
But these Hints may be sufficient for every discerning considerate Person, to
convince him, that the whole State of the World of Mankind, in all Ages, and
the very Being of every Person who has ever lived in it, in every Age, since
the Times of the ancient Prophets, has depended on more Volitions, or Acts of
the Wills of Men, than there are Sands on the Sea-shoar.

And therefore, unless God does most exactly and perfectly foresee the future
Acts of Men's Wills, all the Predictions which he ever uttered concerning
David, Hezekiah, Josiah, Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Alexander; concerning the four
Monarchies, and the Revolutions in them; and concerning all the Wars,
Commotions, Victories, Prosperities and Calamities, of any of the Kingdoms,
Nations, or Communities of the World, have all been without Knowledge.

So that, according to this Notion of God's not foreseeing the Volitions and
free Actions of Men, God could foresee Nothing pertaining to the State of the
World of Mankind in future Ages; not so much as the Being of one Person that
should live in it; and could foreknow no Events, but only such as He would
bring to pass Himself by the extraordinary Interposition of his immediate
Power; or Things which should come to pass in the natural material World, by
the Laws of Motion, and Course of Nature, wherein that is independent on the
Actions or Works of Mankind: That is, as he might, like a very able
Mathematician and Astronomer, with great Exactness calculate the Revolutions of
the heavenly Bodies, and the greater Wheels of the Machine of the external
Creation.

And if we closely consider the Matter, there will appear Reason to convince
us, that he could not with any absolute Certainty foresee even these. As to the
First, namely Things done by the immediate and extraordinary Interposition of
God's Power, these cannot be foreseen, unless it can be foreseen when there
shall be Occasion for such extraordinary Interposition. And that cannot be
foreseen, unless the State of the moral World can be foreseen. For whenever God
thus interposes, it is with Regard to the State of the moral World, requiring
such Divine Interposition. Thus God could not certainly foresee the universal
Deluge, the Calling of Abraham, the Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, the
Plagues on Egypt, and Israel's Redemption out of it, the expelling the seven
Nations of Canaan, and the bringing Israel into that Land; for these all are
represented as connected with Things belonging to the State of the moral World.
Nor can God foreknow the most proper and convenient Time of the Day of
Judgment, and general Conflagration; for that chiefly depends on the Course and
State of Things in the moral World.

Nor, Secondly, can we on this Supposition reasonably think, that God can
certainly foresee what Things shall come to pass, in the Course of Things, in
the natural and material World, even those which in an ordinary State of Things
might be calculated by a good Astronomer. For the moral World is the End of the
natural World; and the Course of Things in the former, is undoubtedly
subordinate to God's Designs with Respect to the latter. Therefore he has seen
Cause, from Regard to the State of Things in the moral World, extraordinarily
to interpose, to interrupt and lay an Arrest on the Course of Things in the
natural World; and even in the greater Wheels of it is Motion; even so as to
stop the Sun in it is Course. And unless he can foresee the Volitions of Men,
and so know something of the future State of the moral World, He cannot know but
that he may still have as great Occasion to interpose in this Manner, as ever
He had: nor can He foresee how, or when, He shall have Occasion thus to
interpose.

Corol. 1. It appears from the Things which have been observed, that unless God
foresees the Volitions of moral Agents, that cannot be true which is observed
by the Apostle James, Act. xv.18. Known unto God are all his Works from the
Beginning of the World.

Corol. 2. It appears from what has been observed, that unless God foreknows
the Volitions of moral Agents, all the Prophecies of Scripture have no better
Foundation than mere Conjecture; and That, in most Instances, a Conjecture
which must have the utmost Uncertainty; depending on an innumerable, and as it
were infinite, Multitude of Volitions, which are all, even to God, uncertain
Events: However, these Prophecies are delivered as absolute Predictions, and
very many of them in the most positive Manner, with Asseverations; and some of
them with the most solemn Oaths.

Corol. 3. It also follows from what has been observed, that if this Notion of
God's Ignorance of future Volitions be true, in vain did Christ say (after
uttering many great and important Predictions, concerning God's moral Kingdom,
and Things depending on Men's moral Actions) Matthew. xxiv.35. Heaven and Earth
shall pass away; but my Words shall not pass away.

Corol. 4. From the same Notion of God's Ignorance, it would follow, that in
vain has God himself often spoken of the Predictions of his Word, as Evidences
of his Foreknowlege; and so as Evidences of that which is his Prerogative as
GOD, and his peculiar Glory, greatly distinguishing Him from all other Beings;
as in Isai. xli.22 -- 26. xliii.9, 10. xliv.8. xlv.21. xlvi.10. and xlviii.14.

ARGUM. II. If God don't foreknow the Volitions of moral Agents, then he did
not foreknow the Fall of Man, nor of Angels, and so could not foreknow the
great Things which are consequent on these Events; such as his sending his Son
into the World to die for Sinners, and all Things pertaining to the great Work
of Redemption; all the Things which were done for four Thousand Years before
Christ came, to prepare the Way for it; and the Incarnation, Life, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ; and the setting Him at the Head of the
Universe, as King of Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men; and the setting up his
Church and Kingdom in this World, and appointing Him the Judge of the World;
and all that Satan should do in the World in Opposition to the Kingdom of
Christ: And the great Transactions of the Day of Judgment, that Men and Devils
shall be the Subjects of, and Angels concerned in; they are all what God was
ignorant of before the Fall. And if so, the following Scriptures, and others
like them, must be without any Meaning, or contrary to Truth. Ephesians. i.4.
According as he has chosen us in Him before the Foundation of the World. 1
Pet. i.20. Who verily was foreordained before the Foundation of the World. 2 Timothy i.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling; not according
to our Works, but according to his own Purpose, and Grace, which was given us
in Christ Jesus before the World began. So, Ephesians. iii.11. (speaking of the
Wisdom of God in the Work of Redemption) according to the eternal Purpose which
he purposed in Christ Jesus. Tit. i.2. In hope of eternal Life, which God, that
cannot lie, promised before the World began. Romans viii.29. Whom he did
foreknow, them he also did predestinate, etc. 1 Pet. i.2. Elect, according to
the Foreknowledge of God the Father.

If God did not foreknow the Fall of Man, nor the Redemption by Jesus Christ,
nor the Volitions of Man since the Fall; then He did not foreknow the Saints in
any Sense; neither as particular Persons, nor as Societies or Nations; either
by Election, or mere Foresight of their Virtue or good Works; or any Foresight
of any Thing about them relating to their Salvation; or any Benefit they have
by Christ, or any Manner of Concern of their's with a Redeemer.

ARG. III. On the Supposition of God's Ignorance of the future Volitions of
free Agents, it will follow, that God must in many Cases truly repent what He
has done, so as properly to wish He had done otherwise: by Reason that the
Event of Things, in those Affairs which are most important, viz. the Affairs of
his moral Kingdom, being uncertain and contingent, often happens quite
otherwise than he was aware beforehand. And there would be Reason to understand
That, in the most literal Sense, in Genesis vi.6. It repented the Lord, that he
had made Man on the Earth, and it grieved him at his Heart. And that, 1 Samuel
xv.11. contrary to that, Numb. xxiii.19. God is not the Son of Man, that he
should repent. And, 1 Samuel xv.15, 29. Also the Strength of Israel will not lie,
nor repent: for he is not a Man that he should repent. Yea, from this Notion it
would follow, that God is liable to repent and be grieved at his Heart, in a
literal Sense, continually; and is always exposed to an infinite Number of real
Disappointments, in his governing the World; and to manifold, constant, great
Perplexity and Vexation: But this is not very consistent with his Title of God
over all, blessed for evermore; which represents Him as possessed of perfect,
constant and uninterrupted Tranquillity and Felicity, as God over the Universe,
and in his Management of the Affairs of the World, as supreme and universal
Ruler. See Romans i.25. ix.5. 2 Cor. xi.31. 1 Timothy vi.15.

ARG. IV. It will also follow* from this Notion, that as God is liable to be
continually repenting what He has done; so He must be exposed to be constantly
changing his Mind and Intentions, as to his future Conduct; altering his
Measures, relinquishing his old Designs, and forming new Schemes and
Projections. For his Purposes, even as to the main Parts of his Scheme, namely,
such as belong to the State of his moral Kingdom, must be always liable to be
broken, through want of Foresight; and He must be continually putting his System
to rights, as it gets out of Order, through the Contingence of the Actions of
moral Agents: He must be a Being, who, instead of being absolutely immutable,
must necessarily be the Subject of infinitely the most numerous Acts of
Repentance, and Changes of Intention, of any Being whatsoever; for this plain
Reason, that his vastly extensive Charge comprehends an infinitely greater
Number of those Things which are to Him contingent and uncertain. In such a
Situation, He must have little else to do, but to mend broken Links as well as
he can, and be rectifying his disjointed Frame and disordered Movements, in the
best Manner the Case will allow. The supreme Lord of all Things must needs be
under great and miserable Disadvantages, in governing the World which He has
made, and has the Care of, through his being utterly unable to find out Things
of chief Importance, which hereafter shall befall his System; which if He did
but know, He might make seasonable Provision for. In many Cases, there may be
very great Necessity that He should make Provision, in the Manner of his
ordering and disposing Things, for some great Events which are to happen, of
vast and extensive Influence, and endless Consequence to the Universe; which He
may see afterward, when it is too late, and may wish in vain that He had known
beforehand, that He might have ordered his Affairs accordingly. And it is in
the Power of Man, on these Principles, by his Devices, Purposes and Actions,
thus to disappoint God, break his Measures, make Him continually to change his
Mind, subject Him to Vexation, and bring Him into Confusion.

But how do these Things consist with Reason, or with the Word of God? Which
represents, that all God's Works, all that He has ever to do, the whole Scheme
and Series of his Operations, are from the Beginning perfectly in his View; and
declares, that whatever Devices and Designs are in the Hearts of Men, the
Counsel of the Lord is that which shall stand, and the Thoughts of his Heart to
all Generations. Prove. xix.21. Psalm. xxxiii.10, 11. And that which the Lord of
Hosts has purposed, none shall disannul, Isai. xiv.27. And that he cannot be
frustrated in one Design or Thought, Job xlii.2. And that what God does, it
shall be forever, that Nothing can be put to it, or taken from it, Eccl.
iii.14. The Stability and Perpetuity of God's Counsels are expressly spoken of
as connected with the Foreknowledge of God, Isai. xlvi.10. Declaring the End
from the Beginning* and from ancient Times the Things that are not yet done*
(...), My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure. And how are these
Things consistent with what the Scripture says of God's Immutability, which
represents Him as without Variableness, or shadow of Turning; and speaks of Him
most particularly as unchangeable with Regard to his Purposes. Mal. iii.6. I am
the Lord; I change not; therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. Exodus
iii.14. I AM THAT I AM. Job xxiii.13, 14. He is in one Mind; and who can turn
Him? And what his Soul desires, even that he does: for he performs the Thing
that is appointed for me.

ARG. V. If this Notion of God's Ignorance of the future Volitions of moral
Agents be thoroughly considered in it is Consequences, it will appear to follow
from it, that God, after he had made the World, was liable to be wholly
frustrated of his End in the Creation of it; and so has been in like Manner
liable to be frustrated of his End in all the great Works He has wrought. It Is
manifest, the moral World is the End of the natural: The rest of the Creation
is but an House which God has built, with Furniture, for moral Agents: And the
good or bad State of the moral World depends on the Improvement they make of
their natural Agency, and so depends on their Volitions. And therefore, if
these cannot be foreseen by God, because they are contingent, and subject to no
Kind of Necessity, then the Affairs of the moral World are liable to go wrong,
to any assignable Degree; yea, liable to be utterly ruined. As on this Scheme,
it may well be supposed to be literally said, when Mankind, by the Abuse of
their moral Agency, became very corrupt before the Flood, that the Lord
repented that he had made Man on the Earth, and it grieved Him at his Heart;
so, when He made the Universe, He did not know but that he might be so
disappointed in it, that it might grieve Him at his Heart that he had made it.
It actually proved, that all Mankind became sinful, and a very great Part of
the Angels apostatised: And how could God know beforehand, that all of them
would not? And how could God know but that all Mankind, notwithstanding Means
used to reclaim them, being still left to the Freedom of their own Will, would
continue in their Apostasy, and grow worse and worse, as they of the Old World
before the Flood did?

According to the Scheme I am endeavoring to confute, neither the Fall of Men
nor Angels, could be foreseen, and God must be greatly disappointed in these
Events; and so the grand Scheme and Contrivance for our Redemption, and
destroying the Works of the Devil, by the Messiah, and all the great Things God
has done in the Prosecution of these Designs, must be only the Fruits of his
own Disappointment, and Contrivances of his to mend and patch up, as well as he
could, his System, which originally was all very good, and perfectly beautiful;
but was marred, broken and confounded by the free Will of Angels and Men. And
still he must be liable to be totally disappointed a second Time: He could not
know, that He should have his desired Success, in the Incarnation, Life, Death,
Resurrection and Exaltation of his only begotten Son, and other great Works
accomplished to restore the State of Things: He could not know after all,
whether there would actually be any tolerable Measure of Restoration; for this
depended on the free Will of Man. There has been a general great Apostasy of
almost all the Christian World, to that which was worse than Heathenism; which
continued for many Ages. And how could God, without foreseeing Men's Volitions,
know whether ever Christendom would return from this Apostasy? And which way
could He tell beforehand how soon it would begin? The Apostle says, it began
to work in his Time; and how could it be known how far it would proceed in that
Age? Yea, how could it be known that the Gospel, which was not effectual for
the Reformation of the Jews, would ever be effectual for the turning of the
Heathen Nations from their Heathen Apostasy, which they had been confirmed in
for so many Ages?

It Is represented often in Scripture, that God who made the World for Himself,
and created it for his Pleasure, would infallibly obtain his End in the
Creation, and in all his Works; that as all Things are of Him, so they would
all be to Him; and that in the final Issue of Things, it would appear that He
is the first, and the last. Rev. xxi.6. And he said unto me, It is done. I am
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, the first and the last. But these
Things are not consistent with God's being so liable to be disappointed in all
his Works, nor indeed with his failing of his End in any Thing that He has
undertaken, or done.

SECTION XII. GOD's certain Foreknowledge of the future Volitions of moral
Agents, inconsistent with such a Contingence of those Volitions, as is without
all Necessity.
HAVING proved, that GOD has a certain and infallible Prescience of the Acts of
the Will of moral Agents, I come now, in the Second Place, to show the
Consequence; to show how it follows from hence, that these Events are
necessary, with a Necessity of Connection or Consequence.

The chief Arminian Divines, so far as I have had Opportunity to observe, deny
this Consequence; and affirm, that if such Foreknowledge be allowed, it is no
Evidence of any Necessity of the Event foreknown. Now I desire, that this
Matter may be particularly and thoroughly enquired into. I cannot but think,
that on particular and full Consideration, it may be perfectly determined,
whether it be indeed so, or not.

In order to a proper Consideration of this Matter, I would observe the
following Things.

I. It Is very evident, with regard to a Thing whose Existence is infallibly and
indissolubly connected with something which already has, or has had Existence,
The Existence of that Thing is necessary. Here may be noted,

1. I observed before, in explaining the Nature of Necessity, that in Things
which are past, their past Existence is now necessary: having already made sure
of Existence, it is too late for any Possibility of Alteration in that Respect:
It Is now impossible, that it should be otherwise than true, that that Thing has
existed.

2. If there be any such Thing as a divine Foreknowledge of the Volitions of
free Agents, that Foreknowledge, by the Supposition, is a Thing which already
has, and long ago had Existence; and so, now it is Existence is necessary; it is
now utterly impossible to be otherwise, than that this Foreknowledge should be,
or should have been.

3. It Is also very manifest, that* those Things which are indissolubly
connected with other Things that are necessary; are Themselves necessary. As
that Proposition whose Truth is necessarily connected with another Proposition,
which is necessarily true, is itself necessarily true. To say otherwise, would
be a Contradiction; it would be in Effect to say, that the Connection was
indissoluble, and yet was not so, but might be broken. If That, whose Existence
is indissolubly connected with something whose Existence is now necessary, is
it self not necessary, then it may possibly not exist, notwithstanding that
indissoluble Connection of it is Existence. -- Whether the Absurdity ben't
glaring, let the Reader judge.

4. It Is no less evident, that if there be a full, certain and infallible
Foreknowledge of the future Existence of the Volitions of moral Agents, then
there is a certain infallible and indissoluble Connection between those Events
and that Foreknowledge; and that therefore, by the preceding Observations,
those Events are necessary Events; being infallibly and indissolubly connected
with that whose Existence already is, and so is now necessary, and cannot but
have been.

To say, the Foreknowledge is certain and infallible, and yet the Connection of
the Event with that Foreknowledge is not indissoluble, but dissoluble and
fallible, is very absurd. To affirm it, would be the same Thing as to affirm,
that there is no necessary Connection between a Proposition's being infallibly
known to be true, and it is being true indeed. So that it is perfectly
demonstrable, that if there be any infallible Knowledge of future Volitions,
the Event is necessary; or, in other Words, that it is impossible but the Event
should come to pass. For if it ben't impossible but that it may be otherwise,
then it is not impossible but that the Proposition which affirms it is future
coming to pass, may not now be true. But how absurd is that, on the Supposition
that there is now an infallible Knowledge (i. e. Knowledge which it is
impossible should fail) that it is true. There is this Absurdity in it, that it
is not impossible but that there now should be no Truth in that Proposition,
which is ^ow infallibly known to be true.

II. That no future Event can be certainly foreknown, whose Existence is
contingent, and without all Necessity, may be proved thus; It Is impossible for
a Thing to be certainly known to any Intellect without Evidence. To suppose
otherwise, implies a Contradiction: Because for a Thing to be certainly known
to any Understanding, is for it to be evident to that Understanding: And for a
Thing to be evident to any Understanding, is the same Thing, as for that
Understanding to see Evidence of it: But no Understanding, created or
increated, can see Evidence where there is none: For that is the same Thing, as
to see that to be, which is not. And therefore, if there be any Truth which is
absolutely without Evidence, that Truth is absolutely unknowable, insomuch that
it implies a Contradiction to suppose that it is known.

But if there be any future Event, whose Existence is contingent, without all
Necessity, the future Existence of that Event is absolutely without Evidence.
If there be any Evidence of it, it must be one of these two Sorts, either
Self-Evidence, or Proof; for there can be no other Sort of Evidence but one of
these two; an evident Thing must be either evident in it self, or evident in
something else; that is, evident by Connection with something else. But a
future Thing, whose Existence is without all Necessity, can have neither of
these Sorts of Evidence. It cannot be Self-evident: For if it be, it may be now
known by what is now to be seen in the Thing it self; either it is present
Existence, or the Necessity of it is Nature: But both these are contrary to the
Supposition. It is supposed, both that the Thing has no present Existence to be
seen; and also that it is not of such a Nature as to be necessarily existent
for the future: So that it is future Existence is not Self-evident. And
secondly, neither is there any Proof, or Evidence in any Thing else, or
Evidence of Connection with something else that is evident; For this also is
contrary to the Supposition. It Is supposed, that there is now Nothing existent,
with which the future Existence of the contingent Event is connected. For such
a Connection destroys its Contingence, and supposes Necessity. Thus it is
demonstrated, that there is in the Nature of Things absolutely no Evidence at
all of the future Existence of that Event, which is contingent, without all
Necessity (if any such Event there be) neither Self-Evidence nor Proof. And
therefore the Thing in Reality is not evident; and so cannot be seen to be
evident, or, which is the same Thing, cannot be known.

Let us consider this in an Example. Suppose that five Thousand seven Hundred
and sixty Years ago, there was no other Being but the divine Being; and then
this World, or some particular Body or Spirit, all at once starts out of
Nothing into Being, and takes on it self a particular Nature and Form; all in
absolute Contingence, without any Concern of God, or any other Cause, in the
Matter; without any Manner of Ground or Reason of it is Existence; or any
Dependence upon, or Connection at all with any Thing foregoing: I say, that if
this be supposed, there was no Evidence of that Event beforehand. There was no
Evidence of it to be seen in the Thing it self; for the Thing it self, as yet,
was not. And there was no Evidence of it to be seen in any Thing else; for
Evidence in something else, is Connection with something else: But such
Connection is contrary to the Supposition. There was no Evidence before, that
this Thing would happen; for by the Supposition, there was no Reason why it
should happen, rather than something else, or rather than Nothing. And if so,
then all Things before were exactly equal, and the same, with Respect to that
and other possible Things; there was no Preponderation, no superior Weight or
Value; and therefore Nothing that could be of any Weight or Value to determine
any Understanding. The Thing was absolutely without Evidence, and absolutely
unknowable. An Increase of Understanding, or of the Capacity of Discerning, has
no Tendency, and makes no Advance, to a discerning any Signs or Evidences of
it, let it be increased never so much; yea, if it be increased infinitely. The
increase of the Strength of Sight may have a Tendency to enable to discern the
Evidence which is far off, and very much hid, and deeply involved in Clouds and
Darkness; but it has no Tendency to enable to discern Evidence where there is
none. If the Sight be infinitely strong, and the Capacity of Discerning
infinitely great, it will enable to see all that there is, and to see it
perfectly, and with Ease; yet it has no Tendency at all to enable a Being to
discern that Evidence which is not; But on the contrary, it has a Tendency to
enable to discern with great Certainty that there is none.

III. To suppose the future Volitions of moral Agents not to be necessary
Events; or, which is the same Thing, Events which it is not impossible but that
they may not come to pass; and yet to suppose that God certainly foreknows
them, and knows all Things; is to suppose. God's Knowledge to be inconsistent
with it self. For to say, that God certainly, and without all Conjecture, knows
that a Thing will infallibly be, which at the same Time he knows to be so
conting^nt, that it may possibly not be, is to suppose his Knowledge
inconsistent with it self; or that one Thing that he knows is utterly
inconsistent with another Thing that he knows. It Is the same Thing as to say,
He now knows a Proposition to be of certain infallible Truth, which he knows to
be of contingent uncertain Truth. If a future Volition is so without all
Necessity, that there is nothing hinders but that it may not be, then the
Proposition which asserts it is future Existence, is so uncertain, that there is
Nothing hinders but that the Truth of it may entirely fail. And if God knows
all Things, He knows this Proposition to be thus uncertain. And that is
inconsistent with his knowing that it is infallibly true; and so inconsistent
with his infallibly knowing that it is true. If the Thing be indeed contingent,
God views it so, and judges it to be contingent, if he views Things as they
are. If the Event be not necessary, then it is possible it may never be: And if
it be possible it may never be, God knows it may possibly never be; and that is
to know that the Proposition which affirms it is Existence, may possibly not be
true; and that is to know that the Truth of it is uncertain; which surely is
inconsistent with his knowing it as a certain Truth. If Volitions are in
Themselves contingent Events, without all Necessity, then it is no Argument of
Perfection of Knowledge in any Being to determine peremptorily that they will
be; but on the contrary, an Argument of Ignorance and Mistake: Because it would
argue, that he supposes that Proposition to be certain, which in it is own
Nature, and all Things considered, is uncertain and contingent. To say in such
a Case, that God may have Ways of knowing contingent Events which we cannot
conceive of, is ridiculous; as much so, as to say, that God may know
Contradictions to be true, for ought we know, or that he may know a Thing to be
certain, and at the same Time know it not to be certain, though we cannot conceive
how; because he has Ways of knowing, which we cannot comprehend.

Corol. 1. From what has been observed it is evident, that the absolute Decrees
of God are no more inconsistent with human Liberty, on Account of any Necessity
of the Event which follows from such Decrees, than the absolute Foreknowledge
of God. Because the Connection between the Event and certain Foreknowledge, is
as infallible and indissoluble, as between the Event and an absolute Decree.
That is, it is no more impossible that the Event and Decree should not agree
together, than that the Event and absolute Knowledge should disagree. The
Connection between the Event and Foreknowledge is absolutely perfect, by the
Supposition: because it it is supposed, that the Certainty and Infallibility of
the Knowledge is absolutely perfect. And it being so, the Certainty cannot be
increased; and therefore the Connection between the Knowledge and Thing known,
cannot be increased; so that if a Decree be added to the Foreknowledge, it don't
at all increase the Connection, or make it more infallible and indissoluble. If
it were not so, the Certainty of Knowledge might be increased by the Addition
of a Decree; which is contrary to the Supposition, which is, that the Knowledge
is absolutely perfect, or perfect to the highest possible Degree.

There is as much of an Impossibility but that the Things which are infallibly
foreknown, should be, or (which is the same Thing) as great a Necessity of
their future Existence, as if the Event were already written down, and was
known and read by all Mankind, through all preceding Ages, and there were the
most indissoluble and perfect Connection possible, between the Writing, and the
Thing written. In such a Case, it would be as impossible the Event should fail
of Existence, as if it had existed already; and a Decree cannot make an Event
surer or more necessary than this.

And therefore, if there be any such Foreknowledge, as it has been proved there
is, then Necessity of Connection and Consequence, is not at all inconsistent
with any Liberty which Man, or any other Creature enjoys. And from hence it may
be inferred, that absolute Decrees of God, which don't at all increase the
Necessity, are not at all inconsistent with the Liberty which Man enjoys, on
any such Account, as that they make the Event decreed necessary, and render it
utterly impossible but that it should come to pass. Therefore if absolute
Decrees are inconsistent with Man's Liberty as a moral Agent, or his Liberty in
a State of Probation, or any Liberty whatsoever that he enjoys, it is not on
Account of any Necessity which absolute Decrees infer.

Dr. Whitby supposes, there is a great Difference between God's Foreknowledge,
and his Decrees, with Regard to Necessity of future Events. In his Discourse on
the five Points, P. 474, etc. He says, God's Prescience has no Influence at all
on our Actions. -- Should God (says he) by immediate Revelation, give me the
Knowledge of the Event of any Man's State or Actions, would my Knowledge of
them have any Influence upon his Actions? Surely none at all. -- Our Knowledge
does not affect the Things we know, to make them more certain, or more future,
than they would be without it. Now Foreknowledge in God is Knowledge. As
therefore Knowledge has no Influence on Things that are, so neither has
Foreknowledge on Things that shall be. And consequently, the Foreknowledge of
any Action that would be otherwise free, cannot alter or diminish that Freedom.
Whereas God's Decree of Election is powerful and active, and comprehends the
Preparation and Exhibition of such Means, as shall unfrustrably produce the
End. -- Hence God's Prescience renders no Actions necessary. And to this
Purpose, P. 473. he cites Origin, where he says, God's Prescience is not the
Cause of Things future, but their being future is the Cause of God's Prescience
that they will be: And Le Blanc, where he says, This is the truest Resolution
of this Difficulty, that Prescience is not the Cause that Things are future;
but their being future is the Cause they are foreseen. In like Manner Dr.
Clark, in his Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God, P. 95, -- 99.
And the Author of the Freedom of Will, in God and the Creature, speaking to the
like Purpose with Dr. Whitby, represents Foreknowledge as having no more
Influence on Things known, to make them necessary, than After-Knowledge, or to
that Purpose.

To all which I would say; That what is said about Knowledge, it is not having
Influence on the Thing known to make it necessary, is Nothing to the Purpose,
nor does it in the least affect the foregoing Reasoning. Whether Prescience be
the Thing that makes the Event necessary or no, it alters not the Case.
Infallible Foreknowledge may prove the Necessity of the Event foreknown, and
yet not be the Thing which causes the Necessity. If the Foreknowledge be
absolute, this proves the Event known to be necessary, or proves that it is
impossible but that the Event should be, by some Means or other, either by a
Decree, or some other Way, if there be any other Way: Because, as was said
before, it is absurd to say, that a Proposition is known to be certainly and
infallibly true, which yet may possibly prove not true.

The whole of the seeming Force of this Evasion lies in this; that, in as much
as certain Foreknowledge don't cause an Event to be necessary, as a Decree
does; therefore it don't prove it to be necessary, as a Decree does. But there
is no Force in this arguing: For it is built wholly on this Supposition, that
Nothing can prove, or be an Evidence of a Thing's being necessary, but that
which has a causal Influence to make it so. But this can never be maintained.
If certain Foreknowledge of the future existing of an Event, be not the Thing
which first makes it impossible that it should fail of Existence; yet it may,
and certainly does demonstrate, that it is impossible it should fail of it,
however that Impossibility comes. If Foreknowledge be not the Cause, but the
Effect of this Impossibility, it may prove that there is such an Impossibility,
as much as if it were the Cause. It is as strong arguing from the Effect to the
Cause, as from the Cause to the Effect. It Is enough, that an Existence which is
infallibly foreknown, cannot fail, whether that Impossibility arises from the
Foreknowledge, or is prior to it. It Is as evident, as it is possible any Thing
should be, that it is impossible a Thing which is infallibly known to be true,
should prove not to be true: therefore there is a Necessity that it should be
otherwise; whether the Knowledge be the Cause of this Necessity, or the
Necessity the Cause of the Knowledge.

All certain Knowledge, whether it be Foreknowledge or After-Knowledge, or
concomitant Knowledge, proves the Thing known now to be necessary, by some
Means or other; or proves that it is impossible it should now be otherwise than
true. -- I freely allow, that Foreknowledge don't prove a Thing to be necessary
any more than After-Knowledge: But then After-knowledge which is certain and
infallible, proves that it is now become impossible but that the Proposition
known should be true. Certain After-Knowledge proves that it is now, in the
Time of the Knowledge, by some Means or other, become impossible but that the
Proposition which predicates past Existence on the Event, should be true. And
so does certain Foreknowledge prove, that now, in the Time of the Knowledge, it
is by some Means or other, become impossible but that the Proposition which
predicates future Existence on the Event, should be true. The Necessity of the
Truth of the Propositions, consisting in the present Impossibility of the
Nonexistence of the Event affirmed, in both Cases, is the immediate Ground of
the certainty of the Knowledge; there can be no Certainty of Knowledge without
it.

There must be a Certainty in Things themselves, before they are certainly
known, or (which is the same Thing) known to be certain. For Certainty of
Knowledge is nothing else but knowing or discerning the Certainty there is in
the Things themselves which are known. Therefore there must be a Certainty in
Things to be a Ground of Certainty of Knowledge, and to render Things capable
of being known to be certain. And this is Nothing but the Necessity of the
Truth known, or it is being impossible but that it should be true; or, in other
Words, the firm and infallible Connection between the Subject and Predicate of
the Proposition that contains that Truth. All Certainty of Knowledge consists
in the View of the Firmness of that Connection. So God's certain Foreknowledge
of the future Existence of any Event, is his View of the firm and indissoluble
Connection of the Subject and Predicate of the Proposition that affirms it is
future Existence. The Subject is that possible Event; the Predicate is it is
future existing: But if future Existence be firmly and indissolubly connected
with that Event, then the future Existence of that Event is necessary. If God
certainly knows the future Existence of an Event which is wholly contingent,
and may possibly never be, then He sees a firm Connection between a Subject and
Predicate that are not firmly connected; which is a Contradiction.

I allow what Dr. Whitby says to be true, That mere Knowledge don't affect the
Thing known, to make it more certain or m^re future. But yet, I say, it
supposes and proves the Thing to be already, both future, and certain; i. e.
necessarily future. Knowledge of Futurity, supposes Futurity; and a certain
Knowledge of Futurity, supposes certain Futurity, antecedent to that certain
Knowledge. But there is no other certain Futurity of a Thing, antecedent to
Certainty of Knowledge, than a prior Impossibility but that the Thing should
prove true; or (which is the same Thing) the Necessity of the Event.

I would observe one Thing further concerning this Matter, and it is this; That
if it be as those forementioned Writers suppose, that God's Foreknowledge is
not the Cause, but the Effect of the Existence of the Event foreknown; this is
so far from showing that this Foreknowledge don't infer the Necessity of the
Existence of that Event, that it rather shows the contrary the more plainly.
Because it shows the Existence of the Event to be so settled and firm, that it
is as if it had already been; in as much as in Effect it actually exists
already; it is future Existence has already had actual Influence and Efficiency,
and has produced an Effect, viz. Prescience: The Effect exists already; and as
the Effect supposes the Cause, is connected with the Cause, and depends
entirely upon it, therefore it is as if the future Event, which is the Cause,
had existed already. The Effect is firm as possible, it having already the
Possession of Existence, and has made sure of it. But the Effect cannot be more
firm and stable than it is Cause, Ground and Reason. The Building cannot be
firmer than the Foundation.

To illustrate this Matter, let us suppose the Appearances and Images of Things
in a Glass; for Instance, a reflecting Telescope to be the real Effects of
heavenly Bodies (at a Distance, and out of Sight) which they resemble: If it be
so, then, as these Images in the Telescope have had a past actual Existence,
and it is become utterly impossible now that it should be otherwise than that
they have existed; so they being the true Effects of the heavenly Bodies they
resemble, this proves the existing of those heavenly Bodies to be as real,
infallible, firm and necessary, as the existing of these Effects; the one being
connected with, and wholly depending on the other. -- Now let us suppose future
Existences some Way or other to have Influence back, to produce Effects
beforehand, and cause exact and perfect Images of themselves in a Glass, a
Thousand Years before they exist, yea, in all preceding Ages; But yet that
these Images are real Effects of these future Existences, perfectly dependent
on, and connected with their Cause; these Effects and Images, having already
had actual Existence, rendering that Matter of their Existing perfectly firm and
stable, and utterly impossible to be otherwise; this proves in like Manner as
in the other Instance, that the Existence of the Things which are their Causes,
is also equally sure, firm and necessary; and that it is alike impossible but
that they should be, as if they had been already, as their Effects have. And if
instead of Images in a Glass, we suppose the antecedent Effects to be perfect
Ideas of them in the divine Mind, which have existed there from all Eternity,
which are as properly Effects, as truly and properly connected with their
Cause, the Case is not altered.

Another Thing which has been said by some Arminians, to take off the Force of
what is urged from God's Prescience, against the Contingence of the Volitions
of moral Agents, is to this Purpose; That when we talk of Foreknowledge in God,
there is no strict Propriety in our so Speaking; and that although it be true,
that there is in God the most perfect Knowledge of all Events from Eternity to
Eternity, yet there is no such Thing as before and after in God, but He sees
all Things by one perfect unchangeable View, without any Succession. -- To this
I answer,

1. It has been already shown, that all certain Knowledge proves the Necessity
of the Truth known; whether it be before, after, or at the same Time. -- Though
it be true, that there is no Succession in God's Knowledge, and the Manner of
his Knowledge is to us inconceivable, yet thus much we know concerning it, that
there is no Event, past, present, or to come, that God is ever uncertain of; He
never is, never was, and never will be without infallible Knowledge of it; He
always sees the Existence of it to be certain and infallible. And as he always
sees Things just as they are in Truth; hence there never is in Reality any
Thing contingent in such a Sense, as that possibly it may happen never to
exist. If, strictly speaking, there is no Foreknowledge in God, it is because
those Things which are future to us, are as present to God, as if they already
had Existence: and that is as much as to say, that future Events are always in
God's View as evident, clear, sure and necessary, as if they already were. If
there never is a Time wherein the Existence of the Event is not present with
God, then there never is a Time wherein it is not as much impossible for it to
fail of Existence, as if it is Existence were present, and were already come to
pass.

God's viewing Things so perfectly and unchangeably as that there is no
Succession in his Ideas or Judgment, don't hinder but that there is properly
now, in the Mind of God, a certain and perfect Knowledge of the moral Actions
of Men, which to us are an Hundred Years hence: yea the Objection supposes
this; and therefore it certainly don't hinder but that, by the foregoing
Arguments, it is now impossible these moral Actions should not come to pass.

We know, that God knows the future voluntary Actions of Men in such a Sense
beforehand, as that he is able particularly to declare, and foretell them, and
write them, or cause them to be written down in a Book, as He often has done;
and that therefore the necessary Connection which there is between God's
Knowledge and the Event known, does as much prove the Event to be necessary
beforehand, as if the divine Knowledge were in the same Sense before the
Event, as the Prediction or Writing is. If the Knowledge be infallible, then
the Expression of it in the written Prediction is infallible; that is, there is
an infallible Connection between that written Prediction and the Event. And if
so, then it is impossible it should ever be otherwise, than that that
Prediction and the Event should agree: And this is the same Thing as to say,
it is impossible but that the Event should come to pass: and this is the same as
to say, that it is coming to pass is necessary. -- So that it is manifest, that
there being no proper Succession in God's Mind, makes no Alteration as to the
Necessity of the Existence of the Events which God knows. Yea,

2. This is so far from weakening the Proof, which has been given of the
Impossibility of the not coming to pass of future Events known, as that it
establishes that wherein the Strength of the foregoing Arguments consists, and
shows the Clearness of the Evidence. For,

(1.) The very Reason why God's Knowledge is without Succession, is, because it
is absolutely perfect, to the highest possible Degree of Clearness and
Certainty: all Things, whether past, present or to come, being viewed with
equal Evidence and Fullness; future Things being seen with as much Clearness, as
if they were present; the View is always in absolute Perfection; and absolute
constant Perfection admits of no Alteration, and so no Succession; the actual
Existence of the Thing known, don't at all increase, or add to the Clearness or
Certainty of the Thing known: God calls the Things that are not, as though they
were; they are all one to Him as if they had already existed. But herein
consists the Strength of the Demonstration before given, of the Impossibility
of the not existing of those Things whose Existence God knows; That it is as
impossible they should fail of Existence, as if they existed already. This
Objection, instead of weakening this Argument, sets it in the clearest and
strongest Light; for it supposes it to be so indeed, that the Existence of
future Events is in God's View so much as if it already had been, that when
they come actually to exist, it makes not the least Alteration or Variation in
his View or Knowledge of them.

(2.) The Objection is founded on the Immutability of God's Knowledge: For it is
the Immutability of Knowledge makes his Knowledge to be without Succession. But
this most directly and plainly demonstrates the Thing I insist on, viz. that
it is utterly impossible the known Events should fail of Existence. For if that
were possible, then it would be possible for there to be a Change in God's
Knowledge and View of Things. For if the known Event should fail of Existence,
and not come into Being, as God expected, then God would see it, and so would
change his Mind, and see his former Mistake; and thus there would be Change and
Succession in his Knowledge. But as God is immutable, and so it is utterly and
infinitely impossible that his View should be changed; so it is, for the same
Reason, just so impossible that the fore-known Event should not exist: And that
is to be impossible in the highest Degree: and therefore the contrary is
necessary. Nothing is more impossible than that the immutable God should be
changed, by the Succession of Time; who comprehends all Things, from Eternity
to Eternity, in one, most perfect, and unalterable View; so that his whole
eternal Duration is Vitae interminabilis, tota, simul, and perfecta Possessis.

On the whole, I need not fear to say, that there is no Geometrical Theorem or
Proposition whatsoever, more capable of strict Demonstration, than that God's
certain Prescience of the Volitions of moral Agents is inconsistent with such a
Contingence of these Events, as is without all Necessity; and so is
inconsistent with the Arminian Notion of Liberty.

Corol. 2. Hence the Doctrine of the Calvinists, concerning the absolute
Decrees of God, does not at all infer any more Fatality in Things, than will
demonstrably follow from the Doctrine of most Arminian Divines, who acknowledge
God's Omniscience, and universal Prescience. Therefore all Objections they make
against the Doctrine of the Calvinists, as implying Hobbes's Doctrine of
Necessity, or the Stoical Doctrine of Fate, lie no more against the Doctrine of
Calvinists, than their own Doctrine: And therefore it don't become those
Divines, to raise such an Outcry against the Calvinists, on this Account.

Corol. 3. Hence all arguing from Necessity, against the Doctrine of the
Inability of unregenerate Men to perform the Conditions of Salvation, and the
Commands of God requiring spiritual Duties, and against the Calvinistic
Doctrine of efficacious Grace; I say, all Arguings of Arminians (such of 'em as
own God's Omniscience) against these Things, on this Ground, that these
Doctrines, though they don't suppose Men to be under any Constraint or Coaction,
yet suppose 'em under Necessity, with Respect to their moral Actions, and those
Things which are required of 'em in Order to their Acceptance with God; and
their arguing against the Necessity of Men's Volitions, taken from the
Reasonableness of God's Commands, Promises, and Threatenings, and the Sincerity
of his Counsels and Invitations; and all Objections against any Doctrines of
the Calvinists as being inconsistent with human Liberty, because they infer
Necessity; I say, all these Arguments and Objections must fall to the Ground,
and be justly esteemed vain and frivolous, as coming from them; being
maintained in an Inconsistence with themselves, and in like Manner levelled
against their own Doctrine, as against the Doctrine of the Calvinists.

SECTION XIII. Whether we suppose the Volitions of moral Agents to be connected
with any Thing antecedent, or not, yet they must be necessary in such a Sense
as to overthrow Arminian Liberty.
EVERY Act of the Will has a Cause, or it has not. If it has a Cause, then,
according to what has already been demonstrated, it is not contingent, but
necessary; the Effect being necessarily dependent and consequent on it is Cause;
and that, let the Cause be what it will. If the Cause is the Will itself, by
antecedent Acts choosing and determining; still the determined and caused Act
must be a necessary Effect. The Act that is the determined Effect of the
foregoing Act which is it is Cause, cannot prevent the Efficiency of it is Cause;
but must be wholly subject to it is Determination and Command, as much as the
Motions of the Hands and Feet: The consequent commanded Acts of the Will are as
passive and as necessary, with Respect to the antecedent determining Acts, as
the Parts of the Body are to the Volitions which determine and command them.
And therefore, if all the free Acts of the Will are thus, if they are all
determined Effects, determined by the Will it self, that is, determined by
antecedent Choice, then they are all necessary; they are all subject to, and
decisively fixed by the foregoing Act, which is their Cause: Yea, even the
determining Act it self; for that must be determined and fixed by another Act,
preceding that, if it be a free and voluntary Act; and so must be necessary. So
that by this all the free Acts of the Will are necessary, and cannot be free
unless they are necessary: Because they cannot be free, according to the
Arminian Notion of Freedom, unless they are determined by the Will; which is to
be determined by antecedent Choice; which being their Cause, prove* 'em
necessary. And yet they say, Necessity is utterly inconsistent with Liberty. So
that, by their Scheme, the Acts of the Will cannot be free unless they are
necessary, and yet cannot be free if they be not necessary!

But if the other Part of the Dilemma be taken, and it be affirmed that the
free Acts of the Will have no Cause, and are connected with nothing whatsoever
that goes before them and determines them, in order to maintain their proper
and absolute Contingence, and this should be allowed to be possible; still it
will not serve their Turn. For if the Volition comes to pass by perfect
Contingence, and without any Cause at all, then it is certain, no Act of the
Will, no prior Act of the Soul was the Cause, no Determination or Choice of the
Soul, had any Hand in it. The Will, or the Soul, was indeed the Subject of what
happened to it accidentally, but was not the Cause. The Will is not active in
causing or determining, but purely the passive Subject; at least according to
their Notion of Action and Passion. In this Case, Contingence does as much
prevent the Determination of the Will, as a proper Cause; and as to the Will,
it was necessary, and could be no otherwise. For to suppose that it could have
been otherwise, if the Will or Soul had pleased, is to suppose that the Act is
dependent on some prior Act of Choice or Pleasure; contrary to what now is
supposed: It is to suppose that it might have been otherwise, if it is Cause had
made it or ordered it otherwise. But this don't agree to it is having no Cause
or Orderer at all. That must be necessary as to the Soul, which is dependent on
no free Act of the Soul: But that which is without a Cause, is dependent on no
free Act of the Soul: because, by the Supposition, it is dependent on Nothing,
and is connected with Nothing. In such a Case, the Soul is necessarily
subjected to what Accident brings to pass, from Time to Time, as much as the
Earth, that is inactive, is necessarily subjected to what falls upon it. But
this don't consist with the Arminian Notion of Liberty, which is the Will's
Power of determining it self in it is own Acts, and being wholly active in it,
without Passiveness, and without being subject to Necessity. -- Thus,
Contingence belongs to the Arminian Notion of Liberty, and yet is inconsistent
with it.

I would here observe, that the Author of the Essay on the Freedom of Will, in
God and the Creature, Page 76, 77. (...), The Word Chance always means
something done without Design. Chance and Design stand in direct Opposition to
each other: and Chance can never be properly applied to the Acts of the Will,
which is the Spring of all Design, and which designs to choose whatsoever it
does choose, whether there be any superior Fitness in the Thing which it
chooses, or no; and it designs to determine it self to one Thing, where two
Things perfectly equal are proposed, merely because it will. But herein appears
a very great Inadvertence in this Author. For if the Will be the Spring of all
Design, as he says, then certainly it is not always the Effect of Design; and
the Acts of the Will themselves must sometimes come to pass when they don't
spring from Design; and consequently come to pass by Chance, according to his
own Definition of Chance. And if the Will designs to choose whatsoever it does
choose, and designs to determine it self, as he says, then it designs to
determine all its Designs. Which carries us back from one Design to a foregoing
Design determining that, and to another determining that; and so on in
infinitum. The very first Design must be the Effect of foregoing Design, or
else it must be by Chance, in his Notion of it.

Here another Alternative may be proposed, relating to the Connection of the
Acts of the Will with something foregoing that is their Cause, not much unlike
to the other; which is this: Either human Liberty is such that it may well
stand with Volitions being necessarily connected with the Views of the
Understanding, and so is consistent with Necessity; or it is inconsistent with,
and contrary to such a Connection and Necessity. The former is directly
subversive of the Arminian Notion of Liberty, consisting in Freedom from all
Necessity. And if the latter be chosen, and it be said, that Liberty is
inconsistent with any such necessary Connection of Volition with foregoing
Views of the Understanding, it consisting in Freedom from any such Necessity of
the Will as that would imply; then the Liberty of the Soul consists (in Part at
least) in the Freedom from Restraint, Limitation and Government, in it is
actings, by the Understanding, and in Liberty and Liableness to act contrary to
the Understanding's Views and Dictates: and consequently the more the Soul has
of this Disengagedness, in it is acting, the more Liberty. Now let it be
considered what this brings the noble Principle of human Liberty to,
particularly when it is possessed and enjoyed in it is Perfection, viz. a full
and perfect Freedom and Liableness to act altogether at Random, without the
least Connection with, or Restraint or Government by, any Dictate of Reason, or
any Thing whatsoever apprehended, considered or viewed by the Understanding; as
being inconsistent with the full and perfect Sovereignty of the Will over it is
own Determinations. -- The Notion Mankind have conceived of Liberty, is some
Dignity or Privilege, something worth claiming. But what Dignity or Privilege
is there, in being given up to such a wild Contingence as this, to be perfectly
and constantly liable to act unintelligently and unreasonably, and as much
without the Guidance of Unstanding, as if we had none, or were as destitute of
Perception as the Smoke that is driven by the Wind!

PART III. Wherein is enquired, whether any such Liberty of Will as Arminians
hold, be necessary to MORAL AGENCY, VIRTUE and VICE, PRAISE, and DISPRAISE, etc.
SECTION I. GOD's moral Excellency necessary, yet virtuous and praiseworthy.
HAVING considered the first Thing that was proposed to be enquired into,
relating to that Freedom of Will which Arminians maintain; namely, Whether any
such Thing does, ever did, or ever can exist, or be conceived of; I come now to
the second Thing proposed to be the Subject of Enquiry, viz. Whether any such
Kind of Liberty be requisite to moral Agency, Virtue and Vice, Praise and
Blame, Reward and Punishment, etc.

I shall begin with some Consideration of the Virtue and Agency of the Supreme
moral Agent, and Fountain of all Agency and Virtue.

Dr. Whitby, in his Discourse on the five Points, P. 14. says, If all human
Actions are necessary, Virtue and Vice must be empty Names; we being capable of
Nothing that is blameworthy, or deserves Praise; For who can blame a Person
for doing only what he could not help, or judge that he deserves Praise only
for what he could not avoid? To the like Purpose he speaks in Places
innumerable; especially in his Discourse on the Freedom of the Will; constantly
maintaining, that a Freedom not only from Coaction, but Necessity, is
absolutely requisite, in order to Actions being either worthy of Blame, or
deserving of Praise. And to this agrees, as is well known, the current Doctrine
of Arminian Writers; who in general hold, that there is no Virtue or Vice,
Reward or Punishment, nothing to be commended or blamed, without this Freedom.
And yet Dr. Whitby, P. 300, allows, that God is without this Freedom; And
Arminians, so far as I have had Opportunity to observe, generally acknowledge,
that God is necessarily holy, and his Will necessarily determined to that which
is good.

So that, put^ing these Things together, the infinitely holy God, who always
used to be esteemed by God's People, not only virtuous, but a Being in whom is
all possible Virtue, and every Virtue in the most absolute Purity and
Perfection, and in infinitely greater Brightness and Amiableness than in any
Creature; the most perfect Pattern of Virtue, and the Fountain from whom all
others Virtue is but as Beams from the Sun; and who has been supposed to be, on
the Account of his Virtue and Holiness, infinitely more worthy to be esteemed,
loved, honored, admired, commended, extolled and praised, than any Creature;
and He who is thus every where represented in Scripture; I say, this Being,
according to this Notion of Dr. Whitby, and other Arminians, has no Virtue at
all; Virtue, when ascribed to Him, is but an empty Name; and he is deserving of
no Commendation or Praise; because he is under Necessity, He cannot avoid being
holy and good as he is; therefore no Thanks to him for it. It seems, the
Holiness, Justice, Faithfulness, etc. of the most High, must not be accounted
to be of the Nature of that which is virtuous and praiseworthy. They will not
deny, that these Things in God are good; But then we must understand them, that
they are no more virtuous, or of the Nature of any Thing commendable, than the
Good that is in any other Being that is not a moral Agent; as the Brightness of
the Sun, and the Fertility of the Earth are good, but not virtuous, because
these Properties are necessary to these Bodies, and not the Fruit of
Self-determining Power.

There needs no other Confutation of this Notion of God's not being virtuous or
praiseworthy, to Christians acquainted with the Bible, but only stating and
particularly representing of it. To bring Texts of Scripture, wherein God is
represented as in every Respect, in the highest Manner virtuous, and supreamly
praiseworthy, would be endless, and is altogether needless to such as have
been brought up under the Light of the Gospel.

It were to be wished, that Dr. Whitby, and other Divines of the same Sort, had
explained themselves, when they have asserted that That which is necessary, is
not deserving of Praise; at the same Time that they have owned God's Perfection
to be necessary, and so in Effect represented God as not deserving Praise.
Certainly, if their Words have any Meaning at all, by Praise, they must mean
the Exercise or Testimony of some Sort of Esteem, Respect, or honorable
Regard. And will they then say, that Men are worthy of that Esteem, Respect,
and Honor for their Virtue, small and imperfect as it is, which yet God is not
worthy of, for his infinite Righteousness, Holiness, and Goodness? If so, it
must be because of some Sort of peculiar Excellency in the virtuous Man, which
is his Prerogative, wherein he really has the Preference; some Dignity, that is
entirely distinguished from any Excellency, Amiableness or Honourableness in
God; not in Imperfection and Dependence, but in Pre-eminence; which therefore
he don't receive from God, nor is God the Fountain or Pattern of it; nor can
God, in that Respect, stand in Competition with him, as the Object of Honor
and Regard; but Man may claim a peculiar Esteem, Commendation and Glory, that
God can have no Pretension to. Yea, God has no Right, by virtue of his
necessary Holiness, to intermeddle with that grateful Respect and Praise, due
to the virtuous Man, who chooses Virtue, in the Exercise of a Freedom ad
utrumque; any more than a precious Stone, which cannot avoid being hard and
beautiful.

And if it be so, let it be explained what that peculiar Respect is, that is
due to the virtuous Man, which differs in Nature and Kind, in some Way of
Pre-eminence, from all that is due to God. What is the Name or Description of
that peculiar Affection? Is it Esteem, Love, Admiration, Honor, Praise, or
Gratitude? The Scripture every where represents God as the highest Object of
all these: there we read of the Soul's magnifying the Lord* of l^ving Him with
all the Heart, with all the Soul, with all the Mind, and with all the Strength;
admiring him, and his righteous Acts, or greatly regarding them, as mavelous
and wonderful; honoring, glorifying, exalting, extolling, blessing, thanking,
and praising Him; giving unto Him all the Glory of the Good which is done or
received, rather than unto Men; that no Flesh should glory in his Presence; but
that He should be regarded as the Being to whom all Glory is due. What then is
that Respect? What Passion, Affection, or Exercise is it, that Arminians call
Praise, diverse from all these Things, which Men are worthy of for their
Virtue, and which God is not worthy of, in any Degree?

If that Necessity which attends God's moral Perfections and Actions, be as
inconsistent with a Being worthy of Praise, as a Necessity of Coaction; as is
plainly implied in or inferred from Dr. Whitby's Discourse; then why should we
thank God for his Goodness, any more than if He were forced to be good, or any
more than we should thank one of our Fellow Creatures who did us Good, not
freely, and of good Will, or from any Kindness of Heart, but from mere
Compulsion, or extrinsecal Necessity? Arminians suppose, that God is
necessarily a good and gracious Being: for this they make the Ground of some of
their main Arguments against many Doctrines maintained by Calvinists: They say,
these are certainly false, and it is impossible they should be true, because
they are not consistent with the Goodness of God. This supposes, that it is
impossible but that God should be good: for if it be possible that He should be
otherwise, then that Impossibility of the Truth of these Doctrines ceases,
according to their own Argument.

That Virtue in God is not, in the most proper Sense, rewardable, is not for
Want of Merit in his moral Perfections and Actions, sufficient to deserve
Rewards from his Creatures; but because He is infinitely above all Capacity of
receiving any Reward or Benefit from the Creature: He is already infinitely and
unchangeably happy* and we cannot be profitable unto Him. But still he is worthy
of our supreme Benevolence for his Virtue; and would be worthy of our
Beneficence, which is the Fruit and Expression of Benevolence, if our Goodness
could extend to Him. If God deserves to be thanked and praised for his
Goodness, He would for the same Reason, deserve that we should also requite his
Kindness, if that were possible. What shall I render to the Lord for all his
Benefits? is the natural Language of Thankfulness: and so far as in us lies, it
is our Duty to recompense God's Goodness, and render again according to
Benefits received* And that we might have Opportunity for so natural an
Expression of our Gratitude to God, as Beneficence, notwithstanding his being
infinitely above our Reach; He has appointed others to be his Receivers, and to
stand in his Stead, as the Objects of our Beneficence; such are especially our
indigent Brethren.

SECTION II. The Acts of the Will of the human Soul of JESUS CHRIST necessarily
holy, yet truly virtuous, praiseworthy, rewardable, etc.
I Have already considered how Dr. Whitby insists upon it, that a Freedom, not
only from Coaction, but Necessity, is requisite to either Virtue or Vice,
Praise or Dispraise, Reward or Punishment. He also insists on the same Freedom
as absolutely requisite to a Person's being the Subject of a Law, or Precepts
or Prohibitions; in the Book before mentioned (P. 301, 314, 328, 339, 340, 341,
342, 347, 361, 373, 410.) And of Promises and Threatenings (P. 298, 301, 305,
311, 339, 340, 363.) And as requisite to a State of Trial. (P. 297, etc.)

Now therefore, with an Eye to these Things, I would enquire into the moral
Conduct and Practice of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he exhibited in his human
Nature here, in his State of Humiliation. And First, I would show, that his
holy Behavior was necessary; or that it was impossible it should be otherwise,
than that He should behave himself holily, and that he should be perfectly holy
in each individual Act of his Life. And Secondly, that his holy Behavior was
properly of the Nature of Virtue, and was worth^ of Praise; and that He was the
Subject of Law, Prec^pts or Commands, Promises and Rewards; and that he was in
a State of Trial.

I. It was impossible, that the Acts of the Will of the human Soul of Christ
should, in any Instance, Degree or Circumstance, be otherwise than holy, and
agreeable to God's Nature and Will. The following Things make this evident.

1. God had promised so effectually to preserve and uphold Him by his Spirit,
under all his Temptations, that he should not fail of reaching the End for
which He came into the World; -- which he would have failed of, had he fallen
into Sin. We have such a Promise, Isai. xlii.1, 2, 3, 4. Behold my Servant,
whom I uphold; mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights: I have put my Spirit
upon Him: He shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles: He shall not cry, nor
lift up, nor cause his Voice to be heard in the Street. -- He shall bring forth
Judgment unto Truth He shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set
Judgment in the Earth; and the Isles shall wait for his Law. This Promise of
Christ's having God's Spirit put upon Him, and his not crying and lifting up
his Voice etc. relates to the Time of Christ's Appearance on Earth; as is
manifest from the Nature of the Promise, and also the Application of it in the
New Testament, Matthew. 12.18. And the Words imply a Promise of his being so
upheld by God's Spirit, that he should be preserved from Sin; particularly from
Pride and Vainglory, and from being overcome by any of the Temptations he
should be under to affect the Glory of this World; the Pomp of an earthly
Prince, or the Applause and Praise of Men: and that he should be so upheld,
that he should by no Means fail of obtaining the End of his coming into the
World, of bringing forth Judgment unto Victory, and establishing his Kingdom of
Grace in the Earth. -- And in the following Verses, this Promise is confirmed,
with the greatest imaginable Solemnity. Thus says the LORD, HE that created
the Heavens, and stretched them out; He that spread forth the Earth, and that
which comes out of it; He that gives Breath unto the People upon it, and
Spirit to them that walk therein: I the Lord have called Thee in Righteousness,
and will hold thine Hand; and will keep Thee, and give Thee for a Covenant of
the People, for a Light of the Gentiles, to open the blind Eyes, to bring out
the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in Darkness out of the
Prisonhouse. I am JEHOVAH, that is my Name, etc.

Very parallel with these Promises is that, Isai. xlix.7, 8, 9. which also has
an apparent Respect to the Time of Christ's Humiliation on Earth. Thus says
the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his holy One, to Him whom Man despises,
to Him whom the Nation abhors, to a Servant of Rulers; Kings shall see and
arise, Princes also shall worship; because of the Lord that is faithful, and
the holy One of Israel, and He shall choose Thee. Thus says the Lord, In an
acceptable Time have I heard Thee; in a Day of Salvation have I helped Thee;
and I will preserve Thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the People, to
establish the Earth, etc.

And in Isai. l. 5 -- 9. we have the Messiah expressing his Assurance, that God
would help Him, by so opening his Ear, or inclining his Heart to God's
Commandments, that He should not be rebellious, but should persevere, and not
apostatise, or turn his Back: That through God's Help, He should be immovable,
in a Way of Obedience, under the great Trials of Reproach and Suffering he
should meet with; setting his Face like a Flint: So that He knew He should not
be ashamed, or frustrated in his Design; and finally should be approved and
justified, as having done his Work faithfully. The Lord has opened mine Ear;
so that I was not rebellious, neither turned away my Back: I gave my Back to
the Smiters, and my Cheeks to them that plucked off the Hair; I hid not my Face
from Shame and Spitting. For the Lord God will help me; therefore shall I not
be confounded: therefore have I set my Face as a Flint, and I know that I shall
not be ashamed. He is near that justifies me: who will contend with me? Let us
stand together. Who is mine Adversary? Let him come near to me. Behold the Lord
God will help me: who is He that shall condemn me! Lo, they shall all was old
as a Garment, the Moth shall eat them up.

2. The same Thing is evident from all the Promises which God made to the
Messiah, of his future Glory, Kingdom and Success, in his Office and Character
of a Mediator: which Glory could not have been obtained, if his Holiness had
failed, and he had been guilty of Sin. God's absolute Promise of any Things
makes the Things promised necessary, and their failing to take Place absolutely
impossible: and in like Manner it makes those Things necessary, on which the
Thing promised depends, and without which it cannot take Effect. Therefore it
appears, that it was utterly impossible that Christ's Holiness should fail,
from such absolute Promises as those, Psalm. cx.4. The Lord has sworn, and will
not repent, Thou art a Priest forever, after the Order of Melchizedek. And from
every other Promise in that Psalm, contained in each Verse of it. And Psalm.
ii.6.7. I will declare the Decree: The Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son,
this Day have I begotten Thee: Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the Heathen for
thine Inheritance, etc. Psalm. xlv.3, 4, etc. Gird thy Sword on thy Thigh, O
most Mighty, with thy Glory and thy Majesty; and in thy Majesty ride
prosperously. And so every Thing that is said from thence to the End of the
Psalm. And those Promises, Isai. lii.13, 14, 15. and liii.10, 11, 12. And all
those Promises which God makes to the Messiah, of Success, Dominion and Glory
in the Character of Redeemer, in Isai. Chap. xlix.

3. It was often promised to the Church of God of old, for their Comfort, that
God would give them a righteous, sinless Savior. Jer. xxiii.5, 6. Behold, the
Days come, says the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a righteous Branch;
and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute Judgment and Justice in
the Earth. In his Days shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely. And
this is the Name whereby He shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. So,
Jer. xxxiii.15. -- I will cause the Branch of Righteousness to grow up unto
David; and He shall execute Judgment and Righteousness in the Land. Isai. ix.6,
7. For unto us a Child is born; -- Upon the Throne of David and of his Kingdom,
to order it, and to establish it with Judgment and Justice, from henceforth,
even forever: The Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will do this. Chap. xi. at the
Beginning. There shall come forth a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch
shall grow out of his Roots; and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon Him, --
The Spirit of Knowledge, and of the Fear of the Lord: -- With Righteousness
shall He judge the Poor, and reprove with Equity: -- Righteousness shall be the
Girdle of his Loins, and Faithfulness the Girdle of his Reins. Chap. lii.13. My
Servant shall deal prudently. Chap. liii.9. Because He had done no Violence,
neither was Guile found in his Mouth. If it be impossible, that these Promises
should fail, and it be easier for Heaven and Earth to pass away, than for one
Jot or Tittle of these Promises of God to pass away, then it was impossible
that Christ should commit any Sin. Christ himself signified, that it was
impossible but that the Things which were spoken concerning Him should be
fulfilled. Luke xxiv.44. -- That all Things must be fulfilled, which were
written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning
Me. Mat. xxvi.53, 54. But how then shall the Scripture be fulfilled, that thus
it must be? Mark xiv.49. But the Scriptures must be fulfilled. And so the
Apostle, Act. i.16, 17. -- This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled.

4. All the Promises which were made to the Church of old, of the Messiah as a
future Savior, from that made to our first Parents in Paradise, to that which
was delivered by the Prophet Malachi, show it to be impossible that Christ
should not have persevered in perfect Holiness. The ancient Predictions given
to God's Church, of the Messiah as a Savior, were of the Nature of Promises;
as is evident by the Predictions themselves, and the Manner of delivering them.
But they are expressly, and very often called Promises in the New Testament; as
in Luke i.54, 55, 72, 73. Acts xiii.32, 33. Romans i.1, 2, 3. and Chap. xv.8.
Heb. vi.13, etc. These Promises were often made with great Solemnity, and
confirmed with an Oath; as in Genesis xxii.16.17. By my self have I sworn, says
the Lord, that in blessing, I will bless thee, and in multiplying, I will
multiply thy Seed, as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand which is upon the
Seashore: -- And in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed.
Compare Luke i.72, 73. and Gal. iii.8, 15, 16. The Apostle in Heb. vi.17, 18.
speaking of this Promise to Abraham, says, Wherein God willing more abundantly
to show to the Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it
by an Oath; that by two IMMUTABLE Things, in which it was IMPOSSIBLE for God to
lie, he might have strong Consolation. -- In which Words, the Necessity of the
Accomplishment, or (which is the same Thing) the Impossibility of the contrary,
is fully declared. So God confirmed the Promise of the great Salvation of the
Messiah, made to David, by an Oath; Psalm. lxxxix.3, 4. I have made a Covenant
with my Chosen, I have sworn unto David my Servant; Thy Seed will I establish
for ever, and build up thy Throne to all Generations. There is Nothing that is
so abundantly set forth in Scripture, as sure and irrefragable, as this Promise
and Oath to David. See Psalm. lxxxix.34, 35, 36. 2 Samuel xxiii.5. Isai. lv.3.
Act. ii.29, 30. and xiii.34. The Scripture expressly speaks of it as utterly
impossible that this Promise and Oath to David, concerning the everlasting
Dominion of the Messiah of his Seed, should fail. Jer. xxxiii.15, etc. In those
Days, and at that Time, I will cause the Branch of Righteousness to grow up
unto David. -- For thus says the Lord, David shall never want a Man to sit
upon the Throne of the House of Israel. -- ver. 20, 21. If you can break my
Covenant of the Day, and my Covenant of the Night, and that there should not be
Day and Night in their Season; then may also my Covenant be broken with David
my Servant, that He should not have a Son to reign upon his Throne. So in ver.
25, 26. -- Thus abundant is the Scripture in representing how impossible it
was, that the Promises made of Old concerning the great Salvation and Kingdom
of the Messiah should fail: Which implies, that it was impossible that this
Messiah, the second Adam, the promised Seed of Abraham, and of David, should
fall from his Integrity, as the first Adam did.

5. All the Promises that were made to the Church of God under the Old
Testament, of the great Enlargement of the Church, and Advancement of her
Glory, in the Days of the Gospel, after the Coming of the Messiah; the Increase
of her Light, Liberty, Holiness, Joy, Triumph over her Enemies, etc. of which
so great a Part of the Old Testament consists; which are repeated so often, are
so variously exhibited, so frequently introduced with great Pomp and Solemnity,
and are so abundantly sealed with typical and symbolical Representations; I
say, all these Promises imply, that the Messiah should perfect the Work of
Redemption; and this implies, that he should persevere in the Work which the
Father had appointed Him, being in all Things conformed to his Will. These
Promises were often confirmed by an Oath. (See Isai. live.9. with the Context;
Chap. lxii.1^.) And it is represented as utterly impossible that these ^romises
should fail. ( Isai. xlix.15. with the Context, Chap. live.10. with the Context;
Chap. li.4, -- 8. Chap. xl.8. with the Context.) And therefore it was
impossible, that the Messiah should fail, or commit Sin.

6. It was impossible, that the Messiah should fail of persevering in Integrity
and Holiness, as the first Adam did, because this would have been inconsistent
with the Promises which God made to the blessed Virgin, his Mother, and to her
Husband; implying, that He should save his People from their Sins, that God
would give Him the Throne of his Father David, that He should reign over the
House of Jacob forever; and that of his Kingdom there should be no End. These
Promises were sure, and it was impossible they should fail. And therefore the
Virgin Mary, in trusting fully to them, acted reasonably, having an immovable
Foundation of her Faith; as Elisabeth observes, ver. 45. And blessed is she
that believes; for there shall be a Performance of those Things which were
told her from the Lord.

7. That it should have been possible that Christ should sin, and so fail in
the Work of our Redemption* does not consist with the eternal Purpose and
Decree of God, revealed in the Scriptures, that He would provide Salvation for
fallen Man in and by Jesus Christ, and that Salvation should be offered to
Sinners through the Preaching of the Gospel. Such an absolute Decree as this
Arminians don't deny. Thus much at least (out of all Controversy) is implied in
such Scriptures, as 1 Cor. ii.7. Ephesians. i.4, 5. and Chapter iii.9, 10, 11. 1 Pet.
i.19, 20. Such an absolute Decree as this, Arminians allow to be signified in
these Texts. And the Arminians Election of Nations and Societies, and general
Election of the Christian Church, and conditional Election of particular
Persons, imply this. God could not decree before the Foundation of the World,
to save all that should believe in, and obey Christ, unless he had absolutely
decreed that Salvation should be provided, and effectually wrought out by
Christ. And since (as the Arminians themselves strenuously maintain) a Decree
of God infers Necessity; hence it became necessary that Christ should
persevere, and actually work out Salvation for us, and that He should not fail
by the Commission of Sin.

8. That it should have been possible for Christ's Holiness to fail, is not
consistent with what God promised to his Son before all Ages. For, that
Salvation should be offered to Men through Christ, and bestowed on all his
faithful Followers, is what is at least implied in that certain and infallible
Promise spoken of by the Apostle, Tit. i.2. In hope of eternal Life; which God,
that cannot lie, promised before the World began. This don't seem to be
controverted by Arminians. See Dr. Whitby on the five Points* P. 48, 49, 50.


9. That it should be possible for Christ to fail of doing his Father's Will,
is inconsistent with the Promise made to the Father by the Son, by the Logos
that was with the Father from the Beginning, before he took the human Nature:
as may be seen in Psalm. xl.6, 7, 8. (compared with the Apostle's
Interpretation, Heb. x.5, -- 9.) Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire:
mine Ears have thou opened, (or bored;) Burnt-Offering and Sin-Offering Thou
have not required. Then said I, Lo, I come: In the Volume of the Book it is
written of me, I delight to do thy Will, O my God, and thy Law is within my
Heart. Where is a manifest Allusion to the Covenant which the willing Servant,
who loved his Master's Service, made with his Master, to be his Servant for
ever, on the Day wherein he had his Ear bored; which Covenant was probably
inserted in the public Records, called the Volume of the Book, by the Judges,
who were called to take Cognizance of the Transaction; Exodus xxi. If the Logos,
who was with the Father, before the World, and who made the World, thus engaged
in Covenant to do the Will of the Father in the human Nature, and the Promise,
was as it were recorded, that it might be made sure, doubtless it was
impossible that it should fail; and so it was impossible that Christ should
fail of doing the Will of the Father in the human Nature.

10. If it was possible for Christ to have failed of doing the Will of his
Father, and so to have failed of effectually working out Redemption for
Sinners, then the Salvation of all the Saints, who were saved from the
Beginning of the World, to the Death of Christ, was not built on a firm
Foundation. The Messiah, and the Redemption which He was to work out by his
Obedience unto Death, was the Foundation of the Salvation of all the Posterity
of fallen Man, that ever were saved. Therefore, if when the Old Testament
Saints had the Pardon of their Sins, and the Favor of God promised them, and
Salvation bestowed upon them, still it was possible that the Messiah, when he
came, might commit Sin, then all this was on a Foundation that was not firm and
stable, but liable to fail; something which it was possible might never be. God
did as it were trust to what his Son had engaged and promised to do in* future
Time; and depended so much upon it, that He proceeded actually to save Men on
the Account of it, as though it had been already done. But this Trust and
Dependence of God, on the Supposition of Christ's being liable to fail of doing
his Will, was leaning on a Staff that was weak, and might possibly break. The
Saints of old trusted on the Promises of a future Redemption to be wrought out
and completed by the Messiah, and built their Comfort upon it: Abraham saw
Christ's Day and rejoiced; and he and the other Patriarchs died in the Faith of
the Promise of it. ( Heb. xi.13.) But on this Supposition, their Faith and
their Comfort, and their Salvation, was built on a moveable fallible
Foundation* Christ was not to them a tried Stone, a sure Foundation; (...) in
Isa^. xxviii.16. David entirely rested on the Covenant of God with him,
concerning the future glorious Dominion and Salvation of the Messiah, of his
Seed; says, it was all his Salvation, and all his Desire; and comforts himself
that this Covenant was an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all Things and sure,
2 Samuel xxiii.5. But if Christ's Virtue might fail, he was mistaken: his great
Comfort was not built so sure, as he thought it was, being founded entirely on
the Determinations of the Free Will of Christ's human Soul; which was subject
to no Necessity, and might be determined either one Way or the other. Also the
Dependence of those who looked for Redemption in Jerusalem, and waited for the
Consolation of Israel, (Luke ii.25. and 38.) and the Confidence of the
Disciples of Jesus, who forsook all and followed Him, that they might enjoy the
Benefits of his future Kingdom, was built on a sandy Foundation.

11. The Man Christ Jesus, before he had finished his Course of Obedience, and
while in the midst of Temptations and Trials, was abundant in positively
predicting his own future Glory in his Kingdom, and the Enlargement of his
Church, the Salvation of the Gentiles through Him etc. and in Promises of
Blessings he would bestow on his true Disciples in his future Kingdom* on which
Promises he required the full Dependence of his Disciples. ( Ioh. xiv.) But the
Disciples would have had no Ground for such Dependence, if Christ had been
liable to fail in his Work: And Christ Himself would have been guilty of
Presumption, in so abounding in peremptory Promises of great Things, which
depended on a mere Contingence; viz. the Determinations of his free Will,
consisting in a Freedom ad utrumque, to either Sin or Holiness, standing in
Indifference, and incident, in Thousands of future Instances, to go either one
Way or the other.

Thus it is evident, that it was impossible that the Acts of the Will of the
human Soul of Christ should be otherwise than holy, and conformed to the Will
of the Father; or, in other Words, they were necessarily so conformed.

I have been the longer in the Proof of this Matter, it being a Thing denied by
some of the greatest Arminians, by Episcopius in particular; and because I look
upon it as a Point clearly and absolutely determining the Controversy between
Calvinists and Arminians, concerning the Necessity of such a Freedom of Will as
is insisted on by the latter, in order to moral Agency, Virtue, Command or
Prohibition, Promise or Threatening, Reward or Punishment, Praise or Dispraise,
Merit or Demerit. I now therefore proceed,

II. To consider whether CHRIST, in his holy Behavior on Earth, was not thus a
moral Agent, subject to Commands, Premises, etc. --

Dr. Whitby very often speaks of what he calls a Freedom ad utrumlibet, without
Necessity, as requisite to Law and Commands; and speaks of Necessity as
entirely inconsistent with Injunctions and Prohibitions. But yet we read of
Christ's being the Subject of the Commands of his Father, Ioh. x.18. and xv.10.
And Christ tells us, that every Thing that He said, or did, was in Compliance
with Commandments he had received of the Father; Joh. xii.49, 50. and xiv.31.
And we often read of Christ's Obedience to his Father's Commands, Romans v.19.
Phil. ii.18. Heb. v.8.

The forementioned Writer represents Promises offered as Motives to Persons to
do their Duty, or a being moved and induced by Promises, as utterly
inconsistent with a State wherein Persons have not a Liberty ad utrumlibet, but
are necessarily determined to one. (See particularly, P. 298. and 311.) But the
Thing which this Writer asserts, is demonstrably false, if the Christian
Religion be true. If there be any Truth in Christianity or the holy Scriptures,
the Man Christ Jesus had his Will infallibly, unalterably and unfrustrab^y
determined to Good, and that alone; but yet he had Promises of glorious Rewards
made to Him, on Condition of his persevering in, and perfecting the Work which
God had appointed Him; Isai. liii.10, 11, 12. Psalm. ii. and cx. Isai. xlix.7,
8, 9. -- In Luke xxii.28, 29. Christ says to his Disciples, Ye are They which
have continued with me in my Temptations; and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as
my Father has appointed unto me. The Word most properly signifies to appoint
by Covenant, or Promise. The plain Meaning of Christ's Words is this: As you
have partook of my Temptations and Trials, and have been steadfast, and have
overcome; I promise to make you Partakers of my Reward, and to give you a
Kingdom; as the Father has promised me a Kingdom for continuing steadfast, and
overcoming in those Trials. And the Words are well explained by those in Rev.
iii.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne; even
as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. And Christ
had not only Promises of glorious Success and Rewards made to his Obedience and
Sufferings, but the Scriptures plainly represent Him as using these Promises
for Motives and Inducements to obey and suffer; and particularly that Promise
of a Kingdom which the Father had appointed Him, or sitting with the Father on
his Throne; as in Heb. xii.1, 2^ Let us lay aside every Weight, and the Sin
which does easily beset us, and let us run with Patience the Race that is set
before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; who for
the Joy that was set before Him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is
set down on the right Hand of the Throne of God.

And how strange would it be to hear any Christian assert, that the holy and
excellent Temper and Behavior of Jesus Christ, and that Obedience which he
performed under such great Trials, was not virtuous or Praiseworthy; because
his Will was not free ad utrumque, to either Holiness or Sin, but was
unalterably determined to one; that upon this Account, there is no Virtue at
all, in all Christ's Humility, Meekness, Patience, Charity, Forgiveness of
Enemies, Contempt of the World, Heavenly-mindedness, Submission to the Will of
God, perfect Obedience to his Commands, (though He was obedient unto Death, even
the Death of the Cross) his great Compassion to the Afflicted, his unparalled
Love to Mankind, his Faithfulness to God and Man, under such great Trials; his
praying for his Enemies, even when nailing Him to the Cross; That Virtue, when
applied to these Things, is but an empty Name; That there was no Merit in any
of these Things; that is, that Christ was worthy of Nothing at all on the
Account of them, worthy of no Reward, no Praise, no Honor or Respect from God
or Man; Because his Will was not indifferent, and free either to these Things,
or the Contrary; but under such a strong Inclination or Bias to the Things that
were excellent, as made it impossible that he should choose the contrary; That
upon this Account (to use Dr. Whitby's Language) it would be sensibly
unreasonable that the human Nature should be rewarded for any of these Things.

According to this Doctrine, That Creature who is evidently set forth in
Scripture as the Firstborn of every Creature, as having in all Things the
Pre-eminence, and as the highest of all Creatures in Virtue, Honor, and
Worthiness of Esteem, Praise and Glory, on the Account of his Virtue, is less
worthy of Reward or Praise, than the very least of Saints; yea, no more worthy
than a Clock or mere Machine, that is purely passive, and moved by natural
Necessity.

If we judge by scriptural Representations of Things, we have Reason to
suppose, that Christ took on him our Nature, and dwelt with us in this World,
in a suffering State, not only to satisfy for our Sins; but that He, being in
our Nature and Circumstances, and under our Trials, might be our most fit and
proper Example, Leader and Captain, in the Exercise of glorious and victorious
Virtue, and might be a visible Instance of the glorious End and Reward of it;
That we might see in Him the Beauty, Amiableness, and true Honor and Glory,
and exceeding Benefit of that Virtue, which it is proper for us human Beings to
practice; and might thereby learn, and be animated, to seek the like Glory and
Honor, and to obtain the like glorious Reward. See Heb. ii.9, -- 14, with v.8,
9. and xii.1, 2, 3. Ioh. xv.10. Romans viii.17. 2 Timothy ii.11.12. 1 Pet. ii.19,
20. and iv.13. But if there was Nothing of any Virtue or Merit, or Worthiness
of any Reward, Glory, Praise or Commendation at all, in all that He did,
because it was all necessary, and He could not help it; then how is here any
Thing so proper to animate and incite us, free Creatures, by patient
Continuance in well-doing, to seek for Honor, Glory, and Virtue?

God speaks of Himself as peculiarly well-pleased with the Righteousness of
this Servant of his. Isai. xlii.21. The Lord is well pleased for his
Righteousness sake. The Sacrifices of old are spoken of as a sweet Savor to
God, but the Obedience of Christ as far more acceptable than they. Psalm. xl.6,
7. Sacrifice and Offering Thou did not desire: -- Mine Ear have Thou opened
[as thy Servant performing willing Obedience;] Burnt-Offering and Sin-Offering
have thou not required: Then said I, Lo, I come [as a Servant that cheerfully
answers the Calls of his Master:] I delight to do thy Will, O my God, and thy
Law is within mine Heart. Matthew. xvii.5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well-pleased. And Christ tells us expressly, that the Father loves Him for that
wonderful Instance of his Obedience, his voluntarily yielding himself to Death,
in Compliance with the Father's Command. Joh. x.17, 18. Therefore does my
Father love me, because I lay down my Life: -- No Man takes it from me; but I
lay it down of my self -- This Commandment received I of my Father.

And if there was no Merit in Christ's Obedience unto Death, if it was not
worthy of Praise, and of the most glorious Rewards, the heavenly Hosts were
exceedingly mistaken, by the Account that is given of them, in Rev. v.8, -- 12.
-- The four Beasts and the four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb,
having every one of them Harps, and golden Vials full of Odours; -- And they
sung a new Song, saying, Thou art WORTHY to take the Book, and to open the
Seals thereof; for Thou wast slain, -- And I beheld, and I heard the Voice of
many Angels round about the Throne, and the Beasts, and the Elders, and the
Number of them was ten Thousand Times ten Thousand, and Thousands of Thousands,
saying with a loud Voice, WORTHY is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power,
and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

Christ speaks of the eternal Life which He was to receive, as the Reward of
his Obedience to the Father's Commandments. Joh. xii.49, 50. I have not spoken
of my self; but the Father which sent me, He gave me a Commandment what I
should say, and what I should speak: And I know that his Commandment is Life
everlasting: Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so
I speak. -- God promises to divide Him a Portion with the great etc. for his
being his righteous Servant, for his glorious Virtue under such great Trials
and Sufferings. Isai. liii.11, 12. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul and
be satisfied: By his Knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many; for he
shall bear their Iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a Portion with the
Great, and he shall divide the Spoil with the Strong, because He has poured
out his Soul unto Death. -- The Scriptures represent God as rewarding Him far
above all his other Servants. Phil. ii.7, 8, 9. He took on Him the Form of a
Servant, and was made in the Likeness of Men: and being found in Fashion as a
Man, He humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the
Cross: Wherefore GOD also has highly exalted Him, and given Him a Name above
every Name. -- Psalm. xlv.7. Thou love Righteousness, and hate Wickedness;
Therefore God, thy God, has anointed Thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy
F^llows.

There is no Room to pretend, that the glorious Benefits bestowed in
Consequence of Christ's Obedience, are not properly of the Nature of a Reward.
What is a Reward, in the most proper Sense, but a Benefit bestowed in
Consequence of something morally excellent in Quality or Behavior, in
Testimony of well-pleasedness in that moral Excellency, and Respect and Favor
on that Account? If we consider the Nature of a Reward most strictly, and make
the utmost of it, and add to the Things contained in this Description, proper
Merit or Worthiness, and the Bestowment of the Benefit in Consequence of a
Promise; still it will be found, there is Nothing belonging to it, but that the
Scripture is most express as to it is belonging to the Glory bestowed on Christ,
after his Sufferings; as appears from what has been already observed: There was
a glorious Benefit bestowed in Consequence of something morally excellent,
being called Righteousness and Obedience; There was great Favor, Love and
Well-pleasedness, for this Righteousness and Obedience, in the Bestower; There
was proper Merit, or Worthiness of the Benefit, in the Obedience; It was
bestowed in Fulfillment of Promises, made to that Obedience; and was bestowed
therefore, or because he had performed that Obedience.

I may add to all these Things, that Jesus Christ, while here in the Flesh, was
manifestly in a State of Trial. The last Adam, as Christ is called, 1 Cor.
xv.45. Romans v.14. taking on Him the human Nature, and so the Form of a Servant,
and being under the Law, to stand and act for us, was put into a State of
Trial, as the first Adam was. -- Dr. Whitby mentions these three Things as
Evidences of Persons being in a State of Trial (on the five Points, P. 298,
299.) namely, Their Afflictions being spoken of as their Trials or Temptations,
their being the Subjects of Promises, and their being exposed to Satan's
Temptations. But Christ was apparently the Subject of each of these. Concerning
Promises made to Him, I have spoken already. The Difficulties and Afflictions
He met with in the Course of his Obedience, are called his Temptations or
Trials, Luke xxii.28. Ye are they which have continued with me in my
Temptations, or Trials. Heb. ii.18. For in that he Himself has suffered, being
tempted [or tried] He is able to succor them that are tempted. And Chap.
iv.15. We have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the Feeling of
our Infirmities; but was in all Points tempted like as we are, yet without Sin.
And as to his being tempted by Satan, it is what none will dispute.

SECTION III. The Case of such as are given up of God to Sin, and of fallen Man
in general, proves moral Necessity and Inability to be consistent with
Blame-worthiness.
DR. Whitby asserts Freedom, not only from Coaction, but Necessity, to be
essential to any Thing deserving the Name of Sin, and to an Action's being
culpable: in these Words (Discourse on five Points, Edit. 3. P. ^48.) If they
be thus necessitated, then neither their Sins of Omission or Commission could
deserve that Name; it being essential to the Nature of Sin, according to St.
Austin's Definition, that it be an Action, a quo liberum est abstinere. Three
Things seem plainly necessary to make an Action or Omission culpable; 1. That
it be in our Power to perform or forbear it: For, as Origin, and all the
Fathers say, no Man is blameworthy for not doing what He could not do. -- And
elsewhere the Doctor insists, that when any do Evil of Necessity, what they do
is no Vice, that they are guilty of no Fault, Disc. on five Poins. P. 347.360,
361.377.
are worthy of no Blame, Dispraise, 303: 326.329. and many other Places.
or Dishonor, 3^1.
but are unblameable. 304.361.


If these Things are true, in Dr. Whitby's Sense of Necessity, they will prove
all such to be blameless, who are given up of God to Sin, in what they commit
after they are thus given up. -- That there is suc^ a Thing as Men's being
judicially given up to Sin, is c^rtain, if the Scripture rightly informs us;
such a Thing being often there spoken of: as in Psalm. lxxxi.12. So I gave them
up to their own Hearts Lust, and they walked in their own Counsels. Act.
vii.42. Then God turned, and gave them up to worship the Host of Heaven. Romans
i.24. Wherefore, God also gave them up to Uncleanness, through the Lusts of
their own Hearts, to dishonor their own Bodies between Themselves. Ver. 26.
For this Cause God gave them up to vile Affections. Ver. 28. And even as they
did not like to retain God in their Knowledge, God gave them over to a
reprobate Mind, to do th^se Things that are not convenient.

It Is needless to stand particularly to inquire, what God's giving Men up to
their own Heart's Lusts signifies: It is sufficient to observe, that hereby is
certainly meant God's so ordering or disposing Things, in some Respect or
other, either by doing or forbearing to do, as that the Consequence should be
Men's continuing in their Sins. So much as Men are given up to, so much is the
Consequence of their being given up; whether that be less or more. If God don't
order Things so, by Action or Permission, that Sin will be the Consequence,
then the Event proves that they are not given up to that Consequence. If Good
be the Consequence, instead of Evil, then God's Mercy is to be acknowledged in
that Good; which Mercy must be contrary to God's Judgment in giving up to Evil.
If the Event must prove that they are given up to Evil as the Consequence, then
the Persons who are the Subjects of this Judgment, must be the Subjects of such
an Event, and so the Event is necessary.

If not only Coaction, but all Necessity, will prove Men blameless, then Judas
was blameless, after Christ had given him over, and had already declared his
certain Damnation, and that he should verily betray Him. He was guilty of no
Sin in betraying his Master, on this Supposition; tho his so doing is spoken of
by Christ as the most aggravated Sin, more heinous than the Sin of Pilate in
crucifying Him. And the Jews in Egypt, in Ieremiah's Time, were guilty of no
Sin, in their not worshipping the true God, after God had Sworn by his great
Name, that his Name should be no more named in the Mouth of any Man of Judah,
in all the Land of Egypt. Jer. xliv.26.

Dr. Whitby (Disc. on five Points. P. 302, 303) denies, that Men, in this
World, are ever so given up by God to Sin, that their Wills should be
necessarily determined to Evil; though He owns, that hereby it may become
exceeding difficult for Men to do Good, having a strong Bent, and powerful
Inclination to what is Evil. -- But if we should allow the Case to be just as
he represents, the Judgment of giving up to Sin will no better agree with his
Notions of that Liberty, which is essential to Praise or Blame, than if we
should suppose it to render the avoiding of Sin impossible. For if an
Impossibility of avoiding Sin wholly excuses a Man; then, for the same Reason,
it is being difficult to avoid it excuses Him in Part; and this just in
Proportion to the Degree of Difficulty. -- If the Influence of moral
Impossibility or Inability be the same, to excuse Persons in not doing, or not
avoiding any Thing, as that of natural Inability, (which is supposed) then
undoubtedly, in like Manner, moral Difficulty has the same Influence to excuse
with natural Difficulty. But all allow, that natural Impossibility wholly
excuses, and also that natural Difficulty excuses in Part, and makes the Act or
Omission less blameable, in Proportion to the Difficulty. All natural
Difficulty, according to the plainest Dictates of the Light of Nature, excuses
in some Degree, so that the Neglect is not so blameable, as if there had been
no Difficulty in the Case: and so the greater the Difficulty is, still the more
excusable, in Proportion to the Increase of the Difficulty. And as natural
Impossibility wholly excuses and excludes all Blame, so the nearer the
Difficulty approaches to Impossibility, still the nearer a Person is to
Blamelesness, in Proportion to that Approach. And if the Case of moral
Impossibility or Necessity, be just the same with natural Necessity or
Co-action, as to Influence to excuse a Neglect, then also, for the same Reason,
the Case of natural Difficulty don't differ in Influence, to excuse a Neglect,
from moral Difficulty, arising from a strong Bias or Bent to Evil, such as Dr.
Whitby owns in the Case of those that are given up to their own Hearts Lusts.
So that the Fault of such Persons must be lessened, in Proportion to the
Difficulty, and Approach to Impossibility. If ten Degrees of moral Difficulty
make the Action quite impossible, and so wholly ex^use, then if there be nine
Degrees of Difficulty, the Person is in great Part excused, and is nine Degrees
in ten, less blameworthy, than if there had been no Difficulty at all; and he
has but one Degree of Blame-worthiness. The Reason is plain, on Arminian
Principles; viz. because as Difficulty, by antecedent Bent and Bias on the
Will, is increased, Liberty of Indifference, and Self-determination in the
Will, is diminished: so much Hindrance and Impediment is there, in the Way of
the Will's acting freely, by mere Self-determination. And if ten Degrees of
such Hindrance take away all such Liberty, then nine Degrees take away nine
Parts in ten, and leave but one Degree of Liberty. And therefore there is but
one Degree of Blameableness, ^^teris paribus, in the Neglect; the Man being no
further blameable in what He does, or neglects, than he has Liberty in that
Affair: For Blame or Praise (say they) arises wholly from a good Use or Abuse
of Liberty.

From all which it follows, that a strong Bent and Bias one Way, and Difficulty
of going the contrary, never causes a Person to be at all more exposed to Sin,
or any Thing blameable: Because as the Difficulty is increased, so much the
less is required and expected. Though in one Respect, Exposedness to Sin or Fault
is increased, viz. by an Increase of Exposedness to the evil Action or
Omission; yet it is diminished in another Respect, to balance it; namely, as
the Sinfulness or Blameableness of the Action or Omission is diminished in the
same Proportion. So that, on the whole, the Affair, as to Exposedness to Guilt
or Blame, is left just as it was.

To illustrate this, let us suppose a Scale of a Balance to be intelligent, and
a free Agent, and endued with a self-moving Power, by Virtue of which it could
act and produce Effects to a certain Degree; ex. gr. to move it self up or down
with a Force equal to a Weight of ten Pounds; and that it might therefore be
required of it, in ordinary Circumstances, to mov^ it self down with that
Force; for which it has Power and (...) Liberty, and therefore would be
blameworthy if it failed of it. But then let us suppose a Weight of ten Pounds
to be put in the opposite Scale, which in Force entirely counter-balances it is
self-moving Power, and so renders it impossible for it to move down at all; and
therefore wholly excuses it from any such Motion. But if we suppose there to be
only nine Pounds in the opposite Scale, this renders it is Motion not
impossible, but yet more difficult; so that it can now only move down with the
Force of one Pound: But however, this is all that is required of it under these
Circumstances; it is wholly excused from nine Parts of its Motion: And if the
Scale, under these Circumstances, neglects to move, and remains at Rest, all
that it will be blamed for, will be it is Neglect of that one tenth Part of it is
Motion; which it had as much Liberty and Advantage for, as in usual
Circumstances, it has for the greater Motion, which in such a Case would be
required. So that this new Difficulty, don't at all increase its Exposedness to
any Thing blameworthy.

And thus the very Supposition of Difficulty in the Way of a Man's Duty, or
Proclivity to Sin, through a being given up to Hardness of Heart, or indeed by
any other Means whatsoever, is an Inconsistence, according to Dr. Whitby's
Notions of Liberty, Virtue and Vice, Blame and Praise. The avoiding Sin and
Blame, and the doing what is virtuous and Praiseworthy, must be always equally
easy.

Dr. Whitby's Notions of Liberty, Obligation, Virtue, Sin, etc. lead Him into
another great Inconsistence. He abundantly insists, that Necessity is
inconsistent with the Nature of Sin or Fault. He says in the forementioned
Treatise, P. 14. Who can blame a Person for doing what he could not help? and
P. 15. It being sensibly unjust, to punish any Man for doing that which it was
never in his Power to avoid. And in P. 341. to confirm his Opinion, he quotes
one of the Fathers, saying, Why does God command, if Man has not Free Will and
Power to obey? And again in the same and the next Page, Who will not cry out,
that it is Folly to command him, that has not Liberty to do what is commanded;
and that it is unjust to condemn Him, that has it not in his Power to do what
is required? And in P. 373. He cites another saying, A Law is given to Him that
can turn to both Parts; i. e. obey or transgress it: But no Law can be against
Him who is bound by Nature.

And yet the same Dr. Whitby asserts, that fallen Man is not able to perform
perfect Obedience. In P. 165. He has these Words, The Nature of Adam had Power
to continue innocent, and without Sin; whereas it is certain, our Nature never
had so. But if we have not Power to continue innocent and without Sin, then Sin is
consistent with Necessity, and we may be sinful in that which we have not Power
to avoid; and those Things cannot be true, which He asserts elsewhere, namely,
That if we be necessitated, neither Sins of Omission nor Commission, would
deserve that Name. (P. 348.) If we have it not in our Power to be innocent,
then we have it not in our Power to be blameless: and if so, we are under a
Necessity of being blameworthy. And how does this consist with what he so
often asserts, that Necessity is inconsistent with Blame or Praise? If we have
it not in our Power to perform perfect Obedience to all the Commands of God,
then we are under a Necessity of breaking some Commands, in some Degree; having
no Power to perform so much as is commanded. And if so, why does he cry out of
the Unreasonableness and Folly of commanding beyond what Men have Power to do?

And Arminians in general are very inconsistent with themselves in what they
say of the Inability of fallen Man in this Respect. They strenuously maintain,
that it would be unjust in God, to require any thing of us beyond our present
Power and Ability to perform; and also hold, that we are now unable to perform
perfect Obedience, and that Christ died to satisfy for the Imperfections of our
Obedience, and has made Way that our imperfect Obedience might be accepted
instead of perfect: Wherein they seem insensibly to run themselves into the
grossest Inconsistence. For, (as I have observed elsewhere) They hold that God
in Mercy to Mankind has abolished that rigorous Constitution or Law, that they
were under originally; and instead of it, has introduced a more mild
Constitution, and put us under a new Law, which requires no more than imperfect
sincere Obedience, in Compliance with our poor infirm impotent Circumstances
since the Fall.

Now, how can these Things be made consistent? I would ask what Law these
Imperfections of our Obedience are a Breach of? If they are a Breach of no Law
that we were ever under, then they are not Sins. And if they be not Sins, what
Need of Christ's dying to satisfy for them? But if they are Sins, and the
Breach of some Law, what Law is it? They cannot be a Breach of their new Law;
for that requires no other than imperfect Obedience, or Obedience with
Imperfections: And therefore to have Obedience attended with Imperfections, is
no Breach of it; for it is as much as it requires. And they cannot be a Breach of
their old Law; for that, they say, is entirely abolished, and we never were
under it. -- They say, it would not be just in God to require of us perfect
Obedience, because it would not be just to require more than we can perform, or
to punish us for failing of it. And therefore, by their own Scheme, the
Imperfections of our Obedience don't deserve to be punished. What need
therefore of Christ's dying, to satisfy for them? What need of his Suffering,
to satisfy for that which is no Fault, and in it is own Nature deserves no
suffering? What need of Christ's dying, to purchase, that our imperfect
Obedience should be accepted, when according to their Scheme, it would be
unjust in it self, that any other Obedience than imperfect should be required?
What need of Christ's dying to make Way for God's accepting such an Obedience,
as it would be unjust in Him not to accept? Is there any Need of Christ's
dying, to prevail with God not to do unrighteously? -- If it be said, that
Christ died to satisfy that old Law for us, that so we might not be under it,
but that there might be Room for our being under a more mild Law; still I would
inquire, what Need of Christ's dying that we might not be under a Law, which
(by their Principles) it would be in it self unjust that we should be under,
whether Christ had died or no, because in our present State we are not able to
keep it?

So the Arminians are inconsistent with themselves, not only in what they say
of the Need of Christ's Satisfaction to atone for those Imperfections which we
cannot avoid, (...) also in what they say of the Grace of God, granted to
enable Men to perform the sincere Obedience of the new Law. I grant (says Dr.
Stebbing Trea^^^ of the Operations of the Spirit. 2 Edit. P. 112, 113.
) indeed, that by Reason of original Sin, we are utterly disabled for the
Performance of the Condition, without new Grace from God. But I say then, that
He gives such Grace to all of us, by which the Performance of the Condition is
truly possible: And upon this Ground he may, and does most righteously require
it. If Dr. Stebbing intends to speak properly, by Grace he must mean, that
Assistance which is of Grace, or of free Favor and Kindness. But yet in the
same Place he speaks of it as very unreasonable, unjust and cruel, for God to
require that, as the Condition of Pardon, that is become impossible by original
Sin. If it be so, what Grace is there in giving Assistance and Ability to
perform the Condition of Pardon? Or why is that called by the Name of Grace,
that is an absolute Debt, which God is bound to bestow, and which it would be
unjust and cruel in Him to withold, seeing he requires that, as the Condition
of Pardon, which we cannot perform without it?

SECTION IV. Command, and Obligation to Obedience, consistent with moral
Inability to obey.
IT being so much insisted on by Arminian Writers, that Necessity is
inconsistent with Law or Command, and particularly, that it is absurd to
suppose God by his Command should require that of Men which they are unable to
do; not allowing in this Case for any Difference that there is between natural
and moral Inability* I would therefore now particularly consider this Matter.

And for the greater Clearness, I would distinctly lay down the following
Things.

I. The Will it self, and not only those Actions which are the Effects of the
Will, is the proper Object of Precept or Command. That is, such or such a State
or Acts of Men's Wills, is in many Cases, properly required of them by Command;
and not only those Alterations in the State of their Bodies or Minds that are
the Consequences of Volition. This is most manifest; for it is the Soul only,
that is properly and directly the Subject of Precepts or Commands; that only
being capable of receiving or perceiving Commands. The Motions or State of the
Body are Matter of Command, only as they are subject to the Soul, and connected
with it is Acts. But now the Soul has no other Faculty whereby it can, in the
most direct and proper Sense, consent, yield to, or comply with any Command,
but the Faculty of the Will; and it is by this Faculty only, that the Soul can
directly disobey, or refuse Compliance: For the very Notions of Consenting,
Yielding, Accepting, Complying, Refusing, Rejecting etc. are, according to the
Meaning of the Terms, Nothing but certain Acts of the Will. Obedience, in the
primary Nature of it, is the submitting and yielding of the Will of one to the
Will of another. Disobedience is the not consenting, not complying of the Will
of the commanded to the manifested Will of the Commander. Other Acts that are
not the Acts of the Will, as certain Motions of the Body and Alterations in the
Soul, are Obedience or Disobedience only indirectly, as they are connected with
the State or Actions of the Will, according to an established Law of Nature. So
that it is manifest, the Will it self may be required: And the Being of a good
Will is the most proper, direct and immediate Subject of Command; and if this
cannot be prescribed or required by Command or Precept, nothing can; For other
Things can be required no otherwise than as they depend upon, and are the
Fruits of a good Will.

Corol. 1. If there be several Acts of the Will, or a Series of Acts, one
following another, and one the Effect of another, the first and determining Act
is properly the Subject of Command, and not only the consequent Acts, which are
dependent upon it. Yea, it is this more especially which is that which Command
or Precept has a proper Respect to; because it is this Act that determines the
whole Affair: In this Act the Obedience or Disobedience lies, in a peculiar
Manner; the consequent Acts being all subject to it, and governed and
determined by it. This determining governing Act must be the proper Subject of
Precept, or none.

Corol. 2. It also follows from what has been observed, That if there be any
Sort of Act, or Exertion of the Soul, prior to all free Acts of the Will or
Acts of Choice in the Case, directing and determining what the Acts of the Will
shall be; that Act or Exertion of the Soul cannot properly be subject to any
Command or Precept, in any Respect whatsoever, either directly or indirectly,
immediately or remotely. Such Acts cannot be subject to Commands directly,
because they are no Acts of the Will; being by the Supposition prior to all
Acts of the Will, determining and giving Rise to all it is Acts: They not being
Acts of the Will, there can be in them no Consent to, or Compliance with any
Command. Neither can they be subject to Command or Precept indirectly or
remotely; for they are not so much as the Effects or Consequences of the Will,
being prior to all its Acts. So that if there be any Obedience in that original
Act of the Soul, determining all Volitions, it is an Act of Obedience wherein
the Will has no Concern at all; it preceding every Act of Will. And therefore,
if the Soul either obeys or disobeys in this Act, it is wholly involuntarily;
there is no willing Obedience or Rebellion, no Compliance or Opposition of the
Will in the Affair: and what Sort of Obedience or Rebellion is this!

And thus the Arminian Notion of the Freedom of the Will consisting in the
Soul's determining it is own Acts of Will, instead of being essential to moral
Agency, and to Men's being the Subjects of moral Government, is utterly
inconsistent with it. For if the Soul determines all it is Acts of Will, it is
therein subject to no Command or moral Government, as has been now observed;
because it is original determining Act is no Act of Will or Choice, it being
prior, by the Supposition, to every Act of Will. And the Soul cannot be the
Subject of Command in the Act of the Will it self, which depends on the
foregoing determining Act, and is determined by it; in as much as this is
necessary, being the necessary Consequence and Effect of that prior determining
Act, which is not voluntary. Nor can the Man be the Subject of Command or
Government in his external Actions; because these are all necessary, being the
necessary Effects of the Acts of the Will themselves. So that Mankind,
according to this Scheme, are Subjects of Command or moral Government in
nothing at all; and all their moral Agency is entirely excluded, and no Room
left for Virtue or Vice in the World.

So that it is the Arminian Scheme, and not the Scheme of the Calvinists, that
is utterly inconsistent with moral Government, and with all Use of Laws,
Precepts, Prohibitions, Promises, or Threatenings. Neither is there any Way
whatsoever to make their Principles consist with these Things. For if it be
said, that there is no prior determining Act of the Soul, preceding the Acts of
the Will, but that Volitions are Events that come to pass by pure Accident,
without any determining Cause, this is most palpably inconsistent with all Use
of Laws and Precepts; for nothing is more plain than that Laws can be of no Use
to direct and regulate perfect Accident; which by the Supposition of it is being
pure Accident, is in no Case regulated by any Thing preceding; but happens
this Way or that perfectly by Chance, without any Cause or Rule. The perfect
Uselesness of Laws and Precepts also follows from the Arminian Notion of
Indifference, as essential to that Liberty which is requisite to Virtue or
Vice. For the End of Laws is to bind to one Side; and the End of Commands is to
turn the Will one Way: and therefore they are of no Use unless they turn or
bias the Will that Way. But if Liberty consists in Indifference, then their
biassing the Will one Way only, destroys Liberty; as it puts the Will out of
Equilibrium. So that the Will, having a Bias, through the Influence of binding
Law, laid upon it, is not wholly left to it self, to determine it self which
Way it will, without Influence from without.

II. Having shown that the Will it self, especially in those Acts which are
original, leading and determining in any Case, is the proper Subject of Precept
and Command, and not only those Alterations in the Body, etc. which are the
Effects of the Will; I now proceed in the second Place, to observe that the
very Opposition or Defect of the Will it self, in that Act which is it is
original and determining Act in the Case, I say the Will's Opposition in this
Act to a Thing proposed or commanded, or it is failing of Compliance, implies a
moral Inability to that Thing: Or in other Words, whenever a Command requires a
certain State or Act of the Will, and the Person commanded, notwithstanding the
Command and the Circumstances under which it is exhibited, still finds his Will
opposite or wanting, in that, belonging to it is State or Acts, which is
original and determining in the Affair, that Man is morally unable to obey that
Command.

This is manifest from what was observed in the first Part, concerning the
Nature of moral Inability, as distinguished from natural: where it was
observed, That a Man may then be said to be morally unable to do a Thing, when
He is under the Influence or Prevalence of a contrary Inclination, or has a
Want of Inclination, under such Circumstances and Views. It Is also evident from
what has been before proved, that the Will is always, and in every individual
Act, necessarily determined by the strongest Motive; and so is always unable to
go against the Motive, which all Things considered, has now the greatest
Strength and Advantage to move the Will. -- But not further to insist on these
Things, the Truth of the Position now laid down, viz. That when the Will is
opposite to, or failing of a Compliance with a Thing in it is original
determining Inclination or Act, it is not able to comply, appears by the
Consideration of these two Things.

1. The Will in the Time of that diverse or opposite leading Act or
Inclination, and when actually under the Influence of it, is not able to exert
it self to the contrary, to make an Alteration, in order to a Compliance. The
Inclination is unable to change it self; and that for this plain Reason, that
it is unable to incline to change it self. Present Choice cannot ^t present
choose to be otherwise: for that would be at present to choose something diverse
from what is at present chosen. If the Will, all Things now considered,
inclines or chooses to go that Way, then it cannot choose, all Things now
considered, to go the other Way, and so cannot choose to be made to go the other
Way. To suppose that the Mind is now sincerely inclined to change it self to a
different Inclination, is to suppose the Mind is now truly inclined otherwise
than it is now inclined. The Will may oppose some future remote Act that it is
exposed to, but not its own present Act.

2. As it is impossible that the Will should comply with the Thing commanded
with Respect to it is leading Act, by any Act of it is own, in the Time of that
diverse or opposite leading and original Act, or after it is actually come
under the Influence of that determining Choice or Inclination; so it is
impossible it should be determined to a Compliance by any foregoing Act; for by
the very Supposition, there is no foregoing Act; the opposite or non-complying
Act being that Act which is original and determining in the Case. Therefore it
must be so, that if this first determining Act be found non-complying, on the
Proposal of the Command, the Mind is morally unable to obey. For to suppose it
to be able to obey, is to suppose it to be able to determine and cause it is
first determining Act to be otherwise, and that it has Power better to govern
and regulate it is first governing and regulating Act, which is absurd; For it
is to suppose a prior Act of the Will, determining it is first determining Act;
that is, an Act prior to the first, and leading and governing the original and
governing Act of all; which is a Contradiction.

Here if it should be said, that although the Mind has not any Ability to will
contrary to what it does will, in the original and leading Act of the Will,
because there is supposed to be no prior Act to determine and order it
otherwise, and the Will cannot immediately change it self, because it cannot at
present incline to a Change; yet the Mind has an Ability for the present to
forbear to proceed to Action, and take Time for Deliberation; which may be an
Occasion of the Change of the Inclination.

I answer, (1.) In this Objection that seems to be forgotten which was observed
before, viz. that the determining to take the Matter into Consideration, is it
self an Act of the Will: And if this be all the Act wherein the Mind exercises
Ability and Freedom, then this, by the Supposition, must be all that can be
commanded or required by Precept. And if this Act be the commanded Act, then
all that has been observed concerning the commanded Act of the Will remains
true, that the very Want of it is a moral Inability to exert it, etc. (2.) We
are speaking concerning the first and leading Act of the Will in the Case, or
about the Affair; And if a Determining to deliberate, or on the contrary, to
proceed immediately without deliberating, be the first and leading Act; or
whether it be or no, if there be another Act before it, which determines that;
or whatever be the original and leading Act; still the foregoing Proof stands
good, that the Noncompliance of the leading Act implies moral Inability to
comply.

If it should be objected, that these Things make all moral Inability equal,
and suppose Men morally unable to will otherwise than they actually do will, in
all Cases, and equally so, in every Instance.

In answer to this Objection, I desire two Things may be observed. First, That
if by being equally unable, be meant as really unable; then so far ^s the
Inability is merely moral, it is true, the Will, in every Instance, acts by
moral Necessity, and is morally unable to act otherwise, as truly and proper^y
in one Case as another; as, I humbly conceive, has been perfectly and
abundantly demonstrated by what has been said in the preceding Part of this
Essay. But yet, in some Respect, the Inability may be said to be greater in
some Instances than others: Though the Man may be truly unable, (if moral
Inability can truly be called Inability,) yet he may be further from being able
to do some Things than others. As it is in Things which Men are naturally
unable to do. A Person whose Strength is no more than sufficient to lift the
Weight of one Hundred Pounds, is as truly and really unable to lift one Hundred
and one Pounds, as ten Thousand Pounds; but yet he is further from being able
to lift the latter Weight than the former; and so, according to common Use of
Speech, has a greater Inability for it. So it is in moral Inability. A Man is
truly morally unable to choose contrary to a present Inclination, which in the
least Degree prevails; or contrary to that Motive, which, all Things
considered, has Strength and Advantage now to move the Will, in the least
Degree, superior to all other Motives in View: But yet he is further from
Ability to resist a very strong Habit, and a violent and deeply rooted
Inclination, or a Motive vastly exceeding all others in Strength. And again,
the Inability may in some Respects be called greater, in some Instances than
others, as it may be more general and extensive to all Acts of that Kind. So
Men may be said to be unable in a different Sense, and to be further from moral
Ability, who have that moral Inability which is general and habitual, than they
who have only that Inability which is occasional and particular. See this
Distinction of moral Inability explained in PART I. Sect. IV.
Thus in Cases of natural Inability; he that is born blind may be said to be
unable to see, in a different Manner, and is in some Respects further from
being able to see, than He whose Sight is hindered by a transient Cloud or Mist.

And besides, that which was observed in the first Part of this Discourse
concerning the Inability which attends a strong and settled Habit, should be
here remembered; viz. That fixed Habit is attended with this peculiar moral
Inability, by which it is distinguished from occasional Volition, namely, that
Endeavors to avoid future Volitions of that Kind, which are agreeable to such a
Habit, much more frequently and commonly prove vain and insufficient. For though
it is impossible there should be any true sincere Desires and Endeavors
against a present Volition or Choice, yet there may be against Volitions of
that Kind, when viewed at a Distance. A Person may desire and use Means to
prevent future Exercises of a certain Inclination; and in order to it, may wish
the Habit might be removed; but his Desires and Endeavors may be ineffectual.
The Man may be said in some Sense to be unable; yea, even as the Word unable is
a relative Term, and has Relation to ineffectual Endeavors; yet not with
Regard to present, but remote Endeavors.

Secondly, It must be borne in Mind, according to what was observed before,
that indeed no Inability whatsoever which is merely moral, is properly called
by the Name of Inability; and that in the strictest Propriety of Speech, a Man
may be said to have a Thing in his Power, if he has it at his Election; and He
cannot be said to be unable to do a Thing, when He can if He now pleases, or
whenever he has a proper, direct and immediate Desire for it. As to those
Desires and Endeavors that may be against the Exercises of a strong Habit,
with Regard to which Men may be said to be unable to avoid those Exercises,
they are remote Desires and Endeavors in two Respects. First, as to Time; they
are never against present Volitions, but only against Volitions of such a Kind,
when viewed at a Distance. Secondly, as to their Nature; these opposite Desires
are not directly and properly against the Habit and Inclination itself, or the
Volitions in which it is exercised; for these, in themselves considered, are
agreeable; but against something else, that attends them, or is their
Consequence; the Opposition of the Mind is levelled entirely against this; the
Inclination or Volitions themselves are not at all opposed directly, and for
their own sake; but only indirectly, and remotely on the Account of something
alien^ and foreign.

III. Though the Opposition of the Will it self, or the very want of Will to a
Thing commanded, implies a moral Inability to that Thing; yet, if it be as has
been already shown, that the Being of a good State or Act of Will, is a Thing
most properly required by Command; then, in some Cases such a State or Act of
Will may properly be required, which at present is not, and which may also be
wanting after it is commanded. And therefore those Things may properly be
commanded, which Men have a moral Inability for.

Such a State or Act of the Will, may be required by Command, as does not
already exist. For if that Volition only may be commanded to be which already
is, there could be no use of Precept; Commands in all Cases would be perfectly
vain and impertinent. And not only may such a Will be required as is wanting
before the Command is given, but also such as may possibly be wanting
afterward; such as the Exhibition of the Command may not be effectual to
produce or excite. Otherwise, no such Thing as Disobedience to a proper and
rightful Command is possible in any Case; and there is no Case supposable or
possible, wherein there can be an inexcusable or faulty Disobedience. Which
Arminians cannot affirm, consistently with their Principles: for this makes
Obedience to just and proper Commands always necessary, and Disobedience
impossible. And so the Arminian would overthrow Himself, yielding the very
Point we are upon, which He so strenuously denies, viz. that Law and Command
are consistent with Necessity.

If merely that Inability will excuse Disobedience, which is implied in the
Opposition or Defect of Inclination, remaining after the Command is exhibited,
then Wickedness always carries that in it which excuses it. It Is evermore so,
that by how much the more Wickedness there is in a Man's Heart, by so much is
his Inclination to Evil the stronger, and by so much the more therefore has he
of moral Inability to the Good required. His moral Inability, consisting in the
Strength of his evil Inclination, is the very Thing wherein his Wickedness
consists; and yet according to Arminian Principles, it must be a Thing
inconsistent with Wickedness; and by how much the more he has of it, by so much
is he the further from Wickedness.

Therefore, on the whole, it is manifest, that moral Inability alone (which
consists in Disinclination) never renders any Thing improperly the
subject matter of Precept or Command, and never can excuse any Person in
Disobedience, or Want of Conformity to a Command.

Natural Inability, arising from the Want of natural Capacity, or external
Hindrance (which alone is properly called Inability) without doubt wholly
excuses, or makes a Thing improperly the Matter of Command. If Men are excused
from doing or acting any good Thing, supposed to be commanded, it must be
through some Defect or Obstacle that is not in the Will itself, but extrinsic
to it; either in the Capacity of Understanding, or Body, or outward
Circumstances.

Here two or three Things may be observed,

1. As to spiritual Duties or Acts, or any good Thing in the State or immanent
Acts of the Will it self, or of the Affections (which are only certain Modes of
the Exercise of the Will) if Persons are justly excused, it must be through want
of Capacity in the natural Faculty of Understanding. Thus the same spiritual
Duties, or holy Affections and Exercises of Heart, cannot be required of Men, as
may be of Angels; the Capacity of Understanding being so much inferior. So Men
cannot be required to love those amiable Persons whom they have had no
Opportunity to see, or hear of, or come to the Knowledge of, in any Way
agreeable to the natural State and Capacity of the human Understanding. But the
Insufficiency of Motives will not excuse; unless their being insufficient
arises not from the moral State of the Will or Inclination it self, but from
the State of the natural Understanding. The great Kindness and Generosity of
another may be a Motive insufficient to excite Gratitude in the Person that
receives the Kindness, through his vile and ungrateful Temper: In this Case, the
Insufficiency of the Motive arises from the State of the Will or Inclination of
Heart, and don't at all excuse. But if this Generosity is not sufficient to
excite Gratitude, being unknown, there being no Means of Information adequate
to the State and Measure of the Person's Faculties, this Insufficiency is
attended with a natural Inability, which entirely excuses.

2. As to such Motions of Body, or Exercises and Alterations of Mind, which
don't consist in the immanent Acts or State of the Will it self, but are
supposed to be required as Effects of the Will; I say, in such supposed Effects
of the Will, in Cases wherein there is no Want of a Capacity of Understanding;
that Inability, and that only excuses, which consists in Want of Connection
between them and the Will. If the Will fully complies, and the proposed Effect
don't prove, according to the Laws of Nature, to be connected with his
Volition, the Man is perfectly excused; he has a natural Inability to the Thing
required. For the Will itself, as has been observed, is all that can be
directly and immediately required by Command; and other Things only indirectly,
as connected with the Will. If therefore there be a full Compliance of Will,
the Person has done his Duty; and if other Things don't prove to be connected
with his Volition, that is not owing to him.

3. Both these Kinds of natural Inability that have been mentioned, and so all
Inability that excuses, may be resolved into one Thing; namely, Want of natural
Capacity or Strength; either Capacity of Understanding, or external Strength.
For when there are external Defects and Obstacles, they would be no Obstacles,
were it not for the Imperfection and Limitations of Understanding and Strength.

Corol. If Things for which Men have a moral Inability, may properly be the
Matter of Precept or Command, then they may also of Invitation and Counsel.
Commands, and Invitations come very much to the same Thing; the Difference is
only circumstantial: Commands are as much a Manifestation of the Will of him
that speaks, as Invitations, and as much Testimonies of Expectation of
Compliance. The Difference between them lies in nothing that touches the Affair
in Hand. The main Difference between Command and Invitation consists in the
Enforcement of the Will of Him who commands or invites. In the latter it is his
Kindness, the Goodness which his Will arises from: in the former it is his
Authority. But whatever be the Ground of the Will of him that speaks, or the
Enforcement of what he says, yet seeing neither his Will nor Expectation is any
more testified in the one Case than the other; therefore a Person's being known
to be morally unable to do the Thing to which he is directed by Invitation, is
no more an Evidence of Insincerity in him that directs, in manifesting either a
Will, or Expectation which he has not, than his being known to be morally
unable to do what he is directed to by Command. -- So that all this grand
Objection of Arminians against the Inability of fallen Men to exert Faith in
Christ, or to perform other spiritual Gospel-Duties, from the Sincerity of
God's Counsels and Invitations, must be without Force.

SECTION V. That Sincerity of Desires and Endeavors, which is supposed to
excuse in the Nonperformance of Things in themselves good, particularly
considered.
IT IS what is much insisted on by many, that some Men, though they are not able
to perform spiritual Duties, such as Repentance of Sin, Love to God, a cordial
Acceptance of Christ as exhibited and offered in the Gospel, etc. yet they may
sincerely desire and endeavor these Things; and therefore must be excused; it
being unreasonable to blame 'em for the Omission of those Things which they
sincerely desire and endeavor to do, but cannot do.

Concerning this Matter, the following Things may be observed.

1. What is here supposed, is a great Mistake, and gross Absurdity; even that
Men may sincerely choose and desire those spiritual Duties of Love, Acceptance,
Choice, Rejection etc. consisting in the Exercise of the Will it self, or in
the Disposition and Inclination of the Heart; and yet not be able to perform or
exert them. This is absurd, because it is absurd to suppose that a Man should
directly, properly and sincerely incline to have an Inclination, which at the
same Time is contrary to his Inclination: for that is* to suppose him not to be
inclined to that which he is inclined to. If a Man, in the State and Acts of
his Will and Inclination, does properly and directly fall in with those Duties,
he therein performs 'em: For the Duties themselves consist in that very Thing;
they consist in the State and Acts of the Will being so formed and directed. If
the Soul properly and sincerely falls in with a certain proposed Act of Will or
Choice, the Soul therein makes that Choice it is own. Even as when a moving Body
falls in with a proposed Direction of its Motion, that is the same Thing as to
move in that Direction.

2. That which is called a Desire and Willingness for those inward Duties, in
such as don't perform them, has respect to these Duties only indirectly and
remotely, and is improperly represented as a Willingness for them; not only
because (as was observed before) it respects those good Volitions only in a
distant View, and with respect to future Time; but also because evermore, not
these Things themselves, but something else, that is aliene and foreign, is the
Object that terminates these Volitions and Desires.

A Drunkard, who continues in his Drunkenness, being under the Power of a Love,
and violent Appetite to strong Drink, and without any Love to Virtue; but being
also extremely covetous and close, and very much exercised and grieved at the
Diminution of his Estate, and Prospect of Poverty, may in a Sort desire the
Virtue of Temperance: and though his present Will is to gratify his extravagant
Appetite, yet he may wish he had a Heart to forbear future Acts of
Intemperance, and forsake his Excesses, through an Unwillingness to part with his
Money: But still he goes on with his Drunkenness; his Wishes and Endeavors are
insufficient and ineffectual: Such a Man has no proper, direct, sincere
Willingness to forsake this Vice, and the vicious Deeds which belong to it: for
He acts voluntarily in continuing to drink to excess: His Desire is very
improperly called a Willingness to be temperate; it is no true Desire of that
Virtue; for it is not that Virtue that terminates his Wishes; nor have they any
direct Respect at all to it. It Is only the saving his Money, and avoiding
Poverty, that terminates, and exhausts the whole Strength of his Desire. The
Virtue of Temperance is regarded only very indirectly and improperly, even as a
necessary Means of gratifying the Vice of Covetousness.

So, a Man of an exceeding corrupt and wicked Heart, who has no Love to God and
Jesus Christ, but on the contrary, being very profanely and carnally inclined,
has the greatest Distaste of the Things of Religion, and Enmity against 'em;
yet being of a Family, that from one Generation to another, have most of 'em
died in Youth of an hereditary Consumption; and so having little Hope of living
long; and having been instructed in the Necessity of a supreme Love to Christ,
and Gratitude for his Death and Sufferings, in Order to his Salvation from
eternal Misery; if under these Circumstances he should, through Fear of eternal
Torments, wish he had such a Disposition: But his profane and carnal Heart
remaining, He continues still in his habitual distaste of, and Enmity to God
and Religion, and wholly without any Exercise of that Love and Gratitude, (as
doubtless the very Devils themselves, notwithstanding all the Devilishness of
their Temper, would wish for a holy Heart, if by that Means they could get out
of Hell:) In this Case, there is no sincere Willingness to love Christ and
choose him as his chief Good: These holy Dispositions and Exercises are not at
all the direct Object of the Will: they truly share no Part of the Inclination
or Desire of the Soul; but all is terminated on Deliverance from Torment: and
these Graces and pious Volitions, notwithstanding this forced Consent, are
looked upon undesirable; as when a sick Man desires a Dose he greatly abhors,
to save his Life. -- From these Things it appears.

3. That this indirect Willingness which has been spoken of, is not that
Exercise of the Will which the Command requires; but is entirely a different
one; being a Volition of a different Nature, and terminated altogether on
different Objects; wholly falling short of that Virtue of Will, which the
Command has respect to.

4. This other Volition, which has only some indirect Concern with the Duty
required, cannot excuse for the Want of that good Will it self, which is
commanded; being not the Thing which answers and fulfils the Command, and being
wholly destitute of the Virtue which the Command seeks.

Further to illustrate this Matter. -- If a Child has a most excellent Father,
that has ever treated him with fatherly Kindness and Tenderness, and has every
Way in the highest Degree merited his Love and dutiful Regard, being withal
very wealthy; but the Son is of so vile a Disposition, that He inveterately
^ates his Father; and yet, apprehending that his Hatred of Him is like to prove
his Ruin, by bringing Him finally to Poverty and abject Circumstances, through
his Father's disinheriting Him, or otherwise; which is exceeding cross to his
Avarice and Ambition; He therefore wishes it were otherwise: but yet remaining
under the invincible Power of his vile and malignant Disposition, He continues
still in his settled Hatred of his Father. Now if such a Son's indirect
Willingness to have Love and Honor toward his Father, at all acquits or
excuses before God, for his failing of actually exercising these Dispositions
toward Him which God requires, it must be on one of these two Accounts. (1.)
Either that it answers and fulfils the Command. But this it does not, by the
Supposition; because the Thing commanded is Love and Honor to his worthy
Parent. If the Command be proper and just, as is supposed, then it obliges to
the Thing commanded; and so nothing else but that can answer the Obligation.
Or, (2.) It must be at least because there is that Virtue or Goodness in his
indirect Willingness, that is equivalent to the Virtue required; and so
balances or countervails it, and makes up for the Want of it. But that also is
contrary to the Supposition. The Willingness the Son has merely from a Regard
to Money and Honor, has no Goodness in it, to countervail the Want of the
pious filial Respect required.

Sincerity and Reality, in that indirect Willingness which has been spoken of,
don't make it the better. That which is real and hearty is often called
sincere; whether it be in Virtue or Vice. Some Persons are sincerely bad;
others are sincerely good; and others may be sincere and hearty in Things which
are in their own Nature indifferent; as a Man may be sincerely desirous of
eating when he is hungry. But a being sincere, hearty and in good Earnest, is
no Virtue, unless it be in a Thing that is virtuous. A Man may be sincere and
hearty in joining a Crew of Pirates, or a Gang of Robbers. When the Devils
cried out, and besought Christ not to torment them, it was no mere Pretense;
they were very hearty in their Desires not to be tormented: but this did not
make their Will or Desires virtuous. And if Men have sincere Desires, which are
in their Kind and Nature no better, it can be no Excuse for the want of any
required Virtue.

And as a Man's being sincere in such an indirect Desire or Willingness to do
his Duty, as has been mentioned, cannot excuse for the want of Performance; so
it is with Endeavors arising from such a Willingness. The Endeavors can have
no more Goodness in 'em, than the Will which they are the Effect and Expression
of. And therefore, however sincere and real, and however great a Person's
Endeavors are; yea, though they should be to the utmost of his Ability; unless
the Will which they proceed from be truly good and virtuous, they can be of no
Avail, Influence or Weight to any Purpose whatsoever, in a moral Sense or
Respect. That which is not truly virtuous in God's Sight, is looked upon by Him
as good for Nothing: and so can be of no Value, Weight or Influence in his
Account, to recommend, satisfy, excuse or make up for any moral Defect. For
nothing can counter-balance Evil, but Good. If Evil be in one Scale, and we put
a great deal into the other, sincere and earnest Desires, and many and great
Endeavors; yet if there be no real Goodness in all, there is no Weight in it;
and so it does nothing toward balancing the real Weight which is in the
opposite Scale. It Is only like the substracting a Thousand Noughts from before a
real Number, which leaves the Sum just as it was.

Indeed such Endeavors may have a negatively good Influence. Those Things
which have no positive Virtue, have no positive moral Influence; yet they may
be an Occasion of Persons avo^ding some positive Evils. As if a Man were in the
Water with a Neighbor that he had ill will to, who could not swim, holding him
by his Hand; which Neighbor was much in Debt to Him; and should be tempted to
let him sink and drown; but should refuse to comply with the Temptation; not
from Love to his Neighbor, but from the Love of Money, and because by his
drowning He should lose his Debt; that which he does in preserving his
Neighbor from drowning, is nothing good in the Sight of God: Yet hereby he
avoids the greater Guilt that would have been contracted, if he had designedly
let his Neighbor sink and perish. But when Arminians in their Disputes with
Calvinists insist so much on sincere Desires and Endeavors, as what must
excuse Men, must be accepted of God etc. it is manifest they have Respect to
some positive moral Weight or Influence of those Desires and Endeavors.
Accepting, justifying, or excusing on the Account of sincere honest Endeavors
(as they are called) and Men's doing what they can, etc. has Relation to some
moral Value, something that is accepted as Good, and as such, countervailing
some Defect.

But there is a great and unknown Deceit, arising from the Ambiguity of the
Phrase, sincere Endeavors. Indeed there is a vast Indistinctness and
Unfixedness in most, or at least very many of the Terms used to express Things
pertaining to moral and spiritual Matters. Whence arise innumerable Mistakes,
strong Prejudices, inextricable Confusion, and endless Controversy.

The Word sincere is most commonly used to signify something that is good: Men
are habituated to understand by it the same as honest and upright* which Terms
excite an Idea of something good in the strictest and highest Sense; good in
the Sight of Him who sees not only the outward Appearance, but the Heart. And
therefore Men think that if a Person be sincere, he will certainly be accepted.
If it be said that any one is sincere in his Endeavors, this suggests to Men's
Minds as much, as that his Heart and Will is good, that there is no Defect of
Duty, as to virtuous Inclination; he honestly and uprightly desires and
endeavors to do as he is required; and this leads 'em to suppose that it would
be very hard and unreasonable to punish him, only because he is unsuccessful in
his Endeavors, the Thing endeavored being beyond his Power. -- Whereas it
ought to be observed, that the Word sincere has these different Significations.

1. Sincerity, as the Word is sometimes used, signifies no more then Reality of
Will and Endeavor, with respect to any Thing that is professed or pretended;
without any Consideration of the Nature of the Principle or Aim, whence this
real Will and true Endeavor arises. If a Man has some real Desire to obtain a
Thing, either direct or indirect, or does really endeavor after a Thing, he is
said sincerely to desire or endeavor ^t; without any Consideration of the
Goodness or Vertuousness of the Principle he acts from, or any Excellency or
Worthiness of the End he acts for. Thus a Man that is kind to his Neighbor's
Wife, who is sick and languishing, and very helpful in her Case, makes a Show
of desiring and endeavoring her Restoration to Health and Vigor; and not only
makes such a Show, but there is a Reality in his Pretense, he does heartily and
earnestly desire to have her Health restored, and uses his true and utmost
Endeavors for it; He is said sincerely to desire and endeavor it, because he
does so truly or really; though perhaps the Principle he acts from, is no other
than a vile and scandalous Passion; having lived in Adultery with her, he
earnestly desires to have her Health and Vigor restored, that he may return to
his criminal Pleasures with her. Or,

2. By Sincerity is meant, not merely a Reality of Will and Endeavor of some
Sort or other, and from some Consideration or other, but a virtuous Sincerity.
That is, that in the Performance of those particular Acts that are the Matter
of Virtue or Duty, there be not only the Matter, but the Form and Essence of
Virtue, consisting in the Aim that governs the Act, and the Principle exercised
in it. There is not only the Reality of the Act, that is as it were the Body of
the Duty; but also the Soul, which should properly belong to such a Body. In
this Sense, a Man is said to be sincere, when he acts with a pure Intention;
not from sinister Views, or bye-Ends: He not only in Reality desires and seeks
the Thing to be done, or Qualification to be obtained, for some End or other;
But he wills the Thing directly and properly, as neither forced nor bribed; the
Virtue of the Thing is properly the Object of the Will.

In the former Sense, a Man is said to be sincere, in Opposition to a mere
Pretense, and Show of the particular Thing to be done or exhibited, without any
real Desire or Endeavor at all. In the latter Sense, a Man is said to be
sincere, in Opposition to that Show of Virtue there is in merely doing the
Matter of Duty, without the Reality of the Virtue it self in the Soul, and the
Essence of it, which there is a Show of. A Man may be sincere in the former
Sense, and yet in the latter be in the Sight of God, who searches the Heart, a
vile Hypocrite.

In the latter Kind of Sincerity, only, is there any Thing truly valuable or
acceptable in the Sight of God. And this is the Thing which in Scripture is
called Sincerity, Uprightness, Integrity, Truth in the inward Parts, and a
being of a perfect Heart. And if there be such a Sincerity, and such a Degree
of it as there ought to be, and there be any Thing further that the Man is not
able to perform, or which don't prove to be connected with his sincere Desires
and Endeavors, the Man is wholly excused and acquitted in the Sight of God;
His Will shall surely be accepted for his Deed: And such a sincere Will and
Endeavor is all that in Strictness is required of him, by any Command of God.
But as to the other Kind of Sincerity of Desires and Endeavors, it having no
Virtue in it, (as was observed before) can be of no Avail before God, in any
Case, to recommend, satisfy, or excuse, and has no positive moral Weight or
Influence whatsoever.

Corol. 1. Hence it may be inferred, that Nothing in the Reason and Nature of
Things appears, from the Consideration of any moral Weight of that former Kind
of Sincerity, which has been spoken of, at all obliging us to believe, or
leading us to suppose, that God has made any positive Promises of Salvation, or
Grace, or any saving Assistance, or any spiritual Benefit whatsoever, to any
Desires, Prayers, Endeavors, Striving, or Obedience of those, who hitherto
have no true Virtue or Holiness in their Hearts; though we should suppose all the
Sincerity, and the utmost Degree of Endeavor, that is possible to be in a
Person without Holiness.

Some object against God's requiring, as the Condition of Salvation, those holy
Exercises, which are the Result of a supernatural Renovation; such as a supreme
Respect to Christ* Love to God, loving Holiness for it is own sake, etc. that
these inward Dispositions and Exercises are above Men's Power, as they are by
Nature; and therefore that we may conclude, that when Men are brought to be
sincere in their Endeavors, and do as well as they can, they are accepted; and
that this must be all that God requires in order to Men's being received as the
Objects of his Favor, and must be what God has appointed as the Condition of
Salvation. Concerning which I would observe, that in such a Manner of Speaking
of Men's being accepted, because they are sincere, and do as well as they can,
there is evidently a Supposition of some Virtue, some Degree of that which is
truly Good; though it don't go so far as were to be wished. For if Men do what
they can, unless their so doing be from some good Principle, Disposition, or
Exercise of Heart, some virtuous Inclination or Act of the Will; their so doing
what they can, is in some Respects not a Whit better than if they did Nothing
at all. In such a Case, there is no more positive moral Goodness in a Man's
doing what he can, than in a Wind-Mill's doing what it can; because the Action
does no more proceed from Virtue; and there is Nothing in such Sincerity of
Endeavor, or doing what we can, that should render it any more a proper or fit
Recommendation to positive Favor and Acceptance, or the Condition of any
Reward or actual Benefit, than doing Nothing; for both the one and the other
are alike Nothing, as to any true moral Weight or Value.

Corol. 2. Hence also it follows, there is Nothing that appears in the Reason
and Nature of Things, which can justly lead us to determine, that God will
certainly give the necessary Means of Salvation, or some Way or other bestow
true Holiness and eternal Life on those Heathen, who are sincere (in the Sense
above explained) in their Endeavors to find out the Will of the Deity, and to
please Him, according to their Light, that they may escape his future
Displeasure and Wrath, and obtain Happiness in their future State, through his
Favor.

SECTION VI. Liberty of Indifference, not only not necessary to Virtue, but
utterly inconsistent with it; And all, either virtuous or vicious Habits or
Inclinations, inconsistent with Arminian Notions of Liberty and moral Agency.
TO suppose such a Freedom of Will, as Arminians talk of, to be requisite to
Virtue and Vice, is many Ways contrary to common Sense.

If Indifference belongs to Liberty of Will, as Arminians suppose, and it be
essential to a virtuous Action that it be performed in a State of Liberty, as
they also suppose; it will follow, that it is essential to a virtuous Action
that it be performed in a State of Indifference: And if it be performed in a
State of Indifference, then doubtless it must be performed in the Time of
Indifference. And so it will follow, that in order to the Vertuousness of an
Act, the Heart must be indifferent in the Time of the Performance of that Act,
and the more indifferent and cold the Heart is with Relation to the Act which
is performed, so much the better; because the Act is performed with so much the
greater Liberty. But is this agreeable to the Light of Nature? Is it agreeable to
the Notions which Mankind, in all Ages, have of Virtue, that it lies in that
which is contrary to Indifference, even in the Tendency and Inclination of the
Heart to virtuous Action; and that the stronger the Inclination, and so the
further from Indifference, the more virtuous the Heart, and so much the more
praiseworthy the Act which proceeds from it?

If we should suppose (contrary to what has been before demonstrated) that
there may be an Act of Will in a State of Indifference; for Instance, this Act,
viz. The Will's determining to put it self out of a Stat^ of Indifference, and
give it self a Preponderation one Way, then it would follow, on Arminian
Principles, that this Act or Determination of the Will is that alone wherein
Virtue consists, because this only is performed while the Mind remains in a
State of Indifference, and so in a State of Liberty: For when once the Mind is
put out of it is Equilibrium, it is no longer in such a State; and therefore all
the Acts which follow afterward, proceeding from Bias, can have the Nature
neither of Virtue nor Vice. Or if the Thing which the Will can do, while yet in
a State of Indifference, and so of Liberty, be only to suspend acting, and
determine to take the Matter into Consideration, then this Determination is
that alone wherein Virtue consists, and not proceeding to Action after the
Scale is turned by Consideration. So that it will follow from these Principles,
all that is done after the Mind, by any Means, is once out of it is Equilibrium
and already possessed by an Inclination, and arising from that Inclination, has
nothing of the Nature of Virtue or Vice, and is worthy of neither (...) or
Praise. But how plainly contrary is this to the univer^^^ Sense of Mankind, and
to the Notion they have of (...) ^ertuous Actions? Which is, that they are
Actions which proceed from a Heart well disposed and inclined; and the
stronger, and the more fixed and determined the good Disposition of the Heart,
the greater the Sincerity of Virtue, and so the more of the Truth and Reality
of it. But if there be any Acts which are done in a State of Equilibrium, or
spring immediately from perfect Indifference and Coldness of Heart, they cannot
arise from any good Principle or Disposition in the Heart; and consequently,
according to common Sense, have no sincere Goodness in 'em, having no Virtue of
Heart in 'em. To have a virtuous Heart, is to have a Heart that favors Virtue,
and is friendly to it, and not one perfectly cold and indifferent about it.

And besides the Actions that are done in a State of Indifference, or that
arise immediately out of such a State, cannot be virtuous, because, by the
Supposition, they are not determined by any preceding Choice. For if there be
preceding Choice, then Choice intervenes between the Act and the State of
Indifference; which is contrary to the Supposition of the Act's arising
immediately out of Indifference. But those Acts which are not determined by
preceding Choice, cannot be virtuous or vicious by Arminian Principles, because
they are not determined by the Will. So that neither one Way, nor the other,
can any Actions be virtuous or vicious according to Arminian Principles. If the
Action be determined by a preceding Act of Choice it cannot be virtuous;
because the Action is not done in a State of Indifference, nor does immediately
arise from such a State; and so is not done in a State of Liberty. If the
Action be not determined by a preceding Act of Choice, then it cannot be
virtuous; because then the Will is not Self-determin'd in it. So that it is made
certain, that neither Virtue nor Vice can ever find any Place in the Universe.

Moreover, that it is necessary to a virtuous Action that it be performed in a
State of Indifference, under a Notion of that is being a State of Liberty, is
contrary to common Sense; as it is a Dictate of common Sense, that Indifference
it self, in many Cases, is vicious, and so to a high Degree. As if when I see
my Neighbor or near Friend, and one who has in the highest Degree merited of
me, in extreme Distress, and ready to perish, I find an Indifference in my
Heart with Respect to any Thing proposed to be done, which I can easily do, for
his Relief. So if it should be proposed to me, to blaspheme God, or kill my
Father, or to do numberless other Things which might be mentioned; the being
indifferent, for a Moment, would be highly vicious and vile.

And it may be further observed, that to suppose this Liberty of Indifference
is essential to Virtue and Vice, destroys the great Difference of Degrees of
the Guilt of different Crimes, and takes away the Heinousness of the most
flagitious horrid Iniquities; such as Adultery Bestiality, Murder, Perjury,
Blasphemy, etc. For according to these Principles, there is no Harm at all in
having the Mind in a State of perfect Indifference with Respect to these
Crimes; nay, it is absolutely necessary in order to any Virtue in avoiding them,
or Vice in doing them. But for the Mind to be in a State of Indifference with
Respect to 'em, is to be next Door to doing them: It is then infinitely near to
choosing, and so committing the Fact: For Equilibrium is the next Step to a
Degree of Preponderation; and one, even the least Degree of Preponderation (all
Things considered) is Choice. And not only so, but for the Will to be in a
State of perfect Equilibrium with Respect to such Crimes, is for the Mind to be
in such a State, as to be full as likely to choose 'em as to refuse 'em, to do
'em as to omit 'em. And if our Minds must be in such a State wherein it is as
near to choosing as refusing, and wherein it must of Necessity, according to the
Nature of Things, be as likely to commit 'em, as to refrain from 'em; where is
the exceeding Heinousness of choosing and committing them? If there be no Harm
in often being in such a State, wherein the Probability of doing and forbearing
are exactly equal, there being an Equilibrium, and no more Tendency to one than
the other; then according to the Nature and Laws of such a Contingence, it may
be expected, as an inevitable Consequence of such a Disposition of Things, that
we should choose 'em as often as reject 'em: That it should generally so fall
out is necessary, as Equality in the Effect is the natural Consequence of the
equal Tendency of the Cause, or of the antecedent State of Things from which
the Effect arises: Why then should we be so exceedingly to blame, if it does so
fall out?

It Is many Ways apparent, that the Arminian Scheme of Liberty is utterly
inconsistent with the being of any such Things as either virtuous or vicious
Habits or Dispositions. If Liberty of Indifference be essential to moral
Agency, then there can be no Virtue in any habitual Inclinations of the Heart;
which are contrary to Indifference, and imply in their Nature the very
Destruction and Exclusion of it. They suppose nothing can be virtuous, in which
no Liberty is exercised; but how absurd is it to talk of exercising
Indifference under Bias and Preponderation!

And if self-determining Power in the Will be necessary to moral Agency,
Praise, Blame, etc. then nothing done by the Will can be any further Praise or
Blameworthy, than so far as the Will is moved, swayed and determined by it
self, and the Scales turned by the sovereign Power the Will has over it self.
And therefore the Will must not be put out of it is Balance already* the
Preponderation must not be determined and effected beforehand; and so the
self-determining Act anticipated. Thus it appears another Way, that habitual
Bias is inconsistent with that Liberty which Arminians suppose to be necessary
to Virtue or Vice; and so it follows, that habitual Bias it self cannot be
either virtuous or vicious.

The same Thing follows from their Doctrine concerning the Inconsistence of
Necessity with Liberty, Praise, Dispraise, etc. None will deny, that Bias and
Inclination may be so strong as to be invincible, and leave no Possibility of
the Will's determining contrary to it; and so be attended with Necessity. This
Dr. Whitby allows concerning the Will of God, Angels and glorified Saints, with
Respect to Good; and the Will of Devils with Respect to Evil. Therefore if
Necessity be inconsistent with Liberty; then when fixed Inclination is to such
a Degree of Strength, it utterly excludes all Virtue, Vice, Praise or Blame.
And if so, then the nearer Habits are to this Strength, the more do they impede
Liberty, and so diminish Praise and Blame. If very strong Habits destroy
Liberty, the lesser Ones proportionably hinder it, according to their Degree of
Strength. And therefore it will follow, that then is the Act most virtuous or
vicious, when performed without any Inclination or habitual Bias at all;
because it is then performed with most Liberty.

Every pre-possessing fixed Bias on the Mind brings a Degree of moral Inability
for the contrary; because so far as the Mind is biassed and pre-possessed, so
much Hindrance is there of the contrary. And therefore if moral Inability be
inconsistent with moral Agency, or the Nature of Virtue and Vice, then so far
as there is any such Thing as evil Disposition of Heart, or habitual Depravity
of Inclination; whether Covetousness, Pride, Malice, Cruelty, or whatever else;
so much the more excusable Persons are; so much the less have their evil Acts
of this Kind, the Nature of Vice. And on the contrary, whatever excellent
Dispositions and Inclinations they have, so much are they the less virtuous.

It Is evident, that no habitual Disposition of Heart, whether it be to a
greater or lesser Degree, can be in any Degree virtuous or vicious; or the
Actions which proceed from them at all Praise or Blameworthy. Because, though we
should suppose the Habit not to be of such Strength as wholly to take away all
moral Ability and self-determining Power; or hinder but that, although the Act be
partly from Bias, yet it may be in Part from Self-determination; yet in this
Case, all that is from antecedent Bias must be set aside, as of no
Consideration; and in estimating the Degree of Virtue or Vice, no more must be
considered than what arises from self-determining Power, without any Influence
of that Bias, because Liberty is exercised in no more: So that all that is the
Exercise of habitual Inclination, is thrown away, as not belonging to the
Morality of the Action. By which it appears* that no Exercise of these Habits,
let 'em be stronger or weak^^ can ever have any Thing of the Nature of either
Virtue or Vice.

Here if any one should say, that notwithstanding all these Things, there may
be the Nature of Virtue and Vice in Habits of the Mind; because these Habits
may be the Effects of those Acts wherein the Mind exercised Liberty; that
however the forementioned Reasons will prove that no Habits which are natural,
or that any are born or crea^^d with us, can be either virtuous or vicious; yet
they will not prove this of Habits, which have been acquired and established by
repea^^d free Acts.

To such an Objector I would say, that this Evasion will not at all help the
Matter. For if Freedom of Will be essential to the very Nature of Virtue and
Vice, then there is no Virtue or Vice but only in that very Thing, wherein this
Liberty is exercised. If a Man in one or more Thing that he does, exercises
Liberty, and then by those Acts is brought into such Circumstances, that his
Liberty ceases, and there follows a long Series of Acts or Events that come to
pass necessarily; those consequent Acts are not virtuous or vicious, rewardable
or punishable; but only the free Acts that established this Necessity; for in
them alone was the Man free. The following Effects that are necessary, have no
more of the Nature of Virtue or Vice, than Health or Sickness of Body have
properly the Nature of Virtue or Vice, being the Effects of a Course of free
Acts of Temperance or Intemperance; or than the good Qualities of a Clock are
of the Nature of Virtue, which are the Effects of free Acts of the Artificer;
or the Goodness and Sweetness of the Fruits of a Garden are moral Virtues,
being the Effects of the free and faithful Acts of the Gardener. If Liberty be
absolutely requisite to the Morality of Actions, and Necessity wholly
inconsistent with it, as Arminians greatly insist; then no necessary Effects
whatsoever, let the Cause be never so good or bad, can be virtuous or vicious;
but the Virtue or Vice must be only in the free Cause. Agreably to this, Dr.
Whitby supposes, the Necessity that attends the good and evil Habits of the
Saints in Heaven, and Damned in Hell, which are the Consequence of their free
Acts in their State of Probation, are not rewardable or punishable.

On the whole, it appears, that if the Notions of Arminians concerning Liberty
and moral Agency be true, it will follow that there is no Virtue in any such
Habits or Qualities as Humility, Meekness, Patience, Mercy, Gratitude,
Generosity, Heavenly-mindedness; Nothing at all Praiseworthy in loving Christ
above Father and Mother, Wife and Children, or our own Lives; or in Delight in
Holiness, hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, Love to Enemies,
universal Benevolence to Mankind: And on the other Hand, there is nothing at
all ^icious, or worthy of Dispraise, in the most sordid, beastly, malignant,
devilish Dispositions* in being ungrateful, profane, habitually hating God, and
Things sacred and holy; or in being most treacherous, envious and cruel toward
Men. For all these Things are Dispositions and Inclinations of the Heart. And
in short, there is no such Thing as any virtuous or vicious Quality of Mind; no
such Thing as inherent Virtue and Holiness, or Vice and Sin: And the stronger
those Habits or Dispositions are, which used to be called virtuous and vicious,
the further they are from being so indeed; the more violent Men's Lusts are,
the more fixed their Pride, Envy, Ingratitude and Maliciousness, still the
further are they from being blameworthy. If there be a Man that by his own
repeated Acts, or by any other Means, is come to be of the most hellish
Disposition, desperately inclined to treat his Neighbors with Injuriousness,
Contempt and Malignity; the further they should be from any Disposition to be
angry with Him, or in the least to blame Him. So on the other Hand, if there be
a Person, who is of a most excellent Spirit, strongly inclining him to the most
amiable Actions, admirably meek, benevolent etc. so much is he further from any
Thing rewardable or commendable. On which Principles, the Man Jesus Christ was
very far from being Praiseworthy for those Acts of Holiness and Kindness which
He performed, these Propensities being so strong in his Heart. And above all,
the infinitely holy and gracious God, is infinitely remote from any Thing
commendable, his good Inclinations being infinitely strong, and He therefore at
the utmost possible Distance from being at Liberty. And in all Cases, the
stronger the Inclinations of any are to Virtue, and the more they love it, the
less virtuous they are; and the more they love Wickedness, the less vicious. --
Whether these Things are agreeable to Scripture, let every Christian, and every
Man who has read the Bible, judge: and whether they are agreeable to common
Sense, let every one judge, that have human Understanding in Exercise.

And if we pursue these Principles, we shall find that Virtue and Vice are
wholly excluded out of the World; and that there never was, nor ever can be any
such Thing as one or the other; either in God, Angels or Men. No Propensity,
Disposition or Habit can be virtuous or vicious, as has been shown; because
they, so far as they take Place, destroy the Freedom of the Will, the
Foundation of all moral Agency, and exclude all Capacity of either Virtue or
Vice. -- And if Habits and Dispositions themselves be not virtuous nor vicious,
neither can the Exercise of these Dispositions be so: For the Exercise of Bias
is not the Exercise of free self-determining Will, and so there is no Exercise
of Liberty in it. Consequently no Man is virtuous or vicious, either in being
well or ill disposed, nor in acting from a good or bad Disposition. And whether
this Bias or Disposition be habitual or not, if it exists but a Moment before
the Act of Will, which is the Effect of it, it alters not the Case, as to the
Necessity of the Effect. Or if there be no previous Disposition at all, either
habitual or occasional, that determines the Act, then it is not Choice that
determines it: it is therefore a Contingence, that happens to the Man, arising
from Nothing in him; and is necessary, as to any Inclination or Choice of his;
and therefore cannot make Him either the better or worse, any more than a Tree
is better than other Trees, because it oftener happens to be lit upon by a Swan
or Nightingal; or a Rock more vicious than other Rocks, because Rattle-Snakes
have happened oftener to crawl over it. So that there is no Virtue nor Vice in
good or bad Dispositions, either fixed or transient; nor any Virtue or Vice in
acting from any good or bad previous Inclination; nor yet any Virtue or Vice in
acting wholly without any previous Inclination. Where then shall we find Room
for Virtue or Vice?

SECTION VII. Arminian Notions of moral Agency inconsistent with all Influence
of Motive and Inducement, in either virtuous or vicious Actions.
AS Arminian Notions of that Liberty, which is essential to Virtue or Vice, are
inconsistent with common Sense, in their being inconsistent with all virtuous
or vicious Habits and Dispositions; so they are no less so in their
Inconsistency with all Influence of Motives in moral Actions.

It Is equally against those Notions of Liberty of Will, whether there be,
previous to the Act of Choice, a Preponderancy of the Inclination, or a
Preponderancy of those Circumstances, which have a Tendency to move the
Inclination. And indeed it comes to just the same Thing: To say, the
Circumstances of the Mind are such as tend to sway and turn it is Inclination
one Way, is the same Thing as to say, the Inclination of the Mind, as under
such Circumstances, tends that Way.

Or if any think it most proper to say, that Motives do alter the Inclination,
and give a new Bias to the Mind; it will not alter the Case, as to the present
Argument. For if Motives operate by giving the Mind an Inclination, then they
operate by destroying the Mind's Indifference, and laying it under a Bias. But
to do this, is to destroy the Arminian Freedom: It is not to leave the Will to
it is own Self-determination, but to bring it into Subjection to the Power of
something extrinsick, which operates upon it, sways and determines it, previous
to it is own Determination. So that what is done from Motive, cannot be either
virtuous or vicious -- And besides, if the Acts of the Will are excited by
Motives, those Motives are the Causes of those Acts of the Will: which makes
the Acts of the Will necessary; as Effects necessarily follow the Efficiency of
the Cause. And if the Influence and Power of the Motive causes the Volition,
then the Influence of the Motive determines Volition, and Volition don't
determine it self; and so is not free, in the Sense of Arminians (as has been
largely shown already) and consequently can be neither virtuous nor vicious.

The Supposition, which has already been taken Notice of as an insufficient
Evasion in other Cases, would be in like Manner impertinently alleged in this
Case; namely, the Supposition that Liberty consists in a Power of suspending
Action for the present, in order to Deliberation. If it should he said, Though it
be true, that the Will is under a Necessity of finally following the strongest
Motive, yet it may for the present forbear to act upon the Motive presented,
till there has been Opportunity thoroughly to consider it, and compare it is
real Weight with the Merit of other Motives. I answer, as follows.

Here again it must be remembered, that if determining thus to suspend and
consider, be that Act of the Will wherein alone Liberty is exercised, then in
this all Virtue and Vice must consist; and the Acts that follow this
Consideration, and are the Effects of it, being necessary, are no more virtuous
or vicious than some good or bad Events which happen when they are fast asleep,
and are the Consequences of what they did when they were awake. Therefore I
would here observe two Things.

1. To suppose that all Virtue and Vice, in every (...), consists in
determining whether to take Time for Consideration, or not, is not agreeable to
common Sense. For according to such a Supposition, the most horrid Crimes,
Adultery, Murder, Buggery, Blasphemy, etc. do not at all consist in the horrid
Nature of the Things themselves, but only in the Neglect of thorough
Consideration before they were perpetrated: which brings their Viciousness to a
small Matter, and makes all Crimes equal. If it be said, that Neglect of
Considerati^^^ when such heinous Evils are proposed to Choice, is worse than in
other Cases: I answer, this is inconsistent, as it supposes the very Thing to
be, which at the same Time is supposed not to be; it supposes all moral Evil,
all Viciousness and Heinousness, does not consist merely in the want of
Consideration. It supposes some Crimes in themselves, in their own Nature, to
be more heinous than others, antecedent to Consideration or Inconsideration,
which lays the Person under a previous Obligation to consider in some Cases
more than others.

2. If it were so, that all Virtue and Vice, in every Case, consisted only in
the Act of the Will, whereby it determines whether to consider or no, it would
not alter the Case in the least, as to the present Argument. For still in this
Act of the Will on this Determination, it is induced by some Motive, and
necessarily follows the strongest Motive; and so is necessary, even in that Act
wherein alone it is either virtuous or vicious.

One Thing more I would observe, concerning the Inconsistence of Arminian
Notions of moral Agency with the Influence of Motives. -- I suppose none will
deny, that it is possible for Motives to be set before the Mind so powerful, and
exhibited in so strong a Light, and under so advantageous Circumstances, as to
be invincible; and such as the Mind cannot but yield to. In this Case,
Arminians will doubtless say, Liberty is destroyed. And if so, then if Motives
are exhibited with half so much Power, they hinder Liberty in Proportion to
their Strength, and go halfway toward destroying it. If a Thousand Degrees of
Motive abolish all Liberty, then five Hundred take it half away. If one Degree
of the Influence of Motive don't at all infringe or diminish Liberty, then no
more do two Degrees; for Nothing doubled, is still Nothing. And if two Degrees
don't diminish the Will's Liberty, no more do four, eight, sixteen, or six
Thousand. For Nothing multiplied never so much, comes to but Nothing. If there
be nothing in the Nature of Motive or moral Suasion, that is at all opposite to
Liberty, then the greatest Degree of it cannot hurt Liberty. But if there be any
Thing in the Nature of the Thing, that is against Liberty, then the least
Degree of it hurts it in some Degree; and consequently hurts and diminishes
Virtue. If invincible Motives to that Action which is good, take away all the
Freedom of the Act, and so all the Virtue of it; then the more forceable the
Motives are, so much the worse, so much the less Virtue; and the weaker the
Motives are, the better for the Cause of Virtue; and none is best of all.

Now let it be considered, whether these Things are agreeable to common Sense.
If it should be allowed, that there are some Instances wherein the Soul chooses
without any Motive, what Virtue can there be in such a Choice? I am sure, there
is no Prudence or Wisdom in it. Such a Choice is made for no good End; for it
is for no End at all. If it were for any End, the View of the End would be the
Motive exciting to the Act; and if the Act be for no good End, and so from no
good Aim, then there is no good Intention in it: And therefore, according to
all our natural Notions of Virtue, no more Virtue in it than in the Motion of
the Smoke, which is driven to and fro by the Wind, without any Aim or End in
the Thing moved, and which knows not whither, nor why and wherefore, it is
moved.

Corol. 1. By these Things it appears, that the Argument against the
Calvinists, taken from the Use of Counsels, Exhortations, Invitations,
Expostulations, etc. so much insisted on by Arminians, is truly against
themselves. For these Things can operate no other Way to any good Effect, than
as in them is exhibited Motive and Inducement, tending to excite and determine
the Acts of the Will. But it follows on their Principles, that the Acts of Will
excited by such Causes, cannot be virtuous; because so far as they are from
these, they are not from the Will's self-determining Power. Hence it will
follow, that it is not worth the while to offer any Arguments to persuade Men
to any virtuous Volition or voluntary Action; it is in vain to set before them
the Wisdom and Amiableness of Ways of Virtue, or the Odiousness and Folly of
Ways of Vice. This Notion of Liberty and moral Agency frustrates all Endeavors
to draw Men to Virtue by Instruction, or Persuasion, Precept, or Example: For
though these Things may induce Men to what is materially virtuous, yet at the
same Time they take away the Form of Virtue, because they destroy Liberty; as
they, by their own Power, put the Will out of it is Equilibrium, determine and
turn the Scale, and take the Work of self-determining Power out of it is Hands.
And the clearer the Instructions are that are given, the more powerful the
Arguments that are used, and the more moving the Persuasions or Examples, the
more likely they are to frustrate their own Design; Because they have so much
the greater Tendency to put the Will out of it is Balance, to hinder it is
Freedom of self-determination; and so to exclude the very Form of Virtue, and
the Essence of whatsoever is Praiseworthy.

So it clearly follows from these Principles, that God has no Hand in any Man's
Virtue, nor does at all promote it, either by a physical or moral Influence;
that none of the moral Methods He uses with Men to promote Virtue in the World,
have Tendency to the Attainment of that End; that all the Instructions which He
has given to Men, from the Beginning of the World to this Day, by Prophets, or
Apostles, or by his Son Jesus Christ; that all his Counsels, Invitations,
Promises, Threatenings, Warnings and Expostulations; that all Means He has used
with Men, in Ordinances, or Providence; yea, all Influences of his Spirit,
ordinary and extraordinary, have had no Tendency at all to excite any one
virtuous Act of the Mind, or to promote any Thing morally good and commendable,
in any Respect. -- For there is no Way that these or any other Means can
promote Virtue, but one of these three. Either (1.) By a physical Operation on
the Heart. But all Effects that are wrought in Men in this Way, have no Virtue
in them, by the concurring Voice of all Arminians. Or (2.) Morally, by
exhibiting Motives to the Understanding, to excite good Acts in the Will. But
it has been demonstrated, that Volitions which are excited by Motives, are
necessary, and not excited by a self-moving Power; and therefore, by their
Principles, there is no Virtue in them. Or (3.) By merely giving the Will an
Opportunity to determine it self concerning the Objects proposed, either to
choose or reject, by it is own uncaused, unmoved, uninfluenced
self-determination. And if this be all, then all those Means do no more to
promote Virtue, than Vice: For they do Nothing but give the Will Opportunity to
determine it self either Way, either to Good or Bad, without laying it under
any Bias to either: And so there is really as much of an Opportunity given to
determine in Favor of Evil, as of Good.

Thus that horrid blasphemous Consequence will certainly follow from the
Arminian Doctrine, which they charge on others; namely, that God acts an
inconsistent Part in using so many Counsels, Warnings, Invitations, Entreaties,
etc. with Sinners, to induce 'em to forsake Sin, and turn to the Ways of
Virtue; and that all are insincere and fallacious. It will follow from their
Doctrine, that God does these Things when He knows at the same Time, that they
have no Manner of Tendency to promote the Effect He seems to aim at; yea, knows
that if they have any Influence, this very Influence will be inconsistent with
such an Effect, and will prevent it. But what an Imputation of Insincerity
would this fix on Him who is infinitely holy and true! -- So that their's is
the Doctrine which if pursued in it is Consequences, does horribly reflect on
the most High, and fix on Him the Charge of Hypocrisy; and not the Doctrine of
the Calvinist; according to their frequent, and vehement Exclamations and
Invectives.

Corol. 2. From what has been observed in this Section, it again appears, that
Arminian Principles and Notions, when fairly examined, and pursued in their
demonstrable Consequences, do evidently shut all Virtue out of the World, and
make it impossible that there should ever be any such Thing, in any Case; or
that any such Thing should ever be conceived of. For by these Principles, the
very Notion of Virtue or Vice implies Absurdity and Contradiction. For it is
absurd in it self, and contrary to common Sense, to suppose a virtuous Act of
Mind without any good Intention or Aim; and by their Principles, it is absurd
to suppose a virtuous Act with a good Intention or Aim; for to act for an End,
is to act from a Motive. So that if we rely on these Principles, there can be
no virtuous Act with a good Design and End; and it is self-evident, there can be
none without: consequently there can be no virtuous Act at all.

Corol. 3. It Is manifest, that Arminian Notions of moral Agency, and the Being
of a Faculty of Will, cannot consist together; and that if there be any such
Thing as, either a virtuous, or vicious Act, it cannot be an Act of Will; no
Will can be at all concerned in it. For that Act which is performed without
Inclination, without Motive, without End, must be performed without any Concern
of the Will. To suppose an Act of the Will without these, implies a
Contradiction. If the Soul in it is Act has no Motive or End; then in that Act
(as was observed before) it seeks Nothing, goes after Nothing, exerts no
Inclination to any Thing; and this implies, that in that Act it desires
Nothing, and chooses Nothing; so that there is no Act of Choice in the Case: And
that is as much as to say, there is no Act of Will in the Case. Which very
effectually shuts out all vicious and virtuous Acts out of the Universe; in as
much as, according to this, there can be no vicious or virtuous Act wherein the
Will is concerned; and according to the plainest Dictates of Reason, and the
Light of Nature, and also the Principles of Arminians themselves, there can be
no virtuous or vicious Act wherein the Will is not concerned. And therefore
there is no Room for any virtuous or vicious Acts at all.

Corol. 4. If none of the moral Actions of intelligent Beings are influenced by
either previous Inclination or Motive, another strange Thing will follow; and
this is, that God not only cannot foreknow any of the future moral Actions of
his Creatures, but He can make no Conjecture, can give no probable Guess
concerning them. For, all Conjecture in Things of this Nature, must depend on
some Discerning or Apprehension of these two Things, previous Disposition, and
Motive; which, as has been observed, Arminian Notions of moral Agency, in their
real Consequence, altogether exclude.

PART IV. Wherein the chief Grounds of the Reasonings of Arminians, in Support
and Defense of the forementioned Notions of Liberty, moral Agency, etc. and
against the opposite Doctrine, are considered.
SECTION I. The Essence of the Virtue and Vice of Dispositions of the Heart,
and Acts of the Will, lies not in their Cause, but their Nature.
ONE main Foundation of the Reasons, which are brought to establish the
forementioned Notions of Liberty, Virtue, Vice, etc. is a Supposition, that the
Vertuousness of the Dispositions or Acts of the Will consists not in the Nature
of these Dispositions or Acts, but wholly in the Origin or Cause of them: so
that if the Disposition of the Mind or Act of the Will be never so good, yet if
the Cause of the Disposition or Act be not our Virtue, there is nothing
virtuous or praiseworthy in it; and on the contrary, if the Will in it is
Inclination or Acts be never so bad, yet unless it arises from something that
is our Vice or Fault, there is Nothing vicious or blameworthy in it. Hence
their grand Objection and pretended Demonstration, or Self-Evidence, against
any Virtue and Commendableness, or Vice and Blame-worthiness, of those Habits
or Acts of the Will, which are not from some virtuous or vicious Determination
of the Will it self.

Now, if this Matter be well considered, it will appear to be altogether a
Mistake, yea, a gross-Absurdity; and that it is most certain, that if there be
any such Things, as a virtuous, or vicious Disposition, or Volition of Mind,
the Vertuousness or Viciousness of them consists not in the Origin or Cause of
these Things, but in the Nature of them.

If the Essence of Vertuousness or Commendableness, and of Viciousness or
Fault, don't lie in the Nature of the Dispositions or Acts of Mind, which are
said to be our Virtue or our Fault, but in their Cause, then it is certain it
lies no where at all. Thus, for Instance, if the Vice of a vicious Act of Will,
lies not in the Nature of the Act, but the Cause; so that it is being of a bad
Nature will not make it at all our Fault, unless it arises from some faulty
Determination of our's as it is Cause, or something in us that is our Fault;
then for the same Reason, neither can the Viciousness of that Cause lie in the
Nature of the Thing it self, but in it is Cause: that evil Determination of
our's is not our Fault, merely because it is of a bad Nature, unless it arises
from some Cause in us that is our Fault. And when we are come to this higher
Cause, still the Reason of the Thing holds good; though this Cause be of a bad
Nature, yet we are not at all to blame on that Account, unless it arises from
something faulty in us. Nor yet can Blame-worthiness lie in the Nature of this
Cause, but in the Cause of that. And thus we must drive Faultiness back from
Step to Step, from a lower Cause to a higher, in infinitum: and that is
thoroughly to banish it from the World, and to allow it no possibility of
Existence any where in the Universality of Things. On these Principles, Vice or
moral Evil cannot consist in any Thing that is an Effect; because Fault don't
consist in the Nature of Things, but in their Cause; as well as because Effects
are necessary, being unavoidably connected with their Cause: therefore the
Cause only is to blame. And so it follows, that Faultiness can lie only in that
Cause, which is a Cause only, and no Effect of any Thing. Nor yet can it lie in
this; for then it must lie in the Nature of the Thing it self; not in it is
being from any Determination of our's, nor any Thing faulty in us which is the
Cause, nor indeed from any Cause at all, for by the Supposition, it is no
Effect, and has no Cause. And thus, He that will maintain, it is not the Nature
of Habits or Acts of Will that makes them virtuous or faulty, but the Cause,
must immediately run Himself out of his own Assertion; and in maintaining it,
will insensibly contradict and deny it.

This is certain, that if Effects are vicious and faulty, not from their
Nature, or from any Thing inherent in them, but because they are from a bad
Cause, it must be on Account of the Badness of the Cause; and so on Account of
the Nature of the Cause: A bad Effect in the Will must be bad, because the
Cause is bad, or of an evil Nature, or has Badness as a Quality inherent in it:
and a good Effect in the Will must be good, by Reason of the Goodness of the
Cause, or it is being of a good Kind and Nature. And if this be what is meant,
the very Supposition of Fault and Praise lying not in the Nature of the Thing,
but the Cause, contradicts it self, and does at least resolve the Essence of
Virtue and Vice into the Nature of Things, and supposes it originally to
consist in that. -- And if a Caviller has a Mind to run from the Absurdity, by
saying, No, the Fault of the Thing which is the Cause, lies not in this, that
the Cause it self is of an evil Nature, but that the Cause is evil in that
Sense, that it is from another bad Cause. Still the Absurdity will follow him;
for if so, then the Cause before charged is at once acquitted, and all the
Blame must be laid to the higher Cause, and must consist in that is being Evil,
or of an evil Nature. So now we are come again to lay the Blame of the Thing
blameworthy, to the Nature of the Thing, and not to the Cause. And if any is
so foolish as to go higher still, and ascend from Step to Step, till he is come
to that which is the first Cause concerned in the whole Affair, and will say,
all the Blame lies in that; then at last he must be forced to own, that the
Faultiness of the Thing which he supposes alone blameworthy, lies wholly in
the Nature of the Thing, and not in the Original or Cause of it; for the
Supposition is, that it has no Original, it is determined by no Act of our's,
is caused by nothing faulty in us, being absolutely without any Cause. And so
the Race is at an End, but the Evader is taken in his Flight.

It Is agreeable to the natural Notions of Mankind, that moral Evil, with it is
Desert of Dislike and Abhorrence, and all it is other Ill-deservings, consists
in a certain Deformity in the Nature of certain Dispositions of the Heart, and
Acts of the Will; and not in the Deformity of something else, diverse from the
very Thing it self, which deserves Abhorrence, supposed to be the Cause of it.
Which would be absurd, because that would be to suppose, a Thing that is
innocent and not Evil, is truly evil and faulty, because another Thing is Evil.
It implies a Contradiction; for it would be to suppose, the very Thing which is
morally evil and blameworthy, is innocent and not blameworthy; but that
something else, which is it is Cause, is only to blame. To say, that Vice don't
consist in the Thing which is vicious, but in it is Cause, is the same as to
say, that Vice don't consist in Vice, but in that which produces it.

It Is true, a Cause may be to blame, for being the Cause of Vice: It may be
Wickedness in the Cause, that it produces Wickedness. But it would imply a
Contradiction, to suppose that these two are the same individual Wickedness.
The wicked Act of the Cause in producing Wickedness, is one Wickedness; and the
Wickedness produced, if there be any produced, is another. And therefore the
Wickedness of the latter don't lie in the former, but is distinct from it; and
the Wickedness of both lies in the evil Nature of the Things which are wicked.

The Thing which makes Sin hateful, is that by which it deserves Punishment;
which is but the Expression of Hatred. And that which renders Virtue lovely, is
the same with that, on the Account of which, it is fit to receive Praise and
Reward; which are but the Expressions of Esteem and Love. But that which makes
Vice hateful, is it is hateful Nature; and that which renders Virtue lovely, is
it is amiable Nature. It Is a certain Beauty or Deformity that are inherent in
that good or evil Will, which is the Soul of Virtue and Vice (and not in the
Occasion of it) which is their Worthiness of Esteem or Disesteem, Praise or
Dispraise, according to the common Sense of Mankind. If the Cause or Occasion
of the Rise of an hateful Disposition or Act of Will, be also hateful; suppose
another antecedent evil Will; that is entirely another Sin, and deserves
Punishment by it self, under a distinct Consideration. There is Worthiness of
Dispraise in the Nature of an evil Volition, and not wholly in some foregoing
Act which is it is Cause; otherwise the evil Volition which is the Effect, is no
moral Evil, any more than Sickness, or some other natural Calamity, which
arises from a Cause morally evil.

Thus for Instance, Ingratitude is hateful and worthy of Dispraise, according
to common Sense; not because something as bad, or worse than Ingratitude, was
the Cause that produced it; but because it is hateful in it self, by it is own
inherent Deformity. So the Love of Virtue is amiable, and worthy of Praise, not
merely because something else went before this Love of Virtue in our Minds,
which caused it to take Place there; for Instance our own Choice; we chose to
love Virtue, and by some Method or other wrought our selves into the Love of
it; but because of the Amiableness and Condecency of such a Disposition and
Inclination of Heart. If that was the Case, that we did choose to love Virtue,
and so produced that Love in our selves, this Choice it self could be no
otherwise amiable or praiseworthy, than as Love to Virtue, or some other
amiable Inclination, was exercised and implied in it. If that Choice was
amiable at all, it must be so on Account of some amiable Quality in the Nature
of the Choice. If we chose to love Virtue, not in Love to Virtue, or any Thing
that was good, and exercised no sort of good Disposition in the Choice, the
Choice it self was not virtuous, nor worthy of any Praise, according to common
Sense, because the Choice was not of a good Nature.

It may not be improper here to take Notice of something said by an Author,
that has lately made a mighty Noise in America. A necessary Holiness (says He
Scrip. Doc. of Original Sin, P. 180. 3d Edit.
) is no Holiness. -- Adam could not be originally created in Righteousness and
true Holiness, because He must choose to be righteous, before He could be
righteous. And therefore He must exist, He must be created, yea He must
exercise Thought and Reflection, before he was righteous. There is much more to
the same Effect in that Place, and also in P. 437, 438, 439, 440. If these
Things are so, it will certainly follow, that the first choosing to be righteous
is no righteous Choice; there is no Righteousness or Holiness in it; because no
choosing to be righteous goes before it. For He plainly speaks of choosing to be
righteous, as what must go before Righteousness: And that which follows the
Choice, being the Effect of the Choice, cannot be Righteousness or Holiness: For
an Effect is a Thing necessary, and cannot prevent the Influence or Efficacy of
it is Cause; and therefore is unavoidably dependent upon the Cause: And He says,
A necessary Holiness is no Holiness. So that neither can a Choice of
Righteousness be Righteousness or Holiness, nor can any Thing that is
consequent on that Choice* and the Effect of it, be Righteousness or Holiness;
nor can any Thing that is without Choice, be Righteousness or Holiness. So that
by his Scheme, all Righteousness and Holiness is at once shut out of the World,
and no Door left open, by which it can ever possibly enter into the World.

I suppose, the Way that Men came to entertain this absurd inconsistent Notion,
with Respect to internal Inclinations and Volitions themselves, (or Notions
that imply it,) viz. that the Essence of their moral Good or Evil lies not in
their Nature, but their Cause; was, that it is indeed a very plain Dictate of
common Sense, that it is so with Respect to all outward Actions, and sensible
Motions of the Body; that the moral Good or Evil of 'em don't lie at all in the
Motions themselves; which taken by themselves, are nothing of a moral Nature;
and the Essence of all the moral Good or Evil that concerns them, lies in those
internal Dispositions and Volitions which are the Cause of them. Now being
always used to determine this, without Hesitation or Dispute, concerning
external Actions; which are the Things that in the common Use of Language are
signified by such Phrases, as Men's Actions, or their Doings; Hence when they
came to speak of Volitions, and internal Exercises of their Inclinations, under
the same Denomination of their Actions, or what they do, they unwarily
determined the Case must also be the same with these, as with external Actions;
not considering the vast Difference in the Nature of the Case.

If any shall still object and say, Why is it not necessary that the Cause
should be considered, in order to determine whether any Thing be worthy of
Blame or Praise? Is it agreeable to Reason and common Sense, that a Man is to be
praised or blamed for that which he is not the Cause or Author of, and has no
Hand in?

I answer, such Phrases as being the Cause, being the Author, having a Hand,
and the like are ambiguous. They are most vulgarly understood for being the
designing voluntary Cause, or Cause by antecedent Choice: And it is most
certain that Men are not in this Sense the Causes or Authors of the first Act
of their Wills, in any Case; as certain as any Thing is, or ever can be; for
nothing can be more certain, than that a Thing is not before it is, nor a Thing
of the same Kind before the first Thing of that Kind; and so no Choice before
the first Choice. -- As the Phrase, being the Author, may be understood, not of
being the Producer by an antecedent Act of Will; but as a Person may be said to
be the Author of the Act of Will it self, by his being the immediate Agent, o^
the Being that is acting, or in Exercise in that Act; If the Phrase of being
the Author, is used to signify this, then doubtless common Sense requires Men's
being the Authors of their own Acts of Will, in order to their being esteemed
worthy of Praise or Dispraise on Account of them. And common Sense teaches,
that they must be the Authors of external Actions, in the former Sense, namely,
their being the Causes of 'em by an Act of Will or Choice, in order to their
being justly blamed or praised: But it teaches no such Thing with Respect to
the Acts of the Will themselves. -- But this may appear more manifest by the
Things which will be observed in the following Section.

SECTION II. The Falseness and Inconsistence of that metaphysical Notion of
Action, and Agency, which seems to be generally entertained by the Defenders of
the Arminian Doctrine concerning Liberty, moral Agency, etc.
ONE Thing that is made very much a Ground of Argument and supposed
Demonstration by Arminians, in Defense of the forementioned Principles,
concerning moral Agency, Virtue, Vice etc. is their metaphysical Notion of
Agency and Action. They say, unless the Soul has a Self-determining Power, it
has no Power of Action; If it is Volitions be not caused by it self, but are
excited and determined by some extrinsic Cause, they cannot be the Soul's own
Acts; and that the Soul cannot be active, but must be wholly passive, in those
Effects which it is the Subject of necessarily, and not from it is own free
Determination.

Mr. Chubb lays the Foundation of his Scheme of Liberty, and of his Arguments
to support it, very much in this Po^^^on, That Man is an Agent, and capable of
Action. Which doubtless is true: But Self-determination belongs to his Notion
of Action, and is the very Essence of it. Whence he infers that it is
impossible for a Man to act and be acted upon, in the same Thing, at the same
Time; and that nothing that is an Action, can be the Effect of the Action of
another: and he insists, that a necessary Agent, or an Agent that is
necessarily determined to act, is a plain Contradiction.

But those are a precarious Sort of Demonstrations, which Men build on the
Meaning that they arbitrarily affix to a Word; especially when that Meaning is
abstruse, inconsistent, and entirely diverse from the original Sense of the
Word in common Speech.

That the Meaning of the Word Action, as Mr. Chubb and many others use it, is
utterly unintelligible and inconsistent, is manifest, because it belongs to
their Notion of an Action, that it is something wherein is no Passion or
Passiveness; that is (according to their Sense of Passiveness) it is under the
Power, Influence or Action of no Cause. And this implies, that Action has no
Cause, and is no Effect: for to be an Effect implies Passiveness, or the being
subject to the Power and Action of it is Cause. And yet they hold, that the
Mind's Action is the Effect of it is own Determination, yea, the Mind's free and
voluntary Determination; which is the same with free Choice. So that Action is
the Effect of something preceding, even a preceding Act of Choice: And
consequently, in this Effect the Mind is passive, subject to the Power and
Action of the preceding Cause, which is the foregoing Choice, and therefore
cannot be active. So that here we have this Contradiction, that Action is always
the Effect of foregoing Choice; and therefore cannot be Action; because it is
passive to the Power of that preceding causal Choice; and the Mind cannot be
active and passive in the same Thing, at the same Time. Again, they say,
Necessity is utterly inconsistent with Action, and a necessary Action is a
Contradiction; and so their Notion of Action implies Contingence, (...)
excludes all Necessity. And therefore their Notion of Action implies, that it
has no necessary Dependence or Connection with any Thing foregoing; for such a
Dependence or Connection excludes Contingence, and implies Necessity. And yet
their Notion of Action implies Necessity, and supposes that it is necessary,
and cannot be contingent. For they suppose, that whatever is properly called
Action, must be determined by the Will and free Choice; and this is as much as
to say, that it must be necessary, being dependent upon, and determined by
something foregoing; namely, a foregoing Act of Choice. Again, it belongs to
their Notion of Action, of that which is a proper and mere Act, that ^t is the
Beginning of Motion, or of Exertion of Power; but yet it is i^plied in their
Notion of Action, that it is not the Beginning of Motion or Exertion of Power,
but is consequent and dependent on a preceding Exertion of Power, viz. the
Power of Will and Choice: for they say there is no proper Action but what is
freely chosen; or, which is the same Thing, determined by a foregoing Act of
free Choice. But if any of them shall see Cause to deny this, and say they hold
no such Thing as that every Action is chosen, or determined by a foregoing
Choice; but that the very first Exertion of Will only, undetermined by any
pr^ceeding Act, is properly called Action; then I say, such a Man's Notion of
Action implies Necessity; for what the Mind is the Subject of without the
Determination of it is own previous Choice, it is the Subject of necessarily, as
to any Hand that free Choice has in the Affair; and without any Ability the
Mind has to prevent it, by any Will or Election of it is own: because by the
Supposition it precludes all previous Acts of the Will or Choice in the Case,
which might prevent it. So that it is again, in this other Way, implied in
their Notion of Act, that it is both necessary and not necessary. Again, it
belongs to their Notion of an Act, that it is no Effect of a pre-determining
Bias or Preponderation, but springs immediately out of Indifference; and this
implies that it cannot be from foregoing Choice, which is foregoing
Preponderation: if it be not habitual, but occasional, yet if it causes the
Act, it is truly previous, efficacious and determining. And yet, at the same
Time, it is essential to their Notion of an Act, that it is what the Agent is
the Author of freely and voluntarily, and that is, by previous Choice and
Design.

So that according to their Notion of an Act, considered with Regard to it is
Consequences, these following* Things are all essential to it; viz. That it
should be necessary, and not necessary; that it should be from a Cause, and no
Cause; that it should be the Fruit of Choice and Design, and not the Fruit of
Choice and Design; that it should be the Beginning of Motion or Exertion, and
yet consequent on previous Exertion; that it should be before it is; that it
should spring immediately out of Indifference and Equilibrium, and yet be the
Effect of Preponderation; that it should be self-originated, and also have it is
Original from something else; that it is what the Mind causes it self, of it is
own Will, and can produce or prevent, according to it is Choice or Pleasure, and
yet what the Mind has no Power to prevent, it precluding all previous Choice in
the Affair.

So that an Act, according to their metaphysical Notion of it, is something of
which there is no Idea; it is nothing but a Confusion of the Mind, excited by
Words without any distinct Meaning, and is an absolute Nonentity; and that in
two Respects; (1.) There is nothing in the World that ever was, is, or can be,
to answer the Things which must belong to it is Description, according to what
they suppose to be essential to it. And (2.) There neither is, nor ever was,
nor can be, any Notion or Idea to answer the Word, as they use and explain it.
For if we should suppose any such Notion, it would many Ways destroy it self.
But it is impossible, any Idea or Notion should subsist in the Mind, whose very
Nature and Essence, which constitutes it, destroys it. -- If some learned
Philosopher, who had been abroad, in giving an Account of the curious
Observations he had made in his Travels, should say, He had been in Terra del
Fuego, and there had seen an Animal, which he calls by a certain Name, that
begat and brought forth it self, and yet had a Sire and a Dam distinct from it
self; that it had an Appetite, and was hungry before it had a Being; that his
Master, who led him, and governed him at his Pleasure, was always governed by
him, and driven by him where he pleased; that when he moved, he always took a
Step before the first Step; that he went with his Head first, and yet always
went Tail foremost; and this, though he had neither Head nor Tail: It would be no
Impudence at all, to tell such a Traveller, though a learned Man, that He himself
had no Notion or Idea of such an Animal as he gave an Account of, and never
had, nor ever would have.

As the forementioned Notion of Action is very inconsistent, so it is wholly
diverse from the original Meaning of the Word. The more usual Signification of
it in vulgar Speech, seems to be some Motion or Exertion of Power, that is
voluntary, or that is the Effect of the Will; and is used in the same Sense as
doing: And most commonly it is used to signify outward Actions. So Thinking is
often distinguished from Acting; and Desiring and Willing, from Doing.

Besides this more usual and proper Signification of the Word Action, there are
other Ways in which the Word is used that are less proper, which yet have Place
in common Speech. Oftentimes it is used to signify some Motion or Alteration in
inanimate Things, with Relation to some Object and Effect. So the Spring of a
Watch is said to act upon the Chain and Wheels; the Sunbeams, to act upon
Plants and Trees; and the Fire, to act upon Wood. Sometimes the Word is used to
signify Motions, Alterations, and Exertions of Power, which are seen in
corporeal Things, considered absolutely; especially when these Motions seem to
arise from some internal Cause which is hidden; so that they have a greater
Resemblance of those Motions of our Bodies, which are the Effects of internal
Volition, or invisible Exertions of Will. So the Fermentation of Liquor, the
Operations of the Loadstone, and of electrical Bodies, are called the Action of
these Things. And sometimes the Word Action is used to signify the Exercise of
Thought, or of Will and Inclination: so meditating, loving, hating, inclining,
disinclining, choosing and refusing, may be sometimes called acting; though more
rarely (unless it be by Philosophers and Metaphysicians) than in any of the
other Senses.

But the Word is never used in vulgar Speech in that Sense which Arminian
Divines use it in, namely, for the self-determinate Exercise of the Will, or an
Exertion of the Soul that arises without any necessary Connection with any
Thing foregoing. If a Man does something voluntarily, or as the Effect of his
Choice, then in the most proper Sense, and as the Word is most originally and
commonly used, he is said to act: But whether that Choice or Volition be
self-determined, or no, whether it be connected with foregoing habitual Bias,
whether it be the certain Effect of the strongest Motive, or some extrinsick
Cause, never comes into Consideration in the Meaning of the Word.

And if the Word Action is arbitrarily used by some Men otherwise, to suit some
Scheme of Metaphysics (...) Morality, no Argument can reasonably be founded on
such (...) of this Term, to prove any Thing but their own Pleasure. For Divines
and Philosophers strenuously to urge such Arguments, as though they were
sufficient to support and demonstr^^e a whole Scheme of moral Philosophy and
Divinity, is certainly to erect a mighty Edifice on the Sand, or rather on a
Shadow. And though it may now perhaps, through Custom, have become natural for 'em
to use the Word in this Sense (if that may be called a Sense or Meaning, which
is so inconsistent with it self) yet this don't prove that it is agreeable to
the natural Notions Men have of Things, or that there can be any Thing in the
Creation that should answer such a Meaning. And though they appeal to Experience,
yet the Truth is, that Men are so far from experiencing any such Thing, that it
is impossible for 'em to have any Conception of it.

If it should be objected, that Action and Passion are doubtless Words of a
contrary Signification; but to suppose that the Agent, in it is Action, is under
the Power and Influence of something extrinsick, is to confound Action and
Passion, and make 'em the same Thing.

I answer, That Action and Passion are doubtless, as they are sometimes used,
Words of opposite Signification; but not as signifying opposite Existences, but
only opposite Relations. The Words Cause and Effect are Terms of opposite
Signification; but nevertheless, if I assert that the same Thing may at the
same Time, in different Respects and Relations, be both Cause and Effect, this
will not prove that I confound the Terms. The Soul may be both active and
passive in the same Thing in different Respects, active with Relation to one
Thing, and passive with Relation to another. The Word Passion when set in
Opposition to Action or rather Activeness, is merely a relative Term: it
signifies no Effect or Cause, nor any proper Existence; but is the same with
Passiveness, or a being passive, or a being acted upon by something. Which is a
mere Relation of a Thing to some Power or Force exerted by some Cause,
producing some Effect in it, or upon it. And Action, when set properly in
Opposition to Passion, or Passiveness, is no real Existence; it is not the same
with AN Action, but is a mere Relation: It Is the Activeness of something on
another Thing, being the opposite Relation to the other, viz. a Relation of
Power, or Force exerted by some Cause, toward another Thing, which is the
Subject of the Effect of that Power. Indeed the Word Action is frequently used
to signify something not merely relative, but more absolute, and a real
Existence; as when we say An Action; when the Word is not used transitively,
but absolutely, for some Motion or Exercise of Body or Mind, without any
Relation to any Object or Effect: And as used thus, it is not properly the
opposite of Passion; which ordinarily signifies nothing absolute, but merely
the Relation of being acted upon. And therefore if the Word Action be used in
the like relative Sense, then Action and Passion are only two contrary
Relations. And it is no Absurdity to suppose, that contrary Relations may belong
to the same Thing, at the same Time, with respect to different Things. So to
suppose, that there are Acts of the Soul by which a Man voluntarily moves, and
acts upon Objects, and produces Effects, which yet themselves are Effects of
something else, and wherein the Soul it self is the Object of something acting
upon, and influencing that, don't at all confound Action and Passion. The Words
may nevertheless be properly of opposite Signification: there may be as true
and real a Difference between acting and being caused to act, though we should
suppose the Soul to be both in the same Volition, as there is between living,
and being quickened, or made to live. It Is no more a Contradiction, to suppose
that Action may be the Effect of some other Cause, besides the Agent, or Being
that acts, than to suppose that Life may be the Effect of some other Cause,
besides the Liver, or the Being that lives, in whom Life is caused to be.

The Thing which has led Men into this inconsistent Notion of Action, when
applied to Volition, as though it were essential to this internal Action, that
the Agent should be self-determined in it, and that the Will should be the
Cause of it, was probably this; that according to the Sense of Mankind, and the
common Use of Language it is so, with respect to Men's external Actions; which
are what originally, and according to the vulgar Use and most proper Sense of
the Word, are called Actions. Men in these are self-directed, self-determined,
and their Wills are the Cause of the Motions of their Bodies, and the external
Things that are done; so that unless Men do 'em voluntarily, and of Choice, and
the Action be determined by their antecedent Volition, it is no Action or Doing
of theirs. Hence some Metaphysicians have been led unwarily, but exceeding
absurdly, to suppose the same concerning Volition it self, that That also must
be determined by the Will; which is to be determined by antecedent Volition, as
the Motion of the Body is; not considering the Contradiction it implies.

But it is very evident, that in the metaphysical Distinction between Action and
Passion, (though long since become common and the general Vogue) due Care has not
been taken to conform Language to the Nature of Things, or to any distinct
clear Ideas. As it is in innumerable other Philosophical, Metaphysical Terms,
used in these Disputes; which has occasioned inexpressible Difficulty,
Contention, Error and Confusion.

And thus probably it came to be thought, that Necessity was inconsistent with
Action, as these Terms are applied to Volition. First, these Terms Action and
Necessity are changed from their original Meaning, as signifying external
voluntary Action, and Constraint, (in which Meaning they are evidently
inconsistent) to signify quite other Things, viz. Volition it self, and
Certainty of Existence. And when the Change of Signification is made, Care is
not taken to make proper Allowances and Abatements for the Difference of Sense;
but still the same Things are unwarily attributed to Action and Necessity, in
the new Meaning of the Words, which plainly belonged to 'em in their first
Sense; and on this Ground, Maxims are established without any real Foundation,
as though they were the most certain Truths, and the most evident Dictates of
Reason.

But however strenuously it is maintained, that what is necessary cannot be
properly called Action, and that a necessary Action is a Contradiction, yet
it is probable there are few Arminian Divines, who if thoroughly tried, would
stand to these Principles. They will allow, that God is in the highest Sense an
active Being, and the highest Fountain of Life and Action; and they would not
probably deny, that those that are called God's Acts of Righteousness, Holiness
and Faithfulness, are truly and properly God's Acts, and God is really a holy
Agent in them: and yet I trust, they will not deny, that God necessarily acts
justly and faithfully, and that it is impossible for Him to act unrighteously
and unholily.

SECTION III. The Reasons why some think it contrary to common Sense, to
suppose those Things which are necessary, to be worthy of either Praise or
Blame.
IT IS abundantly affirmed and urged by Arminian Writers, that it is contrary to
common Sense, and the natural Notions and Apprehensions of Mankind, to suppose
otherwise than that Necessity (making no Distinction between natural and moral
Necessity) is inconsistent with Virtue and Vice, Praise and Blame, Reward and
Punishment. And their Arguments from hence have been greatly triumphed in; and
have been not a little perplexing to many who have been friendly to the Truth,
as clearly revealed in the holy Scriptures: It has seemed to them indeed
difficult, to reconcile Calvinistic Doctrines with the Notions Men commonly
have of Justice and Equity. And the true Reasons of it seem to be these that
follow.

I. It Is indeed a very plain Dictate of common Sense, that natural Necessity is
wholly inconsistent with just Praise or Blame. If Men do Things which in
themselves are very good, fit to be brought to pass, and very happy Effects,
properly against their Wills, and cannot help it; or do them from a Necessity
that is without their Wills, or with which their Wills have no Concern or
Connection; then it is a plain Dictate of common Sense, that it is none of their
Virtue, nor any moral Good in them; and that they are not worthy to be rewarded
or praised; or at all esteemed, honored or loved on that Account. And on the
other Hand, that if from like Necessity they do those Things which in
Themselves are very unhappy and pernicious, and do them because they cannot help
it; the Necessity is such, that it is all one whether they will them, or no;
and the Reason why they are done, is from Necessity only, and not from their
Wills; It Is a very plain Dictate of common Sense that they are not at all to
blame; there is no Vice, Fault, or moral Evil at all in the Effect done; nor
are they who are thus necessitated, in any wise worthy to be punished, hated,
or in the least disrespected, on that Account.

In like Manner, if Things in themselves good and desirable are absolutely
impossible, with a natural Impossibility, the universal Reason of Mankind
teaches, that this wholly and perfectly excuses Persons in their not doing them.

And it is also a plain Dictate of common Sense, that if the doing Things in
themselves Good, or avoiding Things in themselves Evil, is not absolutely
impossible, with such a natural Impossibility, but very difficult, with a
natural Difficulty; that is, a Difficulty prior to, and not at all consisting
in Will and Inclination it self, and which would remain the same, let the
Inclination be what it will; then a Person's Neglect or Omission is excused in
some Measure, though not wholly; his Sin is less aggravated, than if the Thing to
be done were easy. And if instead of Difficulty and Hindrance, there be a
contrary natural Propensity in the State of Things, to the Thing to be done, or
Effect to be brought to pass, abstracted from any Consideration of the
Inclination of the Heart; though the Propensity be not so great as to amount to a
natural Necessity; yet being some Approach to it, so that the doing the good
Thing be very much from this natural Tendency in the State of Things, and but
little from a good Inclination; then it is a Dictate of common Sense, that
there is so much the less Virtue in what is done; and so it is less
Praiseworthy and rewardable. The Reason is easy, viz. because such a natural
Propensity or Tendency is an Approach to natural Necessity; and the greater the
Propensity, still so much the nearer is the Approach to Necessity. And
therefore as natural Necessity takes away or shuts out all Virtue, so this
Propensity approaches to an Abolition of Virtue; that is, it diminishes it. And
on the other Hand, natural Difficulty in the State of Things is an Approach to
natural Impossibility. And as the latter, when it is complete and absolute,
wholly takes away Blame; so such Difficulty takes away some Blame, or
diminishes Blame; and makes the Thing done to be less worthy of Punishment.

II. Men in their first Use of such Phrases as these, Must, cannot, cannot help
it, cannot avoid it, necessary, unable, impossible, unavoidable, irresistible
etc. use them to signify a Necessity of Constraint or Restraint, a natural
Necessity or Impossibility; or some Necessity that the Will has nothing to do
in; which may be, whether Men will or no; and which may be supposed to be just
the same, let Men's Inclinations and Desires be what they will. Such Kind of
Terms in their original Use, I suppose among all Nations, are relative;
carrying in their Signification (as was before observed) a Reference or Respect
to some contrary Will, Desire or Endeavor, which, it is supposed, is, or may
be in the Case. All Men find, and begin to find in early Childhood, that there
are innumerable Things that cannot be done, which they desire to do; and
innumerable Things which they are averse to, that must be, they cannot avoid
them, they will be, whether they choose them or no. It Is to express this
Necessity, which Men so soon and so often find, and which so greatly and so
early affects them in innumerable Cases, that such Terms and Phrases are first
formed; and it is to signify such a Necessity, that they are first used, and
that they are most constantly used, in the common Affairs of Life; and not to
signify any such metaphysical, speculative and abstract Notion, as that
Connection in the Nature or Course of Things, which is between the Subject and
Predicate of a Proposition, and which is the Foundation of the certain Truth of
that Proposition; to signify which, they who employ themselves in Philosophical
Inquiries into the first Origin and Metaphysical Relations and Dependences of
Things, have borrowed these Terms, for want of others. But we grow up from our
Cradles in a Use of such Terms and Phrases, entirely different from this, and
carrying a Sense exceeding diverse from that in which they are commonly used in
the Controversy between Arminians and Calvinists. And it being, as was said
before, a Dictate of the universal Sense of Mankind, evident to us as soon as
we begin to think, that the Necessity signified by these Terms, in the Sense in
which we first learn them, does excuse Persons, and free them from all Fault or
Blame; Hence our Idea's of Excusableness or Faultlesness is tied to these Terms
and Phrases by a strong Habit, which is begun in Childhood as soon as we begin
to speak, and grows up with us, and is strengthened by constant Use and Custom,
the Connection growing stronger and stronger.

The habitual Connection which is in Men's Minds between Blamelesness and those
forementioned Terms, Must, cannot, unable, necessary, impossible, unavoidable
etc. becomes very strong; because as soon as ever Men begin to use Reason and
Speech, they have Occasion to excuse themselves, from the natural Necessity
signified by these Terms, in numerous Instances -- I cannot do it -- I could not
help it. -- And all Mankind have constant and daily Occasion to use such
Phrases in this Sense, to excuse themselves and others in almost all the
Concerns of Life, with Respect to Disappointments, and Things that happen which
concern and affect us and others, that are hurtful, or disagreable to us or
them, or Things desirable that we or others fail of.

That a being accustomed to an Union of different Ideas, from early Childhood,
makes the habitual Connection exceeding strong, as though such Connection were
owing to Nature, is manifest in innumerable Instances. It is altogether by such
an habitual Connection of Ideas, that Men judge of the Bigness or Distance of
the Objects of Sight from their Appearance. Thus it is owing to such a
Connection early established, and growing up with a Person, that he judges a
Mountain, which he sees at ten Miles distance, to be bigger than his Nose, or
further off than the End of it. Having been used so long to join a considerable
Distance and Magnitude with such an Appearance, Men imagine it is by a Dictate
of natural Sense: Whereas it would be quite otherwise with one that had his
Eyes newly opened, who had been born blind: He would have the same visible
Appearance, but natural Sense would dictate no such Thing concerning the
Magnitude or Distance of what appeared.

III. When Men, after they had been so habituated to connect Ideas of Innocence
or Blamelesness with such Terms, that the Union seems to be the Effect of mere
Nature, come to hear the same Terms used, and learn to use them themselves in
the forementioned new and metaphysical Sense, to signify quite another Sort of
Necessity, which has no such Kind of Relation to a contrary supposable Will and
Endeavor; the Notion of plain and manifest Blamelesness, by this Means, is by
a strong Prejudice, insensibly and unwarily transferred to a Case to which it by
no Means belongs: The Change of the Use of the Terms, to a Signification which
is very diverse, not being taken Notice of, or adverted to. And there are
several Reasons why it is not.

1. The Terms, as used by Philosophers, are not very distinct and clear in
their Meaning: few use them in a fixed determined Sense. On the contrary, their
Meaning is very vogue and confused. Which is what commonly happens to the Words
used to signify Things intellectual and moral, and to express what Mr. Lock
calls mixed Modes. If Men had a clear and distinct understanding of what is
intended by these metaphysical Terms, they would be able more easily to compare
them with their original and common Sense; and so would not be so easily
cheated by them. The Minds of Men are so easily led into Delusion by no Sort of
Terms in the World, as by Words of this Sort.

2. The Change of the Signification of the Terms is the more insensible,
because the Things signified, though indeed very different, yet do in some
generals agree. In Necessity, that which is vulgarly so called, there is a
strong Connection between the Thing said to be necessary, and something
antecedent to it, in the Order of Nature; so there is also in philosophical
Necessity. And though in both Kinds of Necessity, the Connection cannot be called
by that Name, with Relation to an opposite Will or Endeavor, to which it is
superior; which is the Case in vulgar Necessity; yet in both, the Connection
is prior to Will and Endeavor, and so in some Respect superior. In both Kinds
of Necessity there is a Foundation for some Certainty of the Proposition that
affirms the Event. -- The Terms used being the same, and the Things signified
agreeing in these and some other general Circumstances, and the Expressions as
used by Philosophers being not well defined, and so of obscure and loose
Signification; hence Persons are not aware of the great Difference; and the
Notions of Innocence or Faultlesness, which were so strongly associated with
them, and were strictly united in their Minds, ever since they can remember,
remain united with them still, as if the Union were altogether natural and
necessary; and they that go about to make a Separation, seem to them to do
great Violence even to Nature it self.

IV. Another Reason why it appears difficult to reconcile it with Reason, that
Men should be blamed for that which is necessary with a moral Necessity (which
as was observed before is a Species of Philosophical Necessity) is, that for
want of due Consideration, Men inwardly entertain that Apprehension, that this
Necessity may be against Men's Wills and sincere Endeavors. They go away with
that Notion, that Men may truly will and wish and strive that it may be
otherwise; but that invincible Necessity stands in the Way. And many think thus
concerning themselves: some that are wicked Men think they wish that they were
good, that they loved God and Holiness; but yet don't find that their Wishes
produce the Effect. -- The Reasons why Men think thus, are as follows. (1.)
They find what may be called an indirect Willingness to have a better Will, in
the Manner before observed. For it is impossible, and a Contradiction to
suppose the Will to be directly and properly against it self. And they don't
consider, that this indirect Willingness is entirely a different Thing from
properly willing the Thing that is the Duty and Virtue required; and that there
is no Virtue in that sort of Willingness which they have. They don't consider,
that the Volitions which a wicked Man may have that he loved God, are no Acts
of the Will at all against the moral Evil of not loving God; but only some
disagreable Consequences. But the making the requisite Distinction requires
more Care of Reflection and Thought than most Men are used to. And Men through a
Prejudice in their own Favor, are disposed to think well of their own Desires
and Dispositions, and to account 'em good and virtuous, though their Respect to
Virtue be only indirect and remote, and it is nothing at all that is virtuous
that truly excites or terminates their Inclinations. (2.) Another Thing that
insensibly leads and beguiles Men into a Supposition that this moral Necessity
or Impossibility is, or may be against Men's Wills, and true Endeavors, is the
Derivation and Formation of the Terms themselves, that are often used to
express it, which is such as seems directly to point to, and hold this forth.
Such Words, for Instance, as unable, unavoidable, impossible, irresistible;
which carry a plain Reference to a supposable Power exerted, Endeavors used,
Resistance made, in Opposition to the Necessity: And the Persons that hear
them, not considering nor suspecting but that they are used in their proper
Sense: That Sense being therefore understood, there does naturally, and as it
were necessarily arise in their Minds a Supposition that it may be so indeed,
that true Desires and Endeavors may take Place, but that invincible Necessity
stands in the Way, and renders 'em vain and to no Effect.

V. Another Thing which makes Persons more ready to suppose it to be contrary
to Reason, that Men should be exposed to the Punishments threatened to Sin, for
doing those Things which are morally necessary, or not doing those Things
morally impossible, is, that Imagination strengthens the Argument, and adds
greatly to the Power and Influence of the seeming Reasons against it, from the
Greatness of that Punishment. To allow that they may be justly exposed to a
small Punishment, would not be so difficult. Whereas, if there were any good
Reason in the Case, if it were truly a Dictate of Reason that such Necessity
was inconsistent with Faultiness, or just Punishment, the Demonstration would
be equally certain with respect to a small Punishment, or any Punishment at
all, as a very great one: But it is not equally easy to the Imagination. They
that argue against the Justice of damning Men for those Things that are thus
necessary, seem to make their Argument the stronger, by setting forth the
Greatness of the Punishment in strong Expressions: -- That a Man should be cast
into eternal Burnings, that he should be made to fry in Hell to all Eternity,
for those Things which He had no Power to avoid, and was under a fatal,
unfrustrable, invincible Necessity of doing. --

SECTION IV. It is agreeable to common Sense, and the natural Notions of
Mankind, to suppose moral Necessity to be consistent with Praise and Blame,
Reward and Punishment.
WHETHER the Reasons that have been given, why it appears difficult to some
Persons to reconcile with common Sense the praising or blaming, rewarding or
punishing those Things which are morally necessary, are thought satisfactory,
or not; yet it most evidently appears by the following Things, that if this
Matter be rightly understood, setting aside all Delusion arising from the
Impropriety and Ambiguity of Terms* this is not at all inconsistent with the
natural Apprehensions of Mankind, and that Sense of Things which is found every
where in the common People, who are furthest from having their* Thoughts
perverted from their natural Channel, by metaphysical and philosophical
Subtilties; but on the contrary, altogether agreeable to, and the very Voice and
Dictate of this natural and vulgar Sense.

I. This will appear if we consider what the vulgar Notion of Blame-worthiness
is. The Idea which the common People through all Ages and Nations have of
Faultiness, I suppose to be plainly this; A Person's being or doing wrong, with
his own Will and Pleasure; containing these two Things; 1. His doing wrong,
when he does as he pleases. 2. His Pleasure's being wrong. Or in other Words,
perhaps more intelligibly expressing their Notion; A Person's having his Heart
wrong, and doing wrong from his Heart. And this is the Sum total of the Matter.

The common People don't ascend up in their Reflections and Abstractions, to
the metaphysical Sources, Relations and Dependences of Things, in order to form
their Notion of Faultiness or Blame-worthiness. They don't wait till they have
decided by their Refinings, what first determines the Will; whether it be
determined by something extrinsic, or intrinsic; whether Volition determines
Volition, or whether the Understanding determines the Will; whether there be
any such Thing as Metaphysicians mean by Contingence (if they have any
Meaning;) whether there be a Sort of a strange unaccountable Sovereignty in the
Will, in the Exercise of which, by it is own sovereign Acts, it brings to pass
all it is own sovereign Acts. They don't take any Part of their Notion of Fault
or Blame from the Resolution of any such Questions. If this were the Case,
there are Multitudes, yea the far greater Part of Mankind, nine Hundred and
ninety-nine out of a Thousand would live and die without having any such Notion
as that of Fault ever entering into their Heads, or without so much as once
having any Conception that any Body was to be either blamed or commended for
any Thing. To be sure, it would be a long Time before Men came to have such
Notions. Whereas it is manifest, they are some of the first Notions that appear
in Children; who discover as soon as they can think, or speak, or act at all as
rational Creatures, a Sense of Desert. And certainly, in forming their Notion
of it, they make no use of Metaphysics. All the Ground they go upon consists
in these two Things; Experience, and a natural Sensation of a certain Fitness
or Agreableness which there is in uniting such moral Evil as is above
described, viz. a being or doing wrong with the Will, and Resentment in others,
and Pain inflicted on the Person in whom this moral Evil is. Which natural
Sense is what we call by the Name of Conscience.

It Is true, the common People and Children, in their Notion of a faulty Act or
Deed of any Person, do suppose that it is the Person's own Act and Deed. But
this is all that belongs to what they understand by a Thing's being a Person's
own Deed or Action; even that it is something done by him of Choice. That some
Exercise or Motion should begin of it self, don't belong to their Notion of an
Action, or Doing. If so, it would belong to their Notion of it, that it is
something which is the Cause of it is own Beginning: And that is as much as to
say, that it is before it begins to be. Nor is their Notion of an Action some
Motion or Exercise that begins accidentally, without any Cause or Reason; for
that is contrary to one of the prime Dictates of common Sense, namely, that
every Thing that begins to be, has some Cause or Reason why it is.

The common People, in their Notion of a faulty or praiseworthy Deed or Work
done by any one, do suppose that the Man does it in the Exercise of Liberty.
But then their Notion of Liberty is only a Person's having Opportunity of doing
as he pleases. They have no Notion of Liberty consisting in the Will's first
acting, and so causing it is own Acts; and determining, and so causing it is own
Determinations; or choosing, and so causing it is own Choice. Such a Notion of
Liberty is what none have, but those that have darkened their own Minds with
confused metaphysical Speculation, and abstruse and ambiguous Terms. If a Man
is not restrained from acting as his Will determines, or constrained to act
otherwise; then he has Liberty, according to common Notions of Liberty, without
taking into the Idea that grand Contradiction of all the Determinations of a
Man's free Will being the Effects of the Determinations of his free Will. --
Nor have Men commonly any Notion of Freedom consisting in Indifference. For if
so, then it would be agreeable to their Notion, that the greater Indifference
Men act with, the more Freedom they act with; whereas the Reverse is true. He
that in acting, proceeds with the fullest Inclination, does what He does with
the greatest Freedom, according to common Sense. And so far is it from being
agreeable to common Sense, that such Liberty as consists in Indifference is
requisite to Praise or Blame, that on the contrary, the Dictate of every Man's
natural Sense through the World is, that the further he is from being indifferent
in his acting Good or Evil, and the more he does either with full and strong
Inclination, the more is he esteemed or abhorred, commended or condemned.

II. If it were inconsistent with the common Sense of Mankind, that Men should
be either to be blamed or commended in any Volitions they have or fail of, in
Case of moral Necessity or Impossibility; then it would surely also be agreeable
to the same Sense and Reason of Mankind, that the nearer the Case approaches to
such a moral Necessity or Impossibility, either through a strong antecedent
moral Propensity on the one Hand, It Is here argued, on Supposition that not all
Propensity implies moral Necessity, but only some very high Degrees; which none
will deny.
or a great antecedent Opposition and Difficulty on the other, the nearer does
it approach to a being neither blameable nor commendable; so that Acts exerted
with such preceding Propensity would be worthy of proportionably less Praise;
and when omitted, the Act being attended with such Difficulty, the Omission
would be worthy of the less Blame. It is so, as was observed before, with
natural Necessity and Impossibility, Propensity and Difficulty: As it is a plain
Dictate of the Sense of all Mankind, that natural Necessity and Impossibility
takes away all Blame and Praise; and therefore, that the nearer the Approach is
to these through previous Propensity or Difficulty, so Praise and Blame are
proportionably diminished. And if it were as much a Dictate of common Sense,
that moral Necessity of doing, or Impossibility of avoiding, takes away all
Praise and Blame, as that natural Necessity or Impossibility does this; then,
by a perfect Parity of Reason, it would be as much the Dictate of common Sense,
that an Approach to moral Necessity of doing, or Impossibility of avoiding,
diminishes Praise and Blame, as that an Approach to natural Necessity and
Impossibility does so. It Is equally the Voice of common Sense, that Persons are
excusable in Part, in neglecting Things difficult against their Wills, as that
they are excusable wholly in neglecting Things impossible against their Wills.
And if it made no Difference, whether the Impossibility were natural and
against the Will, or moral, lying in the Will, with regard to Excusableness; so
neither would it make any Difference, whether the Difficulty, or Approach to
Necessity be natural against the Will, or moral, lying in the Propensity of the
Will.

But it is apparent, that the Reverse of these Things is true. If there be an
Approach to a moral Necessity in a Man's Exertion of good Acts of Will, they
being the Exercise of a strong Propensity to Good, and a very powerful Love to
Virtue; it is so far from being the Dictate of common Sense, that He is less
virtuous, and the less to be esteemed, loved and praised; that it is agreeable to
the natural Notions of all Mankind that he is so much the better Man, worthy of
greater Respect, and higher Commendation. And the stronger the Inclination is,
and the nearer it approaches to Necessity in that Respect, or to Impossibility
of neglecting the virtuous Act, or of doing a vicious one; still the more
virtuous, and worthy of higher Commendation. And on the other Hand, if a Man
exerts evil Acts of Mind; as for Instance, Acts of Pride or Malice, from a
rooted and strong Habit or Principle of Haughtiness and Maliciousness, and a
violent Propensity of Heart to such Acts; according to the natural Sense of all
Men, he is so far from being the less hateful and blameable on that Account,
that he is so much the more worthy to be detested and condemned by all that
observe Him.

Moreover, it is manifest that it is no Part of the Notion which Mankind
commonly have of a blameable or praiseworthy Act of the Will, that it is an
Act which is not determined by an antecedent Bias or Motive, but by the
sovereign Power of the Will it self; because if so, the greater Hand such
Causes have in determining any Acts of the Will, so much the less virtuous or
vicious would they be accounted; and the less Hand, the more virtuous or
vicious. Whereas the Reverse is true: Men don't think a good Act to be the less
praiseworthy, for the Agent's being much determined in it by a good
Inclination or a good Motive; but the more. And if good Inclination or Motive
has but little Influence in determining the Agent, they don't think his Act so
much the more virtuous, but the less. And so concerning evil Acts, which are
determined by evil Motives or Inclinations.

Yea, if it be supposed that good or evil Dispositions are implanted in the
Hearts of Men by Nature it self (which, it is certain, is vulgarly supposed in
innumerable Cases) yet it is not commonly supposed that Men are worthy of no
Praise or Dispraise for such Dispositions; although what is natural is
undoubtedly necessary, Nature being prior to all Acts of the Will whatsoever.
Thus for Instance, if a Man appears to be of a very haughty or malicious
Disposition, and is supposed to be so by his natural Temper, it is no vulgar
Notion, no Dictate of the common Sense and Apprehension of Men, that such
Dispositions are no Vices or moral Evils, or that such Persons are not worthy
of Disesteem, Odium and Dishonor; or that the proud or malicious Acts which
flow from such natural Dispositions, are worthy of no Resentment. Yea, such
vile natural Dispositions, and the Strength of 'em, will commonly be mentioned
rather as an Aggravation of the wicked Acts that come from such a Fountain,
than an Extenuation of 'em. It Is being natural for Men to act thus, is often
observed by Men in the Height of their Indignation: They will say, It Is his
very Nature: He is of a vile natural Temper; it is as natural to Him to act so,
as it is to breathe; He cannot help serving the Devil, etc. But it is not thus
with Regard to hurtful mischievous Things that any are the Subjects or
Occasions of by natural Necessity, against their Inclinations. In such a Case,
the Necessity, by the common Voice of Mankind, will be spoken of as a full
Excuse. -- Thus it is very plain, that common Sense makes a vast Difference
between these two Kinds of Necessity, as to the Judgment it makes of their
Influence on the moral Quality and Desert of Men's Actions.

And these Dictates of Men's Minds are so natural and necessary, that it may be
very much doubted whether the Arminians themselves have ever got rid of 'em;
yea, their greatest Doctors, that have gone furthest in Defense of their
metaphysical Notions of Liberty, and have brought their Arguments to their
greatest Strength, and as they suppose to a Demonstration, against the
Consistence of Virtue and Vice with any Necessity: It Is to be questioned,
whether there is so much as one of them, but that if He suffered very much from
the injurious Acts of a Man under the Power of an invincible Haughtiness and
Malignancy of Temper, would not, from the forementioned natural Sense of Mind,
resent it far otherwise, than if as great Sufferings came upon Him from the
Wind that blows, and Fire that burns by natural Necessity; and otherwise than
he would, if he suffered as much from the Conduct of a Man perfectly delirious;
yea, though he first brought his Distraction upon Him some Way by his own Fault.

Some seem to disdain the Distinction that we make between natural and moral
Necessity, as though it were altogether impertinent in this Controversy: That
which is necessary (say they) is necessary; it is that which must be, and cannot
be preventent And that which is impossible, is impossible, and cannot be done:
and therefore none can be to blame for not doing it. And such Comparisons are
made use of, as the commanding of a Man to walk who has lost his Legs, and
condemning and punishing Him for not obeying; Inviting and calling upon a Man,
who is shut up in a strong Prison, to come forth, etc. But in these Things
Arminians are very unreasonable. Let common Sense determine whether there be
not a great Difference between those two Cases; the one, that of a Man who has
offended his Prince, and is cast into Prison; and after he has lain there a
while, the King comes to him, calls him to come forth to Him; and tells him
that if he will do so, and will fall down before Him, and humbly beg his
Pardon, he shall be forgiven, and set at Liberty, and also be greatly enriched,
and advanced to Honor: The Prisoner heartily repents of the Folly and
Wickedness of his Offense against his Prince, is thoroughly disposed to abase
Himself, and accept of the King's Offer; but is confined by strong Walls, with
Gates of Brass, and Bars of Iron. The other Case is, that of a Man who is of a
very unreasonable Spirit, of a haughty, ungrateful, wilful Disposition; and
moreover, has been brought up in traiterious Principles; and has his Heart
possessed with an extreme and inveterate Enmity to his lawful Sovereign; and
for his Rebellion is cast into Prison, and lies long there, laden with heavy
Chains, and in miserable Circumstances. At length the compassionate Prince
comes to the Prison, orders his Chains to be knocked off, and his Prison-Doors
to be set wide open; calls to him, and tells Him, if He will come forth to him,
and fall down before him, acknowledge that he has treated him unworthily, and
ask his Forgiveness; He shall be forgiven, set at Liberty, and set in a Place
of great Dignity and Profit in his Court. But He is so stout and stomachful,
and full of haughty Malignity, that He cannot be willing to accept the Offer:
his rooted strong Pride and Malice have perfect Power over him, and as it were
bind him, by binding his Heart: The Opposition of his Heart has the Mastery
over Him, having an Influence on his Mind far superior to the King's Grace and
Condescension, and to all his kind Offers and Promises. Now, is it agreeable to
common Sense, to assert and stand to it, that there is no Difference between
these two Cases, as to any Worthiness of Blame in the Prisoners; because,
forsooth, there is a Necessity in both, and the required Act in each Case is
impossible? It Is true, a Man's evil Dispositions may be as strong and immovable
as the Bars of a Castle. But who cannot see, that when a Man, in the latter
Case, is said to be unable to obey the Command, the Expression is used
improperly, and not in the Sense it has originally and in common Speech? And
that it may properly be said to be in the Rebel's Power to come out of Prison,
seeing he can easily do it if he pleases; though by Reason of his vile Temper of
Heart which is fixed and rooted, it is impossible that it should please Him?

Upon the whole, I presume there is no Person of good Understanding, who
impartially considers the Things which have been observed, but will allow that
it is not evident from the Dictates of the common Sense, or natural Notions of
Mankind, that moral Necessity is inconsistent with Praise and Blame. And
therefore, if the Arminians would prove any such Inconsistency, it must be by
some philosophical and metaphysical Arguments, and not common Sense.

There is a grand Illusion in the pretended Demonstration of Arminians from
common Sense. The main Strength of all these Demonstrations, lies in that
Prejudice that arises through the insensible Change of the Use and Meaning of
such Terms as Liberty, able, unable, necessary, impossible, unavoidable,
invincible, Action, etc. from their original and vulgar Sense, to a
metaphysical Sense entirely diverse; and the strong Connection of the Ideas of
Blamelesness etc. with some of these Terms, by an Habit contracted and
established, while these Terms were used in their first Meaning. This Prejudice
and Delusion is the Foundation of all those Positions they lay down as Maxims,
by which most of the Scriptures, which they allege in this Controversy, are
interpreted, and on which all their pompous Demonstrations from Scripture and
Reason depend. From this secret Delusion and Prejudice they have almost all
their Advantages: It Is the Strength of their Bulwarks, and the Edge of their
Weapons. And this is the main Ground of all the Right they have to treat their
Neighbors in so assuming a Manner, and to insult others, perhaps as wise and
good as themselves, as weak Bigots, Men that dwell in the dark Caves of
Superstition, perversely set, obstinately shutting their Eyes against the
Noonday Light, Enemies to common Sense, maintaining the firstborn of
Absurdities, etc. etc. But perhaps an impartial Consideration of the Things
which have been observed in the preceding Parts of this Enquiry, may enable
the Lovers of Truth better to judge, whose Doctrine is indeed absurd, abstruse,
self-contradictory, and inconsistent with common Sense, and many Ways repugnant
to the universal Dictates of the Reason of Mankind.

Corol. From Things which have been observed, it will follow, that it is
agreeable to common Sense to suppose, that the glorified Saints have not their
Freedom at all diminished, in any Respect; and that God Himself has the highest
possible Freedom, according to the true and proper Meaning of the Term; and
that He is in the highest possible respect an Agent, and active in the Exercise
of his infinite Holiness; though He acts therein in the highest Degree
necessarily: and his Actions of this Kind are in the highest, most absolutely
perfect Manner virtuous and praiseworthy; and are so, for that very Reason,
because they are most perfectly necessary.

SECTION V. Concerning those Objections, that this Scheme of Necessity renders
all Means and Endeavors for the avoiding of Sin, or the obtaining Virtue and
Holiness, vain, and to no Purpose; and that it makes Men no more than mere
Machines in Affairs of Morality and Religion.
ARminians say, if it be so, that Sin and Virtue come to pass by a Necessity
consisting in a sure Connection of Causes and Effects, Antecedents and
Consequents, it can never be worth the while to use any Means or Endeavors to
obtain the one, and avoid the other; seeing no Endeavors can alter the
Futurity of the Event, which is become necessary by a Connection already
established.

But I desire, that this Matter may be fully considered; and that it may be
examined with a thorough Strictness, whether it will follow that Endeavors and
Means, in order to avoid or obtain any future Thing, must be more in vain, on
the Supposition of such a Connection of Antecedents and Consequents, than if
the contrary be supposed.

For Endeavors to be in vain, is for 'em not to be successful; that is to say,
for 'em not eventually to be the Means of the Thing aimed at, which cannot be,
but in one of these two Ways; either, First, That although the Means are used,
yet the Event aimed at don't follow: Or, Secondly, If the Event does follow, it
is not because of the Means, or from any Connection or Dependence of the Event
on the Means, the Event would have come to pass, as well without the Means, as
with them. If either of these two Things are the Case, then the Means are not
properly successful, and are truly in vain. The Successfulness or
Unsuccessfulness of Means, in order to an Effect, or their being in vain or not
in vain, consists in those Means being connected, or not connected, with the
Effect, in such a Manner as this, viz. That the Effect is with the Means, and
not without them; or, that the Being of the Effect is, on the one Hand,
connected with the Means, and the Want of the Effect, on the other Hand, is
connected with the Want of the Means. If there be such a Connection as this
between Means and End, the Means are not in vain: The more there is of such a
Connection, the further they are from being in vain; and the less of such a
Connection, the more are they in vain.

Now therefore the Question to be answered, (in order to determine, whether it
follows from this Doctrine of the necessary Connection between foregoing Things
and consequent ones, that Means used in order to any Effect, are more in vain
than they would be otherwise) is, Whether it follows from it, that there is
less of the forementioned Connection between Means and Effect; that is, Whether
on the Supposition of there being a real and true Connection between antecedent
Things and consequent ones, there must be less of a Connection between Means
and Effect, than on the Supposition of there being no fixed Connection between
antecedent Things and consequent ones: And the very stating of this Question is
sufficient to answer it. It must appear to every one that will open his Eyes,
that this Question cannot be affirmed, without the grossest Absurdity and
Inconsistence. Means are foregoing Things, and Effects are following Things:
And if there were no Connection between foregoing Things, and following ones,
there could be no Connection between Means and End; and so all Means would be
wholly vain and fruitless. For it is by Virtue of some Connection only, that
they become successful: It Is some Connection observed, or revealed, or
otherwise known, between antecedent Things and following ones, that is what
directs in the Choice of Means. And if there were no such Thing as an
established Connection, there could be no Choice, as to Means; one Thing would
have no more Tendency to an Effect, than another; there would be no such Thing
as Tendency in the Case. All those Things which are successful Means of other
Things, do therein prove connected Antecedents of them: And therefore to
assert, that a fixed Connection between Antecedents and Consequents makes Means
vain and useless, or stands in the Way to hinder the Connection between Means
and End, is just so ridiculous, as to say, that a Connection between
Antecedents and Consequents stands in the Way to hinder a Connection between
Antecedents and Consequents.

Nor can any supposed Connection of the Succession or Train of Antecedents and
Consequents, from the very Beginning of all Things, the Connection being made
already sure and necessary, either by established Laws of Nature, or by these
together with a Decree of sovereign immediate Interpositions of divine Power,
on such and such Occasions, or any other Way (if any other there be;) I say, no
such necessary Connection of a Series of Antecedents and Consequents can in the
least tend to hinder, but that the Means we use may belong to the Series; and
so may be some of those Antecedents which are connected with the Consequents we
aim at, in the established Course of Things. Endeavors which we use, are
Things that exist; and therefore they belong to the general Chain of Events;
all the Parts of which Chain are supposed to be connected: And so Endeavors
are supposed to be connected with some Effects, or some consequent Things, or
other. And certainly this don't hinder but, that the Events they are connected
with, may be those which we aim at, and which we choose, because we judge 'em
most likely to have a Connection with those Events, from the established Order
and Course of Things which we observe, or from something in divine Revelation.

Let us suppose a real and sure Connection between a Man's having his Eyes open
in the clear Daylight, with good Organs of Sight, and Seeing; so that Seeing
is connected with his opening his Eyes, and not seeing with his not opening his
Eyes; and also the like Connection between such a Man's attempting to open his
Eyes, and his actually doing it: The supposed established Connection between
these Antecedents and Consequents, let the Connection be never so sure and
necessary, certainly don't prove that it is in vain, for a Man in such
Circumstances to attempt to open his Eyes, in order to seeing: His aiming at
that Event, and the Use of the Means, being the Effect of his Will, don't break
the Connection, or hinder the Success.

So that the Objection we are upon, don't lie against the Doctrine of the
Necessity of Events by a Certainty of Connection and Consequence: On the
contrary, it is truly forcible against the Arminian Doctrine of Contingence and
Self-determination; which is inconsistent with such a Connection. If there be
no Connection between those Events wherein Virtue and Vice consist, and any
Thing antecedent; then there is no Connection between these Events and any
Means or Endeavors used in order to them: And if so, then those Means must be
in vain. The less there is of Connection between foregoing Things and following
ones, so much the less there is between Means and End, Endeavors and Success;
and in the same Proportion are Means and Endeavors ineffectual and in vain.

It will follow from Arminian Principles, that there is no Degree of Connection
between Virtue or Vice, and any foregoing Event or Thing: Or in other Words,
That the Determination of the Existence of Virtue or Vice don't in the least
depend on the Influence of any Thing that comes to pass antecedently, from
which the Determination of its Existence is, as its Cause, Means, or Ground;
because, so far as it is so, it is not from Self-determination: And therefore,
so far there is nothing of the Nature of Virtue or Vice. And so it follows,
that Virtue and Vice are not at all, in any Degree, dependent upon, or
connected with any foregoing Event or Existence, as its Cause, Ground, or
Means. And if so, then all foregoing Means must be totally in vain.

Hence it follows, that there cannot, in any Consistence with the Arminian
Scheme, be any reasonable Ground of so much as a Conjecture concerning the
Consequence of any Means and Endeavors, in order to escaping Vice or obtaining
Virtue, or any Choice or Preference of Means, as having a greater Probability
of Success by some than others; either from any natural Connection or
Dependence of the End on the Means, or through any divine Constitution, or
revealed Way of God's bestowing or bringing to pass these Things, in
Consequence of any Means, Endeavors, Prayers or Deeds. Conjecture in this
latter Case depends on a Supposition that God himself is the Giver, or
determining Cause of the Events sought: But if they depend on
Self-determination, then God is not the determining or disposing Author of
them: And if these Things are not of his Disposal, then no Conjecture can be
made from any Revelation he has given concerning any Way or Method of his
Disposal of them.

Yea, on these Principles, it will not only follow that Men cannot have any
reasonable Ground of Judgment or Conjecture, that their Means and Endeavors to
obtain Virtue or avoid Vice, will be successful, but they may be sure they will
not; they may be certain, that they will be in vain; and that if ever the Thing
which they seek comes to pass, it will not be at all owing to the Means they
use. For Means and Endeavors can have no Effect at all, in Order to obtain the
End, but in one of these two Ways; either (1.) Through a natural Tendency and
Influence, to prepare and dispose the Mind more to virtuous Acts, either by
causing the Disposition of the Heart to be more in Favor of such Acts, or by
bringing the Mind more into the View of powerful Motives and Inducements: Or,
(2.) By putting Persons more in the Way of God's Bestowment of the Benefit. But
neither of these can be the Case. Not the latter; for as has been just now
observed, it don't consist with the Arminian Notion of Self-determination,
which they suppose essential to Virtue, that God should be the Bestower, or
(which is the same Thing) the determining, disposing Author of Virtue. Not the
former; for natural Influence and Tendency supposes Causality and Connection;
and that supposes Necessity of Event, which is inconsistent with Arminian
Liberty. A Tendency of Means, by biassing the Heart in Favor of Virtue, or by
bringing the Will under the Influence and Power of Motives in its
Determinations, are both inconsistent with Arminian Liberty of Will, consisting
in Indifference, and sovereign Self-determination, as has been largely
demonstrated.

But for the more full Removal of this Prejudice against that Doctrine of
Necessity which has been maintained, as though it tended to encourage a total
Neglect of all Endeavors as vain; the following Things may be considered.

The Question is not, Whether Men may not thus improve this Doctrine: We know
that many true and wholesome Doctrines are abused: But, Whether the Doctrine
gives any just Occasion for such an Improvement; or whether, on the Supposition
of the Truth of the Doctrine, such a Use of it would not be unreasonable? If
any shall affirm, that it would not, but that the very Nature of the Doctrine
is such as gives just Occasion for it, it must be on this Supposition; namely,
That such an invariable Necessity of all Things already settled, must render
the Interposition of all Means, Ende^^vours, Conclusions or Actions of ours, in
order to the obtaining any future End whatsoever, perfectly insignificant;
because they cannot in the least alter or vary the Course and Series of Things,
in any Event or Circumstance; all being already fixed unalterably by Necessity:
And that therefore it is Folly, for Men to use any Means for any End; but their
Wisdom, to save themselves the Trouble of Endeavors, and take their Ease. No
Person can draw such an Inference from this Doctrine, and come to such a
Conclusion, without contradicting himself, and going counter to the very
Principles he pretends to act upon: For he comes to a Conclusion, and takes a
Course, in order to an End, even his Ease, or the saving himself from Trouble;
he seeks something future, and uses Means in Order to a future Thing, even in
his drawing up that Conclusion, that he will seek nothing, and use no Means in
order to any Thing future; he seeks his future Ease, and the Benefit and
Comfort of Indolence. If prior Necessity that determines all Things, makes vain
all Actions or Conclusions of ours, in order to any Thing future; then it makes
vain all Conclusions and Conduct of ours, in order to our future Ease. The
Measure of our Ease, with the Time, Manner and every Circumstance of it, is
already fixed, by all-determining Necessity, as much as any Thing else. If he
says within himself, What future Happiness or Misery I shall have, is already
in Effect determined by the necessary Course and Connection of Things;
therefore I will save myself the Trouble of Labor and Diligence, which cannot
add to my determined Degree of Happiness, or diminish my Misery; but will take
my Ease, and will enjoy the Comfort of Sloth and Negligence. Such a Man
contradicts himself: He says, the Measure of his future Happiness and Misery is
already fixed, and he will not try to diminish the one, nor add to the other: But
yet in his very Conclusion, he contradicts this; for he takes up this
Conclusion, to add to his future Happiness, by the Ease and Comfort of his
Negligence; and to diminish his future Trouble and Misery, by saving himself
the Trouble of using Means and taking Pains.

Therefore Persons cannot reasonably make this Improvement of the Doctrine of
Necessity, that they will go into a voluntary Negligence of Means for their own
Happiness. For the Principles they must go upon, in order to this, are
inconsistent with their making any Improvement at all of the Doctrine: For to
make some Improvement of it, is to be influenced by it, to come to some
voluntary Conclusion, in Regard to their own Conduct, with some View or Aim:
But this, as has been shown, is inconsistent with the Principles they pretend
to act upon. In short, the Principles are such as cannot be acted upon at all,
or in any Respect, consistently. And therefore in every Pretense of acting upon
them, or making any Improvement at all of them, there is a Self-contradiction.

As to that Objection against the Doctrine which I have endeavored to prove,
that it makes Men no more than mere Machines; I would say, that notwithstanding
this Doctrine, Man is entirely, perfectly and unspeakably different from a mere
Machine, in that he has Reason and Understanding, and has a Faculty of Will,
and so is capable of Volition and Choice; and in that, his Will is guided by
the Dictates or Views of his Understanding; and in that his external Actions
and Behavior, and in many Respect also his Thoughts, and the Exercises of his
Mind, are subject to his Will; so that he has Liberty to act according to his
Choice, and do what he pleases; and by Means of these Things, is capable of
moral Habits and moral Acts, such Inclinations and Actions as according to the
common Sense of Mankind, are worthy of Praise, Esteem, Love and Reward; or on
the contrary, of Disesteem, Detestation, Indignation and Punishment.

In these Things is all the Difference from mere Machines, as to Liberty and
Agency, that would be any Perfection, Dignity or Privilege, in any Respect: All
the Difference that can be desired, and all that can be conceived of; and
indeed all that the Pretensions of the Arminians themselves come to, as they
are forced often to explain themselves. (Though their Explications overthrow and
abolish the Things asserted, and pretended to be explained) For they are forced
to explain a self-determining Power of Will, by a Power in the Soul, to
determine as it chooses or wills; which comes to no more than this, that a Man
has a Power of choosing, and in many Instances, can do as he chooses. Which is
quite a different Thing from that Contradiction, his having Power of choosing
his first Act of Choice in the Case.

Or if their Scheme makes any other Difference than this, between Men and
Machines, it is for the worse: It is so far from supposing Men to have a
Dignity and Privilege above Machines, that it makes the Manner of their being
determined still more unhappy. Whereas Machines are guided by an understanding
Cause, by the skilful Hand of the Workman or Owner; the Will of Man is left to
the Guidance of nothing, but absolute blind Contingence.

SECTION VI. Concerning that Objection against the Doctrine which has been
maintained, that it agrees with the Stoical Doctrine of Fate, and the Opinions
of Mr. Hobbes.
WHEN Calvinists oppose the Arminian Notion of the Freedom of Will, and
Contingence of Volition, and insist that there are no Acts of the Will, nor any
other Events whatsoever, but what are attended with some Kind of Necessity;
their Opposers cry out of them, as agreeing with the ancient Stoics in their
Doctrine of Fate, and with Mr. Hobbes in his Opinion of Necessity.

It would not be worth while, to take Notice of so impertinent an Objection,
had it not been urged by some of the chief Arminian Writers. -- There were many
important Truths maintained by the ancient Greek and Roman Philosophers, and
especially the Stoics, that are never the worse for being held by them. The
Stoic Philosophers, by the general Agreement of Christian Divines, and even
Arminian Divines, were the greatest, wisest and most virtuous of all the
Heathen Philosophers; and in their Doctrine and Practice came the nearest to
Christianity of any of their Sects. How frequently are the Sayings of these
Philosophers, in many of the Writings and Sermons, even of Arminian Divines,
produced, not as Arguments of the Falseness of the Doctrines which they
delivered, but as a Confirmation of some of the greatest Truths of the
Christian Religion, relating to the Unity and Perfections of the Godhead, a
future State, the Duty and Happiness of Mankind, etc. as observing how the
Light of Nature and Reason in the wisest and best of the Heathen, harmonized
with, and confirms the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

And it is very remarkable concerning Dr. Whitby, that although He alleges the
Agreement of the Stoics with us, wherein He supposes they maintained the like
Doctrine with us, as an Argument against the Truth of our Doctrine; yet this
very Dr. Whitby alleges the Agreement of the Stoics with the Arminians,
wherein he supposes they taught the same Doctrine with them, as an Argument for
the Truth of their Doctrine. Whitby on the five Points, Edit. 3. P. 325, 326,
327.
So that when the Stoics agree with them, this (it seems) is a Confirmation of
their Doctrine, and a Confutation of ours, as showing that our Opinions are
contrary to the natural Sense and common Reason of Mankind: Nevertheless, when
the Stoics agree with us, it argues no such Thing in our Favor; but on the
contrary, is a great Argument against us, and shows our Doctrine to be
Heathenish.

It is observed by some Calvinistic Writers, that the Arminians symbolize with
the Stoics, in some of those Doctrines wherein they are opposed by the
Calvinists; particularly in their denying an original, innate, total Corruption
and Depravity of Heart; and in what they held of Man's Ability to make Himself
truly virtuous and conformed to God; -- and in some other Doctrines.

It may be further observed, it is certainly no better Objection against our
Doctrine, that it agrees in some Respects with the Doctrine of the ancient
Stoic Philosophers, than it (...) against theirs, wherein they differ from us,
that it agrees in some Respects with the Opinion of the very worst of the
Heathen Philosophers, the Followers of Epicurus, that Father of Atheism and
Licentiousness, and with the Doctrine of the Sadducees and Jesuits.

I am not much concerned to know precisely what the ancient Stoic Philosophers
held concerning Fate, in order to determine what is Truth; as though it were a
sure Way to be in the right, to take good Heed to differ from them. It seems
that they differed among themselves; and probably the Doctrine of Fate, as
maintained by most of 'em, was in some Respects erroneous. But whatever their
Doctrine was, if any of 'em held such a Fate, as is repugnant to any Liberty
consisting in our doing as we please, I utterly deny such a Fate. If they held
any such Fate, as is not consistent with the common and universal Notions that
Mankind have of Liberty, Activity, moral Agency, Virtue and Vice; I disclaim
any such Thing, and think I have demonstrated that the Scheme I maintain is no
such Scheme. If the Stoics by Fate meant any Thing of such a Nature, as can be
supposed to stand in the Way of the Advantage and Benefit of the Use of Means
and Endeavors, or makes it less worth the while for Men to desire, and seek
after any Thing wherein their Virtue and Happiness consists; I hold no Doctrine
that is clogged with any such Inconvenience, any more than any other Scheme
whatsoever; and by no Means so much as the Arminian Scheme of Contingence; as
has been shown. If they held any such Doctrine of universal Fatality, as is
inconsistent with any Kind of Liberty, that is or can be any Perfection,
Dignity, Privilege or Benefit, or any Thing desirable, in any Respect, for any
intelligent Creature, or indeed with any Liberty that is possible or
conceivable; I embrace no such Doctrine. If they held any such Doctrine of Fate
as is inconsistent with the World's being in all Things subject to the Disposal
of an intelligent wise Agent, that presides, not as the Soul of the World, but
as the sovereign Lord of the Universe, governing all Things by proper Will,
Choice and Design, in the Exercise of the most perfect Liberty conceivable,
without Subjection to any Constraint, or being properly under the Power or
Influence of any Thing before, above or without himself; I wholly renounce any
such Doctrine.

As to Mr. Hobbes's maintaining the same Doctrine concerning Necessity; -- I
confess, it happens I never read Mr. Hobbes. Let his Opinion be what it will,
we need not reject all Truth which is demonstrated by clear Evidence, merely
because it was once held by some bad Man. This great Truth, that Jesus is the
Son of God, was not spoiled because it was once and again proclaimed with a
loud Voice by the Devil. If Truth is so defiled because it is spoken by the
Mouth, or written by the Pen of some ill-minded mischievous Man, that it must
never be received, we shall never know when we hold any of the most precious
and evident Truths by a sure Tenure. And if Mr. Hobbes has made (...) bad Use
of this Truth, that is to be lamented: but the Truth is not to be though it worthy
of Rejection on that Account. It Is common for the Corruptions of the Hearts of
evil Men, to abuse the best Things to vile Purposes.

I might also take Notice of it is having been observed, that the Arminians
agree with Mr. Hobbes Dr. Gill, in his Answer to Dr. Whitby. Vol. 3. P. 183,
etc.
in many more Things than the Calvinists. As, in what he is said to hold
concerning Original Sin, in denying the Necessity of supernatural Illumination,
in denying infused Grace, in denying the Doctrine of Justification by Faith
alone; and other Things.

SECTION VII. Concerning the Necessity of the Divine Will.
SOME may possibly object against what has been supposed of the Absurdity and
Inconsistence of a self-determining Power in the Will, and the Impossibility of
it is being otherwise, than that the Will should be determined in every Case by
some Motive, and by a Motive which (as it stands in the View of the
Understanding) is of superior Strength to any appearing on the other Side;
That if these Things are true, it will follow, that not only the Will of
created Minds, but the Will of God Himself is necessary in all it is
Determinations. Concerning which says the Author of the Essay on the Freedom of
Will in God and in the Creature (Page 85, 86.) What strange Doctrine is this,
contrary to all our Ideas of the Dominion of God? Does it not destroy the Glory
of his Liberty of Choice, and take away from the Creator and Governor and
Benefactor of the World, that most free and sovereign Agent, all the Glory of
this Sort of Freedom? Does it not seem to make Him a Kind of mechanical Medium
of Fate, and introduce Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine of Fatality and Necessity, into
all Things that God has to do with? Does it not seem to represent the blessed
God, as a Being of vast Understanding, as well as Power and Efficiency, but
still to leave Him without a Will to choose among all the Objects within his
View? In short, it seems to make the blessed God a Sort of almighty Minister of
Fate, under it is universal and supreme Influence; as it was the professed
Sentiment of some of the Ancients, that Fate was above the Gods.

This is declaiming, rather than arguing; and an Application to Men's
Imaginations and Prejudices, rather than to mere Reason. -- But I would calmly
endeavor to consider whether there be any Reason in this frightful
Represe^tation. -- But before I enter upon a particular Consideration of the
Matter, I would observe this: That it is reasonable to suppose, it should be
much more difficult to express or conceive Things according to exact
metaphysical Truth, relating to the Nature and Manner of the Existence of
Things in the divine Understanding and Will, and the Operation of these
Faculties (if I may so call them) of the divine Mind, than in the human Mind;
which is infinitely more within our View, and nearer to a Proportion to the
Measure of our Comprehension, and more commensurate to the Use and Import of
human Speech. Language is indeed very deficient, in Regard of Terms to express
precise Truth concerning our own Minds, and their Faculties and Operations.
Words were first formed to express external Things; and those that are applied
to express Things internal and spiritual, are almost all borrowed, and used in
a Sort of figurative Sense. Whence they are most of 'em attended with a great
Deal of Ambiguity and Unfixedness in their Signification, occasioning
innumerable Doubts, Difficulties and Confusions in Enquiries and Controversies
about Things of this Nature. But Language is much less adapted to express
Things in the Mind of the incomprehensible Deity, precisely as they are.

We find a great Deal of Difficulty in conceiving exactly of the Nature of our
own Souls. And notwithstanding all the Progress which has been made in past and
present Ages, in this Kind of Knowledge, whereby our Metaphysics, as it
relates to these Things, is brought to greater Perfection than once it was; yet
here is still Work enough left for future Enquiries and Researches, and Room
for Progress still to be made, for many Ages and Generations. But we had need
to be infinitely able Metaphysicians, to conceive with Clearness, according to
strict, proper and perfect Truth, concerning the Nature of the divine Essence,
and the Modes of the Action and Operation of the Powers of the divine Mind.

And it may be noted particularly, that though we are obliged to conceive of some
Things in God as consequent and dependent on others, and of some Things
pertaining to the divine Nature and Will as the Foundation of others, and so
before others in the Order of Nature: As, we must conceive of the Knowledge and
Holiness of God as prior in the Order of Nature to his Happiness; the
Perfection of his Understanding, as the Foundation of his wise Purposes and
Decrees; the Holiness of his Nature, as the Cause and Reason of his holy
Determinations. And yet when we speak of Cause and Effect, Antecedent and
Consequent, fundamental and dependent, determining and determined, in the first
Being, who is self-existent, independent, of perfect and absolute Simplicity
and Immutability, and the first Cause of all Things; doubtless there must be
less Propriety in such Representations, than when we speak of derived dependent
Beings, who are compounded, and liable to perpetual Mutation and Succession.

Having premised this, I proceed to observe concerning the forementioned
Author's Exclamation, about the necessary Determination of God's Will, in all
Things, by what He sees to be fittest and best.

That all the seeming Force of such Objections and Exclamations must arise from
an Imagination, that there is some Sort of Privilege or Dignity in being
without such a moral Necessity, as will make it impossible to do any other,
than always choose what is wisest and best; as though there were some
Disadvantage, Meanness and Subjection, in such a Necessity; a Thing by which
the Will was confined, kept under, and held in Servitude by something, which,
as it were, maintained a strong and invincible Power and Dominion over it, by
Bonds that held him fast, and that he could by no Means deliver himself from.
Whereas, this must be all mere Imagination and Delusion. It Is no Disadvantage
or Dishonor to a Being, necessarily to act in the most excellent and happy
Manner, from the necessary Perfection of his own Nature. This argues no
Imperfection, Inferiority or Dependence, nor any Want of Dignity, Privilege or
Ascendancy. It might have been objected with much more Plausibleness, that the
supreme Cause cannot be free, because he must needs do always what is best in
the Whole. But this would not at all serve Spinoza's Purpose: For this is a
Necessity, not of Nature and Fate, but of Fitness and Wisdom; a Necessity
consistent with the greatest Freedom, and most perfect Choice. For the only
Foundation of this Necessity is such an unalterable Rectitude of Will, and
Perfection of Wisdom, as makes it impossible for a wise Being to act foolishly.
Clark's Dom. of the Being "and Attrib. of God. Edit. 6. P. 64.

Though God is a most perfectly free Agent, yet he cannot but do always what is
best and wisest in the Whole. The Reason is evident* because perfect Wisdom and
Goodness are as steady and certain Principles of Action, as Necessity itself;
and as infinitely wise and good Being, indeed with the most perfect Liberty,
can no more choose to act in Contradiction to Wisdom and Goodness, than a
necessary Agent can act contrary to the Necessity by which it is acted; it
being as great an Absurdity and impossibility in Choice, for infinite Wisdom to
choose to act unwisely, or infinite Goodness to choose what is not good, as it
would be in Nature, for absolute Necessity to fail of producing its necessary
Effect. There was indeed no Necessity i^ Nature, that God should at first
create such Beings as he has created, or indeed any Being at all; because he is
in himself infinitely happy and All-sufficient. There was also no Necessity in
Nature, that he should preserve and continue Things in Being, after they were
created; because he would be self-sufficient without their Continuance, as he
was before their Creation. But it was ^it and wise and good, that infinite
Wisdom should manifest, and infinite Goodness communicate itself; and therefore
it was necessary, in the Sense of Necessity I am now speaking of, that Things
should be made at such a Time, and continued so long, and indeed with various
Perfections in such Degrees, as infinite Wisdom and Goodness saw it wisest and
best that they should. ^^id* P. 112, 113. It Is not a Fault, but a Perfection of
our Nature, to desire, will and act, according to the last Result of a fair
Examination. -- This is so far from being a Restraint or Diminution of Freedom,
that it is the very Improvement and Benefit of it: It Is not an Abridgment, it is
the End and Use of our Liberty; and the further we are removed from such a
Determination, the nearer we are to Misery and Slavery. A perfect Indifference
i^ the Mind, not determinable by its last Judgment of the Good or Evil that is
thought to attend its Choice, would be so far from being an Advan^^ge and
Excellency of any intellectual Nature, that it would be as great as
Imperfection* as the Want of Indifferency to act, or not to act, till
determined by the Will, would be an Imperfection on the other Side. -- It Is as
much a Perfection, that D^^ire or the Power of preferring should be determined
by Good, as that the Power of acting should be determined by the Will: And the
certainer such Determination is, the greater the Perfection. Nay, were we
determined by any Thing but the last Result of our own Minds, judging of the
Good or Evil of any Action, ^e were not free. The very End of our Freedom
being, that we might attain the Good we choose; and therefore every Man is bro't
under a Necessity by his Constitution, as an intelligent Being, to be
determined in willing by his own Thought and Judgment, what is best for him to
do; else he would be under the Determination of some other than himself, which
is Want of Liberty. And to deny that a Man's Will, in every Determination,
follows his own Judgment, is to say, that a Man wills and acts for an End that
he would not have, at the same Time that he wills and acts for it. For if he
prefers it in his present Thoughts, before any other, it is plain he then thinks
better of it, and would have it before any other; unless he can have, and not
have it; will, and not will it, at the same Time; a Contradiction too manifest
to be admitted. -- If we look upon those superior Bei^gs above us, who enjoy
perfect Happiness, we shall have Reason to judge, that they are more steadily
determined in their Choice of Good than we; and yet we have no Reason to think
they are less happy, or less free, than we are. And if it were fit for such
poor ^^nite Creatures as we are, to pronounce what infinite Wisdom and Goodness
could do, I think we might say, that God himself cannot choose what is not Good.
The Freedom of the Almighty hinders not his being determined by what is best.
-- But to give a right View of this mistakes Part of Liberty, let me ask, Would
any one be a Changeling, because he is less determined by wise Determinations,
than a wise Man? Is it worth the Name of Freedom, to be at Liberty to play the
Fool, and draw Shame and Misery upon a Man's self? If to break loose from the
Conduct of Reason, and to want that Restraint of Examination and Judgment, that
keeps us from doing or choosing the worse, be Liberty, true Liberty, Madmen and
Fools are the only free Men. Yet I think no Body would choose to be mad, for the
sake of such Liberty, but he that is mad already. Lock, Hum. Und. Vol. 1.
Edit. 7. P. 215, 216. This ^^ing having all Things always necessarily in View,
must always, and eternally will* according to his infinite Comprehension of
Things; that is, must will all Things that are wisest and best to be done.
There is no getting free of this Consequence. If it can will at all, it must
will this Way. To be capable of knowing, and not capable of willing, is not to
be understood. And to be capable of willing otherwise than what is wisest and
best, contradicts that Knowledge which is infinite. Infinite Knowledge must
direct the Will without Error Here then is the Origin of moral Necessity; and
that is really, of Freedom. -- Perhaps it may be said, when the divine Will is
determined, from the Consideration of the eternal Aptitudes of Things, it is as
necessarily determined, as if it were physically impel'd, if that were
possible. But it is Unskilfulness, to suppose this an Objection. The great
Principle is once established, viz. That the divine Will is determined by the
eternal Reason and Aptitudes of Things, instead of being physically impelled;
and after that, the more strong and necessary this Determination is, the more
perfect the Deity must be allowed to be: It is this that makes him an amiable
and adorable Being, whose Will and Power are constantly, immutably determined,
by the Consideration of what is wisest and best; instead of a surd Being, with
Power, but without Discerning and Reason. It is the Beauty of this Necessity,
that it is strong as Fate itself, with all the Advantage of Reason and
Goodness. -- It is strange, to see Men contend, that the Deity is not Free,
because he is necessarily rational, immutably good and wise; when a Man is
allowed still the perfecter Being, the more fixedly and c^^stantly his Will is
determined by Reason and Truth. Enq^^^^ into the "Nature of the Hum. Soul.
Edit. 3. Vol. II, P. 403, 404.


It Is not inconsistent with the absolute, and most perfect Sovereignty of God.
The Sovereignty of God is his Ability and Authority to do whatever pleases Him;
whereby He does according to his Will in the Armies of Heaven, and amongst the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his Hand, or say unto him, What
do thou? -- The following Things belong to the Sovereignty of God; viz. (1.)
Supreme, universal, and infinite Power; whereby he is able to do what he
pleases, without Control; without any Confinement of that Power, without any
Subjection in the least Measure to any other Power; and so without any
Hindrance or Restraint, that it should be either impossible, or at all
difficult, for him to accomplish his Will; and without any Dependence of his
Power on any other Power, from whence it should be derived, or which it should
stand in any Need of: So far from this, that all other Power is derived from
Him, and is absolutely dependent on Him. (2.) That He has supreme Authority;
absolute and most perfect Right to do what He wills, without Subjection to any
superior Authority, or any Derivation of Authority from any other, or
Limitation by any distinct independent Authority, either superior, equal, or
inferior; he being the Head of all Dominion, and Fountain of all Authority;
and also without Restraint by any Obligation, implying either Subjection,
Derivation, or Dependence, or proper Limitation. (3.) That his Will is supreme,
underived, and independent on any Thing without Himself; being in every Thing
determined by his own Counsel, having no other Rule but his own Wisdom; his
Will not being subject to, or restrained by the Will of any other, and others
Wills being perfectly subject to his. (4.) That his Wisdom, which determines
his Will, is supreme, perfect, underived, self-sufficient, and independent; so
that it may be said as in Isai. xl.14. With whom took He Counsel? And who
instructed Him and taught Him in the Path of Judgment, and taught Him Knowledge,
and showed Him the Way of Understanding? -- There is no other divine
Sovereignty but this: and this is properly absolute Sovereignty: No other is
desirable; nor would any other be honorable, or happy: and indeed there is no
other conceivable or possible. It Is the Glory and Greatness of the divine
Sovereignty, that God's Will is determined by his own infinite all-sufficient
Wisdom in every Thing; and in nothing at all is either directed by any
inferior Wisdom, or by no Wisdom; whereby it would become senseless
Arbitrariness, determining and acting without Reason, Design or End.

If God's Will is stead^ly and surely determined in every Thing by supreme
Wisdom, then it is in every Thing necessarily determined to that which is most
wise. And certainly it would be a Disadvantage and Indignity, to be otherwise.
For if the divine Will was not necessarily determined to that which in every
Case is wisest and best, it must be subject to some Degree of undesigning
Contingence; and so in the same Degree liable to Evil. To suppose the divine
Will liable to be carried hither and thither at Random, by the uncertain Wind
of blind Contingence, which is guided by no Wisdom, no Motive, no intelligent
Dictate whatsoever, (if any such Thing were possible) would certainly argue a
great Degree of Imperfection and Meanness, infinitely unworthy of the Deity. --
If it be a Disadvantage, for the divine Will to be attended with this moral
Necessity, then the more free from it, and the more left at Random, the greater
Dignity and Advantage. And consequently to be perfectly free from the Direction
of Understanding, and universally and entirely left to senseless unmeaning
Contingence, to act absolutely at Random, would be the supreme Glory.

It no more argues any Dependence of God's Will, that his supremely wise
Volition is necessary, than it argues a Dependence of his Being, that his
Existence is necessary. If it be something too low, for the supreme Being to
have his Will determined by moral Necessity, so as necessarily, in every Case,
to will in the highest Degree holily and happily; then why is it not also
something too low, for him to have his Existence, and the infinite Perfection
of his Nature, and his infinite Happiness determined by Necessity? It is no
more to God's Dishonor, to be necessarily wise, than to be necessarily holy.
And if neither of them be to his Dishonor, then it is not to his Dishonor
necessarily to act holily and wisely. And if it be not dishonorable, to be
necessarily holy and wise, in the highest possible Degree, no more is it mean
or dishonorable, necessarily to act holily and wisely in the highest possible
Degree; or (which is the same Thing) to do that, in every Case, which above all
other Things is wisest and best.

The Reason why it is not dishonorable, to be necessarily most holy, is,
because Holiness in itself is an excellent and honorable Thing. For the same
Reason, it is no Dishonor to be necessarily most wise, and in every Case to
act most wisely, or do the Thing which is the wisest of all; for Wisdom is also
in it self excellent and honorable.

The forementioned Author of the Essay on the Freedom of Will etc. as has been
observed, represents that Doctrine of the divine Will's being in every Thing
necessarily determined by superior Fitness, as making the blessed God a Kind of
almighty Minister and mechanical Medium of Fate: And he insists, P. 93, 94.
that this moral Necessity and Impossibility is in Effect the same Thing with
physical and natural Necessity and Impossibility: And in P. 54, 55. he says,
The Scheme which dete^mines the Will always and certainly by the Understanding,
and the Understanding by the Appearance of Things, seems to take away the true
Nature of Vice and Virtue. For the sublimest of Virtues, and the vilest of
Vices, seem rather to be Matters of Fate and Necessity, flowing naturally and
necessarily from the Existence, the Circumstances, and present Situation of
Persons and Things: For this Existence and Situation necessarily makes such an
Appearance to the Mind; from this Appearance flows a necessary Perception and
Judgment, concerning these Things; this Judgment necessarily determines the
Will: And thus by this Chain of necessary Causes, Virtue and Vice would lose
their Nature, and become natural Ideas, and necessary Things, instead of moral
and free Actions.

And yet this same Author allows, P. 30, 31. That a perfectly wise Being will
constantly and certainly choose what is most fit; and says, P. 102, 103. I
grant, and always have granted, that wheresoever there is such an antecedent
superior Fitness of Things, God acts according to it, so as never to contradict
it; and particularly, in all his judicial Proceedings, as a Governor, and
Distributer of Rewards and Punishments. Yea, he says expressly, P. 42. That it
is not possible for God to act otherwise, than according to this Fitness and
Goodness in Things.

So that according to this Author, putting these several Passages of his Essay
together, there is no Virtue, nor any Thing of a moral Nature, in the most
sublime and glorious Acts and Exercises of God's Holiness, Justice, and
Faithfulness; and He never does any Thing which is in it self supreamly worthy,
and above all other Things fit and excellent, but only as a Kind of mechanical
Medium of Fate; and in what he does as the Judge, and moral Governor of the
World, He exercises no moral Excellency; exercising no Freedom in these Things,
because He acts by moral Necessity, which is in Effect the same with physical
or natural Necessity; and therefore he only acts by an Hobbistical Fatality* as
a Being indeed of vast Understanding, as well as Power and Efficiency (as He
said before) but without a Will to choose, being a Kind of almighty Minister of
Fate, acting under it is supreme Influence. For He allows, that in all these
Things God's Will is determined constantly and certainly by a superior
Fitness, and that it is not possible for Him to act otherwise. And if these
Things are so, what Glory or Praise belongs to God for doing holily and justly,
or taking the most fit, holy, wise and excellent Course, in any one Instance?
Whereas, according to the Scriptures, and also the common Sense of Mankind, it
don't in the least derogate from the Honor of any Being, that through the
moral Perfection of his Nature, he necessarily acts with supreme Wisdom and
Holiness: But on the contrary, his Praise is the greater: Herein consists the
Height of his Glory.

The same Author, P. 56. supposes, that herein appears the excellent Character
of a wise and good Man, that though he can choose contrary to the Fitness of
Things, yet he does not; but suffers himself to be directed by Fitness; and
that in this Conduct He imitates the blessed God. And yet He supposes it is
contrariwise with the blessed God; not that he suffers Himself to be directed
by Fitness, when He can choose contrary to the Fitness of Things, but that he
cannot choose contrary to the Fitness of Things; as he says, P. 42. -- That it
is not possible for God to act otherwise, than, according to this Fitness,
where there is any Fitness or Goodness in Things: Yea, he supposes, P. 31. That
if a Man were perfectly wise and good, he could not do otherwise than be
constantly and certainly determined by the Fitness of Things.

One Thing more I would observe, before I conclude this Section; and that is,
that if it derogates nothing from the Glory of God, to be necessarily
determined by superior Fitness in some Things, then neither does it to be thus
determined in all Things; from any Thing in the Nature of such Necessity, as at
all detracting from God's Freedom, Independence, absolute Supr^macy, or any
Dignity or Glory of his Nature, State, or Manner of acting; or as implying any
Infirmity, Restraint, or Subjection. And if the Thing be such as well consists
with God's Glory, and has nothing tending at all to detract from it; then we
need not be afraid of ascribing it to God in too many Things, lest thereby we
should detract from God's Glory too much.

SECTION VIII. Some further Objections against the moral Necessity of GOD'S
Volitions considered.
THE Author last cited, as has been observed, owns that God, being perfectly
wise, will constantly and certainly choose what appears most fit, where there is
a superior Fitness and Goodness in Things; and that it is not possible for him
to do otherwise. So that it is in Effect confessed, that in those Things where
there is any real Preferableness, it is no Dishonor, nothing in any Respect
unworthy of God, for him to act from Necessity; notwithstanding all that can be
objected from the Agreement of such a Necessity, with the Fate of the Stoics,
and the Necessity maintained by Mr. Hobbes. From which it will follow, that if
it were so, that in all the different Things, among which God chooses, there
were evermore a superior Fitness or Preferableness on one Side, then it would
be no Dishonor, or any Thing, in any Respect, unworthy, or unbecoming of God,
for his Will to be necessarily determined in every Thing. And if this be
allowed, it is a giving up entirely the Argument, from the Unsuitableness of
such a Necessity to the Liberty, Supremacy, Independence and Glory of the
divine Being; and a resting the whole Weight of the Affair on the Decision of
another Point wholly diverse; viz. Whether it be so indeed, that in all the
various possible Things which are in God's View, and may be considered as
capable Objects of his Choice, there is not evermore a Preferableness in one
Thing above another. This is denied by this Author; who supposes, that in many
Instances, between two or more possible Things, which come within the View of
the divine Mind, there is a perfect Indifference and Equality as to Fitness, or
Tendency to attain any good End which God can have in View, or to answer any of
his Designs. Now therefore I would consider whether this be evident.

The Arguments brought to prove this, are of two Kinds. (1.) It is urged, that
in many Instances we must suppose there is absolutely no Difference between
various possible Objects of Choice, which God has in View: And (2.) that the
Difference between many Things is so inconsiderable, or of such a Nature, that
it would be unreasonable to suppose it to be of any Consequence; or to suppose
that any of God's wise Designs would not be answered in one Way as well as the
other.

Therefore,

I. The first Thing to be considered is, Whether there are any Instances
wherein there is a perfect Likeness, and absolutely no D^fference, between
different Objects of Choice, that are propo^ed to the divine Understanding?

And here in the first Place, it may be worthy to be considered, whether the
Contradiction there is in the Terms of the Question proposed, don't give Reason
to suspect that there is an Inconsistence in the Thing supposed. It Is inquired,
whether differ^^^ Objects of Choice may not be absolutely without Difference?
(...) they are absolutely without Difference, then how are they different
Objects of Choice? If there be absolutely no Difference in any Respect, then
there is no Variety or Distinction: For Distinction is only by some Difference.
And if there be no Variety among proposed Objects of Choice, then there is no
Opportunity for Variety of Choice, or Difference of Determination. For that
Determination of a Thing which is not different in any Respect, is not a
different Determination, but the same. That this is no Quibble, may appear more
fully anon.

The Arguments, to prove that the most High, in some Instances, chooses to do
one Thing rather than another, where the Things themselves are perfectly
without Difference, are two.

1. That the various Parts of infinite Time and Space, absolutely considered,
are perfectly alike, and don't differ at all one from another: And that
therefore, when God determined to create the World in such a Part of infinite
Duration and Space, rather than others, he determined and preferred among
various Objects, between which there was no Preferableness, and absolutely no
Difference.

Answ. This Objection supposes an infinite Length of Time before the World was
created, distinguished by successive Parts, properly and truly so; or a
Succession of limited and unmeasurable Periods of Time, following one another,
in an infinitely long Series: which must needs be a groundless Imagination. The
eternal Duration which was before the World, being only the Eternity of God's
Existence; which is nothing else but his immediate, perfect and invariable
Possession of the whole of his unlimited Life, together and at once; Vitae
interminabilis, tota, simul and perfecta Possessio. Which is so generally
allowed, that I need not stand to demonstrate it. If all created Beings were
taken away, all Possibility of any Mutation or Succession of one Thing to
another would appear to be also removed. Abstract Succession in Eternity is
scarce to be understood. What is it that succeeds? One Minute to another
perhaps, velut und^ supervenit undam. But when we imagine this, we fancy that
the Minutes are Things separately existing. This is the common Notion; and yet
it is a manifest Prejudice. Time is nothing but the Existence of created
successive Beings, and Eternity the necessary Existence of the Deity.
Therefore, if this necessary Being has no Change or Succession in his Nature,
his Existence must of Course be unsuccessive. We seem to commit a double
Oversight in this Case; first, we find Succession in the necessary Nature and
Existence of the Deity himself: Which is wrong, if the Reasoning above be
conclusive. And then we ascribe this Succession to Eternity, considered
abstractedly from the eternal Being; and suppose it, one knows not what, a
Thing subsisting by it self, and flowing* one Minute after another. This is the
Work of pure Imagination, and contrary to the Reality of Things. Hence the
common metaphorical Expressions; Time runs a-pace* let us lay hold on the
present Minute, and the like. The Philosophers themselves mislead us by their
Illustrations: They compare Eternity to the Motion of a Point running on
forever, and making a traceless infinite Line. Here the Point i^ supposed a
Thing actually subsisting, representing the present Minute; and then they
ascribe Motion or Succession to it: that ^s* they ascribe Motion to a mere
Nonentity, to illustrate to us a successive Eternity made up of finite
successive Parts. -- If once we allow an all-perfect Mind, which has an
eternal, immutable and infinite Comprehension of all Things, always (and allow
it we must) the Distinction of past and future vanishes with Respect to such a
Mind. -- In a Word, if we proceed Step by Step, as above, the Eternity or
Existence of the Deity will appear to be Vitae interminabilis, tota, simul and
perfecta Possessio; how much soever this may have been a Paradox hitherto.
Enquiry into the Nature of the Human Soul. Vol. 2. P. 409, 410, 411. Edit. 3.


So this Objection supposes an Extent of Space beyond the Limits of the
Creation, of an infinite Length, Breadth and Depth, truly and properly
distinguished into different measurable Parts, limited at certain Stages, one
beyond another, in an infinite Series. Which Notion of absolute and infinite
Space is doubtless as unreasonable, as that now mentioned, of absolute and
infinite Duration. It Is as improper, to imagine that the Immensity and
Omnipresence of God is distinguished by a Series of Miles and Leagues, one
beyond another; as that the infinite Duration of God is distinguished by Months
and Years, one after another. A Diversity and Order of distinct Parts, limited
by certain Periods, is as conceivable, and does as naturally obtrude itself on
our Imagination, in one Case as the other; and there is equal Reason in each
Case, to suppose that our Imagination deceives us. It Is equally improper, to
talk of Months and Years of the divine Existence, and Milesquares of Deity: And
we equally deceive our selves, when we talk of the World's being differently
fixed with Respect to either of these Sorts of Measures. I think, we know not
what we mean, if we say, the World might have been differently placed from what
it is, in the broad Expanse of Infinity; or, that it might have been
differently fixed in the long Line of Eternity: And all Arguments and
Objections which are built on the Imaginations we are apt to have of infinite
Extension or Duration, are Buildings founded on Shadows, or Castles in the Air.

2. The second Argument, to prove that the most High wills one Thing rather
than another, without any superior Fitness or Preferableness in the Thing
preferred, is God's actually placing in different Parts of the World, Particles
or Atoms of Matter that are perfectly equal and alike. The forementioned Author
says, P. 78, etc. If one would descend to the minute specific Particles, of
which different Bodies are composed, we should see abundant Reason to believe
that there are Thousands of such little Particles or Atoms of Matter, which are
perfectly equal and alike, and could give no distinct Determination to the Will
of God, where to place them. He there instances in Particles of Water, of which
there are such immense Numbers, which compose the Rivers and Oceans of this
World; and the infinite Myriads of the luminous and fiery Particles, which
compose the Body of the Sun; so many, that it would be very unreasonable to
suppose no two of them should be exactly equal and alike.

Answ. (1.) To this I answer: That as we must suppose Matter to be infinitely
divisible, it is very unlikely that any two of all these Particles are exactly
equal and alike; so unlikely, that it is a Thousand to one, yea, an infinite
Number to one, but it is otherwise: And that although we should allow a great
Similarity between the different Particles of Water and Fire, as to their
general Nature and Figure; and however small we suppose those Particles to be,
it is infinitely unlikely, that any two of them should be exactly equal in
Dimensions and Quantity of Matter. -- If we should suppose a great many Globes
of the same Nature with the Globe of the Earth, it would be very strange, if
there were any two of them that had exactly the same Number of Particles of
Dust and Water in them. But infinitely less strange, than that two Particles of
Light should have just the same Quantity of Matter. For a Particle of Light
(according to the Doctrine of the infinite Divisibility of Matter) is composed
of infinitely more assignable Parts, than there are Particles of Dust and Water
in the Globe of the Earth. And as it is infinitely unlikely, that any two of
these Particles should be equal; so it is, that they should be alike in other
Respects: To instance in the Configuration of their Surfaces. If there were
very many Globes, of the Nature of the Earth, it would be very unlikely that
any two should have exactly the same Number of Particles of Dust, Water and
Stone, in their Surfaces, and all posited exactly alike, one with Respect to
another, without any Difference, in any Part discernable either by the naked
Eye or Microscope; but infinitely less strange, than that two Particles of
Light should be perfectly of the same Figure. For there are infinitely more
assignable real Parts on the Surface of a Particle of Light, than there are
Particles of Dust, Water and Stone, on the Surface of the terrestrial Globe.

Ans. (2.) But then, supposing that there are two Particles or Atoms of Matter
perfectly equal and alike, which God has placed in different Parts of the
Creation; as I will not deny it to be possible for God to make two Bodies
perfectly alike, and put them in different Places; yet it will not follow, that
two different or distinct Acts or Effects of the divine Power have exactly the
same Fitness for the same Ends. For these two different Bodies are not
different or distinct, in any other Respects than those wherein they differ:
They are two in no other Respects than those wherein there is a Difference. If
they are perfectly equal and alike in themselves, then they can be
distinguished, or be distinct, only in those Things which are called
Circumstances; as, Place, Time, Rest, Motion, or some other present or past
Circumstances or Relations. For it is Difference only, that constitutes
Distinction. If God makes two Bodies in themselves every Way equal and alike,
and agreeing perfectly in all other Circumstances and Relations, but only their
Place; then in this only is there any Distinction or Duplicity. The Figure is
the same, the Measure is the same, the Solidity and Resistance are the same,
and every Thing the same, but only the Place. Therefore what the Will of God
determines, is this, namely, that there should be the same Figure, the same
Extension, the same Resistance, etc. in two different Places. And for this
Determination he has some Reason. There is some End, for which such a
Determination and Act has a peculiar Fitness, above all other Acts. Here is no
one Thing determined without an End, and no one Thing without a Fitness for
that End, superior to any Thing else. If it be the Pleasure of God to cause the
same Resistance, and the same Figure, to be in two different Places and
Situations, we can no more justly argue from it, that here must be some
Determination or Act of God's Will, that is wholly without Motive or End, then
we can argue that whenever, in any Case, it is a Man's Will to speak the same
Words, or make the same Sounds at two different Times; there must be some
Determination or Act of his Will, without any Motive or End. The Difference of
Pl^^e, in the former Case, proves no more than the Difference of Time does in
the other. If any one should say with Regard to the former Case, that there
must be something determined without an End; viz. That of those two similar
Bodies, this in particular should be made in this Place, and the other in the
other, and should enquire why the Creator did not make them in a Transposition,
when both are alike, and each would equally have suited either Place? The
Enquiry supposes something that is not true; namely, that the two Bodies differ
and are distinct in other Respects besides their Place. So that with this
Distinction, inherent in them, they might in their first Creation have been
transposed, and each might have begun it is Existence in the Place of the other.

Let us for Clearness sake suppose, that God had at the Beginning made two
Globes, each of an Inch Diameter, both perfect Spheres, and perfectly solid
without Pores, and perfectly alike in every Respect, and placed them near one
to another, one toward the right Hand, and the other toward the left, without
any Difference as to Time, Motion or Rest, past or present, or any
Circumstance, but only their Place; and the Question should be asked, Why God
in their Creation placed 'em so? Why that which is made on the right Hand, was
not made on the left, and vice versa? Let it be well considered, whether there
be any Sense in such a Question; and whether the Enquiry don't suppose
something false and absurd. Let it be considered, what the Creator must have
done otherwise than he did, what different Act of Will or Power he must have
exerted, in order to the Thing proposed. All that could have been done, would
have been to have made two Spheres, perfectly alike, in the same Places where
he has made them, without any Difference of the Things made, either in
themselves, or in any Circumstance; so that the whole Effect would have been
without any Difference, and therefore just the same. By the Supposition, the
two Spheres are different in no other Respect but their Place; and therefore in
other Respects they are the same. Each has the same Roundness: it is not a
distinct Rotundity, in any other Respect but it is Situation. There are also the
same Dimensions, differing in nothing but their Place. And so of their
Resistance, and every Thing else that belongs to them.

Here if any chooses to say, that there is a Difference in another Respect, viz.
That they are not NUMERICALLY the same: That it is thus with all the Qualities
that belong to them: That it is confessed they are in some Respects the same;
that is, they are both exactly alike; but yet numerically they differ. Thus the
Roundness of one is not the same numerical, individual Roundness with that of
the other. Let this be supposed; then the Question about the Determination of
the divine Will in the Affair, is, Why did God will, that this individual
Roundness should be at the right Hand, and the other individual Roundness at
the left? Why did not he make them in a contrary Position? Let any rational
Person consider, whether such Questions be not Words without a Meaning; as much
as if God should see fit for some Ends to cause the same Sounds to be repeated,
or made at two different Times; the Sounds being perfectly the same in every
other Respect, but only one was a Minute after the other; and it should be
asked upon it, why God caused these Sounds, numerically different, to succeed
one the other in such a Manner? why he did not make that individual Sound which
was in the first Minute, to be in the second? and the individual Sound of the
last Minute to be in the first? Which Enquiries would be even ridiculous; as I
think every Person must see at once, in the Case proposed of two Sounds, being
only the same repeated, absolutely without any Difference, but that one
Circumstance of Time. If the most High sees it will answer some good End, that
the same Sound should be made by Lightning at two distinct Times, and therefore
wills that it should be so, must it needs therefore be, that herein there is
some Act of God's Will without any Motive or End? God saw fit often, at
distinct Times, and on different Occasions, to say the very same Words to
Moses; namely those, I am Jehovah. And would it not be unreasonable, to infer
as a certain Consequence from this, that here must be some Act or Acts of the
divine Will, in determining and disposing these Words exactly alike at
different Times, wholly without Aim or Inducement? But it would be no more
unreasonable than to say, that there must be an Act of God's without any
Inducement, if he sees it best, and for some Reasons, determines that there
shall be the same Resistance, the same Dimensions, and the same Figure, in
several distinct Places.

If in the Instance of the two Spheres, perfectly alike, it be supposed
possible that God might have made them in a contrary Position; that which is
made at the right Hand, being made at the Left; then I ask, Whether it is not
evidently equally possible, if God had made but one of them, and that in the
Place of the right hand Globe, that he might have made that numerically
different from what it is, and numerically different from what he did make it;
though perfectly alike, and in the same Place; and at the same Time, and in every
Respect, in the same Circumstances and Relations? Namely, Whether he might not
have made it numerically the same with that which he has now made at the left
Hand; and so have left that which is now created at the right Hand, in a State
of Nonexistence? And if so, whether it would not have been possible to have
made one in that Place, perfectly like these, and yet numerically differing
from both? And let it be considered, whether from this Notion of a numerical
Difference in Bodies, perfectly equal and alike, which numerical Difference is
something inherent in the Bodies themselves, and diverse from the Difference of
Place or Time, or any Circumstance whatsoever; it will not follow, that there
is an infinite Number of numerically different possible Bodies, perfectly
alike, among which God chooses, by a self-determining Power, when he goes about
to create Bodies.

Therefore let us put the Case thus: Supposing that God in the Beginning had
created but one perfectly solid Sphere, in a certain Place; and it should be
enquired, Why God created that individual Sphere, in that Place, at that Time?
And why (...) did not create another Sphere perfectly like it, but numerically
different, in the same Place, at the same Time? Or why ^e chose to bring into
Being there, that very Body, rather th^n any of the infinite Number of other
Bodies, perfectly like it; either of which he could have made there as well,
and would have answered his End as well? Why he caused to (...), at that Place
and Time, that individual Roundness, rather (...) any other of the infinite
Number of individual (...)* just like it? Why that individual Resistance,
rather than any other of the infinite Number of possible Resistances just like
it? And it might as reasonably be asked, Why, wh^^ God (...) it to Thunder, he
caused that individual ^ound th^^ to be made, and not another just like it? Why
did he make Choice of this very Sound, and reject all the infinite Number of
other possible Sounds just like it, but numerically differing from it, and all
differing one from another? I think, every Body must be sensible of the
Absurdity and Nonsense of what is supposed in such Inquiries. And if we calmly
attend to the Matter, we shall be convinced, that all such Kind of Objections
as I am answering, are founded on nothing but the Imperfec^ion of our Manner of
conceiving of Things, and the Obscureness of Language, and great Want of
Clearness and Precision in the Signification of Terms.

If any shall find Fault with this Reasoning, that it is going a great Length
into metaphysical Niceties and Subtilties; I answer, The Objection which they
are in Reply to, is a ^^taphysical Subtilty, and must be treated according to
the Nature of it. For Men to have Recourse to Subtilties, in raising
Difficulties, and then complain, that they should be taken off by (...)
examining these Subtilties, is a strange Kind of Procedure. Nature of the Hum.
Soul. V. 2. P. 331.


II. Another Thing alleged is, That inummerable Things which are determined by
the divine Will, and chosen and done by God rather than others, differ from
those that are not chosen in so inconsiderable a Manner, that it would be
unreasonable to suppose the Difference to be of any Consequence, or that there
is any superior Fitness or Goodness, that God can have Respect to in the
Determination.

To which I answer; it is impossible for us to determine with any Certainty or
Evidence, that because the Difference is very small, and appears to us of no
Consideration, therefore there is absolutely no superior Goodness, and no
valuable End which can be proposed by the Creator and Governor of the World, in
ordering such a Difference. The forementioned Author mentions many Instances.
One is, there being one Atom in the whole Universe more, or less. But I think
it would be unreasonable to suppose, that God made one Atom in vain, or without
any End or Motive. He made not one Atom but what was a Work of his almighty
Power, as much as the whole Globe of the Earth, and requires as much of a
constant Exertion of almighty Power to uphold it; and was made and is uph^ld
understandingly, and on Design, as much as if no other had been made but that.
And it would be as unreasonable to suppose, that he made it without any Thing
really aimed at in so doing, as much as to suppose that he made the Planet
Jupiter without Aim or Design.

It Is possible, that the most minute Effects of the Creator's Power, the
smallest assignable Differences between the Things which God has made, may be
attended, in the whole Series of Events, and the whole Compass and Extent of
their Influence, with very great and important Consequences. If the Laws of
Motion and Gravitation, laid down by Sir Isaac Newton, hold universally, there
is not one Atom, nor the least assignable Part of an Atom, but what has
Influence, every Moment, throughout the whole material Universe, to cause every
Part to be otherwise than it would be, if it were not for that particular
corporeal Existence. And however the Effect is insensible for the present, yet
it may in Length of Time become great and important.

To illustrate this, Let us suppose two Bodies moving the same Way, in strait
Lines, perfectly parallel one to another; but to be diverted from this Parallel
Course, and drawn one from another, as much as might be by the Attraction of an
Atom, at the Distance of one of the furthest of the fixed Stars from the Earth;
these Bodies being turned out of the (...) of their parallel Motion, will, by
Degrees, get further (...) further distant, one from the other; and though the
Distance may be imperceptible for a long Time, yet at Length it may become very
great. So the Revolution of a Planet round the Sun being retarded or
accelerated, and the Orbit of it is Revolution made greater or less, and more or
less elliptical, and so it is Periodical Time longer or shorter, no more than
may be by the Influence of the least Atom, might in Length of Time perform a
whole Revolution sooner or later than otherwise it would have done; which might
make a vast Alteration with Regard to Millions of important Events. So the
Influence of the least Particle may, for ought we know, have such Effect on
something in the Constitution of some human Body, as to cause another Thought
to arise in the Mind at a certain Time, than otherwise would have been; which
in Length of Time (yea, and that not very great) might occasion a vast
Alteration through the whole World of Mankind. And so innumerable other Ways
might be mentioned, wherein the least assignable Alteration may possibly be
attended with great Consequences.

Another Argument, which the forementioned Author brings against a necessary
Determination of the divine Will by a superior Fitness, is, that such Doctrine
derogates from the Freeness of God's Grace and Goodness, in choosing the Objects
of his Favor and Bounty, and from the Obligation upon Men to Thankfulness for
special Benefits. P. 89, etc.

In answer to this Objection, I would observe,

1. That it derogates no more from the Goodness of God, to suppose the Exercise
of the Benevolence of his Nature to be determined by Wisdom, than to suppose it
determined by Chance, and that his Favors are bestowed altogether at Random,
his Will being determined by nothing but perfect Accident, without any End or
Design whatsoever; which must be the Case, as has been demonstrated, if
Volition be not determined by a prevailing Motive. That which is owing to
perfect Contingence, wherein neither previous Inducement, nor antecedent Choice
has any Hand, is not owing more to Goodness or Benevolence, than that which is
owing to the Influence of a wise End.

2. It Is acknowledged, that if the Motive that determines the Will of God, in
the Choice of the Objects of his Favors, be any moral Quality in the Object,
recommending that Object to his Benevolence above others, his choosing that
Object is not so great a Manifestation of the Freeness and Sovereignty of his
Grace, as if it were otherwise. But there is no Necessity of supposing this, in
order to our supposing that he has some wise End in View, in determining to
bestow his Favors on one Person rather than another. We are to distinguish
between the Merit of the Object of God's Favor, or a moral Qualification of
the Object attracting that Favor and recommending to it, and the natural
Fitness of such a Determination of the Act of God's Goodness, to answer some
wise Design of his own, some End in the View of God's Omniscience. -- It Is
God's own Act, that is the proper and immediate Object of his Volition.

3. I suppose that none will deny, but that in some Instances, God acts from
wise Design in determining the particular Subjects of his Favors: None will
say, I presume, that when God distinguishes by his Bounty particular Societies
or Persons, He never, in any Instance, exercises any Wisdom in so doing, aiming
at some happy Consequence. And if it be not denied to be so in some Instances,
then I would enquire, whether in these Instances God's Goodness is less
manifested, than in those wherein God has no Aim or End at all? And whether the
Subjects have less Cause of Thankfulness? And if so, who shall be thankful for
the Bestowment of distinguishing Mercy, with that enhancing Circumstance of the
Distinction's being made without an End? How shall it be known when God is
influenced by some wise Aim, and when not? It is very manifest with Respect to
the Apostle Paul, that God had wise Ends in choosing Him to be a Christian and
an Apostle, who had been a Persecutor, etc. The Apostle himself mentions one
End. 1 Timothy i.15, 16. Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners, of whom
I am chief. Howbeit, for this Cause I obtained Mercy, that in me first, Jesus
Christ might show forth all Long-suffering, for a Pattern to them who should
hereafter believe on Him to Life everlasting. But yet the Apostle never looked
on it as a Diminution of the Freedom and Riches of divine Grace in his
Election, which He so often and so greatly magnifies. This brings me to observe,

4. Our supposing such a moral Necessity in the Acts of God's Will as has been
spoken of, is so far from necessarily derogating from the Riches of God's Grace
to such as are the chosen Objects of his Favor, that in many Instances, this
moral Necessity may arise from Goodness, and from the great Degree of it. God
may choose this Object rather than another, as having a superior Fitness to
answer the Ends, Designs and Inclinations of his Goodness; being more sinful,
and so more miserable and necessitous than others; the Inclinations of infinite
Mercy and Benevolence may be more gratified, and the gracious Design of God's
sending his Son into the World may be more abundantly answered, in the
Exercises of Mercy toward such an Object, rather than another.

One Thing more I would observe, before I finish what I have to say on the Head
of the Necessity of the Acts of God's Will; and that is, that something much
more like a servile Subjection of the divine Being to fatal Necessity, will
follow from Arminian Principles, than from the Doctrines which they oppose. For
they (at least most of them) suppose, with Respect to all Events that happen in
the moral World depending on the Volitions of moral Agents, which are the most
important Events of the Universe, to which all others are subordinate; I say,
they suppose with respect to these, that God has a certain Foreknowledge of
them, antecedent to any Purposes or Decrees of his about them. And if so, they
have a fixed certain Futurity, prior to any Designs or Volitions of his, and
independent on them, and to which his Volitions must be subject, as He would
wisely accommodate his Affairs to this fixed Futurity of the State of Things in
the moral World. So that here, instead of a moral Necessity of God's Will,
arising from or consisting in the infinite Perfection and Blessedness of the
divine Being, we have a fixed unalterable State of Things, properly distinct
from the perfect Nature of the divine Mind, and the State of the divine Will
and Design, and entirely independent on these Things, and which they have no
Hand in, because they are prior to them; and which God's Will is truly subject
to, being obliged to conform or accommodate himself to it, in all his Purposes
and Decrees, and in every Thing He does in his Disposals and Government of the
World; the moral World being the End of the natural; so that all is in vain,
that is not accommodated to that State of the moral World, which consists in,
or depends upon the Acts and State of the Wills of moral Agents, which had a
fixed Futurition from Eternity. Such a Subjection to Necessity as this, would
truly argue an Inferiority and Servitude, that would be unworthy of the supreme
Being; and is much more agreeable to the Notion which many of the Heathen had of
Fate, as above the Gods, than that moral Necessity of Fitness and Wisdom which
has been spoken of; and is truly repugnant to the absolute Sovereignty of God,
and inconsistent with the Supremacy of his Will; and really subjects the Will
of the most High to the Will of his Creatures, and brings him into Dependence
upon them.

SECTION IX. Concerning that Objection against the Doctrine which has been
maintained, that it makes GOD the Author of Sin.
IT IS urged by Arminians, that the Doctrine of the Necessity of Men's
Volitions, or their necessary Connection with antecedent Events and
Circumstances, makes the first Cause, and supreme Orderer of all Things, the
Author of Sin; in that he has so constituted the State and Course of Things,
that sinful Volitions become necessary, in Consequence of his Disposal. Dr.
Whitby, in his Discourse on the Freedom of the Will, On the five Points. P. 361.
cites one of the Ancients, as on his Side, declaring that this Opinion of the
Necessity of the Will absolves Sinners, as doing nothing of their own Accord
which was Evil, and would cast all the Blame of all the Wickedness committed in
the World, upon God, and upon his Providence, if that were admitted by the
Assertors of this Fate; whether he himself did necessitate them to do these
Things, or ordered Matters so that they should be constrained to do them by
some other Cause. And the Doctor says in another Place, Ibid P. 486.
In the Nature of the Thing, and in the Opinion of Philosophers, Causa
deficious, in rebus necessariis, ad Causam per se efficientem reducenda est. In
Things necessary, the deficient Cause must be reduced to the efficient. And in
this Case the Reason is evident; because the not doing what is required, or not
avoiding what is forbidden, being a Defect, must follow from the Position of
the necessary Cause of that Deficiency.

Concerning this, I would observe the following Things.

I. If there be any Difficulty in this Matter, it is nothing peculiar to this
Scheme; it is no Difficulty or Disadvantage wherein it is distinguished from the
Scheme of Arminians; and therefore not reasonably objected by them.

Dr. Whitby supposes, that if Sin necessarily follows from God's withholding
Assistance, or if that Assistance be not given which is absolutely necessary to
the avoiding of Evil; then in the Nature of the Thing, God must be as properly
the Author of that Evil, as if he were the efficient Cause of it. From whence,
according to what he himself says of the Devils and damned Spirits, God must be
the proper Author of their perfect unrestrained Wickedness: He must be the
efficient Cause of the great Pride of the Devils, and of their perfect
Malignity against God, Christ, his Saints, and all that is Good, and of the
insatiable Cruelty of their Disposition. For he allows, that God has so
forsaken them, and does so withhold his Assistance from them, that they are
incapacitated from doing Good, and determined only to Evil. Ibid P. 302.305.
Our Doctrine, in its Consequence, makes God the Author of Men's Sin in this
World, no more, and in no other Sense, than his Doctrine, in its Consequence,
makes God the Author of the hellish Pride and Malice of the Devils. And
doubtless the latter is as odious an Effect as the former.

Again, if it will follow at all, that God is the Author of Sin, from what has
been supposed of a sure and infallible Connection between Antecedents and
Consequents, it will follow because of this, viz. That for God to be the Author
or Orderer of those Things which he knows beforehand, will infallibly be
attended with such a Consequence, is the same Thing in Effect, as for him to be
the Author of that Consequence. But if this be so, this is a Difficulty which
equally attends the Doctrine of Arminians themselves; at least, of those of
them who allow God's certain Foreknowledge of all Events. For on the
Supposition of such a Foreknowledge, this is the Case with Respect to every
Sin that is committed: God knew, that if he ordered and brought to pass such
and such Events, such Sins would infallibly follow. As for Instance, God
certainly foreknew, long before Judas was born, that if he ordered Things so,
that there should be such a Man born, at such a Time, and at such a Place, and
that his Life should be preserved, and that he should, in divine Providence, be
led into Acquaintance with Jesus; and that his Heart should be so influenced by
God's Spirit or Providence, as to be inclined to be a Follower of Christ; and
that he should be One of those Twelve, which should be chosen constantly to
attend him as his Family; and that his Health should be preserved so that he
should go up to Jerusalem, at the last Passover in Christ's Life; and it should
be so ordered that Judas should see Christ's kind Treatment of the Woman which
anointed him at Bethany, and have that Reproof from Christ, which he had at
that Time, and see and hear other Things, which excited his Enmity against his
Master, and other Circumstances should be ordered, as they were ordered; it
would be what would most certainly and infallibly follow, that Judas would
betray his Lord, and would soon after hang himself, and die impenitent, and be
sent to Hell, for his horrid Wickedness.

Therefore this supposed Difficulty ought not to be brought as an Objection
against the Scheme which has been maintained, as disagreeing with the Arminian
Scheme, seeing it is no Difficulty owing to such a Disagreement; but a
Difficulty wherein the Arminians share with us. That must be unreasonably made
an Objection against our differing from them, which we should not escape or
avoid at all by agreeing with them.

And therefore I would observe,

II. They who object, that this Doctrine makes God the Author of Sin, ought
distinctly to explain what they mean by that Phrase, The Author of Sin. I know,
the Phrase, as it is commonly used, signifies something very Ill. If by the
Author of (...)* be meant the Sinner, the Agent, or Actor of Sin, or the Do^r
of a wicked Thing; so it would be a Reproach and Blasphemy, to suppose God to
be the Author of Sin. In this Sense, I utterly deny God to be the Author of
Sin; rejecting such an Imputation on the most High, as what is infinitely to be
abhorred; and deny any such Thing to be the Consequence of what I have laid
down. But if by the Author of Sin, is meant the Permitter, or not a Hinderer of
Sin; and at the same Time, a Disposer of the State of Events, in such a Manner,
for wise, holy and most excellent Ends and Purposes, that Sin, if it be
permitted or not hindered, will most certainly and infallibly follow: I say, if
this be all that is meant, by being the Author of Sin, I don't deny that God is
the Author of Sin, (though I dislike and reject the Phrase, as that which by Use
and Custom is apt to carry another Sense) it is no Reproach for the most High
to be thus the Author of Sin. This is not to be the Actor of Sin, but on the
contrary, of Holiness. What God does herein, is holy; and a glorious Exercise
of the infinite Excellency of his Nature. And I don't deny, that God's being
thus the Author of Sin, follows from what I have laid down; and I assert, that
it equally follows from the Doctrine which is maintained by most of the
Arminian Divines.

That it is most certainly so, that God is in such a Manner the Disposer and
Orderer of Sin, is evident, if any Credit is to be given to the Scripture; as
well as because it is impossible in the Nature of Things to be otherwise. In
such a Manner God ordered the Obstinacy of Pharaoh, in his refusing to obey
God's Commands, to let the People go. Exodus iv.21. I will harden his Heart, and
he shall not let the People go. Chap. vii.2 -- 5. Aaron thy Brother shall spe^k
unto Pharaoh, that he send the Children of Israel out of his Land. And I will
harden Pharaoh 's Heart, and multiply my Signs and my Wonders in the Land of
Egypt. But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you; that I may lay mine Hand upon
Egypt, by great Judgments, etc. Chap. ix.12. And the Lord hardened the Heart of
Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them, as the Lord had spoken unto Moses.
Chap. x.1, 2. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh; for I have
hardened his Heart, and the Heart of his Servants, that I might show th^se my
Signs before Him, and that thou may t^ll it in the Ears of thy Son, and thy
Son's Son, what Things I have wrought in Egypt, and my Sign^ which I have done
amongst them, that ye may know that I am the Lord. Chap. xiv.4. And I will
harden Pharaoh's Heart, that he shall follow after them: and I will be honored
upon Pharaoh, and upon all his Host. V. 8. And the Lord hardened the Heart of
Pharaoh King of Egypt, and he pursued after the Children of Israel. And it is
certain that in such a Manner, God for wise and good End^, ordered that Event,
Ioseph's being sold into Egypt by his Brethren. Genesis xlv. 5. Now therefore be
not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither; for God did
send me before you to preserve Life. Ver. 7, 8. God did send me before you to
preserve a Posterity in the Earth, and to save your Lives by a great
Deliverance: so that now it was not you, that sent me hither, but God. Psalm.
cvii.17. He sent a Man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a Servant.
It Is certain, that thus God ordered the Sin and Folly of Sihon King of the
Amorites, in refusing to let the People of Israel pass by him peaceably. Deuteronomy.
ii.30. But Sihon King of Heshbon would not let us pass by him; for the Lord thy
God hardened his Spirit, and made his Heart obstinate, that He might deliver
Him into thine Hand. It Is certain, that God thus ordered the Sin and Folly of
the Kings of Canaan, that they attempted not to make Peace with Israel, but
with a stupid Boldness and Obstinacy, set themselves violently to oppose them
and their God. Josh. xi.20. For it was of the Lord, to harden their Hearts,
that they should come against Israel in Battle, that he might destroy them
utterly, and that they might have no Favor; but that he might destroy them, as
the Lord commanded Moses. It Is evident, that thus God ordered the treacherous
Rebellion of Zedekiah, against the King of Babylon. Jer. lii.3. For through the
Anger of the Lord i^ come to pass in Jerusalem, and Judah, 'till He had cast
them out from his Presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon.
So 2 Kings xxiv.20. And it is exceeding manifest, that God thus ordered the
Rapine and unrighteous Ravages of Nebuchadnezzar, in spoiling and ruining the
Nations round about. Jer. xxv.9. Behold, I will send and take all the Families
of the North, says the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar my Servant, and will bring
them against this Land, and against all the Nations round about; and will
utterly destroy them, and make them an Astonishment, and an Hiss^ng, and
perpetual Desolations. Chapter xliii.10.11. I will send and take Nebuchadnezzar the
King of Babylon, my Servant; and I will set his Throne upon these Stones that I
have ^id, and he shall spread his royal Pavilion over them. And when he comes,
he shall s^ite the Land of Egypt, and deliver such as are for Death to Death,
and such as are for Captivity to Captivity, and such as are for the Sword to
the Sword. Thus God represents himself as sending for Nebuchadnezzar, and
taking of him and his Armies, and bringing him against the Nations which were
to be destroyed by him, to that very End, that he might utterly destroy them,
and make them desolate; and as appointing the Work that he should do, so
particularly, that the very Persons were designed, that he should kill with the
Sword; and those that should be killed with Famine and Pestilence, and those
that should be carried into Captivity; and that in doing all these Things, he
should act as his Servant: By which, less cannot be intended, than that he
should serve his Purposes and Designs. And in Ier. xxvii.4, 5, 6. God declares
how he would cause him thus to serve his Designs, viz. by bringing this to pass
in his sovereign Disposals, as the great Possessor and Governor of the
Universe, that disposes all Things just as pleases him. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel; I have made the Earth, the Man and the Beast that are
upon the Ground, by my great Power, and my stretched out Arm, and have given it
unto whom it seemed meet unto me: And now I have given all these Lands into the
Hands of Nebuchadnezzar MY SERVANT, and the Beasts of the Field have I given
also to serve him. And Nebuchadnezzar is spoken of as doing these Things, by
having his Arms strengthened by God, and having God's Sword put into his Hands,
for this End. Ezekiel. xxx.24, 25, 26. Yea, God speaks of his terribly ravaging
and wasting the Nations, and cruelly destroying all Sorts, without Distinction
of Sex or Age, as the Weapon in God's Hand, and the Instrument of his
Indignation, which God makes use of to fulfill his own Purposes, and execute his
own Vengeance. Jer. li.20, etc. Thou art my Battle-A^^, and Weapons of War. For
with thee will I break in Pieces the Nations, and with thee I will destroy
Kingdoms, and with thee I will break in Pieces the Horse and his Rider, and
with thee I will break in Pieces the Chariot and his Rider; with thee also will
I break in Pieces Man and Woman; and with thee will I break in Pieces Old and
Young; and with thee will I break in Pieces the young Man and the Maid, etc.
It Is represented, that the Designs of Nebuchadnezzar, and those that destroyed
Jerusalem, never could have been accomplished, had not God determined them, as
well as they; Lam. iii.37. Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, and the
Lord commands it not? And yet the King of Babylon's thus destroying the
Nations, and especially the Jews, is spoken of as his great Wickedness, for
which God finally destroyed him. Isai. xiv.4, 5, 6, 12. Heb. ii.5, -- 12. and
Ier. Chap. l. and li. It Is most manifest, that God, to serve his own Designs,
providentially ordered Shimei's cursing David. 2 Samuel xvl.10, 11. The Lord has
said unto him, Curse David. -- Let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him.

It Is certain, that God thus, for excellent, holy, gracious and glorious Ends,
ordered the Fact which they committed, who were concerned in Christ's Death;
and that therein they did but fulfill God's Designs. As, I trust, no Christian
will deny it was the Design of God, that Christ should be crucified, and that
for this End, he came into the World. It Is very manifest by many Scriptures,
that the whole Affair of Christ's Crucifixion, with it is Circumstances, and the
Treachery of Judas, that made Way for it, was ordered in God's Providence, in
Pursuance of his Purpose; notwithstanding the Violence that is used with those
plain Scriptures, to obscure and pervert the Sense of 'em. Act. ii.23. Him
being delivered, by the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, Grot^us,
as well as B^na, observes, that (...) must here signify Decree; and Elsner has
shown that it has that Signification, in approved Greek Writers. And it is
certain (...) signifies one given up into the Hands of an Enemy. Doddridge in
Loc.
ye have taken, and with wicked Hands, have crucified and slain. Luke xxii.21,
22. As this Passage is not liable to the Ambiguities, which some have
apprehended in Act. ii.23. and iv.28. (which yet seem on the whole to be
parallel to it, in their most natural Construction) I look upon it as an
evident Proof, that these Things are, in the Language of Scripture, said to be
determined or decreed (or exactly bounded and marked out by God, as the Word
(...) most naturally signifies) which he sees in Fact will happen, in
Consequence of his Volitions, without any necessitating Agency; as well as
those Events, of which he is properly the Author. Dodd. in Loc.
But behold the Hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table: And
truly the Son of Man goes, as it was determined. Act. iv.27, 28. For of a
Truth, against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod, and
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the People of Israel, were gathered
together, for to do whatsoever thy Hand and thy Counsel determined before to be
done. Act. iii.17, 18. And now Brethren, I w^t that through Ignorance ye did
it, as did also your Rulers: But these Things, which God before had showed by
the Mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has so fulfilled.
So that what these Murderers of Christ did, is spoken of as what God brought to
pass or ordered, and that by which he fulfilled his own Word.

In Rev. xvii.17. The agreeing of the Kings of the Earth to give their Kingdom
to the Beast, though it was a very wicked Thing in them, is spoken of as a
fulfilling God's Will, and what God had put it into their Hearts to do. It Is
manifest, that God sometimes permits Sin to be committed, and at the same Time
orders Things so, that if he permits the Fact, it will come to pass, because on
some Accounts he sees it needful and of Importance that it should come to pass.
Matt. xviii.7. It must needs be, that Offenses come; but W^ to that Man by whom
the Offense comes. With 1 Cor. xi.19. For there must also be Heresies among
you, that they which are approved, may be made manifest among you.

Thus it is certain and demonstrable, from the holy Scriptures, as well as the
Nature of Things, and the Principles of Arminians, that God permits Sin; and at
the same Time, so orders Things, in his Providence, that it certainly and
infallibly will come to pass, in Consequence of his Permission.

I proceed to observe in the next Place,

III. That there is a great Difference between God's being concerned thus, by
his Permission, in an Event and Act, which in the inherent Subject and Agent of
it, is Sin, (though the Event will certainly follow on his Permission,) and his
being concerned in it by producing it and exerting the Act of Sin* or between
his being the Orderer of it is certain Existence, by not hindering it, under
certain Circumstances, and his being the proper Actor or Author of it, by a
positive Agency or Efficiency. And this, notwithstanding what Dr. Whitby offers
about a Saying of Philosophers, that Causa deficiens, in Rebus necessariis, ad
Causam per se efficientem reducenda est. As there is a vast Difference between
the Sun's being the Cause of the Lightsomeness and Warmth of the Atmosphere,
and Brightness of Gold and Diamonds, by its Presence and positive Influence;
and its being the Occasion of Darkness and Frost, in the Night, by its Motion,
whereby it descends below the Horizon. The Motion of the Sun is the Occasion of
the latter Kind of Events; but it is not the proper Cause, Efficient or
Producer of them; though they are necessarily consequent on that Motion, under
such Circumstances: No more is any Action of the divine Being the Cause of the
Evil of Men's Wills. If the Sun were the proper Cause of Cold and Darkness, it
would be the Fountain of these Things, as it is the Fountain of Light and Heat:
And then something might be argued from the Nature of Cold and Darkness, to a
Likeness of Nature in the Sun; and it might be justly inferred, that the Sun
itself is dark and cold, and that his Beams are black and frosty. But from its
being the Cause no otherwise than by its Departure, no such Thing can be
inferred, but the contrary; it may justly be argued, that the Sun is a bright
and hot Body, if Cold and Darkness are found to be the Consequence of its
Withdrawment; and the more constantly and necessarily these Effects are
connected with, and confined to its Absence, the more strongly does it argue
the Sun to be the Fountain of Light and Heat. So, inasmuch as Sin is not the
Fruit of any positive Agency or Influence of the most High, but on the
contrary, arises from the withholding of his Action and Energy, and under
certain Circumstances, necessarily follows on the Want of his Influence; this
is no Argument that he is sinful, or his Operation Evil, or has any Thing of
the Nature of Evil; but on the contrary, that He, and his Agency, are
altogether good and holy, and that he is the Fountain of all Holiness. It would
be strange arguing indeed, because Men never commit Sin, but only when God
leaves 'em to themselves, and necessarily sin, when he does so, that therefore
their Sin is not from themselves, but from God; and so, that God must be a
sinful Being: As strange as it would be to argue, because it is always dark
when the Sun is gone, and never dark when the S^^ is present, that therefore
all Darkness is from the Sun, and that his Disk and Beams must needs be black.

IV. It properly belongs to the supreme and absolute Governor of the Universe,
to order all important Events within his Dominion, by his Wisdom: But the
Events in the moral World are of the most important Kind; such as the moral
Actions of intelligent Creatures, and their Consequences.

These Events will be ordered by something. They will either be disposed by
Wisdom, or they will be disposed by Chance; that is, they will be disposed by
blind and undesigning Causes, if that were possible, and could be called a
Disposal. Is it not better, that the Good and Evil which happens in God's
World, should be ordered, regulated, bounded and determined by the good
Pleasure of an infinitely wise Being, who perfectly comprehends within his
Understanding and constant View, the Universality of Things, in all their
Extent and Duration, and sees all the Influence of every Event, with Respect to
every individual Thing and Circumstance, throughout the grand System, and the
whole of the eternal Series of Consequences; than to leave these Things to fall
out by Chance, and to be determined by those Causes which have no Understanding
or Aim? Doubtless, in these important Events, there is a better and a worse, as
to the Time, Subject, Place, Manner and Circumstances of their coming to pass,
with Regard to their Influence on the State and Course of Things. And if there
be, it is certainly best that they should be determined to that Time, Place,
etc. which is best. And therefore it is in its own Nature fit, that Wisdom, and
not Chance, should order these Things. So that it belongs to the Being, who is
the Possessor of infinite Wisdom, and is the Creator and Owner of the whole
System of created Existences, and has the Care of all; I say, it belongs to
him, to take Care of this Matter; and he would not do what is proper for him,
if he should neglect it. And it is so far from being unholy in him, to
undertake this Affair, that it would rather have been unholy to neglect it; as
it would have been a neglecting what fitly appertains to him; and so it would
have been a very unfit and unsuitable Neglect.

Therefore the Sovereignty of God doubtless extends to this Matter: especially
considering, that if it should be supposed to be otherwise, and God should
leave Men's Volitions, and all moral Events, to the Determination and
Disposition of blind and unmeaning Causes, or they should be left to happen
perfectly without a Cause; this would be no more consistent with Liberty, in
any Notion of it, and particularly not in the Arminian Notion of it, than if
these Events were subject to the Disposal of divine Providence, and the Will of
Man were determined by Circumstances which are ordered and disposed by divine
Wisdom; as appears by what has been already observed. But it is evident, that
such a providential disposing and determining Men's moral Actions, though it
infers a moral Necessity of those Actions, yet it does not in the least
infring^ the real Liberty of Mankind,; the only Liberty that common Sense
teaches to be necessary to moral Agency, which, as has been demonstrated, is
not inconsistent whith such Necessity.

On the whole, it is manifest, that God may be, in the Manner which has been
described, the Orderer and Disposer of that Event, which in the inherent
Subject and Agent is moral Evil; and yet His so doing may be no moral Evil. He
may will the Disposal of such an Event, and it is coming to pass for good Ends,
and his Will not be an immoral or sinful Will, but a perfectly holy Will. And
he may actually in his Providence so dispose and permit Things, that the Event
may be certainly and infallibly connected with such Disposal and Permission,
and his Act therein not be an immoral or unholy, but a perfectly holy Act. Sin
may be an evil Thing, and yet that there should be such a Disposal and
Permission, as that it should come to pass, may be a good Thing. This is no
Contradiction, or Inconsistence. Ioseph's Brethren's selling him into Egypt,
consider it only as it was acted by them, and with Respect to their Views and
Aims which were evil, was a very bad Thing; but it was a good Thing, as it was
an Event of God's ordering, and considered with Respect to his Views and Aims
which were good. Genesis l. 20. As for you, ye thought Evil against me; but God
meant it unto Good. So the Crucifixion of Christ, if we consider only those
Things which belong to the Event as it proceeded from his Murderers, and are
comprehended within the Compass of the Affair considered as their Act, their
Principles, Dispositions, Views and Aims; so it was one of the most heinous
Things that ever was done; in many Respects the most horrid of all Acts: But
consider it, as it was willed and ordered of God, in the Extent of his Designs
and Views, it was the most admirable and glorious of all Events; and God's
willing the Event was the most holy Volition of God, that ever was made known
to Men; and God's Act in ordering it, was a divine Act, which above all others,
manifests the moral Excellency of the divine Being.

The Consideration of these Things may help us to a sufficient Answer to the
Cavils of Arminians concerning what has been supposed by many Calvinists, of a
Distinction between a secret and revealed Will of God, and their Diversity one
from the other; supposing, that the Calvinists herein ascribe inconsistent
Wills to the most High: Which is without any Foundation. God's secret and
revealed Will, or in other* Words, his disposing and preceptive Will may be
diverse, and exercised in dissimilar Acts, the one in disapproving and
opposing, the other in willing and determining, without any Inconsistence.
Because, although these dissimilar Exercises of the divine Will may in some
Respects relate to the same Things, yet in Strictness they have different and
contrary Objects, the one Evil and the other Good. Thus for Instance, the
Crucifixion of Christ was a Thing contrary to the revealed or preceptive Will
of God; because, as it was viewed and done by his malignant Murderers, it was a
Thing infinitely contrary to the holy Nature of God, and so necessarily
contrary to the holy Inclination of his Heart revealed in his Law. Yet this
don't at all hinder but that the Crucifixion of Christ, considered with all
those glorious Consequences, which were within the View of the divine
Omniscience, might be indeed, and therefore might appear to God to be, a
glorious Event; and consequently be agreeable to his Will, though this Will may be
secret, i. e. not revealed in God's Law. And thus considered, the Crucifixion
of Christ was not evil, but good. If the secret Exercises of God's Will were of
a Kind that is dissimilar and contrary to his revealed Will, respecting the
same, or like Objects; if the Objects of both were good, or both evil; then
indeed to ascribe contrary Kinds of Volition or Inclination to God, respecting
these Objects, would be to ascribe an inconsistent Will to God: but to ascribe
to Him different and opposite Exercises of Heart, respecting different Objects,
and Objects contrary one to another, is so far from supposing God's Will to be
inconsistent with it self, that it cannot be supposed consistent with it self
any other Way. For any Being to have a Will of Choice respecting Good, and at
the same Time a Will of Rejection and Refusal respecting Evil, is to be very
consistent: But the contrary, viz. to have the same Will toward these contrary
Objects, and to choose and love both Good and Evil at the same Time, is to be
very inconsistent.

There is no Inconsistence in supposing, that God may hate a Thing as it is in
it self, and considered simply as Evil, and yet that it may be his Will it
should come to pass, considering all Consequences. I believe, there is no
Person of good Understanding, who will venture to say, he is certain that it is
impossible it should be best, taking in the whole Compass and Extent of
Existence, and all Consequences in the endless Series of Events, that there
should be such a Thing as moral Evil in the World. Here are worthy to be
observed some Passages of a late noted Writer, of our Nation, that no Body who
is acquainted with Him will suspect to be very favorable to Calvinism. It is
difficult (says he) to handle the Necessity of Evil in such a Manner, as not to
stumble such as are not above being alarmed at Propositions which have an
uncommon Sound. But if Philosophers will but reflect calmly on the Matter, they
will find, that consistently with the unlimited Power of the supreme Cause, it
may be said, that in the best ordered System. Evils must have Place. --
Turnbull's PRINCIPLES of moral Philosophy. Page 327* 328. He is there speaking
of moral Evils, as may be seen.

Again the same Author, in his second Vol. entitled, Christian Philosophy, Page
35. has these Words: If the Author and Governor of all Things be infinitely
perfect, then whatever is, is right; of all possible Systems he has chosen the
best: and consequently there is no absolute Evil in the Universe. -- This being
the Case, all the seeming Imperfections or Evils in it are such only in a
partial View; and with Respect to the whole System, they are Goods.

Ibid. Page 37. Whence then comes Evil, is the Question that has in all Ages
been reckoned the Gordian Knot in Philosophy. And indeed, if we own the
Existence of Evil in the World in an absolute Sense, we diametrically
contradict what has been just now proved of God. For if there be any Evil in
the System, that is not good with Respect to the whole, then is the whole not
good, but evil: or at best, very imperfect: And an Author must be as his
Workmanship is; as is the Effect, such is the Cause. But the Solution of this
Difficulty is at Hand; That there is no Evil in the Universe. What! Are there
no Pains, no Imperfections? Is there no Misery, no Vice in the World? Or are
not these Evils? Evils indeed they are; that is, those of one sort are hurtful,
and those of the other sort are equally hurtful and abominable: But they are
not evil or mischievous with Respect to the whole.

Ibid. Page 42. But He is at the same Time said to create Evil, Darkness,
Confusion; and yet to do no Evil, but to be the Author of Good only. He is
called the Father of Lights, the Author of every perfect and good Gift, with
whom there is no Variableness nor Shadow of Turning, who tempts no Man, but
gives to all Men liberally, and upbraideth not. And yet by the Prophet Isaias
He is introduced saying of Himself, I form Light, and create Darkness; I make
Peace, and create Evil: I the Lord do all these Things. What is the Meaning,
the plain Language of all this, but that the Lord delights in Goodness, and
(as the Scripture speaks) Evil is his strange Work? He intends and pursues the
universal Good of his Creation: and the Evil which happens, is not permitted
for it is own sake, or through any Pleasure in Evil, but because it is requisite
to the greater Good pursued.


And if so, it will certainly follow, that an infinitely wise Being, who always
chooses what is best, must choose that there should be such a Thing. And if so,
then such a Choice is not an Evil, but a wise and holy Choice. And if so, then
that Providence which is agreeable to such a Choice, is a wise and holy
Providence. Men do will Sin as Sin, and so are the Authors and Actors of it:
They love it as Sin, and for evil Ends and Purposes. God don't will Sin as Sin,
or for the sake of any Thing evil; though it be his Pleasure so to order Things,
that He permitting, Sin will come to pass; for the sake of the great Good that
by his Disposal shall be the Consequence. His willing to order Things so that
Evil should come to pass, for the sake of the contrary Good, is no Argument
that He don't hate Evil, as Evil: And if so, then it is no Reason why he may not
reasonably forbid Evil as Evil, and punish it as such.

The Arminians themselves must be obliged, whether they will or no, to allow a
Distinction of God's Will, amounting to just the same Thing that Calvinists
intend by their Distinction of a secret and revealed Will. They must allow a
Distinction of those Things which God thinks best should be, considering all
Circumstances and Consequences, and so are agreeable to his disposing Will, and
those Things which he loves, and are agreeable to his Nature, in themselves
considered. Who is there that will dare to say, that the hellish Pride, Malice
and Cruelty of Devils, are agreeable to God, and what He likes and approves? And
yet, I trust, there is no Christian Divine but what will allow, that it is
agreeable to God's Will so to order and dispose Things concerning them, so to
leave them to themselves, and give them up to their own Wickedness, that this
perfect Wickedness should be a necessary Consequence. Besure Dr. Whitby's Words
do plainly suppose and allow it. Whitby on the five Points. Edit. 2. P. 300,
305, 309.


These following Things may be laid down as Maxims of plain Truth, and
indisputable Evidence.

1. That God is a perfectly happy Being, in the most absolute and highest Sense
possible.

2. That it will follow from hence, that God is free from every Thing that is
contrary to Happiness; and so, that in strict Propriety of Speech, there is no
such Thing as any Pain, Grief or Trouble in God.

3. When any intelligent Being is really crossed and disappointed, and Things
are contrary to what He truly desires, He is the less pleased, or has less
Pleasure, his Pleasure and Happiness is diminished, and he suffers what is
disagreable to him, or is the Subject of something that is of a Nature contrary
to Joy and Happiness, even Pain and Grief. Certainly it is not less absurd and
unreasonable, to talk of God's Will and Desire's being truly and properly
crossed, without his suffering any Uneasiness, or any Thing grievous or
disagreable, than it is to talk of something that may be called a revealed
Will, which may in some Respect be different from a secret Purpose; which
Purpose may be fulfilled, when the other is opposed.


From this last Axiom it follows, that if no Distinction is to be admitted
between God's Hatred of Sin, and his Will with Respect to the Event and the
Existence of Sin, as the alwise Determiner of all Events, under the View of all
Consequences through the whole Compass and Series of Things; I say, then it
certainly follows, that the coming to pass of every individual Act of Sin is
truly, all Things considered, contrary to his Will, and that his Will is really
crossed in it; and this in Proportion as He hates it. And as God's Hatred of
Sin is infinite, by Reason of the infinite Contrariety of his holy Nature to
Sin; so his Will is infinitely crossed, in every Act of Sin that happens. Which
is as much as to say, He endures that which is infinitely disagreable to Him,
by Means of every Act of Sin that He sees committed. And therefore, as appears
by the preceding Positions, He endures truly and really, infinite Grief or
Pain from every Sin. And so He must be infinitely crossed, and suffer infinite
Pain, every Day, in Millions of Millions of Instances: He must continually be
the Subject of an immense Number of real, and truly infinitely great Crosses
and Vexations. Which would be to make him infinitely the most miserable of all
Beings.

If any Objector should say; All that these Things amount to, is, that God may
do Evil that Good may come; which is justly esteemed immoral and sinful in Men;
and therefore may be justly esteemed inconsistent with the moral Perfections of
God. I answer, That for God to dispose and permit Evil, in the Manner that has
been spoken of, is not to do Evil that Good may come; for it is not to do Evil
at all. -- In Order to a Thing's being morally Evil, there must be one of these
Things belonging to it: Either it must be a Thing unfit and unsuitable in it is
own Nature; or it must have a bad Tendency; or it must proceed from an evil
Disposition, and be done for an evil End. But neither of these Things can be
attributed to God's ordering and permitting such Events, as the immoral Acts of
Creatures, for good Ends. (1.) It is not unfit in it is own Nature, that He
should do so. For it is in it is own Nature fit, that infinite Wisdom, and not
blind Chance, should dispose moral Good and Evil in the World. And it is fit,
that the Being who has infinite Wisdom, and is the Maker, Owner, and supreme
Governor of the World, should take Care of that Matter. And therefore there is
no Unfitness, or Unsuitableness in his doing it. It may be unfit, and so
immoral, for any other Beings to go about to order this Affair; because they
are not possessed of a Wisdom, that in any Manner fits them for it; and in
other Respects they are not fit to be trusted with this Affair; nor does it
belong to them, they not being the Owners and Lords of the Universe.

We need not be afraid to affirm, that if a wise and good Man knew with
absolute Certainty, it would be best, all Things considered, that there should
be such a Thing as moral Evil in the World, it would not be contrary to his
Wisdom and Goodness, for him to choose that it should be so. It Is no evil
Desire, to desire Good, and to desire that which, all Things considered, is
best. And it is no unwise Choice, to choose that That should be, which it is
best should be; and to choose the Existence of that Thing concerning which this
is known, viz. that it is best it should be, and so is known in the whole to be
most worthy to be chosen. On the contrary, it would be a plain Defect in Wisdom
and Goodness, for him not to choose it. And the Reason why he might not order
it, if he were able, would not be because he might not desire it, but only the
ordering of that Matter don't belong to him. But it is no Harm for Him who is
by Right, and in the greatest Propriety, the supreme Orderer of all Things, to
order every Thing in such a Manner, as it would be a Point of Wisdom in Him to
choose that they should be ordered. If it would be a plain Defect of Wisdom and
Goodness in a Being, not to choose that That should be, which He certainly knows
it would, all Things considered, be best should be (as was but now observed)
then it must be impossible for a Being who has no Defect of Wisdom and
Goodness, to do otherwise than choose it should be; and that, for this very
Reason, because He is perfectly wise and good. And if it be agreeable to perfect
Wisdom and Goodness for him to choose that it should be, and the ordering of all
Things supremely and perfectly belongs to him, it must be agreeable to infinite
Wisdom and Goodness, to order that it should be. If the Choice is good, the
ordering and disposing Things according to that Choice must also be good. It
can be no Harm in one to whom it belongs to do his Will in the Armies of
Heaven, and amongst the Inhabitants of the Earth, to execute a good Volition.
If his Will be good, and the Object of his Will be, all Things considered, good
and best, then the choosing or willing it is not willing Evil that Good may
come. And if so, then his ordering according to that Will is not doing Evil,
that Good may come.

2. It Is not of a bad Tendency, for the supreme Being thus to order and permit
that moral Evil to be, which it is best should come to pass. For that it is of
good Tendency, is the very Thing supposed in the Point now in Question. --
Christ's Crucifixion, though a most horrid Fact in them that perpetrated it, was
of most glorious Tendency as permitted and ordered of God.

3. Nor is there any Need of supposing, it proceeds from any evil Disposition
or Aim: for by the Supposition, what is aimed at is Good, and Good is the
actual Issue, in the final Result of Things.

SECTION X. Concerning Sin's first Entrance into the World.
THE Things which have already been offered, may serve to obviate or clear many
of the Objections which might be raised concerning Sin's first coming into the
World; as though it would follow from the Doctrine maintained, that God must be
the Author of the first Sin, through his so disposing Things, that it should
necessarily follow from his Permission, that the sinful Act should be
committed, etc. I need not therefore stand to repeat what has been said
already, about such a Necessity's not proving God to be the Author of Sin, in
any ill Sense, or in any such Sense as to infringe any Liberty of Man,
concerned in his moral Agency, or Capacity of Blame, Guilt and Punishment.

But if it should nevertheless be said, Supposing the Case so, that God, when
he had made Man, might so order his Circumstances, that from these
Circumstances, together with his withholding further Assistance and divine
Influence, his Sin would infallibly follow, Why might not God as well have
first made Man with a fixed prevailing Principle of Sin in his Heart?

I answer, 1. It was meet, if Sin did come into Existence, and appear in the
World, it should arise from the Imperfection which properly belongs to a
Creature, as such, and should appear so to do, that it might appear not to be
from God as the Efficient or Fountain. But this could not have been, if Man had
been made at first with Sin in his Heart; nor unless the abiding Principle and
Habit of Sin were first introduced by an evil Act of the Creature. If Sin had
not arose from the Imperfection of the Creature, it would not have been so
visible, that it did not arise from God, as the positive Cause, and real Source
of it. -- But it would require Room that cannot be here allowed, fully to
consider all the Difficulties which have been started, concerning the first
Entrance of Sin into the World.

And therefore,

2. I would observe, that Objections against the Doctrine that has been laid
down, in Opposition to the Arminian Notion of Liberty, from these Difficulties,
are altogether impertinent; because no additional Difficulty is incurred, by
adhering to a Scheme in this Manner differing from theirs, and none would be
removed or avoided, by agreeing with, and maintaining theirs. Nothing that the
Arminians say, about the Contingence, or self-determining Power of Man's Will,
can serve to explain with less Difficulty, how the first sinful Volition of
Mankind could take Place, and Man be justly charged with the Blame of it. To
say, the Will was self-determined, or determined by free Choice, in that sinful
Volition; which is to say, that the first sinful Volition was determined by a
foregoing sinful Volition; is no Solution of the Difficulty. It is an odd Way
of solving Difficulties, to advance greater, in order to it. To say, Two and
Two makes Nine; or, that a Child begat his Father, solves no Difficulty: No
more does it, to say, The first sinful Act of Choice was before the first
sinful Act of Choice, and chose and determined it, and brought it to pass. Nor
is it any better Solution, to say, The first sinful Volition chose, determined
and produced itself; which is to say, It was before it was. Nor will it go any
further toward helping us over the Difficulty, to say, The first sinful
Volition arose accidentally, without any Cause at all; any more than it will
solve that difficult Question, How the World could be made out of Nothing? to
say, It came into Being out of Nothing, without any Cause; as has been already
observed. And if we should allow that That could be, that the first evil
Volition should arise by perfect Accident, without any Cause, it would relieve
no Difficulty, about God's laying the Blame of it to Man. For how was Man to
Blame for perfect Accident, which had no Cause, and which therefore, he (to be
sure) was not the Cause of, any more than if it came by some external Cause? --
Such Kind of Solutions are no better, than if some Person, going about to solve
some of the strange mathematical Paradoxes, about infinitely great and small
Quantities; as, that some infinitely great Quantities are infinitely greater
than some other infinitely great Quantities; and also that some infinitely
small Quantities are infinitely less than others, which yet are infinitely
little; in order to a Solution, should say, That Mankind have been under a
Mistake, in supposing a greater Quantity to exceed a smaller; and that a
Hundred multiplied by Ten, makes but a single Unit.

SECTION XI. Of a supposed Inconsistence of these Principles, with GOD 's moral
Character.
THE Things which have been already observed, may be sufficient to answer most
of the Objections, and silence the great Exclamations of Arminians against the
Calvinists, from the supposed Inconsistence of Calvinistic Principles with the
moral Perfections of God, as exercised in his Government of Mankind. The
Consistence of such a Doctrine of Necessity as has been maintained, with the
Fitness and Reasonableness of God's Commands, Promises and Threatenings, Rewards
and Punishments, has been particularly considered: The Cavils of our Opponents,
as though our Doctrine of Necessity made God the Author of Sin, have been
answered; and also their Objection against these Principles, as inconsistent
with God's Sincerity, in his Counsels, Invitations and Persuasions, has been
already obviated, in what has been observed, respecting the Consistence of what
Calvinists suppose concerning the secret and revealed Will of God: By that it
appears, there is no Repugnance in supposing it may be the secret Will of God,
that his Ordination and Permission of Events should be such that it shall be a
certain Consequence, that a Thing never will come to pass; which yet it is
Man's Duty to do, and so God's preceptive Will, that he should do; and this is
the same Thing as to say, God may sincerely command and require him to do it.
And if he may be sincere in commanding him, he may for the same Reason be
sincere in counselling, inviting and using Persuasions with him to do it.
Counsels and Invitations are Manifestations of God's preceptive Will, or of
what God loves, and what is in it self, and as Man's Act, agreeable to his
Heart; and not of his disposing Will, and what he chooses as a Part of his own
infinite Scheme of Things. It has been particularly shown, Part III. Section
IV. that such a Necessity as has been maintained, is not inconsistent with the
Propriety and Fitness of divine Commands; and for the same Reason, not
inconsistent with the Sincerity of Invitations and Counsels, in the Corollary
at the End of that Section. Yea, it has been shown, Part III. Sect. 7. Coral.
1. that this Objection of Arminians, concerning the Sincerity and Use of divine
Exhortations, Invitations and Counsels, is demonstrably against themselves.

Notwithstanding, I would further observe, that the Difficulty of reconciling
the Sincerity of Counsels, Invitations and Persuasions, with such an antecedent
known Fixedness of all Events, as has been supposed, is not peculiar to this
Scheme, as distinguished from that of the Generality of Arminians, which
acknowledge the absolute Foreknowledge of God: And therefore, it would be
unreasonably brought as an Objection against my differing from them. The main
seeming Difficulty in the Case is this: That God in counselling, inviting and
persuading, makes a Show of aiming at, seeking and using Endeavors for the
Thing exhorted and persuaded to; whereas, it is impossible for any intelligent
Being truly to seek, or use Endeavors for a Thing, which he at the same Time
knows most perfectly will not come to pass; and that it is absurd to suppose,
he makes the obtaining of a Thing his End, in his Calls and Counsels, which he
at the same Time infallibly knows will not be obtained by these Means. Now, if
God knows this, in the utmost Certainty and Perfection, the Way by which he
comes by this Knowledge makes no Difference. If he knows it by the Necessity
which he sees in Things, or by some other Means; it alters not the Case. But it
is in Effect allowed by Arminians themselves, that God's inviting and
persuading Men to do Things, which he at the same Time certainly knows will not
be done, is no Evidence of Insincerity; because they allow, that God has a
certain Foreknowledge of all Men's sinful Actions and Omissions. And as this is
thus implicitly allowed by most Arminians, so all that pretend to own the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, must be constrained to allow it. -- God
commanded and counseled Pharaoh to let his People go, and used Arguments and
Persuasions to induce him to it; he laid before him Arguments taken from his
infinite Greatness and almighty Power ( Exodus vii.16.) and forewarned him of
the fatal Consequences of his Refusal, from Time to Time; ( Chap. viii.1, 2,
20, 21. Chap. ix.1 -- 5.13 -- 17. and x.3, 6.) He commanded Moses, and the
Elders of Israel, to go and beseech Pharaoh to let the People go; and at the
same Time told 'em, he knew surely that he would not comply to it. Exodus
iii.18, 19. And thou shall come, thou and the Elders of Israel, unto the King
of Egypt, and you shall say unto him; The Lord God of the Hebrews has met with
us; and now let us go, we beseech thee, three Days Journey into the Wilderness,
that we may Sacrifice unto the Lord our God: And, I am sure that the King of
Egypt will not let you go. So our blessed Savior, the Evening wherein he was
betrayed, knew that Peter would shamefully deny him, before the Morning; for he
declares it to him with Asseverations, to show the Certainty of it; and tells
the Disciples, that all of them should be of^ended because of him that Night;
Matt. xxvi.31, -- 35. Ioh. xiii.38. Luke xxii.31, -- 34. Ioh. xvi.32. And yet
it was their Duty to avoid these Things; they were very sinful Things, which
God had forbidden, and which it was their Duty to watch and pray against; and
they were obliged to do so from the Counsels and Persuasions Christ used with
them, at that very Time, so to do; Matt. xxvi.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter
not into Temptation. So that whatover Difficulty there can be in this Matter,
it can be no Objection against any Principles which have been maintained in
Opposition to the Principles of Arminians; nor does it any more concern me to
remove the Difficulty, than it does them, or indeed all that call themselves
Christians, and acknowledge the divine Authority of the Scriptures. --
Nevertheless, this Matter may possibly (God allowing) be more particularly and
largely considered, in some future Discourse, on the Doctrine of Predestition.

But I would here observe, that however the Defenders of that Notion of Liberty
of Will, which I have opposed, exclaim against the Doctrine of Calvinists, as
tending to bring Men into Doubts, concerning the moral Perfections of God; it
is their Scheme, and not the Scheme of Calvinists, that indeed is justly
chargeable with this. For it is one of the most fundamental Points of their
Scheme of Things, that a Freedom of Will, consisting in self-determination,
without all Necessity, is essential to Moral Agency. This is the same Thing as
to say, that such a Determination of the Will without all Necessity, must be in
all intelligent Beings, in those Things, wherein they are moral Agents, or in
their moral Acts: And from this it will follow, that God's Will is not
necessarily determined, in any Thing he does, as a moral Agent, or in any of
his Acts that are of a moral Nature. So that in all Things, wherein he acts
holily, justly and truly, he don't act necessarily; or his Will is not
necessarily determined to act holily and justly; because if it were necessarily
determined, he would not be a moral Agent in thus acting: His Will would be
attended with Necessity: which they say is inconsistent with moral Agency: He
can act no otherwise; He is at no Liberty in the Affair; He is determined by
unavoidable invincible Necessity: Therefore such Agency is no moral Agency;
ye^, no Agency at all, properly speaking: A necessary Agent is no Agent: He
being passive, and subject to Necessity, what He does is no Act of his, but an
Effect of a Necessity prior to any Act of his. This is agreeable to their Manner
of arguing. Now then what is become of all our Proof of the moral Perfections
of God? How can we prove, that God certainly will in any one Instance do that
which is just and holy; seeing his Will is determined in the Matter by no
Necessity? We have no other Way of proving that any Thing certainly will be,
but only by the Necessity of the Event. Where we can see no Necessity, but that
the Thing may be, or may not be, there we are unavoidably left at a Loss. We
have no other Way properly and truly to demonstrate the moral Perfections of
God, but the Way that Mr. Chubb proves them, in P. 252, 261, 262, 263. of his
Tracts; viz. That God must necessarily perfectly know what is most worthy and
valuable in it self, which in the Nature of Things is best and fittest to be
done. And as this is most eligible in it self, He being omniscient, must see it
to be so; and being both omniscient and self-sufficient, cannot have any
Temptation to reject it; and so must necessarily will that which is best. And
thus, by this Necessity of the Determination of God's Will to what is good and
best, we demonstrably establish God's moral Character.

Corol. From Things which have been observed, it appears, that most of the
Arguments from Scripture, which Arminians make use of to support their Scheme,
are no other than begging the Question. For in these their Arguments they
determine in the first Place, that without such a Freedom of Will as they hold,
Men cannot be proper moral Agents, nor the Subjects of Command, Counsel,
Persuasion, Invitation, Promises, Threatenings, Expostulations, Rewards and
Punishments; and that without such a Freedom it is to no Purpose for Men to take
any Care, or use any Diligence, Endeavors or Means, in order to their avoiding
Sin, or becoming holy, escaping Punishment or obtaining Happiness: and having
supposed these Things, which are grand Things in Question in the Debate, then
they heap up Scriptures containing Commands, Counsels, Calls, Warnings,
Persuasions, Expostulations, Promises and Threatenings; (as doubtless they may
find enough such; the Bible is conf^ssedly full of them, from the Beginning to
the End) and then they glory, how full the Scripture is on their Side, how many
more Texts there are that evidently favor their Scheme, than such as seem to
favor the contrary. But let them first make manifest the Things in Question,
which they suppose and take for granted, and show them to be consistent with
themselves, and produce clear Evidence of their Truth* and they have gained
their Point, as all will confess, without bringing one Scripture. For none
denies, that there are Commands, Counsels, Promises, Threatenings, etc. in the
Bible. But unless they do these Things, their multiplying such Texts of
Scripture is insignificant and vain.

It may further be observed, that such Scriptures as they bring, are really
against them, and not for them. As it has been demonstrated, that it is their
Scheme, and not ours, that is inconsistent with the Use of Motives and
Persuasives, or any moral Means whatsoever, to induce Men to the Practice of
Virtue, or abstaining from Wickedness: Their Principles, and not ours, are
repugnant to moral Agency, and inconsistent with moral Government, with Law or
Precept, with the Nature of Virtue or Vice, Reward or Punishment, and with
every Thing whatsoever of a moral Nature, either on the Part of the moral
Governor, or in the State, Actions or Conduct of the Subject.

SECTION XII. Of a supposed Tendency of these Principles to Atheism and
Licentiousness.
IF any object against what has been maintained, that it tends to Atheism; I
know not on what Grounds such an Objection can be raised, unless it be that
some Atheists have held a Doctrine of Necessity which they suppose to be like
this. But if it be so, I am persuaded the Arminians would not look upon it
just, that their Notion of Freedom and Continge^ce* should be charged with a
Tendency to all the Errors that ever any embraced, who have held such Opinions.
The Stoic Philosophers, whom the Calvinists are charged with agreeing with,
were no Atheists, but the greatest Theists, and nearest akin to Christians in
their Opinions concerning the Unity and the Perfections of the Godhead, of all
the Heathen Philosophers. And Epicurus, that chief Father of Atheism,
maintained no such Doctrine of Necessity, but was the greatest Maintainer of
Contingence.

The Doctrine of Necessity, which supposes a necessary Connection of all
Events, on some antecedent Ground and Reason of their Existence, is the only
Medium we have to prove the Being of God. And the contrary Doctrine of
Contingence, even as maintained by Arminians (which certainly implies or
infers, that Events may come into Existence, or begin to be, without Dependence
on any Thing foregoing, as their Cause, Ground or Reason) takes away all Proof
of the Being of God; which Proof is summarily expressed by the Apostle, in Romans
i.20. And this is a Tendency to Atheism with a Witness. So that indeed it is
the Doctrine of Arminians, and not of the Calvinists, that is justly charged
with a Tendency to Atheism; it being built on a Foundation that is the utter
Subversion of every demonstrative Argument for the Proof of a Deity; as has
been shown, Part II. Sect. 3d.

And whereas it has often been said, that the Calvinistic Doctrine of
Necessity, saps the Foundations of all Religion and Virtue, and tends to the
greatest Licentiousness of Practice: This Objection is built on the Pretense,
that our Doctrine renders vain all Means and Endeavors, in order to be
virtuous and religious, Which Pretense has been already particularly considered
in the 5th Section of this Part; where it has been demonstrated, that this
Doctrine has no such Tendency; but that such a Tendency is truly to be charged
on the contrary Doctrine: inasmuch as the Notion of Contingence, which their
Doctrine implies, in its certain Consequences, overthrows all Connection, in
every Degree, between Endeavor and Event, Means and End.

And besides, if many other Things which have been observed to belong to the
Arminian Doctrine, or to be plain Consequences of it, be considered, there will
appear just Reason to suppose that it is that, which must rather tend to
Licentiousness. Their Doctrine excuses all evil Inclinations, which Men find to
be natural; because in such Inclinations, they are not self-determined, as such
Inclinations are not owing to any Choice or Determination of their own Wills.
Which leads Men wholly to justify themselves in all their wicked Actions, so
far as natural Inclination has had a Hand in determining their Wills, to the
Commission of 'em. Yea, these Notions which suppose moral Necessity and
Inability to be inconsistent with Blame or moral Obligation, will directly lead
Men to justify the vilest Acts and Practices, from the Strength of their wicked
Inclinations of all Sorts; strong Inclinations inducing a moral Necessity; yea,
to excuse every Degree of evil Inclination, so far as this has evidently
prevailed, and been the Thing which has determined their Wills: Because, so far
as antecedent Inclination determined the Will, so far the Will was without
Liberty of Indifference and Self-determination. Which at last will come to
this, that Men will justify themselves in all the Wickedness they commit. It
has been observed already, that this Scheme of Things does exceedingly diminish
the Guilt of Sin, and the Difference between the greatest and smallest
Offenses: Part III. Sect. 6.
And if it be pursued in its real Consequences, it leaves Room for no such
Thing, as either Virtue or Vice, Blame or Praise in the World. Part III. Sect.
6. Ibid. Sect. 7. Part IV. Sect. 1. Part III. Sect. 3. Corol. 1. after the
first Head.
And then again, how naturally does this Notion of the sovereign
self-determining Power of the Will, in all Things, virtuous or vicious, and
whatsoever deserves either Reward or Punishment, tend to encourage Men to put
off the Work of Religion and Virtue, and turning from Sin to God; it being that
which they have a sovereign Power to determine themselves to, just when they
please; or if not, they are wholly excuseable in going on in Sin, because of
their Inability to do any other.

If it should be said, that the Tendency of this Doctrine of Necessity, to
Licentiousness, appears by the Improvement many at this Day actually make of
it, to justify themselves in their dissolute Courses; I will not deny that some
Men do unreasonably abuse this Doctrine, as they do many other Things which are
true and excellent in their own Nature: But I deny that this proves, the
Doctrine itself has any Tendency to Licentiousness. I think, the Tendency of
Doctrines, by what now appears in the World, and in our Nation in particular,
may much more justly be argued from the general Effect which has been seen to
attend the prevailing of the Principles of Arminians, and the contrary
Principles; as both have had their Turn of general Prevalence in our Nation. If
it be indeed, as is pretended, that Calvinistic Doctrines undermine the very
Foundation of all Religion and Morality, and enervate and disannul all rational
Motives, to holy and virtuous Practice; and that the contrary Doctrines give
the Inducements to Virtue and Goodness their proper Force, and exhibit Religion
in a rational Light, tending to recommend it to the Reason of Mankind, and
enforce it in a Manner that is agreeable to their natural Notions of Things: I
say, if it be thus, it is remarkable, that Virtue and religious Practice should
prevail most, when the former Doctrines, so inconsistent with it, prevailed
almost universally: And that ever since the latter Doctrines, so happily
agreeing with it, and of so proper and excellent a Tendency to promote it, have
been gradually prevailing, Vice, Profaneness, Luxury and Wickedness of all
Sorts, and Contempt of all Religion, and of every Kind of Seriousness and
Strictness of Conversation, should proportionably prevail; and that these
Things should thus accompany one another, and rise and prevail one with
another, now for a whole Age together. It Is remarkable, that this happy Remedy
(discovered by the free Enquiries, and superior Sense and Wisdom of this Age)
against the pernicious Effects of Calvinism, so inconsistent with Religion, and
tending so much to banish all Virtue from the Earth, should on so long a Trial,
be attended with no good Effect; but that the Consequence should be the Reverse
of Amendment; that in Proportion, as the Remedy takes Place, and is thoroughly
applied, so the Disease should prevail; and the very same dismal Effect take
Place, to the highest Degree, which Calvinistic Doctrines are supposed to have
so great a Tendency to; even the banishing of Religion and Virtue, and the
prevailing of unbounded Licentiousness of Manners. If these Things are truly
so, they are very remarkable, and Matter of very curious Speculation*

SECTION XIII. Concerning that Objection against the Reasoning, by which the
Calvinistic Doctrine is supported, that it is Metaphysical and Abstruse.
IT has often been objected against the Defenders of Calvinistic Princples,
that in their Reasonings, they run into nice Scholastic Distinctions, and
abstruse metaphysical Subtilties, and set these in Opposition to common Sense.
And it is possible, that after the former Manner it may be alleged against the
Reasoning by which I have endeavored to confute the Arminian Scheme of Liberty
and moral Agency, that it is very abstracted and metaphysical. -- Concerning
this, I would observe the following Things.

I. If that be made an Objection against the foregoing Reasoning, that it is
metaphysical, or may properly be reduced to the Science of Metaphysics, it is
a very impertinent Objection; whether it be so or no, is not worthy of any
Dispute or Controversy. If the Reasoning be good, it is as frivolous to enquire
what Science it is properly reduced to, as what Language it is delivered in:
And for a Man to go about to confute the Arguments of his Opponent, by telling
him, his Arguments are Metaphysical, would be as weak as to tell him, his
Arguments could not be substantial, because they were written in French or
Latin. The Question is not, Whether what is said be Metaphysics, Physics,
Logic, or Mathematics, Latin, French, English, or Mohawk? But, Whether the
Reasoning be good, and the Arguments truly conclusive? The foregoing Arguments
are no more metaphysical, than those which we use against the Papists, to
disprove their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; alleging, it is inconsistent
with the Notion of corporeal Identity, that it should be in ten Thousand Places
at the same Time. It Is by metaphysical Arguments only we are able to prove,
that the rational Soul is not corporeal; that Lead or Sand cannot think; that
Thoughts are not square or round, or don't weigh a Pound. The Arguments by
which we prove the Being of God, if handled closely and distinctly, so as to
show their clear and demonstrative Evidence, must be metaphysically treated.
It Is by Metaphysics only, that we can demonstrate, that God is not limited to
a Place, or is not mutable; that he is not ignorant, or forgetful; that it is
impossible for him to lie, or be unjust; and that there is one God only, and
not Hundreds or Thousands. And indeed we have no strict Demonstration of any
Thing, excepting mathematical Truths, but by Metaphysics. We can have no
Proof, that is properly demonstrative, of any one Proposition, relating to the
Being and Nature of God, his Creation of the World, the Dependence of all
Things on him, the Nature of Bodies or Spirits, the Nature of our own Souls, or
any of the great Truths of Morality and natural Religion, but what is
metaphysical. I am willing, my Arguments should be brought to the Test of the
strictest and justest Reason, and that a clear, distinct and determinate
Meaning of the Terms I use, should be insisted on; but let not the Whole be
rejected, as if all were confuted, by fixing on it the Epithet Metaphysical.

II. If the Reasoning which has been made use of, be in some Sense
Metaphysical, it will not follow, that therefore it must needs be abstruse,
unintelligible, and akin to the Jargon of the Schools. I humbly conceive, the
foregoing Reasoning, at least as to those Things which are most material
belonging to it, depends on no abstruse Definitions or Distinctions, or Terms
without a Meaning, or of very ambiguous and undetermined Signification, or any
Points of such Abstraction and Subtilty, as tends to involve the attentive
Understanding in Clouds and Darkness. There is no high Degree of Refinement and
abstruse Speculation, in determining, that a Thing is not before it is, and so
cannot be the Cause of itself; or that the first Act of free Choice, has not
another Act of free Choice going before that, to excite or direct it; or in
determining, that no Choice is made, while the Mind remains in a State of
absolute Indifference; that Preference and Equilibrium never co-exist; and that
therefore no Choice is made in a State of Liberty, consisting in Indifference:
And that so far as the Will is determined by Motives, exhibited and operating
previous to the Act of the Will, so far it is not determined by the Act of the
Will itself; that nothing can begin to be, which before was not, without a
Cause, or some antecedent Ground or Reason, why it then begins to be; that
Effects depend on their Causes, and are connected with them; that Virtue is not
the worse, nor Sin the better, for the Strength of Inclination, with which it
is practiced, and the Difficulty which thence arises of doing otherwise; that
when it is already infallibly known, that a Thing will be, it is not a Thing
contingent whether it will ever be or no; or that it can be truly said,
notwithstanding, that it is not necessary it should be, but it either may be,
or may not be. And the like might be observed of many other Things which belong
to the foregoing Reasoning.

If any shall still stand to it, that the foregoing Reasoning is nothing but
metaphysical Sophistry; and that it must be so, that the seeming Force of the
Arguments all depends on some Fallacy and Wile that is hid in the Obscurity,
which always attends a great Degree of metaphysical Abstraction and Refinement;
and shall be ready to say, Here is indeed something that tends to confound the
Mind, but not to satisfy it: For who can ever be truly satisfied in it, that
Men are fitly blamed or commended, punished or rewarded, for those Volitions
which are not from themselves, and of whose Existence they are not the Causes.
Men may refine, as much as they please, and advance their abstract Notions, and
make out a Thousand seeming Contradictions, to puzzle our Understandings; yet
there can be no Satisfaction in such Doctrine as this: The natural Sense of the
Mind of Man will always resist it. A certain noted Author, of the present Age,
says, The Arguments for Necessity are nothing but Quibbling, or Logomachy,
using Words without a Meaning, or Begging the Question. -- I don't know what
Kind of Necessity any Authors He may have Reference to, are Advocates for; or
whether they have managed their Arguments well, or ill. As to the Arguments I
have made use of, if they are Quibble^, they may be shown to be so: such Knots
are capable of being untied, and the Trick and Cheat may be detected and
plainly laid open. If this be fairly done, with Respect to the Grounds and
Reasons I have relied upon, I shall have just Occasion for the future to be
silent* if not to be ashamed of my Argumentations. I am willing, my Proofs
should be thoro'ly examined; and if there be nothing but Begging the Question,
or mere Logomachy, or Dispute of Words, let it be made manifest, and shown how
the seeming Strength of the Argument depends on my using Words without a
Meaning, or arises from the Ambiguity of Terms, or my making use of Words i^ an
indeterminate and unsteady Manner; and that the Weight of my Reasons rest
mainly on such a Foundation: And then* I shall either be ready to retract what
I have urged, and thank the Man that has done the kind Part, or shall be justly
exposed for my Obstinacy.

The same Author is abundant in appealing, in this Affair, from what he calls
Logomachy and Sophistry, to Experience. -- A Person can experience only what
passes in his own Mind. But yet, as we may well suppose, that all Men have the
same human Faculties; so a Man may well argue from his own Experience to that
of others, in Things that show the Nature of those Faculties, and the Manner of
their Operation. But then one has as good Right to allege his Experience, as
another. As to my own Experience, I find, that in innumerable Things I can do
as I will; that the Motions of my Body, in many Respects, instantaneously
follow the Acts of my Will concerning those Motions; and that my Will has some
Command of my Thoughts; and that the Acts of my Will are my own, i. e. that
they are Acts of my Will, the Volitions of my own Mind; or in other Words, that
what I will, I will. Which, I presume, is the Sum of what others experience in
this Affair. But as to finding by Experience, that my Will is originally
determined by it self; or that my Will first choosing what Volition there shall
be, the chosen Volition accordingly follows; and that this is the first Rise of
the Determination of my Will in any Affair; or that any Volition arises in my
Mind contingently; I declare, I know nothing in my self, by Experience, of this
Nature; and nothing that ever I experienced, carries the least Appearance or
Shadow of any such Thing, or gives me any more Reason to suppose or suspect any
such Thing, than to suppose that my Volitions existed twenty Years before they
existed. It Is true, I find my self possessed of my Volitions before I can see
the effectual Power of any Cause to produce them (for the Power and Efficacy of
the Cause is not seen but by the Effect) and this, for ought I know, may make
some imagine, that Volition has no Cause, or that it produces itself. But I
have no more Reason from hence to determine any such Thing* than I have to
determine that I gave my self my own Being* or that I came into Being
accidentally without a Cause, because I first found my self possessed of Being,
before I had Knowledge of a Cause of my Being.


I humbly conceive, that such an Objector, if he has Capacity and Humility and
Calmness of Spirit, sufficient impartially and thoroughly to examine himself,
will find that he knows not really what he would be at; and that indeed his
Difficulty is nothing but a mere Prejudice, from an inadvertent customary Use
of Words, in a Meaning that is not clearly understood, nor carefully reflected
upon. -- Let the Objector reflect again, if he has Candor and Patience enough,
and don't scorn to be at the Trouble of close Attention in the Affair. -- He
would have a Man's Volition be from himself. Let it be from himself, most
primarily and originally of any Way conceivable; that is, from his own Choice:
How will that help the Matter, as to his being justly blamed or praised, unless
that Choice itself be blame or praiseworthy? And how is the Choice itself (an
ill Choice, for Instance) blameworthy, according to these Principles, unless
that be from himself too, in the same Manner; that is, from his own Choice? But
the original and first determining Choice in the Affair is not from his Choice:
His Choice is not the Cause of it. -- And if it be from himself some other Way,
and not from his Choice, surely that will not help the Matter: If it ben't from
himself of Choice, then it is not from himself voluntarily; and if so, he is
surely no more to Blame, than if it were not from himself at all. It is a
Vanity, to pretend it is a sufficient Answer to this, to say, that it is
nothing but metaphysical Refinement and Subtilty, and so attended with
Obscurity and Uncertainty.

If it be the natural Sense of our Minds, that what is blameworthy in a Man
must be from himself, then it doubtless is also, that it must be from something
bad in himself, a bad Choice, or bad Disposition. But then our natural Sense
is, that this bad Choice or Disposition is evil in it self, and the Man
blameworthy for it, on it is own Account, without taking into our Notion of
it is Blame-worthiness, another bad Choice, or Disposition going before this,
from whence this arises: for that is a ridiculous Absurdity, running us into an
immediate Contradiction, which our natural Sense of Blame-worthiness has
nothing to do with, and never comes into the Mind, nor is supposed in the
Judgment we naturally make of the Affair. As was demonstrated before, natural
Sense don't place the moral Evil of Volitions and Dispositions in the Cause of
them, but the Nature of them. An evil Thing's being FROM a Man, or from
something antecedent in him, is not essential to the original Notion we have of
Blame-worthiness: But it is it is being the Choice of the Heart; as appears by
this, that if a Thing be from us, and not from our Choice, it has not the
Nature of Blame-worthiness or Ill-desert, according to our natural Sense. When
a Thing is from a Man, in that Sense, that it is from his Will or Choice, he is
to Blame for it, because his Will is IN IT: So far as the Will is in it, Blame
is in it, and no further. Neither do we go any further in our Notion of Blame,
to enqui^^ whether the bad Will be FROM a bad Will: There is no Consideration
of the Original of that bad Will; because according to our natural
Apprehension, Blame originally consists in it. Therefore a Thing's being from a
Man, is a secondary Consideration, in the Notion of Blame or Ill-desert.
Because those Things in our external Actions, are most properly said to be from
us, which are from our Choice; and no other external Actions but those that are
from us in this Sense, have the Nature of Blame; and they indeed, not so
properly because they are from us, as because we are in them, i. e. our Wills
are in them; not so much because they are from some Property of ours, as
because they are our Properties.

However, all these external Actions being truly from us, as their Cause; and
we being so used, in ordinary Speech, and in the common Affairs of Life, to
speak of Men's Actions and Conduct that we see, and that affect human Society,
as deserving Ill or Well, as worthy of Blame or Praise; hence it is come to
pass, that Philosophers have incautiously taken all their Measures of Good and
Evil, Praise and Blame, from the Dictates of common Sense, about these overt
Acts of Men; to the running of every Thing into the most lamentable and
dreadful Confusion. And therefore I observe,

III. It Is so far from being true (whatever may be pretended) that the Proof of
the Doctrine which has been maintained, depends on certain abstruse,
unintelligible, metaphysical Terms and Notions; and that the Arminian Scheme,
without needing such Clouds and Darkness, for it is Defense, is supported by the
plain Dictates of common Sense; that the very Reverse is most certainly true,
and that to a great Degree. It Is Fact, that they, and not we, have confounded
Things with metaphysical, unintelligible Notions and Phrases, and have drawn
them from the Light of plain Truth, into the gross Darkness of abstruse
metaphysical Propositions, and Words without a Meaning. Their pretended
Demonstrations depend very much on such unintelligible, metaphysical Phrases,
as Self-determination and Sovereignty of the Will; and the metaphysical Sense
they put on such Terms, as Necessity, Contingency, Action, Agency, etc. quite
diverse from their Meaning as used in common Speech; and which, as they use
them, are without any consistent Meaning, or any Manner of distinct consistent
Ideas; as far from it as any of the abstruse Terms and perplexed Phrases of the
Peripatetick Philosophers, or the most unintelligible Jargon of the Schools, or
the Cant of the wildest Fanatics. Yea, we may be bold to say, these
metaphysical Terms, on which they build so much, are what they use without
knowing what they mean themselves; they are pure metaphysical Sound, without
any Ideas whatsoever in their Minds to answer them; in-as-much as it has been
demonstrated, that there cannot be any Notion in the Mind consistent with these
Expressions, as they pretend to explain them; because their Explanations
destroy themselves. No such Notions as imply Self-contradiction, and
Self-abolition, and this a great many Ways, can subsist in the Mind; as there
can be no Idea of a Whole which is less than any of it is Parts, or of solid
Extension without Dimensions, or of an Effect which is before it is Cause. --
Arminians improve these Terms, as Terms of Art, and in their metaphysical
Meaning, to advance and establish those Things which are contrary to common
Sense, in a high Degree. Thus, instead of the plain vulgar Notion of Liberty,
which all Mankind, in every Part of the Face of the Earth, and in all Ages,
have; consisting in Opportunity to do as one pleases; they have introduced a
new strange Liberty, consisting in Indifference, Contingence, and
Self-determination; by which they involve themselves and others in great
Obscurity, and manifold gross Inconsistence. So, instead of placing Virtue and
Vice, as common Sense places them very much, in fixed Bias and Inclination, and
greater Virtue and Vice in stronger and more established Inclination; these,
through their Refinings and abstruse Notions, suppose a Liberty consisting in
Indifference, to be essential to all Virtue and Vice. So they have reasoned
themselves, not by metaphysical Distinctions, but metaphysical Confusion, into
many Principles about moral Agency, Blame, Praise, Reward and Punishment, which
are, as has been shown, exceeding contrary to the common Sense of Mankind; and
perhaps to their own Sense, which governs them in common Life.

THE CONCLUSION.
WHETHER the Things which have been alleged, are liable to any tolerable
Answer in the Ways of calm, intelligible and strict Reasoning, I must leave
others to judge: But I am sensible they are liable to one Sort of Answer. It Is
not unlikely, that some who value themselves on the supposed rational and
generous Principles of the modern fashionable Divinity, will have their
Indignation and Disdain raised at the Sight of this Discourse, and on
perceiving what Things are pretended to be proved in it. And if they think it
worthy of being read, or of so much Notice as to say much about it, they may
probably renew the usual Exclamations, with additional Vehemence and Contempt,
about the Fate of the Heathen, Hobbes's Necessity, and making Men mere
Machines; accumulating the terrible Epithets of fatal, unfrustrable,
inevitable, irresistible, etc. and it may be, with the Addition of horrid and
blasphemous; and perhaps much Skill may be used to set forth Things which have
been said, in Colors which shall be shocking to the Imaginations, and moving
to the Passions of those who have either too little Capacity, or too much
Confidence of the Opinions they have imbibed, and Contempt of the contrary, to
try the Matter by any serious and circumspect Examination. A Writer, of the
present Age, whom I have several Times had Occasion to mention, speaks once and
again of those who hold the Doctrine of Necessity, as scarcely worthy of the
Name of Philosophers. -- I don't know, whether he has respect to any particular
Notion of Necessity, that some may have maintained; and if so, what Doctrine of
Necessity it is that He means. -- Whether I am worthy of the Name of a
Philosopher, or not, would be a Question little to the present Purpose. If any,
and ever so many, should deny it, I should not think it worth the while to
enter into a Dispute on that Question; though at the same Time I might expect,
some better Answer should be given to the Arguments brought for the Truth of
the Doctrine I maintain; and I might further reasonably desire, that it might
be considered, whether it don't become those who are truly worthy of the Name
of Philosophers, to be sensible, that there is a Difference between Argument
and Contempt; yea, and a Difference between the Contemptibleness of the Person
that argues, (...) the Inconclusiveness of the Arguments he offers.
Or Difficulties may be started and insisted on which don't belong to the
Controversy; because, let them be more or less real, and hard to be resolved,
they are not what are owing to any Thing distinguishing of this Scheme from
that of the Arminians, and would not be removed nor diminished by renouncing
the former, and adhering to the latter. Or some particular Things may be picked
out, which they may think will sound harshest in the Ears of the Generality;
and these may be gloss'd and descanted on, with tart and contemptuous Words;
and from thence, the whole treated with Triumph and Insult.

It Is easy to see how the Decision of most of the Points in Controversy,
between Calvinists and Arminians, depends on the Determination of this grand
Article concerning the Freedom of the Will requisite to moral Agency; and that
by clearing and establishing the Calvinistic Doctrine in this Point, the chief
Arguments are obviated, by which Arminian Doctrines in general are supported,
and the contrary Doctrines demonstratively confirmed. Hereby it becomes
manifest, that God's moral Government over Mankind, his treating them as moral
Agents, making them the Objects of his Commands, Counsels, Calls, Warnings,
Expostulations, Promises, Threatenings, Rewards and Punishments, is not
inconsistent with a determining Disposal of all Events, of every Kind,
throughout the Universe, in his Providence; either by positive Efficiency, or
Permission. Indeed such an universal, determining Providence, infers some Kind
of Necessity of all Event^; such a Necessity as implies an infallible previous
Fixedness of the Futurity of the Event: But no other Necessity of moral Events,
or Volitions of intelligent Agents, is needful in order to this, than moral
Necessity; which does as much ascertain the Futurity of the Event, as any other
Necessity. But, as has been demonstrated, such a Necessity is not at all
repugnant to moral Agency, and the reasonable Use of Commands, Calls, Rewards,
Punishments, etc. Yea, not only are Objections of this Kind against the
Doctrine of an universal determining Providence, removed by what has been said;
but the Truth of such a Doctrine is demonstrated. As it has been demonstrated,
that the Futurity of all future Events is established by previous Necessity,
either natural or moral; so it is manifest, that the sovereign Creator and
Disposer of the World has ordered this Necessity, by ordering his own Conduct,
either in designedly acting, or forbearing to act. For, as the Being of the
World is from God, so the Circumstances in which it had it is Being at first,
both negative and positive, must be ordered by him, in one of these Ways; and
all the necessary Consequences of these Circumstances, must be ordered by him.
And God's active and positive Interpositions, after the World was created, and
the Consequences of these Interpositions; also every Instance of his forbearing
to interpose, and the sure Consequences of this Forbearance, must all be
determined according to his Pleasure. And therefore every Event which is the
Consequence of any Thing whatsoever, or that is connected with any foregoing
Thing or Circumstance, either positive or negative, as the Ground or Reason of
its Existence, must be ordered of God; either by a designed Efficiency and
Interposition, or a designed forbearing to operate or interpose. But, as has
been proved, all Events whatsoever are necessarily connected with something
foregoing, either positive or negative, which is the Ground of its Existence.
It follows therefore, that the whole Series of Events is thus connected with
something in the State of Things, either positive or negative, which is
original in the Series; i. e. something which is connected with nothing
preceding that, but God's own immediate Conduct, either his acting or
forbearing to act. From whence it follows, that as God designedly orders his
own Conduct, and its connected Consequences, it must necessarily be, that he
designedly orders all Things.

The Things which have been said, obviate some of the chief Objections of
Arminians against the Calvinistic Doctrine of the total Depravity and
Corruption of Man's Nature, whereby his Heart is wholly under the Power of Sin,
and he is utterly unable, without the Interposition of sovereign Grace,
savingly to love God, believe in Christ, or do any Thing that is truly good and
acceptable in God's Sight. For the main Objection against this Doctrine is,
that it is inconsistent with the Freedom of Man's Will, consisting in
Indifference and self-determining Power; because it supposes Man to be under a
Necessity of Sinning, and that God requires Things of him, in order to his
avoiding eternal Damnation, which he is unable to do; and that this Doctrine is
wholly inconsistent with the Sincerity of Counsels, Invitations, etc. Now this
Doctrine supposes no other Necessity of Sinning, than a moral Necessity; which,
as has been shown, don't at all excuse Sin; and supposes no other Inability to
obey any Command, or perform any Duty, even the most spiritual and exalted, but
a moral Inability, which, as has been proved, don't excuse Persons in the
Nonperformance of any good Thing, or make 'em not to be the proper Objects of
Commands, Counsels and Invitations. And moreover, it has been shown, that there
is not, and never can be, either in Existence, or so much as in Idea, any such
Freedom of Will, consisting in Indifference and Self-determination, for the
Sake of which, this Doctrine of original Sin is cast out; and that no such
Freedom is necessary, in order to the Nature of Sin, and a just Desert of
Punishment.

The Things which have been observed, do also take off the main Objections of
Arminians against the Doctrine of efficacious Grace; and at the same Time,
prove the Grace of God in a Sinner's Conversion (if there be any Grace or
divine Influence in the Affair) to be efficacious, yea, and irresistible too,
if by irresistible is meant, that which is attended with a moral Necessity,
which it is impossible should ever be violated by any Resistance. The main
Objection of Arminians against this Doctrine is, that it is inconsistent with
their self-determining Freedom of Will; and that it is repugnant to the Nature
of Virtue, that it should be wrought in the Heart by the determining Efficacy
and Power of another, instead of its being owing to a self-moving Power; that
in that Case, the Good which is wrought, would not be our Virtue, but rather
God's Virtue; because it is not the Person in whom it is wrought, that is the
determining Author of it, but God that wrought it in him. -- But the Things
which are the Foundation of these Objections, have been considered; and it has
been demonstrated, that the Liberty of moral Agents does not consist in
self-determining Power; and that there is no Need of any such Liberty, in order
to the Nature of Virtue; nor does it at all hinder, but that the State or Act
of the Will may be the Virtue of the Subject, though it be not from
Self-determination, but the Determination of an extrinsic Cause; even so as to
cause the Event to be morally necessary to the Subject of it. And as it has
been proved, that nothing in the State or Acts of the Will of Man is
contingent; but that on the contrary, every Event of this Kind is necessary, by
a moral Necessity; and has also been now demonstated, that the Doctrine of an
universal determining Providence, follows from that Doctrine of Necessity,
which was proved before: And so, that God does decisively, in his Providence,
order all the Volitions of moral Agents, either by positive Influence or
Permission: And it being allowed on all Hands, that what God does in the Affair
o^ Man's virtuous Volitions, whether it be more or less, is by some positive
Influence, and not by mere Permission, as in the Affair of a sinful Volition:
If we put these Things together, it will follow, that God's Assistance or
Influence, must be determining and decisive, or must be attended with a moral
Necessity of the Event; and so, that God gives Virtue, Holiness and Conversion
to Sinners, by an Influence which determines the Effect, in such a Manner, that
the Effect will infallibly follow by a moral Necessity; which is what
Calvinists mean by efficacious and irresistible Grace.

The Things which have been said, do likewise answer the chief Objections
against the Doctrine of God's universal and absolute Decree, and afford
infallible Proof of that Doctrine ^ and of the Doctrine of absolute, eternal,
personal Election in particular. The main Objections against these Doctrines
are, that they infer a Necessity of the Volitions of moral Agents, and of the
future moral State and Acts of Men; and so are not consistent with those
eternal Rewards and Punishments, which are connected with Conversion and
Impenitence; nor can be made to agree with the Reasonableness and Sincerity of
the Precepts, Calls, Counsels, Warnings and Expostulations of the Word of God;
or with the various Methods and Means of Grace, which God uses with Sinners, to
bring 'em to Repentance; and the whole of that moral Government, which God
exercises toward Mankind: And that they infer an Inconsistence between the
secret and revealed Will of God; and make God the Author of Sin. But all these
Things have been obviated in the preceding Discourse. And the certain Truth of
these Doctrines, concerning God's eternal Purposes, will follow from what was
just now observed concerning God's universal Providence; how it infallibly
follows from what has been proved, that God orders all Events, and the
Volitions of moral Agents amongst others, by such a decisive Disposal, that the
Events are infallibly connected with his Disposal. For if God disposes all
Events, so that the infallible Existence of the Events is decided by his
Providence, then he doubtless thus orders and decides Things knowingly, and on
Design. God don't do what he does, nor order what he orders, accidentally and
unawares; either without, or beside his Intention. And if there be a foregoing
Design of doing and ordering as he does, this is the same with a Purpose or
Decree. And as it has been shown, that nothing is new to God, in any Respect,
but all Things are perfectly and equally in his View from Eternity; hence it
will follow, that his Designs or Purposes are not Things formed anew, founded
on any new Views or Appearances, but are all eternal Purposes. And as it has
been now shown, how the Doctrine of determining efficacious Grace certainly
follows from Things proved in the foregoing Discourse; hence will necessarily
follow the Doctrine of particular, eternal, absolute Election. For if Men are
made true Saints, no otherwise than as God makes 'em so, and distinguishes 'em
from others, by an efficacious Power and Influence of his, that decides and
fixes the Event; and God thus makes some Saints, and not others, on Design or
Purpose, and (as has been now observed) no Designs of God are new; it follows,
that God thus distinguished from others, all that ever become true Saints, by
his eternal Design or Decree. -- I might also show, how God's certain
Foreknowledge must suppose an absolute Decree, and how such a Decree can be
proved to a Demonstration from it: But that this Discourse may not be lengthened
out too much, that must be omitted for the present.

From these Things it will inevitably follow, that however Christ in some Sense
may be said to die for all, and to redeem all visible Christians, yea the whole
World by his Death; yet there must be something particular in the Design of his
Death, with Respect to such as He intended should actually be saved thereby. As
appears by what has been now shown, God has the actual Salvation or Redemption
of a certain Number in his proper absolute Design, and of a certain Number
only; and therefore such a Design only can be prosecuted in any Thing God does,
in order to the Salvation of Men. God pursues a proper Design of the Salvation
of the Elect in giving Christ to die, and prosecutes such a Design with Respect
to no other, most strictly speaking; for it is impossible, that God should
prosecute any other Design than only such as He has: He certainly don't, in the
highest Propriety and Strictness of Speech, pursue a Design that He has not. --
And indeed such a Particularity and Limitation of Redemption will as infallibly
follow from the Doctrine of God's Foreknowledge, as from that of the Decree.
For it is as impossible, in Strictness of Speech, that God should prosecute a
Design or Aim at a Thing, which He at the same Time most perfectly knows will
not be accomplished, as that he should use Endeavors for that which is beside
his Decree.

By the Things which have been proved, are obviated some of the main Objections
against the Doctrine of the infallible and necessary Perseverance of Saints,
and some of the main Foundations of this Doctrine are established. The main
Prejudices of Arminians against this Doctrine seem to be these; they suppose
such a necessary, infallible Perseverance to be repugnant to the Freedom of the
Will; that it must be owing to Man's own self-determining Power, that he first
becomes virtuous and holy; and so in like Manner, it must be left a Thing
contingent, to be determined by the same Freedom of Will, whether he will
persevere in Virtue and Holiness; and that otherwise his continuing steadfast in
Faith and Obedience would not be his Virtue, or at all Praiseworthy and
Rewardable; nor could his Perseverance be properly the Matter of divine
Commands, Counsels and Promises, nor his Apostasy be properly threatened, and
Men warned against it. Whereas we find all these Things in Scripture: There we
find Stedfastness and Perseverance in true Christianity, represented as the
Virtue of the Saints, spoken of as Praiseworthy in them, and glorious Rewards
promised to it; and also find, that God makes it the Subject of his Commands,
Counsels and Promises; and the contrary, of Threatenings and Warnings. But the
Foundation of these Objections has been removed, in it is being shown that moral
Necessity and infallible Certainty of Events is not inconsistent with these
Things; and that, as to Freedom of Will lying in the Power of the Will to
determine it self, there neither is any such Thing, nor any Need of it, in
order to Virtue, Reward, Commands, Counsels, etc.

And as the Doctrines of efficacious Grace and absolute Election do certainly
follow from Things which have been proved in the preceding Discourse; so some
of the main Foundations of the Doctrine of Perseverance are thereby
established. If the Beginning of true Faith and Holiness, and a Man's becoming
a true Saint at first, don't depend on the self-determining Power of the Will,
but on the determining efficacious Grace of God; it may well be argued, that it
is so also with Respect to Men's being continued Saints, or persevering in
Faith and Holiness. The Conversion of a Sinner being not owing to a Man's
Self-determination, but to God's Determination, and eternal Election, which is
absolute, and depending on the sovereign Will of God, and not on the free Will
of Man; as is evident from what has been said: And it being very evident from
the Scriptures, that the eternal Election which there is of Saints to Faith and
Holiness, is also an Election of them to eternal Salvation; hence their
Appointment to Salvation must also be absolute, and not depending on their
contingent, self-determining Will. From all which it follows, that it is
absolutely fixed in God's Decree, that all true Saints shall persevere to
actual eternal Salvation.

But I must leave all these Things to the Consideration of the fair and
impartial Reader; and when he has maturely weighed them, I would propose it to
his Consideration, whether many of the first Reformers, and others that
succeeded them, whom God in their Day made the chief Pillars of his Church, and
greatest Instruments of their Deliverance from Error and Darkness, and of the
Support of the Cause of Piety among them, have not been injured, in the
Contempt with which they have been treated by many late Writers, for their
teaching and maintaining such Doctrines as are commonly called Calvinistic.
Indeed some of these new Writers, at the same Time that they have represented
the Doctrines of these ancient and eminent Divines, as in the highest Degree
ridiculous, and contrary to common Sense, in an Ostentation of a very generous
Charity, have allowed that they were honest well-meaning Men: Yea, it may be
some of them, as though it were in great Condescension and Compassion to them,
have allowed that they did pretty well for the Day which they lived in, and
considering the great Disadvantages they ^^boured under: When at the same Time,
their Manner of Speaking has naturally and plainly suggested to the Minds of
their Readers, that they were Persons, who through the Lowness of their Genius,
and Greatness of the Bigotry, with which their Minds were shackled, and
Thoughts confined, living in the gloomy Caves of Superstition, fondly embraced,
and demurely and zealously taught the most absurd, silly and monstrous
Opinions, worthy of the greatest Contempt of Gentlemen possessed of that noble
and generous Freedom of Thought, which happily prevails in this Age of Light
and Enquiry. When indeed such is the Case, that we might, if so disposed, speak
as big Words as they, and on far better Grounds. And really all the Arminians
on Earth might be challenged without Arrogance or Vanity, to make these
Principles of theirs wherein they mainly differ from their Fathers, whom they
so much despise, consistent with common Sense; yea, and perhaps to produce any
Doctrine ever embraced by the blindest Bigot of the Church of Rome, or the most
ignorant Mussulman, or extravagant Enthus^^st, that might be reduced to more,
and more demonstrable Inconsistencies, and Repugnancies to common Sense, and to
themselves; though their Inconsistencies indeed may not lie so deep, or be so
artfully veiled by a deceitful Ambiguity of Words, and an indeterminate
Signification of Phrases. -- I will not deny, that these Gentlemen, many of
them, are Men of great Abilities, and have been helped to higher Seize in
Philosophy, than those ancient Divines, and have done great Service to the
Church of God in some Respects: But I humbly conceive, that their differing
from their Fathers with such magisterial Assurance, in these Points in
Divinity, must be owing to some other Cause than superior Wisdom.

It may also be worthy of Consideration, whether the great Alteration which has
been made in the State of Things in our Nation, and some other Parts of the
Protestant World, in this and the past Age, by the exploding so generally
Calvinistic Doctrines, that is so often spoken of as worthy to be greatly
rejoiced in by the Friends of Truth, Learning and Virtue, as an Instance of the
great Increase of Light in the Christian Church; I say, it may be worthy to be
considered, whether this be indeed a happy Change, owing to any such Cause as
an Increase of true Knowledge and Understanding in Things of Religion; or
whether there is not Reason to fear, that it may be owing to some worse Cause.

And I desire it may be considered, whether the Boldness of some Writers may
not be worthy to be reflected on, who have not scrupled to say, That if these
and those Things are true (which yet appear to be the demonstrable Dictates of
Reason, as well as the certain Dictates of the Mouth of the most High) then God
is unjust and cruel, and guilty of manifest Deceit and double-dealing, and the
like. Yea, some have gon^ so far, as confidently to assert, That if any Book
which pretends to be Scripture, teaches such Doctrines, that alone is
sufficient Warrant for Mankind to reject it, as what cannot be the Word of God.
Some who have not gone so far, have said, That if the Scripture seems to teach
any such Doctrines, so contrary to Reason, we are obliged to find out some
other Interpretation of those Texts, where such Doctrines seem to be exhibited.
Others express themselves yet more modestly: They express a Tenderness and
religious Fear, lest they should receive and teach any Thing that should seem
to reflect on God's moral Character, or be a Disparagement to his Methods of
Administration, in his moral Government; and therefore express themselves as
not daring to embrace some Doctrines, though they seem to be delivered in
Scripture, according to the more obvious and natural Construction of the Words.
But indeed it would show a truer Modesty and Humility, if they would more
entirely rely on God's Wisdom and Discerning, who knows infinitely better than
we, what is agreeable to his own Perfections, and never intended to leave these
Matters to the Decision of the Wisdom and Discerning of Men; but by his own
unerring Instruction, to determine for us what the Truth is; knowing how little
our Judgment is to be depended on, and how extremely prone, vain and blind Men
are, to err in such Matters.

The Truth of the Case is, that if the Scripture plainly taught the opposite
Doctrines, to those that are so much stumbled at, viz. the Arminian Doctrine of
Free Will, and others depending thereon, it would be the greatest of all
Difficulties that attend the Scriptures, incomparably greater than its
containing any, even the most mysterious of those Doctrines of the first
Reformers, which our late Free-thinkers have so superciliously exploded. --
Indeed it is a glorious Argument of the Divinity of the holy Scriptures, that
they teach such Doctrines, which in one Age and another, through the Blindness of
Men's Minds, and strong Prejudices of their Hearts, are rejected, as most
absurd and unreasonable, by the wise and great Men of the World; which yet,
when they are most carefully and strictly examined, appear to be exactly
agreeable to the most demonstrable, certain, and natural Dictates of Reason. By
such Things it appears, that the Foolishness of God is wiser than Men, and God
does as is said in 1 Cor. i.19, 20. For it is written, I will destroy the
Wisdom of the Wise; I will bring to nothing the Understanding of the Prudent.
Where is the Wise! Where is the Scribe! Where is the Disputer of this World!
Has not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World? And as it used to be in
Time past, so it is probable it will be in Time to come, as it is there
written, in ver. 27, 28, 29. But God has chosen the foolish Things of the
World, to confound the Wise: And God has chosen the weak Things of the World,
to confound the Things that are mighty: And base Things of the World, and
Things which are despised, has God chosen: Yea, and Things which are not, to
bring to naught Things that are; that no Flesh should glory in his Presence.
AMEN.

FINIS.
INDEX.
[N. B. The Capital P. signifies the Part; this Mark,, the Section; Concl. the
Conclusion; and the small p. the Page; where the Things here specified, are to
be found.]

ABstracted or Abstruse Reasoning, whether justly objected against Calvinists,
P. 4. 13. p. 278. Action, Inconsistence of the Arminian Notion of it, P. 4. 2.
p. 199. and whence this arose, p. 204. what it is in the common Notion of it,
Ibid. p. 201. -- and how distinguished from Passion, Ibid. p. 203. Activity of
the Nature of the Soul, whether through this, Volition can arise without a Cause,
P. 2. 4. p. 47. Apparent Good, the greatest, in what Sense it determines the
Will, P. 1. 2. p. 7. Arminians, obliged to talk inconsistently, P. 2. 5. p. 53.
Ibid. 7. p. 70.. 9. p. 77. where the main Strength of their pretended
Demonstrations lies, P. 4. 4. p. 219. Their Objection from God's moral
Character, considered and retorted, Ibid. 11. p. 271, 2. Arminian Doctrine, its
Tendency to supersede all Use of Means, and make Endeavors vain, P. 4. 5. p.
222. and in Effect, to exclude all Virtue and Vice out of the World, P. 3. 4.
p. 161, 167. Ibid. 6. p. 184. and 7. p. 190. P. 4. 1. p. 196, 7. Ibid. 12. p.
276. Atheism, the supposed Tendency of Calvinistic Principles to it, P. 4. 12.
p. 274. How Arminian Principles tend to it, Ibid. p. 275. Attending to Motives,
of Liberty's being supposed to consist in an Ability for it, P. 2. 9. p. 80.
Atonement. See CHRIST. Author of Sin, whether it would follow from the Doctrine
here maintained, that GOD is so, P. 4. 9. p. 252. BLame-worthiness, wherein it
consists, according to common Sense, P. 4. 4. p. 212. CAlvinism, consistent
with common Sense, P. 4. 3. p. 206. Cause, how the Word is used in this
Discourse, P. 2. 3. p. 41. No Event without one, P. 2. 3. p. 42. -- and Effect,
a necessary Connection between them, P. 2. 8. p. 73.-This respects moral, as
well as natural Causes, P. 2. 3. p. 41. Christ, his Obedience necessary, yet
virtuous and praiseworthy, P. 3. 1. p. 139. His Atonement excluded in
Consequence of Arminian Principles, P. 3. 3. p. 158. Chubb (Mr.) the
Inconsistence of his Scheme of Liberty, etc. P. 2. 9. p. 85, -- 98. Commands,
consistent with moral Necessity and Inability, P. 3. 4. p. 159. P. 4. 11. p.
270. Inconsistent with Arminian Principles, P. 3. 4. p. 161. Common Sense, why
the Principles maintained in this Discourse, appear to some contrary to it, P.
4. 3. p. 206. Necessary Virtue and Vice agreeable to it, P. 4. 4. p. 212. --
Arminian Tenets opposite to it, P. 3. 6. p. 178. Ibid. 7. p. 187. Contingence,
P. 1. 3. p. 20. the Inconsistence of the Notion, P. 2. 3. p. 45. Whether
necessary in order to Liberty, P. 2. 8. p. 73. -- implied in Arminian Liberty,
and yet inconsistent with it, P. 2. 13. p. 132. Epicurus the greatest
Maintainer of it, P. 4. 6. p. 228. Ibid. 12. p. 275. Corruption of Man's
Nature, CONCL. p. 287. Creation of the World, at such a particular Time and
Place, P. 4. 8. p. 240. DEcree absolute, not inferring Necessity, any more than
certain Foreknowledge does, P. 2. 12: p. 122. How it follows from Things
proved in this Discourse. CONCL. p. 289. Determination. See Will. Dictates. See
Understanding. EFfect. See Cause. Efficacious Grace. CON. p. 288. Election
personal. See Decree. Endeavors, what it is for them to be in vain, P. 4. 5.
p. 220. -- Rendered vain by Arminian Principles, Ibid. p. 222. But not so by
Calvinism, Ibid. p. 224. -- See Sincerity. Entrance of Sin into the World, P.
4. 10. p. 268. Equilibrium. See Indifference. Exhortation. See Invitation.
FAllen Man: See Inability. Fate stoical, P. 4. 6. p. 228. Fatality, the
Principles of Arminians inferring that which is most shocking, P. 4. 9. p. 251.
Foreknowledge of God, of Volitions of moral Agents, proved P. 2. 11. p. 98. --
Inconsistent with Contingence, P. 2. 12. p. 117. Proves Necessity, as much as a
Decree, Ibid. p. 122. The seeming Difficulty of reconciling it with the
Sincerity of his Precepts, Counsels, etc. not peculiar to the Calvinistic
Scheme, P. 4. 11. p. 271. GOD, his Being how known* P. 2. 3. p. 43. P. 4. 12.
p. 275. His moral Excellencies necessary, yet virtuous and praiseworthy, P. 3.
1. p. 135. P. 4. 4. p. 219. The Necessity of his Volitions, P. 4. 7. p. 230.
Whether the Principles maintained in this Discourse are inconsistent with his
moral Character, P. 4. 11. p. 270. How Arminianism destroys the Evidence of his
moral Perfections. Ibid p. 272. Grace of the Spirit, excluded by Arminian
Principles, P. 3. 3. p. 159. Grace, it is Freeness consistent with the moral
Necessity of God's Will, P. 4. 8. p. 249. HA^its, virtuous and vicious,
inconsistent with Arminian Principles, P. 3. 6. p. 181. Heathen, of their
Salvation, P. 3. 5. p. 177. Hobbes, his Doctrine of Necessity, P. 4. 6. p. 229.
IMposibility, the same as negative Necessity, P. 1. 3. p. 19. Inability, how
the Word is used in common Speech, and how by Metaphysicians and Arminians, P.
1. 4. p. 14, 17. P. 4. 3. p. 207. Natural and moral, P. 1. 4. p. 20. Moral, the
several Kinds of it, P. 1. 4. p. 25. P. 3. 4. p. 165. -- of fallen Man to
perform perfect Obedience, P. 3. 3. p. 157. What does, and what does not excuse
Men, P. 3. 3. p. 155. Ibid. 4. p. 167. P. 4. 3. p. 206. Inclinations; see
Habits. Indifference, whether Liberty consists in it, P. 2. 7. p. 63. -- Not
necessary to Virtue, but inconsistent with it, P. 3. 6. p. 178. Indifferent
Things, those which appear so, never the Objects of Volition, P. 1. 2. p. 7. P.
2. 6. p. 56. Whether the Will can determine it self in choosing among such
Things, P. 2. 6. p. 57. Invitations, consistent with moral Necessity and
Inability. P. 3. 4. p. 169. P. 4. 11. p. 270. But not consistent with Arminian
Principles, P. 2. 9. p. 81. P. 3. 7. p. 188. P. 4. 11. p. 272. LAws, the End
whereof is to bind to one Side, rendered useless by Arminian Principles. P. 3.
4. p. 162. Liberty, the Nature of it, P. 1. 5. p. 27. The Arminian Notion of
it, Ibid. p. 28. This inconsistent with other Arminian Notions, P. 2. 9. p. 77,
etc. Licentiousness, whether the Calvinistic Doctrine tends to it, P. 4. 12. p.
275. -- See Endeavors. MAchines, whether Calvinism makes Men such. P. 4. 5. p.
226. M^ms, see Endeavors. Metaphysical Reasoning; see Abstracted. -- To be
justly objected against the Arminian Scheme, P. 4. 13. p. 283. Moral Agency,
it is Nature, P. 1. 5. p, 29. Motives, what they are, P. 1. 2. p. 5, 6. The
strongest determining the Will, Ibid. p. 6. P. 2. 10. p. 88. Arminian
Principles inconsistent with their Influence and Use ^n moral Actions, P. 3. 7.
p. 185. P. 4. 11. p. 273. NAtural Notions; see common Sense. Necessity, how the
Term is used in common Speech, and how by Philosophers, P. 1. 3. p. 13. P. 4.
3. p. 207. -- Philosophical, of various Kinds, Ibid. p. 210. Natural and moral,
P. 1. 4. p. 20. P. ^. 4. p. 217. -- No Liberty without moral Necessity, P. 2.
8. p. 73. Necessity and Contingence, both inconsistent with Arminian Liberty,
P. 2. 13. p. 131. -- Necessity of God's Volition, P. 3. 1. p. 135. P. 4. 7. p.
230. This consistent with the Freeness of his Grace, Ibid. 8. p. 249. --
Necessity, of Christ's Obedience, etc. P. 3. 2. p. 140. -- of the Sin of such
as are given up to Sin, P. 3. 3. p. 153. -- of fallen Man, in general, P. 3. 3.
p. 157. What Necessity wholly excuses Men, P. 3 4. p. 168. P. 4.. 3. p. 206.
and 4. p. 215. OBedience; see Christ, Commands, Necessity. PArticles perfectly
alike, of the Creator's placing such differently, P. 4. 8. p. 242. Perseverance
of Saints, CONCLUS. p. 291. Promises, whether any are made to the Endeavors of
unregenerate Sinners, P. 3. 5. p. 176. Providence, universal and decisive.
CONCL. p. ^86. REdemption particular. CONCLUS. p. 290. Reformers the first, how
treated by many late Writers. CONCLUS. p. 292. SAints in Heaven, their Liberty,
P. 4. 4. p. 219. Scripture, of the Arminians Arguments from thence, P. 4. 11.
p. 273. Self-determining Power of the Will, it is Inconsistence, P. 2. 1. p. 31.
Evasions of the Arguments against it considered* P. 2. 2. p. 35. shown to be
impertinent, Ibid. 5. p. ^1. Sin; see Author, Entrance. Sincerity of Desires
and Endeavors, what is no just Excuse, P. 3. 5. p. 170. The different Sorts of
Sincerity, Ib. p. 175. Sloth, not encouraged by Calvinism, P. 4. 5. p. 224.
Stoic Philosophers, great Theists, P. 4. 12. p. 274.-See Fate. Suspending
Volition, of the Liberty of the Will supposed to consist in an Ability for it,
P. 2. 7. p. 70. P. 3. 4. p. 1^4. Ibid. 7. p. 186. TEndency of the Principles
here maintained, to Atheism and Licentiousness, the Objection considered and
retorted, P. 4. 12. p. 274. Virtue and Vice, the Being of neither of 'em
consistent with Arminian Principles; See Arminian Doctrine. Their Essence, not
lying in their Cause, but their Nature, P. 4. 1. p. 192. Understanding, how it
determines the Will, P. 1. 2. p. 12. P. 2. 9. p. 76. Dictates of the
Understanding and Will, as supposed by some, the same, P. 2. 9. p. 81.
Uneasiness, as supposed to determine the Will, P. 1. 2. p. 7. Volition, not
without a Cause, P. 2. 3. p. 46. P. 2. 4. p. 50. WILL, it is Nature, P. 1. 1. p.
1, etc. Its Determination, P. 1. 2. p. 5, etc. The very Being of such a Faculty
inconsistent with Arminian Principles, P. 3. 7. p. 190. -- Of God, secret and
revealed, P. 4. 9. p. 262. Arminians themselves obliged to allow such a
Distinction, Ibid. p. 264. Willingness to Duty, what is no Excuse for the
Neglect of it. See Sincerity.
Advertisement. ERRATA.
PAge 26. line 22. read, concerning. -- p. 34 l. 1. r. Self-di -- p. 37. l. 27.
r. excite that -- p. 65. l. 2. from Bot. r. and act the -- p. 82. l. last, r.
Notion of Liberty be just, then all Liberty -- p. 91. l. 12. r. Thus, if --
Ibid. l. 37. for or, r. on -- p. 115. l. 30. r. their moral -- p. 132. l. 3.
dele not -- p. 183. l. 1. dele us. -- Ibid. l. 3^. r. shows they are not -- p.
240. l. 37, 8* r. measurable.

A LIST of SUBSCRIBERS, in Alphabetical Order.
A
REv. Mr. John Adams, B^bkirk, Scotland. Mr. John Adams, Milton, Massachusetts.
Mrs. Sarah Alexander, New York. The Hon. John Alford, Esquire Charlestown,
Massachusetts. Mr. Samuel Allis, Summers, ditto. Mr. Samuel Allen, Newark,
New-Iersey.
B
MR. Jonathan Badger, Tutor of New-Iersey College. Mr. Jonathan Baldwin,
Student at ditto. Mr. Nehemiah Baldwin, Newark, New-Iersey. Mr. Joseph Baldwin,
Newark, ditto. Mr. Elisha Baker, Student at Yale-College. Deacon Raham
Bancroft, Reading, Massachusetts. Mr. Samuel Bancroft, Reading, ditto. Mr.
Abner Barnard, Hampshire County, ditto. Mr. Abel Barnes, Bethlem, Connecticut.
Lieut. David Barnum, Woodbury, ditto. Mr. Joel Bardwell, Student at Yale
College. Mr. Charles Beaty, New York Government. Rev. Mr. James Beebe,
North-Stratford, Connecticut, 6 Books. Rev. Mr. Joseph Bellamy, Bethlem, ditto.
6 Books. Rev. Mr. Bellingal, Cuper, Scotland. Rev. Mr. Hugh Blair, Minister in
the Canongate, of Edinburg. Rev. Mr. David Bliss, Concord, Massachusetts. 6
Books. Rev. Mr. Bonner, Cockpen, Scotland. Rev. Mr. David Bostwick,
Long Island, New York. Rev. Mr. John Brainerd, Missionary among the Indians.
Mr. Benoni Bradner, Student at New-Iersey College. Rev. Mr. John Brown,
Augusta, Virginia. 12 Books. Mr. George Brown, Merchant, Glasgow, Scotland. Mr.
Thomas Brown, Newark, New-Iersey. Mr. Thomas Brooks, Concord, Massachusetts.
Rev. Mr. James Brown, Bridge-Hampton, Long Island. Capt. Obadiah Bruen, Newark,
New-Iersey. Mr. Daniel Bull, Hartford, Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Aaron Burr,
President of the College in New-Iersey. 6 Bo. Mr. Thaddeus Burr, Student at
ditto. Mr. Julius King Burbidge, Charles-City-County, Virginia, 12 Books. Mr.
Ebenezer Burt, Northampton, Massachusetts, 6 Books.
C
REv. Mr. Thomas Canfield, Roxbury, Connecticut. Mr. Israel Canfield, Student
at Yale-College. Mr. Samuel Carry, Student at ditto. Rev. Mr. Judah Champion,
Litchfield, Connecticut. Rev. Mr. James Chandler, Rowley, Massachusetts. Mr.
Joseph Chaplin, --, ditto. 6 Books. John Choate, Esquire Ipswich, Massachusetts.
Elder Francis Choate, Ipswich, ditto. Samuel Clark, A. M. Mr. Josiah Clark,
Northampton, Massachusetts. Mr. Gideon Clark, Northampton, ditto. Rev. Mr. John
Cleaveland, Ipswich, ditto. Mr. Samuel Cockrean, Woodbury, Connecticut. Mr.
Benjamin Concklin, Student at Yale-College. Mr. Thomas Coo^, Massachusetts.
Rev. Mr. John Corse, Glasgow, ditto. Rev. Mr. David Cowell, Kilbride, Scotland.
Mr. Charles Crane, Newark, New-Iersey. Mr. Israel Crane, Newark, ditto. Mr.
William Craige, New York. Mr. Benjamin Crocker, Ipswich, Massachusetts. Rev.
Mr. Alexander Cummings, New York. Mr. Garwold Cunningham, Woodbury,
Connecticut.
D
GEorge Daffield, A. B. Newark, New-Iersey. Mr. Joseph Dana, Massachusetts.
Abraham Davenport, Esquire Stamford, Connecticut. 6 Books. Rev. Mr. Davidson,
Galashields, Scotland. Rev. Mr. Joseph Davies, Hanover-County, Virginia. 36
Books. Rev. Mr. Joseph Davis, Holden, Massachusetts. Mr. Benjamin Davis. Mr.
Donaldson, Bookseller at Edinburg, Scotland. Mr. John Down, Boston. Rev. Mr.
Alexander Dunn, Calder, Scotland.
E
MR. John Else, Student at Yale-College. Mr. John Ely, Jun. Springfield,
Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Joseph Emerson, Malden, ditto. Mr. Brown Emerson,
Reading, ditto. Rev. Mr. John Erskine, Culross, Scotland.
F
REv. Mr. Daniel Farrand, Canaan, Connecticut, 6 Books. Samuel Fayerweather, A.
M. Boston, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Nathanael Fisher, Dighton, ditto. 2 Books.
Mr. Benjamin Foster, Reading, ditto. Mr. John Forest, New York. Rev. Mr.
Thomas Fo^croft, Boston, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. John Frelinghaysen, Rariton,
West-New-Iersey.
G
ALexander Gait, Esquire Secretary to the Edinburg Insurance-Office against Fire,
Scotland. Mr. Gibson, Preacher at Edinburg. Rev. Mr. John Gillies, Glasgow,
Scotland. Mr. Francis Gitteau, Bethlem, Connecticut, 36 Books. Mr. Joshua
Gitteau, Bethlem, ditto. 6 Books. Mr. John Gordon, A. M. Rev. Mr. Joseph
Gowdie, Professor of Divinity, Edinburg. Rev. Professor Gowdie, for the
Divinity-Hall-Library, at Edinburg. Rev. Mr. John Graham, Southbury,
Connecticut, 36 Books. Rev. Mr. Chauncy Graham, Rumbout, New York. Rev. Mr.
John Graham, Jun. Suffield, Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Jacob Green, Raway,
New-Iersey, 6 Books. Mr. William Greenough, Student at Yale-College. Mr.
Ebenezer Griffin, -- Massachusetts.
H
MR. Benjamin Haiden, Bra^^tree, Massachusetts. Mr. Samuel Haiden, Medford,
ditto. 6 Books. John Hait, Esquire New York. Benjamin Hait, A. B. Rev. Mr. Moses
Hale, Newbury, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. David Hall, Sutton, ditto. 6 Books. Mr.
Amos Hallam, Student at Yale-College. Mr. Silas Halsey, Newark, New-Iersey. Mr.
Willis Hall, Boston, Massachusetts. Deacon Eleazer Hamlin, -- New York. Rev.
Mr. John Hamilton, Glasgow, Scotland. Mr. Baily Gawin Hamilton, Bookseller,
Edinburg, ditto. Mr. Josias Hammond, Massachusetts. Mr. Robert Hannah, Bethlem,
Connecticut. Mr. Benjamin Hastings, Deerfield, Massachusetts. Ebenezer Hathway,
Esquire Freetown, ditto. Mr. Simeon Hathway, ditto. Mr. Josiah Hathway, ditto. Rev.
Mr. Gideon Hawley, Missionary among the Indians, on the Western Borders. Mr.
Nathaniel Hazard, New York. Mr. Samuel Hazard, Philadelphia. 12 Books. Capt.
John Heald, Acton, Massachusetts, 6 Books. Rev. Mr. Lawrence Hill, of the
Barony Parish at Glasgow, in Scotland. Rev. Mr. Aaron Hitchcock, --
Massachusetts. Mr. William Hogg, Merchant at Edinburg, Scotland. Mr. William
Holt, Williamsburg, Virginia, 12 Books. Mr. Nathaniel Hooker, Student at
Yale-College. Mr. James Hooker, Bethlem, Connecticut. Mr. Hezekiah Hooker, Jun.
Bethlem, ditto. Rev. Mr. Samuel Hopkins, Springfield, Massachusetts. Ezra
Horton, A. B. Rev. Mr. David Humphrey, Derby, Connecticut. Mr. Alexander
Hunter, New York. Mr. Ebenezer Hunt, Northampton, Massachusetts.
I
MR. William Jackson, New York. Rev. Mr. Jedidiah Jewett, Rowley,
Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Stephen Johnson, Lyme, Connecticut. N^thaniel Johnson,
Esquire Newark, New-Iersey. Mr. Matthias Johnson, Province of New York. Rev. Mr.
Jonathan Judd, Northampton, Massachusetts. Mr. Elnathan Judson, Woodbury,
Connecticut.
K.
REv. Mr. James Kafton, Woodbury, Connecticut. 6 Books. Rev. Mr. Elisha Kent,
Philippi, New York. Mr. Elijah Kent, Massachusetts. Mr. Samuel Kent, Jun.
ditto. Mr. Isaac Kendal, ditto. Mr. Samuel Kingsley, ditto. Mr. Eldad King,
Woodbury, Connecticut. Mr. Thomas Kimberly, ditto. Mr. Nathanael Kneeland,
Boston, Massachusetts Hugh Knox, A. M.
L
MR. Benjamin Lawrence, Newton, New York. Mr. John Leavitt, Massachusetts. Rev.
Mr. Dudley Leavitt, Salem, ditto. Mr. Asapli Leavitt, Northampton, ditto. Rev.
Mr. Mark Leavenworth, Waterbury, Connecticut, 6 Books. Mr. Garrit Ledikker,
Student at New-Iersey College. Rev. Mr. Jonathan Lee, Salisbury, Connecticut.
Rev. Mr. Daniel Little, Wells, Massachusetts. Mr. Peter Vanburgh Livingston,
New York. Mr. John Lloyd, Stamford, Connecticut. Rev. Mr. James Lockwood,
Weathersfield, ditto. Rev. Mr. Elijah Lothrop, Hebren, ditto. Mr. Samuel
Lowdon, New York. Mr. John Lion, Newark, New-Iersey. Mr. Phineas Lyman,
Northampton, Massachusetts. Mr. John Lap^^ey, Ruling Elder at Ky^syth,
Scotland. Rev. Mr. Lawrence Hill, of the Barony Parish, in Glasgow. Mr. --
Logan, Preacher at Edinburg, Scotland. 24 Books.
M.
REv. Mr. David Marinus, Achquechenonk, West-New-Iersey. Mr. Ebenezer Martin,
Student at Yale-College. Mr. Henry Martin, New York. 6 Books. Mr. James Martin,
ditto, 6 Books. Mr. Robert McAlpine, ditto, 12 Books. Samuel McClintock, A. B.
Mr. John McKesson, Student at New-Iersey College. Mr. Edward Marrow, Reading,
Massachusetts. Capt. Richard Meux, New-Kent-County, Virginia. 12 Books. Rev.
Mr. Jedidiah Mills, Ripton, Connecticut, 12 Books. Mr. Joseph Miller, --
Massachusetts. Mr. Ebenezer Mills, ditto. Jedidiah Mills, Jun. A. M. Derby,
Connecticut, 6 Books. Mr. Ephraim Minor, Woodbury, Connecticut. Deacon Samuel
Minor, Woodbury, ditto. Mr. John Minor, Jun. Bethlem, ditto. Timothy Mix, A. M.
6 Books. Mr. John Moffat, New York. Mr. Joseph Montgomery, Student at
New-Iersey College. Mr. James Morris, Bethlem, Connecticut. Mr. Samuel Moseley,
-- Massachusetts. 6 Books. Rev. Mr. John McLaurin, Glasgow, Scotland. Rev. Mr.
William McCullock, Cambuslang, Scotland. Mr. John Munn, Deerfield,
Massachusetts. Mr. John Murdock, late Baily of Glasgow, Scotland. Mr. Peter
Murdock, Student at Yale-College.
N.
MR. Thomas Napress, late Bailie of Glasgow, Scotland. Rev. Mr. Samuel Newell,
New-Cambridge, Farmington, Connecticut. 6 Books. Ebenezer Nichols, Esquire Reading,
Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. Samuel Niles, Braintree, ditto, ^2 Books. Mr. -- Nimmo,
Receiver-General of the Excise, Scotland. Mr. Gideon Noble, Student at
Yale-College. Mr. Garrat Noel, Bookseller, New York, 24 Books.
O.
MR. Thomas Ogden, New York. Mr. John Old, -- Massachusetts.
P.
REv. Mr. Jonathan Parsons, Newbury, Massachusetts. 6 Books. Rev. Mr. Moses
Parsons, ditto. Mr. Nathaniel Parker, Reading, ditto. Mr. Samuel Parkhurst,
Newark, New-Iersey. Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Pemberton, Boston, Massachusetts. Mr.
Nathaniel Phelps, --, ditto. Rev. Mr. James Pike, Somersworth, New Hampshire.
Rev. Mr. Timothy Pitkin, Farmington, Connecticut. 6 Books. Mr. Ashbell Pitkin,
Student at Yale-College. Rev. Mr. Thomas Prince, Boston, Massachusetts. Rev.
Mr. Ebenezer Prime, Long Island. 6 Books. Mr. John Prout, --, Connecticut. Mr.
Abraham Purdy, Hanover, New York, 6 Books. Hon. Joseph Pynchon, Esquire Boston,
Massachusetts.
R.
MR. William Ramsey, Student at New-Iersey College. Rev. Mr. -- Randal,
Inckture, Scotland. Mr. James Reeves, Student at New-Iersey College. Rev. Mr.
Aaron Richards, Raway, New-Iersey. Mr. Joseph Riggs, Newark, ditto. Mr. Arthur
Robertson, Merchant, Glasgow, Scotland. Rev. Mr. Philemon Robins, Branford,
Connecticut. 2 Books. Mr. Chandler Robins, Student at Yale-College. Mr.
Philemon Robins, Jun. Student at ditto. Rev. Mr. Nathaniel Rogers, Ipswich,
Massachusetts. Mr. Jesse Roots, Woodbury, Connecticut. Benajah Roots, A. B. Mr.
Robert Ross, Stratfield, Connecticut. 2 Books. Mr. Timothy Rose, Bethlem,
Connecticut.
S.
MR. David Sanford, Student at Yale-College. Mr. Edmund Sawyer, Newbury,
Massachusetts. 6 Books. Mr. Samuel Sawyer, ditto. Mr. Robert Scot, Jun.
Merchant in Glasgow. Mr. John Searle, -- Massachusetts. Rev. Joseph Sewall, D.
D. Boston, Massachusetts. Mr. Joseph Sessions, -- Massachusetts. Mr. Thomas
Seymour, -- ditto. Mr. Thomas Seymour, Student at Yale-College. Mr. Thomas
Shelden, Suffield, ditto. Mr. Reuben Sherman, Woodbury, Connecticut. Mr. David
Shipman, Newark, New-Iersey. Mr. Joseph Shippen, Jun. A. B. Rev. Mr. Robert
Silliman, Norwalk, Connecticut. Mr. Ebenezer Smeads, Deerfield, Massachusetts.
6 Books. Mr. -- Smib^rt, at K^lm^nie, Scotland. Mr. The Hon. William Smith, Esquire
New York. Mr. William Smith, Jun. ditto. Mr. Jonathan Smith, Bethlem,
Connecticut. Rev. Mr. -- Smith, Newburn, Scotland. 2 Books. Mr. Daniel Smith,
Woodbury, Connecticut. 12 Books. Mr. Ephraim Starkweather, Student at
Yale-College. Rev. Mr. James Stirling, Glasgow, Scotland. Mr. Simeon Stoddard,
Student at Yale College. Mr. Smith Stratten, Student at New-Iersey College. Mr.
John Strong, Student at Yale College. 2 Books. Rev. Mr. -- Strong,
New-Marlborough, Massachusetts Mr. Nehemiah Strong, Student at Yale-College. Mr
Nicholas Street, -- Massachusetts. Mr. James Stuart, Receiver-General of the
Widow's Annuity Scotland.
T.
REv. Mr. Nathan Tailor, New-Milford, Connecticut. Mr. John Temple, Reading,
Massachusetts. Mr. Thomas Tiffany, -- ditto. William Thompson, A. B. Rev. Mr.
Samuel Todd, Northbury, Connecticut. Mr. John Tompton, New York. Mr. Jeremiah
Townsend, New Haven, Connecticut. Mr. Isaac Townsend, Student at New-Iersey
College. Mr. -- Traill, Bookseller, Edinburg, Scotland. 6 Books. Rev. Mr. Henry
True, Hamps^ead, New Hampshire. Rev. Mr. John Trumble, Wate^bury, Connecticut.
Rev. Mr. Turnbell, Denny, Scotland.
U.
CAptain James Utley, -- Massachusetts.
W
MR. Noah Waddam, A. B. Rev. Mr. Walker, South-Lieth, Scotland. Rev. Mr. Thomas
Walker, at Dundonnald, Scotland. Rev. Mr. Robert Wallis, Edinburg, Scotland.
Mr. John Walton, Jun. Reading, Massachusetts. Mr. Josiah Walton, ditto. Rev.
Mr. Wandrope, Bathgate, Scotland. Rev. Mr. Alexander Web^ler, Edinburgh,
Scotland. Robert Welwood, Esquire Gellot, Scotland. Mr. Sam^^l Wells, Deerfield,
Massachusetts. Mr. Steph^n West, Student at Yale-College. Mr. Nath. Whittaker,
Basking-Ridge, New-Iersey. 2 Books. Deacon Jabez Whittlesey, Bethlem,
Connecticut. Rev. Mr. Stephen Williams, Springfield, Massachusetts. 6 Books.
Mr. Samuel Williams, Ipswich, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. George Wishart, Edinburg,
Scotland. Rev. Mr. Jeremiah Wise, Berwick, Massachusetts. Rev. Mr. John
Witherspoon, Beath, Scotland. Timothy Woodbridge, Esquire Massachusetts. John
Wright, A. M. Hanover, Virginia, 12 Books. Mr. Ebenezer Little, Newbury,
Massachusetts.
N. B. If there should be any of the Names in the foregoing List without their
proper Titles, wrong spelt, or Places of Abode not right inserted, we desire
the same may be excused, as done through Mistake.


