AN EXPOSTULATORY LETTER Addressed to NICHOLAS LEWIS, Count Zinzendorff, And
Lord ADVOCATE of the Unitas Fratrum. BY G. Whitefield, A. B. Late of Pembroke
College Oxford; and Chaplain to the Right Hon. the Countess of Huntingdon.

O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you? GAL. iii. i. THE THIRD EDITION.

LONDON, Printed: PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted and Sold by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the
Sign of the Bible, in Second-Street, MDCCLIII.

AN EXPOSTULATORY LETTER, etc.
MY LORD,
ALTHOUGH I am persuaded that nothing has a greater Tendency to strengthen the
Hands of Infidels, than the too frequent Altercations between the Professors of
Christianity; yet there are certain Occasions wherein the necessary Defense of
the Principles of our holy Religion, as well as the Practice of it, renders
public Remonstrances of the greatest Use and Importance. The sacred Pages
afford us many Examples of this Nature. When Aaron was prevailed on by the
Israelites to make a golden Calf, and offer Sacrifice to it, what a holy
Indignation did Moses express both against him and them! -- When Peter and
Barnabas were carried away with the Dissimulation of the Jews, how openly did
the Apostle Paul withstand them to the Face* and reprove them before all,
because they were to be blamed* and when this same Apostle saw the Churches of
Corinth and Galatia in Danger of being drawn away from the Simplicity of the
Gospel, what a ferve^t Testimony did he bear against the Au^hor^ and Abetters
of such a destructive Sch^me.

I mention these Instances, my Lord* because I h^^e they will serve as a
sufficient Apology for ^^y troubling your Lordship with this Letter. (...) For
these many Years last past have I been ^^lent, and I trust I can say an
impartial Obs^^ver of the Progress of Moravianism, both in E^^l^^^ and A^^rica;
but such shocking Thi^^ have been lately brought to our Ears, and ^^fences
^^elled to such an enormous Bulk, that ^eal Regard for my King, my Country,
and, ^f I am not greatly mistaken, a disinterested Love for the ever blessed
JESUS, that King of Kings, and the Church which He ha^ purchased with his own
Blood, will not suf^^r me to be silent any longer.

Pardon me therefore, my Lord, if at length, though with great Regret, as the
Searcher of Hearts knows, I am constrained to inform your Lordship, that you,
together with some of your leading Brethren, have been unhappily instrum^ntal
in misguiding many real, simple, honest-hearted Christians; of distressing, if
not totally ruining numerous Families, and introducing a whole Farrago of
superstitious, not to say idolatrou^ Fopperies into the ^ngl^sh Nation.

For my own Part, my Lord, notwithstanding a Folio that has been published (I
presume under your Lordship's Direction) about three Years ago, I am as much at
a Loss as ever to know what were the Principles and Usages of the ancient
Moravian Church; but if she was originally attired in the same Garb in which
she has appeared of late amongst many true-hearted though deluded Protestants,
she is not that simple, apostolical Church the English Brethren were made to
believe she was about twelve Years ago. Sure I am that ^e can find no Traces of
many of her present Practices in the yet more ancient, I mean the primitive
Churches, and which, we all know, were really under an immediate and truly
apostolical Inspection.

Will your Lordship be pleased to give me Leave to descend to a few
Particulars? Pray, my Lord, what Instances have we of the first Christians
walking round the Graves of their deceased Friends on Easter Day, attended with
Hautboys, Trumpets, French horns, Violin^, and other Kinds of musical
Instruments? Or where have we the least Mention made of Pictures of particular
Persons being brought into the first Christian Assemblies, and of Candles being
placed behind them, in order to give a transparent View of these Figures? -- --
Where was it ever known that the Picture of the Apostle Paul, representing him
handing a Gentleman and Lady up to the Side of JESUS CHRIST, was ever
introduced into the primitive Love Feasts? Or do we ever hear, my Lord, of
Incense, or something like it, being burnt for him, in order to perfume the
Room before he made his Entrance among the Brethren? Or can it be supposed that
he, who, together with Barnabas, so eagerly repelled the L^aonians, when they
brought Oxen and Garlands, in order to sacrifice unto them, would ever have
suffered such Things to be done for him, without expressing his Abhorrence and
Detestation of them? And yet your Lordship knows both these have been done for
you, and suffered by you, without your having shown, as far as I can hear, the
least Dislike of them at all I might here take Notice of the married Women's
being ordered to we^^ Blue Knots: the single Women Pink; and those that are
just ^^rrigeable, Pink and White; the Widows that are part Child beating,
White; and those that are not so, Blue and White: And also of the Episcopal
Knot of Mrs. Hannah Nitschman, (who is, I am informed, the present General
Eldress of the Congre^ation) which is sometimes of a Purple, and sometimes of a
Ros^ Color. These, with many other fanciful Things, might be considered: but
my Mind at present is t^o full of Concern, to dwell upon a^y Thing but what
more immediately strikes at the Welfare of Society, and what has a still more
fa^l Tendency to draw away anw^^y Souls from the Simplicity of the Gospel.
Would to God I could with a safe Conscience be excuted even from thi^.
.

A^ain, my Lord, I beg Leave to enquire whether we hear any thing in Scripture
of Eldresses or Deaconnesses of the apostolical Churches seating themselves
before a Table covered with artificial Flowers, against that a little Altar
surrounded with Wax-tapers, on which stood a Cross composed either of mock or
real Diamonds, or other glittering Stones? And yet your Lordship must be
sensible this was done in Fetter-lane Chapel for Mrs. Hannah Nitschman, the
present General Eldress of your Congregation, with this Addition, that all the
Sisters were seated in German Caps, and clothed in White, and the Organ also
illuminated with three Pyramids of Wax-tapers, each of which was tied with a
red Ribbon, and over the Head of the General Eldress was placed her own
Picture, and over that ( h^rresco referens) the Picture of the SON of GOD A
like Scene to this was exhibited by the s^ngle brethren in a Room of their
House at Hatton Garden. One of them who helped to furnish it, gave me the
fo^lowing Acc^^nt, -- The Floor was covered with Sand and Moss, and in the
Middle of it was p^ved a Star of different colored Pebbles, upon that was
placed a gilded Dove, which sp^^ted Water out of its Mouth into a Vessel
prepared for its Reception, which was curiously decked with artificial Leaves
and Flags; the Room was hung with Moss and Shells: the Count, his Son, and
Son-in-law, in Honor of whom all this was done, with Mrs. Hannah Nitschman,
Mr. Peter B^ckl^^, and ^o^e other Laborers, were present. These were seated
under ^n Alcove, supported by Columns made of Pastboard, and over their Heads
was painted an Oval, in Imitation of Marble, containing the Ciphers of Count
Zinzendorff's Family. -- Upon a Side table was a little Altar, covered with
Shell^, and on each Side the Altar was a bloody Heart, out of, or near which
proceeded Flames. The Room was illuminated with Wax-tapers, and Musicians
placed in an adjacent Apartment, while the Company performed their Devotions,
and regaled themselves with Sweetmeats, Coffee, Tea, and Wine. After this the
Laborers departed, and the single Brethren were admitted in. I am told, that
most, if not all, of these leading Persons were present also at the Celebration
of Mrs. Hannah Nits^^man's ^i^t^-day beforementioned.
. -- A goodly Sight this, my Lord, for a Company of English Protestants to
behold! Alas! to what a long Series of childish and superstitious Devotions,
and unscriptural Impositions must they have been habituated, before they could
sit as silent and tame Spectators of such an antichristian Scene. -- Surely,
had Gid^on, though but an Old Testament Saint, been present, he would have
risen and pulled down this, as he formerly did his Father's Altar. Or had even
that meek Man Moses been there, I cannot help thinking but he would have
addressed your Lordship, partly at least, in the Words with which he addressed
his Brother Aaron, What did this People unto thee, that thou have introduced
such superstitious Customs among them?

But this is not all; I have another Question to propose to your Lordship.
Pray, my Lord, did any of the Apostles or Leaders of the primitive Churches
ever usurp an Authority not only over People's Consciences but Properties also,
or draw in the Members of their respective Congregations to dispose of whole
Patrimonies at once, or to be bound for Thousands more than they knew in their
own Consciences they were worth? And yet your Lordship knows this has been done
again and again, in order to serve the Purposes of the Brethren for several
Years last past; and that too, at, or very ^ea^ the Time, when, in order to
procure an Act in their Favor to go abroad, (which now appears to be rather a
Scheme to settle at Home) they boasted to an English Parliament how immensely
rich they were Mr. Rimius, An^ic Counselor to the late King of P^^^^^, in a
Treatise lately published, I think, makes it plainly appear, that the Agents
for the M^^^vi^^ Affairs ^ave misinformed the Parliament in several Respects,
and, upon the Whole, treated that aug^st Body little better than the
Gi^roniti^^ Am^^^^^ors once treated (...), the Captain of the LORD's Hor -- To
this I re^e^ the Reader. It is wrote with great ^and u^, and contains such
inconte^^ible Pree^s of the many dangerous Principles and Practices of the
leading Brethren, that m^^t, I think, constrain all that read it, to say, -- My
Soul come not thou into their Secret, and to their Ass^mbly ^^at Honor be not
thou united.

I suppose it was a Consciousness of this, that induced Mr Coffart, one of the
Court's chief Agents, to suggest to Mr. Linde sometime before its Publication,
that it would be as good as Three Hundred Pounds in his Way if Mr. Rimius his
Book could be suppressed. This looks bad; but I think it was still worse in
another of the Brethren, ^oundly to affirm, in order to quiet some who were
^^ssatisf^ed by reading this Book, that the Author of the above ^ed Treati^e
was one that personated Mr. Rimius, and that the Whole was l^ies. Whereas they
cannot but know that this Gentleman r^^d^s in Ox^nd^nfire^t, and addressed his
book to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, by ^^^mi^sion, and that he
proves almost every Word he says, from the Brethren's own Writings. The above
mentioned Brother was ple^^ed to add, That the (...) M^. Rimius was a (...),
and (...) would not w^^e against them. I answer, That I verily believe he
therefore wrote, as GOD knows I do, because he is a Friend; or, to use his own
Words, "from a strict Regard to Justice, Truth, and the public Good." -- And I
think it instead of adding Sin to Sin, by continuing still to misguide, ensave,
and put out the Eyes of many of GOD's dear Children, who, I am persuaded, know
no more of their secret Mysteries and intended Purposes than those who never
heard of them at all, it would show a much better Spirit in the loading
Brethren, either publicly to refute, or ingeniously to confess, and amend the
Things said to their Charge. -- This is what GOD and the World may justly
require at their Hands; and, without this, I cannot see how they can expect any
future Blessing from above: Since the wisest of Men has told us, That he that
covers his Sins shall not prosper, but whose confesses and forsakes them,
shall have Mercy. Grant us all this Mercy, heavenly Father, for thy dear Son's
sake.

As I am not personally acquainted with Mr. Rimius, I take this Opportunity of
informing him, that it is the Desire of many that the Latin Appendixes may be
translated into English, and the Whole printed in a small Edition, in order to
make it more extensively useful.


.

Your Lordship cannot but be sensible that at this present Time you stand
indebted to sundry Persons to the Value of Forty Thousand Pounds Sterling; and
unless some of your Brethren had agreed to stay Six Years for about Twenty
Thousand Pounds due to them; (though after the Expiration of that Term, as they
have no Security, in all Probability they will be just where they are now) and
if the other Creditors also, upon Consideration of some Bonds given, and
Mortgages made for Principal and Interest The Buildings in Yorkshire,
Bedfordshire, etc. Besides this there are some Thousands due to others, upon
Bond; and many Thousands to a particular Gentleman, for which the Count has
mortgaged one of the German Settlement^: I think it is ^horien^orn.
, had not agreed to stay Four Years for Twenty-one Thousand Pounds more, many
of the poor English Brethren, who out of I know not what Kind of Infatuation,
have not only given their All, but have been bound for Thousands more than they
are able to pay, must either have immediately become Bankrupts, and thereby the
Creditors perhaps not have had a Shilling in the Pound, or have been obliged to
shut up their Shops, go to Prison, or be turned out into the wide World, to the
utter Ruin of themselves and Families.

The Distress and Anguish of Mind that Hundreds have been involved in, upon
this very Account, is I believe unspeakable Since my writing this, I have been
told of a very singular Expedient made use of by Mr. Peter Bo^^ler, one of the
Brethren's Bishops, in order to strengthen the Faith, and to raise the drooping
Spirits of Mr. W^^^^^m Bell, who has been unhappily drawn in, with several
others, to be one of their Agents. It was this, -- It being Mr. Bell's
Birthday, he was sent for from his House in Nevil's-alley Fetter-lane, but for
a While, having had some Words with Mr. Bochler, he refused to come; at length
^e complied, and was introduced into a Hall, in the same Alley, where was
placed an artificial Mountain, which, upon singing a particular Verse, was made
to fall down, and then behind it was discovered an Illumination, representing
JESUS CHRIST and Mr. Bell sitting very near or embracing each other; out of the
Clouds was also represented Plenty of Money falling round Mr. Bell and the
Savior. This Story appeared to me so incredible at the first hearing, that,
though I could not doubt the Veracity of the Relator, yet, fearing he might be
misinformed, I sent for him again, and he assured me that Mr. Bell ^old this
Story himself some Time ago in Company; and a Person of good Reputation of that
Company related it to an Acquaintance of mine. May GOD grant him, and all
others, who have been undesignedly concerned, a more sure and stable Prop for
their Faith, even his own Word, in which he causes his People to trust. Then,
and not till then, even upon the greatest Emergency, they may, without any
fanciful Representations, boldly ^ay, Who art thou, O great Mountain? Before
the Lord JESUS, our all-conquiring Zerubbab^^, thou shall bec^me a Plain.
, and the bare Reflection upon it, whilst I am writing, makes my Heart almost
bleed within me.

Who, who but themselves, my Lord, can tell the late Perplexity of their Mind^,
who have been already arrested, or obliged to break off their respective
Partnerships? Or what Words can express the great Concern Mr. Freeman and Mr.
Thomas Grace must have been necessarily under when they found that Bills had
been drawn in their Names, unknown to them, to the Value of Forty-eight
Thousand Pounds This Mr. Grace told me himself in public Company. He and Mr.
F^^eman live in Thr^gmort-street.
? And how pitiable, my Lord, must the present Circumstances of young Mr. Rhodes
The Case of Mr. Rhodes is very singular: He was of a mean Birth and Occupation,
but, upon the unexpected falling of many Lives, became suddenly possessed of an
Estate of above Four Hundred Pounds a Year; and, to serve the Brethren, after
many Importunities, he was induced to dispose of it. Mr. Lee, the Banker,
purchased it, and Mess. Freeman and Grace received Six Thousand Pounds of the
Money toward what was due to them. Besides this, Mr. Rhodes was bound for many
Thousands more. This made him very uneasy, and fearing the Consequence, he one
Afternoon, about ten Weeks ago, stole an Interview with two single Brethren,
and beseeched them for Christ's sake to let him have Twenty-five Pounds, for
the Payment of which he left them his Watch, Bureau, Horse and Saddle. He then
took his Leave, saying, in all Probability he should never see them any more;
and having nothing to sp^re to leave behind for his poor Mother, (who is since
dead) was content to send her a few parting Lines. Since he has been gone, the
Horse, Watch, Bureau, and Saddle, were sold for Twenty-seven Pounds and Three
Shillings; so that the young Man has the Balance in Bank. GOD grant that this
may prove the last Person that may be imposed on in this Wa^!
be, who, to stop a little of the abovementioned Gap, was prevailed on, your
Lordship knows by whom, about Eighteen Months ago, to sell his Estate of above
Four Hundred Pounds a Year, and went, or was sent off very lately, as I am
assured, to France, (leaving a destitute Mother behind him) only with
Twenty-five Pounds; for the Payment of which he left his Watch, Bureau, Horse
and Saddle.

These are but a few Instances, my Lord, amongst many, indeed, too, too many,
that might be given. The Brethren's Agents, and those concerned with them, can
best tell what horrid Equivocations, Untruths, and low Artifices, have been
made use of to procure Money, at high Interests, wherever it was to be had, in
order to keep up the Brethren's Credit in that poor, lame Manner it has been
kept up for a considerable Time. Was the whole Scene to be opened, I believe
every one would be of Opinion that such an ecclesiastical Project never was
heard of before in any Part of his Majesty's Dominions.

This, my Lord, the Royal Exchange has long since rung of; and if the same Part
has been acted abroad It appears too plain from Mr. Rimius, that this has been
the Case. And no Wonder, since he quotes this Assertion of the Counts from his
own Writings, The O^^o^^mists of the Society, may say to a young rich Man,
Either give us all thou have, or get the^ gone."
, how many Families must have been ruined there, how many more be yet ruined,
in order to fill up the present English Chasm; and consequently what Loads of
Guilt must needs lie at the Door of somebody!

Surely, the LORD of Lords, whose Eyes are like a Flame of Fire, and who
requires Truth in the inward Parts, will one Day or other visit for these
Things, by bringing to Light the hidden Things of Darkness, and thereby making
manifest the Counsels of the Hearts.

I need not inform your Lordship that Babels are generally suffered to be built
pretty high, before GOD comes down to confound the Language of the Builders. If
Knaves are employed, (as commonly they are) GOD's Honor is concerned to
discover them; and if any of his own Children are undesignedly drawn in, (which
is frequently the Case) He who has promised not to suffer them to be tempted
above what they are able to bear, will in Mercy, some Way or other, rebuke the
Tempter, and make a Way for them to escape. It is true, this, in public
Concerns, may sometimes expose them to a little worldly Contempt, and, for a
While, they may seemingly be crushed under the Rubbish of the fallen Fabric;
but even this shall work together for their Good; and happy will it be for
them, if, after all, they at length learn this important Lesson, viz. That it
is dangerous, upon any Pretense whatsoever, to go from the written Word, or
give up their Consciences to the Guidance of my Man, or Body of Men under
Heaven. This, your Lordship well knows, is what weak and unstable Souls are too
apt to do, and artful and designing Men, who are fond of Power, especially if
naturally they are of an ambitious Turn of Mind, easily catch at the pleasing
Bait. But Honesty, my Lord, will be found to be the best Policy after all: And
therefore God forbid that any who call themselves the Followers of the Lamb
should glory in any thing save the Cross of CHRIST.

At present I shall add no more, but earnestly saying Amen to that Part of the
Brethren's Litany, however exceptionable in other Respects, From untimely
Projects, and from unhappily becoming great, keep us our good Lord and God; and
as heartily praying, that the glorious JESUS may prosper all that is Right, and
give Grace to correct and amend all that is Wrong among all his People of all
Denominations; I subscribe myself,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant, GEORGE WHITEFIELD.
London, April 24, 1783.

