A LETTER FROM QUEBECK, in Canada, TO M. L'Maine, a French Officer.
Which contains a particular ACCOUNT of the present Designs of the French upon
the English in North America; what Force the French have collected, their
several Divisions, and the Places destined for each. Likewise an Account of the
defenseless Condition of the English Provinces and Colonies, and the Methods
made Use of by the French to procure such Intelligence.

BOSTON:

Printed and sold by Thomas Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill. 1754.

To Mons. L'Maine.
Quebeck, February 6. 1753. SIR,
THE Day of my Arrival at this Place, I sent Dispatches to all the commanding
Officers in New-France, to meet me within ten Days at Montreal; I also
immediately sent Expresses to all the commanding Officers at Missisippi, to
muster with all Expedition, the Natives inlisted in His Most Christian
Majesty's Service, to join our Troops from France, and proceed forthwith to
Ohio, there to follow such Directions as from time to time they shall receive
from us at Canada: And according to Time appointed, I met Mons. Duverney at
Montreal, with our other Officers; at which Interview, I received a most
agreeable Account from them, in Favor of our Royal Master's Interest, which
gives us a glorious Prospect of soon adding a Kingdom unto our dread
Sovereign's Dominions; for by their Account from North to South, they have
inlisted into his Majesty's Service Four or Five Thousand resolute young
Natives among the several Tribes; and those have been for some Time
disciplined, and well equipt with all Necessaries. They also inform me, that
our Regulars from France, with the Natives included, at Missisippi, amount to
near Two Thousand Four Hundred, who are to build many strong Forts at Ohio and
Places adjacent, which in a little Time we expect will prove impregnable
against any Force the English can raise in those Parts. The Cannon for said
Forts is already dispatched.

Our Army at Canada, with our Regulars included, will amount to near Five
Thousand, which we determine to divide into three main Bodies, one to be
commanded by Count Montery, the second by Mons. Boriel, and the third by Mons.
Estrides. Count Montery to proceed to Crown-Point, and divide his Squadron into
Parties on the Back of Albany. The second Division under Mons. Boriel, on the
Back of Maryland and Pennsylvania; and the third under Mons. Estrides, on the
Back of New England; which are all to be divided into Parties, as the
commanding Officers shall judge proper. We design only to send small Parties of
Indians into their back Settlements, to bring us fresh Supplies of Provision,
until we are properly fortified. Father Anthony, by an uncommon Assiduity and
Influence, has gained over to our Interest, a Number of young Men of the Six
Nations, who by the English are looked upon as our Enemies; let that Suspicion
remain, and they may keep the old Men and Women.

I must not omit to acquaint you, that our new Governor is more and more
zealous and resolute to be a principal Instrument (with the united Assistance
of the Houses of Bourbon) to subdue and extirpate Heretics out of America. And
such a glorious Acquisition, will add a Kingdom, which will prove superior to
Scotland and Ireland, and furnish Stores of every Kind for His Most Christian
and Catholic Majesty's Navy, and Provisions and other Necessaries even to
Profusion, for the supply of their Royal Majesty's Possessions in the
West Indies.

Our young Hero, the present Governor of Canada, did not take this Task upon
him, of making a Conquest of that Part of North America possessed by the
English, only from a Motive which makes him Ruler thereof, and because he has
not a superior Title, but his present Disposition animates him to be revenged
on the English Heretics for the late Indignities offered his illustrious Person
and Royal Predecessors; and is come into these Parts, invested with the Power
and Authority of Church and State, and supported with Money and other
Assistance, by His Most Christian and Catholic Majesty's, and has likewise
received the supreme Sanction and sovereign Benediction of his Holiness the
Pope, to drive out of America pestilent Heretics, to make Room for good
Catholics. I have also the Satisfaction of acquainting you, that the Regiments
raised in the Switz Cantons some Time past, which our Governor brought over
with him, are in high Spirits, zealous to assist as against the English, and
conceive an infinite Satisfaction at our present Prospect of possessing those
fruitful Lands now enjoyed by the English.

I have lately had a Conference with M'Laish, an Irish Jesuit, of the Order of
St. Patrick, a politic ingenious Man, who has been among the several Tribes,
influencing and inlisting the Natives into His Most Christian Majesty's
Service: He gives me a very succinct and satisfactory Account of the several
Tribes of Natives near Canada, that upon any emergent Occasion, we may command
what Numbers we shall have Occasion for. He gives me also a particular Relation
of the several Provinces inhabited by the English on the Sea Coasts, and
appears perfectly acquainted with their Manners and Customs. He informs me
there are many of our hearty Friends among them, with whom he has settled a
Correspondence by Letters, by the way of Cape-Breton, and from thence to
Quebeck. The English (he says) are our good Friends; that the Measures we have
concerted, could not be so effectually carried on, were it not that one hundred
Sail of their Vessels yearly arrive at Cape-Breton, with Provision and other
Necessaries from Philadelphia, New York, Boston, Rhode Island, etc. which, by a
moderate Computation, have brought this Year 10,000 Barrels of Flour, 5000
Barrels of Pork and Beef, 1500 Tons of Bread, and of Butter, Cheese, Hogs, Neat
Cattle, and Poultrey, even to Profusion; some of which is sent to our southern
Plantations, and the King's Commissioners supply the Magazines at Cape-Breton,
and send large Quantities to our Army at Quebeck, which elevates the Spirits of
our Soldiers. We have also a good Supply of Powder by the Way of Cape-Breton.
M'Laish's Sentiments of the English bordering on the Seacoast is satisfactory;
they having little or no Military Discipline among them, no Arms nor
Ammunition, neither do they know properly how to use them, except those
Oliverian Heretics who took our Cape-Breton; these cast a Damp on our
Undertakings; they have the same Governor Shirley, who is an enterprizing,
resolute Man; and when he, and the Puritan Ministers, say to the Inhabitants,
Go, fight for your Religion and Country, they rush like Lions, and had rather
die in Battle, than submit to the Dictates of our Holy Fathers, Jesuits,
Friars, and Monks, and become Members of our Mother Church. They retain the
most martial Spirit of any in North America, and have a Tincture of Oliver
Cromwell's Blood remaining, therefore for the present, we shall not erect any
Forts bordering near them; should we attempt such a Thing, even with Ten
Thousand Men, M'Laish is confident we should be prevented and all our Measures
disconcerted, by the Vigilance of those New England Heretics; for if they could
take Cape-Breton (which we imagined to be impregnable) what can we suppose they
could not effect, when their Indignation and Resentment provokes them to oppose
our Encroachments on their Territories? And they are sensible, that when once
we become their Masters, Fire and Gibbet will be their Portion, if they do not
fall down and worship the Images we shall set up.

Our Design is to get Footing in the Western Provinces. Lord Baltimore was one
of our Mother Church, and a good Friend to King James; and in Maryland and
Virginia, and those Parts, there are many true Catholics that will not fight
their Brethren. M'Laish acquaints me, the Inhabitants of Pennsylvania are a
meek peaceable People, who will neither furnish Money, Arms, nor Ammunition,
that if you take their Coat, they will give you their Cloak also: These we
shall indulge with many Privileges, for their not opposing our Measures, and
quietly surrendering their Lands, and submitting to the godly Admonitions of
our holy Fathers.

M'Laish likewise acquaints me, that from New York West ward, the Inhabitants
are not such Bigots to Religion, therefore may more easily be prevailed on to
be of our holy Religion. The rich Traders in those Parts, are not concerned at
our erecting Forts near them, from a View of private Gain in the Fur Trade. And
M'Laish says, the English might have demolished Crown-Point, but many in Albany
and New York have received considerable Advantages by our Fur Trade, by which,
we have also been benefitted, in receiving Ammunition, etc. in Exchange.

There is now a Dispute between our Grand Monarch and the English, relating to
the Boundary Line in the North, and what are called the Neutral Islands, in
South-America; but his most Christian Majesty is determined to decide the
Controversy very soon. He is now peopling the Neutral Islands, and what Cannon
will be requisite to fortify the same, is already at Martineco. From Canada and
Missisippi we are to have a sufficient Number, of regular Troops to join the
Natives, so soon as we are prepared to receive them, and those to be dispersed
on the Back of the English, between Crown-Point and Ohio. Our Officers are
directed to send proper Persons into the English Provinces, to make a more
perfect Discovery of their Strength and Weakness: Those are to deceive the
English [which French Policy has frequently done!] by amusing them, with being
Deserters.

Our Grand Monarque's Will and Pleasure is, that we immediately build strong
Forts between Crown-Point and Ohio, sufficient to secure Fifty Thousand Men,
and so situated, that upon any extraordinary Occasion, they may immediately
unite and oppose the English, if they should attempt to oppose us, but, at
present, they appear unconcerned and secure: However, their Numbers cannot
terrify us, when they have no Discipline or Union. Had they as many as Mexico,
before the Conquest, could boast of, our Regulars, headed by our Hero, the
present Governor, would destroy as many Thousands as Cortes did of the Mexicans.

I must, with secret Pleasure to ourselves, tell you, Sir, that we are pitying,
not envying, the English who are peopling Nova Scotia: in thus fatiguing
themselves in clearing Land, and expending considerable Sums in building, etc.
as his most Christian Majesty's Pleasure is, to prepare a large Squadron to
deprive them of their Labor and Possessions: Then will they cry out, Who would
have imagined this would have befallen us, when no more Disturbance has been at
Home? When this is effected, the English may undertake by Remonstrances, to
complain of a Violation and Infringement of Treaties. --

I need not inform you, Sir, of our well concerted Plan, which is, to keep
New England, South Carolina and Georgia fully engaged to defend their own
Territories, in order to prevent their assisting the intervening Provinces,
which will fall an easy Prey, as their Ports will be blocked up by our Ships,
and those of his Catholic-Majesty's, who have also a sufficient Number to
divert the English Squadrons, and keep them at Home; at which Time, with our
numerous Indian Allies, we shall enter the English Provinces of New York,
Pennsylvania, Virginia, etc. Our Indian Allies Eastward, are to attack the
Eastward Settlements; and his Catholic Majesty to transport a Number of
Regulars from the Havanna, who are to attack Georgia and South Carolina, which
will be added to his other Dominions of New-Spain; and his most Christian
Majesty to possess all the Land from South Carolina to Newfoundland.

I need not caution you, Sir, to conceal the Contents of this Letter, which you
must be sensible should remain an entire Secret, lest the English should
discover the Measures we have concerted: And while they are amusing themselves
with idle Disputes and Debates, and one Province contending, and promoting
Jealousies, and raising groundless Suspicions of each other, without making any
Preparations for Defense, let u unite as one Body, as loyal Subjects and good
Catholics, then shall we accomplish our glorious Undertaking, and sing Te Deum,
and celebrate Mass in those Places which have been long defiled by the Breath
of Heretics.

I remain, Sir, Your obedient Servant, De Roche.


