SERIOUS CONSIDERATIONS ON THE PRESENT STATE OF THE AFFAIRS OF THE Northern
Colonies.

NEW YORK: Printed for the AUTHOR. 1754.

SERIOUS CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
AS France has hitherto, by the Means of Great Britain chiefly, been prevented
from enslaving the World and Mankind, they are become of Course our implacable
and most inveterate Enemies, and of late every where our Competitors in Trade,
and, as one of the Links of their grand System, Encroachers upon our
Territories; regardless of all Faith, Oaths, or Treaties, their national Polity
being one continued Train of Chicane and Deceit; witness, the late audacious
Insult of an abandoned Crew of his Majesty's own Subjects, instigated and
supported by that grand Monarch, upon the Liberties of Great Britain itself.

THEIR late Encroachments upon his Majesty's Rights and Territories, in the
East and West Indies, in Africa, and in Hudson's- Bay, with the most provoking
Circumstances, are so well known, that I believe I need not mention them. And
now they seem avowedly, and with much Assurance, to open the same shameful
Scene upon this Continent, which they have indeed been long practicing
underhand. Thus by System they are become the Disturbers of the Peace of
Mankind, and worse than a Pest, for there is no End of it to every contiguous
Society; we are not the only Objects of their Resentment.

THAT vast Sums have been expended upon their royal Geographers, and
Hydrographers, in order that their Maps and Sea Charts may quadrate with their
political System of Encroachments upon the Territories of other Nations, is
apparent to the whole World; and thus by establishing their imaginary Rights by
Pen and Ink, they are determined to confirm their Accuracy by a forcible
Possession. Another Piece of Finesse, or French Policy, is that of burying
Leaden Plates up and down this Continent, with certain Inscriptions, in order
to form new Pretensions; but in this, I am told, they were discovered by some
of our Indians, who, though not pleased, were diverted with the Whim, as I am
confident the World must be with their other Project, being equally ridiculous.
What Figure we are like to make in this Dispute; we, I say, who are so nearly
concerned in the Event, and who must become, in all Probability, the first
Sacrifice; we, to whom, in a great Measure, all this Impertinence is owing, who
by an ill-judged Frugality meanly neglected the Preventing their first
Intrusions at Crown-Point, and that important Pass at Niagara, and some more of
the like Kind, together with a total Neglect of Indian Affairs, I shall not
take upon me to determine; nor shall I enter into a Discussion of the Reasons
of that Neglect, or to whom owing, at this Time; this is not the Time to
retrospect, we must now look forward. Our Case at present is neither more nor
less than this, viz. That the French are now drawing a Line along the Borders
of our Settlements in every Province, from the Mouth of St. Lawrence, to the
Mouth of Missisippi, and building Forts to secure the most convenient Passes on
the Lakes, that form the Communication; by which they will effectually cut off
all Intercourse and Traffic, between us and the Indians inhabiting the inland
Countries; and likewise compel those who are Neighbors and Allies, by reason
of the absolute Dependence they must have on the French for every thing they
want, as well as for their Liberty of Hunting and Fishing, to fall under their
Subjection, or starve. It therefore, I think, behooves us at this Time to exert
our utmost Endeavors, by all the Means in our Power, to prevent so bad a
Neighborhood. It is a Maxim in England, to avoid, if possible, the
Neighborhood of a great Lord; by the same Parity of Reason, what ought we then
not to do, to avoid that of an ambitious, all-grasping Monarch, whose Will,
often the Caprice of a Miss, or a Favorite, is the Law; For such is our
Pleasure, is their whole Corpus Juris. One great Step, if not the greatest, to
this grand Monarch's universal System, is that of being possessed of this
Northern Continent of America, a Territory boundless as is his Ambition, in
which he has made not a little Progress.

THE vast Anxiety the Court and Kingdom of France were under on the Loss of
Cape-Breton, esteemed the Key and Dunkirk of North America, and which I doubt
will be equally baneful to us as ever the other was to Britain, together with
other numerous Circumstances, and indeed from every Step taken, may convince
us, that the Plan for extirpating the Subjects of Great Britain out of America,
has been long in Agitation; the French lay their Plans of this Kind at a
Distance, but seldom lose the Point in view.

THEY have for many Years been indefatigable in their Endeavors to seduce our
Indians; we on the other Side, have been as indolent as they could wish; and if
ever they succeed in this Point effectually, they will have little else to do.

REGULAR Troops are of little Use here, further than to fight from behind
Walls; it is by Means of the Indians, and by them only, that any Stop can be
put to those wicked Encroachments. And this is as yet very far from being
either impossible or impracticable, if all Hands set heartily about it; the
very French themselves openly upbraid us with our Indolence, and Divisions,
which they acknowledge to be their greatest Security. It is evident therefore I
think to a Demonstration, that if we continue to neglect our Indians much
longer, or, if this Plan of a Congress for a Confederacy should prove abortive
through the Caprice of any Man, or Number of Men, or by any ill-judged
Frugality, that we may from thence date the Commencement of the the Dissolution
and Destruction of these Colonies: As for my own Part I sincerely believe the
Indians will go off in a Body, and in that Case we shall most certainly be the
first undone, Great Britain will suffer, and all Europe will sooner or later
feel the Effects of it. Those therefore, who are more immediately concerned,
and with whom we have entrusted the Security of our Lives and Fortunes, have
not a little to answer for to the present Generation, as well as to those who
are to come after us, for their Conduct upon this critical Occasion.

LET us for once suppose the French, by their Fortifications and Lines of
Communication, absolutely Masters, either by Force, or Friendship of the
Indians; how easy a Matter would it be for them with a small naval Force to put
us between two Fires? A small Force of regular Troops to attack Albany, and
New York, at the same Time, while their Bloodhounds are burning and massacring
our Out-Settlements, is, in my humble Opinion, the Plan laid, and which they
will put in Execution sooner or later, according as they become Masters of the
Indians; and what a Catastrophe will this create!

WHERE is now that Champion of our Liberties, who so worthily exerted himself
in the Cases of Rotten Row, and rotten black Gowns? Let him now stand forth,
our All being at Stake, and display his Eloquence; a Philippic or two; for
never were Cases more parallel than that of Greece and ours, when Demosthenes,
by his powerful Eloquence, raised such a Spirit of Liberty in his Countrymen
the Athenians, ready to sink, and upon the Brink of Destruction, as saved his
Country; a few Philippics, I say, in that Gentleman's persuasive Manner, I am
serious, might have wonderful Effects, and eternize his Memory. And the Cases
being so much alike, the same Reasoning, with a very few mutatis mutandis, will
hold; we most certainly want the Assistance of our best Heads and Hands, to
infuse some public Spirit amongst us, and to raise us out of our present
Lethargy.

LET us not, however, despair, we are not yet past Redemption; we have Hands,
and I hope Hearts enough, if properly employed, to recover all our past Lapses
and Misteps. But, as a worthy Patriot upon the like Occasion observes, this
must indeed be very burdensome; for if the greatest State in Europe, animated
by the Prospect of universal Dominion, enabled by the absolute Power of its
Government to draw every Shilling out of private Purses into the public Purse;
and assisted by the personal Service of all its People, through the national
Vanity, and martial Habit of the Country; if such a State will press the Ruin
of its Neighbors with an obstinate Expense of all its Blood, and all its
Treasure, no Man can think it is an easy Task to reduce or resist a Power which
shall act this Part: But you are to consider, says he, not so much the
Difficulties you must now encounter to defend yourselves, in this Conjuncture,
as the certain Impossibility of your ever being able to do it again in any
other, if you lose the present Opportunity. I shall only therefore beg Leave to
say as to the State of our Affairs, the Fact is this, that such is the Power,
such the Ambition, such the destructive Plan laid down by France; a plan to
divide and enslave the World; a Plan pursued with the utmost Obstinacy through
every Difficulty for above a Century past; so far my Author; how justly
applicable to the present Situation of our Affairs, judge O Reader!

BUT as pointing out those impending Evils, without offering, or attempting to
offer at a Remedy, a Practice too common, and is only doing Things by Halves, I
shall beg Leave, with much Submission, to offer such Hints as have occurred to
me from long Observation, which I hope some abler Hand will take up and improve
with Candor (avaunt Criticism) I invite them, nay I challenge it, as they will
answer the Contrary to their God, their King, their Country, and Posterity.

THAT we have lost, in a great Measure, all that sincere Friendship and
Attachment which did once subsist between us and our Indians, upon which, from
the Malevolence of a wicked Neighborhood, our Being, in this Part of the
World, chiefly depends, is notorious to the World; by what, or by whose Means,
as before, I shall not take upon me to discuss, the Task is invidious; I shall
only beg Leave to observe, that the injurious and villainous Treatment they
have met with for these many Years, in their Way of Trade, and that without
Redress, together with the proper Use our implacable Enemies have made of it,
who, by all Accounts, however they may treat their Indians in other Matters, in
that of Traffic they are always honestly and justly dealt by, are the Sources
of our Misfortunes. Now in order to regain their Affections and Friendship
effectually, it will be necessary, in my humble Opinion, in the first Place to
establish some good and sufficient Laws for the Regulation of their Trade, and
for summary and severe Justice in case of Abuses: Under the Government of
Boston, they have several, which appear to me very reasonable, and may be
improved; one I shall here beg Leave to insert, it is but short.

BY an Act of the 12th of GEO, it is enacted, That Provisions, Clothing, etc.
suitable for carrying on a Trade with the Indians, not exceeding the Value of
Nine Thousand Pounds, be procured at the Cost of the Province, and the Produce
applied for supplying the Indians, by such Persons as shall be annually chosen,
etc. who shall annually produce fair Accounts of their Proceedings; which
Supplies shall be lodged at, etc. That a suitable Person shall be chesen
annually at each of the Places where any of the Goods are lodged; which
Truck-masters shall be under Oath, and give sufficient Security for the
faithful Execution of that Trust, and such Instructions as they shall receive
from Time to Time; and shall keep fair Accounts of their Trade and Dealings
with the Indians, and shall return the same, with the Produce, to the Person or
Persons who shall be appointed to supply them with Goods; and they shall not
trade with the Indians, on their own Account. That the Truckmasters sell to the
Indians at the Prices set in the Invoices sent them from Time to Time, without
any Advance thereon; and shall allow the Indians for their Furs, and other
Goods, as the Market shall be at Boston, according to the last Advices from the
Person or Persons that shall supply them with the same Commodities of equal
Goodness: Rum to be given to the Indians in moderate Quantities, by the
Truck-masters only: No Person whatsoever, other than the Truckmasters, and they
only as such, shall or may presume, by themselves, or any other for them,
directly or indirectly, to sell, truck, barter, or exchange to any Indian or
Indians, any Wares, Merchandise, or Provisions, within six Miles of any
Truck-house, on Penalty of forfeiting Fifty Pounds, or six Months Imprisonment,
etc.

SOME good Laws of this Kind would go a great Way to answer all our Purposes,
if duly executed. The French treat Indians much a la Cavalier, and often
threaten to cut them off, if they do not join with them in their Excursions,
and will be as good as their Words, so soon as they have completed their
Schemes; and of this the Indians are not without their Apprehensions, and
therefore have still a Hankering or Leaning toward our Interest, which, if
properly managed, will soon reconcile them; they are far from being insensible
that it is their Interest to be on our Side, or that they can at any Time, or
any where, be so well supplied. They are at this Time upon the Balance,
between Hopes and Fears, and if we do not now fix them, I believe we may bid
them fairly adieu! What less can we expect from them? we, who have been
cheating and abusing them for so many Years, without Redress, in a most
abominable Manner, of which take the following Specimen: Without affording them
the least Assistance in any Shape, besides that of a few Presents from Time to
Time, which in Reality are of no Manner of Use to them, being divided at
Albany, the far greater Part remains with those conscientious Handlers there,
for Rum, so that the Castles know little more of the Matter than that there was
a Present made. These however are but Palliatives, there must be something more
substantial in the Case:

HAVING, as above, made proper Regulations for the Trade, and that they may be
no longer so unmercifully imposed upon, both in Weight and Measure, as well as
in Quality and Prices, which has almost alienated their Hearts from us; the
next Step that I would advise should be taken, is, that of erecting proper
Fortifications in or near every one of the Indian Castles, with a Garrison of
about 15 or 20 Men in each, with an approved Sergeant, two or three of which
may be Smiths, in double Pay, with a few Field Pieces, Spare Arms, Snow-Shoes
(with which the French are always provided) small Hatchets, and some Dogs of a
proper Kind, to prevent Surprises in the Night.

THIS, I doubt not, the Indians would readily come into, as it would greatly
encourage their Hunting, as well as their War Parties, and as it would be a
Security for their old Men, Women, and Children, and a safe Retreat for
themselves upon all Occasions; without such Security, they are impatient when
Abroad, and seldom care to go far; besides the Loss of Numbers to the Service,
upon any Emergency, who are detained at home for that Purpose. These Forts
might at the same time answer all the Purposes of Truck or Tradinghouses, to be
divided by Lot amongst the contributing Colonies as far as they will go; and
which, if properly stored with Indian Goods, and regulated according to the
Method in New England, would very soon create such an Intercourse and
Connection between the remote Indian Nations and ours. as would turn out
greatly to our Advantage. And one single independent Company would garrison the
whole; and what a Trifle of a Charge would this be, in Comparison to the
Advantages we might hope for, and expect from it; and indeed it is my humble
Opinion, that nothing less will effectually secure our Interest and Friendship
with the Indians.

As it is agreed on all Hands, that a good strong Fort ought to be erected at
or near the Wood Creek, in order to counter-ballance that of Crown Point, I
shall make no Doubt but that those who are entrusted with the Care of our
Security, will soon see that Part (as well as every other) of their Duty put in
Execution, and I make as little Doubt but that his Majesty, upon a proper
Application, would, out of his wonted Goodness, favor us with an independent
Company of Highlanders; there seems to be so much Affinity both in their
Disposition and Dress, (which I would have complete Highland) with that of our
Indians, that I am confident they would be highly pleased with them, and I
doubt not, have a very good Effect. In case of enlisting for this Service, Care
ought to be taken to avoid all Roman Catholics; we have, I doubt, too many of
that Kidney already from Ireland in these four Companies.

ONE Objection to this Scheme may be, the Expense and Trouble attending the
Victualling and Relieving: To which I beg Leave to say, that if the Indians
approve of it, they will undertake to carry and escort Goods or Provisions, at
an easy Rate: Or why may not those very Garrisons in a little Time, with proper
Care, be induced to raise their own Provisions? Suppose the Victualling of
twenty Men to cost the Government Two Hundred Pounds yearly, let those Men be
encouraged, and set to Work to provide themselves, and let them have the Two
Hundred Pounds besides their Pay, and a Title to all the Lands they do or can
improve, and their Discharge when demanded; this would save the Trouble, the
Risque, the Relieving and the Expense of carrying Provisions, and be the Means
of better settling our Frontiers; there are those to be found, I doubt not, who
would undertake, if properly encouraged. That of relieving Garrisons here, is
in my humble Opinion but bad Policy; I would have none sent but some Tradesmen,
all the rest should be only such as have been used to Husbandry and Labor: Had
this Method been taken fifty Years ago, we should very probably have had many
Thousand Families in the Seneca's Country at this Day.

THE Use of Garrisons here, are either to encourage and protect Settlements, or
to secure important Passes; the French have succeeded in the latter, we, I
shall not say for what Reason, in neither.

THIS however is not all, if we intend to convince them that we are really in
earnest, and that they should fight for us, we must fight along with them, and
always to have some of our People to head their Parties; the French seldom fail
of this Method: I should therefore advise the Establishing an independent
Company or two, in time of War, of an Hundred good Men each, with an Addition
of five Indians from each Nation, to be in constant Pay, Peace or War, as
Rangers; one of the Companies from Connecticut would add Strength to the County
of Albany; the Officers to be Men of some Distinction and Knowledge, and fully
empowered to receive Complaints, and redress Grievances amongst the Indians; to
be a Sort of a flying Camp, frequently moving from Nation to Nation, to head
all Parties, and to command out as many Indians upon any Emergency as they may
think proper; one Company of Rangers properly disposed, will be of more Use
than three in Garrison. And here I shall beg Leave once for all to observe,
that no Person employed in this Service be allowed to trade with the Indians,
on the severest Penalties.

THUS our Indians being secured in an honest and fair Trade, their Castles
secured, either for the Safety of their Families, or as a Retreat for
themselves; and being well assured of our being in Earnest to support them upon
all Occasions, as we have in former Days done, it is not to be doubted but that
we shall very soon get into their good Graces and Friendship.

THE King, the Parliament, and indeed every British Subject, being deeply
concerned in the Event of this Congress at Albany, will doubtless scan the
Conduct of our Colony Assemblies upon this Occasion; a hearty and generous
Concurrence will have wonderful Effects, and I make no Doubt but that we shall
be able in a little Time, by proper Measures, to turn the Tables upon that
faithless Nation, who have been long underhand endeavoring our Destruction,
and who seem now, by their audacious Insults upon our Traders and Plantations,
openly to avow it.

LET us not therefore, Gentlemen of the Assemblies, by an ill-timed Frugality
lose our All; would any of you, pray Gentlemen, lose a Sheep for a Halfpenny's
worth of Tar? Surely not. Let us act like Britons, and with Unanimity; and here
give me Leave to put you in Mind of the Fable

Of the LION and the four BULLS.
FOUR Bulls which had entered into a very strict Friendship, kept always near
one another, and always fed together. The Lion often saw them, and had as often
a Mind to make one of them his Prey: But though he could easily have subdued any
of them single, yet he was afraid to attack the whole Alliance, as knowing they
would be too hard for him, and therefore contented himself for the present with
keeping at a Distance: At last perceiving no Attempt was to be made upon them
as long as this Combination held, he took Occasion by Whispers and Hints to
form Jealousies, and raise Divisions amongst them: This Stratagem succeeded so
well, that the Bulls grew cold and reserved to one another, which soon after
ripened into a downright Hatred and Aversion, and at last ended in a total
Separation. The Lion had now obtained his Ends; and, as impossible it was for
him to hurt them while united, he found no Difficulty, now they were parted, to
seize and devour every Bull of them, one after another.

SIR W. Temple observes, that in the Kingdom of Great Britain, when the Romans
first entered, it was divided into several Districts, each governed by its own
Prince, or Governor, different in their Views and Councils, by which Means they
became an easy Conquest: Dum singuli pugnabunt, universi vincebantur; while
they fought singly, the whole Island was subdued. The French have little to
fight for but the Glory of their Monarch; we have the Glory of Britain, our
Religion, our Liberties and our Properties, and upwards of a Hundred Years
Labor in these wild Deserts, for the Sake of our Posterity; in short, it is
pro aris and focis, that we are to struggle; and I doubt it is now or never.
Should this Congress break up without answering the intended Design of it, I
shall very readily advise my Children to look out in time for a safer Retreat.

LET us seriously consider what Desolation and Destruction our innocent
Neighbors and Fellow Subjects have undergone from those barbarous Canadeans,
who are esteemed, even in France, a Race of Men lost to all those Principles of
Honor upon which that Nation pique themselves; who, together with their
Cannibals, take Pleasure in wantonly burning Cottages, and in the inhuman
Murder, and excruciating harmless old Women and helpless Infants; let us, I
say, seriously consider what we have undergone, when the French were but a
Handful, and our Indians our Friends: What must be our Fate when they are
become more numerous, and they are daily increasing, and our Indians on their
Side? I shudder to think of it.

LET us consider what Anxiety those poor People undergo, with what Uncasiness
they go to their Beds, what Alarms and Heart beatings they are under upon the
least Barking of a Dog, expecting every Moment to have their Scalps carried
off, and their Bodies mangled; while we enjoy a profound Rest, without Care or
Thought: Is this Truth, and will it not move you, Gentlemen?

LET us exert our best Endeavors to show our Gratitude to our Mother Country,
who has hitherto nursed and supported us at an infinite Expense, by preserving
to them, and to them only, the Fruits of our Labor.

THE Time was when we had only to send to our Indians to discharge the French
from building Forts, or making Encroachments; but we have lost it by a fatal
Neglect of Indian Affairs. It is well known with how much Submission they
begged Leave to erect but a small Hut, as a Resting Place only, at Niagara: How
different the Times! The Execution of this Scheme, or, indeed, any other, and
some one or other there must be, will, no doubt, be attended with a very
considerable Expense; but when the other Colonies, who are not less concerned
in the Event, come in for their Proportion, together with what Assistance his
Majesty may be so good as to favor us with, it is to be hoped the Charge will
become tolerably easy: Be that as it will we must launch out. And is there ever
a British Subject amongst us, who alone know the true Value of Liberty and
Property, that will, upon this Occasion, grudge a few Pence upon every Hundred
Acres, or a few Shillings for every Slave, to secure to him and his Posterity,
all that is valuable in Life, or for which Life is valuable. Or why may not the
Gentry pay for their Sash-windows upon such pressing Occasions, and --
Shillings upon every Carriage-wheel of Pleasure? This is all ready Money. And
as the Gentlemen paid lately for their Wigs, why may not the Ladies, in their
Turn, pay for their Hoops? After all, a gentle Land Tax, being the most
equitable upon those Occasions, must be our dernier Refort. Trade is at present
an Object of Compassion, and must be gently treated, as well as the poorer Sort
of the People without Property: They must fight our Battles; which puts me in
mind of the Fable,

The SENSIBLE ASS.

AN old Fellow was feeding an Ass in a fine green Meadow; and being alarmed
with the sudden Approach of the Enemy, was impatient with the Ass to put
himself forward, and fly with all the Speed he was able. The Ass asked him,
Whether or no he thought the Enemy would clap two Pair of Panniers upon his
Back? The Man said, No, there was no fear of that. Why then, says the Ass; I Will
not stir an Inch; for what is it to me who my Master is, since I shall but
carry my Panniers as usual.

THAT parsimonious Disposition, in our Colony Assemblies, have had, and we now
feel it, and ever will have fatal Effects.

OUR Fellow Subjects in Virginia have shown us a noble Example, which has
already put some Life into our Indians: Witness the Half King's Speech to the
French Officer. And as the like Encroachments, as I understand, have been
lately made upon the People of New England, it is not to be doubted, but that
they will exert themselves with the same Spirit and Bravery they did at
Cape-Breton. And shall we, like a Parcel of Poltroons, stand aghast, with our
Hands on our Pockets; we, I say, who have cost the People of England, in
nursing and protecting us, more, perhaps, than all the other Colonies upon the
Continent together; or grudge our Proportion of the Expense, adequate to the
Importance it may be of to us? Let it not be told in Gath, or published in the
Streets of Askelon.

IT has been observed, that Priests have been generally well received amongst
the Indians, whether upon Account of their religious Principles, or that the
Indians being eternally surrounded by a Parcel of Handlers or Pickpockets, and
finding the Parson to avoid the Circle and the whole Sphere of Transactions of
this Kind, that they conclude him an honest Man, I shall not take upon me to
determine: I believe, however, the latter is the Case, as they very often take
his Advice in Matters of Moment, while at the same time they have a very
despicable Opinion of the others. It is by Means of the Priests, in a great
Measure, that the French have succeeded so well in seducing our Indians, and
confirming their own. I should therefore advise, that there should be a Parson
appointed for each Castle, no matter of what Church, with a handsome Allowance:
And why might he not act as a Commissary as well as a Missionary, and deal out
the Goods of the Government as well as those of the Gospel? The Offices are not
at all incompatible; Bishops have frequently been Lord Treasurers. I can by no
Means agree in Sentiment with those Gentlemen who are for continuing that, in
my humble Opinion, pernicious Trade, carried on for so many Years, between
Canada and Albany, if there were no other Reason than that they seem really to
want it, and that more than is generally imagined. I would fain know, whether
they, upon any Consideration, would allow us the same Liberties at Montreal or
Quebeck? To see some Hundreds of French Indians, as Factors from Quebeck,
trading for Indian Goods, who carry off not only Goods, but a large Share of
our Specie; nothing of late will go down with them but Spanish Dollars; while a
poor Trader of ours, if he has the Misfortune to meet with any of the French,
within what they are now pleased to call their Dominions, is immediately
hurried away Prisoner to Quebeck; This is a Contrast that I should be glad the
Advocates for this Trade would account for.

IT is true, they take off of our Manufactures; but it is as true, that those
Commodities would be taken off our Hands directly by the Indians themselves,
when they found they could not have them among the French. It is likewise said,
if they had them not from us, they would find them elsewhere. To which I beg
Leave to say, That the French know their Interest too well to trust an Affair
of that Consequence so long to so precarious a Method of procuring them, as it
is in our Power every Day to put a Stop to it: I therefore conclude, if they
could have fallen upon any other Method of procuring those Commodities, they
would have done it long ago, and have kept their Furs to themselves.

OUR selling our Indian Goods to the French, to trade for us with the Indians,
and having in Return their coarsest Furs, is, in my humble Opinion, not less
ridiculous than that of our formerly sending our Wheat to Boston, and having
our Returns in Bran and some Flour. Besides, what is of the utmost Consequence
to us, is, that the Cachawagas, our old Friends, and their best Indians, whom,
coute qui'l coute, cost what it will, we ought to recover, are the sole
Carriers and Managers in this Affair between Canada and Albany, which has
created such a Connection between them and the French, that till this Trade is
abolished, it will be impossible to accomplish.

NOR can I conceive the Remedy very difficult, as it may very naturally be
brought within the very Letter of the Twelfth of CHARLES II. which declares,
That no Person, not born within the Allegiance of our Sovereign Lord the King,
etc. shall trade in any of the Plantations, upon Pain of forfeiting all his
Goods and Chattels, etc. A Law, however, here, perhaps, might answer better. I
have but one Thing more to add, and that with great Submission, being a Point
that has not been as yet canvassed, and that is, That a general Combination of
all the Indians, sar and near, be formed, to demolish every Spot of fortified
Ground in the Indian Countries on this Side Montreal, and the other Side of
Schenectady, at least that they be brought to one determinate Number, never to
be exceeded: By this Means the Trade will ever be kept open; nor need we
apprehend further Encroachments. The French, I doubt, are too well fixed to
come into any such Proposal; but it will have one good Effect at least, and
that is, that it will convince the Indians, that we have no other Views but
their Interest; while the French are endeavoring their Destruction, by cutting
them off from all Communication with us, to be Masters of their
Hunting-grounds, and of Course they must either become their Slaves, or starve.

How soon this may happen, God, and that great Monarch, can only tell: I am
not, however, without Apprehensions, you may, if you please, call them Dreams,
that the French are upon a Plan different, and a Crisis much nearer, I doubt,
than what we imagine. I can by no Means think that they, who are noted for
their Frugality, would at this Time put themselves to the Charge of raising an
Army of 4 or 5000 Men, for the Sake of a paltry Block-house or two upon a
Branch of Ohio, or any where else, which they might have done as (...) Men, and
without any Noise, according to their usual Method, in Matters of this Kind. I
am further confirmed in my Opinion, that those Block-houses are not the sole
Point which the French have in View, from the Sentiments of our Assembly in a
late Representation to our Lieutenant Governor, in these Words, That the French
have built a Fort at a Place called the French Creek, at a considerable
Distance from the River Ohio; which may, but does not, by any Evidence or Infor
mation, appear to us to be an Invasion of any of his Majesty's Colonies: This
is roundly asserted, but as it in some Measure confirms my Opinion, I shall
leave it to whom it more immediately concerns to discuss, hoping at the same
time that our Enemies may not make an improper Use of it.

THOSE Block-houses therefore, I say, are not, in my humble Opinion, their sole
Designs at present, they are rather imitating, as I conceive, those sagacious
little Animals, who, in order to divert your Attention from the proper Object,
their little Habitations, gently lead you to a proper Distance, till they think
themselves secure; and may not this be all Grimace, and a Feint, to draw our
Attention and Troops from their proper Object, our Frontiers? to wit, What
could be meant by a Number of Troops passing Oswego in one Day, and returning
in the Night, and the next Day passing again by the Fort? This is a very
uncommon Piece of Conduct, and can mean nothing less than to draw our Attention
and Troops after them into a Wild-goose Chase, with the View to make a
Diversion somewhere else.

WHAT can they mean by declaring that they do not want the Assistance of the
Indians, but to lull them into a Neutrality till they strike the Blow? If one
may be allowed to form any Judgment at this Distance, of the Situation of our
Public Affairs at Home, a Rupture does not seem to be at so immense a
Distance, but that a Monsieur Danville, or even that little Squadron, destined
to chastise the Algerines, may bring us the first Account of it. And how soon
are those Thousands upon the back of us, now under Arms, collected at Albany,
with their Indians? Judge now, candid Reader, what a Situation we are in for
such an Event: And whom have we to thank for it? Without an Indian, without a
Fort, that can with any Propriety be called so; without Ammunition, without
Arms, without Money, and I doubt (from the indifferent Treatment those
Creditors of the Government have hitherto met with) without Credit. And should
we want the Assistance of our Neighbors, we have but just shown a very bad
Example. Such is our Situation: And if such an Event should happen, I see
nothing left, but to pray to the Lord to have Mercy upon us.

WHAT a Fatality seems to attend the Proceedings of a Neighbor Colony, who at
this very critical Point of Time treat the Decrees of Heaven, and the King,
with great Contempt! They have the same Directions as the other Colonies have,
to furnish their Quota's, and attend the Congress at Albany, for the
Preservation of the Whole; but because Providence has been pleased to lay its
Hand upon that good Gentleman the Governor, so as to disable him from attending
the Assembly at Amboy, they are pleased to tell him, When he is well enough to
attend them there, they will then consider what is to be done; in the mean time
their Quota's and the Congress is evaded: What, for God's Sake, must be the
Consequence of such Proceedings, when our All is at Stake? Will that trite Tale
of, We your Majesty's most loyal Subjects, etc. protect them from his Majesty's
Displeasure? Or do they trust to the Rioters to protect them, either from that
or the Enemy? Must a whole People suffer for the Caprice of a few
Assembly-men?. Caprice I call it, and have too much Reason to call it so, and
shall ever think it such, till they are pleased to let us (in the most public
Manner) into the Reasons of their Conduct; this we have a Right to demand; but
more properly they ought to give it us without demanding, as they are
accountable to the People for every Step they take, and, in Matters of Moment,
ought not to proceed without first consulting their Constituents. Here, Mr.
Reflector, is an ample Field to expatiate in, and I would fain hope, from your
pathetick Manner of Reasoning, the Eyes of the Obstinate, and Ignorant, may be
opened, for their own Safety, as well as that of the Whole. I am still in the
Jerseys: We have had a long Experience of his Majesty's Lenity, how far it may
extend I know not; but this I will affirm, that we have more to apprehend from
a Parliamentary Scrutiny, than has as yet entered into the Heart of any of us
to conceive; can any Body imagine that this Trifling with his Majesty's
Instructions, in an Affair of so much Consequence to the Trade and Interest of
Great Britain, and to every British Subject, will, according to the usual Cant,
save the Country's Money? Will not the Commissioners from the several Colonies,
and it is to be hoped a Majority will attend, in the first Place consider the
Danger we are in at this Point of Time? 2dly, How to prevent it now, and for
the future? 3dly, Will they not make a Computation of the Expense? 4thly, Wild
not those very Commissioners proportion that Expense; giving to each Colony its
Quota? Does the Jerseys think to escape? This, of Course, will be laid before
his Majesty, which, from the Fate his Instructions have hitherto met with from
that Assembly, as well as from some others, he will naturally order it to be
laid before the Parliament, with whom there is no contending; and who knows,
when their Hands are in, but they may take it into their Heads to lay the
Foundation of a regular Government amongst us, and taking it out of the Hands
of the Assemblies, by fixing a Support for the Governor, and the other Officers
of the Crown, independent of an Assembly? Nor can I see any great Difficulty in
the Execution of it; it is only reviving our own Revenue Acts, to continue as
long as his Majesty, and his Parliament, thinks proper; there is nothing new in
this, it is what we have been used to; those Funds have been thought proper,
both by the King, and Subject, and the only Difference is, as to the Point of
Time. That a Governor for himself, and the Support of the Dignity of the
Government, or the other Officers in the executive Part of the Laws, and
Government, should depend upon the Breath of a few capricious Country Gentlemen
in an Assembly for their daily or yearly Subsistence and Support, or whether
indeed they shall have any at all, is a Solecism in Politics.

AND here I shall beg Leave to conclude with another Fable.

ABOAR stood whetting his Tusks against an old Tree; the Fox, who happened to
come by at the same Time, asked him why he made those Preparations of whetting
his Teeth, since there was no Enemy near that he could perceive? That may be,
Master Reynard, says the Boar; but we should scour up our Arms while we have
Leisure, you know; for in Time of Danger we shall have something else to do.

A WISE General has not his Men to discipline, or his Ammunition to provide,
when the Trumpet sounds TO ARMS; but sets apart his Times of Exercise for one,
and his Magazines for the other, in the calm Season of Peace.

In Pace, ut Sapiens, aptabit idonea Bello.

The END.

