Daily Conversation with GOD, Exemplified in the HOLY LIFE OF Armelle Nicolas,
A Poor ignorant COUNTRY MAID in France; Commonly known by the Name of the GOOD
ARMELLE, Deceased at Bretaigne in the Year 1671.

Done out of French.

Genesis xvii. 1. I am the Almighty GOD; walk before me, and be thou perfect. Psa.
xxv. 15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord. Acts xvii. 27, 28. He is not far
from every one of us. For in him we live, and move, and have our being. GOD
has sent me into the world for no other end then to love him; and by his great
mercy I have loved him to that degree, that I can love him no longer after the
way of mortals. It Is time then for me to go to him, that I may love him after
the manner of the blessed.
Life of Armelle Nicolas, Book II. Chapter xvii.. 16. GERMANTOWN: Printed by
CHRISTOPHER SOWER Junior. 1754.

TO THE READER.
THE person, whose daily conversation is here described, was not long since a
poor simple country maid, and servant to a great family in France. The whole
course of her life was very instructive, and a most shining pattern of a true
spiritual conversation. The particulars here related are taken out of the 18th
chapter of the second part of her Life, giving great encouragement to a daily
and uninterrupted conversation with GOD, and to walk before him as the
omnipresent LORD and Father.

If we knew nothing else of Christianity, or any other exercise, but this, to
spend one day after another in this manner, it would be sufficient. It Is very
remarkable, that this person, who served GOD wi^h unwearied prayer and
watchfulness, was so ignorant, that she could neither read nor write, and
withal a servant, constantly employed in business and hard labor. By this we
see that the true service of GOD is spiritual, universal, plain and easy, so
that no person can be excused from it by any pretense whatsoever.

Some, who discovered her spiritual disposition, would needs have her go into a
nunnery, where she might be more at leisure to serve GOD; which she did
accordingly. But perceiving her former zeal and love to GOD begin to abate, she
went to service again; whereupon she enjoyed the same favor of GOD, as she had
done before.

By this circumstance the LORD taught her and her friends effectually, that
piety and religion was not confined to nunneries; and that the outward
cloistering up of the body, without withdrawing the heart from the world, would
never mortify, though perhaps it might color and hide the inward corruptions of
the soul. And whereas in that party she belonged to, religion is reduced to the
too narrow compass of cloisters and nunneries, this may really convince them,
that the life of grace is of a far larger extent, than to be shut up within the
narrow pales of certain places; and that neither time nor place can restrain
within itself the free and boundless operations of the spirit of GOD, which are
above time and place. An heart humbly resigned to the will of GOD, and walking
in his fear, is the temple, wherein the LORD manifests his secrets.

It Is not so much the changing of places, or names, or modes and forms, or of
any thing without us, as the changing of our will and heart, that will render
our service at all acceptable to GOD. Hence the scripture declaring, what sort
of change is to be wrought in a soul, requires a translation from darkness to
light; ( Acts xxvi. 18.) from death to life, ( Ephesians. ii. 5.) and from being lost
to be found again, ( Luke xv. 32.)

And hence it was, that the person these papers treat of, lost in a manner the
sweet enjoyments of a spiritual life, whilst she sought more of them in
cloisters and nunneries; but recovered them by going back into her former state
of life; which, though it was mean and toilsome in the eye of reason, (too apt
to judge of things by a set form, and a devotion modelled by the art and
contrivance of men) yet was it that wherein she enjoyed richer incomes of GOD'S
favor, than perhaps others in the most retired solitude. And this false rule
of confining religion to certain places, is too commonly observed in that
church this person happened to be a member of.

What is here related of this good Armelle, is a passage of her daily
intercourse with GOD by faith and love. How she spent her time from morning to
night, in her dressing and outward devotion, in the midst of her business, in
eating and drinking, in daily sufferings and temptations, in the evening, and
when she went to bed. In short: it shows the manner of her child-like, hearty
and confident conversing with GOD as her only love, her father, and intimate
friend; and this at all times, in all places, and upon all occasions, without
using any other art or mystery, but that of faith and love.

The design of this short essay, is to excite some able pen or other, to
undertake the translation of the whole account of this spiritual maid into
English; it appearing already in several languages, for promoting the more
substantial points of inward and unsophisticated piety and religion. This is
taken f^^m the French edition, printed with a large preface at Cologn in the
Year 1704, under this title: The school of the pure love of GOD, opened both to
the learned and unlearned, in the mavelous Life of Armelle Nicolas, etc.

The LORD give his grace to all that heartily desire it, always to walk before
him after such a pious manner as this pious soul did, whereof she herself gave
the following account to the author, of her life.

A Christian's daily Conversation with GOD.
AS soon as I wake in the Morning, says she, I throw my self into the arms of
my heavenly love, as a child into the arms of his father. I rise with a design
to serve and please him. And if I have time to pray, I fall upon my knees in
his holy presence, and speak to him, as if I really saw him with my bodily
eyes. I give my self up wholly to him, and desire him, to fulfill all his holy
will in me, and that he would not suffer me that day to do the least thing
which might be offensive to him. Then I recommend to him all the prayers which
shall be made that day. In short: I love, and praise him as much and as long as
my affairs permit; though very often I have hardly so much time as to say the
Lord's Prayer. But I do not trouble my self about that; for I have God always
in my heart, as well when I am about my business, which I do in obedience to
his will, as when I retire on purpose to pray to him. This he himself has
taught me, that whatever I do out of love to him, is a real prayer.

I dress myself in his presence, and he shows me that his love supplies me with
raiment. And when I go a bout my business, even then does he not forsake me,
nor I him; but he converses with me, and I with him; yea, I am then as much
united to him, as when I am at my prayers, set apart on purpose for my
spiritual recollection. O! how sweet and easy is all labor and toil in such
good company! Sometimes I perceive such strength and support in my mind, that
nothing is too hard for me, and I think myself alone able to manage the affairs
of the whole family. Nothing but the body is at work, the heart and myself burn
with love in the sweet familiarity I entertain with God.

I eat and drink in his presence, as I do every thing else, and it is as if I
dipped every bit into the precious blood of my Savior, and as if he himself
gave me food, on purpose to inflame my love, and to engage it the more to
himself. I leave you to judge, what effect this must have upon my soul. Indeed
it is impossible for any body to express it but God himself. As for me, my
whole life would never be sufficient to give an account of it.

When I am about my business in the day time, running up and down, till the
body begins to be weary, or to repine, or to desire unseasonable rest, being
oppressed with anger and uneasiness; my divine love enlightens me forthwith,
and shows me, how I ought to suppress those rebellious motions of corrupt
nature, and not to nourish them at all, either by word or deed. This love keeps
the door of my lips, and watches over my heart, that it may not in the least
contribute to such irregular passions, which thus are crushed and subdued as
soon as they rise.

But if at any time, for want of care, I am surprised with these or the like
faults, I cannot be at rest, till I have obtained pardon, and God be reconciled
to me. I lie prostrate before his footstool, confessing all my faults to him,
as if he did not know them already; and there I continue, till he has forgiven
me, renewed his friendship with me, and confirmed it more than before. For so
it always happens through his infinite mercy, whenever I have committed a
fault, which serves but to inflame my heart more and more with his divine love.
If people persecute me, and by foul and uncharitable censures raise scandals
upon me, or any other way aff^ict me; or if evil spririts attack me with their
crafty cunning temptations, I then presently run to my heavenly LOVE, who
readily stretches forth his sacred arms to receive me, showing me his heart and
wounds open for my security; in which I hide my self as in a strong castle and
fortress. And then I am so mightily strengthened, that if the whole army of hell
itself, together with all the creatures, should rise up against me, I fear them
no more than a fly, because I am under the protection of the most high God, his
love being the hiding place and safeguard of my soul.

If God at any time hides his face, making as if he would go away from me, I
tell him: O! it is no matter, my love, conceal thyself as much as thou please,
nevertheless I Will serve thee; for I know that thou art my God. And then I stand
upon my guard more than ever, to be faithful to him, for fear of displeasing my
love. And at the same time perceiving the greatness of my misery and poverty, I
insist the more upon the merits of our Savior, and resolve to rest contented,
though it should please him to leave me all the days of my life in such a
condition. But he never lets me continue long under these circumstances, and if
I may venture so to speak, he cannot forbear loving me, any more than I can
live without him.

At his return he recompenses the little moment of his absence with so many
caresses and endearments, that oftentimes I am not able to bear them, but am
forced to cry out: I can receive no more! wherefore I desire him to moderate my
sensation, or else to let me die under the powerful sense of his gracious
presence.

Many times, to bear this the better, I leave all, retiring into a corner to
ease myself, by giving vent to the tears and praises due to his Majesty,
wherewith my heart is overcharged. And this I may do very well, since it is not
the mere sense of his kindness I long for, but rather HIMSELF ALONE, that I
desire to enjoy. Although in the mean time one ought thankfully to receive these
extraordinary tokens of God's mercy and love, if it be his holy will so to deal
with us.

If I am persuaded on holidays, to be merry in company, I excuse myself. For
nothing can be compared to the pleasures of my love, which are so much the
sweeter and greater, for my withdrawing from all company whatsoever. If they
wonder, how I can stay always at home alone, I think within myself: O! if you
knew the glorious company I have, you would not say that I was alone: for I am
never less alone, than when I have no body with me.

After this manner I spend not only working days, but holy days too, being
often as much employed in the latter as in the former. But that is no hindrance
to me, to whom labor and rest, hard work and easy, all things are indifferent,
since I do not look upon what I have to do, but upon him, for whose sake I do
it. I am so taken up with his love, that I have no time to mind my self, nor
any thing else but him alone.

But if I do any thing amiss, or out of season, the same moment I feel a
violent pain and sorrow for what I have done, springing from my love, which
also makes me presently hope for pardon; so that thinking of it no more, I go
strait forward on my way, turning aside neither to the right hand, nor to the
left. Neither do I remember what is past, or to come, but only, that I may love
God to the utmost of my power.

The night coming on, and every one going to rest, I find rest only in the arms
of divine love: I sleep leaning on his holy breast, like a child in his
mother's bosom. I say, I go to sleep, but being still busied about the love and
praises of my God, till I fall quite asleep. Many times this love rouzes up all
my senses, so that I cannot sleep the greatest part of the night, but I spend
it in the embraces of the lovely grace of God, which never forsakes such a poor
miserable creature as I am, but preserves me, and takes special care of me.

If in the night the evil spirits hover about, to torment or to surprise me
(which often happens) this divine love guards me, and fights for me. Yea, it
gives me grace, too, to resist them courageously, as if I were awake. For they
seldom continue long to assault me, unless it be in my sleep.

And this is the life I have led for these twenty years past, without
perceiving the least change of that love which was poured out into my heart,
after my sincere conversion unto him. Nay, I have observed its daily increase,
though every day it seemed impossible to endure any addition to what I already
enjoyed. But truly, it is an infinite love, which satisfies and nourishes me,
so that every day I have a new hunger, though methinks I can receive no more,
than what I possess already every moment.

THE author of her life says, concerning the manner of her expressions, that
they were always very modest, without any noise or vehemence: her common
discourses were always holy and edifying; whereas others too commonly misspend
their time in useless conversation and unprofitable talk. If she was in
company, where they talked of indifferent or evil things, she had the faculty
of giving them such a handsome turn, as to bring them quite off from that to
some good and useful subject.

For a long while she could bear no other discourse but of God, and his holy
love. I cannot imagine, said she, how a soul created for heaven can be
concerned about the dross of this world. From that time, if she happened to be
in company, where the subject of the discourse was but indifferent, either she
did not mind it at all, entertaining herself in the mean while with God; or, as
soon as she thought it proper, she diverted and changed the discourse; thinking
it but lost time, which was spent in the trifles of this world.

To every body, that had a mind to be acquainted with God Almighty, she gave
this advice: To be silent, and to learn to keep their thoughts together in the
center of the heart: for this, said she, is the beginning of our union with
God, and by these means the soul forgets earthly things, and raises herself up
to the contemplation of heavenly objects. We ought to lose our familiarity with
the creatures, if we desire to anjoy the conversation of the Creator; a moment
of which does afford more delight and satisfaction, than all the finest
discourses in the world.

SHE declared once, that she did by no means encourage any desire of knowing
what did not concern herself. When a certain person asked her, whether she did
not know such a story, that the town rang of at that time? she answered, no;
and gave God thanks, that she never knew any thing of the news of this world,
neither did she desire to know it. But she knew a great deal of news concerning
the love and mercies of Almighty God. For this she said was the only thing she
desired to know, and wherewith her heart was entirely taken up.

The real (...) she had of the inward and spiritual life of grace, and of the
manifold operations it is attended with, does abundantly apear from the larger
account of her life and conversion. To give the reader a taste there of may
suffice for the present:

One time when her mistress was afraid that Armelle was like to run quite mad
by an excess of devotion, she forbad her all spiritual exercises, and would not
let her go even to church, except on the Lord's day only: Armelle being
sensible of the false step her ^^^tress took, smiled with herself, saying,
Truly, I am not mad, after I have found my beloved, whom I now love with all my
heart. I remember a time when I was seeking only God without me, and than I was
mad indeed. This mistress of hers being of a sour and morose humor, showed a
deal of ill nature to Armelle, of which, however she never complained, but
rather thanked God, that he was pleased to make this a means of her fuller
purification. When her friends seeing what she suffered in that house, advised
her one time, entirely to quit that place, she replied according to her usual
earnestness: Why would you have me flee from the cross which the Lord himself
has entailed upon me? No, by no means: I shall never do it, except you
absolutely command it. If I should undergo a thousand times as much, I shall
never forsake the place for all that, but rather stay till they turn me away by
force. In which unexpected answer they acquiesced, never prompting her again to
quit a place, where she had daily opportunity to practice Patience and
Self-denial; virtues so much contrary to the whole bent of corrupt nature, and
yet so necessary for rightly framing a Christian life and conversation. At
another time she said: If the soul be but well grounded in the favor of God,
and lively affected with the operations of his grace, all the insults of the
devil, and of the creature, are born with joy and comfort. But that is misery
indeed, when the Lord himself withdraws from the soul, and lets her shift for
herself. Then she thinks, that every step is a step into sin and corruption,
being utterly unable to protect herself against it.

In what company soever she was, she talked of nothing more than of being
faithful to God. Nothing dropped more from her mouth, than Let us be faithful,
let us be faithful to the Lord. This word she thought fit for any time, and
suitable to every company. Now and then she would repeat it an hundred times
over; and being asked by her friends, whether she had nothing else to say: She
answered: Don't wonder at my saying this over and over again. If I should live
a thousand years, I should still tell ye the same thing. For it is faithfulness,
wherein the perfection of a Christian life consists.

Of the constraining power of the divine love she has the following expression:
Whenever I happened to adhere a little too much to my natural inclinations (apt
to steal in upon the mind under the specious pretense of necessity) I was
immediately reproved by the love of God. This divine love is like a careful
tutor, who takes all the pains imaginable, for advancing his pupil in the way
of learning he is engaged in; and for this reason keeps his eye constantly
fixed on him, both to correct his failings, though never so small, and to
prevent his being led away by any thing that might divert him from his chief
employment. Thus, says she, dealt the Lord with me. He kept me closely confined
to an holy awe and wariness; and when I happened by one oversight or other to
withdraw, as it were, from his eye, he in that very moment pursued after me,
and recalled me to my duty. But all this was done with so much love and
tenderness, that it must be a heart of brass, if not mollified by such
endearing marks of love and kindness.

Of the disorderly love to friends and relations, which now and then even
well-disposed souls are too much guilty of, she gives the following account:
One time, says she, my parents came to see me; when I entertained them, I found
my self transported with some vain joy and pleasure, and somewhat coldish in
minding the impressions of the love of God; nay, it seemed as if the Lord
himself did in a manner withdraw from me, to let me have as it were, the more
liberty for the present. But no sooner my parents were gone, and I come to
myself, the burden and affliction I then felt upon my spirit, was heavy enough,
since I did not find him whom I loved more than my own soul. However, as soon
as I came home, I felt again a noble return of the divine love, and it was, as
if the Lord had waited for me on purpose, to communicate himself unto me. After
this she freely confessed, that from that very time she found herself entirely
freed from all manner of irregular adherency to her parents, whom she was too
fond of heretofore, being now only taken up with the grand concern of promoting
the more spiritual part of her friends and fellow creatures: Thus, says she,
the love of God made every thing, nay even my very faults and imperfections,
redound to my greater spiritual good and welfare.

'Twas mentioned before, how earnest she was in exhorting every one to be
faithful unto the Lord with what he had received. This faithfulness recommended
by her unto others, she was a most shining pattern of herself in her whole Life
and conversation. But it most visibly appeared in that unwearied readiness and
quickness she dispatched any thing tending to promote the glory of God in her
station. No sooner was she convinced of the will of God, but was very earnest
and diligent, to answer it presently. She often wondered at some peoples
dilatory doings in the service of God, and said, it was a cunning fetch and
stratagem of the devil, to make people put off from one day to another such
designs as might serve to advance the glory of God, and the good of our fellow
creatures. For, said she, it often happens, that that grace which at one hour
offers itself to a man, in order to support him under some difficult
enterprises, is not so easily met with at another time. And besides this, how
uncertain is our life! nay, if we were sure to live longer, yet ought we not to
linger upon that account at all, nor to defer from one day to another what
might be done this day. A man that is full of delays in the service of God,
must needs have but little love at the bottom. Wherever love is raised to any
considerable degree, there the soul cannot rest, whilst there remains any thing
to be done required by the Beloved. And this dilatory temper, said she, was a
great impediment in the way to perfection. Many souls were convinced of the
will of God, but being too backward constantly to struggle against the corrupt
propensions of their dull and lazy t^mper, they made but a slow progress in the
work of religion. They say, tomorrow, tomorrow it shall be done in good
earnest; but that tomorrow never comes. The consequence whereof is, that the
longer they flatter themselves in their disorderly and wonted customs, the less
able they are to resist them at last at all: the Lord leaves them now to their
own will, since they did not improve faithfully what once they had received.

THE virtue of humility was as remarkable in this holy maid as any of the rest;
and it was grounded on a true and solid foundation too. She confesses herself,
that the infinite love of God kept her undefiled as to the vanity of pride;
insomuch that she did not know what pride and haughtiness was. I was
astonished, says she, when I was told to watch against pride; for I thought
whilst I was well in my wits, I could not possibly be proud. I was so fully
convinced that any thing really good was from God, that if all angels and men
had offered to persuade me to the contrary, I should never have believed them.
And this sense fortified me against all manner of pride and presumption, my own
conscience never charging me with the least guilt of that vice, and I could not
imagine how it was possible, that men should attempt so heinous a thing as
this. And this was the reason, that she never would quit that manner of life
she was bred to, though mean and contemptible in the eye of the world.

Even her spiritual friends would now and then most importunately entreat her,
to resign up to any body else her place (which was that of a servant) and this
under a fair pretense too, viz. That she might have the more leisure to give
herself up to a contemplative life, and thus to enjoy the favors and gracious
infusions of the Lord more abundantly. And indeed there wanted no opportunity
of attaining such a quiet retirement, as some had cut out for her. But she
could never be prevailed with to comply. She had too high and esteem for her
low condition. She said, she should never do such a thing, except she was
visibly convinced of the will of God. For though her station was but mean, yet
was she more pleased with it, than with all the prayers and contemplations she
perhaps might enjoy in the most concealed solitude of the world. She said, her
outward employment and all the drugery she was put to, did not at all cool or
weaken the sense of the love, and of the gracious presence of the Lord, she
usually enjoyed. Nay, the more fervent she was to spend herself entirely in
works of charity, cheerfully complying with every thing incident to her life,
the more plentiful incomes she had of the love and favor of God. Hence, it
would be but the effect of a false heart, if one should make bold to quit his
outward employment, in order to gain more rest and quiet in another place, God,
says she, knows ways to find souls wherever they be, if they do not wilfully
shut their hearts against him.

Because her love to God was great and fervent, the love she bore to her fellow
creatures, was also wonderfully influenced and inflamed thereby. When she
considered the woeful state of the wicked, and the dreadful judgment that is
like to befall them at last, she then felt a most tender and commiserating love,
and her very bowels began to yearn for compassion. When she looked upon the
happy state she was arrived to, and the severe doom attending such profligate
wretches, she used to say, She seemed unto herself like one that had been in a
great storm at sea, and by stress of weather like to be cast away every minute;
but getting off at last safe and sound, remembered now ashore the dangers his
brethren and near relations were still exposed to, being tossed up and down in
the huge ocean, and left to the mercy of the roaring billows. Alas! said she,
thus it is with me, when I lay to heart the danger sinners run themselves into.
For the more endearing marks of divine grace the Lord has been pleased to
bestow upon me, the more fervent is my desire, that also others might partake
of the same with me.

AND now, ye learned men, and refined wits of the age, come hither and admire
the ignorance and simplicity of this poor country maid! Consider how far she
exceeds your high flown superficial wisdom, and the dark flashes of human wit
and learning? And was it possible for her to attain to this heavenly wisdom and
divine knowledge, to such a nobleness and elevation of mind, without the scraps
and assistance of artificial learning and philosophy? then truly, there must be
another school wherein those that look unto the Lord (Ps. xxxiv. 5.) are
lightened. Indeed, to know the love of Christ, passes all knowledge, Ephesians. iii.
19. Concerning which our Savior was pleased thus to express his grateful
sentiments with hearty joy, and heavenly triumph: I thank thee, O Father, lord
of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight, Matt. xi. 25, 26. For it is written (says St. Paul) I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of
the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of
this world? But God has chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound
the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the
things which are mighty. And base things of the world, and things which are
despised has God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught
things that are. That no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. i. 19, 20,
27, 28, 29. Isa. xxix. 14. Chap. xxxiii. 18.

Laurentius de la resurection, in his spiritual letters, says: I desire you to
remember what I have often recommended to you, viz. That you do not forget God,
day nor night, in all your employments and exercises, nor in your bodily
refreshments. He is always present with you, do not let him stay alone. It
would be very uncivil to leave a friend alone by himself that came to see you.
Why will you do so with God? Pray do not forget him; think often upon, pray to
him without ceasing; live and die with him. This is the best work a Christian
can be employed about. In short, it is our profession, our trade and calling.

If we do not know it, we must learn it: we must deny all that does not tend to
the glory of God, and (...) ourselves to a continual, familiar and humble
conversation and intercourse with him. And withal, to prevent our souls
swerving from it upon any occasion whatsoever, our heart must be the spiritual
temple, wherein we continually offer up our prayers. We must watch ourselves
narrowly, that we may neither do, nor speak, nor think, whatever may be
displeasing to him. Col. iv. 2. Chapter iii. 17.

FINIS.

