THE CONFERENCE With the Eastern Indians, at the Ratification of the PEACE,
held at Falmouth in Casco-Bay, in July and August, 1726.
Falmouth, in Casco-Bay, July 16. 1726.
HIS Honor WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire; Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief, in
and over His Majesty's Province or the Massachusetts Bay in New England, with a
Quorum of His Majesty's Council of said Province, Arrived here this Day, A
Number of the Gentlemen of the House of Representatives, and others attending
the Lieut. Governor, to receive the Ratification of the late Treary of Peace
from the Eastern Indians.

On the 21st Current, His Honor received a Letter from Wenemouett, Sagamore,
Dated at St. George's, July 19th 1726. in the Words following, Viz.

GREAT GOVERNOR,
THIS Day we saw Your Express sent to Capt. Gyles, wherein you say, you expect
to meet us at Casco-Bay, but we insist on meeting at Pemmaquid, by Reason that
Casco is so far, and it is now a very busy time with us, and we pray we would
Condescend to us in meeting us there, and we will without fail meet you there;
by reason you insist on your own meeting, we cannot have only our own Tribe, but
we rather Choose to have these of Canada etc. with us, through whose Means we
have been (...) meeting you 'till this time. We desire your Answer with all
Dispatch, and are now waiting here for the same: And left the Vessel through
contrary Winds should be detained, we have sent a Canoe with two Men, who will
bring us your Answer with all speed: We Salute You Great Governor, and are
your Friends, etc.

Wenemouett his Mark.
Sagamore.


Which being Communicated to His Majesty's Council, they were of Advice, that
the following Letter should be wrote in Answer thereto, viz.

Wenemouett, Chief Sachem, Falmouth, July 21st 1726. at Five o'Clock Afternoon.
THIS Day at three o'clock Afternoon, we re^d such a Letter from you by the S^,
in Answer to Ours, as we could not have expected, because contrary to your
Engagements in ^ur Treaty; You say, (...) us at Pemmaquid, under Pretense of
it is beinga ^fy T^ and the Difficulty of ^ing hither^ you (...) to (...)
ordered your Business to Comport with your Engagements: We have been waiting
(...) in Expectation of meeting you to Ratify and Conform the P^ (...) to the
Articles Stipitated and Agreed on at Boston (...) Sanders (...) this Letter
will t^ Three Days, and on his return you (...), if you (...) P^sion) have safe
Con^ and Passage hither with him, with as many as (...) A^ated on Board the S^
fully prepared is Ratify the A^ agreed on, w^ is what we ^ly expect, having
(...) of a P^ and H^ C^ if what (...) Part; we (...) you bea^y fa^ll.

WILLIAM DUMMER. Which Letter was Signed John (...) P. Masen^.


Which Letter was accordingly Expressed per the Sloop Merry-meeting, The (...)
Master.

On the 23d. the aforemention d Indians came hither, and waited on the Lieut.
Governor, with a Message from their Sagamore Wenemouett, That they were sent
to know whether His Honor was Arrived here or not. The Lieut. Governor
Acquainted them that the Lieut. Governor of Piscataqua, and Major Mascarene
from Nova Scotia, the same Gentlemen that were at the Treaty at Boston, were
now with him here to receive the Ratification of the Treaty from the Indian
Tribes: That he had received the Letter from Wanemouett their Sachem, and had
wrote an Answer thereto per Capt. Sanders, but least that should miscarry, he
would send a Copy of it by them: And they having refreshed themselves, and
received Necessaries for their Return, were Dispatched about Six of the Clock
that Evening.

On the 29th, Wenemouett, the Chief Sachem, with a Number of his Principal Men,
and others, arrived in Capt. Sanders Sloop, and on the 30th the Conference for
the Ratification of the Treaty was Entered upon, and Concluded the Sixth of
August, as appears by the following Pages.

Anno Regni Regis GEORGII Magnae Britanniae etc. Duodecimo et Decimo Tertio.
AT a CONFERENCE Begun and Held at Falmouth in Casco Bay, July 10th Annoque
Domini, 1726. for the Ratihcation of the late Treaty of Peace, had with the
Eastern Indians at Boston, By and Between His Honor WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire;
Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief, in and over His Majesty's Province of
the MassachusettsBay in New England, The Honorable William Tailer, Esquire; John
W^wright, Esquire; Elisha Cook, Esquire; Joseph Hammond, Esquire; Samuel Tha^ter, Esquire; John
Turner, Esquire; Thomas Palmer, Esquire; His Majesty's Council of said Province, being
Present.

The Honorable JOHN WENTWORTH, Esquire; Lieut. Governor, and Commander in Chief
of His Majesty's Province of New Hampshire in New England, being attended by
George Jeffrey, Esquire; Shadrach Walton, Esquire; Richard Wibird, Esquire; of His
Majesty's Council of said Province. And Major PAUL MASCARENE, Commissioned by
the Honorable LAURENCE ARMSTRONG, Esquire; Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief
of His Majesty's Province of Nova Scotia, or L'Acadie:

On the one Part, And

WENEMOUETT Chief Sachem and Sagamore of the PenopscuttTribe, Espegnect Second
Chief of said Tribe, Edgeremouit, Sousack, Seconkii, Caesar Moxis, Geneket,
Decemanbo, Scoowees, Guilean, Vittor, Martyn, Hassangk, Seauseen, Augustine,
Stannezzes, Bartholomew, Francois Loron, Jun. Francois Xavier, Louis, Paul
Petteremenit, Hassang, Jun. Arrexis, Jun. Pier, Sousack, Jun. Acteon, Chiefs
and others, of the said Tribe of Penobscutt, as well as in Behalf of the said
Tribe, as of all the other Tribes of the Indians, mentioned in the aforesaid
Treaty, Seguaron, alias Loran, Arexis, Francois Xavier, Meganamoumba, Four
Indian Delegates that Signed the said Treaty being also Present

On the other Part.

Lt. Gover. Dummer. I Am very glad to see you here, You are all welcome to
Casco.


Indians. We come to wait on the Governor to know when it will be his Pleasure
that we should see him again, in order for the Treaty. The Business requires
haste, and the Governor has been here a long Time waiting; we want to have the
Business over, that so we might go Home again: All the Indians that are
expected at the Ratification are now arrived.


Lt. Gov. We will be ready at Three a Clock for the Treaty, in Case you are
ready, and it will suit you.


Indians. If the Governor will fire a Great Gun when he is ready for the
Treaty, we shall know by that when to come off from the Island.


Lt. Gov. We will fire a Gun, and hoist the Jack at the Mast-Head of the
Commodore, for the Signal when we are ready.


Indians. It is the desire of our ancient Men that the Governor would give
Orders that all the Vessels in the Harbor, and Taverns on the Shore, may be
restrained from selling our young Men any strong Liquor, which may prevent
Mischief.


Lt. Gov. We approve very much of that, and shall give Orders accordingly.


Indians. We also desire that any Vessels that come in be restrained from
selling Drink to our young Men, we want very much to get Home, and desire the
Business may be done.


Lt. Gov. How many Indians are there in the whole?


Indians. About forty.


Lt. Gov. You shall be supplied with Provisions needful for you. Then the
Indians withdrew.


Post Meridiem.
PRESENT, Lieut. Governor DUMMER, with His Majesty's Council of the
Massachusetts Bay, Lieut. Governor Wentworth, etc. and Major Paul Mascarene
WENEMOUETT, Chief Sachem etc. of the Indians: Capt. John Gyles, Capt. Joseph
Bay, Capt. Samuel Jordan, who were Sworn to the true and faithful Discharge of
their Office in Interpreting in the present Negotiation.


Lt. Gov. of the Massachusetts Bay. Interpreters, You are now to acquaint the
Indians, that you have been Sworn well and truly and faithfully to intepret in
the Negotiation now depending.


Indians. We desire that Capt. Jordan may Interpret to us, because we
understand him plainest, and the other two will stand by.


Lt. Gov. There is here present the Lieut. Governor of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, and His Majesty's Council of said Province, The Lieut.
Governor of New Hampshire, with several of His Majesty's Council of said
Province, and Major Paul Mascarene from the Government of Nova Scotia or L'
Acadie, and we are come Pursuant to the Treaty of Peace lately had at Boston,
and to receive the Ratification of the said Treaty from you. We are ready to
ratify the Articles of the Treaty on Our Part, and we suppose you are also
ready to Ratify the same on your Part, and that is what we have to say now.


Lor^n, Speaker. The Lieut. Governor has mentioned the same Thing that we are
come for, The Treaty we had the last Winter so far as it was then finished,
There are none but the Penobscut-Tribe here at present, Others, that we
expected are not here at this Place, which is the Place the Government expected
we should meet at, We sent Messengers to the other Tribes, and acquainted them
of the Time the Governor appointed to meet, but that being so soon, they are
not yet come, we sent to the Canada Tribes to come over to the Treaty according
to the Time appointed by the Governor, but they have not come, they have sent
a Letter, and two Wampum Belts, one to the Governor, and one to the
Penobscut-Tribe.


Lt. Gov. Who do you ^can by the Canada Indians.


Loron. We mean the Narridgwooks, St. Francois and W^k Indians?


Lt. Gov. What do you mean by giving an Answer to the Canada Indians Letter?


Loron. The St. Francois Indians as we have said sent to the Commissioners
lately sent to Canada, and gave for Answer, that this Government should go to
Mount-Royal, when we Treated with them, that so we should all be before Our
Fathers.


Lt. Gov. What do you mean by the Canada Indians Letter, I never received any
Letter of their's?


Loron. We mean the Belt that was sent.


Lt. Gov. Do you mean by the Letter any thing that was said at Canada before
the Treaty was held at Boston?


Loron, Speaker. We mean only what was said at Canada this Spring, nothing
before, when the Belt was sent to the Governor, meaning the Canada Indians
Belt, there was Letters sent of the 30th of June and 1st of July from
Wenemouett then at St. Georges, to desire that as the Governor was the
furthest from the Canada Indians, that he would send an Answer to Wenemouett,
that we may both join in the Answer to the Canada Indians as we were Brothers.


Lt. Gov. You may go on, I would have you to say, all you have at present to
say.


Loron. We though it when we sent the Letter and Belt from the Canada Indians, that
we should receive an Answer to it for Our further Proceeding, but instead of
that we received the Governor's Direction to meet him here for the
Ratification of the Treaty. As to the first Motions of Peace when we heard of
it from the Governor, we were very glad of it, and were ready to join in the
Peace, and made Proposals in order to effect it, and particularly about the
Lands, and the English quitting the two Houses, viz. Richmond and St. George's,
which the Government did not see cause to come into; If they had, we with the
other Indians should all have come into a Peace before now, and there would be
no Difficulty with the others; not that the Houses should be removed at a great
Distance, but that the House at St. George's should be removed to Pemmaquid,
and that at Richmond to Arrowsick, for the TradingHouses. As for the
Penchscutt-Tribe they are so careful that they will do every Thing that is
just, That there shall be no Breach or Misunderstanding for the future, but
that the Tribes round about us might approve of every thing we do, it was
further mentioned in the Treaty, that if any of the Tribes should rise or break
up what was therein Agreed on, or lift up the Hatchet, we shall all join in
suppressing them, and so we now Agree. We have nothing further to offer now.


Lt. Gov. Besides what I mentioned at first, that the several Governments are
come down to receive the Ratification of the Peace from you, There are
Gentlemen here present from the Government of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, to prove the English Rights to the Land Eastward, pursuant
to the aforesaid Treaty, so that you may perceive we are come fully provided to
make good the Treaty on Our Part, according to the Articles agreed on. That is
all I have to say.


Loron. We have no more to say to Night.


Lt. Gov. To Morrow is the Lord's Day, upon which we do no Business. On Monday
we will give you an Answer to what you have said; and we will Order the same
Signal when we are ready as we did to Day.


Loron. To Morrow is our Sabbath Day, and we also keep the Day.


Lt. Gov. We will take a Glass of Wine, and drink the King's Health, and then
you may retire.


Monday, August 1st. 1726.
PRESENT as Before.

Lt. Gov. of the Massachusetts Bay. WHAT we have now to say is in Writing, I
will give it the Secretary, who will read it to you, and you may have time to
consider and give your Answer to it.

GENTLEMEN,

Before we proceed, it is necessary that you give us a true and full Account
why the Narridgwock Indians are not here, as you have engaged for them in the
Treaty made at Boston, which now lies on the Table: We have considered of what
you said to us, at our meeting on Saturday last, and as to the Proposals of the
Norridgwock and other Tribes, that the Treaty be held at Mount-Royal, we say,
that it is contrary to the Articles of Peace made at Boston, and therefore
deserves no Answer, and you know that we always told you, that it was beneath
the Honor of the English Government to Treat with the Indians in a French
Country; and as to the Insinuations of the Canada Indians, that our
Commissioners begun a Treaty there, it is not true, for our Commissioners were
sent there to Demand of the French Governor in the Name of King GEORGE not to
assist the Indians in the War against us, and also to Restore all the English
Captives in that Government, which they declared to the Governor of Canada as
soon as they Arrived, and that they had no other Business in that Country.

As to the Two Houses you except against, you may Remember you were told at
Boston, that King GEORGE had a Right to build Houses where he pleased within
his Dominions, and we have not built any Houses on Lands in the Eastern Parts
but what we have Purchased, and are ready to p^ the Title, and that the Houses
mentioned were not kept for Offense after the Ratification, but as they were
(...) ^tly Situated in the Judgment of the Government of the Massachusetts for
supplying the Indians, which we (...) concluded you had rested satisfied with,
and you may depend that we shall not depart from that or any other of our
Engagements: This is all we have is say to you at present, if you desire it, it
shall all he repeated to you over again.


Indians. We desire Time to consider of what has been said, and we will make an
Answer.


Lt. Gov. It shall be allowed you.


Wenemouett. When the two first went to Boston, we had not full Power to act,
and to do for the Tribes, but when Loron returned from Boston to Penobscut,
then I sent a Young Man with him to Arreragunt^, and they were all very ready
to come into what the Penobscuts should do as to the Treaty, and we had full
Power Delegated to us to act for the Narridgwocks, Wowenocks, and Ar(...) and
St. Francois, but the Reason of the Narridgwocks not coming in is altogether as
new to us as it can be to you.


Lt. Gov. Did the Belt come from the Narridgwocks?


Wenemouett, No they had no Hand in it.


Lt. Gov. We expect you will send us Word when you are ready with your Answer
to what we have said to Day.


Wenemouett. We will let you know when we are ready.


Lt. Gov. If there be any Thing we (...) ^eable to Wenemouett in, he may have
it, I see he is not well. For which he returned his Thanks to the Lieut.
Governor.


Tuesday, August 2d. 1726.
PRESENT as Before.

Lt. Gov. of the Massachusetts Bay, I Am ready to hear what you have to say.


Loron. We will now give our Answer to what was said Yesterday. And first give
the Reason why the Narridgwock Tribe is not here; we shall be very plain, and
tell the Truth and nothing but the Truth why they are not here. We sent a
Messenger over to the Narridgwocks, St. Francois, and Wowenocks, for them to
come over here to the Treaty, to hear what was said: when the Messengers were
got to those Tribes they discoursed 'em, and delivered their Message to come
over here, but the St. Francois, Wowenocks, and the Narridgwocks, made Answer,
that they would have the Penobscutt Chiefs with these Governments come over
there to hear the Treaty, There were Six of the Narridgwock Indians came over
to Penobscutt this Spring, they missed of the Messengers that were sent from
Penobscutt to Narridgwock; then Two went back and Four staid till the
Penobscutt Messengers returned with an Answer from the St. Francois, etc. with
the Two Belts; the Four Narridgwock Indians that tarried behind would come here
and have been present at the Ratification, but the Belts being sent occasioned
their not coming. When the Belts came to Penobscutt, we had Advice then from
the Governor of the Massachusetts of his coming down to the Ratification, and
the Four Narridgwock Indians told the Penobscutts, to go on, and what ever they
did was all one as if they were Present, and the Narriagwocks after that went
to Canada.


Lt. Gov. Is this the last Account you have had of the Narridgwocks Indians?


Loron. It Is but a little while since they went away, and we have not heard
from them since. The last Man that went away, when he went off he said he would
go foremost to the Arresaguntecock Indians, and discourse 'em on the Message
they have sent, expecting that the Government and the Penobscutt Chiefs will
give an Answer also to the Belts, as we are Brothers. This is what we Answer as
to the First Part of what was said to us Yesterday. Now we proceed to make
Answer to the Second Part of Yesterday's Discourse. Every thing of the Treaty
is very plain to us, and there is nothing in the Way excepting the Two Houses;
in case they could be removed a little further in, as we mentioned Yesterday.
The Governor was mentioning that he would Settle no Lands, but what good
Rights and Titles be set forth to, and in case the Lands were Sold, we have a
Number of young People growing up who never were acquainted of the Lands being
Sold: The Government is a Great and Rich Government, and if the Lands were
Sold, they were Sold for a small Matter, and Cost but little, and it would be
but a small Matter for the Government to make Allowance for them, and give them
up.


Lt. Gov. What do you mean by making Allowance for the Lands?


Loron. We desire that no Houses or Settlement may be made to the Eastward of
Pemmaquid, or above Arrowsick; As for the Penobscutt Tribe in particular, we
don't know that ever they Sold any Lands, That Is all we have to say.


Lt. Gov. We shall be ready to make you an Answer to Morrow Morning at Nine
o'Clock, and shall Order a Signal to be made for you.


Wednesday, August 3d. 1726.
PRESENT as Before.

Lt. Gov. of the Massachusetts. WE have Considered your Motion, That we would
remove those two Houses on Kennebeck and St. George'sRivers a little further
in: To which we Answer, That those Houses are on Lands Purchased by His
Majesty's Subjects, which we are ready by Commissioners appointed by the
Government of the Massachusetts Bay for that Affair, to make evident to you,
(although the Narridgwocks are not Present) by producing fair Deeds under the
Hands of the Sachems of those Countries for the same, as well as diverse Treaties
where you Allowed and Confirmed to the English all the Lands formerly possessed
by them, which Commissioners are here present for that Service, those Lands
being for a long Time since purchased by His Majesty's Subjects, and the
Property vested in them, the Government cannot Disclaim them; And now as you
have assured us, that you very well know all the Articles of the Peace which
was made at Boston, and that you are ready to come hither to Ratify them, so we
are also ready to receive the said Ratification, and now expect that it shall
be done accordingly. We have no more to say, but to demand of you what English
Captives you have ready to Exchange, Pursuant to an Article of the Treaty on
that behalf. We have said what we have to say now, and will take a Walk out for
a little Time if you desire it, and give you an Opportunity of advising one
with another here.


Indians. We thank the Governor; We are the smallest in Number, and we will
walk out; we can best bear the Heat of the Sun: And the Indians accordingly
retired.


Post Meridiem.
Loron. We have been tho'tful of, and consulted what was said to Day, and now
will give Answer to it. We understood he Governor was tho'tful why the
Narridgwock Indians were not here, We are also tho'tful, It is a Hindrance, so
far as we should be glad they should be sent for again, We are of Opinion if
they should be sent for they would appear here forthwith, the Reason why we
mention this is because we would be very careful in what we do in our
Proceedings, that none should break in upon our Proceedings: We should be very
sorry if any Thing should happen amiss as to what we have done, We are not
knowing that any are designed or intend to break our Treaty, but we are very
tho'tful and Concerned that none shall do it. We insist upon the removal of
those two Houses which was mentioned last Winter, we again make mention of them
now, and if they were removed, there would be no Difficulty among the Tribes.
We cannot find any Record in our Memory, nor in the Memory of Our Grandfathers,
that the Penobscutt Tribe have Sold any Land, As to the Deeds mentioned last
Winter, made by Medoccewanda and Sheepsout John, they were not Penobscutt
Indians, one belonging to Machias Medockewondo, the other toward Boston, If we
should find in reality that the Lands were Purchased of the right Owners, we
should not have insisted upon it, nor have opened our Mouths, we would not
pretend to tell a Lie about it, for we know that God will be angry with the Man
that tells a Lie, We do not remember of any Settlements at St. George's, we
remember a pretty while, and as long as we remember, the Place where the
Garrison stands was filled with Great long grown Trees. As to the mentioning of
Prisoners as we told you last Winter, we had not one in our whole Tribe, so we
say now, We have not one Prisoner in our Tribe, if we had, we would have
brought 'em in long before now, all the Prisoners we took, as we took them,
they were returned to Boston, or sent to Canada to the French, and whose that
are among the French, we have no Command of; We mention it over again, that if
we had any Prisoners, we should have brought 'em in long ago, for we understand
it that the Peace was concluded at the Signing the Articles almost a
Twelvemonth ago: All the Controversy now is about a small Tract of Land, which
is but a Trifle, and all is finished excepting that, which is (...) Trifle. We
have nothing further to offer now.


Lt. Gov. What do you mean by having the Narridgwocks sent for, and that hey
would be here if they were sent for, are they within Call do you know?


Indians. We believe if they were sent for, they would be here some Time this
Summer, we know where they were left.


Lt. Gov. Where do you suppose the Narridgwock Indians are now?


Loron. We suppose they are at ^spand^, or St. Francois, scattered among them
Tribes.


Lt. Gov. The Committee for Claims are here, ready in the Presence of all the
Governments here assembled, to set forth the Titles of the English to the Lands
in the Eastern Parts of this Government.

^ Lands (...) St. George's River, and ^spand^ (...) the (...) Proceedings of
(...) (...) Opportunity to (...) of it.


Thursday, August 4. 1726.
PRESENT as Before.

THE (...) ^ (...) Eastern Country, (...) particularly appear by the said
Committee's Report. After which the Conference ^as proceeded in, viz.

Lt. Gov. of the Massachusetts. You have (...) with the Committee this Morning,
and I trust they have given you Satisfaction concerning the Lands in Dispute,
and you may be assured that you (...) always have equal Justice with His
Majesty's English Subjects in a^ Points, when ever any Difficulty shall arise
concern (...) the Property of Lands or any other Matters. We have waited long
enough already for the Narridgwock Indians, in order to their coming to Ratify
the Treaty that you have made for your selves, and others your late
Confederates, wherein you (...) your selves to bring them in, or ^oyn your
young Men to reduce them to Reason. We now justly expect the Ratification, and
accordingly tender the same to you now.


Lieut. Gov. Proceeded. In^ as I see you are not all here present by a
consultrall^ (...), I expect you all appear (...) Morrow Morning, and be
project at the Ratification, and what has been said shall be repeated is you if
you desire it.


Indians. We understand it very well.


Loron. We have been tho'tful of what has been said to us this Morning
respecting h Lands, as well as what the Governor has spoken to us at this Time
concerning the Articles. We suppose you cannot bring to pass what we have been
proposing concerning giving Way; We reckon the Governor was the first mover in
bringing forward the Peace, and having a good Settlement among us, now we think
we shall go beyond, (...) than ordinary to effect a good Understanding; As to
the House at (...), which lies at our Door at it were, we submit that it shall
be a Truck-(...), and that no (...) Houses be built there or thereabouts, but
that that (...) main as a Truck-house for the P^ Tribe. We desire (...) as we
have so good an Understanding together, that there be no other Houses built
there, unless it be by Purchase or Agreement. The Neig^ Tribes have already
told us that we should go on with the Treaty with good Understanding (...)
Courage, and settle every T^. That if a (...) should happen to be run, the
English may her^ b^ to ^p over it, so that every (...) they desire may now be
(...) strong. We are in hopes. Brothers, that what we have offered i^ (...)
year Acceptance. That is all we have to say (...).


(...). Do you agree to (...) all your People with you to ^or^ (...) to S^ the
Articles for the R^tion, If you do. I shall (...) say to you, all I have to say
in Answer to what you have now said?


(...). We reason we are all ready for the Ratification now.


(...). What I shall have to say to you to Morrow will not be New, I have said
almost the same to you already, which I shall say to Morrow, but if you desire
to have my Answer now you the.


(...). What the Governor pleases.


Lt. Gov. I shall then put you in Mind of what I ^d you (...) now respecting
the setting the Lands at St. G^ and that is, that you shall have equal Justice
in all Points with the Subjects of His Majesty King GEORGE, either in
Controversies respecting the Property of Lands, or any other Matter whatsoever,
we don't suppose that any Gentlement that come to produce or offer Claims of
Lands there, shall be their own Judges, but it shall be determined by lawful
Authority, wherein the Indians shall have the Benefit of the Law, equal with
any Englishman whatsoever, and this you may be assured of, for we dont't expect
a Peace to last on any other ^oo^ing than that of Justice.


Indians. We are very well pleased with what is said.


Lt. G^ This is all that can be said to your last offer, and I should desire no
more might be said to me, if it were my own Case.


Indians. For want of that there has been Misunderstandings.


Lt. Gov. I hope it will never be so again, and I trust it will not, and that is
the Mind of the whole Government of New England, we hope this will be a better
and more lasting Feace, than ever was made yet, and that it will last to the
End of the World.


Indians. We hope it will, and rejoice at it.


Lt. Gov. Some Gentlemen have been in doubt, whether you have rightly
understood me, in what has been now said to you. That is, if there should be
any Dispute or Controversy hereaster, between the English and you, respecting
the Titles or Claims of Lands, and after a fair and lawful Trial, if the
English cannot make out and prove their Titles to the Lands controverted, they
shall disclaim them, but if the English can make out their Titles, then the
In(...) shall disclaim the Lands so controverted.


Indians. We understand it very well, and agree to it, that it shall be so, the
Controverties we understand are to be determined by Impartial Judges, and
^nterested Persons appointed for that Purpose, to do equal Justice.


Lt. Gov. It is very well, I expect you to Morrow to ratify the Articles, and
take a Dinner with me.


Friday, August 5. 1726.
PRESENT as Before: And a considerable Number of Gentlemen attending.

Lt. G^. of the Mass^. THE Articles of the Treaty shall be distinctly read, and
faithfully Interpreted to you.

While the Articles were reading, immediately after the Article respecting
Trade, the Indians, by their Speaker L^, acquainted the Lieut. Governor, that
they had been (...), the Prices of Goeds would be raised when the R^cation was
over.

The Lieut. Governor answered them, that they might be assured, that the Goods
always were, and still should be, bought with ready Money, and that the
Government would not make any new Advance on their Goods, and for a Proof of
it, they would be always sensible and find that the Government would supply
them cheaper than any other People whatsoever: That they are acquainted with
the Nature of Markers, that they are sometimes higher and sometimes lower.

After the Articles were read, and the Interpreters had finished; L^ made a
second Motion, and informed the Lieut. Governor, that it had been reported
that the Articles of Peace which were delivered to him, and the other Delegates
at Boston, were not of the same Purport with those they deposited and lest in
the Hands of the Government, and therefore desired that an Exchange might be
made of the Articles they carried with them to P^, with those lest in the Hands
of the Government, in order to their being enabled to consate such Reports:
Which was readily granted them by the Lieutenant Governor, to the apparent
Satisfaction of the whole Tribe. The Articles being interpreted to the Indians,
the Lieut. Governor asked them, whether they tho^oughly understood them.


Indians. We perfectly understand them all.


Lt. Gov. It is necessary to write the Words of the Ratification before you
sign your Names.


Indians. May we not have a Copy of the Conference?


Lt. Gov. You shall have a Copy of it as soon as it can be prepared.

The Ratification of the Treaty which is endorsed on the Original Articles, was
read over distinctly, and Interpreted to the Indians in the Words following,
(...).

WE the Underwritten WENEMOUETT Chief Sachem and Sagamore of the Penopscutt
Tribe, and others the Chiefs, with the Rest of the said Tribe now convened,
having had the within Articles of Peace distinctly and deliberately read over
and interpreted to us.

DO BY THESE PRESENTS in a public and solemn Manner, as well for our Selves as
for all the within mentioned Tribes, from whom we are delegated and fully
empowered, RATIFY AFFIRM and CONFIRM All and Singular the within written
Articles of Peace To HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY KING GEORGE, and that the same and
each of them be, and shall Continue and Remain to be, in full Force, Efficacy
and Power to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever. DONE and CONCLUDED at Faith
in Casco-Bay, before His Honor WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire; Lieutenant Governor and
Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Province of the (...) in New England, and
His Majesty's Council of said Province. The Honorable JOHN WENTWORTH, Esquire;
Lieut. Governor of His Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, and several of His
Majesty's Council of said Province, and Major PAUL MASCARENE, Delegated from
His Majesty's Province of Nova Scotia or L' Acadi^, and the several Gentlemen
that Sub^cribe hereto.

WITNESS Our Hands and Seals the Fifth Day of August, in the Thirteenth Year of
the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, By the Grace of GOD of Great Britain,
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini, One
Thousand seven Hundred and Twenty Six.


Indians. We suppose the Governor intends to Ratify the Articles he signed to
us at the Treaty.


Lt. Gov. Yes, I will Ratify them under my Hand and Seal when you have
finished. Do you understand what has been now read, and Consent to it?


Indians. After some Consultation; We understand it well, and Consent to it,
and then WENEMOUETT the Chief Sachem, with the aforementioned Chiefs and Others,
set their Hands and Seals to the Ratification.


Saturday August 6. 1726.
PRESENT as Before; And a considerable Number of Gentlemen and Others Attending.

Lt. Gov. of the Massachusetts. I Am now come to Ratify and Confirm the
Instrument which I gave to you at the Signing the Articles of Peace: I have
already endorsed the Ratification on that I keep by me, and if you will give me
Yours, the Secretary will endorse the same thereon; which was accordingly
done, and is in the Words following, Viz.

By the Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire; Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief
of His Majesty's Province of the (...)-Bay in New England.
WHEREAS WENEMOUETT the Chief Sach^m of Penopscutt, with Others his Chiefs, and
the rest of said Tribe, (...) at Casco-Bay the Fifth Day of August 1726. Having
(...) and publicly Ratified the Treaty of Submission (...) at Boston the
Fifteenth Day of December last, and delivered the same to me, which I have
accordingly accepted. I do (...) RATIFY and CONFIRM all the Articles in the
within mentioned (...).

Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms at F^^mouth in Casco-B^, the sixth Day of
August, in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, by
the Grace of GOD of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the
Faith, etc. Ann^^^ D^^^^^ One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty Six. WILLIAM
DUMMER. Seal.
By Command of His Honor the Lieut. Governor. John (...). Clerk of the
Council.

The above Ratification was signed in the Presence of a considerable Number of
Spectators, Gentlemen, and Others, who subscribed as Witnesses, and then
delivered to the Indians.

A Copy of the said Ratification was endorsed on the Instrument Lt. Governor
Wentworth gave the Indian Delegates at the signing the Treaty at Boston, and
publicly executed by him in the Presence of the before mentioned Witnesses,
who also subscribed.


Lt. Gov. The Instrument that Major Mascarene gave you at the signing the
Treaty in Behalf of the Government of No^^ S^^tia or L' Acadie, will be
Ratified and Confirmed to any Persons you shall send on your Behalf to the
Governor at Annapolis-Royal.

In Behalf of the Government of the Massachusetts, I shall make you some small
Presents. I am very much disappointed when I come to see the Things which I
designed to make a Present of to you, for they are not so good as I expected,
but soon after (it shall please GOD) I arrive at Boston, I shall see the Great
Court, to whom I shall heartily recommend you as good Friends, Confederates and
Neighbors; acquainting them of your ready and cheerful Compliance with your
Engagements in Ratifying and Confirming the Articles of Peace made at Boston,
which doubtless will have a proper Consideration, and therefore I shall be very
glad then to see you the Chief Sachem WENNEMOUETT, with two or three of your
principal Men attending you at Boston.

Then his Honor ordered the Presents to be delivered. And proceeded,

There were two of your Young Men sent to Canada last Year, in the Service of
this Province; I would see them, that I might make them a Consideration for
their Trouble and loss of Time in performing the Message. Upon which only one
of them, viz. Loron's Son appeared, the other the Sachem said, was lest at P^,
the Lieut. Governor taking two fine Firelocks in his Hand, presented one to
him that was present, the other His Honor delivered to the Chief Sachem
Wenemouett, desiring of him that it might be given to the other Young Man.


Lt. Gov. I design to confer with you on Monday next to Consult the common
Good, so that there remains nothing further at present but to Rejoice with one
another.


Loron. We make bold to mention to the Governor one Thing, that when we were
at St. George's, we desired a Vessel to bring us here, so as we are now short
of Canoes, we desire the Governor would supply us with a Vessel to carry us
back again.


Lt. Gov. I will take care that a small Vessel be provided to carry you back.


Indians. We are very thankful to the Governor. What Place does your Honor
appoint we should Rejoice at?


Lt. Gov. Upon the rising Ground before us at the Point.

The Conference was concluded this Day with public Rejoicing accordingly.


CONFERENCE CONTINUED. Tuesday, August, 9. 1726.
PRESENT the Lieut. Governor and Council of the Massachusetts, And Major
MASCARENE. WENEMOUETT, Chief Sachem, with the other Indians, Capt. John Gyles,
Interpreters. Capt. Samuel Jordan Interpreters.


Lt. Gov. WE should have seen you sooner, but a great deal of our Time has been
taken up in preparing a fair Draught of the Conference so far, and comparing it
with the Minutes, our own particular Business has not hindered us from seeing
you before.

Good Friends, Whereas the Articles of Peace now stand Ratified and Confirmed
(...) Part, for and in Behalf of your Selves and Others the Tribes of the
Eastern Indians, particularly made mention of in the aforesaid Articles, so
that you and we ought to (...) about our Necessary and lawful Business, without
the least Hazard or Danger from one (...) Our Persons or Estates, and a
Friendly Communication kept up and perp^tuated among us: But inasmuch as the
Narridgweeks and other Tribes, did not P^sonally appear at the late Solemn and
Public Ratification, We justly fear that the Inhabitants on the Frontiers will
be in a great Measure retarded, and ^ut by from improving their Lands and
Estates there on that Account, until the aforesaid Tribes do personally
manifest their Approving and Consenting to what you have so Wisely and Maturely
done for them.

We cannot therefore part with you without letting you know, that it will
greatly send to your Good as well as our Peace and Quiet, to remove all
Suspicion of Mischief on this score, that the beneficial Ends proposed by us
all may be fully effected, and by the Blessing of GOD out of the Power of any
ill-minded Person to break in upon the same: We do therefore strenuously urge,
that you let us know what Steps you intend to take with th^se Tribes, and that
you resolutely pursue and bring to pass what we now move to you, and justly
expect your punctual and ready Compliance therewith.


Loron. As to what the Governor was mentioning in the first Part of what he
has now said, that the Inhabitants on the Frontiers will be afraid of making
Improvements, it is also so with us; we are Cencern'd since we have not seen
them; We could make Answer to the Governor's Speech now, but we will consider
of it till the Afternoon, and shall th^n be more particular in our Answer.


Lt. Gov. We will take care of Provis^as for your Dinners.


Post Meridiem.
Loron. We will now mention to the Governor what the Thoughts of the Chiefs
are. The Governor was mentioning unto us to Day that he would have us to say
what we proposed to help those Persons that would be uneafy it, the Frontier^,
upon account of the Norridgwocks, etc. not being present at the Ratification;
It Is the Nature and Custom of the Indians, whenever they send a Letter or Belt
to any Nation, to expect an Answer to their Letter: when any of us write a
Letter, we expect a full Answer to the Contents of it, although the
Subject Matter thereof is not liked: we desire the Governor to mention what
Answer he designs to send in Answer to the Belt, or that he would say if he
desires it that we would express our Answer to it: We mention this because we
understand it that the Belt was sent to us both, and therefore propose that the
Governor would make an Answer first to it if he pleases.


Lt. Gov. A proper Answer from you to what I said to you in the Morning, will
contain an Answer to the Belt.


Loron. The Matter would be more weighty if the Governor would begin in the
Answer.


Lt. Gov. I am ready to hear what you propose in order to join with you in the
Answer to the Belt.


Loron. We will now make our Answer to the Tribes at Arreseguntecook, and our
Answer unto them is as follows, Viz.

We say Brothers, we are not able to make you an Answer to your Belt, wherein
you sent for us, because the time is past for our Ratification of the Articles
of the Treaty. We say Brothers, We wonder you should desire us to come over
into that Country to Treat, which is a Place where we have no being. This
Country is the Place where we belong to, and where the Treaty was begun, and
where we think it ought to have been carried on. This is what we have to say in
Answer to the Belt.


Lt. Gov. We will take it into Consideration, and desire you would give us an
Answer to what we said in the Morning.


Loron. We have nothing further to propose, we shall have a Great Meeting in a
little time, and shall agree what to say further to the Arreseguntecooks.


Lt. Gov. So far as you have spoken I take to be a proper Answer for you to
make as to the Belt. I desire now you will say what Measures you propose to
take, whereby the Inhabitants on our Frontiers may be made Easy and Safe
notwithstanding the Narridgwocks etc. did not personally appear to Ratify the
Articles of the Treaty, agreeable to what I said in the Morning.


Loron. As to the Inhabitants on the Frontiers, we would have them be very
careful, and as soon as we return Home, it shall be our first Care to send to
all the Tribes, that there is a Peace made.


Lt. Gov. Will you lay your Commands and Injunctions on the other Tribes for
that Purpose, as far as you are able?


Loron. We will do our utmost to oblige 'em to live peaceably toward us.


Lt. Gov. Do you say you will resent it, if any hostile Acts or Injuries should
be committed against our People?


Loron. We will resent such Actions, and join our Young Men with yours in such
Case, and oblige 'em to be quiet and set down; We mean in Case any of the
Tribes should rise against us, or resist us, we will take effectual Means to
set 'em down by Force. As to the first Treaty, we reckoned our Selves obliged
to this, but we account we are under much more and stronger Obligations to do
it now, since the Engagements our whole Tribe have taken upon 'em in Ratifying
the Articles of the Treaty, and shall take effectual Care that any such Persons
be obliged to set down. Major Mascarene told us the Government of Annapolis
would Ratify the Treaty if we would send any Persons there on our Behalf for
that Purpose; we don't suppose he is now going to Annapolis, but when he
arrives there, we would pray him to take Care that that Government would send a
Vessel for us to go there to Ratify the Articles of the Treaty, because the Bay
is too bigg for us to pass over in our Canoes.


Major Mascarene. I shall write to the Governor, who is now at Canso, of your
Desire, upon my arrival at Boston, and doubt not of His Compliance therewith, a
few of you will be sufficient to carry the Instrument I gave you at Boston, to
be Ratifyed by the Lieut. Governor or Commander in Chief, and I don't doubt
but that those that come will be made very Welcome.


Loron. We have something more to Offer. We observe that Capt. Gyle^ is Weakly
and Sickly, and if he should be removed by Death, we desire that some Body
might be sent down to St. George's, to take care of the Trade; we think Capt.
Smith a proper Person, not but that we think Capt. Gyles behaves very well in
the Place: This we mention Sides-Ways as it were. We have not heard any Answer
to our Letter about some Frenchmen killing some of our People a great Way up in
the Country: We mention this because the Governor told us if any Mischiefs or
Injuries should happen, we should acquaint one another of it in order for
Redress: We heard the Frenchmen were in Prison at Annapolis.

The Lieut. Governor acquainted them, that he had received their Letter, and
sent an Answer to it, and then recited the Contents of the Letter, and also his
Answer to it, both of which were afterward produced and shown to the Indians;
and then acquainted the Indians, that he had endeavored by Examination, and
other Means, to make out some Proof against the Frenchman mentioned in the
Letter, and now under Confinement; but could find none, yet he kept the said
Frenchman a Prisoner at the Ca^e, where he remained at our coming away from
Baston. And upon the Indians Desire, that Justice might be done on him; it was
answered by the Lieut. Governor, That His Majesty King GEORGE, by his Laws,
did not allow his Governors to meddle with Matters out of their own Provinces,
but that all such Facts must be tried in the Governments wherein they were
committed; and this being said to be done, not in our Government, but in that
of Annapolis, the Lieut. Governor said he would send the Frenchman back
thither, where they might prosecute him, and that they would have a good
Opportunity of doing it when they should go thither to receive the Ratification
of that Government: To which the Indians replied, they were fully satisfied,
and content that it should be so.


Loron. Are the Indian Prisoners at Boston in Health?


Lt. Gov. Yes, they are all very well.


Loron. We desire to know whether it is expected that the Penopscutts procure
any English Prisoners before the Indian Prisoners are delivered; we have before
several Times acquainted the Governor we have not one with us.


Lt. Gov. We expect you do your utmost Endeavor to have the English Prisoners
restored.


Loron. Is it expected we should buy the English Prisoners of the French?


Lt. Gov. How do you understand that Article in the Treaty?


Loron. As to the Articles we understand them fully, we have acquainted the
Governor, we have not one Prisoner in our whole Tribe; We know of none; when
we go Home we shall send directly to Canada, and acquaint them that we have
made a Peace: The French Indians will then ask us presently, How many Captives
have you brought away with you? We shall Answer, none. They will say, How does
it look like a Peace, when you have not got the Captives?


Lt. Gov. What do you mean by sending to Canada?


Loron. To Arreseguntacook.


Lt. Gov. As to what you say, that you shall tell the French Indians you have
not got any of the Captives, I have not told you that I would not deliver up
the Captives, I design you shall have them all, I mean all such as are in the
Hands of the Government.


Loron. We speak truly, we have no English Captives in our Hands, but we speak
for the Indians for those that are any where afar off, their Eyes are looking
upon us, and we would willingly satisfy them as far as we can.


Lt. Gov. I design the Indian Captives shall be set at Liberty when I go to
Boston, and Saccar^xes the Hostage shall also be set at Liberty.

There were several Persons attending, whose Friends and Relations are in the
Hands of the French, who were recommended to the Indians for their Assistance
in getting them returned home.


Loron. As the Governor has offered that the Indian Captives shall all be
restored, and none kept back, so we say, that we will make Search for any
Captives that may be among the Tribes, and shall take Care that they shall be
restored, and shall also do our utmost to get those redeemed that are in the
Hands of the French. We shall not forget it: We have given our Words, and
repeated our Promises and Engagements; and our Words are written down, and they
will appear afterward against us.


Thursday, August 11th. 1726.
PRESENT as Before.

THE CONFERENCE contained in this and the thirty-five foregoing Pages, * The
Original is contained in thirty-six Pages in Writing.
was distinctly read over and Interpreted to ^enemouett, Chief Sachem of
Penobscutt Tribe, and the others of said Tribe at the said Conference.

Whereupon the Lieut. GOVERNOR asked them, if they understood it, and whether
it was rightly taken down?

The Indians Answered, that the Conference was rightly taken down, and not a
Word missing in it.

Which being done, His Honor the Lieut. Governor to prevent Insinuations of
any ill-minded Persons, and for the more full Satisfaction of the Tribe of
Indians now Assembled, Subscribed his Name,

Wm. DUMMER.

And then delivered the same to ^enemouett Chief Sachem.

After which ^enemouett with the Underwritten of his principal Men subscribed
and delivered the same to His Honor the Lieut. Governor.

Wenemouett Sachem Mark.
Chief.

By Command of His Honor the Lieutenant Governor, John Wainwright, Cl.
Council.

THE CONFERENCE With the Eastern Indians, at the further Ratification of the
PEACE, held at Falmouth in Casco-Bay, in July, 1727.
Falmouth, July 11th. 1727.
HIS Honor WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire Lieut, Governor and Commander in Chief, in and
over His Majesty's Province of the MassachusettsBay in New England, with a
Quorum of His Majesty's Council of said Province, Arrived here this Day, A
Number of the Gentlemen of the House of Representatives, and others, attending
the Lieutenant Governor, to receive the further and more general Ratincation
of the late Treaty of PEACE from the several afternamed Tribes of Eastern
Indians.

Upon His Honor's Arrival he received the following Letters, one from the
Chiefs of the several Tribes, the other from Capt. H^th, by the Hands of Capt.
John of Norridgwock, and Squaduck of the Arresag^ Tribe of Indians, Viz.

The Indians Letter is as follows,

Richmond-Fort, July 7th. 1727.
TTE Sun shines bright this Day, we fear God that made it, and Solute You with
a Friendly Heart: You and the Penobscot Indians sent for us, and we come to
Teuconick in the Spring, The Penobscots afterward fast to have us come to
them, but we did not bear them.

We cannot come to Falmouth, having come thus far with great Difficulty: We
hope you will let us see you at Sagadahock or Arowsick, where we expect our
Brethren of Penobscot will also meet. This Message we send by Capt. John,
Quinoise, and Squ^uck.

Toxas X Jummaway X Etserraboonet X.



Capt. Heath's Letter.
Richmond-Fort July 7th. 1727. Honorable Sir,
WHILE I continue in this important Post, shall at all Times think it my Duty
and Honor to consult His Majesty's Service, the Interest of the Province; and
not to Enterprise any Thing unworthy of Tuch Thoughts, nor would I ship any
Opportunity to inform your Honor of all Occurrences to the End the Indian
Affairs may appear in a true Light, and your Instructions be the Rule of my
Practice from Time to Time: With these Views have wrote on all Occasions, and
particularly on the 12th of June last to your Honor, and the 23d of the same
to the Secretary, with Reference to the Conference now on Foot, to which please
to permit me to add on this Occasion, that though I esteem my (...) Fortunate
with the Indians in several Respects, cannot by any Means' as you overcome
their Obstinacy against going to (...), as will appear by the enclosed L^er, in
which they don't assign every Reason for their not going, nor shall I, as not
being for the Service of the present Day, hope it may suffice only to say that
these Indians are prejudiced against, and to a great Degree resolved not to
meet at Falmouth, and in order to gild these Resolutions with specious
Pretenses, have sent some of their Chief Men to the Penobsests, if possible to
prevent their going to Falmouth, and tell me this Day that they have gained the
Point, and expect to meet the said Pensbsests in this River to Morrow
accordingly. Upon the whole, it appears to me that if the said Pensbsests join
the other Indians as above, they will complexly finally conclude not to meet
you at Falmouth, but if Capt. Gyles (in the Sloop sent from hence as mentioned
in my last to the Secretary) can steer the Penobsest Indians to Falmouth, it
seems as though these may follow, but with much Reluctance. In my last to your
Honor I acquainted you that I thought the Indians would readily meet you at
Arowsick, though they mentioned this Place only in their Letter, which it may
be observed they have now come to, and I have no fear of a thorough Conference
as I then mentioned, unless through a Disagreement in the Preliminaries; and
though the way is Plain as yet, am very thoughtful least it should happen to
come to such a critical Point, as that your Honor should be under a Necessity
either not to Treat, or (put off the Governor and) come to Arowsick, which is
somewhat likely if you return a peremptory Refusal to their Repucst of meeting
in this River, except you have the Penobsests first with you at Falmouth, and
if they are not arrived (as I would fain persuade myself they are) it may
succeed well if you please Lovingly to detain these Messengers a Day or two, to
gain Time so as to hear from Capt. Gyles 'ere you give an Answer, unless it
please you to come to the Mouth of this River. The Indians wait, and I have
Time only to plead your Honor's Pardon if I have exceeded, and that I may
Subscribe, as in Heart I am,

Your Honor's most Obedient humble Servant, Joseph Heath.
Please to direct me whether I ought to continue supplying these Indians with
Provisions in Case of a Demur upon meeting at the Place your Honor thinks
proper for the Conference.




Which Letters being Communicated to His Majesty's Council, they were of Advice
that the following Letter should be wrote in Answer thereto, Viz.

Falmouth, July 11th. 1727. GOOD FRIENDS,
I Am this Day arrived from Boston at this Place, to receive of your Tribes a
Personal Ratification of the late Treaty of Peace, Ratified here by the
Penobscots for you as well as for themselves, in which I do sincerely aim at
the good of all your Tribes, and have no other View but to transmit by the help
of GOD a lasting Peace to your and our Children, and if any of our Brethren of
Penobscot, are with you I salute them all, and desire them to come with you
here, which Place I have chesen as the most suitable on all Accounts, and where
I have provided all Accommodations bath for you and my self, with the Gentlemen
of the Government who are attending me here. Upon my Arrival I received your
Message by Capt. John and Squaduck, and I Salute you all kindly: I observe you
say you have come so far with Difficulty, and therefore desire I would see you
at Sagadahock or Arowsick; to which I Answer, if I had apprehended any
Difficulty in your coming, I would have made it more easy by providing a Vessel
and Necessaries for your better Accommodation in your Way ^ither, however to
prevent any further Difficulty, I have now sent Capt. Sanders to Transport you
here, where I expect you, with whom by God's Blessing you may have an easy and
safe Conduct and Passage. Here is also the Honorable John Wentworth Esquire;
Lieut, Governor of the Province of New Hampshire, with His Majesty's Council
of that Province, and a Number of Gentlemen of that Government, and also Major
Paul Mascarene from the Government of Nova Scotia or L'Acadie, One of His
Majesty's Council there, and Commissioned by the Honorable Laurence Armstrong
Esquire; Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief of that Province, attending
here on the Occasion aforesaid.

I bid you heartily Farewell.

Wm. DUMMER.

Superscribed, To TOXSEUS Sagamore of Nerridgawock, AUYUMMOWETT Sagamore of
Arr^saguntaes^k, WOOSSZAURRABOONET Sagamore of Wowenock. To be Communicated to
the Tribes assembled. per Capt. John and Squaduck.

July 17th,
Three Indians Messenger came Express to acquaint His Honor that the
Nerridgwock and Wowenock Tribes were arrived, and designed presently to come
and wait on His Honor, and for that End had sent them first to acquaint His
Honor of their Arrival.

Anno Regni Regis GEORGII Magnae Britanniae and c. Decimo Tertio.
AT a CONFERENCE Begun and Held at Falmouth in Casco Bay, July 17th Anncque
Domini, 1727. for the further and personal Ratification (by the Nerridgawock,
Arresaguntacook and Wowenock Tribes of Indians etc.) of the late Treaty of
Peace, had with the Eastern Indians at Boston, By and Between His Honor
WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire; Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief, in and over His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, The Honorable
William Tailer, Esquire; John Wheelwright, Esquire; (...) Davenport, Esquire; Thomas Fitch,
Esquire; Joseph Hammond, Esquire; Samu^axter, Esquire; John Stoddard, Esquire; John Chandler,
Esquire; and Williams Pepperrell, Esquire; His Majesty's Council of said Province,
being present.

The Honorable JOHN WENTWORTH, Esquire; Lieut. Governor, and Commander in Chief
of His Majesty's Province of New Hampshire in New England, being attended by
George Jessrey, Esquire; Shadrack Walton, Esquire; Richard Wibird, Esquire; of His
Majesty's Council of said Province, and Major PAUL MASCARENE, Commissioned by
the Honorable LAURENCE ARMSTRONG, Esquire; Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief
of His Majesty's Province of Nova Scotia, or L'Acadie:

On the one Part, And

MOXUS Chief Sachem and Sagamore of the Nerridgawock Tribe, SOUSSACK second
Chief of the said Tribe, Nagiscoig alias Capt. John, Suequautoemaug, Pierre,
Terramogus's Son. Wiwarna alias Sh^epscot Jo, Edauweeno, Medockewando,
Mendowett, Whawberett, Chiefs and others of the said Tribe of Nerridgawock,
AUYAUMMOWETT, Captain and Councellor of the Arresaguntacook Tribe, Brother to
the Chief Sachem and Delegated by the said Tribe in his Brother's Absence,
Pierresongck, Loror, Backbaunumbawmett, Sabbatist, Sizabauckaum, Magucwaudo^,
Schowoss, Squaduke, Baquabarat alias Nathaniel, Saaroom, Erreman^seck,
Shwasseen, Praussoway, Suzack Son of Beawand^, Chiefs and others of the said
Tribe of Arresaguntacook, NEMMADGEEN and WOOSSZAURRABOONETT Captains and
Counceliois, two of the Chiefs of the Wowenock Tribe, and delegated by them,
accompanied by AUWEMMONETT the chief Sachem's Son, Wenerramett, Paterramett,
Saawerramett, Quinoise, Chiefs and others of the said Tribe of Wowenock,
WENONGONETT alias WENEMOWETT, Chief Sachem of the Penobscot Tribe, ESPEGUHEAT
second Chief of the said Tribe, the four Indian Delegates, viz. Sauguaa^um
alias Loron, Arexis, Francois Xavier, Megan^, with the underwritten Chiefs and
others of the said Tribe, who were not present at the Conference last Year,
viz. Squad^ alias Capt. Lovis Edowa^, Thoman, Omp^st, Ts^, Sabbatist,
Abenquind, Erre^me^k, Peress^wa' Thoman, (...), Arexis Junr. Neck^auba^witt,
Jeseph, Pau^amew, (...), Junr. and the other Chiefs and others of the said
Tribe of (...) attending.

On the other Part,

John Wai^wright, Esquire; who was by Commission appointed Clerk to His Honor the
Lieutenant Governor and Council in the present Negotiation, and Sworn to the
faithful Discharge of his Duty, officiated in his said Trust accordingly.

Capt. John Gyles, Interpreters. Capt. Jeseph Bean, Interpreters. Capt. Samu^
Jordan, Interpreters.
Lt. Gov. Dumm^r.

I am glad to see you all here, you are Welcome to (...), I would have you all
look Cheerfully, for we are all Friends.


Lt. Gov. Interpreters, Tell the Indians you are now to be Sworn to Interpret
truly and faithfully during the Conference between us and them; and then the
Interpreters were Sworn accordingly.


(...) of Norridgwock As you Honor was pleased to say, you were glad to see us
all here, so we say to you, we are very glad to see you here. It is God's
Pleasure that we should see one another, and we rejoice at it. You sent two
Messengers to us last Year, (...) and Francois, to come to see you, and we are
come here accordingly; that is, the Norridgwocks and (...) The (...) are not
arrived but we suppose they will come by and by, and on their Arrival they will
also come and wait on Your Honor.


Lt. Gov. I desire to know how many of your Two T^ there are here, that I may
make the necessary Provisions for Supplies?


Wi^no. Of the Norridgwocks there are Forty in all, and of the (...) Fifteen.


Lt. Gov. I Will take care of Provisions for you, and I would have each Tribe,
choose a Man to receive the Provisions, and let me have their Names, that so
that there may be no Mistake.


(...). We desire there may be two Seals on Paper, one for each Tribe to be
sent by the Persons who receive the Provisions, which will prevent Mistakes.


Lt. Gov. I like it well, and it shall be so Ordered.


Post Meridiem.
PRESENT Lieut. Governor DUMMER, with His Majesty's Council of the
Massachusetts Bay,

Lieut. Governor WENTWORTH, etc. As in the Morning. And The several Tribes of
Indians with AUYAUMMOWETT a Chief of the Arresagu^acoock Tribe, and others of
the said Tribe.

Lieut. Gov. Dummer. Interpreters, Tell the Arresagumacoocks they are all
Welcome here, and bid them come forth, and I Will shake Hands with them.


(...). We are come to wait on your Honor to Day, being the first Day of our
Arrival, which is according to our Custom, we are not all got together yet,
only some of our elderly Men, the young Men are not as yet come. We are very
glad to see your Honor here, and the rest of the Gentlemen, and we look upon
it, as though we see all the Gentlemen of Boston and (...)(...) here; this is
all we have to say to Day, we come now only to pay our Respects to your Honor.


Lt. Gov. We are very glad to see you.


Capt. (...) (Indian) We desire the Interpreters would be very careful in
Interpreting, that they would not lean to one Side nor the other during the
Conference.


Lt. Gov. The Interpreters were Sworn in the Morning before us and the Tribes
that were (...) then, that they (...) well and truly, and faithfully Interpret
what should be said to them on either Side during the Treaty.


Lt. Gov. How do your Wives and Children do, are they all well?


Indians. We thank your Honor, they are very well.


Lt. Gov. I am glad to hear it, you are all Welcome into this Country.


Indians. We had one Man taken Sick Yesterday.


Lt. Gov. Will you have a Doctor sent to him?


Indians. We thank your Honor, We would have a Doctor if you please.


Lt. Gov. You shall have a Doctor to visit the Sick Man.


Indians. We are very thankful that it has pleased God we are arrived in
Safety, and that we live to see the Faces of one another, and desire your
Honor would let us know when you would see us, that we may enter on Business.


Lt. Gov. I am always ready, and it shall be as soon as you Will.


(...). That is not with me, I have not the Command of that, but when your
Honor pleases, I am ready to enter on the Business you were pleased to send to
us upon.


Lt. Gov. It is very Well, I shall let you know.


Wednesday, July 19. 1727.
PRESENT as Before.

Lt. Gov. DUMMER. GOOD Friends. It is very acceptable to me and the Gentlemen
of the several English Governments new Assembled, to see so good an Appearance
of the respective Tribes of Nerridgwocks, Arreseguntcooks and Wowenocks, and I
make no doubt but you are come with honest Hearts and firm Resolutions
Personally, and in a public Manner to Ratify and Confirm the Peace, which the
Penobscots not only for themselves, but as authorized by you, have with so much
Industry and Faithfulness made and concluded. Since which the several Articles
thereof have been Communicated to you by the said Tribe, so that there now
remains nothing but that you Personally manifest your Consent by setting your
Hands and Seals thereto (as the Penobscots have already done) and for that End,
the said Articles shall be distinctly Read over and faithfully Interpreted to
you.


Auyaummowett. We have heard several Times of the Treaty, and we desire to hear
it again.


Lt. Gov. It is very well, You shall hear it, I brought the Articles for that
Purpose.

The Articles were accordingly Read and Interpreted, as also the Ratification
of the said Articles made by the Penobscots for themselves and the other Tribes
in August last, which is in the Words following, Viz.


The SUBMISSION and AGREEMENT of the Delegates of the Eastern Indians.
WHEREAS the several Tribes of the Eastern Indians Viz. The Penobscot,
Nerridgawock, St. John's, Cape Sables, and other Tribes Inhabiting within His
Majesty's Territories of New England and Nova Scotia, who have been engaged in
the present War, from whom We, Sauguaarum alias Loron, Arexis, Francois Xavier,
and Meganumbee, are Delegated and fully Empowered to enter into Articles of
Pacification with His Majesty's Governments of the Massachusetts Bay,
New Hampshire and Nova Scotia, have contrary to the several Treaties, they have
Solemnly entered into with the said Governments, made an open Rupture, and have
continued some Years in Acts of Hostility against the Subjects of His Majesty
King GEORGE within the said Governments.

They being now sensible of the Miseries and Troubles they have involved
themselves in, and being desirous to be restored to His Majesty's Grace and
Favor, and to live in Peace with all His Majesty's Subjects of the said Three
Governments, and the Province of New York, and Colonys of Connecticut and
Rhode Island, and that all former Acts of Injury be forgotten, have concluded
to make, and we do by these Presents, in the Name and Behalf of the said
Tribes, make our Submission unto His most Excellent Majesty GEORGE, by the
Grace of GOD of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith,
and c. in as Full and Ample Manner, as any of our Predecessors have heretofore
done.

And We do hereby Promise and Engage with the Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire;
as he is Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Province
of the Massachusetts Bay, and with the Governors or Commanders in Chief of the
said Province for the Time being, That is to say.

We the said Delegates, for and in Behalf of the several Tribe abovesaid, do
Promise and Engage, that at all Times for Ever, from and after the Date of
these Presents, We and They will Cease and Forbear all Acts of Hostility,
Injuries and Discords toward all the Subjects of the Crown of Great Britain,
and not offer the least Hurt, Violence or Molestation, to them or any of them
in their Persons or Estates, But will hence forward hold and maintain a firm
and constant Amity and Friendship with all the English, and will never
Confederate or Combine with any other Nation to their Prejudice.

That all the Captives taken in this present War, shall at or before, the Time
of the further Ratificat on of this Treaty, be restored without any Ransom or
Payment to be made by them, or any of them.

That His Majesty's Subjects the English, shall and may Peaceably and Quietly
enter upon, improve and forever enjoy all and singular their Rights of Land and
former Settlements, Properties and Possessions within the Eastern Parts of the
said Province of the Massachusetts Bay, together with all Islands, ^sletts,
Shores, Beaches and Fishery within the same, without any Molestation or Claims
by us or any other Indians, and be in no ways Molested, Interrupted or
Disturbed therein. Saving unto the Penobscot, Nerridgwock, and other Tribes
within His Majesty's Province aforesaid, and their natural Descendants
respectively, all their Land, Liberties and Properties, not by them Conveyed or
Sold to or Possessed by any of the English Subjects, as aforesaid, as also the
Privilege of Fishing, Hunting, and Fowling as formerly.

That all Trade and Commerce which hereafter may be allowed betwixt the English
and Indians, shall be under such Management and Regulation as the Government of
the Massachusetts-Province shall Direct.

If any Controversy or Difference, at any Time hereafter happen to arise
between any of the English and Indians, for any real or supposed Wrong or
Injury done on either Side, no private Revenge shall be taken for the same, but
proper Application shall be made to His Majesty's Government, upon the Plac^,
or Remedy or Re^ress thereof in a due Course of Justice.

We submitting ourselves to be Ruled and Governed by His Majesty's Laws, and
desiring to have the Benefit of the same.

We also the said Delegates, in Behalf of the Tribes of Indians, inhabiting
within the French Territories, who have assisted us in this War, for whom we
are fully Empowered to Act in this present Treaty, DO hereby Promise and Engage,
that they and every of them shall henceforth Cease and Forbear all Acts of
Hostility Force and Violence toward all and every the Subjects of His Majesty
the King of Great Britain.

We do further in Behalf of the Tribe of the Penobscot Indians, Promise and
Engage, that if any of the other Tribes intended to be included in this Treaty,
shall notwithstanding refuse to confirm and Ratify this present Treaty entered
into on their Behalf, and continue or renew Acts of Hostility against the
English, in such Case the said Penobscot Tribe shall join their young Men with
the English, in reducing them to Reason.

In the next Place, We the aforenamed Delegates Do Promise and Engage with the
Honorable JOHN WENTWORTH, Esquire; as He is Lieut. Governor and Commander in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, and with the Governors and
Commander in Chief of the said Province for the Time being, that We and the
Tribes we are deputed from, will henceforth cease and forbear all Acts of
Hostihty, Injuries and Discords toward all the Subjects of His Majesty King
GEORGE, within the said Province. And we do understand, and take it that the
said Government of New Hampshire, is also Included and Comprehended in all and
every the Articles aforegoing excepting that respecting the regulating the
Trade with us.

And further We the aforementioned Delegates, Do Promise and Engage with the
Hon. LAURANCE ARMSTRONG, Esquire; Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief of
His Majesty's Province of Nova Scotia or L'Acadie, to live in Peace with His
Majesty's good Subjects, and their Dependants in that Government, according to
the Articles agreed on with Major PAUL MASCARENE, Commissioned for that
Purpose, and further to be Ratified as mentioned, in the said Articles.

That this present Treaty shall be accepted, Ratified and Confirmed in a public
and solemn Manner, by the Chiefs of the several Eastern Tribes of Indians
included therein, at Falmouth in Casco-Bay some Time in the Month of May next.
In Testimony whereof we have Signed these Present, and affixed our Seals. Dated
at the Council Chamber in Boston in New England, this Fifteenth Day of
December, Anno Domini, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty five, Annoque
Regni Regis GEORGIJ, Magnae, Britanniae etc. Duodecimo.

Sauguaarum Sig.
alias Loron L.S. Arexus Sig.
L.S. Francois Sig.
Xavier L.S. Maganumbee Sig.
L.S.

Done in the Presence of the Great and General Court or Assembly of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid, being first read distinctly, and
Interpreted by Capt. John Gyles, Capt. S^ (...), and Capt. (...), sworn
Interpreters.

Attest. J. (...), Sect.



The Ratification of the aforesaid Articles made by the (...) Tribe, is
engrossed on the Original Articles in these Words.

WE the underwritten (...) Chief Sachem and Sagamore of the P^(...) Tribe and
others the Chiefs, with the rest of the said Tribe now convented, having had
the within Articles of Peace distinctly and deliberately read (...) and
Interpreted to us: Do by these Presents, in a Public and Solemn Manner, as
well for our selves, as for all the (...) mentioned Tribes from whom we are
delegated and fully empowered, Ratify ^firm and Confirm all and singular the
within written Articles of Peace to His most sacred M^ King GEORGE, and that
the same and each of them be, and shall continue and remain to be in full
Force, Efficacy, and Power, to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever. DONE and
Concluded at Falmouth in Casco-Bay, before His Honor WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire
Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, And His Majesty's Council of the said
Province. The Honorable JOHN WENTWORTH, Esquire Lieutenant-Governour of His
Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, and several of His Majesty's Council of
the said Province, and Major PAUL MASCARENE, Delegated from His Majesty's
Province of Nova Scotia or L'Acadit, and the several Gentlemen that Subscribe
hereto. Witness our Hands and Seals the Fifth Day of August, in the Thirteenth
Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, by the Grace of GOD, of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. Anno^ Domini,
One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty Six. Signed by WENEMOUETT, Chief Sachem,
and all the others of the Chiefs and others of the Penobscot Tribe aforenamed.

Auyoum^ett. What we have heard from your Honor at present we shall take into
Consideration still to Morrow, and then you shall hear from us; as for the
Articles which have been read over to us, we have heard of them, but never
heard them read so fully to us, and are very glad to have now heard of them, we
come for that Purpose. As we are now sitting here before your Honor, and see
the Faces of one another, we say, This is the Place which GOD has appointed for
us to see one another at, and as GOD is the Master of Prayer, we pray he would
direct us in all the Ways that may tend to Peace; and we desire your Honor
would let us know, and be so free as to hide nothing from us; and if we say any
Thing that is amiss, or look like an Affront, that you would let us know it,
that we may avoid it; and we shall be so on our Part as to keep nothing back,
nor hide any Thing from you in the Treaty: We ought to join heartily, and be
strong in the Affair, it is of great Weight and Moment, it weighs heavy. We
have said.


Lt. Gov. I shall say nothing but what is exactly agreeable to the Articles of
Peace, for that is what I design firmly to stand to, and if you will do the
same, by the Help of GOD, all Things will be well.


Auya^mowett. We shall answer your Honor to Morrow, if you will give us the
Liberty of considering of it to Night.


Lt. Gov. I would now have you hear the other Part, which I have Signed,
because you will not be able to make your Answer so fully without it.

The Instrument His Honor Signed on the Part of the M^ B^, which is in the
Words following, was accordingly Read and interpreted, (...)


^ By the Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire Lieutenant Governor and Commander in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.
^

I do therefore in the Name of His (...) Excellent Majesty GEORGE by the Gra^
of GOD of Gr^ (...) and (...), King, Defender of the Faith etc. Receive and
Recommend the said Tribes to His Grace and Favor, promising them the Benefit
and Protection of His Majesty's Laws in like Manner as his English Subjects
have and enjoy.

That all Acts of Ho^ from this Government against the said Tribes of Indians
shall cease, and that a firm and constant Friendship and Amity shall her (...)
be maintained with them.

That upon the Indians delivering up all the English Prisoners, as they have
engaged to do, all the Indian Captives within this Government shall likewise be
set at Liberty.

That the said Indians shall peaceably enjoy all their Lands and Properties
which have not been by them conveyed and said unto or possessed by the English,
and be no Ways m^ed or d^bed in their Planting or Improvement; and further that
there be allowed them free Liberty and Privilege of Hunting, Fishing, and
Fowling, as formerly.

And whereas it is the full Res^ if this Government that the Indians (...) no
Injustice (...) the resprecting (...) Lands:

I do therefore a^re them, that the several Claims or Titles, or so many of
them as can be then had and obtained of the English to the Lands in that Part
of this Province, shall be produced at the Ratification of the present Treaty
by a Committee to be appointed by this Court in their present^, and Care be
taken as far as possible to make out the ^n^ to the Satisfaction of the
Indians, and to distinguish and ascertain what ^ds belong to the English, in
order to the effectual Prevention of any Contentions or Misunderstanding on
that Head for the future.

That Commerce and Trade shall be carried on between the English and Indians
according to such Directions as shall be agreed on by His Majesty's Government
of this Province.

That no private Revenge shall be taken by the English, but in Case any Person
shall presume so to do, upon Complaint and Proof thereof, Justice shall be done
the Person aggrieved.

In T^ whereof I have Signed these Presents, and caused the public Seal of the
Province of the Mass^tts-Bay aforesaid to be hereunto affixed. Dated at the
Council Chamber in Boston, this Fifteenth Day of December, A^ D^. One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Twenty five. Annoque Regni Regis GEORGIJ Mag^ Britanni^ etc.
Duodecimo. Wm. DUMMER. By Command of His Honor the Lieutenant Governor F^ W^,
Sec^.

Which Articles were ratified by His Honor, and engrossed on the Original in
the Words following, Viz.

By the Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire; Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief
of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.

WHEREAS WENEMOUETT the Chief Sa^m of Penobs^ot, with Others his Chiefs, and
the Rest of the said Tribe C^ted at Casco-Bay, the Fifth Day of August 1726,
having (...) and publicly Ratified the Treaty of Submission (...) at Botton
the Fifteenth Day of December last, and delivered the same to me, which I have
accordingly accepted. I DO hereby Ratify ad Confirm all the ARTICLES in the
within (...) Instrument.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms at F^lm^uth in Cas^-Bay, the Sixth Day of
August, in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, by
the Grace of GOD of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the
Faith etc. Annoque Domini, 1726. WILLIAM DUMMER. L.S. John Wainwright, Ct. Coun.

Thursday, July 20. 1727.
PRESENT as Before.

A^ I Remember Yesterday I mentioned to your Honor, it was a good Day with us,
and we should endeavor to hearken to one another; and I now shall Answer to
what your Honor said. I have considered of it, and shall now speak. I rose up
in Canada, resolved and forced my selt to come here, and know what your Honor
had to say: Yesterday I heard what your Honor had to say; I was determined at
Canada to come; and now I am come to hear what you have said, and what your
Honor has said to us I like very well; it is all pleasing to me, every Thing
that lay in the Way as a Stumbling Block we find was all cleared away before we
came from Canada. I now declare to your Honor, as the Hearts of my Brethren
are with you ( making a Motion toward the Penobscots) so is my Heart also with
you; as my Brothers Hearts who are here now are all with you; so is my Heart,
and the Hearts of all the Indian Tribes round about us.


Lt. Gov. It is very agreeable to me, and the several Gentlemen of the English
Governments now here, to see you are so universally inclined to Peace. Are you
ready to Sign the Articles of Peace to Night, or would you stay till to Morrow?


A^m^tt. Our Hearts and Hands are ready now, but we choose to stay till to
Morrow before we Sign.


Leren. Good Friends and Brothers: I have one Thing to say; Yesterday was an
Expression, that all former Injuries should be covered and done away, now it is
concluded and done indeed: Now we have heard our Brethren say, what we have
been thoughtful about for a Twelvemonth.

I have done.


Lt. Gov. I hope GOD will enable us and you to keep this Peace for ever, and to
Morrow we will bury the Hatchet with a Dance.


Loren. Since the Articles will not be signed this Day, it will not be a Day of much
Business; and if your Honor pleases, some of the Young Men shall entertain us
with a Dance.


Lt. Gov. In as much as the weighty Affairs are concluded upon, I shall order
the Signal to be made early in the Morning, that you may Sign the Articles; it
will take you up a great Deal of Time to Sign, and the Witnesses that must Sign
also; and when that is done, we will consider of the more minute Affairs, and
the remaining Part of the Day I Will spend in Diversion with you.


Friday, July 21st. 1727.
PRESENT as Before.

THE Articles of Peace being said open at the Conference, and in (...) to the
Personal and Public Rat^tion thereof by the (...), Arresagunta^ and W^ Tribes
of Indians, and (...) of the P^ (...) who were not at the Conference last (...)
the following W^ w^ fairly engrossed, and then read and faithfully Interpreted
to the said Tribes, Viz.

THE within written Articles, S^pulated and Agreed on, as within mentioned by
the within named Delegates, (...) Xa^, and Neganum^, being (...) read ever and
faith^ Interpreted to Us Yesterday at the public Conference and by Us well
understood; and having fully and maturely considered the same, WE the
underwritten, ^MOXUS Chief Sachem and Sagamer^ of the (...) Second Chief of the
said Tribe, with the (...) Chiefs, and (...) the said Tribe, for our Selves and
in (...) of the other Tribes, AUYAUMMOWETT Captain and Councellor of the A^
Tribe, Brother to the Chief Sachem, and delegated by the said Tribe in his
Brother's Absence, with the Underwritten Chiefs and others of the (...) Tribe,
for our Selves and in Behalf of the other Tribes, NEMMADGEEN and
WOOSSZAURRABOONETT, Captains and Counce^ is. Two of the Chief of the (...)
Tribe, and delegated by them, accompanied by (...) the Chief S^chem's Son, with
the Underwritten Chiefs and others of the said Tribe, for our Selves, and in
Behalf of the other Tribes; DO by these Pre^ (...) Public and Solemn Manner
(the P^ Tribe being present) for Our Selves and Our several Tribes
respectively, App^e, Consent to and Ratify all and singular the said Articles,
and that the (...) and each of them that be and remain good valid and binding
upon Us Our (...) and Success^, respectively, to all Intents and Purposes for
ever. DONE at (...) in C^-Bay the Twenty-first Day of July, in the Thirteenth
Year of the Re^ of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, by the Grace of GOD of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith etc. and in the
Year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty Seven. And then the
Articles were accordingly Ratified by Signing, Sealing and Delivering the same,
by the aforenamed MOXUS Chief Sachem of N^, SOOSSAUCK Second Chief of the said
Tribe with all the others aforementioned of the said Tribe, AUYAUMMOWETT
Captain and Councellor of the Arresag^ Tribe, with all the others of the said
Tribe aforementioned, WOOSSZAURRABOONETT and NEMMADGEEN, Captains and
Counselors of the W^w^k Tribe, with all the others of the said Tribe
aforementioned, and also by those Chiefs and others of the Peno^sco^ Tribe
aforenamed, who were not present at the Conference the last Year.

Tuesday, July 25th. 1727.
PRESENT as Before.

Lie^ G^ Dummer. YOU are sensible how far I have performed the Article in the
Treaty respecting the Captives, that I have generously restored them, and now I
justly expect the Performance of that Article on your Part.

I have received Information, from some of the English Inhabitants in these
Parts, that they have sustained Damage by your Dogs (...) some of their Sheep,
and other young Creatures: and therefore I think it necessary when you come
into any English Settlements with your Dogs, that you take Care to have them
mu^, which may for the future pr^ such M^chiess, and the (...) Consequences
that may attend them.

It is now Time that I acqu^ you, that I expect a full Account in An^ to the
Message (...) and (...) were sent upon respecting the English Per^ who were
taken and (...) from (...) last Fa^l.

Note. (...) (...) Express from Peno^ (...) Canada, that the Cape S^ (...)
Plac^, (...) two Hundred E^ (...). To which His Honor now Answered. (...)


Lt. G^ Dummer. I have considered of the Message you brought me the other Night
by some of each of the Tribes (...), with the News from (...), that the (...)
Indians had made a Descent on Piz^ in (...) and killed a great many of the
English; and alth^ I don't give much Order to that Story, yet I think it is a
proper Occasion to propose to you an Additional Article to the late Treaty, in
order to deter that Tribe or any other Indians from violating the same, so
happily made by Us and the several Tribes of Indians who are Parties thereto
(the due Observance of which being so much to the common Tranquillity and
Happiness of all concerned) that upon any Hostility done or offered to be done
by any Indians, the Tribes who have entered into, and Ratified the Treaty,
shall furnish and supply fifty Indians with a Captain of their own, and the
English two Hundred and fifty, and so in Proportion a lesser or greater Number
as the Occasion shall require, both the English and Indians to be paid and
subsisted by the English Government, and under the Conduct and Command of such
a general Officer as the English Governor may judge proper, to pursue and
reduce such refractory Indians by Sea or Land, to live peaceably and quietly
with their Neighbors, which by the Blessing of GOD, may prove an effectual
Method to render us formidable to our Enemies, and thereby happily secure and
perpetuate the Peace to Us, and to Our Posterity; and if any other Tribes of
Indians shall make War upon any of the Tribes now entered into this Peace, in
such Case the English shall assist them at their Cost and Charge with the like
Proportion of Men as may be necessary. This is all I have now to say, and if
you will go out and consider of it, and give me an Answer to it, I shall be
ready to hear you on that or any other Affair you may have to offer.


Auyaummowett. I am very thankful I have this Opportunity of seeing your
Honor, and that we do see the Faces of one another in Health, and that we have
so good an Understanding one with another, and that there may be nothing taken
amiss, for we have heard nothing but what is (...). What your Honor has
proposed to us, we (...) Council to consider of, and then ^ive you an Answer. I
have (...) Brother; Since we have had a good Understanding, and (...), which is
and will be known through the whole C^: As I have (...) Hands with my Brother,
there is no (...) that many (...) on it, that (...) Honor as well as our (...)
no ill Effect on other (...) we are all (...). As we are (...) in this Place,
where the P^ has been conc^, (...) that nothing may be spoken out (...) what
has been (...) concluded. This is what (...) the Conclusion of the P^.


Lt. Gov. You have (...) in what you have said.


Auyaummowett. -- (...) proceeded -- We have had a (...) has mentioned, that if
any (...), that we should join to (...) each other: We agree to it, and (...)
dingly, if Occasion shall be, and our (...) same with your Honor's.


Lt. Gov. That is certainly the Way to keep the (...).


Auyaummowett. As to what your (...) has said about the Captives, and the
People taken at (...), we have (...) As to the Captives, it is true, we have
taken some, but when we have carried them Home, it has not been above a Day or
two before the French had them, and when the French had them and carried them
to their Houses, it was all as (...) as if the English had them themselves: for
the English and the French are Brothers. As to the People taken at (...) there
was a Boy brought to us, but it was all one with him as with the other
Captives; he is in the Hands of the French as others were. We have something
more to offer now.


Lt. Gov. You have forgot to give an Answer to what I mentioned about your Dogs.


Auyaummowett. We will speak to that presently. So far we have had a good
Understanding in what we have said; I would now say further, I desire your
Honor would have a Thought as to P^ and (...); We shall have a great Number of
People come over here quickly, and we desire there may be a sufficient Supply
of Goods for us in each of those Places. I have one Word more on Account of the
Lands we are Owners of, that is, our Hunting Ground, we desire your Honor
would take Care that none of the Mebeg^, or others of the Southern Indians, may
be allowed to come into our Hunting Ground, or even to the Eastward of (...),
for therein they very much Damage us, and take our Game from us, which we
expect to get when we go a Hunting, but may otherwise be wronged herein, if
Care be not taken effectually to prevent those Indians, and their coming among
us may breed Misunderstanding, and be of ill Consequence.


Lt. Gov. I will consider of this, and what else you have said, and shall give
you an Answer by and by; in the mean Time, the Article we have agreed to be
added to the Treaty shall be entered on the Parchment, with the other Articles,
in order to be signed by us all Afternoon.


A^. As to what was said about the Dogs, we will take Care that our Dogs shall
be muz^ed whenever we come into any English Plantation: We desire our Affairs
may be concluded as soon as possible: We hope to Day all may be finished.


Lt. Gov. We will do all we can to D^y, and to Morrow shall shake Hands and D^
together, and after D^nner, I shall have (...) ready to carry you to your (...)
respective Homes, if the (...) be cone.


(...). I have something to say respecting Trade. Your Honor told us that in
carrying on the Trade we should have (...) Thing as cheap as it was bought at
(...) and that we should have for our Beaver as much as it would (...), that I
should take Notice of it, and observe as the Matter was carried on, I observe
this Spring that the Goods we buy are dearer, and the Bea^ cheaper than
formerly; I shall say nothing but what is true, this (...) out to our (...);
when we told the Tribes how the Trade was to be (...) on and it proves
otherwise, it makes us (...); there are a great many that talk to us in another
Language (the (...)) and tell us this Trade is but for (...); it is to draw us
in for a small Time, and then it will fall, and we shall be (...) at.


Lt. Gov. Give me an Instance in what Particulars.


(...) (...); Two Yards of Strouds were sold for three Pounds of (...), now it
is four Pounds of Be^ver.


Lt. Gov. That does not make good what you have asserted, but proceeds only on
Account of the Price of Beaver's (...) at the Market, and not from any Rise on
the Cost of our Goods: Have you not always a Bill of (...) of the Goods you
buy, as well as an Account of the Price allowed for the Beaver. I desire you
always would, and thereby you may know that what I say is true. I am surprised
to hear what you say, the English Government (...) to raise (...) Farthing on
the true Cost of the Goods, and I will be bound to give you Ten for One if ever
you can make out what you have now said: I was apprehensive (...) Year you
might have some Difficulty in Understanding Trade, and therefore I told then
expresty, that the Prizes of all Goods would be sometimes higher and sometimes
lower at the Markets, and that no Body could help it. And then what was said to
them at the Conference the Fifth of August last * Page 12.
respecting Trade, was read and interpreted, which is in the Words following,
Viz.

While the Articles were in R^ling immediately after the Article respecting
Trade. The Indians by their Speaker Loron, acquainted the Lieutenant Governor
that they had been told the Prices of Goods would be raised when the
Ratification was over: The Lieutenant Governor answered them, that they might
be assured that the Goods always were, and still should be bought with ready
Money, and that the Government would not make any New Advance on their Goods,
and for a Proof of it they would always be sensible and find that the
Government would supply them cheaper than any other People whatsoever; that
they are acquainted with the Nature of Markets, that they are sometimes higher
and sometimes lower.


Loron. We would Instance also in Powder, which has come higher to us lately,
than we had it ever before.


Lt. Gov. That cannot be wondered at, when we consider the War that has lately
been in Europe with the Germans and Spaniards; Powder never was known to be so
High as lately it has been on that Account. If there had been the least Advance
on the Powder, or any other Goods sent from Boston to the TruckMaster, I should
have been ashamed to have seen you here, but you may be assured there has been
no Advance at all, and you may prove that always by sending some Persons to
Boston, to try the Markets, and I shall be glad if some of you will go with me
now at my return to Boston.


Lt. Gov. Wentworth. I myself am verysensible of the late rise of Powder, a
little while ago, I bought Powder at Boston for l. 14. per Barrel, and since
that, I have been obliged to pay l. 19 per Barrel for it.


Loron. We desire you would have some Thought about the Truck Master, that the
Trde may be rightly carried on: The first Truck-Master you sent to St. Georges
we liked very well, he managed very pleasing and agreeable to us, we liked Mr.
Mountsorth very well, we have nothing to say against Capt. Gyles at al, he is a
Man that is agreeable to us.


Lt. Gov. Dummer. We have Advice that the Peace in Europe is concluded, and it
is very likely Powder will fall.


Auyaummowett. As your Honor was saying, you had a Vessel to carry us to
Kennebeck River, we shall not have Occasion for that, for as this is the Place
of the Treaty, so we are all here now, but when that is over we shall scatter,
some East, some West, and all go different Ways, so that we desire the Things
may not be sent to Kennebeck. I speak for my self and the Arresaguntacooks.


M^us. We desire for Kennebeck-River, That Capt. Heath may be continued to us.


Lt. Gov. We like him very well.


Loron. We shall be very glad to have a Gunsmith at St. Georges.


Lt. Gov. You shall have one.


Auyaummowett. I had forgot that Article, we desire there may be a Gunsmith at
Sa^, and one at Pejopscot Fort.


Moxus. We desire a Gunsmith may be sent to Capt. Heath's Fort at Kennebeck.


Lt. Gov. You shall be supplied.


Auyaummowett. I speak for the Indians at Pejepscot and Ammerescogin, we have
formerly had Experience of Capt. Gyles, his good and faithful Services, we
desire he may be appointed Truck Master at Pejepscot.


Lt. Gov. We must not rob one Tribe to serve another, we cannot spare so good a
Man from St. Georges.


Loron. We desire to know whether we must pay the Gunsmith that comes to St.
Georges, or whether the English Government will pay him.


Lt. Gov. We will take Care that the Smith shall Charge very moderately for all
the Work he does, and if he should offer to Cheat you, or make any extravagant
Demands for his Work, he shall be discarded, and to enable him to do the Work
cheap, he will be Victualled at the Block-House, at the Charge of the
Government.


Wenongonett. We were speaking a little while ago about Capt. Gyles, we like
him very well, and desire he may be continued to us.


Lt. Gov. We will not rob you of Capt. Gyles.


Moxus. We take hold of Capt. B^ne, and fix him down at Richmond at
Kenneb^-River, we like him very well, and would keep him.


Lt. Gov. It is very well.


Auyaummowett. We desire Capt. Jordan may have the Care of the Trade at
Saco-Fort, and be Truck-Master there.


Lt. Gov. He is a very good Man.


Post Meridiem.
PRESENT as Before.

The Additional Article agreed to being fairly engrossed with the other
Articles was laid open, and distinctly read and faithfully Interpreted to the
Indians, and is in the Words following, Viz.

By the Parties to these Articles.

The following Article is Unanimously and reciprocally agreed upon, for the
more effectual Preservation of the Peace, That if any Hostility shall be
committed or offered to be committed by any Indians on any of the English
Subjects, The Tribes who have entered into, and Ratified the Treaty, shall
furnish and supply Fifty Indians with a Captain of their own, and the English
Two Hundred and Fifty, and so in Proportion a greater or lesser Number as the
Occasion shall require; The Forces to be paid and subsisted by the English, and
under the Conduct of such a General Officer as the English Governor may judge
proper, to pursue such refractory Indians either by Sea or Land, and compel
them to live Peaceably and ^uietly with their Neighbors; And if any other
Tribes of Indians, shall make War upon any of the Tribes now entered into the
Peace, in such Case, the English shall assist them at their own Cost and
Charge, with the like Proportion of Men as may be necessary. DONE at the
Conference at Casco-Bay, this Twenty-fifth Day of July, in the Thirteenth Year
of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord King GEORGE, Ann^ D^mi 1727. And then the
said Article was Openly Signed and Delivered by His Honor WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire;
Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief in and over His M^jesty's Province of
the Massachusetts Bay, The Honorable JOHN WENTWORTH, Esquire; Lieut. Governor and
Commander in Chief in and over His Majesty's Province of (...), and Major PAUL
MASCARENE, Commissioner for the Government of N^-S^a, and also by all the
aforenamed Indians, Chiefs and other of the several respective Tribes aforesaid.

Lt. Gov. In the Morning I acquainted you that I expected a faithful Account
from ^uin^ and Og^, of their Errand concerning the Captives, taken from K^
since the Peace, and did not expect they would have been so backward in it: I
also acquainted you, that I have (...) turning the Captives of the several
Tribes in our Hand, and that I expected the like from you; and now I must tell
you the Answer I (...) received was no Ways Satisfactory, but trifling and
evasive, and that I do expect a better Account, and a just Compliance from you
on that Article.


Auyaummowett. Your Honor said this in the Morning. I say now, as I said then,
I know nothing of any Captive only one Boy, and he is in the H^ of the (...), I
told you when I first spoke, that I came from Home as it were by Force, and on
a Message: I am not Master of those that are in the Hands of the French, but I
will do my Endeavor that they shall be restored when I get back, and shall
acquaint the S^ with what has passed at the Conference; and I shall do what I
can to have the Captives restored: I cannot absolutely premise they shall be
restored, if I should, and not be able to effect it when I get Home, I should
tell you a Lie: If I had one Captive in my Hand, or there were any with us,
there would have been no Need of half these Words, but the Captives should have
been delivered up at once.


Lt. Gov. I believe you speak like an (...) Man; but I am very much
misinformed, if there are not some among you that do know of English Captives
that are in your Hands; I desire you would consuit among your selves, and give
me ^ more full Account to Morrow Morning.


Loron. I spoke not so fully concerning the Trade at St. George's as I intended
to do in the Morning: We desire Mr. M^ may be sent there. It is very strange to
us, that now the Truck-Master is come away, the Door is fast; the Key is turned
on the Lock, and we cannot get any Thing now, nor can our Wives and Children
get the Necessaries of Life. As to P^-Fort and the Officer there, though the P^
know the Prices of Things, yet they are overreached there by the Officer; and
if we are, much more will the Indians that come down out of the Country, and
know nothing of the Prices of Goods; but come to ask, if there be a Trade? He
says, Yes; and then tells them the Prices of Goods. There are four Indians now
sitting here that know the Truth of this; one of them is a Pen^ Indian.

The several Indians referred to, acquainted His Honor of the Things mentioned
by Loron.


Loron. We don't speak this out of Displeasure, but only to inform your Honor
that we have been thus imposed on, and that a Redress may be had.


Lt. Gov. I don't at all blame you for telling me your Grievances, though I am
sorry you have Occasion for it; you do very well in telling me of it; and I
would always have you do so, as often as you have Occastion. As to what you
say, respecting the Stores being shot up at St. Gorg^'s, that shall be
remedied, and I Will see that no such Thing shall be for the future; and as to
what you say about Mr. M^tsirt. I shall consider of it when I get to Court. I
am very sorry to hear you have been so imposed on at P^ and shall resent it;
and must remind you of my Caution formerly to you, not to trade with any
private Person, when you may be supplied at the public Stores; however, if you
cannot govern yourselvers in this Affair, I shall give Orders, that the Officer
shall not be allowed to Trade with you on any Account whatsoever, nor shall any
Person under his Command be allowed to Trade with you on any Account. As to
what you say in being Imposed on, or overreached in buying any Thing at P^, I
shall take Care that some of the Gentlemen of the Council shall hear that
Matter to Morrow Morning, when your People will attend them, and shall order
that Justice be done them on they Head; and Three of the Council were appointed
accordingly, vit. (...) (...), Esqrs; and Capt. (...) the Fort at Pr^, who was
present, was ordered to attend.


Lt. Gov. Interpreters. Turn to the (...) and tell them I shall expect they
come to Morrow Morning, prepared to give me a better Account of the English
Captives.


Wednesday, July 26. 1727.
PRESENT as Before.

Lt. Gov. I Acquainted you last Night that I expected to Day, you should give
me a better Account of the English Captures, than what I have yet received, and
I now meet you for that purpose.


Auy^. Brethren. As you mentioned, concerning the English Captives Yesterday
Morning, in the Afternoon, and now to Day again, I shall now go from this
Place, and I shall acquaint the Tribes of every Thing that has happed, and
shall do my Endeavor to get the English Captives back, but I would not have
you think hard; I will do what I can but I cannot promise Certainly, I shall
Endeavor to deliver up all the English Captives, those that have been there
these Forty Years, I will do my utmost Endeavor to accomplish this, and if I
cannot succeed in the Affair, I shall return back and acquaint you, but nothing
shall be wanting that I can do, to have the English restored.


Lt. Gov. This Answer is much the same with what I had last Night, it is
Trifling, and I insist that you give me a better Account, and that the Captives
shall be forthwith delivered. I am informed there are several Captives now in
your Hands, and I suppose the Person that informed of this may be produced.


Auy^. I am acquainted of Five Captives at Arr^, there are some that are
Married, and I cannot say any Thing as to them; there is one Woman at St. (...),
taken at North (...) and two Boys, and two Girls, taken at (...)-River, or
(...)-River and (...).


Lt. Gov. Where are they?


(...) All at St. Fran^^^.


Lt. Gov. I desire to know who are their Masters.


(...). The Men are not here, it is not our Custom to mention any Body's Name
that is not present.


Lt. Gov. I did not give you Occasion to ask whose Hands the Indian Captives
were in, and I expect you give a direct Answer to that Question.


(...). One Captive is in the Hands of (...) is Master of Two, and (...) squaw,
is Mistress of a Girl, (...) Squaw, is Mistress of an old Woman.


Lt. Gov. Is the Boy, taken from (...) last Fall, one of the Five you have
mentioned.


(...). No, He is among the French.


Lt. Gov. I expect that (...) and (...), give me an Account of the Family taken
at (...), they were ^ent on purpose on that Errand, and therefore I expect they
come out in (...), and give an Account of what they know of that Matter.


(...). They (...), That the Boy was among the (...), and that is all they know
about it, as they have informed me.


Lt. Gov. I expect the^ give the Account themselves.


The Two Indians came out. Lt. Gov. I now demand that you give an Account of
your Proceeding on the Errand you were seat on, from (...) last Winter,
respecting the Family taken at (...) in the Fall, according to your Promises to
the Government by whom you were (...) out, and for your Performance of that
Service, you (...), left your Son as a Pledge.


(...) (...) had the Misfortune to have a Wound in his Leg, and many other
Accidents intervening, (...) my proceeding on that Errand till we had an
Account from the Indians we met, who informed us they were come to (...) the
Peace. I gave Capt (...) the full Account of my Proceeding in this Matter,
which I suppose he Communicated to your Honor by (...). I heard when the
Indians took that Family, the English pursued them very quick, and the Indians
were afraid of being discovered, and so they killed three of the English, and
the Boy they carried away.


Lt. Gov. When you went away from (...) you promised me to make what Discovery
you could to bring back the Persons taken, if possible, or at least that you
would give me the Names of the Indians that committed that Action, and what
Tribes they belonged to.


Quineis;e. The Indians Names are, Waubaway, Paucaunaump^jte, Acteon,
Omber^ees, Manneerbowbau, Pier, Su^gdaugunds.


Lt. Gov. Of what Tribes were the Indians?


Quineise. Some St. Francois, some (...), and some Scatacook Indians.


Lt. Gov. Of what Tribe was (...)?


Quineise. Of the M^^gans formerly.


Lt. Gov. Since we have so far happily concluded the Peace, and you have
informed me of these Captives, I desire and expect you give me an Account what
Measures you propose to take for the effectual restoring the English Captives
to their Homes and Relations again. I suppose Quineise and Ogicksan^ have given
an Account according to the best of their Knowledge.


(...). As to what your Honor has mentioned about having a good Understanding
in the Peace, nothing shall be wanting to effect it on our Part, and we hope
the like from you, and if both of us join in this, there is no Doubt but we
shall mutually enjoy the good Effects of the Peace, otherwise not: When I go
back I shall acquaint the Tribes of all that has passed, and use my utmost
Endeavors to restore the Captives, and doubt not but I may prevail to have
them all restored when the Tribes hear what I shall say to them to enforce the
Matter. Your Honor has not given us any Answer to what we said about the (...)
hunting in our Ground.


Lt. Gov. I have not forgot it, I think it a very reasonable Demand, and though
they are not in this Government, yet I shall write to the Governor of (...),
in whose Government they dwell, and acquaint him of what you desire, that he
would restrain those Indians in their hunting accordingly.


(...) We of the (...) desire that Capt. Senders Sloop may be appointed to
carry us down to our Country.


Lt. Gov. You shall have the Sloop to carry you down according to your Desire.


N.B.

That at this Time at the Conference, The Representatives present desired the
Lieutenant Governor to acquaint the Indians, that the Government would satisfy
any reasonable Charges they may be at in traveling backwards and forwards to
restore the English Captives, upon their delivering such Captives into the
Hands of the Government, and for the Encouragement of the Indians herein, that
His Honor will please to acquaint them, that the three Indian Captives now in
the Hands of the English shall be restored upon the Rendition of the English
Captives as aforesaid.

Lt. Gov. I had all the Reason in Justice to expect that I should have had all
the English Captives delivered up at the Treaty, as I have delivered up the
Indian Captives to you, and I suppose if you had been so sensible of the Nature
of this Affair before, as you are now, you would have done it; but I still
expect that your Chief AUYAUMMOWETT does his utmost Endeavor to have the
English Captives restored according to his repeated Promises; and though I am
not obliged by the Articles of the Treaty to do any Thing herein, yet for your
Encouragement to bring in and deliver up all the English Captives into the
Hands of the Government at Boston, I promise you that you shall have reasonable
Satisfaction for your Time and Trouble in Traveling backwards and forwards in
completing this Matter; and further for your Encouragement, I now promise in
the Name of the Government, That upon your delivering up all the English
Captives as aforesaid, that you shall have three Indian Captives now in this
Province delivered to you, who were sold away by the Captors, and though they
must be purchased of their Masters, yet I will engage they shall be delivered
up upon the restoring the English Captives as aforesaid.


Lt. Gov. Wentworth. I promise the same on the Part of the Government of
NewHampshire.


Lt. Gov. Dummer. I do not intend by any Thing that I have said, that there
shall be any Allowance made for the Ransom of the Captives, which I would have
you be fully sensible of, but for your own Charges and Trouble only.


Auyaumm^wett. We cannot give any other Answer than what we have already done,
but we assure you we will certainly do our utmost Endeavors to have all the
English Captives restored.


Lt. Gov. Wentworth. I have a small Present for you from the Government of
NewHampshire, which is at the St^rn of our Vessel, and is ready for you if
you will call for it.


Lt. Gov. Dummer. Dinner is now ready and waiting for us, and we will go and
refresh our selves, and the Secretary shall get a fair Drought of the
Conference ready for Examination in the Morning, that we may see it is rightly
taken down, and then we will take our Leave, and bid each other farewell in
Peace.


Indians -- by a general Consent -- We have a right and full Understanding of
what passed at the Conference, the Matters have been often repeated to Us. We
have been a long While from Home, and very earnestly desire we may be
dispatched this Night.


Lt. Gov. Dummer. It is well, We will endeavor to get Things in such a
Readiness, that you may go away this Evening. When I get to Boston I shall
order the Conference to be Printed, which will come out under the Secretary's
Hand, and Copies thereof shall be forwarded you as soon as may be, for the Use
of your Tribes respectively; with which they all appeared to be very much
pleased and fully satissied.

His Honor with the Council, and Gentlemen attending, together with the
several Tribes, dined publicly under a Tent prepared for that Purpose, and the
Conference was concluded with public Rejoicings.


Thursday, August 27th. 1727.
THE several Tribes being assembled in a public Manner to receive of His
Honor Lieutenant Governor DUMMER the Present from this Government; His Honor
directed that the Committees Report on the Complaints of several Indians being
misused in Trade by Capt. (...), of His Majesty's Fort (...), at (...) Falls
(as by the said Complaints made the 25th Current appears should be read and
interpreted to the (...), which was accordingly done, and is as follows;
Captain (...) being present, and hearing the said Report, (...) 20. July, 1727.

Complaint being made to the Honorable the Lieutenant Governor by diverse
Indians, that they were overreached; and hardly used in the Price of Goods
they bought of Capt. (...), and thereupon we being appointed to hear the
Parties, and to examine and make an Estimate of the Value of said Goods, are of
Opinion, that what is overcharged on each Indian's Account ought to be paid
them by Capt. (...); or that upon their returning any of the Goods bought of
him, which have received no Damage since they had them, he shall restore the
whole of what they paid him for such Goods; particularly the Rings (...) had of
him, and one half of the Gold Necklace (...) had. The respective Accounts are
as follow, Bartho (...) Secretary (...) if Capt. William Wood^s;i would.
(...) L. 06 00 00 (...) L. 03 15 00 (...) 05 00 00 03 00 00 (...) 02 10 00 01
15 00 (...) 00 10 00 00 10 00 (...) 00 06 00 00 06 00 (...) 00 12 00 00 06 00
L. 14 18 06 L. 00 12 00 Overcharged L. 25 06 06 Arramaument (...) of D^tto.
(...) L. 03 03 00. Valued at 01 11 06 Overcharged 01 11 06 Pier bought of
Capt. William Woodside.
One (...) L. 02 00 00 (...) L. 01 05 00 One (...) L. 01 10 00 L 01 00 00
Overcharged L 01 05 00 Toma bought of Ditto.
Half a Gold Necklace, for which be paid 15 L. of (...). L. 06 15 00 (...) at
L. 05 00 00 One Silk (...) Silk Aprens, L. 12 (...). L. 05 08 00 L 04 08 00
Overcharged, L. 02 15 00 Overcharged in all L. 10 18 00

William Ta^er, Addington Davenport, Thomas F^ten.

His Honor then as^ed the said Capt. (...) how he proposed to Comply with the
Committees Report, in making Satisfaction to the Indians? To which he replied,
he was not just then in a Capacity to do it, but would make them Satisfaction
on his return to his Post at (...), and gave Notes of his Hand to pay to the
several Indians, the Sums particularly set to their Names in the said Report on
Demand. Which Piece of Public Justice, was to the great Satisfaction of the
several Tribes of Indians, as well as to the Numerous Company of the Spectators
present.

By Command of His Honor the Lieutenant Governor, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Council John Wainwright, Cl. Counc.

Upon His Honor's Arrival at (...), He was pleased to (...) the following
Proclamation (...)
By The Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER, Esquire; Lieutenant Governor and Commander in
Chief, in and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts (...) in
New England. A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas(...)of December, 1725. by Delagates,(...) Tribes of Indians (...) at
Falmounth (...) Day of July, the said Indians (...) PEACE(...)
Massachusetts Bay(...)Indian Tribes (...)

I Have therefore thought fit with the Advice of His Majesty's Council, to
(...) this Proclamation. That so all Persons within this Government may be duly
informed of the same; And I do hereby strictly Command and Require all His
Majesty's good Subjects to live in Peace and Amity with all the (...) of the
(...) Tribes, as also with the several other Tribes not herein particularly
named, for whom the (...) in the Treaty abovementioned; (...) Hostility
against any of the said In^ (...) them the lead (...); But on the contrary, to
(...) them all necessary Comfort (...) may require; And His (...) of the Peace,
and (...) in such Places where the (...) Endeavor, that no (...) and that the
good Laws of this (...) in all Dealings and Transactions (...) them.

(...) Day of August, 1727, In the (...) GEORGE, in the Great of GOD of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, KING, (...) of the Faith, etc.

W. DUMMER.
By Order of the Honorable the (...), by and with (...) of the Council, (...),
Secr.

GOD Save the KING.
BOSTON: Reprinted by S. KNEELAND, by Order of the (...) House of
REPRESENTATIVES, 1754.


