Dr. Chauncy's SERMON ON The horrid Nature, and enormous Guilt, of MURDER.

The horrid Nature, and enormous Guilt of MURDER. A SERMON Preached at the
Thursday-Lecture in BOSTON, November 19th. 1754. The Day of the Execution of
William Wieer, For the MURDER of William Chism.

By Charles Chauncy, D. D. One of the Pastors of the first Church in Boston.

Genesis 6. 9. Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed; for in
the Image of God made he Man. Numb. 35. 31 -- Ye shall take no Satisfaction for
the Life of a Murderer; -- but he shall surely be put to Death. BOSTON: Printed
by Thomas Fleet. 1754.

The Scripture-Law against MURDER explained and enforced.
Matt. 19, 18. -- Jesus said, Thou shall do no Murder.
THESE Words of our Lord Jesus Christ are quoted from the sixth of the ten
Commandments, which God published from Sinai, in the hearing of the main Body
of the Jewish Nation, and wrote on two Tables of Stone, that they might be a
standing perpetual Rule for the Direction of their Conduct toward Him and one
another. And as all these Commandments (the Fourth only excepted, and this only
in part) are grounded on Reason, and not mere positive Institution, they are
universally obligatory, so far as Mankind are under Advantages to become
acquainted with them. This is particularly true of the Commandment I have just
read to you; because it took rise from that Fitness and Propriety of Action,
which is everlastingly due from Men toward each other, as they are all of one
Blood, and endowed with the same common Right to the possession and enjoyment
of Life here on Earth. And this Commandment is eminently binding upon us
Christians, as it has been adopted by our great Master and Lord into his
Religion, and makes one of the important Laws of his Kingdom. Jesus said, Thou
shall do no Murder. In discoursing to which Words, I shall endeavor two Things.

I. First, Explain the Sense in which we are here commanded to do no Murder.

II. Secondly, Enforce the Command, by representing the horrid Nature, and
enormous Guilt of the Sin of Murder.

We shall then conclude the Discourse with the proper Application.

I. First, I am to explain the Command, Thou shall do no Murder.

And it is plain, if one Man should slay another by mere Chance, as we vulgarly
speak; that is, when he had no Intention to do it, nor any Thought of being the
occasion of Hurt to him, in the least, it is a Mishap only, and not the Crime
here cautioned against. Accordingly we find, that God himself, in this Case,
frees a Man from Guilt, ordaining that he shall live. Deuteronomy. 19. 4, 5. Whosoever
kills his Brother ignorantly, whom he hated not in Time past, as when a Man
goes into the Wood with his Neighbor to hew Wood, and his Hand fetches a
stroke with the Ax to cut down the Tree, and the Head slippeth from the Helve,
and lights upon his Neighbor that he die, he shall -- live. Only, it ought
to be remembered here, Carelessness is a Fault; and should we, in this Way, be
the occasion, though accidentally, of the Death of another, we might have just
reason for uneasy Reflections on ourselves; much more, if we were engaged in
that which was in it self unwarrantable and sinful.

Again, If one Man should take away another's Life, in necessary Self-Defence;
as when, by being suddenly and unavoidably assaulted, he is obliged to repel
Force with Force, or run the Risque of losing his own Life, he is not
chargeable with the Sin of Murder. In Cases of this Sort, the Fault lies not
with him that slays, but with him who is slain. The Man who was thus compelled
to smite his Brother is innocent. There is indeed the Guilt of Blood; but it is
wholly chargeable upon him who gave the occasion for exerting the unalienable
Right, which Men have to preserve themselves. The Scripture therefore says,
Exodus 22. 2. If a Thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there
shall be no Blood shed for him. He is himself the proper sole Cause of this
Evil; and ought therefore to be the only Sufferer for it. Though great Care
should be taken, that Men do not needlessly expose themselves to the necessity
of exerting their Right of Self-Defence: nor should they ever exert this Right,
in this extreme Case, unless when the Necessity is real, and apparently
unavoidable.

In like manner, Enemies may be slain in War, without any Breach of this
Command: Always provided, the War is engaged in upon just and necessary
Reasons; as, to redress Injuries, guard against Wrongs and Violence, and secure
the Possession and Enjoyment of valuable Rights and Privileges; all other
Methods having proved ineffectual. In this Case, it is rather a Virtue than a
Crime, to be instrumental in curbing the Insolence of Enemies, and weakening
their Strength to injure and oppress; though in the doing of it, Numbers of them
should be slain. They are indeed the faulty Causes of their own Death. The
opposing them with Force may properly be considered as an Act of public
Justice, and necessary Self-Defence; and those who are active herein, instead
of being faulted, ought to be applauded: And the more successful they are in
reducing such Enemies to Reason, or Destruction, the more worthy they are of
Honor. But if Wars are come into merely to serve the Ends of Pride, Ambition,
Avarice, or any other Lust, either of the Flesh or Mind, the Lives which are
taken away in such Wars are really so many horrid Murders. How far the
immediate Instruments may be chargeable with Blame in God's Sight, may be
difficult to determine; but it is, at once, evident, that their Employers, the
Princes and Potentates of the Earth, are, in this Case, inhuman, cruel,
barbarous Butchers of their Fellow-Men, and will be treated as such by the King
of Kings, who respects not the Persons of Men; but will render to all,
whether high or low, without favor or Affection, according to their Deeds, in
the Day of the appearing of his Son Jesus Christ to judge the World in
Righteousness.

In fine, If Men are put to Death for Capital Crimes by Authority from the
Civil Magistrate, who is God's Minister, and holds the Sword for this very
Purpose, it is not a Trespass upon my Text; but an act of public Service,
necessary for the well-being of Society; which could not subsist, if wicked and
violent Men should be suffered, with Impunity, to invade the Rights of others,
as their ungoverned Lusts might prompt them thereto.

These Cases being excepted, the Sin forbidden in this Commandment, is the
voluntary taking away another's Life without Cause, or without a just and
necessary one: Upon what Motive soever it is done, whether from Hatred, or
Malice, or Envy, or Revenge, or presumed Safety, or pretended Reparation of
Honor: Or, by what Means soever it be effected; whether by direct Violence, or
fraudulent Contrivance; in an open, or clandestine Manner; immediately by
ourselves, or by the Instrumentality of others. Or if Life should not be
actually taken away, yet is this Commandment violated, at least, in the all
seeing View of God, if it was endeavored, and such Endeavor would have taken
Effect, had it not been counter-acted by some unforeseen Turn or other in the
Conduct of Providence; as in the Case of those, who entered into a Conspiracy
to kill Paul, and laid wait for him, in prosecution of this bloody Design, but
were hindered, beyond their own Intention, from accomplishing it; Acts 23. 12,
14.

This now is the Crime which is here forbidden; and it is a more or a less
aggravated one, in proportion to the Circumstances that attend it. If the
Design upon another's Life was not suddenly excited; but took rise from cool,
deliberate, settled, Hatred and Malice, it is Murder in the grossest Sense. Nor
will the Manner in which it was committed make any considerable Difference in
the Degree of Guilt. It is Murder of the deepest Dye.

It is Murder also, though in a less criminal Sense, when Life is taken away, not
from a settled Principle of calm and deliberate Malice, but in consequence of
sudden Anger heightened into Rage and Fury. What Allowances human Laws, under
some Governments, may make for sudden Transports of Passion, and how far, in
some Cases, they may be satisfied without the Blood of the guilty Person, I
pretend not to determine; but, in true Reason, it is evidently unfit, that Life
should be continually exposed to hazard, from the turbulent and ungoverned
Wrath of Men. This would be to subject quiet and peaceable Members of Society
to the greatest Hardships, by constructively giving Encouragement to angry Men
to vent their Fury on them. It is plain, the possession of Life is not so
strongly guarded and secured as it might be, and ought to be, in well regulated
Society, if passionate Men may be indulged the Liberty of slaying their
Neighbors; provided they are able to plead, they were in a Fit of Rage, not
having the government of themselves, and not knowing what they did. This, at
best, is only making one Crime an Excuse for another; which if allowed as
valid, and sufficient to wipe off the Guilt of Blood, no one can enjoy his Life
with safety. That Anger increasing into Rage, which hurries a Man on wickedly
and injuriously to invade his Neighbor, and deprive him of Life, is murderous
in the Eye of Reason, and in the Eye of God, and it is Pity if it is not, in
all Places, so esteemed, by the Law of Man. I now proceed,

II. In the second Place, to enforce the Command in my Text, by representing
the horrid Nature of this Sin of Murder.

It is indeed one of the blackest and most monstrous Sins, and so esteemed both
by God and Man.

It is mentioned by Name, in the sacred Writings, as a Sin which is eminently
hateful to God. Psalm 5. 6. The Lord will abhor the bloody Man. Prove. 6. 16,
17. Hands that shed innocent Blood are an Abomination to the Lord. And he has
accordingly testified his great Displeasure against this Sin, even from the
Beginning of the World. That was his Language to Cain, the Son of the first Man
that ever lived, upon having murdered his Brother Abel. Genesis 4. 10, 11. 12.
What have thou done? The Voice of thy Brother's Blood cries to me from the
Ground. And now thou art cursed from the Earth, which has opened her Mouth to
receive thy Brother's Blood from thy Hand. -- A fugitive and a Vagabond shall
thou be in the Earth. An awful Punishment this! And well might Cain break
forth, and say, as in the Words that next follow, My Punishment is greater than
I can bear! It may be worthy Observation, The most awfully severe and extensive
Judgment God, was ever pleased to visit this World of ours with, was its
Destruction by a Deluge of Water, one Family only excepted; and the Reason is
given, Genesis 6. 11. Because the Earth was filled with Violence. And it was to
prevent such Violence in the new Generations that might proceed out of the
Loins of Noah, that God made it a standing perpetual Law. Genesis 9. 5, 6. At the
Hand of every Man's Brother will I require the Life of Man. Whosoever sheddeth
Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. And when he took upon himself the
more special Government of the Nation of the Jews, he peremptorily annexed the
Sentence of Death, to the Law against Murder. And that it might be known what
Murder was, he says, concerning every Man that should kill his Neighbor, as in
Numb. 35. 16. And if he smite him with an Instrument of Iron, so that he die,
he is a Murderer: The Murderer shall surely be put to Death. It follows, in the
next Verse, And if he smite him with throwing a Stone, and he die: he is a
Murderer: The Murderer shall surely be put to Death. It is yet added in the
following Verse, which may be worthy of Notice, upon this Occasion, or if he
smite him with a hand-weapon of Wood (wherewith he may die) and he die; he is a
Murderer: The Murderer shall surely be put to Death. And it is farther
observable, the Sovereign Lord of Life was pleased most solemnly, and in
express Words, to prohibit the taking any Satisfaction for the Life of a
Murderer, as in the 30th and 31st Verses of this Chapter, Whosoever kills any
Person, the Murderer shall be put to Death -- ye shall take no Satisfaction for
the Life of a Murderer; but he shall surely be put to Death. And that this Law
might not be evaded, by the Flight of Murderers to any of the Cities of Refuge
(a Number of which were appointed for the Protection of those, who though they
had killed others, yet were not chargeable with Murder) he particularly
ordained, Deuteronomy. 19. 12. That they should be fetched thence, and delivered into
the Hands of the Avenger of Blood, that they might die.

But more than all this, the holy God, to signify his great Indignation against
this Sin of Murder, has particularly rank't it, in the Revelation of his Will
by his Son Jesus Christ, among those Crimes which, if not repented of, will
certainly be a Bar in the Way of Men's obtaining Life in Heaven, according to 1
John 3. 15. No Murderer has eternal Life; yea, he has mentioned it, by Name,
as a Sin that will, without sincere Repentance, expose Men to the second Death,
or, which means the same Thing, the Fire of Hell, according to Rev. 21. 8.
Murderers shall have their Part in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone: which is the second Death.

And as this Sin of Murder is thus singularly foul and black in the Esteem of
God, so it is likewise in the Account of Man. It is indeed a Crime that is
shocking to the human Mind, unless when abandoned to all Sense of what is right
and fit: Nor are there many, however debauched in their Principles, and
dissolute in their Manners, but would find within themselves uneasy Emotions of
Soul at the Thought of committing a barbarous Murder; adopting the Language of
Hazael, and saying, Is thy Servant a Dog that he should do this Thing? All
civilized Nations have, as one, united in ranking Murder among the most
enormous Crimes, and guarding against it by enacting Laws with the Sanction of
Death. We know indeed of no People, however rude and uncultivated, in other
Respects, but have entertained a kind of Horror at the Sin of Murder; judging
it worthy of some remarkable Punishment. Hence the Barbarians, at Melita,
reasoned among themselves, as in Acts 28. 4. No doubt this Man is a Murderer*
whom, though he has escaped the Sea, (...) Vengeance suffers not to live. And
even Murderers themselves, when they come coolly to reflect upon what they have
done, are commonly filled with great inward Remorse; turning upon themselves
with the keenest resentments of their Folly. And should they escape the
Vengeance of Man, they scarce ever after enjoy themselves, or take Comfort in
Life. Their Hearts misgive them; their Thoughts trouble them; their guilty
Fears perpetually haunt them: And sometimes, for the sake of Peace within, they
have been, as it were, forced to reveal their own Wickedness; choosing rather to
die by the Hands of Justice, than to drag on Life under the uneasy Sensations
of a continually Self-condemning Conscience.

And it is upon just and reasonable Grounds, that Murder is thus reckoned by
God and Man as one of the blackest and most monstrous Crimes, and felt to be so
by Murderers themselves: For it carries in it, in an high Degree,
Uncharitableness, Injustice, and Impiety; each of which are in themselves great
Breaches upon the Law of Nature and Religion.

Charity, or Love to our Neighbor is the second summary Commandment; and like
the first, which requires Love to God, it is great and important. On these two
Commandments hang the Law and the Prophets, the Gospel and the Apostles. We are
destitute of all Virtue and Religion, if we do not love God; and it is a vain
Thing to pretend that we love God, if we love not our Neighbor also. For as
the Apostle John speaks, 1 John 4. 20. If a Man says that he loves God, and
hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for he that loves not his Brother, whom he
has seen, cannot love God whom he has not seen. And what stronger Evidence
can a Man give, that he don't love his Brother, than embruing his Hands in his
Blood? This is the strongest Proof of his being entirely void of that Christian
Temper which is kind, and gentle, and peaceable, and apt to put one upon
walking with all Lowlinss, and Meekness, and Longsuffering; forbearing and
forgiving one another in Love. To be sure, when one Man is urged on to slay
another from Hatred and Malice, deliberate and premeditated, he discovers
Uncharitableness, in the highest Degree; yea, Inhumanity and Barbarity reign in
him, instead of Good Will and Christian Piety. To hate a Brother to the Death
is the utmost Pitch of Hatred. And if, in imitation of our Master and Savior
Jesus Christ, and out of respect to him, we ought to be willing to lay down our
Lives for the Brethren, it must be a most enormous Breach of Christian Charity
for a Man wilfully, and without Cause, to take away his Brother's Life.

Judgment is as weighty a matter of God's Law as Mercy; for the Lord our God
has particularly required it of us to do Justice. But the Murderer
outragiously transgresses the Rule of Right; invading his Neighbor's
Property, in the most indisputable Case: For the Possession of Life is what he
claims by immediate Grant from the great Sovereign of the Universe. And by
invading this Right he does him the greatest possible Injury; for he deprives
him of the most valuable Good. Nothing indeed, in all the World, is so precious
as Life; for it is the Foundation of all other Enjoyments, and justly
preferable to them all. The Father of Lies therefore spoke Truth, when he said,
as in Job 2. 9. Skin for Skin, all that a Man has will he give for his Life.
Nor can the Loss of it be repaired or compensated. He that loses his Life,
loses therewith all future Capacity of Enjoyment in this World, without any
Possibility of recovering it again. It is therefore the highest and most
aggravated Injury that can be done to a Man to take away his Life unjustly. It,
in a manner, infinitely surpasses every other Evil, whether in Name, Estate, or
bodily Welfare in any Kind; for these have their Measure, and may be capable of
some Reparation: But this is altogether extreme and irreparable.

Besides it ought to be remembered here, when a Man wickedly slays his Brother,
he not only, at once, turns him out of all Capacity of enjoying any farther
Good in this World, but deprives him of the Time he might otherwise have had to
make Preparation for another World, and may be the Means of his being
tormented, instead of comforted there. The Murderer of his Brother not only
robs him of his temporal Life, and all Temporal Good therewith; but of his
Space for Repentance, and Opportunity to make his Peace with God, and to get
into good Terms with Heaven: And if he should suddenly dispatch him into the
other World, and in his Sins too, as, it may be feared, is too often the Case,
he is, in a Sense, the Murderer of his Soul, as well as Body, and may properly
be charged with bringing upon him the second, as well as the first Death. A
very serious and awful Truth this! And if it were duly attended to, might,
under the Blessing of God, be happily influential to restrain from the horrid
Sin of Murder. It is not confined, in its Consequences, to the present World;
but may prove injurious to our poor innocent Brother, innocent as to us, beyond
the Grave, in the Resurrection World. Many a poor Sinner, it may be feared, by
the Murder of his Body, has been virtually and constructively murdered in his
Soul also. And shall we dare venture upon the Commission of a Crime which may
be the immediate Occasion of the Damnation of our Brother? Shall we not rather
keep at the utmost Distance from that Act of Injustice, toward our Brother,
which, together with destroying* Body, may be the Means of destroying his Soul
in Hell?

I may still add here, the Injustice involved in the Sin of Murder, affects
others besides the Man himself that is turned out of Life. His Relations,
especially near ones are greatly injured; as hereby those natural Passions are
awakened, which occasion the keenest Sense of Pain, and, many Times, abiding
Sorrow of Heart, such as they are never freed from on this Side the Grave.
Besides which, they are deprived of the Advantage they might have received from
him, upon whom, under God, they chiefly depended for their comfortable
Subsistence in Being. The Wife of a Man's Bosom is sometimes, by this injurious
Sin, at once subjected, not merely to the Solitude of a widowed Life, but to
unknown Difficulties, Anxieties, and Hardships consequent thereupon; while, at
the same Time, his Children are reduced to the State of poor helpless Orphans,
without a Guide to their Youth, or, it may be, any Means to provide for their
Education, and future Welfare in the Word. -- But God only knows all the
Injuries which are connected with this unjust Act of taking away another's
Life. -- Whole Families have been ruined by it; yea, in its unhappy
Consequences, it may have been the Means of their Ruin in another World, as
well as this. -- Moreover, the Public is highly injured by the Sin of Murder,
as well as the murdered Person himself, and his Relatives. It loses one of its
Members, and, together herewith, all the Service it might have reaped from one
in his Place, in the Improvement of his Time and Talents, for promoting the
general Good. And, as the Case may be, and sometimes really has been, the
Injury, in this Respect, rises high, and proves an irreparable Damage. -- Such
Injustice is involved in the Sin of Murder.

It argues also Impiety against God, and to a great Degree; for it is a
downright Encroachment upon, and Usurpation of, that Right over Life, which the
Sovereign Lord of the Universe has reserved to be exercised by himself only, or
by his Vicegerents in certain Cases, wherein the Good of Society may make it
necessary. -- And it is, in another Respect, an high Indignity offered to God;
for it dispossesses him of his just Property, by virtually robbing him of a
Creature whom his Hands have formed; yea, of a Servant and Subject, from whom
he might have received a Revenue of Honor and Service. Besides all which, it
is a destroying of that Image of God which every Man naturally bears. And it
was indeed for this Reason, in special, that the Statute against Murder, in the
Days of Noah, was guarded by God himself with the Sanction of Death. So we
read, Genesis 6. 9. Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed;
for in the Image of God made he Man. The Man who murderously sheds another's
Blood, is not thought fit, by the Wisdom of the Supreme Legislator, to live any
longer on the Earth; because he hereby heinously affronts God, by throwing
Contempt on the noblest Work of his Hands, that which he made after his own
Likeness, in his own Image.

So that, upon the whole, this Sin of Murder appears to be one of the foulest
and blackest Crimes, of very heinous and complicated Guilt. It is at once a Sin
against God and Man. It virtually usurps God's sovereign Authority, his Throne
of Justice, his Sword of Vengeance; and it does the highest Injustice to Man,
both in his private Capacity, and as related in Society.

The Application yet remains.
And from the Representation I have given of the Sin of Murder, in its horrid
Nature, and enormous Guilt, let us detest it in our Hearts, and keep at the
utmost Distance from it in our Practice. I speak not thus from an Apprehension,
as though there was any one here present, upon whom this inhuman Crime could be
justly fastened, even by their own Consciences, or the God who knows all
Things: I would rather hope, the Idea of this Sin, is, in all our Minds, so
associated with Dread and Horror, that we should tremble at the Thought of
committing it. But we are yet in the Body, and within the Reach of Danger; not
knowing what Temptations may befall us. It cannot therefore be improper, upon
suitable Occasions, to put us upon our Guard, by calling our Attention to the
Counsels and Warnings of God against Murder. And it is the rather seasonable at
this Time, as the public Vengeance will, by God's Leave, in the Afternoon, be
executed upon the poor unhappy Man under Sentence of Death for this atrocious
Crime.

He has had a fair Trial conformably to the Law of the Land; and as, upon a
full hearing of his Case, it very evidently appeared, that he had murderously
shed Man's Blood, it is right and fit, that by Man his Blood should be shed.
Our Hearts may possibly relent toward him; we may be disposed, from the
working of natural Pity, to wish he might be permitted to live, and not obliged
to die: But the great Governor of the World, who is infinitely merciful, but,
at the same Time, wisely so, has said, Deuteronomy. 19. 13. Thine Eye shall not Pity
him; that is, so as to save him from Death: Thou shall put away innocent Blood
from Israel; that is, by shedding the Blood of the Murderer. Instead therefore
of such Pity as will not consist with the Will of God, and those human Laws
which are founded thereon, as well as on the common Good of Society; let us
rather discover our Christian Compassion and Love by carrying his Case to the
Throne of Grace, humbly and earnestly beseeching the Father of Mercies to make
the Destruction of his Flesh the Means of Salvation to his Soul. Thanks be to
God, this is possible. Even Murderers may, by fleeing to Christ, in the
Exercise of Repentance, and Faith, and a submissive Temper of Mind, be secure
from the Avenger of Blood, the Sanction of the Divine Law, as it respects the
future invisible World. In this City of Refuge, of God's own Appointment, there
is a safe Retreat, not only for the Manslayer, but the wilful Murderer also,
however complicated, however aggravated his Guilt has been; and having fled to
it, he may hope for the Favor of his Judge, an Acquittance at the Bar of the
coming Judgment, and an Admission to dwell with God in happy Life for ever. We
unitedly bow the Knee to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, humbly
and earnestly supplicating this Mercy for the poor Criminal, who must this Day
pass through temporal Death. May he fear God, since be is in this Condemnation;
and acknowledge it to be just, for that he receives the due Reward of his
wicked Deed, in slaying his innocent Brother. And may he be enabled penitently
to apply to the once crucified, but now enthroned Jesus, to remember him in his
Kingdom: And may the compassionate Savior of Men, who also is their King and
Judge, say to him, as to the Malefactor that was crucified with him, This Day
shall thou be with me in Pradadise.

And we all heartily wish and pray, that he may die thus penitently and
comfortably, for the sake of his distressed Relatives, as well as his own.
This, if any Thing; This, more than any Thing, would mitigate their Grief, and
compose their Minds to Silence and Submission under this heavy Rebuke of
Heaven, if they favor the Things of God and Religion; as we hope they do.

The Case of the poor Woman, who will be left this Day a sorrowful Widow, under
peculiarly striking Circumstances, is truly pitiable: Nor do we blame her, if,
in the Agonies of her Grief, she has taken to her Words, and said, Have Pity
upon me, have Pity upon me, O my Friends, for the Hand of the Lord has touched
me! May she be enabled suitably to cast this afflictive Burden on the Lord, and
find his everlasting Arms underneath, sustaining and supporting her! May that
God, who pities those who hope in his Mercy, as a Father pities his Children,
pity her distressed Case, comfort her Heart, sanctify this Calamity to her, and
make it turn out to her Spiritual and everlasting Good!

May the poor innocent Children, also, innocent of this great Crime for which
their Father ignominiously suffers Death, find Favor with him who has said,
All Souls are mine; as the Soul of the Father, so also the Soul of the Son is
mine. The Soul that sins it shall die: -- The Son shall not bear the
Iniquity of the Father. And may they find favor with Man likewise. Let none
cast it cruelly in their Teeth, that their Father died a Murderer. Let none
think, or (...) the worse of them, on this Account; but be (...) disposed to
exercise all Christian Offices of Love and Tenderness toward them; as their
Circumstances eminently bespeak the Compassion of all. And may they understand,
and hearken to, the Voice of God in this awful Providence, which loudly calls
upon them, not to forsake him, least he should forsake them, and leave them to
reap the Consequences of their own Folly, even in this World, as far as Death,
with public Ignominy.

We cordially mourn with the aged Parents of this unhappy Man. The Occasion of
their Grief is truly bitter. What Consolations in Christ do they stand in need
of? Can we who are Parents, put our Souls in their Souls stead, and not mingle
our Tears with theirs? If we have any Bowels, they cannot but be moved within
us. Let it be our ardent Prayer to the God who dwells on high, that he would
send the Comforter to dwell in their Hearts, that this Burden, added to that of
Age, may not bear too hard upon them. He only can relieve their Souls. And if
he shall please to undertake for their Help, this Stroke of his Hand, severe as
it is, shall only serve for the Trial of their Faith, and Hope, and Patience,
and Subjection to the Father of Spirits; which Graces, being proved to be more
precious than Gold that perishes, though it should be tried with Fire, shall be
found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory, at the appearance of Jesus Christ;
for this is that which he has said, and on which he has caused us to hope,
Blessed are they which endure Affliction; for when they are tried, they shall
receive the Crown of Life, which God has prepared for them that love him.

But Relatives and Friends are not the only Persons who should mourn upon this
Occasion. If they mourn, as being themselves sufferers; we should mourn,
because God's Law has been transgressed, his Name dishonored, his Image
destroyed, and such Guilt contracted as cries for Vengeance, and will defile
the whole Land, if it be not removed by shedding of Blood; so inhuman, so foul,
so black, so enormous, is the Sin of Murder! It should sensibly touch our
Hearts with Grief, when any are left of God to be thus impious and unjust; and
the tremendous Consequence of such Guilt, even in this World, should fix in our
Minds a detestation and dread of it, that no Temptation shall be ever able, by
divine Help, to overcome.

And this is the great Thing aimed at, both by God and Man, in publicly taking
away the Life of Murderers. For as this Punishment puts a Period to their
Existence in the present World, it is final; and cannot be intended for their
future better Conduct, but for the Restraint of others, by awakening their
Attention, by striking their Minds with Awe, and guarding them, through the
Influence of the Passion of Fear, against the Force of the Temptations they may
meet with to transgress in this Kind. To this Purpose is that in Deuteronomy. 13. 11.
And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such Wickedness.
It was Wickedness punishable with Death that is here spoken of. It is therefore
said, in the immediately foregoing Verses, concerning the Man, whoever he was,
that should be guilty of this Wickedness, Thine Hand shall be upon him to put
him to Death. -- Thou shall Stone him with Stones 'till he dies. And why was he
to be thus awfully punished? Evidently, for the public Good, for the Benefit of
all Israel, to alarm their Fear, and put them upon their Guard, to do no more
such Wickedness.

And this is the Design of this Day's Execution. It is intended for the common
Good, by exhibiting an Example of public Vengeance: Such an one as is fitted to
curb the Lusts of Men, and prevent their breaking forth in murderous Attempts
upon the Life of their Neighbor. We should view it in this Light, and be
deterred from that Crime which will expose us to be cut off by the Hand of
civil Justice.

There are doubtless many here present, who design to be among the numerous
Spectators of the tragical End of this unhappy Criminal. -- Be advised not to
make this melancholy Sight a Matter of vain Curiosity; much less of Sport and
Merriment. It is capable of a wise and good Use; and you may receive lasting
Advantage herefrom. Be serious, considerate. -- Recollect the Hazard you may
have been in of committing this Sin; and, in pious Ejaculations, acknowledge
the Kindness of God in the Restraints of Providence which may have preserved
you. -- Be in the Exercise of the last Office of Love and Pity toward this
condemned Man, by giving Vent to the Breathings of your Souls in silent
Applications to the Throne of Mercy, on his Behalf, in this Time of his
greatest Need. And, in a Word, let it be your sincere Endeavor to get your
Hearts impressed with a deep Sense of Sin, of the Sin of Murder in particular.
Detest it from the Bottom of your Souls, and resolve within yourselves, in the
Strength of Divine Grace, that you will, through your whole future Life, take
Care that you be not drawn aside to commit so heinous a Transgression. And that
your Resolution may be effectual for your Restraint,

Be upon your Guard against all the Tendencies toward this Sin, such as Anger,
Wrath, Hatred, Malice, Envy, Revenge; together with their immediate Effects,
contumelious and despiteful Language, Quarrellings and Fightings. If we do not
keep our selves from the governing Influence of these Occasions of the Sin of
Murder, we shall live in continual Hazard of being betrayed unto it, to our
own, as well as the Dishonor of God.

Especially would I put you upon your Guard against outrageous Anger; as it was
owing to rash, impetuous, wild Passion, that this poor Man was hurried into the
Sin for which he is condemned to die. If we are of a hasty Spirit, and given to
Anger, we should fear what may be the Consequence, and lay the Restraints of
Reason and Religion upon this unruly Passion. We should watch against the first
Risings of Anger, and check it in its Beginnings, lest, as it gains Strength,
it should get beyond Government, put us out of Possession of our selves, and be
the Occasion of our doing that, which may bring us to public Shame in this
World, and hazard our Salvation in the next.

But above all, let me advise you not to suffer your selves to be easy, 'till
you are the Subjects of that Faith which works by Love, Love to God, Love to
Christ, and Love to one another. This, more than any Thing, more than every
Thing, will put us out of Danger of injuriously treating our Neighbor, at
least, in any high Degree. If we love God and Jesus Christ, and, from Love to
them, love our Brother also, we shall then be so far from being under the undue
Influence of Hatred, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Envy, and the other Lusts of the
Flesh or Mind, that we shall be disposed to all the Offices of Kindness and
Goodness to all Men. We shall be full of Mercy and good Fruits. We shall walk
in all Lowliness, and Meekness, and Forbearance; being ready to forgive one
another, as God for Christ's sake forgiveth us. If any should* curse, we shall
be ready to bless; if any should revile, we, instead of reviling again, shall
leave our Case with God, who judges righteously; and instead of being overcome
with Evil, we should overcome Evil with Good. And being thus fitted in the
Temper of our Minds for the Society of Angels and glorified Saints, we shall,
in God's Time, be admitted to dwell with them in that World, where there is no
Variance nor Strife, but everlasting Peace and Concord, and those mutual
Offices of Love and Friendship, which will make us the Delight of one another,
and the Delight of God, from whose Presence will flow to us Rivers of Pleasure
for evermore. God grant it may be the Portion of us all, for his Mercy's Sake,
in Christ Jesus. Amen.

THE END.

