THE CRISIS.

Scire volunt, Secreta Domus atque inde Timeri.

Printed in June 1754.

THE CRISIS.
THE VOICE OF THE PEOPLE has been distinctly heard, not in rude Clamours, not
in calumnious Invectives -- not in outrageous Declamations, but in the sober
Strains of Reason and Argument, against this pernicious, this detestable Scheme
of extending the Ex -- se.

How unhappy is it that those who have had the Direction of this Affair, have
hitherto like the deaf Adder, stopped their Ears against every Charm, by which
Wisdom and Liberty would have commanded their Attention. They have without any
Remorse carried this Affair through both H -- s. It now stands before HIM, who if
he should refuse to pass it, would deserve the Highest Praise, and if not, the
smallest Blame. -- For if Liberty is desorted and exposed by its proper
Parents, who can expect it will be nursed in the Lap of Prerogative? -- Be the
Event as it will, may Posterity know, that the Sons of New England were not all
asleep: That when pr..v..te Interests, mistaken Views, Ignorance of the
Constitution, and in..q...t...s Compacts to create and discharge f..l..f..sh
Obligations, had influenced the Conduct of our A -- y, there were not wanting
those, who had the Courage to hold the broad Mirror of Truth before their
pernicious Schemes, and represent them in their true Light to their
Constituents. -- Perhaps it may not be long before we are plunged into the most
abject Subjection, and the unconscious Mud of Slavery may sleep over us -- we
will NOW improve the Liberty which GOD and Nature has given us, and our
Constitution has not thought proper to restrain.

It is a great Misfortune that the Promoters of this B -- ll were so
unacquainted with the British Constitution, and the patriotick Struggles to
preserve it from this destroying Corroder in 1733. Had they known the Number
and Character of its Opposers, had they digested their weighty Arguments, had
they been animated by their Spirit, they would have stifled this M.nst.r before
it was capable of doing Mischief: I cannot but claim the Merit of being candid
in this Supposition, for if there were any that knew better, and through
corrupt Motives counteracted the Light of their Consciences, they have departed
from that filial Regard they owe to the Constitution, and proved themselves
Bastards and not Sons.

No Man in the Exercise of common Sense, can deny that the Extension of the E
-- e A-t will deprive us of Part of our Liberty. If it be alleged, that Part
of our Liberty (...) of Society, yet in all Cases where that happens, it ought
evidently to appear that this desirable End could not be obtained without it;
and will any Man be so hardy as to assert, that this is the Case respecting the
present A...t? Will any Man think himself after the Commencement of this A-t as
free as he was before, and will not every one know that he might have had his
Liberty preserved inviolable, and the Ends of the Government answered another
Way.

Besides this destroys the exclusive Right that every Man has to the innocent
Secrets of his Family. For if an Account of any Part of his innocent Conduct is
extorted from him, every other Part may with equal Reason be required, and a
Political Inquisition severe as that in Catholic Countries may inspect and
control every Step of his private Conduct. And if the Exigencies of the State
Increase, and this be the only Way of answering them, this State Inquisition
may be extended, as much beyond Decency, as it is at present beyond our natural
Rights. As Dr. Done in Pope's Dress says,

Shortly no Lad shall Chuck, or Lady Vole,
But some EXCISING COURTIER will have Tole
The needless Multiplication of Penal Laws, and Officers to execute them, have
been justly deemed inconsistent with Liberty: When these are calculated to
support a Scheme which evidently destroys some of our Privileges, Occasions of
Sedition and Contention will not be wanting; to suppress these a Military Force
will be necessary; as this will sharpen the Spirit of Opposition, that Military
Force must be ESTABLISHED; and when that is the Case we must expect to take an
Eternal Vanguard of Liberty. -- The Places that arise from this B...ll, may be
in the Disposal of an H -- devoted to a C -- t (...) respect to the
Administration of this Oath. This may fall under the Direction of those who
want to make themselves absolute, and well know how to make this conducive to
that End. Those who are so complaisant as to fall in with their Measures,
especially in the Choice of Representatives, will meet with all possible
Encouragement, and those who are so obstinate as to love and assert their
Remaining Liberties, must be learnt by a severe Conduct, to accommodate
themselves to all the Schemes of arbitrary Power.

Thus all the various Tendencies and Consequences of this A... lead to, and
terminate in the Destruction of a free Constitution, and the Support of
Arbitrary Power. I have heard it alleged in order to reconcile this B..l to a
New England Taste, that there will not be such an Invasion of our Liberties as
some uneasy People imagine..that the Officers of the Ex..se are not to be
invested with the Power of Visitation, and all the Authority they are to have,
is to demand an Account upon Oath: But will any one presume to say, that this
will be no Diminution of our Liberties, if it be an essential Part of our
Constitution, that no Man is held to convict himself in any Affair whereof he
is accused? And whoever will undertake to prove, that a Man can consistent with
the Constitution, be obliged to clear himself of an innocent Action by Oath, or
forfeit an heavy Penalty, may a fortiori prove, that this Practice is
desensible in Criminal Cases: If the Argument for purging by Oath in one Case,
is founded upon the Advantage the Public will receive by knowing the Truth,
the very same Argument will hold stronger in Criminal Cases: If it be said,
that to make that a Test in Criminal Cases, would be laying a Temptation before
Men to perjure themselves, the very same Reason holds good in this Case; and
such Evasions will take Place here among Persons who are ill principled, as
will partake largely of the Guilt of Perjury, and frustrate the Views of the
Gov...m...t too. -- If it be alleged that such Oaths are warranted by various
Precedents, I answer that in almost all Cases where that happens, it is justly
complained of as an Infringement on the Constitution, -- that they generally
respect Things that are Criminal in themselves, and the Ends proposed to be
answered by them, cannot be answered another Way: -- Will any Man that has lost
one of his Arms, be persuaded from that very Consideration to part with the
other, or will he not be the more desirous to preserve it? -- Besides may not
our Superiors take Occasion from our Readiness to adopt this unconstitutional
Test, to put us upon Oath with Regard to all we eat, drink, or wear, and extend
that to our own Manufactures, under Pretense of promoting the Manufactures of
Great Britain, and what a Train of Mischiefs would that bring with it to the
whole Community!

No one can slatter themselves that the whole Community will be brought upon an
equal Footing in the Payment of this Exc...se by Means of the Oath. When a
Search is established, (which occasioned such a Clamor in 1733,) All are
equally exposed to it; But in this Case it can be only the honest and
conscientious Man, for when an Oath is administered to one of this Character
nothing can be concealed; consequently such a one will pay his full Proportion
to the support of the State, while the Man who fears not an Oath will pay
nothing at all, -- and the Officer has no other Way to come at him.

As Oaths are so awful and sacred, and the Welfare of Society so much depends
on cultivating a religious Reverence for them, they ought not to be too
frequently used, nor adopted into every trisling Concern. -- They ought to be
both given and taken with the utmost Deliberation, Seriousness and Caution, --
their Nature and sacred Obligations should be explained to the Ignorant, and
enforced on the Careless and Vicious: But by this A-t they will be made as
common as Street Swearing, -- they are to be administered by Collectors and
Deputy Collectors of Ex -- se, and none under this odious Economy (it is
presumed) will undertake such a JOBB, but Men of the most contemptible and
abandoned Characters. -- How shocking will it be to have an Oath administered by
one of these, who has perhaps just taken the tremendous Name of GOD in vain in
common Conversation, who will administer it in a hurry with Carelessness and
Levity, and to many without affording them proper Time for Recollection, -- How
will this tend to eradicate the Fear of GOD, and a serious Sense of Religion
from Men's Minds, and proportionably weaken the Obligations to all the Duties
of Society -- How will that Reverence of an Oath properly administered in a
Court of Judicature be lessened by the inconsiderate and indecent Manner in
which it will be IMPOSED in this Case. And when once this most sacred Band of
Society is broken, what horrid Consequences will follow? Look over into our
Mother Country for Examples of this kind! -- the frequency of Swearing upon
trifling Occasions, and the light indifferent Manner of giving an Oath has so
greatly abated that Awe and Solemnity which formerly attended it, that Perjury
is become common, and Evidences may for a Trifle be procured to swear away both
Property and Life: For which Reasons a Concurrence of Circumstances in Courts
of Judicature, has been sometimes more depended upon in Cases of Life and
Death, than multiplied Oaths.

It Is very possible that Religion may have been out of the Question, with some
of the warm St..ckl..rs for this B..ll, but how can it be estem'd equal,? It is
indeed the pretended Equality of the B...ll which has drawn in many of the less
discerning to countenance it -- All the Poor, say they, purchase only Rum, and
that in small Quantities; they pay an Exc..se of 2 s6 per Gallon, while the
richer Part purchase in large Quantities, and so get clear of that Burden, --
But allowing this to be the Case, is not the Manner of their living considered
by the Assessors, as an Evidence of their Circumstances, and are they not Taxed
the more upon this Presumption. -- Moreover Wine, the Liquor most in Vogue in
the trading Towns, has so large an Impost laid upon it, that allowing 3 Gallons
of Wine is as soon consumed as a Gallon of Rum; it amounts to much more than
the Exc...se upon Rum; it should also be considered that Persons in Trade are
by the Nature of their Business obliged to entertain more Company, and live in
a less frugal Manner than those of the same Circumstances not in Trade,
consequently the Impost Duty upon the Wine they expend, more than makes up for
the West India Rum they purchase free of Exc..se, which also is subject to an
Impost, and is not bought by the poorer Sort, who prefer our own Manufacture --
And although Wine be esteemed by some an Article of Luxury, it should be
observed, that our Wine is chiefly purchased with our Lumbar and Fish, and with
a sort of the latter which does not answer so well at other Markets. But even
allowing the Ex...se as it has been hitherto laid, to be something unequal, the
Method proposed to remedy this will be far worse to you my Country Brethren,
than the Evil complained of -- It strikes at our Constitution -- It will affect
our Morals -- And when once from a Pretext of easing the Poor by this
Imposition on the Rich, the popular Voice should be for it, a Precedent will be
then made for Excising any other Articles of our Consumption -- And if this
severe and dangerous Method is thought necessary to be taken in order to raise
Money to defray the Charge of erecting a Fort on our Frontiers -- What will be
the Consequence of our being involved in an Indian War? -- What the Consequence
to a People who has such an extent of Frontiers to defend as we have --

This is only the beginning of Sorrows -- Your Windows it has been already
proposed to Tax. -- Your Cider, your Sugar, your Candles and Soap, your
Molosses, even your small Beer must be Excis'd anon, when the restless
Politics of your French Neighbors create a Necessity for more Armaments.

You may perhaps think your superior Interest in the House will secure you, as
long as any Trade is left to be Taxed; but when Trade dies, when Merchants and
Tradesmen leave you, and there are hardly Commodities or People left in our
Maritime Towns to pay Exc..se, you must have all these Burdens shifted and
doubled upon you, and what is worse, be put to it to raise Money out of your
Produce to answer these pressing Demands. Many a Country has grown rich and
affluent by Trade alone, no Country without it. -- It Is as easy to lose Trade,
as to lose Reputation, and it is equally hard to recover either.

However tender we wish you to be of the Interests of Trade, we need no other
Arguments to dissuade you from consenting to this B..ll, than those that arise
from your known Love to our happy Constitution.

Some of your Rep...sen....tives have argued for it, from this Principle, that
the Town of Boston would be greatly eased by it, by the large Revenues that it
would draw from the Country. -- -- Though that were to be the certain Effect of
it, yea though we were freed thereby from all our Taxes, I hope no one would
desire to purchase that Benefit, great as it is, with the Loss of the
Constitution. It is not the fear of an heavier Tax, it is not the hopes of any
Abatement that occasions the present Ferment: It is not the desire of being
excused from a reasonable Share in the Expense, of this chargeable Expedition.
Were Religion and Liberty at Stake, I doubt not there is Virtue enough left in
the Citizens of Boston to sacrifice their Fortunes, in the Defense and
Establishment of either.

The Pulse of Liberty at this critical Conjuncture beats high in all Ranks:
Those, whose Circumstances never allowed, those, whose Inclinations never
prompted them to drink either Wine or Rum have for the pure Love of Liberty,
joined the general Voice, and with one Consent, endeavored to Chase the
deformed M..ft..r back to the Den of Arbitrary Power, the Place of his
Nativity. May it never issue out of its hateful Retreat, without finding a
Victorious Enemy, in the Friend of Liberty.

This Scheme my dear Brethren is an Entering Wedge into the Constitution: The
first Year will be remarkable for the Lenity of the Officers who collect the
Exc...se, for all the Severities of it cannot be inflicted at once; by this I
enity we shall be learnt Security: This will not answer the Ends of the
Government -- The expected Revenues will fall short, -- To make them good,
stricter Officers will be appointed, -- more Articles will be Excis'd, --
Security and Severity will go hand in hand, Arbitrary Power will tread close on
their Steps, Exc...ses will become a Part of our Constitution, and like an
inveterate Canker grow into it, and devour its Vitals. Perhaps you that are
Poor, may think to obtain Relief by it, but this will be only partial and
temporary -- Liberty, the only Thing that can console a Man under the Wants of
Life, the only alleviating Circumstance of Poverty, will be put far away from
you: And if through honest Industry you should emerge into competent or
affluent Circumstances, you must go through all the Fatigue, Self-Denial and
Patience, requisite thereto -- for what? Why for a Posterity of Slaves. -- If
we should be so Patient as to Consent to try this Scheme, and find these Evils
grow out of it, it may not be easy to discharge our selves from it: Power and
Revenues are sweet, -- Those that have Artifice enough to keep People Quiet
under the first Establishment of both, have generally Address enough to
perpetuate them.

Their Successors enter into their Advantages, and look upon themselves under
small Obligations to remove an Evil, which they have not Established --
Pretenses are found to continue it, -- Prodigality arises from these ample
Means, -- That grows into an heavy Debt, and a perpetual Reason for maintaining
these Oppressions -- The Spirit of the People will sink under the Pressure of
an Evil, which is doubly aggravated by the Reflection, that they once had it in
their Power to have hindered it: Murmurings, Broils and Tumults will excite new
Severities, and they in their Turn new Troubles: Faction, Confusion, and Evil
Work will sadden every Heart, and lour on every Face, and Desolation, War and
Blood, must restore the Constitution, or fix the miserable Subjects of it in
irretrievable Slavery --

This my Brethren is the faithful Portrait of these Mischiefs which this
M..nst...r may produce, perhaps by slow, but certain Gradations -- Shall we not
then all awake and assert our Alliance and Affection to one of the best and
freest Constitutions of Liberty? It is our Security, let us preserve it; It is
our Happiness, let us rejoice in it; It is the Gift of Heaven, let us not
despise it! Without it, all the Charms of Life, Wither and Languish; the Riches
of Nature, the Productions of Art, the Improvement of Commerce, and the Efforts
of Genius, are crampt in their Operations, and languid in their Effects! Would
we act up to the Light of past Ages? Would we transmit the sacred Flame to
Posterity? Do we covet present Advantage? Do we Pant after Applause upon the
Theater of Nature? Let us distinguish ourselves in the support of that Liberty
which is now w....nded in the House of its Friends.

Who then that relishes the sweets of our happy Constitution can forbear crying
out in the fullness of his Heart, -- May no Weapon formed against thee ever
Prosper. Blessed be he that blesses thee, and Cursed be he that Curses thee
-- Whoever with an upright Heart supporteth thee against the Ravages of lawless
Power, and the Arts of designing Men, is a Friend to the best Interests of his
Country, a Friend to Mankind, a Friend to the Universal Chorus of Rational
Beings. -- And he shall hereafter BE CALLED THE FRIEND OF GOD.

SUPPLEMENT.
SINCE the above was put into the Press, we have been favored with his
E....len....y's Speech to both H...s...s upon this Affair. It is impossible to
express the Joy which it has diffused -- The People were not indeed so impious
as to shout upon this Occasion, It is the Voice of a God and not of a Man; but
we may surely say consistent with Decency and Religion, that this Speech of our
G....v....r was heard, like the Voice of a kind Messenger from Heaven, DO
YOURSELVES NO HARM. He has saved us from ourselves -- He has stepped in between
the Constitution, and our mistaken R..p..s..n...v..s. -- He has preserved
Liberty from the cruel St....bs of those that call themselves Freemen, And if
he has not as yet wholly broken, he has at least hung up for a while those
Ch....ns which the G...rd...ns of our Liberty had f....rg'd for us, and which
they impatiently demanded to have immediately f...st....n'd upon us.....It now
lies with you the Freemen of this Province to say, whether you will wear these
Sh...ckl...s, or reject them with that Disdain which becomes every Man born
under the British Constitution, and who has ever tasted the Sweets of Liberty
-- Some of those who are chosen to act for you in the G.....l A.....y, may be
dishonest, perhaps some are Ignorant, and surely none are Infallible......This
Sch...me of theirs is fatal: All wise and unprejudiced Persons see it -- The
G...v...rn...r fees it, and is generously willing to to prevent it. He cannot
believe that you will Concur with your R....pr....v....s upon this Occasion --
He Appeals from them to you, nor will he pass an Act that will deprive you of a
valuable Branch of your Liberty, unless you will say yourselves that you
despise your Birthright, and insist upon having it taken from you.

I am afraid, my dear Countrymen that your Votes will be called for upon this
Occasion suddenly, and before you can be well appriz'd of the Nature and
Consequences of it.

I am afraid that it will be represented to you, that all that is said against
this extraordinary B....ll is only the Clamor of Selfish and factious Men --
It is the Interest of some People to make you believe so, and therefore they
will take Pains for this -- But I cannot have so mean an Opinion of the
Understandings of New England Men, who are equal in natural good Sense to any
People under Heaven, as to imagine they will be so imposed upon -- Would the
G...v...n...r patronize the Cause of interested and factious Men, when his
Regard to Truth and Justice is so conspicuous? Would the common Father of the
Country listen to the Complaints of one Town in an Affair of such general
Concern, if he did not think they would be seconded by the Voice of the whole
Province? Would he ever oppose the other Branches of the L....g....sl....ture
with whom it is always his Inclination and Interest to cultivate Harmony, if he
thought they acted in a Manner agreeable to the Constitution, and the true
Interest of the People? Is there a Man to be found among us more thoroughly
acquainted with the English Constitution then he who now fills the Chair? more
versed in our Laws and Customs; more capable of prying into the distant
Consequences of Things, or more ready to employ his great Talents for the
public Good? and can we believe that a Gentleman placed so high, and able to
see so far around him, may be deceived and imposed upon by senseless Arguments,
and empty Clamor? To suggest it is ridiculous: And yet this is the Gentleman
that tells you, and speaks so loud that the whole Province may hear -- He tells
you I say in so many Words -- That the Method of raising Money proposed in this
B...ll, is not only of an extraordinary Kind, but altogether unprecedented in
the English Government: and that he should ill discharge the Trust reposed in
him by his Majesty, if he should join in imposing a Burden upon the People
which would be INCONSISTENT WITH THE NATURAL RIGHTS OF EVERY PRIVATE FAMILY IN
THE COMMUNITY. He tells you likewise that this B....ll is unconstitutional, and
contrary to all true Policy; and informs you of the extraordinary Manner in
which it was received, after being nonconcurr'd by the C..un..l.

Is there then a Freeman in the Province that can now be at a Loss what Part to
act in this important Affair? Is there a New England Man that is weary of his
Privileges? If this is not the Case, and God forbid it ever should be, we
shall unite to a Man in instructing our R..pr.......ves tenderly to cherish
LIBERTY and PROPERTY, and defend us from so grievous an EXCISE. When this is
done,

Awake ye Bards the sprightly Lyrick,
Now Hey for Praise and Panegyric,
The M...nst...r Slain, the People freed,
And Wreaths round SHIRLEY'S glorious Head.
FINIS.
Now in the Press, and will be published with all Speed. The Monster of
Monsters, A true and faithful Narrative of a most remarkable Phenomenon, which
lately made its Appearance in this Metropolis, to the Surprise and Terror of
all his Majesty's good Subjects, Dedicated to all the Virtuosi of New England.


