THE ILL POLICY AND INHUMANITY OF Imprisoning Insolvent DEBTORS, Fairly STATED
and DISCUSSED.

By an IMPARTIAL HAND.

Judge not, that ye be not judged; for with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged: And with what Measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

JESUS CHRIST. Printed M,DCC,LIVE.

" Man hard of Heart to Man, of horrid Things
" Most horrid! -- Hear it not ye Stars;
" And thou pale Moon, turn paler at the Sound;
" Man is to Man, the sorest, surest Ill."

WITH what an anxious and close Attention do Men hearken to those, who are
relating, though relating in ever so poor a Manor, what concerns their Interest?
And how greedily do Men read, and how tenaciously do they remember what they
have rea^, when the Matter deeply concerns them!

Now, seeing all Men are liable to Pain, Misery, and Death; to the Loss of
Reputation, Credit, Estate, Friends, and every Thing that is dear and valuable
in Life; to the ungodly Usurpation, Tyranny, and Oppression of their Fellow
Creatures: What sort of Principles therefore, must those be actuated by, who
can afflict willingly, and greviously torment the Children of Men! How just is
the Damnation of JUDAS, who for a little MONEY, betrayed Innocent Blood?

Mankind, O shame! have placed such Est^^m and Dignity (if you will allow the
Pi^^^^) i^ (...), that a Man without M^^^^, is next t^ Nothing. The arbitrary
Val^^ which the Tyranny of CUSTOM has unj^^^ly (...) Mercy, is the Reason why
Mark^^ run such Risques, and embrace such Dangers to obtain it. And Men are so
united and dependant upon one another in Society, and especially in Trade, that
one Individual cannot suffer, but some others must suffer with him. This is the
Case more especially with Regard to the Merchants and Traders, who are every
Moment liable to Misfortunes. The Hope of Gain induces Traders in general, to
hazard much, and to enterprise too deeply; but if they su^^^^d, they are on
Account of their Success, (...) applauded and caressed. The Applause paid to
some for their Success, pushes on others to attempt and venture upon such like
Enterprises. -- But alas* they are dash^d to Pieces in a Moment! and the
unfortunate Persons immediately deemed and calle^ Rogues and Villains, and
treated as such. Success therefore (so wise we are) seems to be the established
Criterion to judge Men's Conduct and Characters by -- (...) the Race (...) not
to the Swift, nor the Pa^^^^ to the Strong, ^^r Bread to the W^^e, nor (...) to
Men of ^nderstanding; and therefore to judge a Man's Principles or Conduct, to
be G^^d or Bad, ^neerly from his Success and Prosperity, or ^^s Misfortunes and
Adversity, is a very weak (if not a malicious) Conclusion and Judgment.

But as my Design, at present, is to expose the Ill-Policy and Inhumanity of
Im^ris^ning Insolvent DEBTORS, I must beg the ^^ader's ^^^^est Attention to the
^^llowing Things.

And in the first Place. We will consider ^his Case in a Political View: And
then, ^econdly in a Moral Light.

Now first, in a Political Point of View, the Question is, 'Whether, when a
Man's Circumstances are such, that his whole Estate will not pay his just
Debts, it is best for Society, that his (...) receive a Proportion of their
(...), according to their several just Demands, and his Person be sat at
Liberty to seek new Employment; or that his Body be imprisoned for the
Deficiency, until he pay the utmost Farthing, which is impossible?'

Now, in fairly discussing this Question, let it be well considered, That the
wise End of all Laws, is the Good of the Society for which such Laws are made.
Is it not best therefore, that each Member in Society, should be employed in
some useful Occupation, which Nature points him out the most fit, and best
qualified for? But Nature has pointed out no honest Man for a Prison: Then
consequently, those must be bad Laws, which authorize the Imprisoning any Man
for Debt, who does honestly give up to his Creditors all that he has in the
World. Let any justly pretending to Rationality, say, to what good End, a
Debtor is shut up in a Prison, after he is stripped of all his Goods. Can his
Creditors, with all their Wisdom, have more than All? Will his Imprisonment
increase his Estate? Will his Confinement pay or diminish his Debts^ or the
Punishment of his Body be any Kin^ of Advantage to them, or to Society* I^ not,
then we beg Leave to quere, Whethe^ Legislators are acting in the Character
(...) wise and good Rulers, when by Law, they empower Creditors to take their
unfortunate^ Neighbors and Debtors by the Throat, an^ cast them into Prison,
and permit them to keep their Debtors there forever? By this inhuman Treatment,
an unfortunate Debtor, whilst in Prison, is rendered utterly Useless ^o
Society, a Burden to himself, a Charge to his Creditors, a Lamentation to his
dear Wife and Children, who are rendered completely miserable -- and all this,
because he will not pay them, what GOD in his Providence, h^s deprived him of
-- After a Man has labored ten, twenty, or thirty Years, for a Livelihood,
would it not, think ye, be Misery, great Misery indeed, to have All he had in
Possession, snatched away from him at once? But must the Infamy of a ^ail be
added to his other Misfortunes, and by those too, who are, in the Nature of
Things, liable to the like Vicissitudes and Changes in Life!

On the most candid and cool Reflections, a Conduct like this, we are of
Opinion, will ^ot be found Reasonable in itself, or Benefi^ial to Society. For
if it is best for Society, that Trade and Commerce, Agriculture, Navigation,
etc. should be encouraged and ^ncreased by all reasonable and probable Means,
and which are carried on by the Work and Labor of the PEOPLE; then the Labor
of the People, without which all Business stagnates, is the true Riches of the
Community; the more People, the more Riches: And such Laws therefore, which
protect and encourage Trade, Industry, and Equity, are the best Laws for
Trading Societies. And can any say, That Manufactures are more encouraged,
Lands better improved, Trade and Business negotiated. Navigation and Commerce
carried on with more Dispatch and Safety, in those Societies or Communities
where the Creditor has such Power over the Body of the Debtor, as to cast him
into Prison forever? Or, in such Communities or Governments, where the Laws
free and protect the Person of the Debtor, after he has honestly given up All
he has in the World to his Creditor? We appeal to LONDON, Holland, etc. where
the Debtor is at Liberty, upon his paying All that he has, and then goes to
Work again with Spirit, upon the Foundation of HOPE. And therefore we conclude,
and we think the Conclusion just, as grounded upon long Experience, That it is
best for Society, that a Law of Liberty for Insolvent DEBTORS, should be
Established in all Trading Communities.

Again: If we soundly reflect, that Mankind are often unstable as Water, and
Wayward as the Wind; that they are too, too often hurried on by their Lusts and
Passions, to wicked and unjust Actions; we shall then the more clearly see the
Reasonableness and Wisdom of those LAWS of Equity and Justice, which require an
equal Distribution of a Debtor's Goods and Effects amongst all his Creditors,
in Proportion to their just Demands: For if by Fire, Storm, Cheats, or the
Tongue s^t on Fire of Hell, a Man in Trade and Business, who is both a Debtor
and a Creditor, and is therefore liable every Moment to Accidents, unforeseen
Casualties, and Contingencies; the Moment any remarkable unfortunate Stroke
befalls him, away comes his greedy voracious Creditors, who like Men of Prey,
glut themselves immediately, not in the least caring who sinks or swims,
starves or perishes: Whereas the compassionate benevolent Creditor, who is very
sorry at his Neighbor's Losses and Misfortunes, and therefore cannot of
himself, ^dd more Affliction to him, by immediately falling upon him to devour
him quite: The moderate, merciful Creditor, is therefore, as it were,
fore-stalled, tricked, and almost robbed of his Right by such hasty snap
Dragons, wh^ you will find always oppose Laws of Mercy Equity, and just
Distribution of a Debt^^^ Effects; wherefore it is, that in such Cases the
unmerciful Creditor gets All, and the compassionate Creditor often loses All.

Now, if this is the real State of the Case as we dare affirm it is, Is it not
therefore expedient, as well as just, wise, and reasonable, that, on Account of
the unfortunate Debtor, who has no Place of Shelter, or Protection from such
hungry Mortals); and all on Account of all his Creditors, to have suc^ Laws of
Equity and Distribution made as established, that equal Justice might always be
done to every Individual justly concerne^ which is not in the Power of the
unfortunate Debtor to effect; and because, instead (...) Laws of Protection and
Equity in this Cas^ there are among us, only Laws which pe^mit Destruction and
Haveck.

We are of Opinion therefore, that greatly behooves the Wisdom of the
Legislators, to enact and establish a Law of Liberty and Equity, for Insolvent
Debtors.

Moreover, if we realize and consider, The the Fear of Man brings a Snare --
we shall be still farther convinced of the Reasonableness, and (...) Necessity
of making such a ^^utary, such a whol^om LAW, as we have ^een so earnestly
contending for.

Trade, we know, is supported by Credit; and Credit is to Trade, what the Blood
is to ^he Body; If Credit ^ails, Trade stagnates; (...) the Blood don't
circulate, the Body die. The Circulation in Trade is kept up, by Men's duly
performing their Contracts, Agreements, and Promises; But when a Man in Trade
breaks his Agreements, Contracts, and Promises, so that there can be no well
grounded Dependence upon him, he is ^oon discovered, bunted down, undone, and
^erhaps cast into Prison: Punctuality is therefore the Li^e of Trade.

Now in order to avoid sudden Calamity, (...) wounded Tra^^siaan, on whom the
Power ^f Fear has fallen, is led into Temptation ^o hire Money of Usarers and
Sharpers, who ^re to Men in Necessity for Money, what the ^ultures are to their
Prey. These ^surers must have foursold Security, and exhorbitant interest, even
as much as a Thief must pay, when he is catched, which is Foursold. This
^hocking Refuge he flies to, in order to be punctual: And when his Refuge
falls, he ^hen ^alls to selling his Goods to Money Customers for 10 or 20 per
Cent. Loss upon the First Cost. How in such a Case, doe^ his Stock diminish,
and his Burden of De^^ increase! which in the Language of the Dunciad, is,
Downward to climb, and backward to advance.

But this is not all; for in so doing, he n^^ only wounds his Conscience, but
actually cheats his Creditors. And in Case he dies i^ the midst of his bad
Circumstances, his Estate is justly represented Insolvent, and perhap^ will not
pay Two Shillings and Six Pence for Twenty Shillings: Thus the Fear of M^^
brings a Snare.

Again: But in Case an honest Debtor could be protected by a LAW of Equity and
Liberty, so soon as he found his Business fail, and by Losses and
Disappointments, his Estate would not pay above Eighteen, o^ Fifteen Shillings
in Twenty, he would, if an honest Man, make known his Circumstances, compound
and settle with his Creditors, free himself from Perplexity, Doubt, Shuffling.
Evasion, and the like; and thus begin the World again with fresh Courage,
home^elt Experience, which is the soundest Wisdom, and soon find fresh Credit;
and by Industry and Frugality, grow up in the World, a second Edition as it
were, corrected of a valuable Book. And whereas the best, and greatest Men in
the World, from Age to Age, have been bred up in, and come from the School of
AFFLICTION,; all his former Pangs, Agonies, and Fears, would be turned into
Gratitude, Thankfulness, Circumspection, and Watchfulness, and upon the whole,
prove a much wiser and better Man, and a more useful Member in Society; for his
Example would be of great Advantage to all around him.

Now as such good Consequences would naturally result from the above mentioned
salutary Law, we leave it to the wise and thinking Part of Mankind, to say,
what Sort of Men those are, who directly oppose such a Benevolent Method of
accomodating Difficulties amongst Mankind, so dependant upon one another in
Society.

As the Sun is to the Day after a Tempest; or Health to the Body after
Sickness; or what a Bridgroom feels coming out of his Chamber, that, LIBERTY is
to a broken Trader.

But before we conclude this Head, we beg Leave to answer a few OBJECTIONS. For
some Men are so sond of Objections, that they dislike every Thing but
themselves; who indeed are an Objection to all Mercy, Peace, and Benevolence.

The first Objection we shall mention is, That no Man ought to agree to any
Thing that is not in his Power to perform, and therefore ought to pay according
to his Agreement.

In Answer to this Objection, we must observe, That in Strictness of Speech,
this is impossible, because no Man has Power over Accidents, Casualties, and
Contingencies, but is liable to them all, and even this Night his Soul may be
required of him, and therefore whatever is future, he has not absolute Power
over, not even of himself, but is a dependent relative Being, whose Breath is
in his Nostrils, and whose Life is a Span; and therefore all Promises and
Agreements are in their Nature uncertain, casual, and conditional; and when the
Power of performing is wanting, the Intention is accepted: So that in some
special Cases, a Man may break his Promise and Contract, and yet be an honest
Man.

But he that makes a Promise with a Design to break it, or with no Resolution
of performing it, cannot be so: And he that makes a Promise, and does not
positively do his Endeavor to the utmost of his Power to perform it (if it is
just) cannot be an honest Man; for a Promise once made, supposes the Promiser
willing to be as good as his Word, and it has a binding Influence upon him who
made the Promise, so far as his Power of performing extends; but if it is not
in his Power to perform it, as in the Affair of Payment of Money, is often the
Case, the Man cannot be condemned as a dishonest Man: For the Performance of
his Promise might depend on the Promises of Others to him, on the customary Run
of the Trade and Business he is engaged in, and on many other contingent
Circumstances, and all might possibly fail him, though ever so honest a Man
himself.

The Objection therefore, especially with Regard to Traders, is unreasonable,
and of no Force against the above mentioned Law.

Secondly: Another Objection is, 'That such a LAW (as the above mentioned)
would encourage Debtors to be careless, extravagant, and dishonest.'

To this Objection we reply, That no Human Laws can make all Men Good and Wife.
Amongst the Clergy, some are not sit for their Holy Function. Amongst the
Physicians, some are Quacks, and of no Value. Amongst Counsello^s, some are of
a Reprobate Mind. Shall we therefore be so politically Wise, as to have no
Counselors, no Physicians, nor Clergymen? And because some Traders prove
Knaves and Rogues, must all Traders be liable to be treated as such?

Men accustomed to do Evil, habituated to Wickedness and Villainy, ought to be
duly punished. But a Man's Misfortunes does not prove him a Rogue. Nor is
Weakness, Inadvertency, or Imprudence, which all Men have more or less of, a
Proof of Fraud, Dishonesty, or Extravagancy; for Men are too often valued, not
according to the Integrity of their Hearts, the Cleanness of their Hands, the
Wisdom of their Heads; but only according to the supposed (...) of their
Purses. And we too (...) Men good or bad Names, ^greeable to wh^^ we get or
what we lose by them, not considering the Principles they may have acted from,
or the general Tenor of their former Conduct. Such Treatment of Mankin^, loudly
speaks for itself.

How many prodigious sturdy Oaks, have been by violent Winds blown down, and in
their Fall crus^^ed all the lesser Trees in their Reach? And has not the
Tempest of Adversity (in like Manner) beat so tremen^^^^sly, that some mighty
Merchants have (...) and almost shook the R^val Exchange in L^^^on! So the
Tower of Siloam sell, and many were buried in the Ruin -- But who da^e affirm,
they were greater Villai^ and ^^^^^es, than those who secretly rej^^^ed at
their Destruction? And how o^^en do we see the ^owl of Fortune, like the ^owl
at Nine ^ins, strike one Pin, which Pin (...) the next, who knocks down a
t^^^d: (...) are shook, but some by Chance, stand (...) the Game. But are those
that stand, bet^^^ Pins than (...) that Fall --? And might not the Bowl of
Fortune have happened on the standing Side first? So that h^ that proudly
stand, need take Care lest he (...).

If therefore, the above Objection has any Worth or Weight in it, it will hold
good also, against every Thing that is Good and Valuable amongst Mankind. For
the best Men are liable to, and often meet with the worst Calamities; and the
vilest Men, on the contrary are exalted, have Riches, Power, and bear Rule (or
Mis-rule) and no Wonder then, their tender Mercies are the h^ttest Torments --
Are there no real Objects (...) Charity, because there are some Imp^^^ters? Is
a Man a Rogue, because he cannot do Justice to his Neighbor, when it is
a^^^lutely out of his Power? And as (...) ^elessness and Extravagancy, these
are Terms of such an ambiguous and unfixed (...) that the greatest Casuists or
(...) fully fix and ascertain them. For, if a ^^n of Money, and great Business,
does not ^ive away, and spend in Pr^^^^tion to his Reputation, and magnified
Circumstances, he is then deemed, and called, a hard, stingy, covetous,
grinding, ill-natured, and perhaps too, a dishonest churlish F^llow; and M^^e^
is his God: And if such an One meets with Misfortunes, it is a Judgment upon
him (say they) for his Covete^^^^.

But now, his Neighbor, a Gentleman of Character, Business, and Fortune, to
avoid being stigmatized with diminutive Epithets and Appellations, fares
sumptuously every Day, is kind to the Poo^, and being greatly caressed, keeps
up the Pomp and Dignity of high Life, in full Proportion to his Fortune and
Income -- But lo^ sudden Destruction comes upon him like a Whi^lwind, and
(...) him (...) in a tempestuous Manne^, like a House built upon the Sand! And
now the open mouthed, ungodly Sons of Slan^er, (...), (...), and (...). The
(...) of Yesterday, are to Day turned into yelling Crucify! Crucify!

So that, in our Opinion, the above second O^^^^ion, is rather a strong
Argument in Fav^^^^ of such a La^ as we are contending for, than a rea^^^ (...)
Ob^^^tion against it.

But thirdly: Another Objection is, That Debtors would take Advantages under
such a Law, by dish ^estly concealing Part of their Goods and (...) from their
Credit^^s, and the Pro^fs in such Cases, would be very difficult (...); and
therefore the Terror of a (...) is the best Security against Dish^^^^^y.

This Objection we (...), is of great Force, with Regard to (...), Cheats, and
Rogues, who (...) according to their Crimes. The (...) of Society requires it,
for the better Security of private Property, and a^^ for the (...) ^eace and
Tranquillity; and therefore (...) Man will plead for a Law to (...) from condign
Punishment: (...) judiciously to distinguish between the Sons of Belial, and
the Sons of Misfortune. The Hurt and Damage that acc^es by the adverse Fortune
of an honest Man, is perhaps no more his Fault, than the Damage which insues
from Fire, Tempests, Lightning, Earthquakes, Enundations, Pestilence, and the
like. -- Whereas the Mis^hief that (...) from the Villainy and Malice of Rogues
and Cheats, is premeditated and designed, and therefore ought in all Wisdom and
Justice, to be duly punished. But no Punishment whatsoever, has been sufficient
absolutely to deter all the Sons of Violence and Madness, from Bribery,
Perjury, Murder, Suicide, Blasphemy, and the like enormous Crimes -- But some
remark and say, How many more such atrocious Actions would there be committed
by such abandoned Wretches, if the Punishment that awaits them, did not seize
them with horrible Fear? Which is in effect, calling Mankind in general,
cowardly -- Devils; and is such a Complement upon the Human Species, that those
that approve and embrace it, as Birds of a Feather flock together, are duly
tempered for such Fellowship and Society. And if it proves any Thing, in the
Case before us, it proves too much -- viz. That all Mankind would be ROGUES if
they (...)!

For (...) governs the World? And why (...) with more WISDOM? (...) and the
Rod, (...), be the GOD of GOD.

-- ^! (...), Impiety --

But we return from this Digression. It (...) a LAW of Equity, Mercy, and
Justice, re^^^ing INSOLVENT DEBTORS, when they have Henes^^y given up All they
have in the World, to their just Crediters, that we are (...) for: And to put
such Men into Prison, under Confinement, and as it were, upon the Footing and
Level of Cutthroats, Pa^icides, and the like, is (...) and ung^dly, and
perhaps those that do so, would soon^^ (...) give all such, than a Sin of Debt.

A V^^^ain will not pay his just Debts, when it is in his Power; and therefore
is justly cast into Prison, until he pays the uttermost Farthing: And because
an unfortunate honest Trader cannot pay, must he be treated in the same Manner!
-- A Righteous Man (says the wisest King) falling down before the Wicked, is
as a troubled Fountain, and a corrupt Spring. Where therefore is the Wisdom,
the Policy, or the Logic, of such indiscriminate Proceedings? And if there is
no Law to prevent such inhuman, such unequal Measures, in Places of Commerce
and Trade, where Accidents and Casualties are daily happening to Men in Trade,
Is it not (say impartial Reader, is it not) full Time, there was such a LAW?
And is not the Neglect in such a Case (we speak it with great Submission, and
all becoming Deference) a very criminal Neglect? And then who are most to be
blamed (if all are guilty) those that permit such inhuman Actions, or those
that commit them under Cover of the Laws, which authorize such Usage to all
Debtors without Distinction? With Patience hear us -- Is this DOING Justice? Is
this LOVING Mercy? Is this HATING Iniquity? -- But is it not rather
establishing INIQUITY by a LAW! Is it not a Sort of petty Tyranny? And where,
and to whom, are we to fly for Shelter and Refuge, when under the Power of an
angry, wrathful Creditor, that would lose his Soul to gain the World, or give
up his Humanity in Search of his Money --? Where, I say, should a Debtor fly in
such a desperate Situation, but to our Rulers, our Lawmakers, our wise and
chosen Men, who are appointed and set apart to do Justice. Righteousness, and
Judgment, to relieve the Distressed, and comfort the broken hearted, and
consequently to stay the Hands of the violent Man: For nothing is bad enough
for the Tongue, nor hard enough for the Heart, nor cruel enough for the Hands
of a mad-headed CREDITOR, when his unhappy Debtor is under his Power. And (...)
us duly consider, that POWER in the (...) of a Man, is a dangerous Weapon, and
ought to be watched with a jealous Eye, and ^ecured, as it were, in the Castle
of Wisdom, within the great and mighty Gates of TRUTH, barricado'd with
Benevolence -- Hence it is, that the Almighty JEHOVAH challenges Vengeance to
himself, because his Wisdom is Infinite, and his Goodness inexhaustible.

But how dangerous is Power in the Hands of an inexorable Creditor! If such an
One loses Money by his Debtor, though the Debtor's Misfortunes be ever so
shocking and pitiful, and he ever so modest and honest a Man, yet his
inexorable Creditor, where the Law will countenance him in his unrelenting
Disposition, in the Fury of his Lust for the Mammon of Unrighteousness, hurls
headlong the unfortunate Debtor into a dark and loathsome Prison, I had almost
said, much fitter for himself -- The many shocking Scenes therefore, of Havoc,
Mis^^ule, and Cruelty, practiced upon unfortunate Merchants, Traders, and
Debtors in England, our Mother Country, induced the Wisdom of our Nation, to
enact the wise and healthful STATUTE of BANKRUPTCY -- or, if you please, a Law
against Inhumanity; or in other Words, a Law of Liberty and Protection, for the
Persons or Bodies of broken Insolvent Debtors, when they have (...), or given
up All into the Hands of their just Creditors.

And notwithstanding all the Contrivances, all the Evasions, all the Wiles,
Tricks and Schemes, of the Men of Cunning and Stratagem, to conceal, secret,
cozen, make away with, and keep back, any, even the least Part, of the Debtor's
Estate or Effects, which some Men are bad enough to connive at, yet
notwithstanding these probable Disadvantages, or Objections, seeing honest and
good Men are liable to Ruin, by a Variety of unforeseen Accidents, as well as
the bad; yea, many, very many indeed, are the Misfortunes and Afflictions of
the best Men. The Wisdom of the Nation therefore, with consummate Goodness,
continue the discriminating Statute of Bankruptcy, because vast Benefit and
Utility has flowed from this Fountain, the Streams whereof, have made Glad
many worthy Citizens of London, whose Hearts panted for these Waters of Liberty
-- And they have so refreshed their thirsty Souls, that afterward they have
grown like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Water, and in due Season flourished
like a Cedar in Lebanon.

Experience, like Demonstration, teaches irresistibly -- And from above an
Hundred Years Experience, the above mentioned Statute is found Healthful,
Expedient, Salutary, and of unspeakable Importance;

Because, it vindicates and protects the Unfortunate.

Because, it encourages Industry and Honesty.

Because, it distributes and maintains Equity and Justice.

Because, it favors Trade and Commerce.

And,

Because, it punishes remarkably all Fraud and Villainy.

Will it be said, and has it not been said, That although such Law may do in
England, yet it will not do in this Colony? This is too Black a Mark, and too
much like the Bird that betrays its own Nest, and we believe it is very unjust.

Again: Many Persons will run into Debt on Purpo^^ to break, and so cheat their
Creditors, and after a while appear in Trade, and (...) rich, upon their stolen
Capital? -- This is just as reasonable and as likely too, as for a Man to break
his Arms and Legs, to feel how (...) a Chirurg^^n could mend them up again; and
then to see how much faster he could ^un with broken Legs than whole On^^ --
That there are both Fools and Rogues in the World, in all Climates and
Countries, we have abundant Proof of -- But are there therefore no wise, honest
and good Men? And must there be no difference made betwixt them? If this is the
Case, then we grant there is no Need of any Laws, for where there is no Law --
there is no Transgression -- For shame, offer no more such Arguments, Reasons,
and Objections.

And now upon the Whole, we are of Opinion, the abovementioned huge Objection,
That a Jail makes Men honest, is of no Force against the Law of Equity we so
zealously contend about.

But Fourthly and La^^^^. It is said, and it has often been (...) ^^^jection to
the aforemention^d Law, (...) Creditors are so unreasonable (...) their
Debtors, as to (...), after they have h^^es^ly given up all (...), and have
Nothing lest to pay; because a Jail pays no Debts.

How specious and plausible soever this Objection appea^ at (...) Sig^^, yet
the many Thousand Instances in History, of the Deceitfulness and Trea^hery of
Mankind toward each other, is an (...) Argument against the Force of it, in
the present Case at least. Out of (...) Instances, give us Leave to mention but
one or two.

First; as to Ha^^el: When the Prophet told him what (...) Things he should be
guilty of he was ast^nished even at the mentioning them, and cried out, Is thy
Servant a Dog, that he should be guilty of so great Evil -- But so soon as he
had the Opportunity (pardon the Expression) the Dog perpetrated the Crimes so
(...), with unbounded Lust and Cru^lty* (...) like an Angel, but reigned like a
Devil.

How do you like the (...) Silver-t^ng (...) much harder to stop -- than to
proceed; for the Subject is as Fruitful as the ^ile. And the Experience of all
Mankind ^hes up to invalidate (...) Objection.

Moreover, the very Terms of the Objection answer themselves: For, if it be
unreasonable in Creditors to act such an inhuman Part toward their Debtors,
when in the abovementioned Situation, then consequently it must be
unreasonable in Lea^slators, to establish that by a Law, which the very
Objectors themselves, in this Case, allow to be just and right.

But now for Governments to presame, that every Creditor will be just and
merciful, without any Laws obliging him, is presuming too much, and daily
Experience is a flat Contradiction to the Objection. And will not it be a very
weak and pitiful (...), for those, whose Duty obliges, and whose Wisdom and
Power authorize them, to provide all necessary Laws for the Good of Society, to
say, They thought Mankind (...) have acted right, without any Laws* (...) that
this Mountain has (...) a ^^ouse.

And thus having traveled through our first Stage, notwithstanding the (...) we
have met with in our Journey, by Men of (...) and inhuman Principles; we submit
the Case to those who are ordained to humanize and civilize Mankind: And so we
proceed to our second general Head, which was, to consider the Case before us
in a moral Light.

And here in Allusion to a great Author, we would say, What shame to Men, who
of all Rational Creatures only disagree, though they are under H^pe of Heavenly
Grace, and God proclaims Peace and good Will; yet they live in Hatred, Strife,
and Envy among themselves, levying civil Wars, and wasting the Earth, to
destroy each other, as if (which Consideration of itself might induce us to
Amity, Unity, and Brotherly Love) Man had not hellish Foes enough besides, that
Day and Night wait for his Destruction -- As if we were born into the World
merely to hate, and not to love another!

But to the P^int in Hand.

In the first Place. The Un^easonableness and Inhumanity of imprisoning
Insolvent Debtors, is demonstrable from the great Law of Equity: Do unto
others, as you would they should do unto (...) there was but one Way for a Man
to obtain P^^son for a certain Crime be had committed, and that was by running
a Race, which he was capable of performing; but immediately his Legs are fast
bound, his Hands t^ed behind his Back, and then he is whistled to, stroak'd,
and bid to run; again clapped upon the Back, and bid to run: But it is
impossible for him now to run, and therefore impossible for him to perform the
Condition of Pardon. Can any Man say, he should like to be treated with such
Derision and Mockery, such Insult and Inhumanity? Is this doing as you would be
done unto? And might not an impr^^oned Insolvent reply to his inhuman Creditor,
as Nathan did to David; Thou art the Man!

Again: What Son of Violence has Front enough to say, he should very well like
to be cast into Prison forever? made completely miserable; his Family poor,
despis^d, naked, wretched, and (...), his Wise! -- worse, far worse than a
Widow -- and his Children in a most deplorable Situation: All this, because he
had been guilty of no Capital Crime, unless the Sin of being unfortunate, is a
Capital Sin. This speaks for itself -- And as no Man can approve such Treatment
with Regard to himself, so he ought not to be guilty of it toward others,
which fully demonstrates the Inhumanity of Imprisoning Insolvent Debtors. And
seeing we have no Law to prevent such barbarous Usage, Is it not highly
reasonable, wise, and fit, we should have such a Law.

Secondly. To deprive an honest Man of Liberty, and the Power of a^ling, is
Inhuman and Unreasonable.

Liberty is dear to Man. Life without Liberty, is a Kind of dying daily. Man is
born free, and born for Action, and to Labor, and has a natural Right to
Himself, his Labor, and to the Air, the Earth, and the Seas; and his Fellow
Creatures have not, in a State of Nature, any Right to interrupt him in the
free Enjoyment of what his Great Creator has bountifully bestowed upon, or
granted to him.

But Man in Society, voluntarily gives up Part of his natural Liberty, in order
to be governed by such Laws as are best adapted to promote the Peace and
Prosperity of Society -- But then he has an equal Right to as much Liberty as
the Laws grant to the other Members in the same Community. But under the
English Constitution, and under the Light of the glorious Gospel, is it right
and fit to take away a Man's Liberty, his Labor, yea, his Liberty of Air, and
shut him up in a Prison, because he has lost his Money, and cannot pay what he
owes; and this by Means out of his Power to prevent?

Again: Is it right and sit, that Christian Communities should make Laws in
direct Opposition to the Laws of GOD?

By the mere Providence of GOD, an henest Man is suddenly deprived of all his
Worldly Substance, which immediately demands our sincere Pity and Commiseration
and Assistance; because we are under the same Law of Nature, and therefore
certainly liable to the same Effects and Consequences from the same Causes.

But by a Law in the Community where the unhappy Man suffered under
Misfortunes, it is there lawful to cast him into Prison forever -- for Debt
only -- This loose, indiscriminating Law, is left open, because wicked Men, by
wicked Deeds, sometimes cheat their Creditors, who justly, for so doing, cast
them into Prison: Therefore all Men, the best Men (is this right!) who owe
Money, though the mere Providence of God, by some remarkable Accident, has put it
out of their Power to pay; yet, if their Creditors please, he shall likewise be
cast into Prison -- Is not this therefore, doing Evil, that Good may come of
it? And is not this acting in direct Opposition to the Command of God? Is it
not highly reasonable, therefore, to have some Medium, to adjust the Difference
betwixt the Debtor and the Creditor?

With what sacred Rage! with what Vehemence, Indignation, and Pathos, did the
Man after GOD's own Heart, call for dire Vengeance on such -- For they
persecute him, whom thou have smitten; and they talk to the Grief of those,
whom thou have wounded, Psa. 69.

To afflict the Afflicted, to take away a Man's natural and his civil Liberty,
and deprive him of the Power of acting, and improving his Time, and his
Talents, for the Good of himself and his Family, for the Benefit of the
Community; in doing which, he so far glorifies GOD his Maker, to deprive an
honest Unfortunate, of the necessary Advantages, is, as it were, to murder a
Man after he is dead, and therefore i^ unreasonable and inhuman.

Wherefore, it is absolutely necessary, for the Good of the Community, to have
a Law of Equity established, which should judge between the Creditor and the
Debtor, in Cases extreme. Because the Tempers and Passions of Creditors may
hurry them on to do such barbarous Actions to their Debtors, when under their
Power, and under Color of the Law too, that may ruin a valuable Man, his
Family, and deprive Society of a useful Member; and all out of mere Humor,
Will, Resentment, Spite, or Malice. It is Godlike, to prevent such inhuman,
such unreasonable Power.

But Thirdly and Lastly. The Imprisoning honest Insolvents, is Inhuman in
itself, and consequently in despite of the Christian Religion, which is the
only Religion we profess to believe.

Every Thing that is comprehended and implied in the Words, Goodness, Love,
Peace, Mercy, Truth, and Charity, is in the most earnest Manner recommended and
inculcated in the Christian Religion, and enforced by the Godlike Example of
its glorious Author, His own Example was more Forcable than all the Arguments
in a whole World full of Books -- And those that love him will keep his
Commandments; but those who will neither believe Moses, nor the Prophets, nor
JESUS CHRIST himself (in whose Words we finish what we have at present to say
on this Subject) all such we ^eave in the Hands of HIM who will render to every
One according to their Deeds.

Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how often shall my Brother sin against
me, and I forgive? till seven Times?

JESUS says unto him, I say not unto thee, until seven Times, but until Twenty
Times Seven. Therefore is the Kingdom of Heaven likened unto a certain King,
which would take an Account of his Servants; and when he had begun to reckon,
one was brought unto him, which owed him Ten Thousand Talents: But forasmuch as
he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his Wise and
Children, and all that he had, and Payment to be made.

The Servant therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have
Patience with me, and I will pay thee All. Then the Lord of that Servant was
moved with Compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the Debt.

But the same Servant went out and found one of his Fellow Servant which owed
him an Hundred Pence, and he laid Hands on him, and took him by the Throat,
saying, Pay me that thou owe And his Fellow Servant fell down at hi^ Feet,
and besought him, saying, Have Patience with me, and I will pay the^ All; and
he would not, but went an^ cast him into Prison till he should pay the Debt.

So when his Fellow Servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came
and told unto their Lord all that was done.

Then the Lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked
Servant, I forgave thee all that Debt, because thou desiredst me, should not
thou also have had Compassion on thy Fellow Servant even as I had Pity on thee?

And his Lord was wroth, and delivere^ him to the Tormentors, till he should
pay All that was due unto him.

So likewise shall my Heavenly FATHER do also unto you, if ye from your Hearts
forgive not every one his Brother their Trespasses. -- Thus spoke JESUS the Son
of GOD, who spoke as never Man spoke -- Who is styled the Wisdom of GOD, and
the Power of GOD. See Matt. Gosp. Chap. 18.

FINIS.

