SOME MEMOIRS Of the LIFE of JOHN ROBERTS.

Written by his SON DANIEL ROBERTS.

The FOURTH EDITION.

The Steps of a good Man are ordered by the LORD; and he delights in his Way.
He is his Strength in the Time of Trouble. Psalm xxxvii. 23, 39. BRISTOL:
Printed.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted and Sold by JAMES CHATTIN, next Door to the Pipe in
Church Alley 1753.

SOME MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF JOHN ROBERTS.
I HAVE had it on my mind, for some years past, to commit to writing some
memorable passages, the chief of which were tansacted in my time, together with
some short account of our family.

My grandfather's name was JOHN ROBERTS, alias HAYWARD. He lived at a vilage
called Siddington, within a mile of Cirencester, in Gloucestershire. I have
heard he lived reputably on a little estate of his own, which he occupied. He
married MARY SOLLISS, sister to ANDREW SOLLISS. Esquire who was in the commission
of the peace, and sustained great spoil in the time of the civil war between
king CHARLES I. and the parliament. I have heard a colonel and his men and
horses quartered themselves upon him a considerable time together, turning
their horses to the corn and hay mows.

My father and his next Neighbor went into the army under Oliver Cromwell, and
continued till they heard Cirencester was taken by the king's party; when they
thought proper to return home, to see how it fared with their parents and
relations.

As they were passing by Cirencester, they were discovered and pursued by two
soldiers of the king's party (then in possession of the town.) Seeing
themselves pursued, they quitted their horses, and took to their heels: but by
reason of their accoutrements could make little speed. They came up with my
father first; and though he begged for quarter, none would they give him; but
laid on him with their swords, cutting and slashing his hands and arms, which
he held up to save his head; as the marks upon them did long after testify. At
length it pleased the Almighty to put it into his mind to fall down on his
face; which he did. Hereupon the soldiers being on horseback, cried to each
other, alight, and cut his throat! But neither of them did; yet continued to
strike and prick him about the jaws, 'till they thought him dead. Then they
left him, and pursued his neighbor, whom they presently overtook and killed.
Soon after they had left my father, it was said in his heart, Rife, and flee
for thy life; which call he obeyed; and starting upon his feet, his enemies
espied him in motion, and pursued him again. He ran down a steep hill, and
through a river, which ran at the bottom of it; though with exceeding
difficulty, his boots filling with water, and his wounds bleeding very much.
They followed him to the top of the hill; but, seeing he had got over, they
pursued him no further. He was at a loss which way to take in this wounded and
disconsolate condition, being surrounded with enemies on every hand. At length
he determined to go to his uncle Solliss's; from whence he sent a servant to a
widow at Cirencester (at whose house the chief officers lay) with whom he was
acquainted, desiring her to come to him; which she readily did, and offered him
all the service in her power. He desired her, as the principal officers lay at
her house, to use her interest with them to give command that none of the
soldiers might offer him any abuse. Which she effected; and in good will to her
they likewise sent their ablest surgeon to him. He was a man of great skill,
but of a four disposition; for he told my father, if he had met him in the
field, he would have killed him himself; but now (said he) I Will cure you; which
he did. When my father found himself able, he went to his father's house, and
found him very ill in bed. They greeted each other with many tears, and a great
intermixture of joy and sorrow. After some time my father perceived him to
tremble to such a degree, that the bed shook under him Upon which my father
asked him how it was with him? He replied, I am well: I feel no pain. It Is the
mighty power of God that shakes me. After lying still some time, he broke out
in a sweet melody of spirit, saying, In the Lord only have I righteousness and
strength! In God have I salvation! I don't remember to have heard he said any
thing more before his departure.

The civil war continuing, my father found he could not be safe at home; and
therefore he went again, and continued till near the conclusion of that
dreadful eruption; when he returned again to his sorrowful family at
Siddington. After some time he took to wife Lydia Tindal, daughter of Thomas
Tindal of Slincomb, near Dursley; a religious family, and one of those under
the denomination of Puritans. Matthew Hale (afterward lord chief justice of
England) was her kinsman, and drew her marriage-settlement. It pleased God to
give them six children, viz. John, Joseph, Lydia, Thomas, Nathaniel, and
Daniel. Joseph and Lydia died young; Thomas was killed at the age of fourteen,
by a kick from a mare; the rest lived to man's estate.

In the year 1665, it pleased the Lord to send two women friends out of the
North to Cirencester, who enquiring after such as feared God, were directed to
my father, as the likeliest person to entertain them. They came to his house,
and desired a meeting. He granted it, and invited several of his acquaintance
to sit with them. After some time of silence, the friends spoke a few words,
which had a good effect. After the meeting, my father endeavored to engage them
in discourse: but they said little, only recommended him to Richard Farnsworth,
then a prisoner for the testimony of truth in Banbury jail, to whom they were
going. Upon this recommendation my father went shortly after to the prison, in
order to converse with Richard; where he met with the two women who had been at
his house. The turnkey was denying them entrance, and telling them he had an
order not to let any of those giddy-headed people in; and therefore if they did
go in, he would keep them there. But upon my father's desire they were admitted
in along with him, and conducted through several rooms to a dungeon, where
Richard Farnsworth was preaching through a grate to the people in the street:
but soon after they came in, he desisted; and, after a little time of silence,
turning to them, he spoke to this purpose: That Zacheus, being a man of low
stature, and having a mind to see Christ, ran before, and climbed up into a
sycamore tree: and our Savior, knowing his good desires, called to him,
Zacheus, come down! This day is salvation come to thy house. Thus, Zacheus was
like some in our day, who are climbing up into the tree of knowledge, thinking
to find Christ there. But the word now is, Zacheus come down, come down; for
that which is to be known of God, is manifested within. This, with more to the
same purpose, was spoken in such Authority, that, when my father came home, he
told my mother he had seen Richard Farnsworth, who had spoke to his condition
as if he had known him from his youth. From this time he patiently bore the
cross; afterward, when it pleased God to communicate to him a portion of the
knowledge of his blessed Truth, a necessity was laid upon him one first day
morning to go to the public worship house in Cirencester in the time of
worship, not knowing what might be required of him there. He went; and,
standing with his hat on, the priest was silent for some time: but being asked
why he did not go on? he answered, he could not, while that man stood with his
hat on. Upon this some took him by the arm, and led him into the street,
staying at the door to keep him out: but after waiting a little in stilness, he
found himself clear, and passed away. As he passed the marketplace, the tie of
his shoe slackened; and while he stooped down to fasten it, a man came behind
him, and struck him on the back a hard blow with a stone, saying, There, take
that for Jesus Christ's sake. He answered, so I do; not looking back to see who
is was, but quietly going his way. A few days after a man came and asked him
forgiveness; telling him he was the unhappy man that gave him the blow on his
back, and he could have no rest since he had done it.

Not long after, three Friends came that way, who found the like concern, viz.
Robert Silvester, Philip Gray, and Thomas Onyon. These standing in the
steeple-house with their hats on, though they said nothing, the priest was
silent: And being asked if he was not well? he answered, he could not go
forward whilst those dumb dogs stood there. Wherefore the People dragged them
out: and the priest afterward informing a justice that they had interrupted
him in divine service, they were bound over to the quarter sessions. My father,
at their desire, accompanied them to the sessions: and when they were called,
and the priest had accused them, the bench, in a rage, without asking them any
questions, ordered their mittimus's to be made. This unjust and illegal
proceeding kindled my father's zeal, insomuch that he stepping forward, called
to the justices, saying, Are not those who sit on the bench sworn to do
justice? Is there not a man among you that will do the thing that is right?
Whereupon John Stephens, of Lipeat (then chairman) cried out, Who are you,
sirrah? What is your name? My father telling him his name, he said, I am glad I
have you here: I have heard of you: you deserve a stone doublet: there is many
an honester man than you hanged. It may be so, answered my father: but what
do thou think becomes of those who hang honest men? The Justice replied,
I Will send you to prison; and if any insurrection or tumult be in the land, I Will
come and cut your throat first with my own sword; for I fear to sleep in my
bed, lest such fanatics should come and cut my throat: and, snatching up a ball
of wax, he violently throw'd it at my father; who avoided ^^e blow by stepping
aside. Their mittimus's were then made, and they were all sent to prison.

The same evening my uncle Solliss, who was one of the justices on the bench,
came to the prison, and, calling for my father, asked him if he was willing to
have his liberty to go home to his wife and family? Upon what terms uncle? said
my father.

Justice. Upon such terms, that the jailor open the door, and let you out.


John Roberts. What! without entering into any recognizance?


Justice. Yes.


John Roberts. Then I accept of my liberty. But admire, uncle, how thou and
several others could sit upon the bench as with your thumbs in your mouths,
when you should speak a word in behalf of the innocent.


Justice. You must learn to live under a law, cousin. And if you will accept of
your liberty till next sessions, you may have it: if not, stay where you are.


So they parted; and on the morrow my father went home, having also the
jailor's leave.

In the night a concern came upon him, with such weight, that it made him
tremble till the bed shook under him. My mother asking the reason of it, he
answered: The Lord requires hard things of me: if it would please him, I had
rather lay down my life than obey him in what he requires at my hands. To which
my mother replied: If thou art fully persuaded the Lord requires it of thee, I
would not have thee disobey him; for he will require nothing of us but what he
will enable us to go through: Therefore we have good cause to trust in him. On
which he said, I must go to this John Stephens, who is my great enemy, and sent
me to prison, where he said he would secure me; and as my uncle Solliss in
kindness has given me leave to come home, I can expect no favor from him, if I
now go and run myself into the mouth of my adversary. But I must go whatever I
suffer. He arose, and prepared for his journey; but durst eat or drink nothing.
When he mounted his horse, the command of the Lord was unto him, Remember Lot'
s wife: look not back. So on he rode very cheerfully 8 or 9 miles, till he came
within sight of the justice's house, and then he let in the reasoner, who
reasoned him out of all his courage, presenting to his mind, that his uncle
Solliss and his neighbors would say he had no regard for his wife and family,
thus to push himself into the hands of his greatest enemy. This brought such a
cloud over his mind, that he alighted off his horse, and sat down upon the
ground, to spread his cause before the Lord. After he had waited sometime in
silence, the Lord appeared, and dishpated the cloud, and his word was to him,
Go, and I will go with thee, and will give thee a threshing instrument, and
thou shall thresh the mountains Now he was exceedingly overcome with the love
of God: and I have often heard him say, he was filled like a vessel that wanted
vent, and said in his heart, Thy presence is enough, proceeding to the house
with great satisfaction. It being pretty early in the morning, and seeing the
stable door open, he went to the groom, and desired him to put up his horse.
While this was doing, the justice's son and his clerk came up, the latter
roughly said, I thought you had been in Gloucester castle.

John Roberts. So I was.


Clerk. And how came you out?


John Roberts. When thou have authority to demand it, I can give thee an
answer. But my business is with thy master, if I may speak with him.


Clerk. You may, if you will promise to be civil.


John Roberts. If thou see me uncivil, I desire thee to tell me of it.


They went in; and my father following them, they bid him take a turn in the
hall, and they would acquaint the justice of his being there. He was soon
called in; and my father no sooner saw him, but he believed the Lord had been
at work upon him: for, as he had behaved to him with the fierceness of a lion
before, he now appeared like a lamb, meeting him with a pleasant countenance,
and, taking him by the hand, said, Friend Haywood, how do you do? My father
answered, pretty well; and then proceeded thus; I am come in the fear and dread
of heaven, to warn thee to repent of thy wickedness with speed, lest the Lord
cut the thread of thy life, and send thee to the pit that is bottomless. I am
come to warn thee, in great love, whether thou will hear or forbear, and to
preach the everlasting Gospel to thee. The justice replied, You are a welcome
messenger to me; that is what I have long desired to hear. The everlasting
Gospel (returned my father) is the same that God sent his servant John to
declare, when he saw an angel flying through the midst of beaven, saying with a
loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to his name, and worship him who made
heaven and earth, the sea, and the fountains of water, The justice then caused
my father to sit down by him on a couch; and said, I believe your message is of
God, and I receive it as such. I am sorry I have done you wrong: and I will
never wrong you more. I would pray you to forgive me, and to pray to God to
forgive me. After much more discourse, he offered my father the best
entertainment his house afforded; but my father excused himself from eating or
drinking with him at that time, expressing his kind acceptance of his love; and
so in much love they parted.

The same day William Dewsberry had appointed a meeting at Tedbury; whether my
mother went. But she was so concerned on account of my father's exercise, that
she could receive little benefit from the meeting. After the meeting was ended,
William Dewsberry walked to and fro in a long passage, groaning in spirit; and
by and by came up to my mother, and, though she was a stranger to him, he laid
his hand upon her head, and said, Woman thy sorrow is great: I sorrow with
thee. Then walking a little to and fro, as before, he came to her again, and
said, Now the time is come, that those who marry, must be as though they married
not, and those who have husbands, as though they had none; for the Lord calls for
all to be offered up. By this she saw the Lord had given him a sense of her
great burden; for she had not discovered her exercise to any: And it gave her
such ease in her mind, that she went home rejoicing in the Lord. She no sooner
got home, but she found my father returned from Lypeat, where his message was
received in such love, as was far from their expectation: the sense of which,
brake them into tears, in consideration of the great goodness of God, in so
eminently making way for, and helping them that day.

At the next sessions my father and the three friends appeared in court; where,
as soon as justice Stephens espied them, he called to my father, and said,
John, I accept of your appearance, and discharge you, and the court discharges
you. You may go about your business. But my father thinking his work not done,
did not hasten out of court. Upon which the clerk demanded his fees. What! do
mean money? says my father. Yes: what do you think I mean? says the clerk. My
father replied, I don't know that I ow any man here any thing but love, and
must I now purchase my liberty with money? I don't accept it on such terms.

Clerk. (to the chairman.) An't please your worship, John will not pay the fees of
the court.


John Roberts. I don't accept my liberty on such terms.


Then he was ordered to prison with the three friends. But in the evening the
clerk discharged them, and ever after carried himself very kindly to my father.

He was afterward cast into prison at Cirencester, by George Bull, vicar of
Upper Siddington, for tithes. Where was confined at the same time, upon the
same account, Elizabeth Hewlings a widow, of Amney, near Cirencester. She was a
good christian, and so good a midwife that her confinement was a loss to that
side of the country; insomuch, that lady Dunch, of Down-Amney, thought it would
be an act of charity to the neighborhood to purchase her likerty, by paying the
priest's demand; which she did. She like wise came to Cirencester in a coach,
and sent her footman Alexander Cornwall, to the prison to bring Elizabeth to
her. And while Elizabeth was making ready to go with the man, my father and he
fell into a little discourse. He asked my father his name, and where his home
was; which when my father had told him. What* said he, are you that John
Haywood of Siddington, who keeps great conventicles at your house? My father
answered. The church of Christ often meets at my house. I suppose I am the man
thou meanest. I have often (replied Cornwall) heard my lady speak of you; and I
am sure she would gladly be acquainted with you: When he returned to his lady,
he told her he had met with such a man in the prison as he believed she would
not suffer to lie in prison for conscience sake; informing her withal who he
was. She immediately bid him go back and fetch him to her. Accordingly he came
to the jail, and told my father his lady wanted to speak with him. My father
answered; If any body would speak with me, they must come where I am; for I am
a prisoner. Oh (said Cornwall) I Will get leave of the jailor for you to go.
Which he did. And when they came before the lady, she put on a majestic air, to
see how the Quaker would greet her. He went up toward her, and bluntly said,
Woman, would then speak with me?

Lady. What is your name?


John Roberts. My name is John Roberts, but I am commonly known by the name of
John Haywood in the place where I live.


Lady. Where do you live?


John Roberts. At a vilage called Siddington, about a mile distant from this
town.


Lady. Are you the man that keeps conventicles at your house?


John Roberts. The church of Christ do often meet at my house. I presume I am
the man that thou meanest.


Lady. What do you lie in prison for?


John Roberts. Because, for conscience sake, I cannot pay an hireling priest
what he demands of me; therefore he, like the false prophets of old, prepares
war against me, because I cannot put into his month.


Lady. By what I have heard of you, I took you to be a wise man, and if you
could not pay him yourself, you might let somebody else pay him for you.


John Roberts. That would be underhand dealing, and I had rather pay him
myself, than be such a hypocrite.


Lady. Then suppose some neighbor or friend should pay him for you, unknown to
you, you would choose not to lie in prison when you might have your liberty.


John Roberts. I am very well content where I am, till it shall please God to
make way for my freedom.


Lady. I have a mind to set you at liberty, that I may have some of your
company, which I cannot well have while you are in the prison.


Then, speaking to her man, she bid him go to the priest's attorney, and tell
him she would satisfy him, and then pay the jailor his fees, and get a horse
for my father to go to Down-Amney with her.

John Roberts. If thou art a charitable woman, as I take thee to be, there are
abroad in the world many real objects of charity on whom to bestow thy bounty:
but to feed such devourers as these, I don't think to be charity. They are like
Pharoah's lean kine; they eat up the fat and the goodly, and look not a whit
the better.


Lady. Well; I would have you get ready to go with us.


John Roberts. I don't know thou art like to have me when thou have bought and
paid for me: for if I may have my liberty, I shall think it my place to be at
home with my wife and family. But, if thou desire it, I intend to come and
see thee at Down-Amney some other time.


Lady. That will suit me better. But set your time, and I Will lay aside all
other business to have your company.


John Roberts. If it please God to give me life, health, and liberty, I intend
to come on sevenday next, the day thou call saturday.


Lady. Is that as far as you used to promise?


John Roberts. Yes.


According to his appointment, my father went; and found her very inquisitive
about the things of God, and very attentive to the truths he delivered. She
engaged him likewise a second time, and treated him with abundance of regard. A
third time she bid her man Cornwall go to him, and desire him to appoint a day
when he would pay her another visit: and then ordered him to go to priest
Careless, of Cirencester, and desire him to come and take a dinner with her at
the same time; and not let either of them know the other was to be there. On
the day appointed my father went; and when he had got within sight of her
house, he heard a horse behind him, and looking back, he saw the priest
following him; which made him conclude the lady had projected to bring them
together. When the priest came up to him, Well overtaken, John (said he) how
far are you going this way? My father answered, I believe we are both going to
the same place. What! (said Careless) are you going the great house? Yes, said
my fathers. Come on then John, said he. So then they went in together. And the
lady being ill in bed, a servant went up and informed her they were come. What!
(said she) did they come together? Yes, answered the servant. I admire at that
(said she) But do you beckon John out, and bring him to me first up the back
stairs. When my father came up, she told him she had been very ill in a fit of
the stone, and said, I have heard you have done good in many distempers.

John Roberts. I confess I have; but to this of the stone I am a stranger.
Indeed I once knew a man, who lived at ease, and fared delicately, as thou
may do, and whilst he continued in that practice he was much afflicted with
that distemper. But it pleased the Lord to visit him with the knowledge of his
blessed truth, which brought him to a more regular and temperate life, and this
preserved him more free from it.


Lady Oh! I know what you aim at. You want to have me a Quaker. And I confess,
if I could be such an one as you are, I would be a Quaker tomorrow. -- But I
understand Mr Careless is below, and though you are men of different persuasions,
I account you both wise and godly men, and some moderate discourse of the
things of God between you, I believe would do me good.


John Roberts. If he ask me any questions, as the Lord shall enable me, I shall
endeavor to give him an answer.


She then had the parson up: and after a compliment or two, she said, I made
bold to send for you to take an ordinary dinner with me, though I am disappointed
of your company by my illness. But John Haywood and you being persons of
different persuasions (though (...) believe both good christians) if you would
soberly ask and answer each other a few questions, it would divert me; so that
I should be less sensible of the pains I lie under.

Priest. An't please your ladyship, I see nothing in that.


Lady. Pray Mr. Careless, ask John some questions.


Priest. It will not edify your ladyship; for I have discoursed John, and
several others of his persuasion, diverse times, and I have read their books,
and all to no purpose; for they sprang from the Papists, and hold the same
doctrine the Papists do. Let John deny it if he can.


John Roberts. I find thou art setting us out in very black characters with
design to affright me; but therein thou will be mistaken. I advise thee to say
no worse of us than thou can make out, and then make us as black as thou
can. And if thou can prove me a Papist in one thing, with the help of God
I Will prove thee like them in ten. And this woman who lies here in bed, shall be
judge.


Priest. The Quakers hold that damnable doctrine, and dangerous tenet, of
perfection in this life; and so do the Papists.

If you go about to deny it John, I can prove you hold it.


John Roberts. I doubt thou art now going about to be^y the Papists behind
their backs, as thou have heretofore done by us. For, by what I have learnt of
their principles, they do not believe a state of freedom from sin and
acceptance with God possible on this side the grave; and therefore they have
imagined to themselves a place of purgation after death. But whether they
believe such a state attainable or no, I do.


Priest. An't please your ladyship, John has confessed enough out of his own
mouth; for that is a damnable doctrine, and dangerous tenet.


John Roberts. I would ask thee one question: do thou own a purgatory?


Priest. No.


John Roberts. Then the Papists, in this case, are wiser than thee. They own
the saying of Christ, who told the unbelieving Jews, If ye die in your sins,
whither I go ye cannot come. But, by thy discourse, thou and thy followers must
needs go headlong to destruction; since thou neither ownest a place of
purgation after death, nor such a preparation for heaven to be possible in this
life, as is absolutely necessary. The Scripture thou know tells us, Where
death leaves us, judgment will find us. If a tree falls toward the north or
south, there it shall lie.

And since no unclean thing can enter the kingdom of Heaven, pray tell this
poor woman, whom thou have been preaching to for thy belly, whether ever, or
never, she must expect to be freed from her sins, and made sit for the kingdom
of heaven; or whether the blind must lead the blind till both fall into the
ditch.


Priest. No, John, you mistake me: I believe that God Almighty is able of his
great mercy to forgive persons their sins, and fit them for heaven, a little
before they depart this life.


John Roberts. I believe the same. But, if thou will limit the Holy One of
Israel, how long will thou give the Lord leave to fit a person for his glorious
kingdom.


Priest. It may be an hour or two.


John Roberts. My faith is a day or two, as well as an hour or two.


Priest. I believe so too.


John Roberts. O^ (...) week or two.


And my father carried it to a month or two; and so gradually till he brought
it to seven years, the priest confessing he believed the same. On which my
father thus proceeded: How could thou accuse me of popery, in holding this
doctrine, which thou thy self have confessed too? If I am like a Papist, thou
art, by thy own confession, as like a Papist as I am. And if it be a damnable
doctrine and dangerous tenet in the Quakers, is it not the same in thy self?
Thou told'st me I mistook thee; but have not thou mistaken thy self in
condemning thine own acknowledged opinion when uttered by me? But
notwithstanding thou have failed in making me out to be a Papist in this
particular, can thou do it in any thing else? Upon this the priest being
mute, my father thus proceeded: Well! though thou have fall'd in proving me like
them, it need not hinder me from showing thee to be so in many things. For
instance, you build houses and consecrate them, calling them churches; as do
the Papists. You hang bells in 'em, and consecrate 'em, calling them by the
names of faints; so do they. The pope and the priests of the Roman church wear
surplices, gowns, cassocks, etc. calling them their ornaments; here thou have
the like; and do thou not style them thy ornaments? You consecrate the
ground where you interr your dead, calling it holy ground; so do they. In
short, thou art like a Papist in so many things, he need be a wise man to
distinguish betwixt them and thee.

At this the priest appeared uneasy, and said to the lady, Madam, I must beg
your excuse; for there is to be a lecture this afternoon, and I must be there.
She pressed him to stay to dinner, but he earnesty desired to be excused. So a
slice or two being cut off of the spit, he eat, and took his leave.

The lady then said to my father, had she not seen it, she could not have
believed Mr. C^^^less could have been so soiled in discourse by any man: for,
said she, I accoun^^^ him as sound and orthodox a divine as any wa^, but now I
must tell you, I am so far of your opinion, that if you will let me know when you
have a meeting at your house, and somebody to preach (not a silent meeting)
I Will come and hear 'em my self. My father answered, he expected she would be as
good as her word. Not long after came two friends to my father's house; and
though the weather was very severe, he found he could not be easy without
acquainting her with it. So he went to her house, but she seemed a little
surprised, saying, What Is your will now, John? He imformed her of the two
friends, and their intention of having a meeting at his house. How can you
expect (said she) I should go out such weather as this? You know I seldom stir
out of my chamber, and to go so far may endanger my health. My father returned,
I would not have thee make excuses, as some of old did, and were not found
worthy. Thou know time is none of ours, and we know not whether we may have
the like opportunity again. The snow need not much incommode thee: thou may
be quickly in thy coach, and, putting up the glasses, may be pretty warm; and
when thou come to my house, I know my wife will do her best for thee. So she
ordered her coach and six to be got ready (for the distance was seven miles)
saying, John's like death, he will not be denied, My father came along with her;
and during the time of silence in the meeting, she appeared something restless;
but was very attentive whilst either of the friends were speaking. She was very
well pleased after the meeting, and sat at table with the friends. While the
rest sat silent, she would be frequently whispering to my mother, till one of
them spoke a few words before meat. She was ashamed, and told my mother when
she was among the great, she was accounted a wise woman; but now (said she) I
am among you Luakers, I am a very fool. Presently after dinner she returned
home, and came several times to the meeting afterward; and I am fully persuaded
she was convinced of the truth; but going up to London, she was there taken
ill, and died.

Her man, Alexander Cornwall, was convinced of the truth, and was afterward a
prisoner with my father in Gloucester castle; where the jailor was very cruel
to them, sometimes putting them into the common jail among felons, and other
times he would hire a tinker (who lay for his sees) to trouble them in the
night by playing on his hautboy. One time in particular my father being
concerned to speak to him in the dread and power of God, it struck him to such
a degree, that he dropped the instrument out of his hand, and would never take it
into hand upon that occasion any more. When the jailor asked him why he
discontinued it, he answered, They are the servants of the living God, and I Will
never play more to disturb them, if you hang me up at the door for it. What!
(said the jailor) are you bewitched too? I Will turn you out of the castle. Which
he did; and the friends who were there prisoners raised him some money,
clothed him, and away he went.

Some time after my father had three conferences with -- Nicholson, bishop of
Gloucester, introduced in the following manner. An apparitor came to cite my
father to appear at the bishop's court: but he told my father he could not
encourage him to come, lest they should ensnare him, and send him to prison. At
the same time they cited a servant of my father's, named John Overall. My
father went at the time appointed, without his servant: and when his name was
called over, he answered to it. The discourse that occurred was in substance as
follows: --

Bishop. What Is your name?


John Roberts. I have been called by my name, and answered to it.


Bishop. I desire to hear it again.


John Roberts. My name is John Roberts.


Bishop. Well; you were born Roberts; but you were not born John.

Pray who gave you that name?


John Roberts. Thou have asked me a very hard question, my name being given me
before I was capable of remembering who gave it me. But I believe it was my
parents, they being the only persons who had a right to give me my name. That
name they always called me by, and to that name I always answered; and I
believe none need call it in question now.


Bishop. No, no; but how many children have you?


John Roberts. It has pleased God to give me six children; three of whom he
was pleased to take from me; the other three are still living.


Bishop. And how many of them have been bishop'd?


John Roberts. None that I know of.


Bishop. What reason can you give for that?


John Roberts. A very good one, I think: most of my children were born in
Oliver's days, when bishops were out of fashion. ( At this the court fell a
laughing.)


Bishop. But how many of them have been baptized?


John Roberts. What do thou mean by that?


Bishop. What! don't you own baptism?


John Roberts. Yes; but perhaps we may differ in that point.


Bishop. What Baptism do you own? That of the Spirit I suppose?


John Roberts. Yes. What other baptism should I own?


Bishop. Do you own but one baptism?


John Roberts. If one be enough, what needs any more? The apostle said, One
Lord, one faith, and baptism.


Bishop. What say you of the baptism of water?


John Roberts. I say there was a man sent from God, whose name was John, who
had a real commishon for it; and he was the only man that I read of who was
empowered for that work.


Bishop. But what if I make it appear to you, that some of Christ's disciples
themselves baptized with water, after Chrift's Ascension?


John Roberts. I suppose that is no very difficult task: but what is that to me?


Bishop. Is it nothing to you, what Christ's disciples themselves did?


John Roberts. Not in every thing; for Paul, that eminent apostle, who I
suppose thou will grant had as extensive a commissionas any of the rest of the
apostles; nay, he says himself, he was not a whit be hind the chiefest of them,
and yet he honestly ^^^^esses he had no commission to baptize with w^^er; and
further says, I thank God I baptized none but such and such; for (says he) I
was not sent to baptize (i. e. with water) but to preach the gospel.

And if he was not sent, I would soberly ask, who required it at his hands?
Perhaps he might have as little thanks for his labor as thou may have for
thine; and I would willingly know who sent thee to baptize?


Bishop. This is not our present business. You are here returned for not coming
to church. What say you to that?


John Roberts. I desire to see mine accusers.


Bishop. It is the minister and churchwardens. Do you deny it?


John Roberts. Yes I do: for it is always my principle and practice to go to
church.


Bishop. And do you go to church?


John Roberts. Yes; and sometimes the church comes to me.


Bishop. The church comes to you? I don't understand you friend.


John Roberts. It may be so: it is often for want of a good understanding that
the innocent are made to suffer.


Apparitor. My lord, he keeps meetings at his house, and he calls that a church.


John Roberts. No; I no more believe my house to be a church, than I believe
what you call so to be one. I call the people of God the church of God,
wheresoever they are met to worship him in spirit and in truth. And when I say
the church comes to me, I mean the assembly of such worshippers, who frequently
meet at my house. I do not call that a church which you do, which is made of
wood and stone, that is but the workmanship of men's hands: whereas the true
church consists of living stones, and is built up by Christ a spiritual house
to God.


Bishop. We call it a church figuratively, meaning the place where the church
meets.


John Roberts. I fear you call it a church hypocritically and deceitfully, with
design to (...) the people into a veneration for the place, which is not due to
it, as though your consecrations had made that house holier than others.


Bishop. What do you call that which we call a church?


John Roberts. It may properly enough be called a mass-house, it being formerly
built for that purpose.


Apparitor. Mr. Haywood, it is expected you should show more respect than you
do in this place in keeping on your hat.


John Roberts. Who expects it?


Apparitor. My lord bishop.


John Roberts. I expect better things from him.


Bishop. No, no; keep on your hat: I don't expect it from you. A little after,
the bishop said: Well friend, this is not a convenient time for you and I to
dispute; but I may take you to my chamber and convince you of your errors.


John Roberts. I should take it kindly of thee, or any man else, to convince me
of any errors that I hold; and would hold them no longer.


Bishop. Call some others. -- Then my father's man was called; who not
appearing, the apparitor said, Mr. Haywood, is John Overall here?


John Roberts. I believe not.


Bishop. What Is the reason he is not here?


John Roberts. I think there are very good reasons for his absence.


Bishop. What are they? may not I know?


John Roberts. In the first place, he is an old man, and not of ability to
undertake such a journey, except it was upon a very good account. In the second
place, he is my servant; and I cannot spare him out of my business in my absence.


Bishop. Why does he not go to church the^?


John Roberts. He does go to church with me. (at this the court fell a
laughing.)


Bishop. Call somebody else.


Then a Baptist preacher was called, who seeing the bishop's civility to my
father, in suffering him to keep on his hat, thought to take the same liberty.
At whom the bishop put on a stern countenance, and said, "Don't you know this
is the king's court, and that I sit here to represent his majesty's person? And
do you come here in an uncivil and irreverent manner, in contempt of his
majesty and his court, with your hat on? I confess there are some men in the
world who make a conscience of putting off their hats, to whom we ought to have
some regard. But for you, who can put it off to every mechanic you meet, to
come here, in contempt of authority, with it on, I Will assure you, friend, you
shall speed never the better for it" -- I heard my father say, these words came
so honestly from the bishop, that it did him good to hear him. -- The Baptist
then taking off his hat, said, An't please you, my lord, I have not been well in
my head.

Bishop. Why, You have got a cap on; nay you have two caps on. (He had a black
one over a white one.) What is your reason for denying your children that holy
ordinance of baptisin?


Baptist. An't please you my lord, I am not well satisfied about it.


Bishop. What Is the ground of your dissatisfaction? did you ever see a book I
published, entitled, The order of baptism?


Baptist. No my lord.


Bishop. I thought so.


Then telling how and where he might get it, he gave him a space of time to
peruse it; and told him if that would not satisfy him, to come to him, and he
would give him full satisfaction. -- Some time after the bishop sent his
bailiff to take my father: but he was then gone to Bristol with George Fox. The
officers came several times and searched the house for him, pretending they
only wanted him for a small trespass, which would soon be made up, if they
could see him. My mother answered she didn't believe any neighbor he had would
trouble him upon such an account; for if by chance any of his cattle trespassed
upon any, he would readily make 'em satisfaction, without further trouble.
Which they very well knew. However, she always treated them civilly, and
frequently set meat and drink before 'em. My father staying away longer than
was expected, they imagined he absconded for fear of 'em; and therefore offered
my mother, if she would give them twenty shillings, to let him come home for a
month. But she told them she knew of no wrong he had done to any man, and
therefore would give 'em no money; for that would imply a consciousness of
guilt "But (said she) if my enemy hunger, I can feed him; and if he thirst, I
can give him drink." Upon this they flew into a rage, and said, they would have
him if he were above ground; for none could pardon him but the king. -- My
father returning home through Tedbury, was there informed that the bailiffs had
been about his house almost ever since he went from home. He therefore
contrived to come home after daylight, when he came into his own grounds, the
moon shining bright, he spied the shadow of a man, and asked, who is there? 'It
is I,' says the man.

John Roberts. Who! Sam. Stubbs?


Sam. Stubbs. Yes, master.


John Roberts. Have thou any thing against me? (He was a bailiff.)


S. Stubbs. No, master: I might; but I would not meddle: I have wronged you
enough already: God forgive me. But those who now lie in wait for you are the
Paytons, my lord bimop's bailiffs. I would not have you fall into their hands,
for they are merciless rogues. I would have you, master, take my counsel: ever
while you live please a knave, for an honest man will not hurt you.


My father came home, and desired us not to let the bailiffs in upon him that
night, that he might have an opportunity of taking counsel on his pillow. In
the morning he told my mother what he had seen that night in a vision. "I
thought (said he) I was walking a fine, pleasant green way; but it was narrow,
and had a wall on each side of it. In my way lay something like a bear, but
more dreadful. The sight of him put me to a stand. A man seeing me surpised,
came to me with a smiling countenance, and said, Why art thou afraid, friend?
he is chained, and cannot hurt thee. I though it I made answer, The way is so
narrow, I cannot pass by but he may reach me. -- Don't be afraid (says the man)
he cannot hurt thee. I saw he spoke in great goodwill, and thought his face
shone like the face of an angel. Upon which I took courage, and steping
forward, laid my hand upon his head." -- The construction be made of this to my
mother was: Truth is a narrow way; and this bishop lies in my way: I must go to
him, whatever I suffer. So he arose, and set forward, and called upon Amariah
Dreweit, a friend of Girencester, to accompany him. When they came to the
bishop's house at Cle^e, near Glouceser) they found a butcher's wife of
Girencester, who was come to intercede for her husband, who was put into the
b^shop's court for killing meat on firstdays. Two young sparks of the bishop's
attendance, were asking her if she knew John Haywood? She answered, 'Yes, very
well.' "What is he for a man?" said they A very good man (said she) setting
aside his religion: but I have nothing (...) say to that. One of them said he would
give five shillings to see him; the other offered eight. Upon which my father
stepped up to them; but they said not one word to him. One of them presently
informed the bishop he was come. Whereupon the bishop dismissed his company,
and had him up stairs. My father found him sented in his chair, with his hat
under his arm, assuming a majestic air. My father stood silent a while; and
seeing the bishop didn't begin with him, he approached nearer, and thus
accosted him: 'Old man my business is with thee.'

Bishop. What is your business with me?


John Roberts. I have heard thou have sent out thy bailiffs to take me: but I
rather chose to come myself, to know what wrong I have done thee. If it appear
I have done thee any, I am ready to make thee satisfaction: but if, upon
enquiry, I appear to be innocent, I desire thee, for thy own soul's sake, thou
do not injure me.


Bishop. You are misinformed, friend; I am not your adversary


John Roberts. Then I desire thee to tell me who is my adversary, that I may go
and agree with him while I am in the way.


Bishop. The king is your adversary. The king's laws you have broken: And to
the king you shall answer; that is more.


John Roberts. Our subjection to laws is either active or passive. So that if a
man cannot, for conscience sake, do the thing the law requires, but passively
suffers what the law inflicts, the law, I conceive, is as fully answered as it
he had actually obeyed.


Bishop. You are wrong in that too: for suppose a man steal an ox, and then be
taken, and hanged for the fact; what restitution is that to the owner?


John Roberts. None at all. But though it is no restitution to the owner, yet the
law is satisfied. Though the owner be a loter, the criminal has sufferr'd the
punishment the law inflicts, as an equivalent for the crime committed. But thou
may see the corruptness of such laws, which put the life of a man upon a
level with the life of a beast.


Bishop. What! do such men as you find fault with the laws?


John Roberts. Yes: and I Will tell thee plainly, it is high time wiser men were
chosen, to make better laws. For if this thief was taken and sold for a proper
term, according to the law of Moses, and the owner had four oxen for his ox,
and four sheep for his sheep, he would be satisfied, and the man's life
preserved, that he might repent, and amend his ways. -- But I hope thou do
not accuse me of having stole any man's ox or ass.


Bishop. No, no; God forbid!


John Roberts. Then, if thou please to give me leave, I Will state a case more
parallel to the matter in hand.


Bishop. You may.


John Roberts. There lived in days past Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, who
set up an image, and made a decree, that all who would not bow to it should be
cast the same hour into a burning fiery furnace. There were then three young
men, who served the same God that I do now, and these durst not bow down to it;
but passively submitted their bodies to the flames. Was not that a sufficient
satisfaction to the unjust decree of the king?


Bishop. Yes: God forbid else! -- For that was to worship the workmanship of
men's hands; which is idolatry?


John Roberts. Is that thy judgment, that to worship the workmanship of men's
hands is idolatry?


Bishop. Yes certainly.


John Roberts. Then give me leave to ask thee, by whose hands the
common prayer book was made, I am sure it was made by somebody's hands, for it
could not make itself?


Bishop. Do you compare our common-prayerbook to Nebuchadnezzar's image?


John Roberts. Yes, I do: that was his image, and this is thine. And be it
known unto thee, I speak in the dread of the God of heaven, I no more dare bow
to thy common prayer book than the three children could to Nebuchadnezzar's
image.


Bishop. Yours is a strange upstart religion, of a very few years standing, and
you are grown so confident in it, that there is no beating you out of it.


John Roberts. Out of my religion? God forbid! I was a long time seeking
acquaintance with the living God amongst the dead forms of worship, and
enquiring after the right way and worship of God, before I could find it; and
now, I hope neither thou nor any man living shall be able to persuade me out of
it. But though thou art an ancient man and a bishop, I find thou art very
ignorant of the rise and antiquity of our religion?


Bishop. (Smiling) Do you Quakers pretend antiquity for your religion?


John Roberts. Yes; and I don't question but, with the help of God, I can make
it appear, that our religion was many hundred years before thine was thought of.


Bishop. You see I have given you liberty of discourse, and have not sought to
ensnare you in your words; but if you can make the Quakers religion appear to
be many hundred years older than mine, you will speed the better.


John Roberts. If I do not, I seek no favor at thy hands, and, in order to it,
I hope thou wilt give me liberty to ask a few sober questions.


Bishop. You may.


John Roberts. Then first I would ask thee where was thy religion in Oliver's
days? The common prayer book was then become (even among the clergy) like an
old almanac, very few regarding it in our country. There were two or three
priests indeed, who stood honestly to their principles, and suffered pretty
much; but the far greater number turned with the tide: and we have reason to
believe, that if Oliver would have put mass into their mouths, they would have
conformed even to that for their bellies.


Bishop. What would you have us do? would you have had Oliver cut our throats?


John Roberts. No, by no means. But what religion was that you were afraid to
venture your throats for? Be it known unto thee, I ventured my throat for my
religion in Oliver's days, as I do now.


Bishop. And I must tell you, though in Oliver's days I did not dare to own it as
I do now, yet I never owned any other religion.


John Roberts. Then I suppose thou made (...) conscience of it; and I should
abundantly rather choose to fall into such a man's hands, than into the hand of
one who makes no conscience toward God, but will conform to any thing for his
belly. But if thou did not think thy religion worth venturing thy throat for
in Oliver's days, I desire thee to consider, it is not worth cutting other men's
throats now, for not conforming to it.


Bishop. You say right: I hope we shall have a care how we cut men's throats.
(Several others were now come into the room.) But you know the
common prayer book was before Oliver's days.


John Roberts. Yes: I have a great deal of reason to know that; for I was bred
up under a common-prayer-priest, and a poor old drunken man he was: sometimes
he was so drunk he could not say his prayers, and at best he could but say 'em;
though I think he was by far a better man than he that is priest there now.


Bishop. Who is your minister now?


John Roberts. My minister is Christ Jesus, the minister of the everlasting
covenant; but the present priest of the parish is George Bull.


Bishop. Do you say that drunken old man was better than Mr. Bull? I tell you,
I account Mr. Bull as sound, able, and orthodox a divine as any we have among
us.


John Roberts. I am sorry for that; for if he is one of the best of you, I
believe the Lord will not suffer you long: for he is a proud, ambitious,
ungodly man, he has often sued me at law, and brought his servants to swear
against me wrongfully. His servants themselves have confessed to my servants,
that I might have their ears; for their master made 'em drunk and then told 'em
they were set down in the list a^ witnesses against me, and they must swear to
it, and so they (...) and brought treble damages. They likewise owned they took
tithes from my servant, threshed 'em out, and sold 'em for their master. They
have also several times took my cattle out of my grounds, drove 'em to fairs
and markets, and sold them without giving me any account.


Bishop. I do assure you I will inform Mr. Bull of what you say.


John Roberts. Very well. And if thou please to send for me to face him, I
shall make much more appear to his face than I Will say behind his back.


Bishop. But I remember you said you could make it appear that your religion
was long before mine; and that is what I want to hear you make out.


John Roberts. Our religion, as thou may read in the scripture ( John iv.)
was set up by Christ himself, between sixteen and seventeen hundred years ago:
and he had full power to establish the true religion in his church, when he
told the woman of Samaria, that neither at that mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem,
was the place of true worship. They worshipped they knew not what. For said he,
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
truth.

This is our religion, and has ever been the religion of all those who have
worshipped God acceptably through the several ages since down to this time; and
will be the religion of the true spiritual worshippers of God to the world's
end; a religion performed by the assistance of the spirit of God, because God
is a spirit; a religion established by Christ himself before the mass book,
service book or directory, or any of those inventions and traditions of men,
which in the ^ight of apostasy were set up.


Bishop. Are all the Quakers of the same opinion?


John Roberts. Yes they are. If any hold doctrines contrary to that taught by
our Savior to the woman of Samaria, they are not of us.


Bishop. Do you own the Trinity?


John Roberts. I don't remember such a word in the holy scriptures.


Bishop. Do you own three persons?


John Roberts. I believe according to the scripture, that there are Three that
bear record in heaven, and that those Three are One: thou may make as many
persons of them as thou can. But I would soberl^ ask thee, since the
scriptures say the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, and that he is
incomprehensible, by what person or likeness can thou comprehend the Almighty?


Bishop. Yours is the strangest of all persuasions: for though there are many
sects (which he named) and though they and we differ in some circumstances, yet
in fundamentals we agree as one. But I observe you, of all others, strike at
the very root and basis of our religion.


John Roberts. Art thou sensible of that?


Bishop. Yes I am.


John Roberts. I am glad of that; for the root is the rottenness, and truth
strikes at the very foundation thereof. That little stone which Daviel saw cut
out of the mountain without hands will overturn all in God's due time, when you
have done all you can to support it. But, as to those others thou mention'st,
there is so little difference between you, that wise men wonder why you differ
at all; only we read, the beast had many heads, and many horns, which push
against each other.

And yet I am fully persuaned, there are many in this day true spiritual
worshippers in all persuasions.


Bishop. But you will not give us the same liberty you give a common mechanic
to call our tools by their own names.


John Roberts. I desire thee to explain thy self.


Bishop. Why, you will give a carpenter leave to call his gimblet a gimblet,
and his gouge a gouge; but you call our church a mass-house.


John Roberts. I wish you were half so honest men as carpenters.


Bishop. Why? do you upbraid us!


John Roberts. I would not upbraid you; but I Will endeavor to show thee wherein
you fall short of carpenters. Suppose I have a son intended to learn the trade
of a carpenter; I indent with an honest man of that calling, in consideration
of so much money, to teach my son his trade in such a term of years; at the end
of which term my son may be as good, or perhaps a better workman than his
master, and he shall be at liberty from him to follow the business for himself.
Now will you be so honest as this carpenter? You are men who pretend to know
more of light, life, and salvation, and things pertaining to the kingdom of
heaven, than we do: I would ask in how long a time you would undertake to teach
us as much as you know? and what shall we give you, that we may be once free
from our masters? But here you keep us always learning, that we may be always
paying you. Plainly it is a very cheat. What! always learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of God! miserable sinners you found us, and miserable
sinners you leave us.


Bishop. Are you against confession?


John Roberts. No, for I believe those who confess and forsake their sins shall
find mercy at the hand of God; but those who persist in them shall be punished.
But if ever you intend to be better, you must throw away your old book, and get
a new one, or turn over a new leaf; for if you keep on in your old lesson, you
must always be doing what you ought not, and leaving undone what ye out to do;
and you can never do worse. I believe, in my heart, you mock God.


Bishop. How dare you say?


John Roberts. I Will state the case, and thou shall judge. Suppose thou had a
son, and thou should daily let him know what thou would have him to do,
and he should day by day, week by week, and year after year provoke thee to thy
face, and say, father, I have not done what thou commandedst me to do; but have
done quite the contrary; and continue to provoke thee to thy face in this
manner once or oft'ner every week, would thou not think him a rebellious
child, and that his application to thee was mere mockery? and would it not
occasion thee to disinherit him?


After some more discourse, my father told him time was far spent; and said,
"If nothing will serve thee but my body in a prison, here it is in thy power;
and if thou command me to deliver myself up, either to the sheriff, or to
the jailor of Gloucester castle, as thy prisoner, I will go, and seek no other
judge, advocate, or attorney to plead my cause, but the great Judge of heaven
and earth, who knows I have nothing but love and goodwill in my heart to thee
and all mankind."

Bishop. No; you shall go home about your business.


John Roberts. Then I desire thee for the future not to trouble thyself to send
any more bailiffs after me; for if thou please it any time to let me know by
a line or two, that thou would speak with me, though it be to send me to
prison, if I am well and able, I Will come.


The Bishop then called for something to drink; but my father acknowledged his
kindness, and excused himself from drinking. And the bishop being called out of
the room, one Cuthbert, who took offense at my father's freedom with the
bishop, said, Haywood, you are afraid of nothing; I never met with such a man
in my life. I Am afraid of my life, left such fanatics as you should cut my
throat as I sleep.

John Roberts. I don't wonder that thou art afraid.


Cuthbert. Why should I be afraid any more than you?


John Roberts. Because I am under the protection of him who numbreth the very
hairs of my head, and without whose providence a sparrow shall not fall to the
ground; but thou have Cain's mark of envy on thy forehead, and like him art
afraid whoever meets thee will kill thee.


Cuthbert. (In a great rage) If all the Quakers in England are not hanged in a
month's time, I Will be hanged for them.


John Roberts. (Smiling) Prithee, friend, remember and be as good as thy word.


My father, and his friend Amariah Drewett, then took their leave, and returned
home with the answer of peace in their bosoms.

Some time after this, the bishop and the chancellor in their coaches,
accompanied with The Masters, Esquire in his coach, and about so clergymen on
horseback, made my father's house in their way to a visitation, which was to be
at Tedbury the next day. They stopped at the gate, and George Evans, the
bishop's kinsman, rode into the yard to call my father; who coming to the
bishop's coach-side, he put out his hand (which my father respectfully took)
saying, I could not well go out of the county without seeing you. That Is very
kind (said my father) will thou please to alight and come in, with those who
are along with thee?

Bishop. I thank you, John; we are going to Tedbury, and time will not admit of
it now; but I will drink with you if you please.


My father went in, and ordered some drink to be brought, and then returned to
the coachside.

George Evans. John, is your house free to entertain such men as we are?


John Roberts. Yes, George; I entertain honest men, and sometimes others.


George Evans. (to the bishop) My lord, John's friends are the honest men, and
we are the others.


John Roberts. That Is not fair, George, for thee to put thy construction on my
words: thou should have given me leave to do that.


'Squire Masters came out of his coach, and stood by the bishop's coach-side;
and the chancellor, in a diverting humor, said to my father, 'My lord and these
gentlemen have been to see your burying-ground, and we think you keep it very
decent.' (This piece of ground my father had given to friends for that purpose;
it lay at the lower end of his orchard.) My father answered yes; though we are
against pride, we think it commendable to be decent.

Chancellor. But there is one thing among you, which I did not expect to see; I
think it looks a little superstitious; I mean those grave-stones which are
placed at the head and feet of your graves.


John Roberts. That I consess is what I cannot much plead for; but it was
permitted to gratify some who had their relations there interred. We,
notwithstanding, propose to have them taken up ever long, and converted to some
better use. But I desire thee to take notice, we had it from among you, and I
have observed in many things wherein we have taken you for our pattern you have
led us wrong; and therefore we are now resolved, with the help of God, not to
follow you one step further.


At this the bishop smiled, and said, John, I think your beer is long a coming.

John Roberts. I suppose my wife is willing thou should have the best, and
therefore stays to broach a fresh vessel.


Bishop. Nay, if it be for the best, we'll stay.


Presently my mother brought the drink, and when the bishop had drank, he said,
I commend you John, you keep a cup of good beer in your house. I have not drank
any that pleased me better since I came from home. The chancellor drank next
and the cup coming round again to my father's hand, 'squire Masters said to
him, Now, old school-fellow, I hope you will drink to me?

John Roberts. Thou know it is not my practice to drink to any man; if it
was, I would as soon drink to thee as another, as being my (...) acquaintance
and school-fellow; but if th^^ (...) pleased to drink, thou art very welcome.


The 'squire then taking the cup into his hand, said, Now, John, before my lord
and all those gentlemen, tell me what ceremony or compliment do you Quakers
(...) when you drink to one another.

John Roberts. None at all. For me to drink to another, and drink the liquor,
is at best but a compliment, and that borders much on a lie.


'Squire Masters. What do you do then?


John Roberts. Why, If I have a mind to drink, I take the cup and drink; and if
my friend pleases, he does the same; if not, he may let it alone.


'Squire Masters. Honest John, give me thy hand. Here Is to thee with all my
heart; and, according to thy own compliment, if thou will drink, thou may,
if not, thou may let it alone.


My father then offering the cup to priest Bull, he refused it, saying, It is
full of hops and heresy. To which my father replied, As for hops, I cannot say
much, not being at the brewing of it; but as for heresy, I do assure thee
neighbor Bull, there is none in my beer; and if thou please to drink, thou art
welcome; but if not, I desire thee to take notice, as good as thee will; and
those are as well able to judge of heresy. Here thy lord bishop has drank of
it, and commends it; he finds no heresy in the cup.

Bishop. (Leaning over the coach door, and whispering to my father, said) John,
I advise you to take care you don't offend against the higher powers. I have
heard great complaints against you, that you are the ringleader of the Quakers
in this country; and that if you are not suppressed, all will signify nothing.
Therefore, pray John take care for the future, and don't offend any more.


John Roberts. I like thy counsel very well, and intend to cake it. but thou
know God is the higher power; and you mortal men, however advanced in this
world, are but the lower power; and it is only because I endeavor to be
obedient to the will of the higher powers, that the lower powers are angry with
me. But I hope, with the assistance of God, to take thy counsel, and be subject
to the higher powers, let the lower powers do with me as it may please God to
suffer them.


Bishop. I want some more discourse with you. Will you go with me to Mr. Bull's.


John Roberts. Thou know he has no goodwill for me. I had rather attend on
thee elsewhere.


Bishop, Will you come tomorrow to Tedbury?


John Roberts. Yes, If thou desire it.


Bishop. Well, I do.


The bishop then took his leave, and went not to George Bull's, at which he was
very much offended.

Next morning my father took his son Nathaniel with him, in case the bishop (in
compliance with the violent clamors of the priests) should send him to Prison,
which he expected. As they were passing along a street in Tedbury they were met
by Anthony Sharp, of Ireland, whose mother lived at Tedbury. After he
understood by my father where he was going, he asked if he would accept of a
companion? If thou have a mind to go to prison, says my father, thou may go
with me. I Will venture that (replied Anthony) for if I do, I shall have good
company. When they came to the foot of the stairs which led up to the bishop's
chamber, they were espied by George Evans, who said, come up, John; my lord
thought you long. When they came up, the bishop was just setting down to
dinner, with a number of clergymen; and offering to make room for my father he
excused himself, and retired with his friend till dinner was over. The bishop
spoke to the woman of the house for another room, which (it being market day)
was soon filled with priests and clothiers, etc.

Bishop. (Putting on a stern countenance) said, come, John, I must turn over a
new leaf with you. If you will not promise me to go to church, and to keep no
more of these seditious conventicles at your house, I must make your mittimus
and send you to prison.


John Roberts. Would thou have me shut my doors against my friends? It was
but yesterday that thou thyself, and many others here present, were at my
house; and I was so far from shutting my doors against you, that I invired you
in, and you should have been welcome to the best entertainment I had.


Bishop. It is those meetings I speak of which you keep at your house, to the
terror of the country.


John Roberts. This I Will promise thee, before all this company, that if any
plotters or ill-minded persons come to my house to plot or conspire against the
king or government, if I know of it, I Will be the first informer against them
myself, though I have not a penny for my labor. But if honest and sober people
come to my house, to wait upon, and worship the God of heaven, in spirit and in
truth, such shall be welcome to me as long as I have a house for 'em to meet
in; and if I should have none, the Lord will provide one for 'em.


Bishop. Will you promise to go to your own parish church to hear divine
service?


John Roberts. I can promise no such thing. The last time I was there, I was
moved and required of the Lord, whom I serve, to bear my testimony against a
hireling priest, who was preaching for hire and divining for money; and he was
angry with me, and caused the people to turn me out. And I don't intend to
trouble him again till he learn more civility, except the Lord requires it of
me.


Bishop. Send for the constable: I must take another course.


John Roberts. If thou should come to my house under a pretense of
friendship, and, in a Judas like manner, betray me hither to send me to prison,
as I have hitherto commended thee for thy moderation, I should then have
occasion to put thy name in print, and cause it to stink before all sober
people. But it is those who set thee on to mischief. I would not have thee
hearken to 'em, but bid 'em take up some honest vocation, and rob their honest
neighbors no longer. They are like a company of carerpillars who destroy the
fruit of the earth, and live on the fruit of other men's labor.


Then priest Rich, of North-Surray, said, who are those you call caterpillars?

John Roberts. We herdsmen call them caterpillars, who live on the fruit of
other men's fields, and on the sweat of other men's brows. And if thou do so,
thou may be one of them.


Rich. May it please your lordship, if you suffer such a man as this to thou
your lordship, and call you old man, what will become of us?


John Roberts. We honor old age, if it be found in the way of well-doing; but
one would not think you should be such dunces as to forget grammar rules. You
bred up at Oxford and Cambridge! For what? I, that am a layman, and bred at the
plow-tail, understand the singular and plural numbers. Thee and Thou is proper
to a single person, if it be to a prince: thou know it old man. What I have
you for got your prayers' Is it, You O Lord, or Thou O Lord, in your prayers?
Will you not accept the same language from your fellow mortals, which you give
to the Almighty? What spirit was that in proud Haman that would have poor
Mordecai to bow to him?


Bishop. This will not do. Make their mittimus's. What Is your name?


Anthony Sharp. My name is Anthony Sharp.


Bishop. Where do you live?


Anthony Sharp. At Dublin, in the kingdom of Ireland.


Bishop. What Is your business here?


Anthony Sharp. My mother lives in this town: And as she is such, and an
ancient woman, I thought it my duty to come and see her.


John Roberts. He only came hither in goodwill to bear me company. If thou
please, lay the more on me, and let him go free.


Bishop. No; he may be as dangerous a person as yourself; and as you came for
company, you shall go for company. Send for the constable to take them into
custody.


The woman of the house understanding the constable was to be sent for,
dispatched a messenger to him to bid him get out of the way. But the messenger
missing him, he came to the house by accident. To whom the landlady said, 'What
do you here, when honest John Haywood is going to be sent to prison? Here, come
along with me.' The constable being willing, she concealed him in another room,
and the bishop's messenger bringing him word that the constable was not to be
found, he said to my father: --

Bishop. Here are many gentlemen who have a great way home, and I can send you
to prison in the afternoon; so you may take your liberty until six of the clock.


My father perceived his intent was to get rid of his company. So he withdrew
with his friend Anthony Sharp; and at six a clock returned without him, and
found only two persons with the bishop, i.e. Edward Barnet, a surgeon of
Cockerton, and parson Hall.

Bishop. So, John, you are come. It Is well; I want some more discourse with you.


Parson Hall. An't please you, my lord, let me discourse with him.


Bishop. Ay, do, Mr. Hall, John will give you an answer.


Parson Hall. It Is a great pity such men as you should have the light, sight
and knowledge of the scriptures; for the knowledge of the scriptures has made
you mad.


John Roberts. Why should I not have the privilege of buying the scriptures
for my money as well as thee or any other man? But you priests, like the
Papists, would have us laymen kept in ignorance, that we might pin our faith on
your sleeves; and so the blind lead the blind till both fall into the ditch.
But if the knowledge of the scriptures has made me mad, the knowledge of the
sack-pot has almost made thee mad; and if we two mad men should dispute about
religion* we should make mad work of it. But, as thou art an unworthy man, I Will
not dispute with thee.


Parson Hall. An't please you, my lord, he says I am drunk.


John Roberts. Will thou speak an untruth before thy lord-bishop?


Parson Hall. He did say I was drunk, my lord


Bishop. What did you say, John? I Will believe you.


My father repeating what he said before, the bishop held up his hands, and
smiling, said, Did you say so, John? By which Hall perceiving the bishop did
not incline to favor him, went away in a huff* The bishop then directing his
discourse to my father, said; ' John, I thought you dealt hardly with me
today, in telling me, before so many gentlemen, that I came to your house in a
Judas like manner, and betrayed you hither to send you to prison: for if I had
not done what I did, people would have reported me an encourager of the Quakers.

John Roberts. If they had, it would have been no discredit to thee.


Bishop. Come now, John, I Will burn your mittimus before your face. And now Mr.
Barnot, I have a mind to ask John some questions. John, I have heard Mr. Bull
say strange things of you: that you can tell where to find any thing that is
lost as well as any cunning man, but I desire to hear it from your own mouth.
'Twas about some cows that a neighbor had lost, and could no where find them,
till they applied to you


John Roberts. If thou please to hear me, I Will tell thee the truth of that
story.


Bishop. Pray do; I shall believe you, John.


John Roberts. I had a poor neighbor, who had a wife and six children, and whom
the chief men about us permitted to keep six or seven cows upon the waste,
which were the principal support of his family, and preserved 'em from becoming
chargeable to the parish. One very stormy night the cattle were left in the
yard, as usual; but could not be found in the morning. The man and his sons had
sought 'em to no purpose: and after they had been lost 4 days, his wife came to
me, and, in a great deal of grief, cried, O Lord! master Haywood, we are
undone! my husband and I must go a begging in our old age! we have lost all our
cows! my husband and the boys have been round the country, and can hear nothing
of them, I Will down on my bare knees if you will stand our friend? I desired she
would not be in such an agony, and told her she should not down on her knees to
me; but I would gladly help them in what I could. I know, said she, you are a
good man, and God will hear your prayers. I desire thee (said I) to be still
and quiet in thy mind; perhaps thy husband or son may hear of 'em to day: if
not, let thy husband get a horse, and come to me tomorrow morning as soon as
he will; and I think, if it please God, to go with him to seek them. The woman
seemed transported with joy, crying, Then we shall have our cows again! Her
faith being so strong, brought the greater exercise upon me, with strong cries
unto the Lord, that he would be pleased to make me instrumental in his hand,
for the help of the poor family. In the morning early comes the old man, In the
name of God, says he, which way shall we go and seek them? I being deeply
concerned in my mind, did not answer him till he had thrice repeated it; and
then I answered, "In the name of God we will go to seek them (and said before I
was aware) we will go to Malmsbury, and at the horse fair we shall find them."
When I had spoken the words, I was much troubled lest they should not prove
true. It was very early, and the first man we saw, I asked him if he had seen
any stray milch cows thereabouts? What manner of cattle are they? said he. And
the old man describing of their marks and number, he told us there were some
stood chewing their cuds in their horse fair; but thinking they belonged to
some in the neighborhood, he did not take particular notice of them. When we
came to the place, the old man found 'em to be his; but suffered his transports
of joy to rise so high, that I was ashamed of his behavior; for he fell a
hallowing, and threw up his mountier cap in the air several times, 'till he
raised the neighbors out of their beds to see what was the matter. O (said he)
I had lost my cows four or five days ago, and thought I should never see them
again; and this honest neighbor of mine, told me this morning by his own fire
side, nine miles off, that here I should find them, and here I have them! Then
up goes his cap again. I begged of the poor man to be quiet, and take his cows
home, and be thankful, as indeed I was, being reverently bowed in my spirit
before the Lord, in that he was pleased to put the words of truth into my
mouth. And the man drove his cattle home, to the great joy of his family.


Bishop. I remember another Mr. Bull told me, about a parcel of sheep a
neighbor had lost, and you told him where to find them.


John Roberts. The truth of the story is this: a neighbor of mine, one John
Curtis (at that time a domestic of George Bull's) kept some sheep of his own;
and it so fell out that he lost them for some days; but happening to see me,
and knowing I went pretty much abroad, he desired me if I should see them any
where in my travels, to let him know of it. It happened the next day, as I was
riding toward my own field, my dogs being with me, put up a hare, and seeing
they were likely to kill her, I rode up to take them off, that she might
escape, and by mere accident, I espied J. CURTIS's sheep in one corner of the
field, in a thick briery part of the hedge, wherein they stood as secure as if
they had been in a pound. I suppose they had been driven there by the hounds.
When I came home I sent him word of it. And though this is no more than a common
accident, I find George Bull has endeavored to improve it to my disadvantage.


Bishop I remember one story more he told me, about a horse.


John Roberts. If I shall not tire thy patience, I Will acquaint thee how that was.
One Edward Symons came from London to see his parents at Siddington. They put
his horse to grass with their own, in some ground beyond a part of mine, called
the Fursen Leases, through which they went with the horse; and when they wanted
to take him from grass, they could not find him. After he had been lost some
time, and they had cr^'d him at several market towns, somebody (who, (...)
likely, might have heard the former stories told, as thou might hear them)
directed this Edward Symons to me, who telling me the case, I asked him which
way they had the horse to grass? He answered through the Fursen Leases.

I said, the horse being a stranger in the place, it is very likely he might
endeavor to bend homewards, and loose himself in the Fursen Leases; for there
are a great many acres under that name, which are so overgrown with
furse-bushes, that a horse may lie there concealed a long time. I therefore
advised him to get a good deal of company, and search the places diligently, as
if they were beating for a hare; which if he did, I told him I was of the mind
he would find him. The man did take my advice, and found him. And where is the
cunning of all this? It Is no more than their own reason might have directed
them to, had they properly considered the case.


Bishop. I ^^^nted to hear these stories from your own mouth, though I did not,
nor should I have credited them, in the sense Mr. Bull related them. But I
believe you, John. And now, Mr. Barnet, we'll ask John some serious questions.
I can compare him to nothing but a good ring of ^^^ls. You know, Mr. Barnet, a
ring of bells may be made of as good metal as can be put into bells; but they
may be out of tune: so we may say of John; he is a man of as good metal as I
ever met with, but he is quite out of tune.


John Roberts. Thou may well say so; for I cannot tune after thy pipe.


Bishop. Well, I remember to have read, at the preaching of the apostle the
heart of Lydia was opened. Can you tell us what it was that opened the heart of
Lydia?


John Roberts. I believe I can.


Bishop. I thought so. I desire you to do it.


John Roberts. It was nothing but the key of David.


Bishop. Nay, now JOHN, I think you are going wrong.


John Roberts. If thou please to speak, I Will hear thee; but if thou would
have me speak, I desire thee to hear me.


Bishop. Come, Mr. Barnet, we'll hear John.


John Roberts. It is written, Thou have the key of David, which opens, and none
can shut; and if thou shut'st, none can open.

And that is no other but the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ. It was the same
spiritual key that opened the heart of Moses, the first penman of the
seripture, and gave him a sight of things from the beginning. It was the same
spiritual key that opened the hearts of all the holy patriarchs, prophets and
apostles, in ages past, who left their experience of the things of God upon
record: which if they had not done, you bishops and priests would not have any
thing to make a trade of; for it is by telling the experiences of these holy
men, that you get your great bishoprics and personages. And the same spiritual
key, has, blessed be God, open^d the hearts of thousands in this age; and the
same spiritual key has, in a measure, opened my heart, and given me to
destinguish things that differ. And it must be the same that must open thy
heart, if ever thou come to have it truly opened.


Bishop. It is the truth, the very truth. I never heard it so defined before.
John, I have done you much wrong: I desire you to forgive me; and I Will never
wrong you more.


John Roberts. I do heartily forgive thee, as far as it is in my power; and I
truly pray the father of mercies may forgive thee, and make thee his. As to the
latter part, that thou will never wrong me more; I am of the same mind with
thee; for it is in my heart to tell thee, I shall never see thy face any more.


Bishop. I have heard you once told the jailor of Gloucester so, and it proved
true.


John Roberts. That jailor had been very cruel to me, and the rest of our
friends, who were then prisoners He had kept us in prison from the session to
the assize, and from the assize to the session, omitting to put our names in
the calendar, that we might have had a hearing. At length I found means, at an
assize time, to acquaint the judge (by letter) of his illegal proceedings. In
consequence of which we were ordered to be put on the calendar, had a hearing,
and were acquitted. The judge severely reprimanded the jailor, saying, "Sirrah!
if ever I hear that you do the like for the future, I Will take care that you
shall be jailor here no longer. Shall I come here to hear and determine causes,
and shall you keep men in prison during your pleasure, and not put their names
in the calendar?" The jailor coming out of the castle was heard by the turnkey
to say, "It was about Haywood that I was so severely reprimanded by the judge;
and if ever he comes into the castle again, he shall never come out alive."
Upon which the turnkey took an opportunity to find me out, and informing me of
it, said, 'I would not have you by any means come back to the castle tonight,
to fetch any of your things; for if you do, he will certainly detain you for his
fees. I Will take equal care of your things, as if yourself were present to do
it.' I acknowledged his kindness, and went home. When the jailor returned to
the castle, he asked the turnkey where the Quakers were? He answered, he though it
it his business to take care of the felons, and to leave the Quakers to him.
Not long after, being constable I secured a felon who broke out of the castle,
and sent the turnkey notice of it. He coming over to fetch him back, begged, if
by any means I could prevent it, that I would not come any more a prisoner to
the castle whilst his master was jailor; "For (says he) if you do, he swears
you shall never go out alive; and that hour you come in, I Will leave the castle;
for I cannot stay there to see you abused." Does he still say so? said I. Yes,
he does, said he. "Then remember me to him (said I) and tell him from me, I
shall never see his face any more! Soon after it pleased God to take him away
by death; and in a little time I was had prisoner there again.


This was the last conference my father had with the bishop, who died soon
after.

Some time after our friends having been kept out of their meeting at
Cirencester a considerable time, had continued to meet in the street. But
orders being given one day to permit them to meet in the house, they did; and
whilst Theophila Townshend was in prayer, the bishop (successed to bishop
Nicholson) Sir John Guise, William Brother, of Barnsley, justice of the peace,
with a great company attending them, came in. The bishop laid his hand on
Theophila's head, saying, Enough, good woman, enough: desist, desist. When she
had done, Richard Bowley, of Cirencester went to prayer. And when he had done,
Sir John Guise asked his name?

R. Bowley. My name is Richard Bowley.


Sir John Guise. Where do you live?


Richard Bowley. In this Town.


Sir John Guise. What trade are you?


R. Bowley. A malster.


Sir John Guise. Set down Richard Bowley 20^. for Preaching. Whose house is
this?


John Roberts. This house has many owners.


Sir John Guise. But who is the landlord?


John Roberts. One who is able to give us a quiet possession of it.


Sir John Guise. I demand of you who is the landlord of it?


John Roberts. The king is our landlord.


Sir John Guise. How is the king your landlord?


John Roberts. It is the king's land, and we pay the king's auditors. And we
are not only his peaceable subjects, but also his good tenants, who pay him his
rent Therefore we have reason to hope he will give us a peaceable possession of
our bargain.


Sir John Guise. Who pays the king's auditors?


R. Bowley. I do.


Sir John Guise. Set down R. Bowley 20 l. for the house.


John Roberts. Who is that (speaking to the other justice) who is so forward to
take names, and levy fines?


Justice Burcher. Don't you know him? It Is Sir John Guise.


Sir John Guise. What Is that to you? What Is your name?


John Roberts. I Am not ashamed of my name. But if thy name be JOHN GUISE, I
knew thy father by a very remarkable incident: and I would have thee take
warning by thy father. -- A word to the wise is sufficient.


Sir John Guise. Here, constable, take this fellow, and lay him by the heels.
He affronts me.


John Roberts. My heels, man! Fear and dread the living God: I am not afraid of
being laid by the heels. The constable not being forward to obey his orders, he
took my father by one arm, and bid the constable take him by the other. So they
led him into the street, and bid him go about his business. 'I am about my
business,' said my father: and on their going in again, my father followed them


Sir John Guise. Haywood, I thought I had you out. What do you here again?


John Roberts. I come to see how thou behavest amongst my friends, and if thou
do not behave thyself well, I shall make bold to tell thee of it.


Sir John Guise. I command you in the king's name, to go out again.


John Roberts. If thou please go out first, I Will follow.


With some pains he got all the friends out of the house, and ordered all the
forms to be brought out into the street.

Which being done, my father said, 'The seats are our own, and we may as well
sit as stand.' So the friends fat down: but presently after they were broken up
and dispersed. -- Not long after John Timbrel, a friend, of Cirencester, wrote
to justice Burcher, and told him (amongst other things) he had till then a
better opinion of him than to think he would set his hand to such a work; and
that he was sorry that he should be one in it. Sir JOHN, being acquainted with
it by justice Burcher, sent out a special warrant against JOHN TIMBRLL. The
constable who had it to serve was so civil to inform him of it, and tell him he
would not serve it on him till his market was over. However, he left his
market, came to my father, told him of the warrant, and asked his advice. My
father advised him not to stay for the serving of the warrant, but go directly
to Sir JOHN. He engaging my father to accompany him, so ^way they went. When
they came before Sir JOHN, JOHN TIMBREL said, "I heard that thou had sent
out a warrant to bring me before thee. But I chose rather to come without it."

Sir JOHN. What Is your name?


John Timbrel. My name is John Timbrel.


Sir JOHN. Are you that saucy, pragmatic fellow that wrote to Mr. Burcher, to
deter him from executing the king's laws?


J. Timbrel. I did write a letter to Wm. Burcher.


Sir JOHN. Then you deserve a stone doublet.


J. Timb. Have thou seen the letter?


Sir JOHN. No, but I have had an account of it.


John Roberts. Then, though thou art but a young man, I desire thee to show
thyself so much a wise man, as not to condemn any thing thou halt not seen. I
have seen a copy of it, and think there is a great deal of good advice in it;
and I wish both thee and W. Burcher were so wise as to take it."


Sir JOHN. I thought you were the writer or inditer of it, though Timbrel's name
was to it.


John Roberts. No, I was not. I knew nothing of it, till after it was sent.


Sir JOHN. But I remember you affronted me the other day before a great number of
people concerning my father. Pray what do you know of my father?


John Roberts. Sometime ago, several of my friends being met, together with me
in a peaceable manner, to worship God, at Stoke Or^^ard, thy father came in
with a file of musketeers at his heels, and beat and abused us very much. I
then warned him in abundance of love. Yet he did not seem to regard it, but
sent about 12 of us to Gl^^cester castle. I then told him God would plead our
cause with him. And I was credibly informed, that, not the very night, but the
next night after, he went to bed as well in appearance as usual; but in the
morning, he not ringing a certain bell, which he had by him for that purpose,
at the time he used to do, his housekeeper went up several times, and thought
he was asleep. But at length, suspecting something more than ordinary, she made
a closer inspection; and, perceiving his countenance changed, she threw open
the curtains in a great surprise. On which, he just flashed open his eyes, but
said not a word. She asked him how he did? but he made no answer. Which made
her cry more earnestly; 'Pray, sir, how do you do? How is it with you? For
God's sake tell me. And all he said to her was, Oh! these Quakers! Oh! these
Quakers! Would to God I had never had a hand against these Quakers! I did not
hear that ever be spoke more.


Sir JOHN seemed surprised at this relation, and did not contradict it in the
least; which, it is reasonable to think, he would, and with resentment too, had
it not been true. Yet notwithstanding this fair warning, he continued his
practice of granting warrants against us. But the officers were generally so
civil as to acquaint us with it in time. Some time after this, Sir ^. GUISE and
Sir ROBT. ATKINS, being at (...) Brook, two miles from Cirencester, quarreled
as they were gaming. Sir JOHN drew his sword, and demanded satisfaction: But
those in the house stepped between and parted them. They seeming to appear
pacified, and sat down again. But afterward, taking a walk together in the
bowling-green, the breast of Sir JOHN being filled with resentment, he said,
Sir ROBERT, you gave me the lie; and I will have satisfaction.

Sir ROBERT. If I have said any thing more than what is common for gentlemen to
say to each other in their play, betwixt you and I, I ask your pardon.


Sir JOHN. If you will go in, and ask it before the people of the house, I will
put it up; otherwise I will not.


Sir ROBERT. No, Sir JOHN; that is beneat^ me.


Sir JOHN. Then draw, or you shall die like a dog. -- They both drew, and Sir
ROBERT gave him a gentle prick in the arm, and said, I desire you, Sir JOHN, to
take that for satisfaction. I could have had you elsewhere; but was unwilling
to do you further mischief.


Sir JOHN. I Will kill or be killed.


Sir ROBERT. If that be your mind, look to your self as well as you can; for I
shall have you at the next pass.


-- And so he had; for he ran him through, in at the belly, and out at the
back; on which he fell. Sir ROBERT stepped up to him, unbutton'd his clothes,
tore his shirt down, and gently drew out his sword; and then, after he had well
sucked the wound, taking his handkerchief, he rolled up the corners of it hard,
and thrust it into the orifice: then buttoning of his clothes, he lifted him
up, and desired him while he was able, that he would acquaint the people of the
house that his death was owing to his own seeking. And when they were come
about him, he was so generous as to say, "If I die, Sir ROBERT is clear; for if
he had not killed me, I would have killed him." Sir ROBERT procured him
Surgeons: and, after a while, when great pain came upon him, he lamented
himself much, and said, "It was the just hand of God upon me for meddling with
the Quakers. But, if he will be pleased to spare me, and try me again, I Will
never have a hand against them any more. For Haywood told me if I went on
persecuting, the same hand that overtook my father would overtake me, before I
was aware. He further told me, I was set on by some envious priests; and I
might have time to repent it. And so I do with all my heart. And it is true; I
could never come into company with Mr. Careless or Mr. Freame, but they would
be stirring me up to put the laws in execution against Dissenters." The sword
having missed his intrails, he recovered, stood candidate for the county after,
and never mere disturbed our meetings.

The next thing I shall take notice of, is the proceeding of justice JAMES
GEORGE, against my father, my brother Nathaniel and myself. He came to the Ram
in Cirencester, and sent for my brother and me. My father went with us. And
when we came thither, he said: -- "'It Is very well, JOHN, that you are come too.
I sent for your sons, to let them know it is his majesty's pleasure to have the
laws put in execution: and now I take this opportunity to let them and you
know, that we must all be of one church.

John Roberts. Thou ought then to be well assured it is the right church.
For if thou should be so far permitted to exercise the authority thou art
entrusted with, as to force a man, against his conscience, to conform to a
wrong church, thou can not indemnify that man for so conforming in the day
of account. I have read indeed, that our Savior made a whip of small cords to
whip the buyers and sellers out of the temple; but I never read that he whipped
any in.


-- The window of the room being open, we had a prospect of Cirencester tower;
and the justice pointing to it, said, what do you call that, John?"

John Roberts. Thou may call it a daw-house, if thou please. Dos^^'t thou
see how the jackdaws flock about it?


Justice. Well, notwithstanding your jesting I warn you, in the king's name,
that you meet no more, as you will answer it at your peril.


John Roberts. Then, I suppose thou think thou have done thy duty.


Justice. Yes.


John Roberts. Then I desire thee to give me leave to do my duty. And I do now
warn thee, in the name of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords* not to molest
or hinder us in the peaceable exercise of our duty to God, as thou will answer
it at another day.


A little time after this, he sent to the officers, to bid 'em go to the
Quakers meeting house on sunday next, and bring their names to him. The
officers were very unwilling to obey his commands; and some of them acquainted
me with their orders, desiring we would not meet at the ^sual time, or
otherwise that we would meet at another place. I told them, we did not dare
(...) far to deny the Worship of our God: For, said I, we worship the same God
that Daniel did: and he notwithstanding the severe decree of the king, failed
not (...) to own God, by praying to him, with his window open as usual. And our
God is the same he was in Daniel's days, as able to stop the mouths of lions as
he was then. And we are not afraid to trust him, having had experience of many
deliverances he has wrought for us. The next first day we met at the time and
place we used to meet; and a good meeting we had, the living presence of the
Lord being sensibly felt amongst us. One of the constables came in, and
delivered a warrant to my brother John, desiring him to read it. But my brother
put it in his pocket, telling him he designed to read it when the meeting was
over, 'That will not do, said he; for if you will not read it now, I desire you
to give it to me again.' Which he did. And then they took a list of several of
our names, and carried it to justice George. On which he sent out his warrants
to distrain our goods. They seized my father's corn in his barns, and locked up
the barn-doors. And at that same time the murrain had seized the justice's
cattle, and they died apace. His steward told him, he must send for John
Haywood, or he would loose all his cattle. 'No, said the justice, don't send
for him no^* because I have warrants out against him and hi^ sons. Send for any
body else.' So the steward sent for another; who did what he could for 'em, but
to very little purpose, for the cattle continued to sicken and die as before.
The steward then told him, 'Please your worship, if you don't send for John
Haywood, I believe you will loose all your cattie; for now the bull is sick,
and off his meat; and I don't find this man does them any good. But if you will
please to send for John, I don't question but he would be of service to them.'
Send for him then, said the justice; but don't bring him in as you used to do.
When he has done what he can, pay him, and dismiss him. So my father was sent
for, and went (having learned that great christian lesson to return good for
evil) and did his best for 'em. When he had done, as he was wiping his hands in
the entry, the justice undesignedly came by him; and, seeing he could not avoid
his notice, said, So, John, You have done something for my cattle, I suppose.
Yes, said my father, and I hope it will do them good. Well (said the justice to
the steward) pay John.

John Roberts. No; I Will have none of thy money.


JUSTICE. None of my money! why so?


John Roberts. To what purpose is it for me to take a little of thy money by
retail, and thou'l^ come and take my goods by wholesale.


JUSTICE. Don't think your coming to drench and bleed my cattle shall deter me
from executing the king's laws.


John Roberts. It Is time enough for thee to deny me a favor when I ask it of
thee. I seek no favor at thy hands. But when thou have done me all the
displeasure thou art permitted to do, I will notwithstanding serve thee or
thine to the utmost of my power.


JUSTICE. Well, John, you must stay and dine with me.


John Roberts. Perhaps I shall intrude if I stay. I had rather be excused.


JUSTICE. It Is no intrusion, John; you shall stay.


So my father stayed, and presented him with a piece of Thomas Elwood's against
persecution. Which, together with my father's readiness to serve him, so
wrought on him, that I don't remember any of his corn was taken from him at
that time. But my brother Nathaniel and myself, being partners in trade in
Cirencester, were fined by this justice George, for ourselves, and unable
persons present with us at the meeting, seventy pounds.

Some time after came to our house Sir Thomas Cutter, with other justices, the
sheriff of the county, his men, and two constables. Our neighbors in good will
to us shut our doors, and the maid fastened them on the inside. But the
justices gave orders they should be broke open. A young woman being in the shop
when it was done, ran out at the backdoor in a fright. Which Sir Thomas
seeing, said, "There is one gone! There might as well be five hundred gone;
I Will take my oath here was a conventicle." I, being near him, bid him take care
what he said or swore, because he must give account, and he knew not how soon.
A servant belonging to one of them took off my hat, and laid it on the table. I
took it, and put it on again, saying, I hope a man may keep his hat on in his
own house, without offonce to any man.

Sir Thomas. What Is your name?


D. Roberts. Daniel Roberts.


Sir Thomas. Can you swear?


D. Roberts. Not that I know of. I never tried


Sir Thomas. Then you must begin now.


D. Roberts. I think I shall not.


Sir Thomas. How will you help it?


D. Roberts. By not doing it. But if thou can convince me by that book in thy
hand (which was a bible) that it is lawful to swear, since Christ forbids it,
then I will swear. For when men come and say you must swear or suffer, it is but
reasonable to expect such men should be qualified to prove it lawful. Our
Savior says, Swear not at all: Thou say I must swear. Pray which must I
obey?


Sir Thomas. Well, Daniel, if you will not swear, you must go to jail.


D. Roberts. The will of God be done. For be it known unto you, we had rather
be in prison, and enjoy our peace with God, than be at liberty, and break our
peace with him.


Justice Parsons. I suppose you are one of John Haywood's sons?


D. Roberts. Yes.


Justice Parsons. I am sorry for that.


D. Roberts. Why art thou sorry for that? I never heard an honest man speak
against my father in my life. What have thou against him?


Sir Thomas. That he is not only misled himself, but is also a means to
mis-lead others.


D. Roberts. If you have nothing against him, but his obedience to the law of
his God, that is no more than the accusers of honest Daniel had against him; and
that does not concern me.


Sir Thomas. His worshipping God in the way he does, is crime enough.


D. Roberts. Then I hope I shall be a criminal as long as I live.


Then they seized what goods they pleased, and took 'em away with 'em. And
after they had tendered us oaths twice more, our mittimus was made, and we were
sent to Gloucester Castle; where we sound several of our friends before us;
and, with them that were sent in soon after us, we became a family of forty or
fifty. The jailor's name was John Landborne; and for a piece of service I did
him gratis in his absence, ( i. e. officiating as key-turner, and preventing
two notorious robbers from breaking out) I could prevail with him to let
several of our friends go home, when occasion particularly required, for some
time together. We, being a large number of us in prison, had often large
meetings on the firstdays in the castle. Diverse of the Prisoners, who were not
of us, as well as several people out of the city, would come and sit down with
us. Therefore Richard P^^sons, one of our persecutors, who lived in the city,
came to our morning meeting, accompan^^^ with several others. My father was
pre^^^^ with us, and Henry Panto^ (who had formerly been a fencing master) was
preaching, when they came in, concerning the confession of (...), who
perpetually say they are ^^^^g w^^t they ought not, and leaving undone what
they ought to do: which words Parsons (who (...) a chancellor, and a justice)
took ho^^ (...) ^^^ling him he was complaining of others for what he was doing
himself: for (said he) you are now doing what you ought not, and leaving undone
what you ought to do; catching, hold of his gray locks to pull him down. But
Henry being a tall man, pretty strong and active, though in years, he stood his
ground, and spoke over his head. Parsons then strove to (...) his mouth; but he
avoided it, by turning his head on one side. When he had done ^^^aking, a
friend stood up, and said, It Is a sign (...) devil's hard put to it to have his
drudgery done that priests must leave their pulpits and parishoners, to take up
the business of informers against poo^ prisoners in the prison. After priest
Parsons had been some time endeavoring to get the names of some present, and no
body would give him information, he thus broke out: 'If you are thereabouts, I
shall be even with you another way.' For he had got a list of several of the
prisoners names; and taking for granted that they were all present at the time,
he sent out his warrants for distraining their goods. However, herein he was
mistaken; for several were then absent; among whom was Lettice Gush, a widow,
who lived about 20 miles distant. Some officers being sent to her house to
distrain her goods, for being at this meeting, when she was 20 miles from the
place. When the officers came, she told them she was not at the meeting: and to
convince them, persuaded them to go with her to her landlord, who was also a
justice of the peace, and knew (...) said to be true. When they came before
him, and showed him the warrant, "What a rascal (said he) is this Parsons! Here
he says he will take his oath that my tenant was convicted by him of being at a
conventicle in Gloucester castle such a day of the month; and I Will take my oath
she was at home at the same time, which is 20 miles off. If you touch any of
her goods by virtue of this warrant, be it at your peril. I Will assure you if
you do, I Will stick close to your skirts." Officer. What can be done in this
case? How can we make a legal return of the warrant without executing it?
Landlord. Carry it back to Mr. Parsons, and tell him to wipe his breech with
it; and I Will bear you out in it. So they returned, without giving her any
further trouble. -- Another warrant was issued out against Francis Boy,
physician, on the same account, and of the same value, who was likewise absent
at the time of his pretended conviction. When the officers came to disstrain
his goods, he was not at home. So his cattle were take away to the value of
between 20 and 30 l. He afterward, on inspection, found by his books, that he
was attending a gentleman the time he was said to be convicted. To this
gentleman he went, and enquired of him if he could remember the day he attended
him? The gentleman answered, 'He had good reason to remember it; for (said he)
if you had not done what you did for me that day, I believe I should have been
now in my grave.' He then informed the gentleman of the reason that induced him
to give him that trouble. 'Well (replied he) I advise you to appeal to the next
quarter sessions for redress; and you may assure yourself I Will endeavor to
serve you what lies in my power; for I Will take my oath before any judge or
bench of justices in England, that you was with me that day.' But it so fell
out that he had no occasion to appeal. For it soon took air that he had such a
substantial evidence in his favor; and his cattle were returned before the
sessions.

Not long after it pleased God to visit my dear father with sickness that
proved mortal. I had leave to attend him the major part of the time he was
sick: and the Lord was pleased to favor him with his living presence in his
last moments: and having honorably finished his days work, he departed this
life in the year 1683, and was interred in the piece of ground he had long
before give^ to friends for a burying-place, situate at the ^ower end of his
orchard, at Siddington, near Cirences^^^

Some days after his interment, I had the news that my brother and myself, with
four friends more, were discharged by the judge; but that the other four were
detained for their fees. I therefore went down to use my interest for their
discharge. I found him ill in bed; and he told me he was very willing to remit
the fees belonging to himself; but there was some due to the undersheriff, and
those were not in his power. But soon after providence so ordered that we all
had our liberty; and I came and settled at my present habitation at Chesham, in
Buckinghamshire, where I have now dwelt about forty years.

Thus, considering that it were great pity those singular providence of the
Almighty should not be recorded, for the benefit of posterity, I was willing
for my own perusal and that of my family, and some few particular friends, to
commit them to writing. In the doing of which, respecting the several
conferences my father had with the bishops, and others, beforementioned, I
have been careful to pen them down in the same words they were then expressed
in, as near as I could recollect, or at least to retain the genuin sense and
purport of them. Which, reader, if they tend to thy confirmation and
encouragement in a course of true christian piety, I have my end; who am

Thy sincere Friend, DANIEL ROBERTS.
Chesoam, 4th Mo. 1725.
THE END.

