AN EPISTLE OF CAUTION and ADVICE, CONCERNING THE BUYING and KEEPING OF SLAVES.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by JAMES CHATTIN, in Church-Alley. 1754.

An EPISTLE of CAUTION and ADVICE, etc.
From our Yearly Meeting for the Provinces of Pennsylvania, and New-Jerseys,
held at Burlington by Adjournments from the 14th Day of the Ninth Month, 1754,
to the 19th of the same inclusive.
DEAR FRIENDS,
IT has frequently been the Concern of our Yearly Meeting, to testify their
Uneasiness and Disunity, with the Importation and Purchasing of Negrocs and
other Slaves, and to direct the Overseers of the several Meetings to advise and
deal with such as engage therein. And it has likewise been the continued Care
of many weighty Friends, to press those that bear our Name, to guard, as much
as possible, against, being in any Respect, concerned in promoting the Bondage
of such unhappy People: Yet, as we have with Sorrow to observe, that their
Number is of late increased amongst us; we have thought proper to make our
Advice and Judgment more public, that none may plead Ignorance of our
Principles therein; and also, again, earnestly to exhort all to avoid, in any
Manner encouraging that Practice of making Slaves of our Fellow Creatures.

Now dear Friends, if we continually bear in Mind the royal Law, of doing to
others, as we would be done by, we shall never think of bereaving our Fellow
Creatures of that valuable Blessing Liberty; nor endure to grow rich by their
Bondage. To live in Ease and Plenty, by the Toil of those whom Violence and
Cruelty have put in our Power, is neither consistent with Christianity, nor
common Justice; and we have good Reason to believe, draws down the Displeasure
of Heaven, it being a melancholy but true Reflection, That, where Slave keeping
prevails, pure Religion and Sobriety decline, as it evidently tends to harden
the Heart, and render the Soul less susceptible of that holy Spirit of Love,
Meekness and Charity, which is the peculiar Character of a true Christian.

How then can we who have been concerned to publish the Gospel of universal
Love and Peace among Mankind, be so inconsistent with ourselves, as to purchase
such who are Prisoners of War; and thereby encourage, this antichristian
Practice? And more especially, as many of these poor Creatures are stolen away,
Parents from Children, and Children from Parents, and others who were in good
Circumstances in their native Country, inhumanly torn from what they esteemed a
happy Situation, and compelled to toil in a State of Slavery, too often
extremely cruel! What dreadful Scenes of Murder and Cruelty those barbarous
Ravages must occasion in these unhappy People's Country, are too obvious to
mention: Let us make their Case our own, and consider what we should think, and
how we should feel, were we in their Circumstances. Remember our blessed
Redeemer's positive Command, To do unto others, as we would have them do unto
us, and that, with what Measure we mete, it shall be measured to us again. And
we entreat you to examine, whether the purchasing of a Negroe either born here,
or imported, does not contribute to a further Importation; and consequently to
the upholding all the Evils above mentioned, and promoting Man-stealing, the
only Theft which by the Mosaic Law was punished with Death, He that steals a
Man and sells him, or if he be found in his Hand, he shall surely be put to
death, Exodus xxi. 16.

THE Characteristic and Badge of a true Christian is Love, and good Works; our
SAVIOR'S whole Life on Earth was one continual Exercise of them: Love one
another, says he, as I have loved you. How can we be said to love our Brethren,
who bring, or for selfish Ends keep them in Bondage? Do we act consistent with
this noble Principle, who lay such heavy Burdens on our Fellow Creatures? Do we
consider, that they are called, and sincerely desire that they may become Heirs
with us in Glory, and rejoice in the Liberty of the Sons of GOD, whilst we are
withholding from them the common Liberties of Mankind? Or can the Spirit of
GOD, by which we have always professed to be led, be the Author of those
oppressive and unrighteous Measures? Or do we not thereby manifest, that
temporal Interest has more Influence on our Conduct herein, than the Dictates
of that merciful, holy and unerring GUIDE?

AND we likewise earnestly recommend to all who have Slaves, to be careful to
come up in the Performance of their Duty toward them, and to be particularly
watchful over their own Hearts; it being, by sorrowful Experience remarkable,
that Custom and a Familiarity with Evil of any Kind, has a Tendency to bias
the Judgment, and deprave the Mind. And it is obvious, that the future Welfare
of those poor Slaves, who are now in Bondage, is generally too much disregarded
by those who keep them; if their daily Task of Labor be but fulfilled, little
else perhaps is thought of; nay, even that which in others would be looked upon
with Horror and Detestation, is little regarded in them by their Masters, such
as the frequent Separation of Husbands from Wives, and Wives from Husbands,
whereby they are tempted to break their Marriage Covenants, and live in
Adultery, in direct Opposition to the Laws both of GOD and Men, although we
believe, that CHRIST died for all Men, without respect of Persons. How fearful
then ought we to be, of engaging in what has so natural a Tendency to lessen
our Humanity, and of suffering ourselves to be enured to the Exercise of hard
and cruel Measures, lest thereby we in any Degree, loose our tender and feeling
Sense of the Miseries of our Fellow Creatures, and become worse than those who
have not believed?

AND, dear Friends, you who by Inheritance have Slaves born in your Families,
we beseech you to consider them as Souls committed to your Trust, whom the LORD
will requite at your Hand, and who as well as you are made Partakers of the
Spirit of Grace, and called to be Heirs of Salvation, and let it be your
constant Care, to watch over them for Good, instructing them in the Fear of
GOD, and the Knowledge of the Gospel of CHRIST, that they may answer the End of
their Creation, and GOD be glorified and honored by them, as well as by us,
and so train them up, that if you should come to behold their unhappy
Situation, in the same Light that many worthy Men who are at rest have done,
and many of your Brethren now do; and should think it your Duty to set them
free, they may be the more capable to make a proper use of their Liberty.
Finally Brethren, we entreat you, in the Bowels of Gospel Love, seriously to
weigh the Cause of detaining them in Bondage: If it be for your own private
Gain, or any other Motive than their Good, it is much to be feared, that the
Love of GOD, and the Influence of the holy Spririt, is not the prevailing
Principle in you, and that your Hearts are not sufficiently redeemed from the
World, which that you, with ourselves may more and more come to witness,
through the cleansing Virtue of the holy Spirit of JESUS CHRIST, is our earnest
Desire. With the Salutation of our (...) we are your Friends and (...)

Signed, by Appointment, on behalf of the Yearly Meeting, by JOHN EVANS, JOHN
SMITH, THOMAS CARLETON, WILLIAM TRIMBLE, JOHN SCARBROUGH, JOSEPH HAMTON,
ABRAHAM FARRINGTON, JOSEPH NOBLE, JAMES DANIEL, JOSEPH GIBSON, JOHN SHOTWELL,
JOSEPH PARKER.



