THE MONSTER of MONSTERS: A true and faithful NARRATIVE of a most remarkable
Phenomenon lately seen in the METROPOLIS; to the great Surprise and Terror of
His MAJESTY's good Subjects: Humbly DEDICATED to all the Virtuosi of
New England.

By Thomas Thumb, Esquire.

Monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens --
Black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell!
Whence, and what are thou, execrable Shape!
That dare, the grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated Front athwart my Way!
MILTON. Printed in July 1754.

THE MONSTER OF MONSTERS.
IT is hoped that the common idle Stories about Monsters and Prodigies, which
amuse and please the Vulgar, while they disgust sober and reasonable Men, will
be no insuperable Objection against the ensuing Narrative: Though the Author is
aware, that the Frequency of such Tales, which are soon found to be destitute
of all Truth and Reality, will be a considerable Prejudice to it. But let its
Reception be what it will, he thinks the Subject of it too singular and
remarkable, to have no public Notice taken of it. And in full Confidence, that
the Truth will, at length, surmount all Obstacles, and triumph over the most
determined Infidelity, he can cheerfully risque all the Credit he has in the
World, whether more or less, upon the Verity of what follows.

THERE lately appeared, in this Metropolis, a MONSTER of the most hideous Form,
and terrible Aspect; such an one as was never before seen in America by any
Man's Eyes; and, I believe, no where else; to be sure not in the British
Dominions. There was indeed one formerly a little like him in Turkey: another
in Italy; and, as some say, there is one in France at this Day. He had more
Heads and Horns than any Beast described in the Apocalypse; and pushed more
furiously than the He-Goat in Daniel. His Teeth resembled those of an overgrown
Lion: His Trunk was like that of an Elephant; the Protuberance on his Back,
like that of a Camel; his Eye (for he had only one with all his Heads) was like
that of Polyphemus; his Ears were of a much greater Longitude than those of
good St. Francis's traying Auditory: The Wings which came out of his Sides,
were like those of an Eagle: his Hair (or rather Feathers) was like
Nebuchadnezzar's, after he was driven from among Men; his Claws, like those of
a Bear, only much bigger; and for a Tail, Gulliver's Monkey was a Fool to him.

FROM what Parts he was brought, I do not certainly know; and would not deceive
the Reader by pretending to an Acquaintance with such Circumstances as I am
ignorant of. Some assert that he came from the South; others, from the West;
and some, from the East: But I rather think (if he were not brought forth
amongst us) that he came out of the North; considering the Evils and the
Destruction which his Appearance portended.

HE was first seen here in a large Assembly of Matrons; who, one would have
thought, from their natural Timidity, must have been universally shocked at so
tremendous a Sight. But ( wonderful to relate!) they were, almost to a Woman,
greatly pleased with the Creature: And though many of them were not past the
Age of Pregnancy; yet I have not heard of a single one that miscarried; nor
indeed of more than about half a Score that were even thrown into Hysteric
Fits. The far greater Part were so strangely captivated with this Monster, that
they fondled and played with him: and would even have taken him into their Laps
and Bosoms, had he not been of too unweildy a Size. "What a pretty Lap-Dog,
said one and another, would this Creature make, if he was not of such an
enormous Bulk!" And a third even called him Sh^^k, as she leaned against his
Proboscis.

THOSE few Ladies of better Taste, who spoke of him as an ugly, deformed, over
grown Beast of Prey; and would have had him immediately turned out of the
House, were cried out upon as having no Taste at all; and even threatened, that
they should never come there again, to drink Tea and Coffee in such polite
Company. It is thought that two Attorneys Wives, besides several other Ladies
of less Distinction, would have admitted him, had he been of an amorous Turn,
like Fa^^^s and the Satyrs, to some Familiarities not so fit to be mentioned.
Europa was never more enamored of a Bull; nor Leda, of a Swan: and both of
them had certainly a far juster Taste than these modern Ladies. He was even
voted, in Form, by them, who ought to be the best Judges of Beauty, to be the
prettiest, handsomest Creature, they had ever laid their Eyes upon, in all
their Lives.

THIS Assembly of Matrons, not content with admiring the Monster themselves,
took great Pains, both by Caresses, and Threats, to gain others over to their
odd Opinion. They decorated him with Ribbands and Garlands, like an ancient
Victim, or rather like an Egyptian God, by the Assistance of a Priestess to be
mentioned hereafter: and having first done Homage to him themselves on bended
Knees; sent him in that Dress, to another Company of Ladies, who used to meet
to dance, and to regale themselves, at no great Distance from their own
Assembly-Room.

THOSE of the Club, who were ordered to escort him thither, came and said;
"Behold here, Ladies, one of the most lovely, charming, adorable Creatures,
that ever your Eyes were laid upon! Pray, good Ladies, join with us in our
Admiration, and share our Pleasure. O! the Beauty of the dear Creature! See how
he looks! View him all over critically and exactly! Who ever saw the like! --
For the Entertainment and Delight of the Public, (and in order to put Money
into our own Coffers, to game with etc. when our Husbands are out of Humor) we
have resolved to hire a great Number of Persons to carry him through the Country
for a Sight. So good a Show will certainly give infinite Pleasure to People of
every Rank; at the same Time that it will bring in Cash enough to find us all,
in Tea, and Coffee, in Equipages and fine Clothes, in Citron Water and gaming
Money, as long as we live. Come, dear Ladies, cast in your Lot among us, and
let us go Snacks! We shall all find our Profit in it; and others, their
Pleasure and Amusement."

MANY of this latter Assembly were as marvellously pleased with the Monster, as
those of the former; and soon expressed their Readiness to concur the Motion,
for carrying him about for a Show. But a middle-aged Gentlewoman of a more
refined Taste, and who was both in Stature and Judgment, Superior to most,
even of the other Sex, stood up; and spoke to this Purpose. "What Demon has
gotten Possession of you, my dear Ladies! and deprives you of your Senses to
such a Degree, as to make you take this filthy Monster for a Beauty! I am
afraid to come near him, least he should hook up my Petticoats, and rip up my
Stays, if nothing worse! And how he whisks his nasty Tail in your Faces, at
many Yards distance! Mercy on us! This a Beauty! Look on those Ears! See that
plaguey hump Back! View that bloody, ferocious Eye; if you can look steadily
upon it! See those diabolical Horns! Look on that triple Row of Ivory, in each
of his enormous Jaws! And how he "Grins horribly, a ghastly Smile!" Observe his
Feet, how they are Cloven; branching out into five or six Claws, of huge Length
and Thickness! A pretty Creature, upon my Conscience, for Women to be taken
with! How much better you like Horns, than your Spouses do? This a Creature, to
be carried about the Country for an agreeable Spectacle! And because you are run
mad, forsooth! we must run mad to keep you Company; or else fall under your
Displeasure! No truly! I like not your fancy; nor this strange Proposal! If you
should send this more than Cerberian-mouth'd Monster through all the Towns in
the Province, take my Word for it, you would rather fright the Inhabitants out
of them, than draw Spectators about him. And though you expect to get so much
Money by this Show, I am much mistaken if you would get enough to defray the
Charges of carting it about. People will rather conclude you send a Monster to
devour and destroy, than a Spectacle to entertain and delight, them! Fie upon
it, Ladies! What evil Spirit put this Notion into your Heads; and deludes you
at such a Rate! To be plain with you, you had far better hire a Score or two of
the sturdiest Butchers in the Town, to kill this horrible Creature outright,
before he does any Mischief; and to throw him, Piecemeal, into the Dock, than
run the Risque of keeping him alive a single Day. What would become of us all,
if he should break his Chain, get out of his Cage, and range about at large,
seeking whom to devour! Doors and Locks, and Bolts, and Bars, would be no
Security against him. He (having a Faculty of contracting and enlarging himself
at Pleasure) would easily climb into our Bed Chambers; and though we should hide
ourseves down in our Wine Cellars among the Casks; he would find us out even
there; drag us into Day Light, and gorge himself with our mangled Carcases! A
pretty Creature to be kept for a Show, truly! Thus spoke Mrs. GRACCHA; for that
was the Name of this accomplished Lady.

THIS Speech was soon seconded and thirded by other Ladies of great Merit Madam
CORNELIA in particular, (an open, plain-hearted Lady; and in high Esteem, though
low of Stature) amongst other Things very pertinent to the Occasion said;
"Well! I am equally surprised, Ladies, at your Taste and at your Judgment. I
wonder you can imagine that such a Spectacle as you propose, can be relished by
the People of this Country; or that any good can come of this Project. Are you
really in earnest, Ladies! Why! Do you not remember, when a Leopard only was
carried about for a Show, a few Years since, what Confusion and Terror People
were thrown into! Not only those of our own Sex; but the Men also; even some of
the Military Order! Was not the Consternation still greater, and more
universal, when the Lion was carted about, some Time before? What terrible
Apprehensions had People of his breaking from his Durance, and eating them half
up! And more lately, when there was only a Wild-Cat of uncommon Size and
fierceness, and longer Fangs than usual, carried from Place to Place; you have
not, surely, forgot how precipitately even such brave, valiant Men as C -- pt
-- ins and C -- ll -- n -- ls fled before it; leaving the Towns where they
respectively lived, upon the first News of its approach! The Courage of such
Gentlemen, was never doubted by any one; And it is certain they would have
singly encountered the whole Rebel Army in Scotland, with the Pretender at its
Head! But the People of this Country, I say, cannot endure wild Beasts, and
Lawless Devourers! How then, Ladies, in the Name of Amazement, can it enter
into your Thoughts, that they will be delighted with a Monster! especially such
an huge, dreadful one as this; which might devour half a Country Village for a
Breakfast; and be hungry still! Will they give their Money freely, do you
think, for such a Show! When you reflect, Ladies, upon the Abborrence and Dread
which they have of all wild Creatures; of all Beasts of Prey; when you
consister how contrary such Shows are to their natural Taste, Genius and
Manners; when you consider farther, what Mischiefs may be actually done by this
dreadful Creature; I shall think you ought to drink no Tea, except such as is
made of Hellebore, if you persist in the project of carrying about this
Creature; a Monster, as much more formidable than a Lion, as a Lion, than a
common Puppy-Dog!"

THESE two Speeches, together with some others, were very attentively heard by
the Club: And, in short, made so good an Impression, that the major Part
adopted the Sentiments of them; and rejected the Motion of the other Club,
after due Deliberation. Whereupon those who presented the Monster to them for
their Approbation, returned with him to their own Sisterhood, in great Wrath
and Indignation for this imaginary Affront; and endeavored, Thalestris-like,
to inflame the Passions of the Assembly; which they found no very hard Task to
perform. The greater Part being now well heated with Anger; some with laced
Tea, others with Gin, and some with Citron Water; they came to a Resolution to
send the Monster immediately back again, with another Message; giving out their
Menaces, concerning what they would do to any Lady of the other Sisterhood, who
should be so hardy as to reject their Proposal a second Time. "My Word for it,
says one, that Lady that shall dare to open her Lips in disparagement of this
rare, curious, lovely Animal, shall have her Pinners torn off her Head; and her
Sack stripped over her Ears!" "And my Word for it, says another, although they
pretend to be at least our Equals, if not our Superiors; and to have as good a
Right as we, to enjoy their own Opinion about the Beauty and Deformity of any
Creature living; yet we will make them know the Difference, I warrant you! We
are the most numerous Club; and will soon cause them to submit to our
Determination; or pull all their Caps and Ruffles off! Do they call this, a
Monster? a dangerous Monster, nor fit to be kept alive! I say again, we will
have him carried about for a Show, let them say what they will: And they shall
join with us too in this Project, or we'll know why; and that is more!"

THE Monster's greatest Admirers in this Assembly, were (1) Madam RIXA;
formerly a lean, poor Gentlewoman, thought to be in a Consumption; and who used
to go very meanly clad: But of late Years, plumped up to a considerable
Magnitude; and become a perfect Belle, with her rich Lace and Ruffles; and
almost every Female Ornament, excepting that of a meek and quiet Heart. Some
idle People insinuate, that she got her Money by Gaming; and that she never
used to play fairly: but I do not concern myself about such Matters.

(2) MADAM PROTEA; a Gentlewoman that was lately seen in Public with a
remarkable Head Dress. This Lady has many good Qualities: but is very variable
and inconstant in every Thing; so that it was expected her Passion for the
Monster, would have been but short-lived. However, to the Surprise of every
one, She, who never used to be of the same Mind two Days together, has, in this
Respect, shown all the Steadiness and Perseverance of a Saint; continues to
extol the Beauty of the Monster, and seems determined to live and dye in the
Faith of his Charms.

(3) ANOTHER of his great Admirers was Madam RUTI^A, the Wife of a very fine,
handsome Gentleman: to find whom making Panegyricks, with so much Zeal upon
such an ugly Creature, was a Surprise to all: especially when this Zeal carried
her to speak even of her own aged Mother, with less Decorum and Respect than
became her. For the good old Lady happening to be her Tenant, she threatened
that she would turn her out, if she did not approve her Passion. The
Gentlewoman of whom I am now speaking, is singularly plain and modest in her
Dress; commonly appearing abroad in a dark Russel Gown. She is a Lady of real
and great Worth; but ought certainly to have been a better Judge of Propriety
and Decency, as well as of Beauty and Deformity, than to have spoke and acted
in the Manner she did.

(4) Mrs. AQUATICA (a jolly-looking, pursy Gentlewoman; and a little
asthmatical) was also a great Admirer of the Monster; nursing it with much
Tenderness, and a peculiar Fondness. Nor is this strange, if, as some have
hinted, she was the real Mother of it; though by Means of an unlawful Commerce.
But whether this be Fact, or not; and if it is, whether the Monster issued from
her Head, as Pallas did from the Thunderer's, according to the Pagan Mythology,
or whether it dropped from her Belly, as the unformed Cub falls from the
prowling, ravenous Bear's; I confess myself unable to determine. Nor is it very
material, supposing it to be her Offspring, whether the Foetus was originally
conceived in her Brain, or Belly; since a less monstrous Production could not
have been rationally expected from either; nor a more perfect from the one than
from the other. This Matron was the Wife of a certain great Farmer living out
of the Town; who had many Tenants under him; and it is said, he was wont to
treat them with such Severity, Haughtiness and Insolence, especially in
gathering in his Rents, that he has often been in Jeopardy of a broken Pate.
But it is not the Husband, but the Wife, gentle Reader, that we have now to do
with. She, as was hinted before, was at least the Nurse, if not the Mother of
the Monster. And though she has so liberally given Food and Nutriment to it,
yet she expects, in her Turn, to receive Nourishment from it. For although I
sometimes speak of this Creature, as being of the Male Gender, I would now
acquaint the Reader, that it is really an Hermaphrodite; and has a Multitude of
large Teats; at which many hope to hang in Rows, like so many sucking Pigs, or
rather like Imps at the Teats of Witches. Nor need I observe here, what every
one knows already, That though Monsters are said not to breed; yet they
frequently give Milk in prodigious Quantities. But then it takes the Produce of
a whole Country to feed one. And indeed, if this should live, I fear we shall
find the old Proverb concerning the Sterility of Monsters, erroneous.

(5) ANOTHER of these Monster-loving-Matrons, was Madam CAPILLA; a very sleek,
soft-spoken, double-tongu'd, rosey Gentlewoman; though, I think, somewhat older
than either of the other. She was formerly the Wife of a Priest of Ap^s in
Egypt, and herself a Priestess. For which Reason, as some say, she was employed
to usher this Monster into the World, with all the Pomp and Ceremonial,
practiced by the Pagan Hierarchy: Though she had not, for many Years past,
concerned herself much about Religion in any Shape; but given herself up to
Matters merely worldly and secular, at the best. However, since the Sacerdotal
Character is indelible, (although the Office is prostituted ever so much, or
even wholly renounced) a more proper Person, certainly, could not have been
pitched upon to perform the said Rites, considering for what Creature they were
to be performed!

(6) A younger Lady than either of the former, was a considerable Admirer of,
and a warm Advocate for, the Monster. She is remarkable for a Chin, somewhat
immoderate in Length; and wears both Night and Day a very large Beauty Spot
upon her right Cheek: In which there is this farther observable, that it is
very difficult to take it off, without taking the Skin away with it! This Lady
was very lately in high Esteem in the Town: And although her Conduct with
Relation to the Monster, has been exceptionable; yet it is not doubted but that
Time, and a circumspect Behavior, will restore a Lady of so many laudable
Qualities, to her former Reputation.

(7.) Mrs. BIDDY brings up the Rear of all these Ladies; and Claims a very
particular Notice. She is the Wife of a certain valiant C -- ll -- n -- l; and,
in Imitation of him, wears a great Tuft of Feathers on the top of her Head; so
weighty, that it is thought to have overstrain'd, and weakened, that tender
Part; and made her a little giddy. She pretends to a great deal of Religion;
though but few think she has more Virtue than her Neighbors. She has the
Misfortune to have a very sly, cunning, Jewish Look; and not being of the
fairest Complexion, nor able to look a good Christian in the Face; some have
suspected her to be of that Religion; and hinted, that the only Reason why she
is not conformed to 'its whole Ritual, is her Sex. Yea, many are very
confident, that she is an Isr...I...te.. ind...d..... bating this single Branch
of the Character, that in such Persons there is no Guile. I must confess that I
could not help entertaining some Suspicions of this Sort, myself, upon a
certain Occasion; though I would not be uncharitable. For happening to dine with
her some Time ago, at a Country-Inn, where we had nothing served up, but one
Dish of roasted Pork and Partridge together; I observed, Mrs Biddy seemed to
love Partridge very well; but would not touch a Morsel of the Pork: though she
greedily took a large Sop made of the Dripping. And what seemed to enter into
her therewith, I choose not to say!

THERE are others who have suspected Mrs. Biddy of being a follower of Mahomet,
instead of Moses: But, in my Opinion, with far less Reason. For whereas the
Mohammedan Religion forbids its Votaries to use the Fruit of the Vine, she is a
great Admirer of it: And is known to have spent the the whole Afternoon of the
Christian Sabbath, over her Bottle. But whether this is a conclusive Argument,
or not, that she is no Disciple of the Arabian Impostor, I think it is at least
a fair one, that she is no Christian. If she is really a Jewess, as I am rather
inclined to think, it is to be hoped, that, since her Sex will not allow of the
most distingushing Mark and Characteristick of that Persuasion, she will not
always want another, which is very compatible thereto; I mean that she will not
be long unc...re...m^...sed in Ears: Alas! this decent Ceremony is too much
neglected amongst the clipping Children of Abraham, both Male and Female, in
their present dispersed State! Nor is this a necessary Omission; since we know
that this Rite was no peculiar Part of their ancient Temple-Service: And indeed
Experience has shown the great Need and Advantage of it; and the good that is
done by it, to this People, even in Countries where not so much as Synagogues
are allowed of. But this is a Digression: and having thus paid my Devoirs to
these Female Worthies, I now return to the Monster, and my Narrative.

THE Monster was sent back almost Instantaneously, as it had been determined.
Many Ladies of fine Taste and great Merit, belonging to that Club which
rejected the Motion of the other, (and which I call the Club superior for
distinction sake) had been absent from it for several Days. The good Lady also,
who had lately said so much in derogation from the Glory of the Monster, had by
this Time left the Company, to look after her Household Affairs. Some others,
of her Opinion, had also done the same; and some had absented themselves
through Cowardice. Some of this Sisterhood who were present, were intimidated
by the Threats of the other: And some, it is said, were turned from their
former Opinion, chiefly by the Efficacy of laced Tea, and Citron Water; with
which they were plentifully regaled, at the Cost of those who labored their
Conversion. So that, in short, when this grave Sisterhood came to Vote a second
Time, it was carried in favor of the Monster by a small Majority; to the great
Joy and Triumph of all that w-rsh-ped the Beast.

IN that which I call the Club superior, (though the least in Number) several
Ladies signalized themselves in Favor of the Monster, some by their Craft and
Subtlety, others by their Weakness and Simplicity.

Madam MARINA (a tall Lady) who had often crossed the Ocean, and who was even
when past her grand Climacteri, in an honest Way, a true Votary to the Goddess
which sprang from the Briny Element; Madam MARINA I say, declared she would not
have been for keeping this Monster alive, and exhibiting him as a public
Spectacle, had she thought her Vote would have contributed to it, or been of
any Efficacy toward getting a Majority of Voices on that Side. For she knew
there were enough without it. --

Madam CHEMIA, (a very philosophical Lady) who some Years since (as is well
known) discovered that precious Stone, of which the Royal Society has been in
quest a long Time, to no Purpose; Madam CHEMIA, I say, argued in Favor of the
Monster, only because she though it that the Public would be hugely delighted and
edified with so curious a Show.

SHE said there was not a real Virtuoso, a true Adept, in all North America,
but what would come to see it; "and the Populace, you know, said she, are
always fond of Novelties and strange Sights." This was her Motive. So that it
is very malicious in any to insinuate, as some have done, that Madam CHEMIA was
on that Side of the Question, for fear of being turned out of the Club. And
indeed every one knows, that this good Lady never balked or wronged her
Judgment, to curry Favor either with Great or Small, Male or Female.

ONE Miss POLLY, was also a Favourer of the Monster; so far, I mean, as to give
her Voice on that Side: Though I am credibly informed, that she now fully
vindicates her Taste and Conduct, by solemnly averring, that she held up her
Hand quite contrary to her own Judgment and Conscience. And for how many others
in both Clubs, the same convincing and satisfactory Plea might serve, I pretend
not to know! This Miss POLLY is a young, dapper, spruce, coquettish Lady, and
trips along the Streets like any Thing! But as young and airy as she is
herself, she has of late Years affected to keep very sedate Company: and she
was actually at considerable Expense to get admitted a Member of this grave
Club; wherein every one is now surpised to see such a blooming Lass, and in
which there are sundry Matrons that are very old.

BUT not to digress too far from my Monster..... All the People in Town,
exclusive of these two Female Assemblies, and the Blacks, stood aghast; and
hourly expected when the terrible Creature would break loose, and devour them.
Great and Small, High and Low, Rich and Poor, turned pale and trembled. The
Trojan Horse, when armed Creeks burst by Thousands from his Belly, did not
cause half so much Terror and Consternation through the poor, devoted City!

THE Ladies who idolized the Beast, and had already received his Mark in their
tender, impressive Foreheads, now thought their Point gained; and discovered
their Joy in a Way somewhat too boisterous, perhaps, to be very becoming that
soft and delicate Sex. However, there was one Obstacle yet in their Way. The
large House, where they used to hold their Club, belonged to a Gentleman,
without whose Approbation they did not incline to do any Thing of Consequence.
Nor were they out of the Way, in paying so great a Deference to his Opinion.
For though he was only a private Gentleman (sustaining no Office in the
Government, whether Civil or Military) he was a most accomplished Person; a
Gentleman of a good Descent, and of a fine, as well as learned Education. He
had traveled through many Countries in Europe; and improved himself in them
all. His Genius was strong; his Knowledge of Men and Things extensive; his
Taste exact, his Address winning; his Conversation equally improving and
entertaining. With these Qualities, it is not strange that he was acceptable to
the Ladies, as well as to the Gentlemen; especially considering he excelled in
dancing; though this I reckon amongst the least considerable of his
Accomplishments. This Gentleman, though he was always backward to contradict
the Ladies in any Thing, had dropped a Word or two, intimating his
Disapprobation of what had been proposed; and what was indeed now resolved
upon. This came to the Ears of the Ladies, who could hardly believe it. It was
therefore unanimously determined, to refer the Matter, in a formal Manner, to
Him: And they obliged themselves beforehand, though they were very much set upon
the Thing, to submit entirely to his Judgment; and follow his Advice.

THEY accordingly laid the Case before him, in Presence of the Monster; with
many Encomiums on his Beauty, etc. The Gentleman (though he was naturally endowed
with great Magnanimity) did not choose to venture into the Hall, where the Beast
was, without taking a large Spear in his Hand. And standing in the midst, he
accosted the Ladies thus verbatim.

"Ladies, said he, I am extremely obliged to you for the Compliment you are
pleased to pay to my Taste and Judgment; though I am not less astonished at your
own. I must confess that I have had some Knowledge both of Men, and of Beasts.
As you are pleased to demand my Opinion, I think I am obliged to tell you, that
I wonder at the Oddity of your Fancy, and cannot approve your Project. This a
lovely Creature! How can you bestow your sweet Caresses and Endearments on him!
how worship such a Monster? the Compendium of all Deformity! This Creature will
devour you, your Husbands, your Children, and one half the Province; and the
other half, he will keep in perpetual Fear and Slavery! Ah! sweet Ladies all!
you little think what you are doing! Are the good People of this Country to be
kept in bodily Terror by a Brute? by the most deformed of all Brutes! such an
one as neither they, nor their Grandmothers, ever star'd at! such an one as the
Monster-breeding- Nile never produced! They had rather combat Tigers at
Ephesus; or the African Monster, that made such Havoc with Regulus's Army!
They cannot endure the Thoughts of a total Excision, by the voracious Jaws of
this Dragon, this Gergon! this....... what shall I call him? I can scarce
forbear plunging this Spear into his Heart, this very Instant, without farther
Ceremony; But Ceremony is what the Ladies always expect; and Men of Honor
always use toward them. Nor will I tell you, that you have forgot the natural
Softness and Delicacy of your Sex and Constitution, and are turned Amanons and
Termagants, or else you could not be pleased with such a Spectacle. No! But I
assure you Ladies, that you will neither oblige the People, nor get much Money,
by exhibiting such a Show! My Advice is, that you get the ingenious Mr. Hurd to
engrave the Monster on a Copper Plate; and disperse the Prints of him about the
Country. If the Image and Superscription pleases, it will be Time enough then,
to send about the Original. Should you immediately send about the Monster, in
propria persona, (excuse a Latin Word or two Ladies, though you should not
understand it) you would raise a Suspicion in People, that you had some bad
Design not only upon their Pockets; but upon their Liberties and Lives. You
would certainly set them all to Swearing, except Ministers, and a few other
very grave, solid Folks: And Ladies always abhor Oaths! Besides, if the People
once get to SWEARING, it is odds but they will also get to Lying, and perjuring
themselves! You are pleased in short to refer it to me, Ladies, whether you and
they shall be Happy or Miserable. I therefore resolve, as far as in me lies,
that both shall be happy; and think myself so, in having a Thing of this Nature
submitted to my Determination. You will excuse my Freedom, Ladies; and do me
the Justice to believe, that I would gladly oblige you in every Way, except
that of contributing to your Misery. This I can never consent to, even though I
should be so unhappy as to incur your Displeasure!"

THUS spoke the Friend of the Ladies, the Friend of all. It is impossible to
describe their Looks during the Time of his Speaking; and after he had done; --
the Joy that appeared in the Countenances of some, the Shame, Disappointment,
and Anger, that were visible in the Faces of others. But the Rejoicing was
universal through the Town, amongst People of all Ranks, when they found
themselves delivered from their former Fears. It was surprising to see, and is
impossible to express, the sudden Change that was produced in every Face:
"Freedom from all terrible Sights; a quiet Enjoyment of what we have, and NO
MONSTERS!" was the universal Cry; and still continues the most common Health
that goes round.

HAVING thus finished my true and faithful Narrative of the most formidable
Monster, that was ever seen in this Land; I now beg leave to Congratulate my
dear Countrymen, that we are not without an HERCULES! This Monster is not
indeed yet actually killed; but only bound in strong Chains. Whether he shall
be quite demolished, and sent to his own proper Place, or whether he shall be
permitted to live, to cram his merciless and insatiable Maw with our very
Blood, and Bones, and Vitals; depends upon my good Country Men themselves. He
now only lives till they shall please to pass Sentence of Death upon him. And
after what has been said, it would be an Affront to their Understandings and
Senses, should I go about, in a formal Manner to convince them, that it is not
fitting and safe that he should live, and be carried about from Place to Place,
as the Women have proposed. You will all quickly see the ugly Portrait, the
dreadful Picture, of this Animal. And when it is presented to you, take
particular Notice of his Horns, his Teeth, and his terrible Claws: though even
his Tail (as inconsiderable a Member as that is generally accounted in Animals)
might prove a Besom of Destruction. A single Brush or Flap of it would sweep us
away Dozens and Scores!

YOU will at once conclude, that this Dog of H -- ll, ought not only to have
his enormous Length of Ears and Tail diminished; his Teeth pulled out, and his
Claws paired, but that his very Head (or Heads rather; for they are many!)
ought to be excis'd; I mean cut off. Or if that cannot be done, you will think
he should be bound, at least for one thousand prophetic Years; and cast into
the bottomless Abyss; not to be seen again above Ground, till that term is
expired, or till Gog and Magog shall make their Appearance, springing
spontaneously from the Slime and Filth of the Earth; according to a certain
Learned Expositor! This Creature may indeed make a tolerable Show, in the
nether Regions, amongst his Black cloven footed Brethren: (though I believe he
would at first startle even them) But certainly he ought not to be seen by any,
that are yet out of the Place of Dragons!

BUT when the true Effigies of this dreadful Creature comes out; you will then
be able, my loving Countrymen, to form an exact Idea of him. And after seeing
this Print, he that can desire to see the Original; or would willingly suffer
the Creature to be kept alive for a Show, would deserve no better a Fate in my
Opinion, than to become Food and Sustenance for him; just as Cats and Dogs and
Monkeys and other inferior Animals, are thrown to Lions to prey upon: Though it
would of the two, be more honorable to Share the Fate of these contemptible
Animals, in falling a Sacrifice to the noble, renowned, hereditary Monarch of
the Forest; than to be devoured by such an unheard of, upstart, unlicked,
miscreated Monster! It is to be hoped that what has been said will have no
Tendency to excite any undue Resentment against the Ladies I have had Occasion
to speak of in this Narrative. Many if not all of those Women, who were for
keeping this Creature for a Show, had doubtless a kind and generous Intention
to gratify Peoples Curiosity; not being aware of the Danger attending their
Project, and of the fatal Evils that might follow from it. They were certainly
out in their own Taste; and under a great Mistake about ours. But Errors of
this Nature should be overlooked and forgiven: Especially if they are not
obstinately persisted in, but seasonably recanted. I would therefore, my dear
Countrymen, conclude by earnestly recommending these Ladies to your best
Affections (at least those of them that are either Widows or Maidens) and this
I do the rather, because it is impossible for those who Love such pretty,
well-proprtion'd, charming Creatures as WOMEN, not to hate MONSTERS.

FINIS MONSTRI ET EXCISIO.
An ADVERTISEMENT, That is too long by one half.
THE Author of the preceding Narrative, having hitherto been speaking in Jest,
thinks its now Time to speak in Earnest. Having a leisure Hour or two, I though it
to amuse my self by writing something in the fabulous, romantic, mavelous
Way; in Imitation of many Persons both ancient and modern. And from the
Reception which many Things of this sort meet with from the greater Part of
Readers, I did not know but I might innocently divert some others, as well as
my self.

WHEN the Romance was finished, I showed it to a Printer, who is my very good
Friend; (a better Friend to me perhaps, than I shall prove to him in the End)
and a Person whose Judgment I highly value. He frankly told me that he approved
of it, and though it it would take; adding that he believed he could get a Penny by
it these hard Times; at least enough to pay him for his Labor, Paper, and the
Wear of his Press and Types; which he looked upon as no inconsiderable Matter
for a Printer at this Day! I accordingly gave him a Copy.

BUT when the Piece was almost out of the Press, I reflected what a sad
Propensity there is in many Readers, to make invidious Applications; to wrest
an Author's Sense; and to construe the most harmless Romances into Satyr,
Scandal and Invective, even against the greatest and worthiest Personages: I
considered, that while some might make such Applications through Malice, others
might do it through Ignorance; and therefore though it I could not, with a safe
Conscience, let the innocent Piece see the Light, without saying something by
Way of Caution.

WHAT happened at the Printing House about an Hour ago, determined me to take
this Course. The Printer assured me, he had found out my whole Meaning, as
plainly as if I had told him my self. Yes, said he, the Church of Rome is a
very sad Church indeed! and well deserves to be exposed for her Idolatries, and
for persecuting the poor Protestants. Why! she is called the Beast and the
Dragon in the Bible! The Pope, or the INQUISITION, is the Monster. I don't love
to judge Folks, but I am afraid the Pope is a very bad Man. I hope you will write
against him again; and defend Liberty of Conscience. O! that INQUISITION is a
sad, sad Thing! What! may we not enjoy our own private Opinion in religious
Matters! Would they make Slaves and Beasts of us all!

ONE of his Journey-men, who assisted in correcting the Press, soon put in his
Oar: but rowed another Way. Well! for my Part, said he, I don't believe it is
aimed against the Pope; but against the French, and the Eastward Indians; them
Dogs that are not willing we should enjoy our Rights and Liberties; but would
eat us all up alive. Well, the G-v-r -- r is gone down; and I don't question
he will give 'em a Bone to pick, that will make their Teeth crack again! I knew,
before I had composed five Pages, that you intended the French King, by the
Monster which had so many Heads and Horns, and such plaguey long Claws!

ANOTHER of the Workmen gave it as his solid Opinion, that it was designed as a
Satyr upon the Women. For Women, said he, are set in a ridiculous Light, from
the Beginning of it to the End. From which Imputation I cleared my self with
some Degree of Warmth; thinking it equally a Reflection on my Breeding, Taste
and Judgment. Nor could such a Thought have entered into his Noddle had he
known how happy I am, in the best of Wives; and in two fine Daughters, though I
say it, new marriageable; waiting (O ye dilatory, frozen Batchelors!) for
suitable Proposals to be made to them.

AS my Back was turned, I overheard an unlucky Jackanaps of a Boy, that stood
by, talking to his Fellow-Prentice: Witches for a Guess! said he: and Master
always was! I don't believe ever a one of 'em is in the right: I Will wage it
relates to****etc. And so the Rascal went on to make the most groundless, saucy
Application of several Parts of it, that could be. I stamped, and gave the
Urchin a severe Rebuke for his Pertness, and Impudence; charging him never to
lisp such a Word again (especially when he hawked it about) as he valued his
two Ears! and so came away.

AS I was going home, though it I, if People go on guessing and guessing, applying
and applying, at this Rate; and making Senses, where there was none before;
what may they not come to at last! The wild, extravagant Fancies of some, may
carry them to fix such an arbitrary Meaning to this idle Tale, as I almost
shudder to think of! and as would leave a Sting in the End of it!

NOW to prevent every Thing of this Sort, I think my self bound in Duty to
declare, that my Narrative (like most Travelers Stories) has not one Word of
Truth in it. There has not, to my Knowledge, been any Monster in the Town; nor
any Thing like a Monster. There has nothing happened lately which could
naturally give Occasion to such a Fiction; nor any Thing to which it can be
justly applied, in the Way of Allegorical Interpretation. And the Persons who
shall attempt this, must be very simple, or ill-natured; for it is merely a
Work of Fancy and Imagination; of which there is neither Type nor Antitype. And
having declared this, I think I may innocently let it see the Light, as a very
harmless, toothless Production; wishing that all other Romancers and Story
Tellers had been as fair and ingenuous, to undeceive their Readers, as soon as
they had finished their Lies!

BUT if I must open my whole Heart, as to my Views in writing this, (which I
have not yet done) I shall certainly appear a little vain. For Ambition had
some Share in this Production, as mean as it is. To tell the Truth, I have long
designed to write the KNAVE's PROGRESS, in Imitation of the PILGRIM's, by the
excellent Mr. John Bunyan; And I though it, that by exercising my self a little in
this fanciful, mystical Way of writing, I might execute that great Work the
better when I set my self about it. And you must excuse my Vanity, gentle
Reader, if I tell you, that I am not without some Hopes of performing the Task
in such a Manner, as may render me not wholly undeserving the Title of his
Successor If this little Attempt in the Romantic Way, meets with due
Encouragement from the Public; I propose to set about that large, voluminous
Work alluded to, as soon as Leisure will permit.
. Homer wrote of Frogs, (an ugly Sort of Creature) before he wrote of Kings and
the Trojan War. Even Gnats employed the Pen of Maro, before it immortalized
Mezentius and other Heroes. Milton wrote of the Wizzard-like, monstrous Comus,
before he wrote of fallen Men, and apostate Angels. Nor do I doubt but that the
great Bunyan himself, wrote the Progress of some other Animals, perhaps of
Monsters, before he wrote that of the Pilgrim. Though I acknowledge, that there
are no Creatures in the World, so dissimilar as Pilgrims and Monsters; since
the former hurt and devour Nothing; the latter, EVERY THING!

THE END

