SERIOUS ADVICE TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE Northern-Colonies, ON THE Present
SITUATION OF AFFAIRS.

NEW YORK: Printed for the AUTHOR, 1755.

SERIOUS ADVICE, etc.
Friends, and Fellow Countrymen,
WHETHER we are to be a rich, flourishing, free People, or mean Slaves to a
French King, is the present Dispute.

LET us take a short View of both Sides of the Question, and then judge which
is the most eligible.

HAVING taken Niagara, and take it we must, to which Crown-Point and the Ohio
are but Appendages, and made it the Seat of Government, a Place so well adapted
for that Purpose, having so easy a Communication with all the Lakes, with the
great River St. Lawrence, with Hudson's River, with the several Branches of the
Missisippi, together with an immensly extended Continent, in Variety of
Climates, we shall be a powerful People, and our King one of the greatest
Princes, perhaps, on the Face of the Earth. Here will be full Employment for us
and our Posterity for ever. And what a glorious Scene here opens for the Trade
of Great Britain!

AND this we can do, if we jointly and heartily endeavor it, in spite of all
the Power of France, who, before they can put themselves upon a Balance with
us upon this Continent, will, in all Probability, be so far exhausted, as even
to give an Opportunity to some of their injured Neighbors at Home to do
themselves Justice.

WE are Twenty to One able to bear Arms, and a Thousand to One at least in
Wealth and Property: For a further Proof of this, see the following Calculation.

Number of the British Subjects, Men, Women, and Children, in the Colonies of
North America, taken from Militia Rolls, Poll-Taxes, Bills of Mortality,
Returns from Governors, and other authentic Authorities.
The Colonies of Inhabitants. Halifax, and Luxenburg, in Nova Scotia, 5000
New Hampshire, 30000 Massachusetts Bay, 220000 Rhode Island, and Providence,
35000 Connecticut, 100000 New York, 100000 The Jerseys, 60000 Pennsylvania,
250000 Maryland, 85000 Virginia, 85000 North Carolina, 45000 South Carolina,
30000 Georgia, 6000 Total Number, 1051000
Exclusive of military Forces in Pay of the Government, and Negroes.

Number of the French Inhabitants in North America, exclusive of regular
Troops, and Negroes.
The Colonies of Inhabitants. Canada, 45000 Louisiana, 7000 Total Number, 52000
So that the English are more than in the Proportion of Twenty to One: But in
the Words of a Memorial quoted by the Author of The State of the British and
French Colonies, in North America; Union, Situation, proper Management of the
Indians, superior Knowledge of the Country, and constant Application to a
Purpose, will more than balance divided Numbers, and will easily break a Rope
of Sand.

THIS Calculation must be of some standing, as in several of the Colonies it is
short of the Truth, the Alarm List of Massachusetts being, as we are pretty
well assured, Forty-eight Thousand, and the Training Last Forty-two Thousand;
that of Connecticut Thirty-eight Thousand, and Thirty-two Thousand; Virginia,
the Males from Sixteen and upwards, Forty-five Thousand: I wish I could give an
Account of the rest with equal Certainty; and we may even yet, by a proper
Management, command what Indians we please. What then should hinder us from
being Masters of this Continent when we please, but Want of Unanimity and
Spirit? These, with a good General Officer at Albany, to give our Forces their
proper Destinations, but to allow us to fight in our own Way; that is, often to
TREE ALL, a Word of Command those regular Gentlemen are not used to: In short,
we must attack and defend as our Enemies do. The French have long given up all
their European military Discipline, and fallen entirely into that of the
Indians, which is sculking and destroying by Surprise, hunting their Enemies in
the same Manner as they do a Bear or a Wolf. To stand still to be shot at,
while there is a Tree or a Bush at Hand, they reckon Madness, not Bravery; and
the same Methods we must follow if we mean to succeed. A heavy Train of
Artillery, or any other than a few light Field Pieces, in these Woods,
especially when you are well assured you can encounter no such Thing, is a mere
Farce, and only serves to retard and embarrass the Whole. But we must learn. A
general Fund, according to the Albany Stipulation (let us not at this Time
burden too much our Mother Country, she probably may have enough upon her
Hands, and that too chiefly upon our Accounts) to be disposed of by the General
in the most frugal Manner, by and with the Advice of a Council of War, to wit,
Two Members from each Colony to reside constantly at Albany with the General;
too many Restraints however of this Kind in Cases of this Nature have often
fatal Consequences.

As to fixing this general Fund, the Parliament (for in Parliament it must be
done) can be at no Loss, the Colonies having already agreed to their several
Proportions, the Quantum of each must of Course be according to the Exigency of
Affairs: I am therefore humbly of Opinion, that if four Noughts are added to
each Number for the first Year, and that Sum to lessen the second Year one
Half, or two Thirds, and so on as Circumstances and the Nature of Things shall
admit, it would answer all Purposes; and no one, I am confident, would grudge
his Proportion for so good a Purpose, as that of dislodging our ever
treacherous Neighbors: And thus it would stand.

Colonies.
Massachusetts Bay, 7 New Hampshire, 2 Connecticut, 5 Rhode Island, 2 New York,
4 New-Jerseys, 3 Pennsylvania, 6 Maryland, 4 Virginia, 7 N. Carolina, 4 S.
Carolina, 4 L 480000
WHY our West India Gentry, whose Well or Ill-being, even their daily Bread,
depends upon our Security, should not contribute to this general Fund, I am at
a Loss to determine. I may, however, venture to foretell, without the Gift of
Prophecy, what their Fate will be, if we are undone.

AND a general Embargo through the whole Continent upon all Provisions, during
a War, or the Appearance of it, would, in my humble Opinion, with the
Assistance of a small Squadron, and the joint and hearty Endeavors of all the
Colonies, put his Majesty in Possession of all Canada in twelve Months.

THUS united, I do affirm we have it in our Power to reduce this ambitious
Monarch to be thought as inconsiderable in America as he is formidable in
Europe. But, my good Friends, let us remember the trite Story of the old
Gentleman, who having left his Sons a fine Estate, upon his Deathbed ordered
them all to attend him with a Bundle of Twigs, and directed each of them,
separately, to take the whole Bundle and break it, which eluded all their
Efforts. He then directed each of them to take a single Twig from the Bundle
and break it, which was readily complied with. Let the Moral convince you, Oh
my Countrymen, that while we continue thus disunited, we are but single Twigs.

DEMOSTHENES, upon an Occasion of the like Kind, thus addresses himself to his
Countrymen; And yet, Oh ye immortal Gods, when we shall have abandoned all
Things to this Philip! When by the Indifference of some, and the Treachery of
others, we have as it were added Force and Wings to his Ambition, we shall yet
make ourselves a great Scorn to our Enemies, by upbraiding and loading each
other with the Reproach. Each Party, though equally guilty, by their Divisions,
of the common Calamity, will be imputing the Miscarriage to his Neighbor; and
though never so conscious, every one will be for excusing himself, by laying the
Blame on another; as after the Loss of a Battle, not a Man that fled but
accuses his Companion, condemns his General, and, separately examined, no Man
takes Shame to himself, each shifting the common Disgrace from one to another:
But yet it is certain, that every-individual Man that gave Ground was equally
accessory to the general Defeat. The Man who accuses his Companion, might have
stood firm if he pleased, and that which was a Route, had been a Victory.

SUCH is the Pride and Folly of Parties overborn and swayed by personal
Prejudice, sacrificing the Public to private Resentment, and charging each
other with Miscarriages for which they are every one equally accountable, etc.

WHAT Good can be hoped from such a Confusion of Councils, directed only by
Prejudice and Partiality, in Defiance of Sense and right Reason?

LET us now take a View of the Case on the other Side.

THE French are possessed of at least two Thirds of this grand Empire; but
unjustly, by Usurpation and Encroachments from Time to Time, to which we, in a
cowardly Manner, have tamely submitted.

THE Advice of the same great Man to his Countrymen, in much the like
Circumstances, may, in my humble Opinion, be not less applicable than useful.

HUMAN Societies, says he, have indeed many Means for their better Security,
such as Walls, Ditches, Ramparts, and the like; all which Defenses are raised
with great Labor, and kept up at a continual Expense. But there is one cheap
and never failing Preservative in the Breast of all considerate Persons, which
is highly useful to private Men, but indispensibly necessary in Common Wealths,
which have the Misfortune to be situated in the Neighborhood of Tyrants; and
that is Circumspection and Distrust. Carry this Charm always about you; never
part with it upon any Terms; so long as you keep it you will be safe. What is
it you aim at? No Doubt Liberty. And do you not perceive, that not only the
Disposition, but the Title, of Philip implies a direct Contradiction to
Freedom. Every such King, every Tyrant is a natural Enemy of Liberty, and
Subverter of Laws. You earnestly desire an End of this expensive and bloody
War: But weigh well the Consequences, lest it prove, upon Trial, not so much an
End of the War, as a Beginning of your Slavery.

THE French, from the undoubted Testimony of all their Writers, upon American
Affairs, have long had the same Views for establishing universal Monarchy (
alias Slavery) upon this Continent, as they have had in Europe. They have for
many Years been making Encroachments, and corrupting our Indians, while we,
though we even (...), have been looking on with a stupid Unconcern. The fatal
Effects of which, many a poor Family, perhaps this very Moment, feel.

THEY have already carried their Insolence so far, as even to make some of our
Brethren Slaves. This has been a Practice amongst them for some Years, as is
well known. And as a further Confirmation of the Truth of it, I shall beg Leave
to insert the following Extract of a Letter, dated Montreal, in Canada, May 10,
1755, written to the Reverend Mr. Phineas Stevens, Pastor, etc. at Contoocook.

I WILL write you all the News I dare; for I do not know when I write but my
Letters will be opened before they get out of the Country. I think Contoocook
cannot be too careful, as the Indians have great Encouragement for Prisoners,
and Scalping. They cannot make Half so much Money any other Way as by taking
Englishmen, and selling them for Slaves. And the French are very ready to buy
them; for when they buy a Man or Woman for Three or Four Hundred Livres, they
pay in Paper-money, or Goods, and they will ask double in Silver; and they make
them live and work like Negroes, till they make them pay just what they please.
As for my Part, I always thought the Indians were very kind to me, till they
sold me to a Man, I don't know what to call him: He used me so barbarously,
that his own Country People offered the Money he gave for me three Times, which
he refused, because he expected to have Silver Money for me; so that I lived
with him till the Twentieth of January, when I left him, and went into the
Country to work, where I stayed till the Tenth (...) March. I came to Town to
see if I could hear any News from New England, and he saw me, and went to the
General and got an Order to confine me in (...) on Bread and Water; and here I
must stay till I am redeemed, if it be this seven Years first. When I sent a
Letter to the General, to let him know how I had been used since I had been in
the Country, he would not read it; neither will he hear any Persons that go to
speak for me; For, says he, when the Indians bring English here, they cry to
the French to buy them; and when they (...) them out of Charity, they are great
Lords, and will not work. This you will not wonder at, when you come to know
their Reasons. They know that twenty Indians will do more Damage to our Country
than all Canada; and they are willing to give them all the Encouragement they
can; so that if an Englishman is used ever so bad, in this Country, the
Commanders of it will not hear their Complaint, for fear they should discourage
the French from buying them. Another Thing is, it brings Silver Money into the
Country, and they have but little of it: So I would have all my Country People
take Care to keep out of their Hands, for this is their Destiny if they come,
either to be Slaves, or Prisoners on Bread and Water. I do not think there is
Danger of a Body of Indians attacking any Fort; for all the Forces of the
French and Indians are gone to Ohio, which they call Belle Riviere.

ENOS BISHOP.


THE above was taken from a Letter sent to the Reverend Mr. Robert Breck, of
Springfield, Part of which is as follows.

Reverend Sir,
I have sent this Letter copied from the Original, and should be glad you would
take the Pains to get it published in the Public Papers, to move the (...) of
People, and to stir them to resent the Conduct of the French


IN short, the common Method is, all Prisoners by Agreement become the Property
of the Indians, whom the French, afterward, out of their great Humanity,
purchase for some of their Country Produce, and make the Friends and Relations
afterward pay in Silver whatever they please: And of this we have some late
Instances in this Province. If they treat us thus in the Bud, what may we
expect when they become a great Tree.

AND is the Race of the brave Britons, and brave Batavians, and united too,
whose Ancestors have so gloriously distinguished themselves in History for
their noble Exploits in Defense of their Liberties and Country, so far
degenerate as to bear such Treatment, and tamely submit to be conquered? Though I
believe Conquest is the least of their Thoughts; it is our absolute Destruction
they mean (they will be wiser than to admit us as Neutrals) by a Parcel of
Banditti, the Scum of France, the Emptyings of their Goals. It cannot be! Rouse
then, my brave Countrymen, and let us take Vengeance for the innumerable
Insults we have met with. Now is your Time. Take this Opportunity, for you will
never have another.

FOR this Purpose, it is humbly proposed, that all the Troops now under Arms
upon this Continent, as well as those proposed to be raised, which may in all
amount to about Ten Thousand Men, take up their Winter Quarters at New York,
Albany, Schenectady, and Fort Hunter, and in the mean time to be adding as many
more as may be thought necessary, the Fall of the Year being the best Time to
enlist. Those to be employed in erecting Fortifications, clearing the Roads,
and building Vessels upon the Lakes. This will make a Descent upon Canada early
in the Spring easy. The same Squadron to continue to protect our Coast, assist
us up the River with a few Ships, and to prevent Supplies from France. This
will be doing what we must do at last; for Delenda of Carthage. There is no
Alternate, and perhaps at ten Times the Expense. This Continent cannot hold us
both. With a Government whose first Principles are laid in universal Rule or
Dominion, a Stipulation about Boundaries is a Contradiction in Terms.
Embarkations from England, at so great a Distance for Enterprises of this Kind,
from the Nature of our Constitution, will ever be precarious. This we have felt
in three fruitless Attempts, which has cost the Crown and the Colonies immense
Sums, besides the Loss of Credit with the Indians. Here is a fair Opportunity
of recovering all. Here will be no Transports, those Banes of all Expeditions,
wanted, I hope, but for carrying off Prisoners. And here I cannot help
observing of what infinite Advantage the Re-taking of Cape-Breton would be to
the general System. While the French have a Foot of Ground upon, or near, this
Continent, we shall have no Peace. It is from thence their Fleets and
Privateers, destined for our Destruction, are refreshed and supplied with
Provisions, and other Necessaries, from our own Colonies, of which we shall
soon feel the fatal Effects, should our brave Admirals leave it untaken.

WE may meet with some Rebuffs and Disappointments at first, such as our late
One near Fort Du Quesne, never to be accounted for; and such as, perhaps, never
did happen, and probably may never happen again. What other can be expect'd for
some Time, from a People used to Business and Labor, and of Course timid, when
they have at first to deal with a Race of Men born and bred for Desolation and
Plunder. Let not a few Disappointments of this Kind discourage (...) but rather
incite our Resentment. This is Virgil's Advice, (...) Malis, sed contra
andentior ito. It may be our Turn next; and one such Blow will go a great Way
to do their Business; whereas a great many on their Side will affect us but
little. Let us but avoid, or at least be prepared for surprises, and the whole
Affair will be but an Amusement, especially as we are now in a fair Way of
starving of them. You are never to expect a fair Encounter, unless they are
three Times your Number, which will be our Faults if ever they are. As I have
given you my Opinion of the Quixotism of our Trains of Artillery, and European
military Discipline, I cannot help observing upon the Clothing of our Men; to
see a brave Fellow, tucked at all Points, with a great heavy Hat of two or
three Pounds Weight, instead of a light fierce-looking Cap. A Coat, Waistcoat,
and Breeches, that I am confident will weigh as much as six Frenchmens, or
twelve Indians, such I mean as we meet with in the Wood-Fighters, or Coureurs
de Bois, instead of a light Jacket and Blanket. A Pair of Shoes of about two or
three Pounds, instead of Indian Shoes of two or three Ounces. A Hanger, a heavy
Musket, and Bayonet seldom used but to withstand the Shock of a Body of Horse,
or in a close Engagement, which it is not very probable will be the Case soon
with us, instead of a light Carbine, or Indian Fusee, and a small Hatchet, to
which I should prefer a small Lance, Harpoon Fashion. Thus I compute an English
Soldier stands encumbered with a Weight of about Forty or Fifty Pounds, while
that of a Frenchman or Indian is not above Twelve or Fifteen. What Service can
be expected from Men thus encumbered, not upon Account of the Weight only, but
the Manner of the Encumbrance, which deprives them of all Activity; while our
Enemies, being lightly clothed and armed, are sometimes in our Front,
sometimes in our Rear, and often on all Sides of us, Hussar Fashion, taking the
Advantage of every Tree and Bush, while we, either according to Discipline, or
the Weight and Encumbrance of our Accoutrements, must stand still, and be
knocked in the Head. In short, till we fall into the same Methods of attacking
and defending as the French and Indians do, we shall be Sufferers; the sooner
then the better. As this is much after the Highland Manner, there is nothing I
more wish to see than a Thousand of those brave Fellows, with their own
Officers, Wives and Children, directly from their native Hills, well settled at
Niagara; and to this Expense I would cheerfully contribute my Proportion.

LET us not in the mean time renounce and abandon that Reputation which we
inherit from our Ancestors, and was purchased with so much Toil, Hazard and
Glory. Let the proper Funds be established, and every One take their Turn in
the Field: Our Cause is just, and, with the Blessing of God, we cannot fail of
Success.

BUT, O! Tempora, O! Mores. --

TO see some of our Assemblies contending about their Proportions, perhaps for
a few Pounds, when even our All is at Stake. To see them endeavor to dupe and
jockey one another in this and other Particulars: To see even those Proportions
agreed to, come in so heavily, is not a little mortifying. Hence the Root and
Spring of all our Misfortunes. To those Dissentions our Enemies have trusted,
declaring (...), even some of their ablest Politicians, That so many different
trading Colonies, in different interests, they were sure could never so far
agree, as to give them any real Fears.

HENCE the almost total Loss of all our Indians, who, on whose ever Side they
fall, will in all Probability cast the Balance.

LET us seriously consider the Consequences of continuing thus disunited.

LET us suppose New York attacked, and taken, while our good Neighbors are
looking on to see the Event; Albany drops of Course; and of Course
Hudson's-River, and every Indian upon the Continent. This would effectually
complete their System, which they have been long concerting, for driving us off
the Continent, and erecting a Monarchy greater than any perhaps we have either
read or heard of.

THE first Connections with our Indians, were by the Means of Hudson's River,
and Albany; and by the same Means they have subsisted ever since.

BY our late bad Management, indeed the Covenant Chain has contracted so much
Rust, that nothing but Time, and a better Management, will be able to clear.
This our Indians have never failed to represent, as often as they had the
Opportunity. In short, if we lose Hudson's-River, we may bid adieu to all
Connections with them; the Consequences of which are obvious.

FEW People, I believe, have ever considered of what Importance the
Preservation of it is.

LET us, in order to awaken us out of our Stupidity, suppose this Place taken,
which will infallibly be the Consequence of our Indolence and Inactivity,
notwithstanding all our fine Batteries, which, in the Hands of an Enemy, would
add greatly to our Misfortunes. And this probably would have been the Case
lately, had not his Majesty, in a very singular Manner, not to be forgot by us,
interposed his paternal good Offices, in directing so seasonably a British
Squadron for our Protection.

LET us, I say, suppose this Place in the Hands of the French for twelve
Months, it might in that Time be so fortified, that all the Power of Britain
would hardly be able to remove them. The City perhaps might be retaken; but
there are Places and Passes in that River, which, if properly fortified, they
might, with their numerous Hosts of Indians, defend themselves against all the
Powers on Earth. I need not name the Places.

THE Loss of Boston, or any other Place upon the Continent, is of no other
Consequence than that of the Trouble and Expense of re-taking them.
Hudson's-River is the Center and Key of the Continent; it is the Basis of all
our Trade and Connections with our own and foreign Indians: And if ever we lose
it, we may fairly bid adieu to the Whole. The French, with their numerous
Bodies of Indians, will soon drive in all our Out-settlements, starve us, and
render our Towns only Traps for our Destruction.

I WILL here beg Leave to carry my Supposition a little farther: And suppose
this Town, or any other Town, in the Hands of the French, can we hope for, or
expect, better Terms than those which Beausejour lately had, that is, to be
transported to Great Britain, or some of our Islands. And is it not very
natural to imagine, that all those of the best Estates, who have been so
tenacious in preserving of them, will be first shipped off. Adieu then, ye
Grandees, to your fine Houses, Lands, Bonds, Bills, Mortgages, etc. and perhaps
to some of your pretty Wives, and Daughters. A new Country, or Settlement,
ought carefully to preserve the Means of increasing and multiplying This is the
first Command, given by God himself. And what is above all, adieu to your
Freedom, if you have not the good Fortune to be transported, for all cannot;
this would be a melancholy Parting indeed; but is there not all the Reason in
the World to believe it would be the Case.

AS for my own Part, all that I should wish upon such an Occasion, would be,
that some hungry Frenchman might cast his Eye upon my little Habitation, which
I would readily give up for Transportation; though I should rather it were to
some of the Dutch Settlements, than stand the everlasting Reproach of my own
Countrymen, which must be the Case, if there is any Truth in the above
Calculation.

I HAVE but little to say, in regard to the young Men of our Province, who have
shown so little Spirit upon this critical Occasion, and who seem to be fonder
of a Cupboard than a Camp. The Parting from their Mistresses, Sweet-hearts and
Bottle, no Doubt will create some Whining for a While. The Ladies, it is to be
hoped, however, will soon get over it, as there is nothing more despicable in
their Eyes than Cowardice.

I HAD the Pleasure, a few Nights ago, to be in Company with a Room-full of
young Ladies, who showed the highest Resentment of our late Misfortunes upon
the Ohio, declaring one and all, that if they were Men they would go -- and,
etc. This however convinced me, that they really would do every Thing in their
Power to serve their Country in this critical Juncture, and only wanted to be
put in a Way. I would therefore humbly propose, that they should all enter into
an Association, not to admit any Youth of the Age of Eighteen to the smallest
Share of their good Graces, until such Time as they had either laid a French
Scalp, bona Fide taken, at their Feet, or showed a Wound received in Front, in
the Defense of their Country, or produced a Certificate from some Commanding
Officer of their having served one Campaign in the Service of their Country.
This, duly observed, would, in all Probability have a wonderful good Effect
upon our young Men.

THE Wretch, says a grave Author, who, during the Times of Danger, is not
ashamed to linger at Home, and chooses to lead a lazy, sauntring, unprofitable
Life, canvassing the Actions of others, questioning and enquiring after News,
should no longer be permitted to eat the Bread of the Diligent and Laborious;
for thus these domestic Loiterers spend and waste their miserable Hours. There
is nothing in human Nature, says he, so wretched, as this unaccountable Humor
of preferring a little dear-bought Ease and present Pleasure to our own
Happiness, and that of our Posterity.

LET not our common People, however, exult at an Event of this Kind, or at the
Distresses of their Betters, or rejoice at the Exchange of Masters, as they
have but little to lose, there is but little Hopes of their being transported.
It is true, they will find full Employment upon the Fortifications, Batteries,
and other Services of their new King; but give me Leave to assure them, that a
little salt Provisions, with sometimes Bread, and sometimes none, and a Penny a
Day for Garlic, or Tobacco, must content them; and there is no complaining,
but at the Risque of being chained to an Oar for (...).

IF the Fate of Kingdoms, says a late Author, is lodged in a just and impartial
Hand, what but the grossest Self-flattery can banish our Fears? And if our
Fears are banished, leave it not unobserved, that our very Want of Fear is a
Proof of our Danger: -- For Heaven infatuates when it determines to destroy.

THUS, my good Friends, and Countrymen, the Danger is apparent; and I have
endeavored to point out the Remedy in plain, and, I hope, intelligible Terms:
Hard Words, and refined Periods, are none of my (...).

HERE is Liberty* with all its Blessings attending it; a sacred Deposite,
lodged with you by your Ancestors, at the Expense of many Lives and much
Treasure, and which you ought, at all Events, to hand down to your Children and
Posterity; and Slavery, with its Train of Miseries, in your Choice; in which, I
pray GOD direct you; the one or the other will most infallibly be the Result of
your present Councils and Resolutions.

O FREEDOM! sovereign Boon of Heaven,
Great Charter, with our Being given;
For which the Patriot, and the Sage,
Have planned, have bled, in every Age:
High Privilege of human Race,
Beyond a mortal Monarch's Grace;
Who could not give, who cannot claim,
What but from GOD immediate came.
The END.

