THE JOURNAL OF Major George Washington, SENT BY THE Hon. ROBERT DINWIDDIE, Esquire
His Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief of VIRGINIA, TO THE
COMMANDANT OF THE FRENCH FORCES ON OHIO.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, THE GOVERNOR's LETTER, AND A TRANSLATION OF THE FRENCH
OFFICER's ANSWER.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by WILLIAM HUNTER. 1754.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS it was thought advisable by his Honor the Governor to have the following
Account of my Proceedings to and from the French on Ohio, committed to Print; I
think I can do no less than apologize, in some Measure, for the numberless
Imperfections of it.

There intervened but one Day between my Arrival in Williamsburg, and the Time
for the Council's Meeting, for me to prepare and transcribe, from the rough
Minutes I had taken in my Travels, this Iournal; the writing of which only was
sufficient to employ me closely the whole Time, consequently admitted of no
Leisure to consult of a new and proper Form to offer it in, or to correct or
amend the Diction of the old; neither was I apprised, or did in the least
conceive, when I wrote this for his Honor's Perusal, that it ever would be
published, or even have more than a cursory Reading; till I was informed, at
the Meeting of the present General As^embly, that it was already in the Press.

There is nothing can recommend it to the Public, but this. Those Things which
came under the Notice of my own Observation, I have been explicit and just in a
Recital of: -- Those which I have gathered from Report, I have been
particularly cautious not to augment, but collected the Opinions of the several
Intelligencers, and selected from the whole, the most probable and consistent
Account.

G. WASHINGTON.

THE JOURNAL, etc.
Wednesday, October 31st, 1753.
I WAS commissioned and appointed by the Honorable Robert Dinwiddie, Esquire
Governor, etc. of Virginia, to visit and deliver a Letter to the Commandant of
the French Forces on the Ohio, and set out on the intended journey the same
Day; the next, I arrived at Fredericksburg, and engaged Mr. Jacob Vanbraam, to
be my French Interpreter; and proceeded with him to Alexandria, where we
provided Necessaries; from thence we went to Winchester, and got Baggage,
Horses, etc. and from thence we pursued the new Road to Wills-Creek, where we
arrived the 14th of November.

Here I engaged Mr. Gist to pilot us out, and also hired four others as
Servitors, Barnaby Currin, and John Mac-Quire, Indian Traders, Henry Steward,
and William Ienkins, and in Company with those Persons, left the Inhabitants
the Day following.

The excessive Rains and vast Quantity of Snow that had fallen, prevented our
reaching Mr. Frazier's an Indian Trader, at the Mouth of Turtle-Creek, on
Monongahela, till Thursday the 22d. We were informed here, that Expresses were
sent a few Days ago to the Traders down the River, to acquaint them with the
French General's Death, and the Return of the major Part of the French Army
into Winter Quarters.

The Waters were quite impassable, without swimming our Horses; which obliged
us to get the Loan of a Canoe from Frazier, and to send Barnaby Currin, and
Henry Steward, down Monongahela, with our Baggage, to meet us at the Forks of
Ohio, about 10 Miles, to cross Aligany.

As I got down before the Canoe, I spent some Time in viewing the Rivers, and
the Land in the Fork, which I think extremely well situated for a Fort, as it
has the absolute Command of both Rivers. The Land at the Point is 20 or 25 Feet
above the common Surface of the Water, and a considerable Bottom of flat,
well-timbered Land all around it, very convenient for Building: The Rivers are
each a Quarter of a Mile, or more, across, and run here very near at right
Angles: Aligany bearing N. E. and Monongahela S. E. the former of these two is
a very rapid and swift running Water, the other deep and still, without any
perceptible Fall.

About two Miles from this, on the South East Side of the River, at the Place
where the Ohio Company intended to erect a Fort, lives Shingiss, King of the
Delawares; we called upon him, to invite him to Council at the Loggs-Town.

As I had taken a good deal of Notice Yesterday of the Situation at the Forks,
my Curiosity led me to examine this more particularly, and I think it greatly
inferior, either for Defense or Advantages; especially the latter; for a Fort
at the Forks would be equally well situated on Ohio, and have the entire
Command of Monongahela, which runs up to our Settlements and is extremely well
designed for Water Carriage, as it is of a deep still Nature; besides, a Fort
at the Fork might be built at a much less Expense, than at the other Place. --

Nature has well contrived the lower Place, for Water Defense; but the Hill
whereon it must stand being about a Quarter of a Mile in Length, and then
descending gradually on the Land Side, will render it difficult and very
expensive, making a sufficient Fortification there. -- The whole Flat upon the
Hill must be taken in, or the Side next the Descent made extremely high; or
else the Hill cut away: Otherwise, the Enemy may raise Batteries within that
Distance without being exposed to a single Shot from the Fort.

Shingiss attended us to the Loggs-Town, where we arrived between Sunsetting
and Dark, the 25th Day after I left Williamsburg: We traveled over some
extreme good, and bad Land, to get to this Place. --

As soon as I came into Town, I went to Monacatoocha (as the Half-King was out
at his hunting Cabin on little Beaver Creek, about 15 Miles off) and informed
him by John Davison my Indian Interpreter, that I was sent a Messenger to the
French General; and was ordered to call upon the Sachems of the Six Nations, to
acquaint them with it. -- I gave him a String of Wampum, and a Twist of
Tobacco, and desired him to send for the Half-King; which he promised to do by
a Runner in the Morning, and for other Sachems. -- I invited him and the other
great Men present to my Tent, where they stayed about an Hour and returned.

According to the best Observations I could make, Mr. Gist's new Settlement
(which we passed by) bears about W. N. W. 70 Miles from Wills-Creek; Shanapins,
or the Forks N. by W. or N. N. W. about 50 Miles from that; and from thence to
the Loggs-Town, the Course is nearly West about 18 or 20 Miles; so that the
whole Distance, as we went and computed it, is at least 135 or 140 Miles from
our back Inhabitants.

25th, Came to Town four of ten Frenchmen that deserted from a Company at the
Cuscuscas, which lies at the Mouth of this River; I got the following Account
from them. They were sent from New Orleans with 100 Men, and 8 Canoe Loads of
Provisions to this Place; where they expected to have met the same Number of
Men, from the Forts this Side Lake Erie, to convoy them and the Stores up, who
were not arrived when they ran off.

I enquired into the Situation of the French, on the Missisippi, their Number,
and what Forts they had built: They informed me, That there were four small
Forts between New-Orleans and the Black-Islands, garrisoned with about 30 or 40
Men, and a few small Pieces, in each: That at New-Orleans, which is near the
Mouth of the Missisippi, there are 35 Companies, of 40 Men each, with a pretty
strong Fort mounting 8 Carriage Guns; and at the Black-Islands there are
several Companies, and a Fort with 6 Guns. The Black-Islands are about 130
Leagues above the Mouth of the Ohio, which is about 350 above New-Orleans: They
also acquainted me, that there was a small pallisado'd Fort on the Ohio, at the
Mouth of the Obaish about 60 Leagues from the Missisippi: The Obaish heads near
the West End of Lake Erie, and affords the Communication between the French on
M^ssisippi and those on the Lakes. These Deserters came up from the lower
Shanoah Town with one Brown, an Indian Trader, and were going to Philadelphia.

About 3 o'Clock this Evening the Half-King came to Town; I went up and invited
him and Davison, privately, to my Tent, and desired him to relate some of the
Particulars of his Journey to the French Commandant, and Reception there; and
to give me an Account of the Ways and Distance. He told me, that the nearest
and levellest Way was now impassable, by Reason of many large miry Savannas;
that we must be obliged to go by Venango, and should not get to the near Fort
under 5 or 6 Night's Sleep, good Traveling. When he went to the Fort, he said
he was received in a very stern Manner by the late Commander; Who asked him
very abruptly, what he had come about, and to declare his Business, which he
said he did in the following Speech.

Fathers, I am come to tell you your own Speeches; what ^ur own Mouths have
declared. Fathers, You, in former ^ays, set a Silver Basin before us, wherein
there was the Leg (...) a Beaver, and desired of all Nations to come and eat of
it; (...) eat in Peace and Plenty, and not to be churlish (...) ^ne another;
and that if any such Person should be found (...) D^sturber, I here lay down by
the Edge of the Dish a (...) you must scourge them with; and if I your (...)
should get foolish, in my old Days, I desire you may (...) me as well as others.

(...) ^athers, it is you that are the D^sturbers in this Land, (...) and
building your Towns, and taking it away (...) us, and by Force.

F^^hers, We kindled a Fire a long Time ago, at a Place called Montreal, where
we desired you to stay, and not to come and intrude upon our Land. I now desire
you may dispatch to that Place; for be it known to you, Fathers, that this is
our Land, and not yours.

Fathers, I desire you may hear me in Civilness; if not, we must handle that
Red which was laid down for the Use of the obstreperous. If you had come in a
peaceable Manner, like our Brothers the English, we should not have been
against your trading with us, as they do; but to come, Fathers, and build great
Houses upon our Land, and to take it by Force, is what we cannot submit to.

Fathers, Both you and the English are white, we live in a Country between;
therefore the Land belongs to neither one nor the other: But the Great Being
above allowed it to be a Place of Residence for us; so Fathers, I desire you to
withdraw, as I have done our Brothers the English; for I will keep you at Arms
Length: I lay this down as a Trial for both, to see which will have the
greatest Regard to it, and that Side we will stand by, and make equal Sharers
with us. Our Brothers the English have heard this, and I come now to tell it to
you, for I am not afraid to discharge you off this Land.

This he said was the Substance of what he said to the General, who made this
Reply.

Now my Child, I have heard your Speech, you spcke first, but it is my Time to
speak now. Where is my Wampum that you took away, with the Marks of Towns in
it? This Wampum I do not know, which you have discharged me off the Land with;
but you need not put yourself to the Trouble of speaking, for I will not hear
you: I am not afraid of Flies, or Musquitos, for Indians are such as those; I
tell you, down that River I will go, and will build upon it, according to my
Command: If the River was blocked up, I have Forces sufficient to burst it
open, and tread under my Feet all that stand in Opposition, together with their
Alliances; for my Force is as the Sand upon the Sea Shore: Therefore, here is
your Wampum, I sting it at you. Child, you talk foolish; you say this Land
belongs to you, but there is not the Black of my Nail yours: I saw that Land
sooner than you did, before the shannoahs and you were at War: Lead was the Man
that went down, and took Possession of that River: It is my Land, and I will
have it, let who will stand up for, or say against it. I Will buy and sell with
the English, (mockingly). If People will be ruled by me, they may expect
Kindness, but not else.

The Half-King told me he enquired of the General after two Englishmen that
were made Prisoners, and received this Answer,

Child, You think it is a very great Hardship that I made Prisoners of those
two People at Venango, don't you concern yourself with it, we took and carried
them to Canada, to get Intelligence of what the English were doing in Virginia.

He informed me that they had built two Forts, one on Lake Erie, and another on
French-Creek, near a small Lake about 15 Miles asunder, and a large Wagon Road
between; they are both built after the same Model, but different in the Size;
that on the Lake the largest; he gave me a Plan of them, of his own drawing.

The Indians enquired very particularly after their Brothers in Carolina Goal.

They also asked what Sort of a Boy it was that was taken from the
South-Branch; for they had, by some Indians, heard that a Party of French
Indians had carried a white Boy by the Cuscusca Town, toward the Lakes.

26th. We met in Council at the Long-House, about 9 o'Clock, 'where I spoke to
them as follows,

Brothers, I have called you together in Council, by Order of your Brother the
Governor of Virginia, to acquaint you that I am sent, with all possible
Dispatch, to visit, and deliver a Letter to the French Commandant, of very
great Importance to your Brothers the English; and I dare say, to you their
Friends and Allies.

I was desired, Brothers, by your Brother the Governor, to call upon you, the
Sachems of the Nations, to inform you of it, and to ask your Advice and
Assistance to proceed the nearest and best Road to the French. You see,
Brothers, I have got thus for on my Journey.

His Honor likewise desired me to apply to you for some of your young Men, to
conduct and provide Provisions for us on our Way, and be a Safeguard against
those French Indians who have taken up the Hatchet against us. I have spoke
this particularly to you, Brothers, because his Honor our Governor treats you
as good Friends and Allies, and holds you in great Esteem. To confirm what I
have said, I give you this String of Wampum.

After they had considered some Time on the above, the Half-King got up and
spoke.

Now, my Brothers, in Regard to what my Brother the Governor has desired of me,
I return you this Answer.

I rely upon you as a Brother ought to do, as you say we (...) Brothers and one
People: We shall put Heart in Hand, (...) speak to our Fathers the French
concerning the Speech (...) made to me, and you may depend that we will
endeavor (...) your Guard.

Brother, as you have asked my Advice, I hope you (...) by it, and stay till I
can provide a Company to go (...) you: The French Speech-Belt is not here, I
have it to (...) to my hunting Cabin; likewise the People which I have (...)
in, are not yet come, nor cannot till the third Night from (...), till which
Time, Brother, I must beg you to stay.

I intend to send a Guard of Mingo's, Shannoahs, (...) Delawares, that our
Brothers may see the Love and (...) we bear them.

As I had Orders to make all possible Dispatch, and waiting here was very
contrary to my Inclination, I thanked him in the most suitable Manner I could,
and told him that my Business required the greatest Expedition, and would not
admit of that Delay: He was not well pleased that I should offer to go before
the Time he had appointed, and told me that he could not consent to our going
without a Guard, for Fear some Accident should be^al us, and draw a Reflection
upon him; besides, says he, this is a Matter of no small Moment, and must not
be entered into without due Consideration; for now I intend to deliver up the
French-Speech-Belt, and make the Shanoahs and Delawares do the same: and
accordingly he gave Orders to King Shingiss, who was present, to attend on
Wednesday Night with the Wampum, and two Men of their Nation to be in Readin^ss
to set out with us next Morning. As I found it was impossible to get off
without affronting them in the most egreg ious Manner, I consented to stay.

I gave them back a String of Wampum that I met with at Mr. Frazi^r's, which
they had sent with a Speech to his Honor the Governor, to inform him, that
three Nations of French Indians, viz. Chippoways, Ottoways, and Orundacks, had
taken up the Hatchet against the English, and desired them to repeat it over
again, which they postponed doing till they met in full Council with the
Shannoahs and Delaware Chiefs.

27th. Runners were dispatched very early for the Shanoah Chiefs, the Half-King
set out himself to fetch the French-Speech-Belt from his Hunting-Cabbin.

28th. He returned this Evening, and came with Mon^catoocha, and two other
Sachems to my Tent; and begged, (as they had complied with his Honor the
Governor's Request, in providing Men, etc.) to know on what Business we were
going to the French? this was a Question I all along expected, and had provided
as satisfactory Answers to, as I could, and which allayed their Curiosity a
little.

Monocatoocha informed me, that an Indian from Venango brought News, a few Days
ago, that the French had called all the M^ngos, Delawares, etc. together at
that Place, and told them that they intended to have been down the River this
Fall, but the Waters were growing cold, and the Winter advancing, which obliged
them to go into Quarters: But they might assuredly expect them in the Spring,
with a far greater Number; and desired that they might be quite passive, and
not to intermeddle, unless they had a Mind to draw all their Force upon them,
for that they expected to fight the English three Years, (as they supposed
there would be some Attempts made to stop them) in which Time they should
conquer, but if they should prove equally strong, that they and the English,
would join to cut them all off, and divide the Land between them; that though
they had lo^t their General, and some few of their Soldiers, yet there were Men
enough to reinforce them, and make them Mast^rs of the Ohio.

'This Speech, he said, was delivered to them by one Captain Ioncaire their
Interpreter in Chief, living at Venango, and a Man of Note in the Army.

29th. The Half-King and Monocatoocha, came very early, and begged me to stay
one Day more, for notwithstanding they had used all the Diligence in their
Power, the Shanoah Chiefs had not brought the Wampum they ordered, but would
certainly be in Tonight; if not, they would delay me no longer, but would send
it after us as soon as they arrived: When I found them so pressing in their
Request, and knew that returning of Wampum was the abolishing of Agreements;
and giving this up, was shaking of all Dependence upon the French, I consented
to stay, as I believed an Offense offered at this Crisis, might be attended
with greater ill Consequence, than another Day's Delay. They also informed me
that Shingiss could not get in his Men, and was prevented from coming himself
by his Wife's Sickness, (I believe, by Fear of the French) but that the Wampum
of that Nation was lodged with Custaloga one of their Chiefs at Venango.

In the Evening late they came again and acquainted me that the Shannoahs were
not yet come, but it should not retard the Prosecution of our Journey. He
delivered in my Hearing, the Speeches that were to be made to the French, by
Ieskakake, one of their old Chiefs, which was giving up the Belt the late
Commandant had asked for, and repeating near the same Speech he himself had
done before.

He also delivered a String of Wampum to this Chief, which was sent by King
Shingiss, to be given to Custaloga, with Orders to repair to the French, and
deliver up the Wampum.

He likewise gave a very large String of black and white Wampum, which was to
be sent up immediately to the Six Nations, if the French refused to quit the
Land at this Warning; which was the third and last Time, and was the Right of
this Ieskakake to deliver.

30th. Last Night the great Men assembled to their Council-House, to consult
further about this Journey, and who were to go; the Result of which was, that
only three of their Chiefs, with one of their best Hunters, should be our
Convoy: The Reason which they gave for not sending more, after what had been
proposed at Council the 26th, was, that a greater Number might give the French
Suspicions of some bad Design, and cause them to be treated rudely: But I
rather think they could not get their Hunters in.

We set out about 9 o'Clock with the Half-King, Ieskakake, White Thunder, and
the Hunter, and traveled on the Road to Venango, where we arrived the 4th of
December, without any Thing remarkable happening but a continued Series of bad
Weather.

This is an old Indian Town, situated at the Mouth of French Creek on Ohio, and
lies near N. about 60 Miles from the Loggs-Town, but more than 70 the Way we
were obliged to go.

We found the French Colors hoisted at a House which they drove Mr. John
Frazier, an English Subject, from; I immediately repaired to it, to know where
the Commander resided: There were three Officers, one of whom, Capt. Ioncaire,
informed me, that he had the Command of the Ohio, but that there was a General
Officer at the near Fort, which he advised me to for an Answer. He invited us
to sup with them, and treated us with the greatest Complaisance.

The Wine, as they dosed themselves pretty plentifully with it, soon banished
the Restraint which at first appeared in their Conversation, and gave a License
to their Tongues to reveal their Sentiments more freely.

They told me, That it was their absolute Design to take Possession of the
Ohio, and by G -- they would do it* for that they were sensible the English
could raise two Men for their one; yet they knew, their Motions were too slow
and dilstory to prevent any Undertaking of theirs. They pretend to have an
undoubted Right to the River, from a Discovery made by one La Sol 60 Years ago;
and the Rise of this Expedition is, to prevent our settling on the River or
Waters of it, as they have heard of some Families moving out in Order thereto.
From the best Intelligence I could get, there have been 1500 Men on this Side
Ontario Lake, but upon the Death of the General all were recalled to about 6 or
700, who were left to garrison four Forts, 150 or there abouts in each, the
first of which is on French Creek, near a small Lake, about 60 Miles from
Venango, near N. N. W. the next lies on Lake Erie, where the greatest Part of
their Stores are kept, about 15 Miles from the other; from that it is 120 Miles
to the carrying Place, at the Falls of Lake Erie, where there is a small Fort
which they lodge their Goods at, in bringing them from Montreal, the Place that
all their Stores come from: The next Fort lies about 20 Miles from this, on
Ontario Lake; between this Fort and Montreal there are three others, the first
of which is near opposite to the English Fort Oswego. From the Fort on Lake
Erie to Montreal is about 600 Miles, which they say requires no more, if good
Weather, than four Weeks Voyage, if they go in Barks or large Vessels, that
they can cross the Lake; but if they come in Canoes it will require 5 or 6
Weeks, for they are obliged to keep under the Shore.

5th, Rained excessively all Day, which prevented our Traveling. Capt.
Ioncaire sent for the Half-King, as he had but just heard that he came with me:
He affected to be much concerned that I did not make free to bring them in
before; I excused it in the best Manner I was capable, and told him I did not
think their Company agreeable, as I had heard him say a good deal in Dispraise
of Indians in general; but another Motive prevented me from bringing them into
his Company; I knew he was Interpreter, and a Person of very great Influence
among the Indians, and had lately used all possible Means to draw them over to
their Interest; therefore I was desirous of giving no Opportunity that could be
avoided.

When they came in, there was great Pleasure expressed at ^^^ing them; he
wondered how they could be so near without coming to visit him, made several
trifling Presents, and applied Liquor so fast, that they were soon rendered
incapable of the Business they came about, notwithstanding the Caution that was
given.

6th, The Half-King came to my Tent, quite sober, and insisted very much that I
should stay and hear what he had to say to the French; I fain would have
prevented his speaking any Thing, 'til he came to the Commandant; but could not
pr^vail: He told me, that at this Place a Council Fire was kindled, where all
their Business with these People was to be transacted, and that the Management
of the Indian Affairs was left solely to Monsieur Ioncaire. As I was desirous
of knowing the Issue of this, I agreed to stay, but sent our Horses a little
Way up French Creek, to raft over and encamp; which I knew would make it near
Night.

About 10 o'Clock they met in Council; the King spoke much the same as he had
before done to the General, and offered the French Speech-Belt which had before
been demanded, with the Marks of four Towns on it, which Monsieur Ioncaire
refused to receive; but desired him to carry it to the Fort to the Commander.

7th, Monsieur La Force, Commissary of the French Stores, and three other
Soldiers came over to accompany us up. We found it extremely difficult getting
the Indians off Today, as every Stratagem had been used to prevent their going
up with me: I had last Night l^ft John Davison (the Indian Interpreter that I
brought from the Loggs-Town with me) strictly charged not to be out of their
Company, as I could not get them over to my Tent (they having some Business
with Custaloga, to know the Reason why he did not deliver up the French Belt
which he had in Keeping) but was obliged to send Mr. Gist over Today to fetch
them, which he did with great Persuasion.

At 11 o'Clock we set out for the Fort, and were prevented from arriving there
'til the 11th by excessive Rains, Snows, and bad Traveling, through many Mires
and Swamps, which we were obliged to pass, to avoid crossing the Creek, which
was impossible; either by fording or rafting, the Water was so high and rapid.

We passed over much good Land since we left Venango, and through several
extensive and very rich Meadows; one of which I believe was near four Miles in
Length, and considerably wide in some Places.

12th, I prepared early to wait upon the Commander, and was received and
conducted to him by the second Officer in Command; I acquainted him with my
Business, and offered my Commission and Letter, both of which he desired me to
keep 'til the Arrival of Monsieur Riparti, Captain, at the next Fort, who was
sent for and expected every Hour.

This Commander is a Knight of the military Order of St. Lewis, and named
Legardeur de St. Piere. He is an elderly Gentleman; and has much the Air of a
Soldier; he was sent over to take the Command, immediately upon the Death of
the late General, and arrived here about seven Days before me.

At 2 o'Clock the Gentleman that was sent for arrived, when I offered the
Letter; etc. again; which they received, and adjourned into a private Apartment
for the Captain to translate, who understood a little English; after he had
done it, the Commander desired I would walk in, and bring my Interpreter to
peruse and correct it, which I did.

13th, The chief Officers retired, to hold a Council of War, which gave me an
Opportunity of taking the Dimensions of the Fort, and making what Observations
I could.

It is situated on the South, or West Fork of French Creek, near the Water, and
is almost surrounded by the Creek, and a small Branch of it which forms a Kind
of an Island; four Houses compose the Sides; the Bastions are made of Piles
driven into the Ground, and about 12 Feet above, and sharp at Top, with
Port-Holes cut for Cannon and Loop-Holes for the small Arms to fire through;
there are eight 6 lb. Pieces mounted, two in each Bastion, and one Piece of
four Pound before the Gate; in the Bastions are a Guard-House, Chapel, Doctor's
Lodging, and the Commander's private Store, round which are laid Plat-Forms for
the Cannon and Men to stand on: There are several Barracks without the Fort,
for the Soldiers Dwelling, covered, some with Bark, and some with Boards, and
made chiefly of Loggs: There are also several other Houses, such as Stables,
Smiths Shop, etc.

I could get no certain Account of the Number of Men here; but according to the
best Judgment I could form, there are an Hundred exclusive of Officers, of
which th^re are many. I also gave Orders to the People that were with me, to
take an exact Account of the Canoes that were haled up to convey their Forces
down in the Spring, which they did, and told 50 of Bir^h Bark, and 170 of Pine,
besides many others that were blocked out, in Readiness to make.

14th, As the Snow increased very fast, and our Horses daily became weaker, I
sent them off unloaded, under the Care of Barnaby Currin and two others, to
make all convenient Dispatch to Venango, and there wait our Arrival if there
was a Prospect of the Rivers freezing, if not, then to continue down to
Shanapin's Town, at the Forks of Ohio, and there to wait 'til we came to cross
Aligany, intending myself to go down by Water, as I had the Offer of a Canoe or
Two.

As I found many Plots concerted to retard the Indians Business, and prevent
their returning with m^; I endeavored all that lay in my Power to frustrate
their Schemes, and hurry them on to execute their intended Design; they
accordingly pr^ssed for Admittance this Evening, which at Length was granted
them, privately, with the Commander and one or two other Officers: The
Half-King told me, that he offered the Wampum to the Commander, who evaded
taking it, and made many fair Promises of Love and Friendship; said he wanted
to live in Peace, and trade amicably with them, as a Proof of which he would
send some Goods immediately down to the Loggs-Town for them; but I rather think
the Design of that is, to bring away all our straggling Traders they meet with,
as I privately understood they intended to carry an Officer, etc. with them;
and what rather confirms this Opinion, I was enquiring of the Commander, by
what Authority he had made Prisoners of several of our English Subjects; he
told me that the Country belonged to them, that no Englishman had a Right to
trade upon those Waters; and that he had Orders to make every Person Prisoner
that attempted it on the Ohio, or the Waters of it.

I inquired of Capt. Riparti about the Boy that was carried by, as it was done
while the Command devolved on him, between the Death of the late General, and
the Arrival of the present; he acknowledged, that a Boy had been carried past,
and that the Indians had two or three white Men's Scalps, (I was told by some
of the Indians at Venango Eight) but pretended to have forgot the Name of the
Place that the Boy came from, and all the Particulars, though he questioned him
for some Hours, as they were carrying him past: I likewise enquired what they
had done with John Trotter and James MacClocklan, two Pennsylvania Traders,
whom they had taken, with all their Goods: They told me, that they had been
sent to Canada, but were now returned Home.

This Evening I received an Answer to his Honor the Governor's Letter from the
Commandant.

15th, The Commandant ordered a plentiful Store of ^^quor, Provision, etc. to
be put on Board our Canoe, and appe^red to be extremely complaisant, though he
was exersing every Artifice that he could invent to set our own I (...) as at
Variance with us, to prevent their going 'til after our Departure: Presents,
Rewards, and every Thing that could be suggested by him or his Officers. -- I
cannot say that ^ver in my Life I suffered so much Anxiety as I did in this
Affair; I saw that every Stratagem that the most fruitful Brain could invent,
was practiced, to win the Half-King to their Interest, and that leaving Him
here was giving them the Opportunity they aimed at. -- I went to the Half-King,
and pressed him in the strongest Terms to go: He told me the Commandant would
not discharge him 'til the, Morning. I then went to the Commandant, and desired
him to do their Business, and complisin'd of ill Treatment; for keeping them,
as they were Part of my Company, was (...) are; which he promised not to do,
but to forward my Journey as much as he could: He protested he did not keep
them, but was ignorant of the Cause of their St^y; though I soon found it out:
-- He had promised them a Present of Guns, etc. if they would wait 'til the
Morning.

A^ I was very much pr^s^'d, by the Indians, to wait this (...) for their, I
(...), on a Promise; That nothing should (...) th^^ in the Morninsg.

16th. The (...) were not st^ck in their Inventions to keep the Indian this Day
also; but as they were obligated, (...), to give the Present, they then (...)
Power of Liquor, which I doubt not would have (...) at any other Time than
this, but I (...) and insisted with the King so closely upon his Word, that her
fr^in^d, and set off with us as he had engaged.

We had a t^^^ous and very fatiguing Passage down the Cr^^k, several Times we
had like to have been shaved against Rocks, and many Times were obliged all
Hands to get out and remain in the Water Half an Hour or more, getting over the
Shoals; at one Place the Ice had lodged and made it impassable by Water;
therefore we were obliged to carry our Canoe across a Neck of Land, a Quarter
of a Mile over. We did not reach Venango, till the 22d, where we met with our
Hors^s.

This Creek is extremely crooked, I dare say the Distance between the Fort and
Venango cannot be less than 130 Miles, to follow the Meanders.

23d. When I got Things ready to set off, I sent for the Half-King, to know
whether he intended to go with us, or by Water, he told me that White-Thunder
had hurt himself much, and was sick and unable to walk, therefore he was
obliged to carry him down in a Canoe: As I found he intended to stay here a Day
or two, and knew that Monsi^ur Ioncaire would employ every Scheme to set him
against the English as he had before done; I told him I hoped he would guard
against his Flattery, and let no fine Speeches influence him in their Favor:
He desired I might not be concerned, for he knew the French too well, for any
Thing to engage him in their Behalf, and though he could not go down with us,
he would endeavor to meet at the Forks with Joseph Campbell, to deliver a
Speech for me to carry to his Honor the Governor. He told me he would order
the young Hunter to attend us, and get Provision, etc. if wanted.

Our Horses were now so weak and feeble, and the Baggage heavy, as we here
obliged to provide all the Necessaries that the Journey would require; that we
doubted much their performing it: therefore myself and others (except the
Drivers which were obliged to ride) gave up our Horses for Packs, to assist
along with the Baggage, I put myself in as Indian walking Dress, and continued
with them three Days, till I found there was no Probability of their getting
in, in any reasonable Time; the Horses grew less able to travel every Day; the
Cold increased very fast, and the Roads were becoming much worse by a deep
Snow, continually (...); and as I was uneasy to get back, to make Report of my
Proceedings to his Honor the Governor, I determined to prosecute my Journey
the nearest Way through the Woods, on Foot.

Accordingly I left Mr. Vanbraam in Charge of our Baggage, with Money and
Directions, to provide Necessaries from Place to Place for themselves and
Horses, and to make the most convenient Dispatch in.

I took my necessary Papers, pulled off my Clo^ths; tied myself up in a Match
Coat; and with my Pack at my Back with my Papers and Provisions in it, and a
Gun, set out with Mr. Gist, fitted in the same Manner, on Wednesday the 26th.
The Day following, just after we had passed a Place called the Murdering-Town,
where we intended to quit the Path, and steer across the Country for Shannapins
Town, we fell in with a Party of French Indians, who had lain in Wait for us;
one of them fired at Mr. Gist or me, not 15 Steps, but fortunately missed. We
took this Fellow into Custody, and kept him till about 9 o'Clock at Night, and
then let him go, and walked all the remaining Part of the Night without making
any Stop, that we might get the Start, so far, as to be out of the Reach of
their Pursuit the next Day, as we were well assured they would follow our Tract
as soon as it was light: The next Day we continued traveling till quite ^ark,
and got to the River about two Miles above Shannapins; we expected to have
found the River frozen, but it was not, only about 50 Yards from each Shore;
the Ice I suppose had broke up above, for it was driving in vast Quantities.

There was no Way for getting over but on a Raft, which we set about, with but
one poor Hatchet, and got finished just after Sunsetting, after a whole Days
Work; we got (...) launched, and on Board of it, and set off; but before we
were Half Way over, we were jammed in the Ice in such a Manner that we expected
every Moment our Raft to sink, and ourselves to perish, I put out my setting
Pole to try to stop the Raft, that the Ice might pass by, when the Rapidity of
the Stream threw it with so much Viol^nce against the Pole, that it jirk^d me
out into ten Feet Water, but I fortunately saved myself by catching hold of one
of the Raft Logs; notwithstanding all our Efforts we could not get the Raft to
either Shore, but were obliged, as we were near an Island, to quit our Raft and
make to it.

The Cold was so extremely severe, that Mr. Gist, had all his Fingers, and some
of his Toes frozen, and the Wat^r was shut up so hard, that we sound no
Difficulty in getting off the Island, on the Ice, in the Morning, and went to
Mr. Frazier's. We met here with 20 Warriors who were going to the Southward to
War, but coming to a Place upon the Head of the great Cunnaway, where they
found s^ven People kill^d and scalped, all but one Woman with v^ry light Hair,
they turned about and ran back, for Fear the Inhabitants should rise and take
them as the Authors of the Murder: They report that the People were lying about
the House, and some, of them much torn and eat^n by Hogs: By the Marks that
were left, they say they were French Indians of the Otteway Nation, etc. that
did it.

As we inten^^d to take Horses here, and it required some Time to find them, I
w^nt up about thre^ Miles to the Mouth of Y^dghyaughga^e to visit Queen
Alliquppu, who had expressed gr^^t Conc^rn that we pass^d her in going to the
Fort. I mad^ her a Pr^s^nt of a Mat^h^ at and a Bottle of Rum, which latt^r was
thought much the best Pr^sent of the two.

Tuesday the 1st Day of January, we le^t Mr. Frazi^r's House, and arr^^^d at
Mr. Gist's at (...) the 2d, where I bought Horse, S^^^dl^, etc. the 6th w^ m^t
17 Horses loaded with Materi^ls and Stores for a Fort at the Forks of Ohio, and
the Day aft^r some Families g^ing out to settle! This Day we arrived at
Wills-Creek, aft^r as fatiguing a Journey as it is possible to conceive,
rendered so by excessive (...) Weather: From the first Day of December to the
15th, there was but one Day but it rained or snowed incessantly* and throughout
the whole Journey we met with nothing but one continued S^ri^s of cold wet
Weather, which occasioned very uncomfortable Lodgings, especially after we had
left our Tent, which was some Screen from the Inclemency of it.

On the 11th I got to Belvoir where I stopped one Day to take necessary R^st,
and then set out, and arrived in Williamsburg the 16th, and waited upon his
Honor the Goernor with the Letter I had brought from the French Commandant,
and to give an Account of the Proceedings of my Journey, which I beg Leave to
do by offering the foregoing, as it contains the most remarkable Occurences
that happened to me.

I hope it will be sufficient to satisfy your Honor with my Proceedings; for
that was my Aim in undertaking the Journey, and chief Study throughout the
Prosecution of it.

With the Hope of doing it, I, with infinite Pleasure, subscribe myself,

Your Honor's most Obedient, And very humble Servant, G. Washington.

COPY of his Honor the GOVERNOR'S Letter to the Commandant of the French
Forces on the OHIO, sent by Major Washington.
SIR,
THE Lands upon the River Ohio, in the Western Parts of the Colony of Virginia,
are so notoriously known to be the Property of the Crown of Great Britain, that
it is a Matter of equal Concern and Surprise to me, to hear that a Body of
French Forces are erecting Fortresses, and making Settlements upon that River,
within his Majesty's Dominions.

The many and repeated Complaints I have received of these Acts of Hostility,
lay me under the Necessity, of sending, in the Name of the King my Master, the
Bearer hereof, George Washington, Esquire one of the Adjutants General of the
Forces of this Dominion, to complain to you of the Encroachments thus made, and
of the Injuries done to the Subjects of Great Britain, in open Violation of the
Law of Nations, and the Treaties now subsisting between the two Crowns.

If these Facts are true, and you shall think fit to justify your Proceedings,
I must desire you to acquaint me, by whose Authority and Instructions you have
lately marched from Canada, with an armed Force, and invaded the King of
Great-Britain's Territories, in the Manner complained of; that according to the
Purport and Resolution of your Answer, I may act agreably to the Commission I
am honored with, from the King my Master.

However Sir, in Obedience to my Instructions, it becomes my Duty to require
your peaceable Departure; and that you would forbear prosecuting a Purpose so
interruptive of the Harmony and good Understanding, which his Majesty is
desirous to continue and cultivate with the most Christian King.

I persuade myself you will receive and entertain Major Washington with the
Candor and Politeness natural to your Nation; and it will give me the greatest
Satisfaction, if you return him with an Answer suitable to my Wishes for a very
long and lasting Peace between us.

I have the Honor to subscribe myself,

SIR, Your most obedient, Humble Servant, ROBERT DINWIDDIE.
Williamsburg, in Virginia, October 31st, 1753.
TRANSLATION of a Letter from Mr. Legardeur de St. Piere, a principal French
Officer, in Answer to the Governor's Letter.
SIR,
AS I have the Honor of commanding here in Chief, Mr. Washington delivered me
the Letter which you writ to the Commandant of the French Troops.

I should have been glad that you had given him Orders, or that he had been
inclined to proceed to Canada, to see our General, to whom it better belongs
than to me to set forth the Evidence and Reality of the Rights of the King, my
Master, upon the Lands situated along the River Ohio, and to contest the
Pretensions of the King of Great Britain thereto.

I shall transmit your Letter to the Marquess Duguisne; his Answer will be a
Law to me, and if he shall order me to communicate it (...), Sir, you may be
assured I shall not fail to dispatch it to you forthwith.

As to the Summons you send me to retire, I do not think myself obliged to obey
it; whatever may be your Instructions, I am here by Virtue of the Orders of my
General; and I entreat you, Sir, not to doubt one Moment, but that I am
determined to conform myself to them with all the Exactness and Resolution
which can be expected from the best Officer.

I don't know that in the Progress of this Campaign any Thing has passed which
can be reputed an Act of Hostility, or that is contrary to the Treaties which
subsist between the two Crowns, the Continuation whereof as much interests, and
is as pleasing to us, as the English. Had you been pleased, Sir, to have
descended to particularize the Facts which occasioned your Complaint, I should
have had the Honor of answering you in the fullest, and, I am persuaded, most
satisfactory Manner.

I made it my particular Care to receive Mr. Washington, with a Distinction
suitable to your Dignity, and his Quality and great Merit; I flatter myself he
will do me this Justice before you, Sir, and that he will signify to you as
well as I, the profound Respect with which I am,

SIR, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, LEGARDZUR DE ST. PIERE.
From the Fort sur La Riviere au Beuf, the 15th of December 1753.

