A PLEA FOR THE Poor and Distressed, Against the BILL For granting an Excise
upon Wines and Spirits distilled, sold by Retail, or consumed within this
Province, etc.

BOSTON, Printed in the Year 1754.

A Plea for the Poor and Distressed, Against the BILL For granting an Excise
upon Wines and Spirits distilled, sold by Retail, or consumed within this
Province, etc.
IT has been said of this Act, that it is intended to cause such as spend their
Money unnecessarily in strong Liquors, luxurious living, etc. to pay something
more than others toward the Support of Government; whether as a Punishment, or
to restrain them, if it could be confined only to such Persons, the End
proposed would be good; and no doubt the good Intention of the Legislators in
passing this Bill was such; but to distress the Poor and Needy could not be
intended by it; nor do we suppose it was to prevent the frugal and necessary
Use of Spirituous Liquors, but to tax the Excess and unnecessary Use of them.
Therefore (as we have Leave) let us examine and find whether this Act will
answer the proposed End, without doing more Hurt than Good; and this may be
done by comparing the different Manner of Living and Circumstances of three
several Sorts of Persons in the Province.

1. The prudent, frugal, industrious honest Farmers and Husbandmen, who live in
Plenty, Peace and Safety, not acquainted with the Way and Manner that others
live.

2. The poor exposed suffering People in the Frontiers, laboring and exposing
themselves to Danger, and patiently enduring Cold and Hunger, and many other
Hardships in the Woods, endeavoring to make Settlements for themselves and
their Children, in doing of which they are a Wall, Cover and Defense to the
Inland Plantations.

3. The Fishermen, necessary and profitable to the Country, whose Labor is
great, their Profits little, and their Comforts less.

First then, those Farmers and Husbandmen living in old Towns and Plantations,
who have other Towns settled outside them, live and enjoy their Families and
Estates in Peace and Safety; they can attend their Business and Labors without
Fear; they have all the Blessings of the Heavens; every Rain and Dew refreshes
the Fruits of their Lands, which bring them plenty of the best Food and good
Raiment as the Earth can produce, and great variety of good Liquors (much
better than Rum, the principal Thing aimed at in this Bill to pay Excise for)
they can and do make excellent Beer, Cider, and a variety of Spirituous
Liquors, all of the Fruits of their Farms, the Lands, Vines, Trees, Bushes and
Herbs, which with only the Care and Labor of the Husbandman and his own
Family, with no other Expense, produce Plenty of rich Food, Raiment and
exhilerating Spirits, equal as to its Usefulness to any in the World. They have
it not only in plenty for their own Use, but a great deal to spare, which they
sell for Money and enrich themselves. -- They sleep quietly in their Houses,
their Fields are well secured from Danger, every one sits quietly under his
Vines and Fruit Trees, and none can make them afraid. They hear not (or at
least they fear not) the Alarm of War; their Persons, Families and Estates are
secure, protected and defended by the best Government upon Earth, and Laws
which are as a Wall or Fence round about them, that none dare to touch them or
theirs to their hurt, but may expect to be severely punished. -- The good
Providence of God has made a Hedge about them in such Manner as their Civil and
Religious Liberties and Privileges are so secured to them, as there is no Place
in any Country, in any Nation or Kingdom, in more happy Circumstances than
these are in; it is much better than the Condition their Forefathers were in,
for they in Times past had War and Trouble. Then surely these People who now
thus enjoy the Blessings of Heaven to such a Degree in all Respects, would take
it as a great Injury done them (and it may be so) to say of them that they are
unwilling to bear a due Proportion according to their Ability, of the Charges
of the Support of such a Government under which they enjoy so much Good: They
live as they list, their Estates are their own, absolutely their own in Fee. No
Lords over them, nor Quit Rents to pay, all are free Men and their Estates
free, and they like Gideon's Brethren, each one resembles the Children of a
King.

Secondly. The poor exposed suffering People in the Frontiers, those who go
into the Wilderness to clear and subdue the Lands to make Settlements, are
generally very poor, and they must suffer great Hardships and Dangers; the
Wilderness produces them no Corn for Bread, they must with great Pains clear
the Land before they can till it: -- A little Land takes many Years Labor to
subdue and make it profitable, or in any considerable Measure useful; and while
they are doing that, they must suffer for want of Victuals. -- If they can have
the Lands given them for clearing and settling it, they must first cut their
Wood and Timber to sell for Food to support Life. Many of them are not able to
buy Oxen to hale their Wood and Timber to a Landing Place for sale, but are
obliged to carry Wood and Timber upon their Shoulders to buy Bread and
Clothing for themselves and their Children, ready to faint under their
Burdens, yet pressed on by pinching Want, get something to fell to relieve
them; but then they must venture it over Sea for Corn and Pork, and other
Necessaries of Life, and wait the return, which is sometimes long coming,
sometimes no return at all; but if they do receive the returns of their Labor,
that is perhaps a little Indian Corn for Bread, and a little lean salt Meat,
which may help to keep them alive as long as it lasts; but what is their Drink?
Generally in the Woods their Drink is Water, not from good and wholesome Springs,
but from Rivulets issuing from unwholsom Ponds and Marshes, often poisoned with
Spawns of Toads, Frogs, creeping Things, hateful Insects and Vermin, soaking
through Heaths and Box and other poisonous Bogs, Roots and Bushes, which render
the Waters very unwholsom, causing many Sicknesses and Deaths. -- And when they
have cleared a few Acres of Land, and can keep a Cow or two, this is something,
but will not support them, their Dependence must still be chiefly upon their
Lumber for their living, their Lands not yet affording half sufficient for the
support of their Families. -- Then comes War, or a Rumor of War; Indians do
Mischief, their Houses are like weak and defenseless Wigwams, they must fly or
die; some get together into small Huts fenced in with Poles, to save their
Lives, and all they had at home laid Waste and destroyed. -- To keep in their
weak Garrisons without Work, is Death; if they venture out, there is nothing
but melancholy Aspects, Desolations and Fear on every Side; they are in
continual Distress, the Enemy sculking to catch them; the Famine is within
their Walls; the Sword of the Wilderness without; difficult which Death to
choose; -- their Living is without any real Comfort: -- Their Food but mean and
scanty, their Clothing rent and torn, scarcely sufficient to keep them
tolerably warm in the Winter; Wool and Flax they have none, or very little,
their Wants are such as cannot be easily expressed; none knows their Sufferings,
Fears, Dangers and Sorrows, but those who have suffered with them; neither can
they themselves express it. -- Sometimes, when some of these poor Wretches have
some Returns for their Wood and Timber, perhaps they may get a Bottle or Gallon
of Rum to drink in the Woods, to prevent the evil Effects of those Spawns and
noxious Waters, and this is all they can have to drink (and this but seldom)
besides such Waters; have but little Rum in all they can get; Beer they cannot
have, Cider is not there, no Fruit Trees in the Woods and new Plantations; if
any raise a Bushel of Barley, they must eat it or starve; they cannot spare any
for Malt; and now if they drink a Dram of Rum they must keep account how much,
and where and when they had it, and swear to it, and pay Excise for it too, or
pay L. 10 Lawful Money, as shall please the Deputy Excise Man.

Now compare these People's living with the former. Would the meanest Farmer or
Husbandman beforementioned exchange Conditions or Livings with any of these?
Surely no. -- Yet Money to support the Government (if this Bill should pass)
must be taken from these poor half starved People, much more than their
Proportion according to their Estates, to ease the other who live at ease in
safety, and were never acquainted with Hunger or Thirst. -- The Country allows
Soldiers in Garrison Beer to drink, if marching Men, a certain Allowance of
Rum, which they don't pay Excise for, besides their daily Allowance of Bread
and Meat. Such Allowance many of these poor Inhabitants gladly would, but
cannot get so much to live upon as well as Soldiers, yet though as much exposed
as Soldiers, and more too, they must pay Excise for every Bottle of Rum they or
their Families drink, without regarding the necessity they are under, and
without allowing them to live like other Men: The Farmer's Slaves In the
Country, live abundantly better than most Men in the new Plantations can
possibly live.

Farmers and Husbandmen have no need of Rum, they have better Liquor and better
living in all Respects, and all of their own raising. -- And if they knew or
could be made sensible of the miserable Condition, Difficulties and Distresses
of their poor Brethren and Neighbors who live in the Frontier Towns, they
themselves of mere Compassion would pay all their Taxes and their Excise too
for them, and let these poor People go free. -- They would consider that some
must be outside next to the Indians, and it is impossible but they must suffer
and endure many Hardships. -- And to add weight to their heavy Burdens, by
exacting an Excise upon them for the Necessaries of Life they use, such as Rum,
and other spirituous Liquors, to them in the Woods, is extreme hard.

Thirdly. The Fishermen; their Calling is honest, and a great Benefit to the
Country in many respects. -- The Fish and Lumber is all that this Country has
of its own Produce, to export and trade with in other Parts of the World, to
import Commodities from other Countries which are necessary to be used here,
and that the Fishery ought to be encouraged none will deny. -- The Work and
Business is dangerous, hard and difficult. The Men are always exposed to the
Indian and French Pirates at Sea, also in their open Boats to the Storms, Rocks
and Tempests, many Times not having a dry Garment for many Days or Weeks
together; the Sea raging and breaking over them, looks as if they should be
immediately swallowed up; they suffer Wet and Cold, and Watching in bad
Weather, and when the Weather is fair, the unwholsom Scent which always attends
their Business from which they cannot go, but must endure it and work too, all
this will try the strongest Constitution; and in this Business it is necessary,
and they must take a little Rum or other Spirits to keep up their Spirits, or
they must surfeit or faint in their nasty, though necessary Employment. These
Men, so much exposed every Day and Hour to the Danger of the Seas, and in
Perils which way soever they turn, all Men who are acquainted with that
Business allow, that they need and should use more Rum than is necessary in any
other Calling whatsoever: Yet no Farmer or Husbandman would care to exchange
Conditions with these for the sake of their Rum. -- Husbandmen can lay dry in
their Beds in stormy Weather, when Fishermen are most exposed to the Weather,
they must endure it or sink, Wet, Cold and Hunger too, or eat raw Meat, as is
sometimes the Case; and notwithstanding all the Fisherman's Labors and
Sufferings and great Pains he takes to live, they are generally very poor and
in Debt, all they can get in the Year, will scarcely pay the Farmers for Corn
and Meat to supply their poor Families in their Absence. Let them be ever so
industrious, their Living is but mean and low, yet because they drink pretty
much Rum, seven times their Share of the Support of Government must be laid
upon them by Way of Excise. These have little or no Estates to be saved or
lost, and those that have great Estates safe and secure from Danger, are
thereby eased of their Taxes, though much better able to pay them.

It is well known, that the Fishery and Lumber Trade is all that this Country
has of its own Produce to trade and purchase Rum, Salt, Molasses, Cotton,
Sugar, Wine and other Necessaries, from all parts of the World where we can
Trade; and if those who labor in Peril of their Lives, and procure those very
Things necessary to carry on our Trade and Merchandise, and procure Rum, etc.
have no Liberty to make free Use of what comes by their own painful Labor and
Care; they are in worse Condition than were the Oxen in old Times, whose Mouths
were not to be muzzel'd when they tread out the Corn. -- All their doleful
Circumstances claim Pity and Compassion: And if instead of taking any Excise of
these poor People in the Frontiers and Fishery for the Rum they drink, by an
Excise upon Cider and Malt, there should be a Soldiers Allowance of Rum and
some other Bounty given to each of them, to encourage them and quicken their
slow Motions toward their Settlements and Fishery, this would be more
profitable for the Country than this strange sort of Excise. The Frontiers
would be sooner settled strong and defenceable, and be a Wall to all the inland
Parts of the Country, and they within safely raise Supply for the Fishery,
which would be of great Service to all in every State and Condition in the
Country, much more than this Excise will ever be. --

But here I am aware of an Objection, viz. That Cider and Malt is their own
Produce. Answer, so is Rum as much the Fishermen and Lumber Men's Work and
Produce as that is of the others, and is as much the Blood of these Men who
venture their Lives in Jeopardy for it, as the Water of the Well of Bethlehem
was the Blood of David's three mighty Men, and should these now pay Excise to
favor those who never knew Danger?

Taxes for the Support of Government is the best Money we lay out, whatever any
may think of it; it is necessary next to Life itself, for without Government
Life would be but a Burden; it is a just Debt due from every one that lives in
and has the Benefit and Protection of the Government, in Proportion to their
Substance kept and secured to them by it; and to take from the poor and needy
to ease those who are able and ought to pay it, it is not equal.

The Fish and Lumber cannot be all used here, but is sent to the West India
Islands, and part of the Rum purchased by these Commodities is sent to
Virginia, Carolina, and other Places, to procure Corn and Pork, to enable them
to go on with their Labors and Fishery, or it must cease, for this Country
cannot supply them with all Things necessary.

The Eastern Frontiers, more than a hundred Miles in length by the Sea (is all
that the Province has now to defend) not one Town in it but what lies exposed
both to the Sea and Land Rovers, has been the Seat of War in all Times of War
ever since New England was first settled; every Town except three have been
several Times wholly broken up and destroyed, and laid Waste many Years, and
those three have had but a miserable Life; sometimes one part of a Town
destroyed by the Indians, and sometimes another part of the same, and this was
the Case with all the three, always in Fear and in Danger; they could not
improve their Lands: Never was any Town in the Country able to raise sufficient
Provision for their own Inhabitants, by reason of their continual Troubles:
Their Dependence has been and still is in almost every Town in the Country for
their Victuals and Clothes to be procured by their Lumber and Fishery, both
which for some Years past have failed and come short of a sufficiency: They
have not had Times of Peace sufficient to raise Orchards and Fruit Trees: In a
few Years of War their deserted Fields are grown over with Bushes, and upon
resettling requires new fencing and clearing, and Time to bring it fit to till.
-- They need some Cordial to comfort them in their Labors, which their Lands
will not produce. They are glad of poor Food, and drink Water without any Thing
else. -- Then is there any Sin in the necessary and temperate Use of Rum? Must
these be denied the use of a little Rum, the Fruit of their own Labor, or pay
Excise for it, because others have no need of it, but live without it better
than these can with it? -- Does it hurt any Body for these to have a little
such Spirits, which the Country think necessary to allow Soldiers in their
Service? -- What Injury is it to those who use little or no Rum themselves, if
these at their own Cost do use some?

An Excise upon Cider and Malt would raise more Money than this, and as I
conceive would be a much better way, for those best able would pay it. -- As to
the Method of collecting this new Sort of Excise, several have written their
Thoughts, take mine also. Concerning the Behavior of the Deputy Excise-Man
toward several sorts of Persons, who must submit to be examined and sworn, as
the Excise-Man or his Deputy pleases, he can exact or dispense with the Oath;
he is at Liberty, and those subjected to his Authority are the Honorable
Counselors, the Judges and Magistrates of the Land, the Gentleman Yeoman and
Tradesman, every Degree, Office and Calling (except a few Clergymen) Women also
must endure a strict Examination, and perhaps answer to very impertinent
Questions, or the unmannerly Deputy will be affronted.

May it not be compared to Popish Auricular Confession, or perhaps worse in
some respects? for whether they confess their Sins or not, they are like to
suffer severe Penance. A poor laboring Man that in the Course of the Year has
had eight or ten Bottles or Pints of Rum, more or less, perhaps given to him by
his Employers after faithful Service, to make merry, keeps no Account, nor does
he know how to keep any, nor think it necessary, or it may be neglects it, and
forgets whether he had half of it from a Person licenced or not; he comsumes it
in his Family, don't expect to be called to Account for it, but finds himself
mistaken; when the Excise Man's Deputy comes, if he likes the poor Man's Wife,
he will not like his Account, will not agree with him nor acquit him; it may be
the Man cannot swear to any Account; his Excise perhaps might amount to One
Shilling, Lawful Money, and no more, yet he is threatened with the Penalty of
Ten Pounds, that is L 75. old Tenor, which is, it may be, more than such a Man
can get in Silver Money for his Labor in seven Years, and to pay that Sum
would break up and destroy the Man and his Family. Ten Pounds, Lawful Money, is
the Penalty, no Chancery in the Matter; none can remit the Fine but the Deputy
Exciseman; be this Man never so poor or innocent, he don't swear, and it is the
Pleasure of the Exciseman's Deputy that he shall be prosecuted, who is not
worth the Money, nor is he ever like to be able to pay it; the Cost of making
any Defense will ruin him, to Prison he must go, and feed the Jailer, though he
starves himself; his Wife and Children have nothing to eat but his daily
Earnings, Partners with him in his Sin in consuming the Bottle of Rum. --
Terrified at the Apprehension of his being taken from them, they find the
Deputy Exciseman inexorable, and are almost driven to Despair. -- Though the
General Court did not know who would be the Man, they have made Law enough for
him to manage and triumph (not as they expected) but as he pleases. -- Then if
he in his abundant Lenity shall after much threatening, signify that the poor
Man may be excused from a Prosecution, and from paying the Fine upon Terms he
offers, to save the Man and his Family from ruin, the poor Woman, who always
intended Honesty, and now had rather continue so than otherwise; yet, to
prevent what she feared would be a worse Evil, consents or submits to sacrifice
her Virtue to the letcherous Humor of a brawny Deputy-Exciseman.

This is no uncharitable Surmise, but natural to suppose; and I am fully of
Opinion, that if this Bill passes the Seal of the Province, there will be many
Instances of this Kind in Town and Country, to the great Disturbance of both.

This Act as I apprehend it, is big with many arbitrary Powers, Authorities and
Advantages unwarily (not designedly) given to Persons who the Legislators know
not, nor how they will use their Authority; the vilest of Men may be
recommended, and obtain that Office too late to be remedied, and so this Act
may eventually put a Sword into the Hand of a Rogue, to destroy the Poor, and
he will doubtless make Use of it.

No Courts of Judicature have any dispencing Power like this of the Exciseman.
-- They are bound to do Justice according to the Laws. They may not say, this
innocent Person shall be punished, and that guilty Person go free: But all this
at the absolute Will and Pleasure of a Deputy Exciseman may be done, perhaps by
such a Fellow as caused the Insurrection called Wat Tyler's Rebellion, which
cost many thousand Persons Lives.

The Governor's discerning Eye, and fatherly Care of the Province, in not
passing this Act, is very conspicuous, and ought never to be forgotten: It is
having Compassion on this People; -- saving them with Fear, pulling them out of
the Fire. -- It is to be hoped, as he had Wisdom to foresee the evil
Consequences of it, and Justice with Compassion to stay this Act from taking
Effect, that he will still continue his good Will and fatherly Kindness toward
the Country, and finally to put a stop to this Act; in doing of which, he will,
as I imagine, prevent many Evils that otherwise would unavoidably follow. --

As the Honorable House of Representatives has published part of the Excise
Bill, on Purpose that the Minds of the Inhabitants of the Province concerning
it may be known; it is supposed that they expect and desire such Persons as do
not like the Bill, to let them know their Thoughts about it with freedom:
Nothing herein is meant or intended to give Offense to the House, or to any
particular Person, but to show the Opinion of the Writer, which is called for,
(however differing from others) it is here published, and he hopes will be
favorably interpreted; and that if any Excise be granted, it may not extend to
private Families, and that those poor Persons in the Frontiers and Fishery may
be excused from paying any; -- encouraged in their Business; -- and some better
Method found for collecting the Excise that may be granted; -- which is humbly
submitted by their Advocate. --


