A Message from His Excellency ARTHUR DOBBS, Esquire Captain General, and Governor
in Chief, in and over his Majesty's Province of North Carolina;
To the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, held at Newb^rn, the Twelfth Day of December, 1754.
Gentlemen of his Majesty's Council, Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the
Assembly,
HAVING in my Speech to you at your Meeting, told you that I should, in a more
ample Manner, lay before you the Grand Plan of France, to ru^n and distress all
the British Colonies on this Continent; I take the earliest Opportunity of
laying their wicked and enslaving Scheme before you, that you may see the
Necessity there is of granting a reasonable and immediate Supply, and entering
into a Plan of Union with all the British Colonies, for our mutual future
Defense:

The French, ever active and ambitious, under the insatiable and rapacious
House of Bourbon, whose Ministers having destroyed the Gallic Liberties by the
establishing an arbitrary Power in the King alone, have, for near Two
Centuries, laid a Plan for enslaving Europe, by ruining the Liberties of the
Germanick Body, and Protestant Interest of Europe: Their first Attempt was to
ruin the House of Austria, by playing the Germanick Body against their Head,
and raising themselves upon its Ruin; and made Use of the Germanick Protestant
Powers for that Purpose, when, at the same Time, they were ruining the
Protestents in France, and depriving the French of their Liberties; whilst they
were extending their Limits, at the Expense of Germany, and the Spanish Branch
of the House of Austria; and by that Means had forced the House of Sp^^n, for
the Sake of Peace, to intermarry with the House of Bourbon, upon their Solemn
Renunciation of their Right of Succession to the Spanish Monarchy: That fatal
Match has been the Cause of the late expensive Wars, and has endangered the
Loss of the Liberties of Europe; for by the Gallic Intrigues, they have
est^blished a younger Branch of the House of Bourbon, to govern the Spanish
Monarchy; which by its Pretention to, and Possession of, above half of America,
which they claim as their Right only by a Papal Donation, have acquired a
Dominion more extensive and rich than any Empire ever known on the Globe: Thus
France, from a Powerful Enemy, have made the Spanish Monarchy a confirmed and
potent Ally, with some Hopes, I fear too well grounded, of its being sooner or
later united to the Gallic Monarchy.

But the French, after Two long and bloody Wars, having been obstructed in
their Plan of aggrandizing themselves in Europe, by sailing in their Attempt of
ruining the House of Austria, by the Prudence, Magnanimity, and steady Conduct
of our most gracious King, the Father of his People, who, supported by the
Courage, Wealth, and Naval Power of the British Empire, by powerfully
supporting and assis^ing his Allies, has defeated the Gallic future Schemes in
Europe: The French, mad at their Disappointment, finding that the British
Liberties and Protestant Interest are secure under his Majesty's Government,
and con^irmed by the Protestant Succession in his illustrious House; and that
Britain cannot be conquered or reduced but by ruining its Commerce, and with it
our Naval Power, have changed their System, and have laid a Plan to ruin the
British Commerce, by confining, invading, and conquering all our American
Colonies; by first attempti^g the Colonies on the Continent; ^or by securing
^he Fisheries, and Naval Stores of America, they would in^rease their Mar^^,
and ruin the Commerce, and with it the Naval Power of Britain; and then they
would divide America with the Spaniards, and the whole would center in the
^ouse of B^urbon; for then, by the Assistance of France, Portugal must fall an
easy Prey to the Power of Spain, and the (...) would stipulate to have the
Brazil^, Africa, and India, yielded to them as the elder Branch of the House of
Bourbon* and then the Wealth and Power of Britain being reduced, all the
Powers-of Europe, though united, could not withstand the united Power and Wealth
of the House of Bourbon; it being demonstrable, that those who have the Wealth,
Power, and Commerce of America, Africa, and the Indies, must be Masters of the
Liberties of Europe.

The Gallic Branch of the House of Bourbon, distinguished of late for their
worse than punic Faith, have, for at least a Century, never ended one War, but
with a View to extend their Power and Dominions in Time of Peace, by Force or
Intrigues, and to prepare for another War; and think it no Crime to invade or
incroach upon their Neighbors, who obstruct their Schemes, in profound Peace,
thinking themselves not bound by the most solemn Treaties, if they prevent
their aggrandizing their Empire.

This has been very notorious formerly in Europe, but their Schemes proving
abortive there, they have of late prosecuted their Plan in America: Have they
not, contrary to the most solemn Treaties, deprived us of the greatest and best
Part of Nova Scotia, to the Westward of the Bay of Fundi? Erected Forts at
Chine^^o, to confine us within the Peninsula? and made another, and are forming
a Settlement on the River of St. John's, to ruin the Trade of New England, and
the Northern Colonies, by their Privateers in the next War, when we shall be
couped up by their Shipping there, and at Louisburg? Have not they by their
hellish Missionaries, spirited up all their Indian Allies to massacre and make
Depredations, not only in Nova Scotia, but against all our Northern Colonies?
Have they not erected a Fort at Crown-point, to distress and con^ine our
Colonies of New England, and New York, on Lands which are the undoubted Right
of his Majesty? Have they not erected a Fort at Niagara, upon the Lands of the
Six Nations, our acknowleged and declared Allies by the Treaty of Utrecht? Have
they not laid a Claim to, and er^cten Forts upon his Majesty's Lands on the
back of Virginia, and pretend a Right to all the Lands beyond the Mountains, as
far as the Mississippi? Have they not, contrary to the Right of Treaties,
deprived us of the Indian Trade, and seized our Traders and all their Goods, in
Time of pro^ound Peace? Have not they privately sent over and-increased their
Forces, from Time to Time, both in Louisiana, and Canada? And have not they
sent Forces from Louisiana, to erect a Fort on the Entrance of the Ouabach, or
River of St. Jerome, into the Ohio? Are not these en^rmous Invasions and
Encroachments in Time of Peace? Are not they gaining all the Indian Nations,
intercepting and depriving us of our Indian Allies, and daily instigating their
Allies to scalp, massacre, and destroy our Settlers: These are all Facts too
notorious and recent to be denied; and must naturally discover to us the whole
Plan and Scheme laid by the French to confine, conquer, and enslave all our
Colonies.

A Scheme grand in its Extent, romantic in Appearance, and even beyond the
Power of France to execute, although the Crown has an absolute Power over all the
Private Pur^es of his Subjects, when he has a Call for them; provided the
Colonies exert their native Force immediately, and repel them to their
inhospitable cold Colony of Canada, and confine them to the hot Sands of
Louisiana. The Plan that they have laid, is no less than immediately to con^ine
our Colonies betwixt the Mountains and the Eastern Ocean, by erecting Forts
from Canada to Louisiana, upon the Ohio, and Principal Rivers betwixt the Two
Colonies, ^ixing strong Garrisons in them, and so forming a Chai^ for above
^000 Miles to prevent our corresponding or trading with our Indian Allies. When
that is done; and they have, by Menaces, or by their hellish Jesuitical
Missionaries, made Proselytes of them, not to the true Christian Religion*
^ounded on Peace, Benignity, and Brotherly Love, but to the Pomps and outward
Trappings of the Popish Hierarchy and Superstition; and have inspired an
enthusiastic. Fury into them against Protestants, whom they call Heretics,
making it meritorous in them to massacre and destroy them, upon which they
assure them their future Happiness depends; then they propose proc^eding
further, and to seize and secure all the Passes on the Mountains* and head the
(...) against all our Colonies, and force us to become tributary, or to submit
to the arbit^ary Government of France, and become th^^^ Slaves, or be massacred
by them and their Indians, or be forced out of our Religion, Liberties, and
Properties; a fatal Dilemma, should they execute their Scheme!

This Scheme, hatched in ^ell, and suppo^ted by the Court of Rome, so
iniquitous and unlikely to be brought to Perfection, could never be adopted by
the Court of France, if they were not pre-possessed that the British Colonies
were unwilling, or incapable of uniting and exerting their Force; imagining,
(for which they have some G^ounds,) that the several Colonies are like a Rope
of Sand, each guided by selfish partial Views; and that each Planter is more
wedded to his own private Gain, than to defend the Rights of his Community, or
of the Neighboring Colonies, and will not part with a Share of his Wealth, to
secure the Remainder; imagining, that he will be the last that shall suffer, or
vainly expecting, that Britain can and will be at the whole Expense, and let
them indolently look on; so that before they can be brought to act, the French
will have formed the Chain, and gain their Ends: They also consider the
military Genius of the French Gentry, who are al^ educated with a View to Pomp
and Power, and their whole Thoughts are turned to support the Glory of the
Grand Monarque, and therefore are never easy in Time of Peace, but always
forming Projects for aggrandizing France by the next War; so that this
villainous Opinion they have of the British Planters in the Colonies, and the
enthusiastic Spirit of their military Gentry, induce the French Ministry to
undertake Schemes beyond their Power to execute.

If then we give the French Time to execute the Scheme they have begun, the
Liberties, Properties, and Protestant Religion in these Colonies, will be
unavoidably lost.

How miserable must be the Condition then of all our Colonies, when con^ined
within the Mountains, deprived of all the Inland Trade the Continent, and the
Indians, from being our faithful Allies, obliged to become our inveterate
Enemies; drove by them from the Mountains toward the Sea Coast, our Sea Coast
attacked by flying French Squadr^^s, and Privateers: In this Situation we must
submit to be Slaves to France, become their hewers of Wood, and drawers of
Water, suppo^ting them with most enormous Taxes.

God Almighty, who by his Providence under the Conduct of our Messiah, has, in
many remarkable Instances, defeated all Popish Schemes, when the Protestant
Interest and Liberties of Britain seemed to be at the Brink of Ruin: Our
Messiah, who is ever a beneficent Guardian to his true Protestant Church,
founded on Justice, Humanity, and social Love, has now put it into our Power
to make their whole Scheme abortive; if we exert our whole Native Force without
loss of Time, by in^atuating their Councils, and permitting them to discover
and enter upon the Execution of their Plan, before they are prepared and
strengthened by a suf^icient Force from France; it being evident at present,
that we out-number the (...) Colonies upon this Continent by above Forty to
One, and are yet strengthened with many brave Indian Allies; so that we vastly
exceed both in Wealth and Number all the French upon the Continent, or those
they can support, if sent from France, in their present inhospitable Colonies.

Great Britain, which has ^ormed and nursed up these Colonies from their
In^ancy to a State of Manhood, and has greatly increased their Numbers and
Wealth, by protecting them hitherto, and sending or pe^mitting many British
Families to come and s^ttle in their Colonies; and who, by their mild free
Government, have encouraged many ^oreign Protestants to come over and settle
and increase their Numbers; and though they are (...) with Debts and enormous,
though necessary, Taxes; has not only protected these Colonies, but indulged
them in paying a small Quit-Rent, and the easiest Taxes ^pent in their own
Support,) of any civilized Nation on the Globe. Whilst Britain, and every State
in Europe, are loaded with Taxes, and most of the trading Nations with heavy
Debt^; whilst Britain is struggling under th^se Difficulties, although the
Parliament has a Pow^^ of t^xing the Coloni^^ ^or their own Support, by taking
off the Pr^miums they pay us ^or some of our Export, and laying on Duties upon
what we export to Britain, or elsewhere; yet his M^j^s^y, in R^gard to his
^aithful Colonies, is only desirous that they should unite and form a Soci^ty
amongst themselves, to raise a proper and adequate Quota or Fund for th^^r
mut^^l Support and De^^nce, that the united Force of the Colonies may act
together and ^ave it^ (...) Weight; and l^aves it to the Colonies, to consider
o^ the most ^quitable and proper M^thod of rai^ing the (...) which are
necessary ^or the Support of his Government, their own Peace and Safety; and a
reasonable Sum from each of the Colonies to be laid up as a Fund, to support
and increase our Indian Allie^, and to prevent all Foreign Invasions and
Encroachments: And if France should still go on with their romantic Scheme,
when they see we shall exert our whole Native Force, and should pour in Troops
from France to enslave us, then his Majesty will exert his Power, and maintain
the Rights of Britain by their Naval Power, and enable the Colonies to support
their just Rights and Properties.

In this critical Situation, let us, his Majesty's faithful Subjects of the
Colony of North Carolina, show that we are true Sons of Britain, whose
Ancestors have been ever famous for de^ending their valuable Religion, and
Liberties; and that we are still inspired with the same Spirit of Liberty, and
are determined to support our Religious and Civil Rights, and hand them down to
our Posterity: Let us show, that though we are one of the ^atest (...) Colonies,
and scarcely arrived at the State of Manhood that our neighboring C^loni^s
have attained to, either in Wealth or Number, yet that we are still ready to
exert our Power, and grant an immediate Supply to assist in the General Defense
of the Colonie^; and that as we have already shown a good Example, so we shall
continue to be a la^dable Precedent to the rest of the more opulent Colonies;
and instead of ent^ring into Private Party Quarrels, as some have done, or
postponing or putting off proper Supplies, as some others have done, by an
ill-judged Economy, or out of a penurious selfish Consideration, as some
Proprietary and Charter Colonies have done, vainly imagining that the Danger is
at a Distance, and that they will leave the Brunt of it to others; and that
Britain, loaded with Debts and Taxes, will defend them, and indulge them in
living without Taxes, or assisting in the General Defense of the Colonies. Let
us then cheerfully give what is reasonable and proper for us, by an immediate
Supply, as well knowing that a moderate Sum now granted, will go farther in
securing our Rights and Properties, than Ten Times as much if longer delayed:
Let us then inspire the other Colonies with an equal Fire to maintain their
Religion and Liberties, and to preserve the Friendship, and de^end the Rights
of our Indian Allies. This, as grateful Men, we owe to them, for the Happiness
we enjoy in possessing these fine Climates and rich Land^ of America, which was
once theirs, either by Possession or Conquest; this we owe to them, as free Men
and true Christians, to promote their Happiness, and make them Parta^^^^ of our
happy Constitution, and extending it th^o' the Continent, by ^ndeavouring to
civilize and incorp^^ate with them, and to lay a Foundation for their becoming
Christians; and this true Christian Zeal will heap Blessings upon all our
Colonies and our Posterity.

Let us then behave like generous brave Men and true Christians; for a little
while con^ine our Appetites and Luxuries, and part with a reasonable Part of
our Wealth to preserve the Remainder, and our happy Constitution in Church and
State, to our latest Posterity; this will show the Gallic Monarch, and his
insatiable Ministry, that we are not to be intimidated or to be bullied out of
our Rights, and that if he should insist upon his romantic Scheme of
surrounding, confining, and enslaving us, that we will jointly and unanimously
support our valuable Religion, Liberties, and Properties, with our Lives and
Fortunes; and that whilst we b^have like brave Men, and true Christians, we are
sure of the Protection of God our Messiah, and that we shall not only be happy
i^ ^his World, b^t to endless Ages.


