A TREATISE UPON Husbandry or Planting.

By William Belgrove. A regular bred, and long experienced Planter, Of the
Island of Barbados.

And may be of great Use to the Planters of all the West India Islands.

BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND, Printed by D. FOUL in Ann-Street, near the Town-Dock.
1755.

A Treatise Upon Husbandry or Planting in BARBADOS.
IT is an obvious Remark, that the Profits arising from Husbandry are always
proportionate to the Care and Attention we give it. And as it is acknowledged
by all that a Plantation, seasonably cultivated in this Island, will yield
great Profits, if judiciously managed; which, if not strictly attended to,
will, on Account of the Variety of Accidents, to which it is by its Nature
subject, soon become a Charge and Debtor to the Owner; it would be superfluous
and unnecessary to urge the Necessity, or enumerate the Advantages, of a
constant Attention to the Management of a Plantation.

What I now propose in this little Treatise is, First, To recommend some Rules
and Methods by which I conceive a Plantation may be managed to the greatest
Advantage. And those will be calculated particularly for the Management of one
of five hundred Acres of Land.

Secondly, I shall recommend what Buildings are proper, what Number of Negroes
is sufficient and what Stock of different Sorts is required to work up to the
height an Estate of that Size: To which I shall add some Observations upon, and
some Directions for, the making of Rum and the improvement of Sugar.

Lastly, I shall fix the Value of the Estate after it is completely built and
stocked, and calculate the annual Expenses of it. -- And if any Thing that I
shall offer on this Subject shall in the least contribute to the Benefit of
Masters or the Improvement of Managers, my Design will be answered. If it
should be thought that I have not succeeded, I hope the Candor of my Readers
will restrain their Censures and Contempt of these my well meant Endeavors: I
further hope they will in such Case be rather inclined to lend their Assistance
to a Work which may prove serviceable to the Public. A consideration which has
induced me to publish these plain Observations which were at first made for my
own Amusement and Improvement. I shall now begin to show what I think is the
best Method of preparing the Land for Canes, and of planting and reaping a
Crop; for which End I shall divide the Business of the Year, and prescribe what
is proper to be done in each Month.

Of Lineing and Holeing the Land for Canes.
AN Acre of Land contains 43560 Feet. Now to know the Number of Holes that will
be contained in an Acre at any certain Distance which you design to line at,
you must divide the Number of Feet in an Acre by the Number of Feet that will
be contained in one Hole, Bank and Distance; and your Quotient will give you
the Number of Holes in the Acre at that lineing. As for Example, if you line at
five Feet one way, and three and half Feet across, you will have in one Hole,
Bank and Distance seventeen Feet and half, which make your Divisor, and the
Number of Feet in the Acre, your Dividend, your Quotient will give you the
Number of Holes: which you will find it is necessary to know to be enabled to
proportion your Dung; by this Method you will know to a Certainty the Quantity
of Dung you will require, not only for one Field, but for the whole Crop you
purpose to plant; without which Adjustment you cannot be regular in your Dung.

Examples of Lineing, ( viz.) Holes.
At 5 and 3 Feet you will have 17 square 2489 5 and 3 Feet you will have 15 square
2904 4 and 3 Feet you will have 15 square 2765 4 and 3 Feet you will have 13 square
3226 4 and 4 Feet you will have 16 square 2722 4 and 3 Feet you will have 14 square
3111 4 and 3 Feet you will have 12 square 3630

These are the Distances at which we generally line the Land; except it be in a
very poor Soil, where the Canes do not sucker and bunch by an After-spring: In
such places we line closer; for the Quality of the Soil should govern the
Distance of Holeing. -- The Distance I would recommend as most proper to hole
at in most Parts of the Island is four Feet every Way. By holeing at this
Distance you turn up and manure more of the Soil, and also give the Canes the
Benefit of Air, which is as necessary to Vegetation as Heat or Moisture. But
what I do most earnestly recommend is to turn up all the Land you design to
plant at least two Months before you hole it. If it be turned up six or eight
Inches, and lie that Time before it be holed, you will never fail of a vigorous
Spring -- If it be objected that this Method is attended with too great Labor,
and an expense of Time, I answer, that he who treats his Land in this Manner,
so effectually destroys all the Weeds, (except it be the invincible Nut-Grass,)
and so mellows the Land, that the Time afterward saved in those two Articles,
is at least equal to that spent in turning it up.

As to Dung, the Article upon which the success of a Crop almost entirely
depends, it is I think impossible to prescribe any particular Rule for the
making it: However so far as I am able to explain my own Method, I will.

When a set of Pens is fixed, I think it proper at the same Time, to throw up
as much Mould as will be sufficient to serve the whole Set. And I advise every
one most carefully to avoid the use of poor and hungry Mould. He who can supply
himself from Gulleys or Mould-Holes, will find that the Time and Trouble it
costs him to make his Dung with Mould gathered from such Places, will be very
inconsiderable, with respect to the great Benefits he may expect to reap
therefrom. It has been a Custom of long standing, to mould Pens once every
Fortnight; the Stratum of Mould, four Inches, that of Trash, when close
trodden, two Inches.

I have already given my Opinion of the Mould most proper to be used for Dung:
to which I shall add, that only such a Quantity should be laid upon the Pens,
as is just sufficient to retain the Tincture, which it may be thought to
receive from the Time of one Moulding to the next.

For whatever may be thought of Quantity, I am of Opinion, that he who makes
the best, makes the most Dung. -- As to Trash, which is used by many, I do
entirely exclude it, raw and unprepared; except what is sufficient to preserve
the Cattle from Mud and Mire in the wet Seasons. -- The Litter from the Stable,
if a sufficient Number of Horses be kept on an Estate, will be always enough
for the Pens; provided it be properly managed. -- This is an Article, on which
much might be said: But as Men differ widely in their Opinions concerning the
use of it, I shall not prescribe what Time it ought to lie in the Stable before
it be cleaned out, or how it should be afterward applied.

My own Opinion is, that the longer it lies together in the Stable, the more it
contributes to the Improvement of the Dung; provided when it be taken from the
Stable, it be immediately thrown upon the Pens and covered with Mould: It being
then hot, and that Heat confined by the Mould that is thrown over it, it
ferments and divides, and separates the Mould; and thereby produces good Dung.
While I am speaking upon Dung, I must not neglect strenuously to recommend the
turning of it as often as it is convenient and consistent with other Business.

In order to know how many Head of Cattle a Pen of any Size requires, allowing
ten square Feet to every Beast, you must multiply one Square by the other. As
for Example.

A Pen of 30 Feet square, 9 Head of Cattle. A Pen of 40 Feet square, 16 Head of
Cattle. A Pen of 50 Feet square, 25 Head of Cattle. A Pen of 60 Feet square, 36
Head of Cattle.

And so continue the Proportion for a Pen of any Size: And to know the Number
of square Feet of Dung any Heap contains, you must multiply the Squares
together, which Product multiply by the Thickness, and that gives you the
Number of solid Feet of Dung: As for Example.

A Pen of 20 Feet square and 2 Feet thick, is 800 solid Feet, -- which when
well cured and digested will weigh about 80 Pounds. But 50 or 60 Pounds of good
Dung may be sufficient for each Hole.

The general Allowance at present, is a square or solid Foot of Dung to each
Hole, which ought to be well cured and digested, and laid one half in the
bottom of the Holes, and the other on the Plants. If the Land is most, and the
Canes generally bunch well, two or three good Plants will be sufficient; for it
often happens, by putting in too many Plants, the Canes are withy and yield
little: but in late or unseasonable Planting, many Plants should be used. By
knowing the Number of Feet in a heap of Dung, and the Number of Holes in an
Acre of Land, we become enabled to calculate our Dung for that Number of Acres
we design to make our Crop consist of.

Not more than one fourth of the Cane Land should be annually planted in Canes.
Now in order to calculate your Dung for the Crop, you are first to find out the
Number of Holes that each Piece of Land will contain, according to the Distance
you line at; This will inform you what Number of Pens, and of what Dimensions,
the Piece will require; allowing a Foot of Dung to each Hole.

Observe, to situate your Dung-Heaps most convenient for the Carriage, as that
is a great Article of the Labor, both in making the Dung, and throwing it to
the Holes, for you are to avoid making more Dung in one Heap, than will serve
two Acres, least you increase the Labor on your Slaves, who ought to be eased
and encouraged as much as possible. Another Thing by which they are greatly
oppressed is, the planting a greater Number of Acres than the Plantation can
well afford; by which the Cattle are deprived of the grazing they require, and
bad Shifts used every Year to keep up an equal Quantity; which is a vast
Prejudice. A proper Number and Strength of Slaves should always be kept on a
Plantation, and no Dependence had upon hired Labor; which will ocsion many
Disappointments, and forces the Husbandman to do many Things out of Season, by
which he must fail of Success.

As these Particulars are very hurtful to the Owners of Plantations as well as
to the Reputation of the Husbandman, whose Care they are under, those who have
Estates under their Direction should supply them with all necessaries for their
better Improvement.

The want of a sufficient Stock of Cattle and Horses, to make the Dung within
due Time, is attended with many Inconveniences, and a manifest Loss. And I not
only recommend a proper Quantity of those, but a sufficient Strength of
Negroes; whom I would employ on a Work, which though of much Consequence, has
been very little thought of. I mean to provide a Plenty of Meat to feed the
Cattle on the Pens, and to gather as many green Bushes, Vines, etc. as
possible, which with every Thing of the vegetable Kind, will greatly improve
the Dung.

Of dividing the twelve Months of the Year; and appointing the respective
Business for each Month.
January. This Month your Provisions of all sorts being Ripe, break in your
Corn, dig in your Yams, and Eddoes, gather your dry Grain of all Sorts; though
you will have several Gathers of the Pigeon-Pease, etc. after you have reaped
the Corn; If you can avoid it, do not plant the Pigeon-Pease in the Guinea
Cornfieldsd, as that will prevent your grazing your Cattle after you have
gathered your Corn, and which should be done to enable your Cattle to perform
the Labor of your Crop; and besides that Disadvantage, when your Pease Trees
are full of Blossoms in the Month of November, the high Winds then will strike
the Stalks of the Corn against the Boughs of the Pease, and brush off the
Blossoms and young Pease, and in the beginning of January before the Corn is
ripe enough to reap, the same Stalks will strike those Boughs of Pease which
then will be full of dry Grain, and husk them out, thefore they ought if
possible to be separate.

Cut down your Corn Stalks for Fuel, and provide as much as you possibly can
of Brush, etc. for your Stoke-Holes. As your Watchmen are now called in, get
immediately to making Sugar. It is best to avoid grinding Canes on a Saturday:
If many Canes are cut down, and left all Night in the Field, or at the Mill,
they must be carefully watched or well secured, otherwise they will be greatly
stolen. The Fuel should be dry to make the Coppers boil well; and the Stokers
should be engaged to keep regular constant good Fires. The Boilers should be
very diligent in well attending the Coppers, and very well cleaning the Liquor
only of the Filth; and not throw down to the Still-House any Liquor that may be
made into Sugar: And you should never boil after 11 o'Clock at Night at the
latest. -- Skip your Sugar at an equal moderate due Height; and neither Pot it
too hot, or too cold. -- Although your Canes will yield but indifferently in
this Month, you will find it more to your Advantage to meet your Loss at the
beginning of the Crop than at the close of it. Don't let your Cattle run too
long over your Guinea Corn Stumps, because you will want that Supply of Meat for
your Stock which you will require upon finishing the Crop, and thereby be reduced
to assign the too common, which indeed is an idle Reason, for not closing the
Crop: i. e. If I should finish my Crop, the Stock must starve.

February. Keep close to making Sugar, notwithstanding the great Variety you will
meet with; which you must expect according to the Age of the Canes, and the
Soil they grow upon. If you have Showers, be sure to supply your young Canes
with Tops, and fill up your Still Pond with all you design to put in it: And
prepare as much Fuel as you can possibly; and charge round all your Dung Pits,
that you may have nothing to interfere with making of Sugar the whole ensuing
Month. By no Means neglect to weed the young Canes. --

March. This is a good Month for making of Sugar, therefore do nothing else
whilst you can keep at work. You Will discover very little Variation in the
yielding, for the Canes are now in Perfection. If you should have Rain, open
all the Land you design for Indian Corn, Guinea Corn, Yams, and every other
sort of Provisions, as, not the least Opportunity ought to be lost, considering
the great Advantage of moulder'd Land, for all Things; and especially Grain, as
the Vermin will destroy it, if the Land is not moulder'd to give it an
immediate Spring.

April. This Month is equal with the former, for making of Sugar, except that
we expect, and have generally more Showers; therefore go on as is prescribed
above; plant and supply your Plantain Walk. Twenty Acres of Land well kept in a
Plantain Walk, will afford a very considerable Support, as Plantains are as
hearty a Food as Eddoes, and the Plantain Walk may be a Nursery for declining
Slaves, as well as to fatten old Cattle when they are past Labor.

May. This Month the Canes will make good Sugar, except a little dark, as they
will begin to feel the Spring; and will yield pretty well 'till toward the
latter end of it, when you must expect great loss in the yielding, and a weak
dark Sugar, except in some particular Parts of this Island. If you are
prevented by Showers from finishing your Crop, spend that Time in Planting all
your Land that has the Dung made in it, and be careful to plant a large Crop of
Indian Corn, from which you will find great Advantage.

June. If you have been prevented from finishing your Crop the preceding
Month, besure to do it with all convenient Expedition in this, and dig up the
Banks of the Cane Holes, and mould the Indian Corn 'till it is able to bear
holeing through for Canes, and plant and supply every sort of Provisions. Weed
clean all that is planted and growing, and proceed to holeing with your able
Slaves, whilst your others are Weeding and Nursing all the Provisions and
keeping clean all the Guinea Corn that is in open Land, that it may be able to
be^^ a general Cutting to feed your Cattle upon the Pens the greatest Part of
the following Month, which you will be very well able to do, with the Assistance
of the Meat from the Corn Stumps cut down in January, if preserved from Abuse.
Take down your Mill Points, if you have not finished your Crop, and done so
before this Month; for this is a Work that ought not to be deferred.

July. Move your Still-pond Dung where you intend to use it, and you may at
your Leisure carry the remaining Offals of the StillHouse, and lay over it, and
turn all the Dung that is made, that it may be well mouldered and digested; for
no Dung ought to be used before it is thus prepared, if we would guard against
the Blast and the Grub: besides, by such Dung you will secure a regular Spring;
whereas the indifferent Spring which is commonly raised, will be liable to be
prejudiced by the Fermentation of undigested Dung. If you have any Buildings to
repair or erect, or Coppers, etc. to hang, it is best to do it this Month, or
before the wet Season of the Year comes in, for at that Time all Workmen are
very troublesome, especially Masons who take off the Laborers to attend them,
which will interfere with your other Business. -- Besure to keep close to your
Holeing with your able People, as the other Gang may be sufficient to mould
your Pens every Fortnight and carry on your light Labor: by the close of this
Month you ought to have half your Crop holed, and three Fourths of your Dung
made, as you are never to neglect moulding your Dung-Pits of all Sorts that it
may come on in it is Proportion and proper Time, therefore remove now all your
home Dung-Pits of their first Round and repeat in the same Pits, as they should
be made full Twice in a Year, except the Still-pond. This Month you having fed
your Cattle entirely upon the Pens, that Round of Dung must be extremely well
tinctured, therefore out of that round save your Stable Litter for your next
Round of Pens as you must always lay some Stable Litter over each Pen when you
mould them, for your Horse Stable may be enabled to afford it by being well
supplied with dry Trash, and the Horses well fed. A Pit of Stable Dung properly
Molded may be near the Stable, or the Stable Dung thrown on the other Dung
every other Day to raise a Fermentation.

August. Having cleaned all your Provisions and supplied and cut the last Piece
of Guinea-Corn you intend for Seed, and molded up the Stumps, as none are to
be cut after July, lest the Worm take it, your chief Employ is to keep to your
Holeing; some Planters do begin to plant Canes in this Month, but those early
planted Canes seldom make a good white Sugar, nor is it common to have a kind
Spring from their Stumps when cut to supply you with Plants, if you reserve
them for that Purpose. You may have 30 Acres of Land in Pigeon Pease and
Bonavis, as they agree well together in the same Piece. 100 Acres in Guinea
Corn, 50 Acres in Potatoes, planted at different Times to be dug regular before
they spoil, 10 Acres in Yams, 15 Acres in Eddoes, 5 Acres of Casavy, and the 20
Acres of Plantain Walk to maintain the White and Black Families of this
Plantation, which it will do with very little or no Expense from another Market.

September. This Month most People plant Canes in, but I would choose to lay all
the Dung that is properly prepared, into the Cane Holes, and the Land wed very
clean, and to have at least four fifths of the Land for the Crop holed, and
nine tenths of the Dung made, that b^^h may be well mouldered, which will give
and well secure a good strong Spring to be well preserved, which if was as
strictly observed as it necessarily ought, it would avoid that most troublesome
and repeated Labor of supplying, which is too often neglected and unseasonably
done.

October. This Month finish your Holeing, and entirely employ your Time in
planting Canes, and get in at least three fifths of the 100 Acres planted.
People were formerly fond of planting Corn in their young Canes, which if
possible ought to be omitted, as that Corn is certainly of Prejudice to the
Canes, and may be better provided for in the Manner I shall hereafter advise.

November. This is also a fine Month for planting Canes, therefore plant all
you possibly can. Plant Potatoes and all sorts of Pease; move your Pens for the
ensuing Year, and with all Diligence prepare this last Dung which will require
but little Time to lie before it is used; this Dung should be made of rotten
Trash, Stable Litter and the finest Mould, as that Dung cannot have an equal
Time to remain as the former Dung had, which was made in the dry Season.

December. By the middle of this Month the planting of Canes ought to be
entirely finished -- Some Parts of the Island will make more and better Sugar
in seasonable Years from Canes planted in the Months of January, February, and
March, but the most necessary and proper Work to be done in these Months is
certainly the reaping the ripe Crop. Raise your Mill Points, and put all your
Affairs in Order, for you have little to do but to reap your Provisions, as
they are all near ripe at this Time, and is the most proper Employ for the
Slaves, as their Spirits and Flesh must be reduced after the Year's Fatigue of
hard Labor: Weed over all your young Canes, and when I say, mould your Canes,
I would not be understood to draw down the Banks as was the former Practice,
for by that Method, without the greatest Care, the Slaves will draw down so
much Earth as destroys the Succors, therefore dig up the Banks and Distances,
but besure to do it when the Land is very dry, by which Practice you will the more
effectually destroy the Weeds or Grass, and give them the greater Nourishment,
from every small Shower, even the Dews in the Night, will penetrate to their
Advantage. Now you have 100 Acres of Canes well and seasonably planted, and
your Pens in some part of the 50 Acres of Potatoe Pieces which were lately dug
out, as the whole 50 Acres will come into the next Year's 100 Acres (the 10
Acres you dug the Yams out of, and the 15 that the Eddoes were in, put into
Potatoes) and of the 60 Acres that were drawn for Plants, 50 Acres of them will
make up the next Year's ensuing 100. And that other 10 of the 60 may be planted
with Yams: Now this 100 Acres of first Crop Canes is in good Order: And I will
suppose I had 40 Acres of second Crop kept out of the last Year's 100 Acres,
which are now to be broken with the 100 Acres of first Crop, which is to be
reaped in the Manner I shall recommend by the Plantation I shall describe.

A Plantation of five hundred Acres of Land requires, -- A Dwelling House, --
Two WindMills, -- A Boiling-House, -- A DistillingHouse, -- A Curing-House
large enough to contain at least 2500 Pots, -- A Stable to hold thirty Horses,
with a Loft over it for dry Grain, -- A Rum-House, -- An House: for Servants,
-- A Sick-House, -- A proper Room to confine disorderly Negroes, -- A
Storehouse for Salt Provisions, -- A Smith-Shop, -- A Cooper's-Shop, -- A
Trash-House, -- And a Store for English Goods. It requires three hundred
Slaves, -- An hundred and fifty head of Cattle, -- Twenty five Horses, -- Fifty
head of Sheep.

I would choose the Boiling-House to contain eighteen Coppers of three different
Sizes, viz. Three Tatches at each End; two Cleansers to each Side, each to
contain two hundred and twenty five Gallons; and four Clarifiers to each End,
each to contain three hundred Gallons. I proportion them in this Manner,
because if the Person, who stands at the Clarifier does his Duty, there will
not be more than twenty five per Ct. of Filth and aqueous Matter exhausted when
the Liquor is fit to be sent forward to be Strained. --

The Distilling House should have three Stills to contain 900 Gallons of
Liquor, and a Fourth big enough to contain the low Wines produced from the
other three. It will require 48 Vats of three hundred Gallons each, although 36
Vats will employ those Stills twice a Day throughout the Week, as 12 times the
Stills is the content of 36 Vats at 300 Gallons each: But as Liquor requires to
be fallen some short Time before you distill it, and as there are frequent
Variations in the falling, as well as in the yielding of Liquor, though several
Vessels may be set at the same Time, and every Proportion alike: You will not
be able to Distill above 36 Vats per Week; However there is a Necessity to keep
the 48 employed, that you may always be provided with a sufficiency of Liquor
fallen. It will require the Boiling-House to make 300 Pots of Sugar per Week to
employ those Vessels and Stills, for each Pot of Sugar will afford 12 or 13
Gallons of Skimings; but suppose only 12 Gallons per Pot, 12 times 300 is 3600
Gallons of Skimings, which being mixed at a Proportion of 25 per Cent Skimings,
will set the 48 Vats of 300 Gallons each, or the 14400 Gallons of Liquor, or
being mixed at a Proportion of some of the following Receipts will produce a
Gallon of proof Rum to every six Gallons of fermented Liquor, as 2400 Gallons
of Rum is the one sixth Part of 14400 Gallons of that Liquor. I would not be
understood by this Calculation that it is infallible; nor that you are to
expect this Success by being confined to any particular Receipt: for I have
already hinted, that you will meet sundry Variations which will require the
Distillers Attention to watch every Circumstance: for although it has been
calculated that five Gallons of Skimings is equal to one Gallon of Molasses,
yet it is not so throughout every Month, sometimes four, sometimes six, and I
have known eight: which Discovery is to be made from the Quantity of Spirit
extracted: here let me observe, that there is a great Difference between a weak
and a firm bodied Sugar, or Sugar boiled very high, and that which is boiled
very low. I would be understood herein, that when the Crop is finished, and the
Boiling-House and Still-House Journals are fairly adjusted, that then you will
find upon an Average, you will not be short of eight Gallons to a Pot of
Double-clayed Sugar, which yields in the Total 5 Gallons of Molasses, and if
the Skimings from it yields equal to 2 Gallons of Molasses, those Materials
must be sufficient for eight Gallons of Rum, as 8 times 300 is 2400, which
Quantity of Rum may be produced from 14400 Gallons of Liquor set from the
Offals of the 300 Pots of Double-clayed Sugar. It was formerly generally
imagined that there could not be more Rum made from a Pot of Double-clayed
Sugar than five Gallons without Prejudice to the Boiling-House, but this
Mistake is now rectified, and it is allowed that eight Gallous of Rum may with
Care be made from a ten Gallon Pot of Double-clayed Sugar. But you must
strictly attend to the following Regulations (the Liquor that will make a ten
Gallon Pot of Sugar, will afford 12 or 13 Gallons of Skimings, and that Pot
double-clayed will yield 5 Gallons of Molasses, and the Skimings being equal to
2, makes it eight Gallons per Pot.)

Regulations to be observed in the Still-House.
Be careful to cool your Coppers in the Boiling-House with no more Water than
will be sufficient for that Day's Offals of the Number of Pots of Sugar made;
which turn down to your Receiving-Cistern in the Still-House, each separate,
that you may be the better able to adjust the Proportions in your
Mixing-Cisterns, and from thence fill up your fermenting Vats, by which
Practice you will be sure that the Proportions of each Vat are alike, and which
you may set the following Day.

Never throw in your Molasses before you discover the Liquor to ferment, which
it will, within twenty-four Hours, unless your Returns with which it was set,
was too hot; be careful to skim the Liquor constantly, and to let it lay close
covered, at least twenty-four Hours, after it has fallen, before you distill
it; for there is a Fermentation beneath, after it disappears upon the Surface.
Never let a Vessel remain empty while you have Molasses, though you may be
without Skimings, and be sure every Time you empty a Vessel to wash out that
thick Sediment with thin Return-Liquor before you fill it again. It will
require you to have three Return-Cisterns, by which you will always be furnished
with thin cool Returns, and by keeping them as clean, as I have recommended the
Vats to be kept, you will escape that Miscarriage which often happens by thick
Returns.

It is also necessary to have three Receiving Cisterns, one for Water, and the
other two for Skimings, for all thick Matter is a great Obstruction to
Fermentation or Circulation. Therefore if the Liquor (after being proportioned
in the Mixing Vessel) was strained through a course Searge into each fermenting
Vat by laying it over the Vat; it may be done without the least Trouble, and
will totally avoid that evil.

At the beginning of a Crop before you have proper Returns.
Water 40 Equal to 12 per Cent, in order to raise proper Returns; Skimings 60
(Then) Water 20 Returns 40
Water 15 Skimings30
Water 13 Skimings 40
Water 25 Skimings 25
Skimings 32 Molasses 8
Returns 50 Molasses 5
Returns 40 Molasses 7
Returns 40 Molasses 10
14 per Cent. 11 per Cent. 15 per Cent. 15 per Cent.

An ancient Practice was one third of each with 10 per Cent Molasses, and I
have known it succeed very well. You are always to have Regard to the
Difference between Muscovado-Sugar Molasses, and Clay'd-Sugar Molasses, as also
between the firm and the weak Sugar, as well as the high boiled and the low
boiled Sugar. You Will find it necessary to make Trial of all those different
Receipts 'till you discover that which answers best, and which Prudence will
direct your Continuance of. To say any Thing of Mixing without the Skimings
will be quite immaterial, because the Quantity and Quality of Sweets is to be
your Guide, and therefore I shall conclude here. Those various Proportions of
mixing the Liquor have been known to answer at different Times and in different
Vessels, which cannot be wondered at, when we consider what Variety
Distillation affords.

I shall now proceed to make some Remarks upon claying Sugar. A free Sugar
fairly Cleansed, Boiled and Tempered, will be fit to Clay in 12 or 15 Days; but
to judge the better of it, start it out of the Pot, and if the Molasses has
past through of the Pot, return it in the same Position and clay it thus; dig
up the Sugar so deep as to be sure to take out all that Part that is called the
Fountain, which will appear like a Plate of Glue and lies a little below the
Surface of the Sugar, and which if not carefully taken out will obstruct the
Office or Purpose of the Clay; then pound or break your Sugar very fine and
level it very firm, leaving a little Hollow in the Middle or Center of the Pot,
then examine your Clay that it be stiff or Wax like, which you will be able to
discover by the quantity of Water it will require to reduce it to a proper
Pulp, for the more Water your Clay will bear the better, as the Clay is no
other than the Vehicle to retain the Water and to deliver the same gradually
for the Use that the Sugar requires to alter it is Color. Clay that will bear
25 Gallons of Water to 100 With. will always best answer the Purpose, and when it
requires more, then the Use of Bay-Sand is necessary to open the Body of such
Clay, for the Eye alone will never be able to make a sufficient Discovery,
though such Clay is rare to be met with: and the want of true Judgment in the
sort of Clay, and the proper Management of it, oversets in the Curing-House all
the Care, Pains and Judgment that has been used in the BoilingHouse, then the
common and idle Excuse is assigned, (i. e.) the Soil will not make white Sugar.

If your Sugar be a very firm Body, put one Gallon of this Batter to each ten
Gallon Pot the first Claying, which may lie on ten Days, and ten Days after
that, second Clay it with six Pints of the like Batter, but if your Sugar be
weak or low Boiled, put less in Quantity, and make the Batter thicker and so in
Proportion to a Pot of any Size. You must always observe to dry your Clay
extremely well in the Sun before you weigh and mix it. --

I shall proceed to say something in Relation to melting down or improving
Sugar from a coarse Stock.

Take 1000 Weight of the Bottoms of Clayed Sugar well dried in the Sun, to
which add one third of that Weight of white Limewater, all which mix in the
Copper 'till it is well incorporated, then take one Gallon and a half of Blood
(of your Cattle) and divide it into three equal Parts, and to each Part add
half a Gallon of white Limewater, with each of which raise a Scum, by a very
gentle Fire, which as soon as you observe to begin to break, draw back your
Fire, and let it remain half an Hour to gather up the Scum which the Use of the
Fire will raise, and the quality of the Blood will close, which Scum take off
with a steady Hand, left you sink that Filth to the Bottom, from whence it will
not ascend; and so continue to repeat the Use of the Blood with which you will
raise many Scums: in like Manner act with 100 Eggs, only the Whites, ten each
Time, with some Limewater, which will raise many Scums and clear the Syrrup
off that reddish Color the Blood may have given it; then keep up a strong
Fire, and well work your Liquor by brewing and beating it with the Skimmer, to
raise the Scum, which, with a nimble light Hand will soon procure a fine
Transparent Syrrup, then strain it into your Tatch and Boil it off with the
quickest Fire, observing to make three Skips of it, the first of a very low
Muscovado Height, the second a little higher, and the third a full Height, all
which mix well in your Cooler by stirring and brewing, and Pot it hot enough to
admit of a third Stirring in the Pots; your Pots must be very clean as well as
dry. -- In three or four Days you may clay it according to the Directions given
in the foregoing to clay Sugar, and in eight Days you may second Clay it
according to the former Prescriptions.

To Refine the foregoing Stock you may do it thus:
Take any Quantity of it, to which add of the of its Weight in fair Water, and
well mix and incorporate it, then make Use of 100 or more Eggs in raising many
Scums as before prescribed, and with all Diligence and Caution attend to your
Fire, that it may be timely drawn back, and a proper Time given to gather up
the Scum and Filth, and so continue to repeat until you have used all the Eggs,
then well cleanse your Syrrup and strain it into the Tatches and then boil it
to a low Muscovado Height, it will require great exactness, left it run too
high, for that Error is without Remedy, Pot it, Stir and Clay it as before
advised.

I would advise this Plantation of 500 Acres to be laid off by Survey in ten
Acre-Fields, and that the Cane-Fields, etc. may be formed in Chequer Order,
that it may be convenient to carry the Trash to the Neighboring Pieces to make
Dung, and the Plants to plant it; and of the 500 Acres you will have 100 Acres
every Year in first Crop, and as you will have 150 head of Cattle, 25 Horses and
50 head of Sheep: this Stock with the Still-Pond will be sufficient Dung for
the 100 Acres, which being so seasonably Planted, and with such a Proportion of
Tincture, you may reasonably expect a very good Produce from the second Crop,
40 Acres of which you are to reserve for Sugar Annually: All the rest of the
Plantation must be in Provisions, Pastures, Wood for Negro Houses (which ought
to be kept in good Order, as more Negroes dye for want of proper Houses than by
other Means) Cattle Pens, Yards, and Commons. I would always have 50 Acres of
Potatoes planted at different Times, as they are a ready Food for Human and
animal Creatures, and greatly improve the Land, and exclusive of those
Considerations they will save you that great Expense of planting Indian Corn in
the young Canes called the November Crop, which is extremely injurious to those
Canes as Experience has proved; for such a Field of Canes wherein a fine
November Crop of Corn has been reaped, have continued to show a regular
Distinction in each Row until those Canes have been cut to make Sugar, and that
Discovery could be made at a very distant Prospect from the Field.

I would recommend instead of moulding your young Canes according to the former
Custom, to dig up the intermediate Spaces, such as the Banks and Distances, and
to perform it always when the Earth is very dry, and repeat this frequently at
the Distance of ten or fifteen Days until you have brought all the hard Lumps
of Earth into a fine Mould, through which all Moisture will constantly
penetrate to the Roots of the Canes; by this Husbandry it may be reasonable to
expect near fifty Pots per Acre, which with 40 Acres of second Crop Canes we
may reasonably hope, will yield five Thousand Pots per Annum; the remaining
sixty Acres of second Crop Canes you must keep very clean to raise you a
Sufficiency of Plants to plant the ensuing 100 Acres. Prudence will direct you
Yearly to exchange your Cane Pieces, whereby the whole 100 Acres will become
changed every fourth Year; but be sure to observe and keep up the Figure of
your Husbandry in a regular Chequer Order to manifest your Abilities in that
Office as well as your Discretion, by contracting the Labor of the Husbandry,
and by this continual Exchange of your Cane-Fields, you will very much enrich your
Pastures, to the vast Advantage of your Cattle: In all your Land, wherein your
Dung is made by the first Day of May (which ought to be at least sixty Acres as
you removed in November,) be sure to plant a large Crop of Indian Corn in every
Row, and to hole through it as early as the Corn can bear the Cane Bank, from
which you may reap eight Hundred or a Thousand Bushels of that sort of Corn;
and from 100 Acres of Guinea-Corn well taken Care of, may be reaped from
fifteen Hundred to two Thousand Bushels of Corn, which with the constant supply
of the Potatoes out of the fifty Acres within the Year, and the Assistance of
the twenty Acres of Plantain-walk together with the green and dry Grain, and
the 10 Acres of Yams, and the 15 Acres of Eddoes, and 5 Acres of Casavy, will
certainly be sufficient Food for 300 Slaves, provided these Provisions are as
seasonably Planted and as well taken care of as before recommended; and
provided also no Accident happens to any of those several Sorts of Provisions.
With the Conveniences, Strength, etc. beforementioned, it will be in the Power
of the Husbandman to do every Thing in its most proper Season, I mean not to
be a Planting when he ought to be Reaping, or a Reaping when he ought to be
Planting: Therefore he may reap this Crop of Sugar in about twenty Weeks by
making about three Hundred Pots per Week, and as his Still-House will contain
14400 Gallons of Liquor, and dispatch 10800 Gallons of it into a Discharge of
1800 Gallons of Rum per Week; therefore within 26 or 27 Weeks, the Still-House
may dispense with the Offals of the five Thousand Pots of Doubleclayed Sugar,
and according to that Calculation of Time the Sugar may be all made by the
close of May, or very early in June; and the Rum by the close of August, or
early in September: for as there is sufficient Room reserved for more Sugar and
Rum to be made, if Accidents should happen to prevent the Regularity
beforementioned, you will not be confined in any case; therefore it is necessary
that the Curing-House should have Room to contain two Thousand five Hundred
Pots of Clayed-Sugar as is before expressed; and as this Sugar when
Doubleclayed may be sent to Market in ten Weeks after it is made, and there is
a sufficient StillHouse to dispense with the Offals, I see no just Reason why
this Still-House should be making Rum in the wet Season of the Year, when no
good Fermentation can be expected or made equal to the Months between January
and August; so that the Excuse must be Idle, that may be alleged for making
Rum late.

I think I have given the Husbandman sufficient Time from the middle of June to
the first of October, to nurse his young Crop; plant all his Provisions or
rather nurse them, and prepare his Dung with holeing the 100 Acres of Land for
the Crop of Canes, as he may receive great Assistance in some sorts of those
Works from three Cattle-Carts, and two Horse-Carts which I recommend to be kept
upon this Estate.

It is necessary to reserve great Quantity of dry Trash to Litter the Pens and
Stable and to make proper Shelters for the poorer Cattle in the wet Season, as
they are subject to many Disorders, besides their Hoofs becoming soft, which
alone will occasion a Beast to look thin as he will refuse the Pasture for want
of Feet: And this work of raising those heaps of Trash may be done immediately
after finishing the Crop, by taking it off from those 40 Acres of the second
Crop you reserve for Sugar, by doing which you will give yourself Room to dig up
the intermediate Spaces in that Land which must be performed in the same Manner
as directed, at about ten or fifteen Days distance of Time, and continued until
the large Lumps of Earth becomes pulverized, which the Sun will very much
assist to do, and until those Canes become too forward to admit Repetition:
shallow Land will not so well bear this as deep Land.

It has frequently happened that in the Months of March and April in many Parts
of this Island, fifty Gallons of Cane-Juice have made a ten Gallon Pot of
Sugar, and at some particular Places, 45 Gallons have been known to make it;
which Sugar will weigh Green, 120 lb. the same after it is regularly clay'd a
second Time, and perfectly Cured will weigh from 48 to 60 lb. the difference of
Weight the Still-House is chargeable with to the Curing-House in the several
sorts of Molasses, viz. the Muscovado, the first and second clayed Molasses, as
well as the StillHouse is chargeable to the Boiling-House for the Quantity of
Skimmings it receives from thence, all which Materials, as has been already
shown, may make eight Gallons of Rum to that Pot of Sugar.

I shall proceed to fix a reasonable Valuation upon the foregoing Plantation,
and the Gross Produce; and examine what Expenses it will require to support it
Annually. In doing which, I shall endeavor to be as regular as possible.

An exact Estimate of the Metals and Utensils, required to furnish the
foregoing Plantation of 500 Acres of Land, viz.
L. s. d. 8 Clarifiers to contain 300 Gallons each, to weigh 2 lb. to a Gallon,
and at 2 s. per lb 480 4 Cleansers to contain 225 Gallons each at ditto. 180 6
Tatches to contain and weigh, viz. 2 ditto at 50 Gallons, each at 6 lb. to a
Gallon, 2 ditto at 60 Gallons, each at 5 lb. to a Gallon, and 2 ditto at 80
Gallons, each at 4 lb. to a Gallon, and 2 s. per lb. 184 L. 844 Brought over L.
844 3 Stills to contain 300 Gallons, each at 2 lb. to a Gallon, and at 2 s. per
lb. with Heads of 150 lb. each at 20 d. per lb. and to each a Worm of 400
Weight at 20 d. per lb. 317 10 1 small Still for low Wines of 200 Gallons at 2
lb. to a Gallon, and at 2 s. per lb. and a Head of 100 Weight at 20 d. per lb.
and a Worm of 300 Weight at 20 d. per lb. 73 6 8 10,000 lb. of Load at L 184 s.
per Foder. 91 4 Coolers to hold 100 Gallons each, and to weigh 3 lb. to a
Gallon, and at 2 s. per lb. 120 2 Sugar Basins to Pot Sugar, at 50 s. each. 5
12 Copper Lamps at 15 s. each. 9 18 Skimers and 12 Ladles at 10 s. each. 15 4
Worm Tubs at L. 10 each. 40 48 Fermenting Vats, each L. 5 240 Carried over L.
1754 16 8 Brought over 1754 16 8 For Washers for the Vats, and Brass Stop-Cocks
for Pumps. 105 3 4 140 Gratings 1400 lb. at 10 s. per Cent. 70 3 Cattle-Carts
and 2 Horse-Carts with their Furniture at L. 24 each. 120 3000 Pair of Pots and
Jars at 3 s. per Pair. 450 The Amount of the Mettles and Utensils. 2500 An
exact Valuation of the Buildings. A Dwelling House. 500 2 Wind-Mills at L. 500
each. 1000 A Boiling-House. 600 A Distill-House with three Receiving-Cisterns,
one Mixing ditto, and four Return-Cisterns. 800 A Curing-House with a Shed the
length of it, with a Loft over the Shed, in which the Plantation Stores may be
kept. 1100 Carried over L 6500 Brought over 6500 A Barbecue-House. 100 A
Horse-Stable. 350 A House for Servants. 100 A Sick-House, and a proper Room to
confine Negroes. 100 A Cooper's-Shop, a Smith-Shop, and a Room for Salt
Provisions. 150 A Trash-House. 50 A Water-Cistern. 150 7500 500 Acres of bare
Land at L. 20 per Acre. 10000 L. 17500 The Furniture of the BoilingHouse, viz.
Coppers, Coolers, Basins, Skimers, Ladles, Lamps, and Lead, etc. Amounts to
1154 The Furniture of the Still-House, viz. Stills, Heads, Worms, Tubs, Vats,
Washers, Cooks and Pumps, Amount to 776 The Furniture of the CuringHouse, of
Pots and Drips, Amount to 450 The Value of the Slaves.
10 Men, viz. a Mill-Man, a Boiler, a Clayer, a Distiller, a Groom, two
Carters, two Drivers, one General Watchman to overlook the others, at 80 L.
per Head. L. 800 20 Men at L. 60 per ditto. 1200 20 ditto at 50 per ditto. 1000
100 Men and Women at 40 per ditto. 4000 100 ditto at 35 per ditto. 3500 50
Improving Boys and Girls at 30 L. per ditto. 1500 300 Slaves upon an Average of
40 l. per Head. 12000 Ditto of the Cattle.
40 Oxen at 15 l. per Head. 600 60 ditto at 10 per ditto. 600 50 Improving
Heifers, Steers and Bulls at 6 l. per ditto. 300 150 Head of Cattle upon an
Average of 10 l. per Head. 1500 A Reasonable Valuation of the Plantation.
500 Acres of Land with all the aforesaid Buildings, Utensils, etc. at 35 l.
per Acre. L. 17500 300 Slaves at 40 l. per Head. 12000 150 head of Cattle at 10
l. per ditto. 1500 25 Horses at 20 l. per ditto. 500 50 Head of Sheep at 10 s.
per ditto. 25 The Amount thereof is L. 31525 Annual Expenses required to
support this Plantation.
Sallaries, viz. l. The chief Overseer 300 The chief Driver 30 The under Driver
15 The Key-Keeper 30 A Servant to take Care of the Plantain Walk 15 A White
Groom 25 A White Herdsman 25 A Farrier 25 The Doctor 75 The Town Agent 100
Carried over. l. 640 Brought over. L 640 The Book Poster 40 To Salt Provisions
for the white Servants. 100 To 300 Quintles of Salt-Fish for the Slaves at 15
s. per Quintle. 225 To 700 Bushels of Oats for the Horses at 2 s 6 d. per
Bushel. 87 10 To Clothing for 300 Slaves at 10 s. per Head. 150 To the Tax of
their Head at 2 s 6 d. each. 37 10 To the Parochial Tax of 500 Acres of Land at
1 s 3 d. per Acre. 31 5 To Labor spent upon the Highways for the 500 Acres,
as 50 Negroes is required to Labor two Days, and is worth 1 s 3 d. per Day. 6
5 To Tax of two Wind-Mills at 20 s each. 2 To 500 Pair of Pots and Jars,
Annually at 3 s. per Pair. 75 To Repairs of Negroes at 5 l. per Ct. upon their
Prime Value, or 5 per Ct. or 15 per Annum. 600 Repairs of Cattle at 10 l. per
Ct. upon their Value, or 10 l. per Ct. or 15 l. per Annum. 150 Carried over. l.
2144 10 Brought over. l. 2144 10 Repairs of Horses at 20 l. per Ct. upon their
Value or 5 l. per Annum. 100 To an English Invoice, viz.
H^^s, Bills, Nails, Holland-Duck for Windmill Sails, Straining-Cloth,
Cart-Harness, Chains, Crows, Sledges, Skimers, Ladles, Lamps, etc. all which
Necessaries we must be supplied with from England. 300 As for Repairs and all
other Expenses, not provided for herein, such as in Case of an Accident to the
Crop of Corn, or any other Provisions and Tradesmen, viz. Carpenters, Masons,
Plumers, Blacksmiths, Braziers, Glaziers, Harness-Menders, etc. and for the
better Accommodations, etc. I allow 455 10 Annual Expenses. l. 3000

The Annual Expenses as here computed, amounting to 3000 L. and the Value of
the Plantation supposed to be 31525 L. the five Thousand Pots of Double-clayed
Sugar, and forty Thousand Gallons of Rum supposed to be Annually made from this
Plantation ought to sell at high Prices to yield a reasonable clear Profit to
the Owner, whose considerable Expenses, many Risques, and the Calamities,
Losses, Inconveniences, Labors and Fatigues, necessarily attending a Sugar
Plantation in this Island more especially; should induce their being kept as
free as possible from all Duties, Impositions and Restraints; for although in
some Years the clear Profits with Frugality and good Economy may be
considerable, yet for want of seasonable Weather, and due Care, and proper
Supplies, and good Management, many Plantations have proved not worth holding,
and there are many dismal Prospects of ruinous Buildings in the Island, that
were at first very Commodious, which have by various Accidents been destroyed,
and only the Land been regarded as of Value by joining to other Estates. --
Plantations in this Island do not yield near so much clear Profit, as those in
other Sugar Colonies, which are managed more easily, at little Expense, and are
more certain in their Produce.

My Reason for making so large an Allowance upon the Supplies, or Repairs of
the Slaves and Stock is, first supposing such a Number to dye Annually, it will
require that Supply immediately, or oppress the remaining Number, or submit to
unseasonable Husbandry, or to depend upon hired Laborers, which most certainly
will lead you into many Difficulties and Losses. But suppose those Slaves don't
dye; it is reasonable to imagine that they, as well as the Cattle and Horses
must be so much the worse: For if every Planter would take an Inventory of the
Value of his Slaves the first Day of February, and again the first Day of
November, he would discover that difference at least in the Countenances of
300; and so it will admit in Proportion a difference in the Value of the Horses
and Cattle between the first Day of March, and the last Day of September. For
if we see inanimate Things, such as the Utensils of the Plantation become
worse, though used with the greatest Care in the Hands of the Artificers, how
much more must the Constitutions of the Human and Animal Creatures be impaired:
The Slaves in reaping the ripe Crop, nursing the Young, and planting the
ensuing one, and the Stock by the Labor of reaping and carrying it to Market?
my Reason for allowing so little to the several Tradesmen is, when a set of
Works and Buildings are all in Perfection, they will require very little of
their Assistance for many Years, except it is for hanging the Coppers and
Stills, and that Expense will require to be repeated every four or five Years,
if there is five Thousand Pots of Sugar Boiled in them.

As for any Accident which every Thing according to its Kind or Nature is
subject to, that must be submitted to, and a Charge made for out of the Neat
Proceeds (when it happens) as Profit and Loss.

If any Objection should arise concerning the Number of 50 Pots per Acre with
the Addition of the 40 Acres of second Crop to the 100 Acres of first Crop
Canes, it would be just to try that Experiment before it is strongly opposed or
argued against.

If any Observation be made upon what I Have said of 50 Gallons of Cain-Juice to
make a ten Gallon Pot of Sugar, let it be considered that it is in the prime
Months of March and April, and not throughout a Crop. I have now several
Journals by me, all which I have carefully looked over, and find upon an
Average, that a ten Gallon Pot has taken 63 Gallons in one Year, and in
another, 65 Gallons of Liquor; the latter being until the Month of July when
finished, and doubtless if we were to keep on working through August,
September, etc. we may discover more considerable Loss. I have been just, as
well as curious herein. -- If any should object to a 10 Gallon Pot being
Doubleclayed, to weigh from 48 to 60 lb. of Neat Sugar; first let it be
considered what it weighs green, then how liable it is to Abuse in the sort of
Clay and Management of it, and how old it is too, whilst it is neglected and
becomes so dry that it admits the Clay Water a sudden Passage, which carries
away the Sugar into the Jarrs without much Improvement of the Color of that it
leaves in the Pot. Therefore I insist upon it, that Sugar fairly Tempered,
Cleansed and Boiled, will be fit to receive the Clay in 12 or 15 Days, except
you have Potted it colder than necessary, which if not extremely cold, may make
it 20 Days, or according to the Degree it was cold: for that in itself is an
Error without Remedy, especially for Sugar you design to clay.

If your Sugar is such as I have described, and has not been Injured by the
Boiler, then the Sugar not being changed truly white, must be from some Error
of the Clayer in the CuringHouse, from either the sort of Clay, the due
Proportion of Water, or the due Mixing and Tempering; for Clay will require
many Hours Labor and Pains to incorporate thoroughly before it goes through
the Strainer to lay upon the Sugar. And it is my humble Opinion that a
Miscarriage is often owing to the want of Care in this Particular.

The several Remarks I have herein made, if they are heartily and duly
considered, will, I humbly presume to hope, incite the Owners of Estates to
provide for them effectually in every respect, and in some Measure assist them,
in knowing more readily, when Plantations are well and properly managed. --
Prompt chief Overseers, and all employed in Plantations, to do their respective
Duties, in the most honest, faithful, diligent, careful and exact Manner; and
to enlarge and improve on the Hints offered in this Treatise. -- And if a
laudable Emulation can be raised in every one to exert himself in the best
Manner he is able, for the Benefit and Improvement of a Sugar Plantation;
possibly my Endeavors in this Work, will escape all illnatured, inconsiderate
Criticisms, or any Conceits, that it may be in any Respect the least
Prejudicial, and may be commended, and my kind generous Subscribers, not blame
me for what I have here produced to public View; but should all my own
Observations be deemed merely Trifling and Insignificant, surely the annexing
some most useful excellent Instructions, given many Years ago, by HENRY DRAX
Esquire for the Management of his two Plantations in this Island, will render my
Treatise valuable, as those Instructions cannot be too much admired, considered,
and practiced by every worthy goodPlanter, or Master of an Estate, and
therefore I do with Pleasure publish the Copy I procured of them.

INSTRUCTIONS For the Management of Drax-Hall, and the Irish-hope Plantations:
TO Archibald Johnson,
By HENRY DRAX, Esquire
I Shall insert some general Rules and Observations, which I have walked by my
self, for the Government of the Family both Whites and Black.

1. In the first Place, I must enjoin you, and it is my positive Directions,
that every Sunday, all the Family of Whites be called in to hear Morning and
Evening Prayers; and of other Days, if you have Time and Convenience. Let a
Penalty be put on the absent, either the Forfeiture of their Allowance that
Week, or what other, you think fit.

2. On your first entering upon the Estate, I would have an exact Inventory
taken of all Things on the Plantation, a true Copy of which must be sent me.

3. For your greater Ease, and that you may not be taken off from solely
minding the Plantation Affairs of planting and making Sugar, and that you may
have as little Occasion as possible, of being absent from the Plantation, which
I have experimentally found, to be very pernicious to all Proceedings there,
every Person being more diligent in his Employ, when the Master is at home,
although he stirs not out of his Chamber, than when he is abroad; therefore it
must be observed for a Rule, that you never be absent from the Plantation, but
in Case of Necessity: I say for your greater Ease, I have engaged proper
Persons to act in, and do all my Business in Bridge-Town.

4. I hope you will find a sufficient breeding Stock for the plentiful
furnishing your Table; but if you find there are not ten good breeding Cows,
twelve good laying Turkey Hens, eight Muscovy Ducks, eighteen good Dunghill
Hens, all to be kept for a breeding Stock; then I would have you buy of each
Sort to make up the Number.

5. It is my Desire, that not only for the more comfortable Support of your
self, and those of my Family as shall eat at Table with you, but also for the
Relief of all such, either Whites or Blacks as shall be sick in the Family,
that you keep a plentiful Table; for the furnishing of which, I do allow you,
the Produce of all the Sheep, Hogs, Turkeys, Dunghill Fowls, Ducks, Pigeons,
etc. none of which shall you ever sell. You must be careful not to be
overstocked, especially in Sheep, which are great Tainters, and Destroyers of
the Pastures, and consequently very injurious to Cattle; fourteen Ews of the
best Sort, will be enough, to keep for breeding, the Ewe Lambs of which must be
constantly killed, and the rest made Weathers, and killed as you have Occasion.
I would have the Sheep constantly kept at the Hope-Plantation for making Dung
there.

6. For your Supply of Maderia Wine, Salt, Spice, Oatmeal, salt Provisions, and
other Necessaries that must be bought for Housekeeping, I do not think fit to
stint you, being confident of your Moderation and careful Frugality in the Use
of them; besides, I know not what Occasion there may be, of more than ordinary
Expenses for drenching of Horses and Cattle, and for the Relief of sick People,
whom I earnestly desire may not want any Thing that is fit for them; the Kitchen
being more useful in raising and recovering of Negroes in most Distempers than
the Apothecary's Shop; they do well together, but Physic alone without proper
Care, and the Help of what the Kitchen affords, does rather injure or destroy,
than assist Nature, but I have so great a Confidence in your more than ordinary
Care in this Particular, that I shall not further enlarge upon it.

7. For your Supply of Beer, I shall give Directions that twice or thrice every
Year two Hogsheads of the best Strong Beer be sent you from London.

8. My Attorneys must be invited by you to view the Plantations once a Year,
when they must be well entertained, and you must desire them carefully to
inspect every Thing, and show them all Accounts relating to Plantation-affairs,
and acquaint them with all your Schemes and Intentions for the Management and
Improvement of the Estate, and their Directions and Advice I would have you to
observe and follow.

9. I would have to eat at the Table with you, the Person who keeps the general
Waste-book and Account of making and dispatching of Rum: The Doctor; the chief
Accomptant or BookKeeper; and also the Head-Curer.

10. You must sometimes, the oftener the better, call your white Overseers
together, to advise and discourse them about the Plantation-Affairs; as about
what Pieces of Canes or Corn etc. do most want Weeding; what is the next
properest Work to fall on; how Canes or Provisions stand in such a Piece or
Part of the Plantation; whether the Watchers of them do their Duty; whether
there is any Dung to be provided or saved; or what other Questions you shall
think fit to ask them. Besides, the Advantage you will receive in hearing their
several Opinions, it may give you Information of some Things, which otherwise
you might have been ignorant of, and certainly bring several Matters into your
Remembrance. You Will by this Means improve all their Judgments in the Affairs of
the Plantation, and make them far more diligent than they would otherwise have
been.

11. It will be necessary to encourage the white Servants according to their
Merits, either by an extraordinary Allowance of Clothes or Provisions, or if
you see Cause, of some Wages.

12. The Doctor must be very skilful, diligent, and humane, for the utmost Care
should be taken of all the Sick, many of whom will yearly die if they want good
Kitchen Physic, and good looking after.

13. You must never punish to gratify Anger or Passion, the End of Punishments
being to reclaim the Malefactor, and to terrify others from committing the like
Faults. A wise prudent Man will not be passionate, to Servants especially, for
a passionate Man is not fit to judge or to command.

14. Be strict in punishing all Vice, especially Drunkenness, which is
frequently the Original of all others, and it is a Vice the Whites are much
addicted to; the Stocks or laying them Neck and Heels till they are sober and
sensible of their Faults, I have observed to be the properest Punishment for
the Crime, Blows generally enrages a drunken Man and makes him fit for any
Mischief.

15. If at any Time you take Notice of a Fault you design to punish, let it be
immediately executed, especially upon Negroes, many of them choosing to kill
themselves to avoid Correction.

16. The Blacks are commonly addicted to Thieving; if it be for their Belly, it
is the more excusable, but I hope none of mine will ever have Occasion to be
Thieves for Want; but if at any Time they are taken stealing Sugar, Molasses,
or Rum, they must be severely handled.

17. There must be the greatest Care imaginable taken to preserve all Portable
Things from being stolen.

18. The Curer has a very great Trust committed to his Charge, therefore you
must be very careful to employ not only a skilful and diligent Man, but also
one that is sober and honest. In order to keep him so, he should be above
conversing with the ordinary Servants, for which reason I would have him eat at
Table with you, by which Means also you will have a more frequent Opportunity of
discoursing with him, and giving him Directions about his Business. You must
frequently view his Accounts, also daily see all his Sugar in every Bay. This
Diligence of yours will make him fearful of erring by Neglect or otherwise,
well knowing it must be discovered. The Curer must take particular Care to have
all the Pots pricked in the BoilingHouse before brought into the Curing-House;
he must look to the Jarrs the Pots are set on, that they be both tight and very
sweet; in setting them up to sort the high boiled Pots from the low, and if
there happens to be any very bad Pots in the Parcel to put them by themselves;
but I hope by your Care in the BoilingHouse such Mistakes will seldom happen.
The Sugar being good and boiled to it is true Height, will be ready to break
and level in five or six Days Time, which must not be neglected, for the sooner
it is knocked out, the sooner it will be Shipped, and the Pots ready to fill
again. -- There must great Care be taken in setting the Pots level and right
for claying, and emptying all the Jarrs of the Molasses, that every Pot may
have it is empty Jarr to purge into after being clayed. For such Sugar as
happens to be high boiled or bad, you must judge of the time of claying by
knocking the Pots out, and if you find them purge three Quarters through, you
may immediately level and clay them. As soon as the first Clay is dry, take it
off, and let the Sugar the second Time be levelled. You must choose for claying
Sugar a stiff Clay, and such as shall be free from Gravel, Earth, etc. The
Negroes must work the Clay well and strain it through a Cullender, and make it
either a thiner or thicker Batter according to the Firmness or Softness of the
Sugar that it is to be laid on. If the Sugar be strong and high boiled, it will
endure a very thin Batter. Observe for a Rule, that all Sugars whatsoever be
clayed both Muscovado and Paneels, except some Paneels prove bad and too weak
to bear a Clay, in such Case you must only Sun dry such Sugar to pay away. For
the Time of knocking out Sugar there is no certain Rule; the usual Time is
about six Weeks or two Months after claying, but the best Way to be certain, is
to knock out several Pots of those Bays that are oldest, and if you find it
clear to the Bottom, it is fit to be knocked out. In knocking out, there must be
great Care taken, if the Sugar comes out with Difficulty, as it generally does
from new Pots; it must be knocked out upon Canvis quilted for that Purpose, and
Sometimes dug out to preserve the Pot from breaking. Let your clayed Muscovado
be sorted into three or four Sorts according to the Goodness of it, in which
your Head-Curer must be very nice and exact, especially of the white Sorts: and
Paneels into two Sorts, and afterward very well dried, for which Purpose you will
find Conveniences to dry five thousand Pounds With. a Day. It will be the Curers
Care to see the Casks he packs the Sugar in, be strong and clean; ^e must be
exact in tareing the Casks, which Tare must be put on several parts of the Cask
with Chalk. Let every Sort of Sugar be weighed in Bags as it is brought from
the Barbacue, which Weight must be put in a Book kept for that Purpose, as also
all Sugar daily knocked out; what Number of Pots; that your knocking out may
agree with your weekly Receipts of Pots. Your Curer must be very careful in
Packing, that he makes no Mistakes or false Package. Let the Sugar both by
ramming and shaking the Cask be as close packed as possible. Besides, comparing
the Sorts in packing, the several Sorts must be expressed with Chalk on the
Outsides of the Cask. Let all the Sugar (except the Paneels that is bad) be
packed up in Casks at the Plantation, and fitted for Shipping before it be sent
to the Bridge. As soon as the Casks are filled, let them be headed up and
numbered, and immediately Weighed and Tared, and the Sort of Sugar contained in
each Cask must be immediately entered in a Book kept for that Purpose This the
Curer must have a particular Charge to be careful in, that there be no
Difference in the Weights when the Sugar arrives at London. As the Sugars are
carted to the Bridge, let the Number be expressed in the Book, that you may at
any Time know what is sent down. -- All Sugar Pots, Jarrs, and all other
Necessaries belonging to the Curing-House, must be delivered to the Curer by
Inventory, for which he must be accountable as follows; for all Pots or Jarrs
he delivers out to the Boiling-House, or for any other Use, he must charge the
HeadBoilers, or other Persons, who must when that Occasion is served for which
they were delivered, return them again, and be discharged. These Accounts must
be kept in a Book, in which must be inserted all that are broken, the Day when,
and by what Accident.

19. For the better Preservation of Plantation Tools and Necessaries, I would
have a Room set apart on Purpose to keep them in, which must be divided into
small Partitions, for the more orderly keeping each sort apart. In this Room,
where all those Necessaries are kept, there must be an exact Account of what is
delivered out of this Store for Use, as Hoes, Crows, Wedges for splitting Wood,
or Stone Axes, Hatchets, Crosscut-Saws, Skimmers, Basins, Ladles,
Straining-Cloths, and all other of the Plantation Necessaries. Whatever is in
this Store, charge one of your White-Servants that can Write with, who, in some
Book, where a List of the same Things must be kept, must mention, what White or
Black by Name, he delivers any of these Particulars to; which when returned
back, must be expressed at the End of every Line, but if not returned, then the
said white Receiver, must immediately acquaint you therewith, that you may
enquire into the Matter. The oftener you inspect all these Accounts, the more
careful you will make the Parties concerned. All Tradesmen's-Tools, with other
Things not before mentioned, have formerly been kept in the Storehouse, by the
Bookkeeper, and the several Persons concerned, charged with all Things
delivered, who are accountable for the same.

20. Be sure you keep all the Houses in the Plantations in good Repair, as a
short Neglect in this, will treble the Charge and Trouble. -- You must take
such convenient Opportunities to Repair or erect Buildings, as not to neglect
even one Days Work, in either Planting, Weeding, making of Sugar etc. -- You
should take a convenient Time when Vessels arrive from St. Lucia, and Timber is
cheap, to store your self. -- Timbers kept in the Plantations as a Reserve,
must be Housed and kept dry, and often viewed, lest the Wood-Lice get to them,
as they at Times do much Damage to Timber, especially to Locust and Sweet-Wood.
-- I would have no Timber bought except on absolute Necessity, or that you can
meet with it very cheap. -- Preserve the young Mastick Trees for making
Millpoints, as they answer this Use very well. -- You should always have a good
Stock of Laths lying by you Seasoning, to be ready on Occasion. Sweet-Wood has
generally been made use of in this Plantation: You must try smooth and strait
Grain Mastick, which I believe may do well for Laths. -- Have always ready at
each Plantation for fear of any Accident by Fire, one long Ladder, and two or
three shorter, these may be hung against the Wall to the leeward Side of the
Stoke-Holes at the Hope, where under the Eves they will be preserved dry, and in
the old Cattle-Mill at Drax-Hall Plantation. Let it be a Rule that whoever
takes them from thence for any Use, that they return them back again.

21. You must be very careful in the Choice of your Field Overseers, who must
besides having a good Command, be very active, diligent, and ingenious, if
possible, honest; Negroes so qualified under your Directions, will quickly make
able Overseers, as it will be your Part to see that there be not too much
Severity, or Lenity used by them. Negroes upon their first having a Command are
very apt to be severe, which must be strictly guarded against, for I have found
it easier to abate the Courage of obstinate Fellows, than to raise the Spirits
of one that has been dejected by hard or severe Usage. -- There must also be
great Care taken to prevent Partiality in the black Overseers.

22. There must be especial Care taken in working the Hands, that every Negro
does his Part according to his Ability, the weak Hands must not be pressed, nor
the Strong suffered to shrink from their Work. Many Negroes will be apt to Lurk
and Meech from their Work, without great Care be taken to prevent it.

23. The best Way that I know of to prevent Idleness, and to make the Negroes
do their Work properly, will be upon the change of Work, constantly to Gang all
the Negroes in the Plantations in the Time of Planting. All the Men Negroes
into two Gangs, the ablest and best by themselves for Holeing and the stronger
Work, and the more ordinary Negroes in a Gang for Dunging, etc. The Women
Negroes also into two Gangs as before, and the lesser Negroes into two Gangs,
the least to be followed by some careful old Woman, who must use them with
Gentleness. Out of these six Gangs of Negroes must the Carters, Stillers,
CuringHouse Negroes, Cooks, Lookers after Stock, Watchers of Provisions, etc.
be drawn. Your Under-Overseer must constantly have a List of the Gang under his
particular Care, that he may be able to give a particular Account of every one,
whether Sick or how employed. In the Time of grinding Canes after your Watches
for your Mills, Boiling-House, and Cane-cutting Gangs are taken out, all the
rest of the Negroes, except the smallest Gangs, must be Listed into a running
Gang for getting Home and Houseing all sorts of Fuel. The Reason why all the
Negroes are to be Listed is, because other Employments are uncertain, and when
there is no Occasion for Negroes to be in the Still-House, Curing-House, etc.
then they must constantly make their Appearance in the running Gang, of which
when the Number is great, it will be necessary to have two Overseers, and the
able Negroes divided from the weaker. This Method will be most effectual to
prevent lazy Negroes absenting from their Work. -- I had commonly every
Fortnight, and sometimes oftener, a List brought me where every Negro in the
Plantation was employed; which Custom will be for your Ease and Satisfaction to
continue.

24. For the enabling Negroes to go through their Work with Cheerfulness, there
must be great Care taken that they have Plantation Provisions enough, besides
the constant ProvisionGround of their own. The Quantity and the most convenient
Place for the Negroes Gardens you must allot, which should be in the out Skirts
of the Plantation. Besides enough of Plantation Provisions, which the Negroes
must not by any Means want for their most comfortable Support; every Negro must
have Weekly, one Pound of Fish or Mackrel. Overseers and Head-Boilers must have
double that Allowance: And every Negro must have two Quarts of Molasses Weekly,
or more if needful: and twice or thrice a Year or oftener if you see Occasion,
when Tobacco is cheap, two or three Hundred Weight must be bought and
distributed amongst all the Negroes, who must be furnished with Salt whenever
they want it. Twice or thrice a Year give a Barrel of Palm-Oyl if easily to be
procured, amongst them. Once every Year supply the Men-Slaves with Drawers,
Shirts, Jackets and Monmouth Caps; and the Women with Petticoats, Jackets and
red Caps. For Encouragement to particular Negroes, give what you think fit. In
wet Weather give Rum to each Negro every Morning; and at other Times as you
shall see convenient, according to their early Rising, or the Work they are
about.

25. If you don't find a sufficient Number of working Negroes to carry on
conveniently the Business of the Plantations to the Height, you must prudently
buy a proper Number at a Time; I do not think it at all profitable to buy Lot
Negroes. I suppose to supply the Place of those that shall be decayed or dye,
you will want a Yearly Recruit of ten or fifteen, or it may be (if by any
contagious Distemper there happens a great Mortality, which I beseech the great
GOD of his Mercy to keep you from) twenty or more may be wanting, which must be
supplied. Let all you buy, be choice young Negroes who will be fit for present
Service. I have observed the Caramantines, and Gold-Coast Slaves, have always
stood and proved best on my Plantations, therefore you will do well rather to buy
those than of any other Sorts.

26. The Horses you will find on the Plantations, with those you carry with you,
will I hope, be sufficient to make up two good Teams; if not, by ^^^ing these
make up at least that Number, which I suppose will (besides working on Occasion
i^ the Plantations) be sufficient to carry down all my Sugar to Bridge-Town:
Horses, if sober careful Men do not attend them, are incident to many
Casualties.

27. You know ^^^y well the Necessity of a good Stock of working Cattle for
carrying on the Plantation-Busin^^^; and that no Cattle do so well on my
Plantations, as those bred on them, therefore there must be especial Care taken
in the raising of Calves. I have observed, that the best Way is to let them run
with the Cows, and have all the Milk, by which Means they become more hardy and
large; therefore I would not have above three Cows kept for the Pail; the rest
for breeding, which sometimes when they are not big, or have Calves sucking,
may also in Case of Necessity be worked. I would have a good Bull kept for the
Cows. I have observed if Cattle have Food enough, they cannot be over worked,
especially in the dry Time when the Roads are good, therefore must enjoin you
to be extraordinary careful of having all the Cattle kept in good Pastures all
Day, and fully Meated at Night, especially the working Cattle, which ought to
have Corn allowed them, particularly in the wet Time of the Year; there is a
great Convenience by feeding of Cattle with Cane-tops, Abundance of which on
the Pens, makes a great Quantity of good Dung. When you have decayed Cattle
that are old and past Labor, I would either have you seed them or sell to the
Butchers (at which Time you may reserve a roasting Piece for your own Use) or
in Case you cannot conveniently feed them, you may sell them lean, but put none
forth to the halfs. -- A sure Way to know when Cattle are well and sufficiently
Meated at Night is, when you find Cane-tops next Morning in several Parts of
the Pen untouched; if Cattle are Neglected they will dye of the Murrain, which
follows Poverty and Hunger in Cattle.

28. Besides your particular Care of visiting the Stable frequently when the
Horses are at home, you must have an especial Care to get honest and able
Carters, whom as much as may be, must be kept from the Acquaintance of Carters
on the Road, who are generally very idle Fellows, and apt to spoil by their bad
Examples, those that otherwise would be honest.

29. You will find the Asses useful to you on many Occasions, especially for
bringing Wood up the Hill into Places proper for the Carts. Great Care must be
taken of the Asses, and diligent and skilful Drivers provided for them.

30. For the beginning of the Crop you must lay Mold 1 and Foot thick all over
the Hole, that is every Year made Use of for that Purpose adjoining to the
Still-House, over which spread the Ashes from the Stoke-Holes, and let into it
the Liquor from the Stills when no longer fit to be returned into the Cistern,
which Liquor when it has overflown the whole Place, and lain so two Months, the
Dung should be taken out and laid into a convenient Place for Carts to load;
thus by twice digging, the Earth and Ashes will be very well mixed together.
This by certain Experience I know to be excellent Manure for Canes, and being
repeated three or four Times a Year, will produce great Quantities of Dung,
which if you have time should be carted into the Pieces you intend to use it
in, before the Extremity of the wet Weather comes in, at which Time neither the
Cattle or Horses can do half as much even with double toiling; and for the
greatest ease of Carting, all the bad Places in the most used broad Paths of
the Plantation, should at convenient Times be well mended with great Stones, or
what other Way you shall think most convenient.

31. Your next Care must be to produce good Piants, of which you must have for
both Plantations at least Twenty Acres every Year; for this you must make use
of the best and newest Land in the remote Parts of both Plantations.

32. There is no producing good Canes without dunging every Hole, therefore it
must be one of your chiefest Cares to provide sufficient Quantities of Dung
every Year. At Drax-Hall you will seldom want Dung for those Pieces that lie nigh
the Work, for besides the Still-House and Stables, the Cattle fed at home,
where are also Hogstyes, which Places by often Trashing will afford much Dung;
and for remote Pieces, I would have a Lime-kiln built at the Bottom of the old
House, that being nigh great Quantities of Stone and the greatest Part of the
Wood, where you may burn Lime very easily, which being carried to the Land
where you intend to use it, and there mixed in a Bed with Bottom Earth, or
rather Loom (which is to be found in many Bottoms) where it is to lie some Time
till it be dissolved, and the Loom become mellow. I am told and am very
confident, this Method will make very excellent Manure for Land, and the
cheapest you can use for Land that lies at a Distance from the Works. This
Convenience you will want at the Hope, there being little or no Wood, which must
therefore be otherways supplied by your Industry.

33. I do suppose two Hundred Acres of Canes to be as little as you ought to
plant well in both Plantations every Year; the best Way for planting according
to my Observation, is in Rows of four Feet and half Distance; this Space
betwixt the Rows will give the Holers Room enough to make large and deep Holes,
which must be constantly done.

34. The Dung-Carriers are to lay a large Box or Basket well heaped up with
Dung betwixt every two Holes, which by the Planters, after they have prepared a
good Bed in the Bottom of each Hole, and carefully placed the Plants, must
equally divide and spread over the Plants of the two adjoining Holes, which
must again be covered slightly with Mold.

35. In the planting Bottoms you must observe to raise Beds of every two Rows
of Canes, by which Means there will be Gutters to convey the Water to the
Trench that must lead to the Hole you have dug in the lower Part of the Bottom
amongst the Rocks for the drawing the Water off; without this Course be taken
you will not get Canes to grow in Bottoms, which generally is the best Land.

36. The Planters must observe at first planting (especially if the Season be
very wet) not to cover their Plants too thick, which often kills or choaks the
Plants, and when they are in a flat or level Piece of Land where the Water does
not quickly drain off, they must be directed to make the Bed to lay the Plants
on, at least level with the Top of the Earth, otherwise if the Plants be not
quite killed, they will be so chilled with the Water that lies in the Hole,
that the Cane will never thrive.

37. After you have taken Care to Hole, dung, and plant well, it will be Labor
lost, unless you take Care to keep the Land clean; therefore let it be observed
for a Rule, that rather than let the Weeds in any Part of the Plantation run to
ripe Seed, that you leave all Works whatever and go to weeding; one Month's
Neglect thereof will double your Labor, and especially in ProvisionLand.

38. In weeding of young Canes after they are well come up, I have found it
very beneficial to draw the Banks of Mold and Trash that lie between the Rows
over the Stocks of the Canes; there must be Care taken they be cut very close
to the Ground, especially such as you let stand for another Crop, otherwise
they will spring up too thick, and come to nothing but Trash.

39. Before you begin to grind Canes be careful to have all the Mills well
fixed, besides which, there should be a spare Set of Points and Arms well
fixed and tarred at each Work, lying by to be ready on Occasion; also you must
have spare Coggs for the Mills, and at least one spare Set of Sails to change
upon Occasion, if those up should want mending, by doing of which in Time, the
Sails will be much preserved and last much longer.

40. Be sure that all Beds of the Mills, Cisterns, and Gutters be very tight,
which must be kept very sweet and clean, whilst you are at work, by often
washing and scalding to avoid tainting the Liquor.

41. You must be sure to place at the Mills, such Feeders, as by their Care,
Diligence and Skill, shall make the best Use of the Wind, so as not to loose,
if possible, the Opportunity of grinding a Cane, for if the Feeders do their
Part, all the other Negroes belonging to the Work must do theirs, therefore you
must have for each Work a diligent Overseer of the Mills, who besides seeing
all the Negroes do their Duty, must be very careful to keep the Mills in the
Wind, the Sails in good Trim, and the Gudgeons, Shafts, Collars, and Coggs very
well greased, of which you must never be unprovided.

42. If there be never so great Diligence used to provide a great Crop, yet if
there is either Neglect, or Want of Skill in the Boiling-House, the Profit will
be little, therefore the greatest Care imaginable must be there used, and the
most of your Time be there spent. It is the chief Part of a good Planter to be
well skilled in the best Method of dispatching and making great Weeks Works,
and also in true tempering, cleaning, and ordering the Liquor for making good
Sugar.

43. Be careful before you begin to Work that every Thing be in good Order in
the BoilingHouse; the Coppers all well hung and in good Repair, and well faced
with Lead, which must be very thick: That your Coolers, Basins, Skimers and
Ladles are in good Repair.

44. You must provide good Store of Fuel against you begin. Lime enough for the
Crop, and all the Ashes you can save or procure from the Pot-House.

45. All the Coppers and Leaden Beds must be scowered and washed clean, and so
kept by scowering and scraping as often as you have Occasion.

46. There must be Care taken in clarifying, that the Liquor has its due
tempering; if there be a Mistake in the clarifying, it is hard to be rectified
in the rest of the Coppers, therefore the Head-Boiler of each Work must have a
particular Care of clarifying, and upon their Neglect to be severely punished.

47. The Coppers being well hung, if you have good Fuel, each Copper will
require a Negro, who must be very diligent and industrious to skim every Copper
as the Liquor passes along to the skipping Tatches. If the Liquor has its due
Proportion of Temper at first, and the Coppers boil well, by often beating the
Liquor down, the Filth will rise, that the Syrrup may be made very clean,
without dashing of Temper in the smaller Coppers, which the Negroes cannot
discreetly use, therefore must never be done, without your self, or the
Head-boiler finds it necessary. When it comes to the third Copper from the
skipping Tatch, the Liquor must be well strained, and by all Means be made
clean, otherwise it will never purge well and turn white under Clay. In the
Skipping there must be great Care in the exact Height; if it happens to be low
there is great loss, an error on the other side is more excusable; the greatest
Inconveniency of being a little too high is, that the Sugar will take a little
longer Time in curing.

48. The Head-boiler's Care will be also to see the Sugar potted in due Time,
if it is potted somewhat too hot it may be remedied by stiring in the Pot, the
Inconveniency of potting cold is without Remedy, therefore not to be suffered.

49. It will be the Potters Care to have all the Pots very well washed, and if
new, well soaked, and just before the potting to wet the Inside very well with
Temper, otherwise the Pot will be in great Danger of breaking by the difficult
knocking out of the Sugar.

50. As soon as the Sugar in Pots is grown cold and hard, it must immediately
be set on Jarrs, the Neglect of which will be injurious to the Sugar.

51. It will be convenient every Morning to clear the Boiling-House by carrying
all the Pots of Sugar that have been set upon Jarrs into the Curing-House.

52. All Negroes being much addicted to Stealing, to prevent their p^lfering
Sugar or Molasses out of the Boiling-House, the Overseer of each Work should
constantly keep the Door shut and the Key in his Pocket, more especially if he
is obliged to be out of the Boiling-House.

53. When you are at full Work, return the Skimmings of the Tatches and
adjoining Coppers into the Clarifiers, but if the Mill furnish Liquor but for
Part of the Coppers, you must clarify and boil the Skimmings by themselves, or
with Molasses. The Skimmings of the great Coppers must be thrown down to the
Still-House; the Gutters that lead to the Still-House must be kept in good
Repair, and very often in the Time of working inspected, least they should be
stopped, which by Reason of thick Skimmings from the Clarifiers that are flung
down, is very apt to be done.

54. The Wood Stokers who have most leisure should be charged with keeping the
Gutters leading to the Still-House clean and open, and punished if not careful.

55. The Still-House if well taken Care of, brings very considerable Profit
with little charge, therefore must be diligently minded. I hope you will find
the Still-Houses well fitted with Cisterns, Stills, Worms, Pumps, Gutters, and
all other Necessaries, all which must be constantly kept in good Order and well
fixed.

56. Your Stillers must not only be skilful in the quick preparing and fitting
the Liquor, but must be also very diligent to take it at the exact Time, and
active in running it off with great Expedition. It is by this Means that great
Quantities of Rum is made. If at any Time you have a Servant that is fit to
undertake the important Charge of an able Distiller, it will be necessary that
you allow him some yearly Sum for his Encouragement according to his Merit. All
Necessaries belonging to the Still-House, as Tubs, Pails, Anchors, with all
other Casks and Jarrs, are to be delivered to the Charge of the Stiller, who is
to be accountable for them in like Manner as the Curer.

57. As the Rum is daily sent up, let an exact Account be kept of it in a
Tally, and every Week the Stiller must take the Rum-Keeper's Receipt in a Book,
which is to be kept for that Purpose. Let the Rum be disposed of, and an
Account kept thereof.

58. Your Stiller must observe for a Rule, that if at any Time he has Occasion
to be absent or asleep, he then have the Still-House Door locked and the Key in
his Pocket to prevent the Negroes thieving, which they never miss any
Opportunity of doing.

59. After the first Crop Canes are all broke, which is possible, should be
finished before the wet Seasons set in, and all Provision Land cleaned and
planted; the next Work must be to fit the Cane Land for planting, and prepare
Dung. The remote pieces that will be least dung'd ought to be first planted,
that they may have all the timely Seasons to grow in. After your first Crop
Canes are finished your second Crop may be played with, so that you ought not
to neglect the proper Season for planting, for the Sake of making a little
Sugar at so great a Disadvantage as you must do, if you work in wet Weather;
besides, there is no great Fear of having sufficient Intervals of dry Weather,
during the Seasons of Rain, as to give you an Opportunity to run out your
second Crop, but if it should happen otherwise, I shall not think it a
Disadvantage, except you should want the Land for planting, or the Pieces lie
so, that it will much disorder the Method you have designed, to have forty or
fifty Acres of second Crop left to begin the next Crop with.

60. The Cistern for receiving Molasses must be bept very clean and sweet, and
the Molasses boiled up, if possible, every Week. If by grinding you are
hindered of that, you must boil it as often as you possibly can with
convenience, for the fresher the Syrrups are the better will the Pancels be.

61. When you have Time, let every SugarPot be well hoop'd; to keep the Hoops
on, they should with Monjack boiled up with Lamp-Oyl to a convenient Height,
be daubed over.

62. You will constantly have Occasion for four Wain Tumbrels, and two Horse
Tumbrels, one Horse Cart and a Wagon, for the Plantation Use, which must be
constantly kept in good Repair; and when not in Use, be housed. For the
continual maintaining of these, you must have two Pair of Wheels lying by ready
fitted, Velloes, Spokes, and Axle-trees ready hewn for five or six Pair more;
and some Quantity of Timber fit for Cart Spokes will be much wanting.

63. If the Moon shines in the beginning of the Night, dispatch your Carts
about 3 o'Clock in the Afternoon; and if it shines the latter Part of the
Night, dispatch them from the Plantation about 2 in the Morning, by which
Means, they will avoid the Heat of the Day in their Traveling, which certainly
is destructive both to the Horses and Cattle, and may prevent the Acquaintance
with bad Carters.

64. To keep your Carters in better Awe, it will be convenient sometimes to set
a Spy over them, and if you hear they loiter at any House by the Way, or of any
other Misconduct, then punish them moderately and prudently according to the
Nature of the Crime, by which Means they will be more fearful of offending: but
if they approve themselves to be careful and diligent, give them all proper
Encouragement.

65. I would have all my Rum sent to Town, and none sold at the Plantation,
except on Account of Workmen that belong to the Plantation; and would have all
Necessaries for the Estate bought by the Town Agent, therefore send to him on
all Occasions for what you want; he will also ship and dispose of all my
Sugars, which must be sent to him, and none sold at the Plantation, only if you
should at any Time have Occasion to buy any Plantation Provisions (which I hope
will happen very rarely) which will be more convenient for you to buy to save
Carriage, and should be bought as near home as possible. For paying for
Provisions and all Workmen, you may have Occasion to employ in the Plantations,
my Town Agent will furnish you with Money. A particular exact Account must
constantly be sent you by the Town Agent of all he receives from, and sends to
the Plantations with the Prices of each Article, and of all other Particulars
necessary to be known, and each Particular must be regularly entered in a Book
to be kept at the Plantation for your Discharge, and as a Charge upon him.

66. It is my Advice, that you yearly put some remote Cane Fields of Drax Hall
Plantation into Potatoes, which being well trash'd, seldom fails of producing
great Quantities of Potatoes. At the Hope Plantation put some remote Cane piece
into Bonavis, which being dung'd (besides the Advantage of the Pulse) will so
fit the Land for Canes against another Year, as to make it produce good Canes
with indifferent Dunging.

67. When you want Fuel, I would have you cut the Wood and Bushes adjoining to
the old Plantain Walk, some Quantity of which Land, I would have planted with
Plantain Trees, in doing which, you must observe to take the Plants from the
Stalks of small Plantains, that being a better Sort, and will produce the
larger Bunches. Plantains is a Provision the Negroes much delight in, and is a
very wholesome Food, especially in Fluxes, and they produce greatly in the
Years when there are no very high Winds.

68. As all Sorts of Provisions are subject to Casualties, some will be
destroyed by Worms and Flies, and all by long Droughts, therefore it is my
positive Directions, that you have constantly a Reserve of ten or fifteen Acres
of Casavy, for fear of other Provisions failing, that being more certain, and
will lie four or five Years in the Ground, and still improve, and therefore to
be depended on. Your Casavy Pieces should be near the Plantain Walk, that one
Watch may look after both. Observe for a Rule, that as you dig the Casavy,
constantly to plant the Land again, by which Means you will never want.

69. There must be Care taken to plant all the Land you can, with Corn, without
which neither Horses or Cattle will be able to perform their Work; and when
there is no Want of Corn, every Thing in the Plantation will be fat, it being
very good Food for the Negroes.

70. Whenever you plant Corn among Canes, observe to plant the Rows at double
Distance, especially if you plant Guinea Corn among Canes, in which Case you
must always take Care to thin it, and not to suffer above two or three Stalks
at most to grow from one Hole, otherwise it will much prejudice the Canes.

71. There are some Pieces in the Out-skirts of the Plantation rocky, barren,
and fit for little, but Guinea Corn, which after the Corn is gathered affords
good Pasture, and therefore should be planted if you have Time yearly, but for
Want of your being able to do it yearly, you must take the best Care of it, for
second Crop, as Guinea Corn produces a good second Crop.

72. After you have fallen Land enough below the Hill, either let your new Land
as you fall it, run again to Wood, or plant the like Quantity of Land in some
other Part with Fiddle-Wood-Trees, which will be no Hindrance for some Years,
to the planting of it at least with Guinea Corn.

73. Let the leeward Side of all Divisions of Canes be planted with
Fiddle-Woods; you must observe to keep the young Woods for some Years after
planting clean from Vines, otherwise the Growth will be extremely hindered, if
the Wood is not quite destroyed by them.

74. I would have you in your Plantain-Walk, to plant as you can get the Nuts,
five hundred or two thousand Palm-Oyl-Trees, and in the Garden at home the
first Season that happens, plant five hundred sower, five hundred sweet, and
five hundred China Orange Trees, and forty or fifty Shadocks, which must be
planted at convenient Distances, and in strait and good Order. Plant also one
hundred Citron-Trees, and one hundred sower Lemon-Trees of the best Kind.

75. On the first of January, I would have an Inventory taken of all Things
whatsoever in the Plantation, and the same fairly entered in a Book to be kept
for that Purpose called the Book of Records, in which must be also kept by Way
of Debit and Credit, according to the Method there appointed by my Father Sir
JAMES DRAX, an Account of the Increase and Decrease of the Stock (viz.) what
born, bought or received, also what dead, worn out, or disposed of; in which
Book must be entered a brief Account of all the Sugars, the Quantity of Pots
made and knocked out, and the Sorts, all the weekly Accounts of Rum made, and
how disposed of, what is yielded and how disposed of, and also an Abstract of
all the Expenses of the Plantation according to the Form prescribed, a Copy of
all which I would have sent me to London by the first Vessel that sails after
the first Day of January. I would also have Quarterly Accounts of the
Plantation Debits and Credits sent me by convenient Opportunities. Also send me
every Year as soon as you have done planting, the Number of the Pieces planted,
according to the Plats of each Plantation, and at the same Time mention the
Number of Acres you have to break the ensuing Year in every Piece, in which you
must distinguish the first from the second Crop Canes.

76. I shall not further enlarge, than by adding my most hearty Prayers to the
great GOD for his Blessing on all your Undertakings, and assuring you of my
being your cordial and affectionate Friend

Henry Drax.


