Dr. Mayhew's Election SERMON.
May 29th 1754.

A SERMON Preached in the Audience of His Excellency WILLIAM SHIRLEY, Esquire
Captain General, Governor and Commander in Chief, The HONORABLE His MAJESTY'S
COUNCIL, And the HONORABLE House of REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, IN NEW ENGLAND. May 29th 1754.

Being the Anniversary for the ELECTION of His MAJESTY's COUNCIL for the
Province.

N. B. The Parts of some Paragraphs passed over in the Preaching of this
Discourse, are now inserted in the Publication.

By JONATHAN MAYHEW, D. D. Pastor of the West Church in Boston.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed by SAMUEL KNEELAND, Printer to the Honorable House of
Representatives. 1754.

In the House of Representatives, May 30 th. 1754.
ORdered, That the Representatives of the Town of Boston; together with Mr.
William Fletcher, be directed to give the Thanks of this House, to the Rev. Dr.
Jonathan Mayhew, of Boston, for his Sermon preached Yesterday before the
General Court, being the Anniversary for the Election of COUNSELORS, and
desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. Oliver Partridge, Cler. Dom. Rep.

AN Election SERMON.
MATT. XXV. 21. HIS LORD said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful
Servant; thou have been faithful --
THIS is part of our Savior's well-known parable of the talents; the moral of
which is in general this, That whatever powers and advantages of any kind, men
severally enjoy, are committed to them in trust by the great Lord and
Proprietor of all, to whom they are accountable for the use they make of them;
and from whom they shall, in the close of this present scene, receive either a
glorious recompense of their fidelity, or the punishment due to their sloth and
wickedness. The subject, then, is very general, and equally interesting. All
men, of whatever rank or character, are concerned in it. It leads our thoughts
from what we possess, up to the great source thereof; from what we are at
present, to what we shall be hereafter. It connects this world with another;
and comprehends both our probationary and final state, under the righteous
administration of God.

BUT though the subject is very general, and of the last importance to all; yet
civil power being one of the principal of those talents which Heaven commits to
men, and the present occasion requiring a more particular consideration of it,
the ensuing discourse will be confined thereto. Nor would I injure our honored
Rulers by the least suspicion, that they can possibly take it amiss to be
reminded of their duty to God and Man upon this occasion, with all the
plainness and simplicity becoming a minister of the Gospel, and consistent with
decency; the rules of which, it is hoped, will not be violated.

INDEED were One to discourse upon this subject before Rulers in an arbitary
government; or before unfaithful Rulers, even where the constitution is free;
there would be almost a necessity of disguising and suppressing the truth, on
one hand, or of giving umbrage on the other. A miserable dilemma! But surely
there can be no necessity of the former, nor any danger of the latter, under
such a government as the British, and before such Rulers as I have the honor
to speak to.

IT is customary for those who are called to speak upon such public occasions,
to apologize for their want of proper qualifications for the task. But how much
reason soever they may often have for this, I think it is usually their
unhappiness not to be though it very sincere in doing it. I shall therefore wholly
omit this common ceremony; because I would fain be thought quite in earnest in
every thing I say before so grave and venerable an auditory, and upon so
important an occasion.

IT may not be improper, in the first place, to speak of the source and origin
of civil power: And then, of the great end of government: Which two particulars
will be dispatched in a few words. In the third place, it will be useful to
recollect some of those arguments, by which those who are vested with
authority, should be induced to exercise it with fidelity, suitable to the
design of it. And so the subject will be closed with some reflections, chiefly
relative to this Anniversary, and to the present state of the Province.

As to the source and origin of civil power; the parable on which my discourse
is grounded, suggests that it is ultimately derived from God, whose "kingdom
rules over all;" this being as truly a talent committed by Him to the fidelity
of men, as any thing else can be. In this light it is considered in the holy
scriptures. It is not only agreeable to the original scheme and plan of God's
universal government, that civil rule should take place among men, in
subordination to His own; but his providence is actually concerned in raising
those persons to power and dominion, who are possessed of it. In the language
of the Prophet, Wisdom and might are His. He removes kings, and sets up
kings. The most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever
he will. The language of the apostles is not less emphatical. They tell us that
there is no power, but of God; that the powers that be, are ordained of God;
and that they are God's Ministers.

BUT then it is to be remembered, that this power is derived from God, not
immediately, but mediately, as other talents and blessings are. The notions of
any particular form of government explicitly instituted by God, as designed for
a universal model; of the divine right of monarchy, in contradistinction from
all other modes; of the hereditary, unalienable right of succession; of the
despotic, unlimited power of kings, by the immediate grant of Heaven; and the
like; these notions are not drawn from the holy scriptures, but from a far less
pure and sacred fountain. They are only the divices of lawned parasites, or
other graceless politicians, to serve the purposes of ambition and tyranny. And
though they are of late date, yet being traced up to their true original, they
will be found to come, by uninterrupted succession, from him who was a
politician from the beginning.

GOD did indeed formerly take one nation under his more immediate care and
patronage, establishing therein a kind of civil polity. But with this, the
other nations of the world had no concern; nor were they required to imitate
it. It might be added, that even this commonwealth of Israel was not molded
and modeled wholly by the immediate dictates of Heaven. Moses, who sometimes
consulted God in the Mount, at other times consulted his father-in-law Jethro
in Midian, the prince and priest of that country. By whose advice, though a mere
pagan, it was that the great Hebrew lawgiver, partly framed his government. And
it is to be observed, that this government did not put on the regal form at
all, till after a long time; and then, in express contradiction to the counsel
of the Prophet, God declaring that this people rejected Him, in requesting a
king. To say the least, monarchical government has no better foundation in the
oracles of God, than any other. And after the establishment of it amongst the
Hebrews, the crown, instead of descending uniformly to the elder branch of the
male line, was often bestowed on a younger; sometimes transferred to another
family; and sometimes even into another tribe: And this not without the divine
approbation.

ALL the different constitutions of government now in the world, are
immediately the creatures of man's making, not of God's. And indeed the
vestiges of human imperfection are so manifest in them, that it would be a
reproach to the all-wise God to attribute them directly to Him. And as they are
the creatures of man's making; so from man, from common consent, it is that
lawful rulers immediately receive their power. This is the channel in which it
flows from God, the original source of it. Nor are any possessed of a greater
portion of it, than what is conveyed to them in this Way. Or at least, if they
have any more, they have it only as the thief or the robber has the spoil,
which fraud or violence has put into his hands. Agreably to what is here said,
concerning the medium or channel through which power is derived from God,
government is spoken of in scripture, as being both the ordinance of God, and
the ordinance of man: Of God, in reference to His original plan, and universal
Providence; and of man, as it is more immediately the result of human prudence,
wisdom and concert.

IN the SECOND place, we are just to mention the great end of government. And
after the glory of God, which we usually consider as the end of all things in
general, that can be no other than the good of man, the common benefit of
society. This is equally evident whether we consider it as a divine, or an
human institution.

As it is God's ordinance, it is designed for a blessing to the world. It is
instituted for the preservation of men's persons, properties and various rights,
against fraud and lawless violence; and that, by means of it, we may both
procure, and quietly enjoy, those numerous blessings and advantages, which are
unattainable out of society, and being unconnected by the bonds of it. It is
not conceiveable that the all-wise and good God, should ordain government
amongst men, but with a view to its being subservient to their happiness, and
well-being in the world: to be sure, not, that it might be subservient to a
contrary one, their misery. We cannot imagine it possible that He who is good
unto all, and whose tender mercies are over all his works, should exalt a few
persons to power over the rest, to be their oppressors; or merely for their own
sakes, that they may amass riches, that they may live in ease and splendour,
that they may riot on the produce of other's toil, and receive the homage of
millions, without doing them any good. It were blasphemous to think that God
has instituted government for such a partial, unworthy end.

So far as God interposed in founding the commonwealth of Israel, it was in
favor to his chosen people that he did it: not that they might be oppressed
and enslaved by their own Rulers; but that they might be delivered from
oppression and slavery and their taskmasters in Egypt: And that, being brought
out of the house of Bondage, they might be conducted into a good land, flowing
with milk and honey; that they might there possess property, enjoy the blessing
of equal laws, and be happy. Nor is the general design of government and
magistracy now, throughout the world, different from what it was among the
Israelites; viz. the happiness of men. Accordingly the apostle tells us that
the civil magistrate "is the minister of God to us for good," and from hence
argues the reasonableness of submitting to his authority. And all the
instructions and admonitions which God has given to rulers in his word, exactly
correspond to this declared end of their institution. The end of government
then, as it is a divine ordinance, must be human felicity.

AND if we consider it as it is more immediately the ordinance of man, the end
must evidently be the same. It being founded in, and supported by, common
consent, it is impossible the design of it should be any other: since we cannot
suppose that men would voluntarily enter into society, and set up and maintain
a common authority, upon any other principles than those of mutual security and
common good. Nor is there any medium betwixt such common consent as is here
intended, and plain lawless force and violence; for which Christians, surely,
ought not to be advocates. Some states may have (...) their beginning, and
more, their progress and engagement, to the latter of these causes. But these
are not to be drawn into example, or to have any regard paid to them, when we
are speaking of the end of government. We ought not to take our estimate of the
design hereof, from the views of banditti, and robbers, associated to plunder
and oppress others: (though even they have a common interest which they profess
to regard, and which keeps them together.) But we are to form our idea of this
end, by what reason suggests must be the motive with reasonable and honest men
to unite together in the bonds of society. And if we judge by this rule, the
end of government must be the common good of all, and of every individual, so
far as is consistent therewith.

We are therefore brought exactly to the same point at last, whether we
consider government as it is originally an appointment of Heaven, or, more
immediately, the voluntary choice of men. The security and happiness of all the
members composing the political body, must be the design and end thereof,
considered in both these lights. God is too good to ordain it for any other
Purposes; and men, at least love themselves too well, to choose it from any
other principles: Unless, perhaps we may suppose that a farther design of
political union, is the defense and patronage of other persons, out of the
society; and the doing of good to all, as opportunity is, in providence,
afforded for it. But if this is really any end at all; yet it being only a
secondary and remote one, it might have been passed over in silence.

BUT though the grand end of government under all its different forms, is one,
the good of the political body; this general end admits of various
subdivisions, and is prosecuted in a variety of ways; to speak of which is
quite beyond the design of this discourse: and indeed that would be to deliver
a system of politics, rather than a sermon. I shall therefore only add under
this head, that as the happiness of men in society depends greatly upon the
goodness of their morals, and as morals have a close connection with religion,
the latter as well as the former, ought doubtless to be encouraged by the civil
magistrate; not only by his own pious life and good example; but also by his
laws, as far as is consistent with the natural, unalienable rights of every
man's conscience. Protection is, in justice, due to all persons indifferently,
whose religion does not manifestly, and very directly, tend to the subversion
of the government. And a general toleration, with this single exception, is so
far from being pernicious to society, that it greatly promotes the good of it
in many respects. Persecution and intolerance, are not only un just, and
criminal in the sight of God; but they also cramp, enfeeble, and diminish the
state. And many states, in other respects politic enough, have hereby greatly
prejudiced themselves, and strengthened their rival neighbors. For what else
is it, to butcher multitudes of their own people on religious accounts, as they
have done; and to oblige others of them to betake themselves to flight, with
their effects and arts, into foreign countries, where they may live securely?
So that setting aside the great impiety and unrighteousness of this practice,
the impolicy of it is a sufficient argument against it. Nor, indeed, can it be
doubted but that the interest of true religion, has been greatly prejudiced, by
that notion which has so generally prev^^^^d in Christendom from the days of
Constantine; I mean, that kings could not be nursing fathers, nor queens
nursing mothers, to the Church, unless they suckled her with human blood, and
fed her with the flesh of those, whom angry Ecclesiastics are pleased to
stigmatize with the names of heretic, schismatic and infidel. Not only Germany,
but all the Christian states, bled at the wounds which they -- received in --
religious wars; a rage which is peculiar to Christians, who are ignorant of
idolatry, and is the unhappy consequence of that dogmatical spirit, which has
so long been introduced into all parties. There are few points of controversy
which have not been the occasion of a civil war: and foreign nations (perhaps
our own posterity) will one day be unable to comprehend how it was possible,
that our forefathers could kill one another, for so many years together, and
yet, at the same time, be preaching patience. Vol. Age of L^XIV.


THIRDLY: It is now time to mention some of those arguments by which Rulers
should be induced to exercise their power with fidelity, suitable to the great
end and design of it. It is asserted by a great man of the last age, that the
pretended depth and difficulty in matters of state, is a mere cheat. And from
the beginning of the world, says he, to this day, you never found a
commonwealth, where the leaders, having honesty enough, wanted skill enough to
lead her to her true interest both at home and abroad. Harrington*
It belongs not to my function to determine how far this assertion will hold
true. But I may venture to say, that if honesty and public spirit are all that
are wanting, there are not wanting arguments enough, sounded in reason and
religion, to engage Rulers to act from those principles.

To a generous mind, the public good, as it is the end of government, so it is
also such a noble and excellent one, that the prospect of attaining it will
animate the pursuit, and being attained, it will reward the pains. The very
name of patriotism is indeed become a jest with some men; which would be much
stranger than it is, had not so many others made a jest of the thing, serving
their own base and wicked ends, under the pretext and color of it. But there
will be hypocrites in politics, as well as in religion. Nor ought so sacred a
name to fall into contempt, however it may have been prostituted and profaned,
to varnish over crimes. And those times are perilous indeed, wherein men shall
be only lovers of their own selves, having no concern for the good of the
public. Shall we go to the pagans to learn this god-like virtue? Even they can
teach it. And is there a Christian, who is required to love all men, and to do
good to all, as he may have opportunity for it; is there a Christian, who does
not love even his brethren, the members of the same body with himself? Is there
a Christian, who is void of all generous solicitude for his country's welfare?
Is there, who has no desire to see it in a prosperous and flourishing
condition? Who has no pleasure in actually seeing it so? Is there, who has no
grief, in beholding its calamities? no disposition to serve it? Such a person,
though he were of a private character, would be a reproach not only to his
religion, a religion of charity and beneficence, but even to our common nature,
as corrupt and depraved as it is. But how much more infamous were this, in
persons of a public character? in those, on whom the welfare of their country,
under providence, immediately depends?

BUT it is not to be thought merely an office of generosity and charity, for
Rulers to exert themselves in the service of the public. This is an
indispensable duty of justice which they owe to it, by virtue of their station.
They have taken the care and guardianship thereof upon themselves: yea they are
commonly laid under the solemn obligation of an oath, to study and pursue its
interest. And why are they honored? why, rewarded by the public, but that the
public may receive benefit from them? Here, then, are ties, if possible, more
strong and sacred than those of charity: ties, which being violated, leave the
violators of them, guilty of manifest injustice, and great impiety.

ANOTHER argument of some weight, is, that people are not usually either so
blind and insensible as not to know when they are well governed; or so
ungrateful as not to acknowledge it, and to requite their benefactors suitably
to their merits. Some men will, indeed be captious, and find fault without
reason: But it is a mere calumny to represent them of this turn and temper in
general. All history scarce affords an example of a people ruled with prudence,
justice, and due clemency, but what loved and honored their Rulers; but what
loudly proclaimed their virtues; but what, in all proper ways, requited their
paternal care and goodness, while living, and reverenced their memory, when
dead. And how much more desirable is this, than for them to have their ears
filled with cries, complaints and murmurings? How much more eligible is it, to
live esteemed, and to have their names transmitted with honor to posterity,
than to be the objects of public hatred, as being rather taskmasters than
fathers; and to leave no remembrance behind them, but of their selfishness and
injustice; their unfaithfulness and oppressions?

IT were, moreover, to be wished, that Rulers (especially Legislators, whom I
have all along chiefly in view) would seriously consider how much their own
beloved posterity may be affected by their counsels and conduct. The effect of
public counsels and resolutions, whether good or bad, is not so transient as
they are themselves. Even remote generations often feel the consequence of
them. By wise and good laws, and a proper conduct in other respects, the
governors of a people, lay a foundation, by God's blessing, not only for the
welfare of the generation present, but also for the prosperity of those who may
come after them. In doing which, they, in effect, leave the most valuable
legacy to their own offspring; whereas, by a contrary conduct, they entail on
them only misery and ruin. This consideration will be of great weight, not only
with persons of a truly patriot and public spirit; but even with all such as
are not without natural affection; with all, who would not have their memory
cursed after they are gone, even by those who should rise up, and call them
blessed.

A FARTHER argument may be drawn from this consideration, that Rulers derive
their power from God, and are ordained to be his ministers for good. They are
not only entrusted by man with the care of the public; but by God himself, the
supreme lawgiver, that they may be the instruments of his goodness and
munificence. This doctrine, that rulers are God's ministers, and clothed with
authority delegated from Him, has far too often been made use of as a topic of
compliment and adulation, in order to sooth them, and puff them up with vain
imaginations. And so successful have the servile adorers of Princes sometimes
been, in the management of it, as to make them conceit themselves almost
literally Gods, and to think their subjects scarce better than brutes, made
only for their service. That the title intended, denotes their dignity, and the
honor which they may justly expect, no one can question. But the grand
inference they themselves ought to draw from hence, is, that they should
imitate the justice and unwearied goodness of that God, whose ministers they
are; and exercise the power with which His providence has clothed them, to
that gracious end, for which it is given. When they prosecute the true
interests of the public, and diffuse happiness around them, then, and only
then, they act up to their honorable character. They then answer the noble
purposes for which Heaven exalted them; and are seconding the benevolent
designs of providence, being workers together with God. And what can more
animate a considerate man to fidelity in his trust, than this reflection, That
while he is thus serving his generation, he is doing it according to the will
of God? that he therein concurs with the designs of the greatest and best of
Beings, the Creator and Lord of all, who is good unto all? It is an honest joy,
a pleasure truly divine, that must result from such conscious integrity.

CHRISTIAN Rulers should, moreover, always have in view the example of our
blessed Lord and Redeemer, to whom all power in Heaven and in earth is given.
All his ^^ws are calculated for the good of his subjects; and he (...) them, in
order to render them happy. He was the king foretold, who was to "reign in
righteousness." After Him should all the princes and rulers of the earth copy.
And if they did so, the great object and end of their government, would be to
bless mankind.

BUT the argument suggested in my text, is of the greatest weight and solemnity
of any that can be though it of; viz. the account which all men are to give of
their conduct hereafter, to the judge of quick and dead. That same Lord, who
has given to one of his servants five talents, to another two, and to another
one, will come at the appointed time to reckon with them; and to render to
every man according to his deeds. Nor are there any persons who have more
reason to aim at approving themselves to Him, than civil Rulers, who have so
great a charge. It is an established maxim of God's equal government, that unto
whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required. Nor does He, at whose
tribunal they are to appear, regard the persons of princes any more than of
their slaves. They are all equally His servants. Happy! thrice happy! those who
shall then be found faithful; for then shall they enter into the joy of their
Lord. Not so, the slothful and wicked servant, who has either neglected, or
wilfully misapplied, the talents committed to him! Innumerable, alas!
innumerable are the miseries and calamities which have accrued, and are daily
accruing, to mankind, from the abuse of that very power, which was designed to
prevent them, and to be instrumental of good to all that are under it. Heaven
beholds these things: And shall not Heaven, at length, visit for them! "Shall
not the judge of all the earth do right!"

RULERS surely, even the most dignified and powerful of them, should not be so
elevated with the thoughts of their power, as to forget from whom it comes; for
what purposes it is delegated to them; whose impartial eye it is that surveys
all their counsels, designs and actions; and who it is that will, one day,
exact an account of their stewardship. If only the hand upon the wall, caused
the haughty Babylonian's knees to smite one against another; what amazement
will seize the proud oppressors of the earth, when they shall behold the son of
man coming in the clouds of Heaven, with all the holy angels with Him! The
apocalypse of St. John informs us how different sentiments the kings of the
earth, and the great men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, shall
then entertain of themselves, from those which they are too apt to entertain at
present. You will then see many of those who made the world tremble and stoop
before them, in vain attempting to hide themselves in the dens and in the rocks
of the mountains! But

IT now remains to make some reflections upon this subject, and to apply it to
the present occasion.

AND we are reminded by the preceding discourse, how great a blessing good
government is; and what gratitude becomes those whom God, in his providence,
favors with it. Inconsiderate men are too apt to think government rather a
burden, than a blessing; rather, as what some persons have invented for their
own particular advantage, than what God has instituted for the good of all.
This is, under Him, the great guard and security of men's property, peace,
religion, lives; of every thing here, for which it is worth while to live. And
this is a blessing which British subjects enjoy, in as high a degree, perhaps,
as any other people. It is their felicity to be governed by such men, and by
such laws, as themselves approve; without which their boasted liberty would,
indeed, be but an empty name. The form of our government is justly the envy of
most other nations; especially of those which have either no parliaments at
all, or such as may be banished at the word and pleasure of a tyrant; which
comes much to the same thing. We have also, for several late reigns, been
blessed with Princes too just and good to encroach upon the rights of their
subjects, and too wise to think that Britons can endure a chain. Happy had it
been for some former Princes, as well as for their people, had they been
endowed with the same moderation, justice and wisdom! --

PERSONS of a private character are, moreover, admonished of the reverence and
submission, which they owe to government as it is God's ordinance; and as
Rulers derive their power from him. Were this no more than an human
institution, yet it would, in the nature of the thing, demand great respect;
that being necessary even to the preservation of it in the world, and so, to
peoples reaping those numerous advantages which accrue from it. But when we
reflect, that this is an appointment of Heaven, it suggests that we should be
subject even "for conscience sake;" and that we cannot behave undutifully
toward our Rulers, without also rebelling against God. Nor is it easy to
mention any duty which the gospel inculcates upon the consciences of men, with
greater solemnity, than that of paying due honor to Kings, and all that are in
authority. However, it is not be forgotten, that as in all free constitutions
of government, law, and not will, is the measure of the executive Magistrate's
power; so it is the measure of the subject's obedience and submission. The
consequence of which, I shall at present leave others to draw; only observing,
that it is very strange we should be told, at this time of day, that loyalty
and slavery mean the same thing; though this is plainly the amount of that
doctrine which some, even now, have the forehead to ventilate, in order to
bring a reproach upon the Revolution, upon the present happy settlement of the
crown, and to prepare us for the dutiful reception of an hereditary Tyrant.

IT is moreover suggested by what has been said upon this subject, how much
care and integrity should be exercised in the choice of those, who are to have
a share in government; that they may not be unworthy of it. If it ever happens
in countries of liberty, that the conduct of public affairs falls into the
hands of weak or dishonest men, the people will scarce be the less miserable,
because they had the choice of these men themselves; though they will be the less
to be pitied. People have, in some countries, been so regardless of their own
welfare, as to give too much encouragement to designing men, who would practice
upon them; yea, as to make an infamous merchandise of their hands and voices to
the highest bidder, without any consideration of merit, of capacity or
inclination to serve the public. It is not easy to determine, who are the most
criminal, they who would make their way to places of power and trust, by
indirect means, or they who have so little concern for the welfare of their
country, as to hearken to them, and to become the tools of their ambition and
covetousness. And how faithfully they are likely to serve their country, who
set out with corrupting it; they who aspire to a part in the government, by
bribing the avaricious, by flattering the foolish, and making fine promises to
the credulous; is not hard to conjecture.

SIR Thomas More tells us, in his model of a commonwealth, that the wise and
virtuous Utopians, take an oath, before they proceed to an election, that they
will choose him whom they think meetest for the office: and that, if a man
aspires to an office, he is sure never to compass it. Some will perhaps think
it a pity, that it is only an Utopia, an imaginary region, where such maxims
are said to prevail. People being under no undue influence, would doubtless
make a better choice than they often do, in those places, where importunity
supplies the want of wisdom in the candidate; and the spirit of corruption, the
spirit of patriotism. As to men of real worth, it is a pity they should be put
upon violating their natural modesty, by proclaiming their own superior
qualifications for serving the public; and by soliciting an acknowledgment
hereof. It is still harder, that those who are most capable of serving their
country, should be obliged to reward others for the liberty of doing it. Such
men should surely be made choice of, freely and voluntarily, without being
forced, as it were, either to beg or to buy, a confession of their great merit;
especially because, in this case, some people of a jealous temper, may be apt
to suspect, that they have something else more at heart, than the good of their
country. -- Indeed the experience of all ages has proved, that men of the
greatest merit, do the most disdain those arts and practices, of which others
serve themselves with the unwary; and that those who are the most addicted to
them, are commonly the least fit to be trusted, either in respect of capacity
or integrity, or both.

GOD forbid, that ever such things should become fashionable and reputable
amongst us; or that any Son of New England, should prove such a profane Esau,
as to ^ell his birthright! Our ancestors, though not perfect and infallible in
all respects, were a religious, brave and virtuous set of men, whose love of
liberty, civil and religious, brought them from their native land, into the
American deserts. By their generous care, it is, under the smiles of a gracious
providence, that we have now here a goodly heritage; and see these once desert
and solitary places rejoicing and blossoming as the rose, the glory of Lebanon
being given unto them, the excellency of Carmel and of Sharon. By the wisdom
and piety of our forefathers it is, under that God who has determined the
bounds of all men's habitation, that we here enjoy many invaluable privileges;
of which this day, amongst other things, is a proof and monument. Though we are
not an independent state, yet, Heaven be thanked! we are a free people. However
all know, that it is not from our privileges and liberties, simply considered,
but from the use we make of them, that our felicity is to be expected. And they
are so great and ample, that the right improvement of them, cannot but make us
happy, provided we have the virtue and honor to make such a one of them. Nor
can I think we are so far degenerated from the laudible spirit of our
Ancestors, as to despise and abuse what they procured for us at so dear a rate.
I am not willing to believe we are running so fast into the evil practices and
customs of other places; or so fond of imitating the fashionable follies and
vices of any, even of those whom decency may perhaps require us to call our
betters, as some would insinuate that we are; and from hence prognosticate our
destruction. No: I will not believe but that we fear God, reverence the memory
of our forefathers, love our country and ourselves, more than to do thus* and
that God will still give us to see the good of his chosen.

But long custom requires that, upon this occasion, I apply myself more
particularly to our honored Rulers; or, at least, custom will s^rene me from
the imputation of presumption in doing it. To you, therefore, the Legislators
and political Fathers of the country, I would now, with all proper humility and
defference, direct my discourse.

I would not, much honored Fathers, willingly go beyond my line in any
respect. But surely I should forget the proper duty of my station, if I did not
embrace the opportunity which this day affords me, to beseech you, as you fear
God, whose ministers you are; as you love the country, whose welfare depends
upon you; as you regard that good name, which is as precious ointment, and
rather to be chosen than great riches; as you have any concern for posterity,
even your own; as you would enjoy the blessed peace of a good conscience, in
life and death; and, in fine, as you would be found of our common judge in
peace, in the day of his appearing; if I did not beseech and exhort you, by all
these motives, to be faithful in the discharge of that trust which is devolved
upon you by God and man; to let no unworthy views influence your conduct; but
in all things to consult and prosecute the public good. You are very sensible,
my Fathers, that this is your indispensable duty. Your God, your king, your
country, all expect this of you. Nor could you answer it to either of them; no,
not even to yourselves, should you neglect it. It is, I trust from a sense of
duty to God, in whose name I am now called to speak, and from an affectionate
concern for the welfare of my dear, native country, not from a vain affectation
of putting on the monitor toward my superiors, that I use this freedom of
speech, and such importunity. And if it serves, in any measure, by the blessing
of God, to awaken your zeal for His honor, and for the prosperity of this
people, the intent of it is answered.

THERE is but little probability, that those who fear not God, will much regard
man; or that they who have not an habitual sense of His authority over
themselves, will exercise that which he has given them over others, as they
ought to do. Be pleased, therefore, always to bear in mind that glorious Being,
who is ever with you: who spoke all worlds into existence; whose power sustains
and governs all things; in whose presence no seraph is unveiled; at whose
frown, apostate spirits tremble; before whom all the inhabitants of the earth
are reputed as nothing: whose eyes ever view, and whose eyelids try the
children of men: That righteous Lord who loves righteousness; and under whose
administration, all men shall at last find their account in an upright conduct,
and in that alone. While you have a just sense of these things upon your minds,
you will pursue no unworthy ends: you will have the interest of the public at
heart: you will be inquisitive about the best measures of promoting it; and
attend continually upon this very thing.

IT is an important branch of the legislature for the ensuing year, that is
this day to be chosen; a branch of great honor, weight and influence in the
government. Besides the known part which the gentlemen of that honorable
board, will have to act in a legislative capacity; they will have another,
which demands, at least, equal wisdom, equal uprightness, equal fortitude; that
of freely giving advice, at all times, to the Governor, for the good management
of the public affairs of the government; according to the form of their oath.
The world does not abound with persons, in whom all those qualities concur,
which render them fit for Advisers and counselors, even in matters of far less
moment. But superior wisdom and discretion; a good knowledge of the nature of
government in general; of the British in particular; of our charter rights, and
this provincial constitution; a thorough acquaintance with the circumstances of
the province, and with its true interests; a generous and public spirit; great
honesty and intrepidity, such as will not waver with every gale of popular
breath, or any other breath; these surely are the qualities, which are
naturally expected to be found, in all who have a seat at that respectable
board. Should there be ever seen hereafter, (a supposition which I do not make
without great reluctance; but should there ever be seen hereafter) at the
council board, a person of a low capacity, of little knowledge and discretion;
one, almost ignorant of the laws, government, and circumstances, even of his
own country; one, of a narrow, selfish, avaricious turn; one, of little
integrity and little fortitude; one, afraid to disclose his mind, when advice
is to be given freely for the good management of the public affairs; should
such a one be ever seen hereafter at that board; this, surely would not seem
very agreeable to its known style and character of honorable. And all who are
concerned in the approaching election, will regard those qualities which tend
to support and justify that title; exercising a care proportionate to the
importance and dignity of such a trust: I mean they will do so, provided they
are actuated in this affair, by such principles as become men and Christians;
the principles of fidelity to God, and love to the country. Taking it for
granted therefore, that these are the principles which will govern in the
ensuing choice, in opposition to those of party, personal friendships and
personal enmities; and to all private interest; taking this for granted, I say,
I would now beg leave, honored Fathers, to mention some other things that may
possibly deserve consideration; though with great submission and defference,
knowing that to prescribe, is not my province.

IT may be worth considering, whether we have not some laws in force, hardly
reconcilable with that religious liberty which we profess; and which the Royal
charter expressly requires should be preserved inviolate. A neighboring colony,
we know, has lately been reprimanded on account of some laws of a persecuting
aspect. And whether some of our own, are of a genius and complexion
sufficiently abhorrent from the same spirit, is not, perhaps, unworthy the
consideration of the legislature.

THE state of our College can neither be forgotten, nor enough lamented, by
those who wish to see learning duly honored, and in a flourishing condition.
Indeed if literature and the muses chiefly haunted where poverty resides -- But
this a threadbare topic. -- Long live the names of our venerable forefathers,
who did so much for the promotion of liberal science, in the infant state of
the country! Long, the names of all the generous benefactors to this seminary
of learning! Long, the names of HARVARD, STOUGHTON, HOLLIS, BERKELEY!

THE want of some act effectually to settle claims and quiet possessions,
especially in the frontiers of the Province, is much complained of by many: not
merely, as what renders private property too precarious; but also as what is
prejudicial to the public, in more respects than one.

THERE is such a spirit in some respects, now appearing, and growing, amongst
us, as being duly encouraged by the legislature, cannot, with the ordinary
blessing of providence, but be of happy consequence. We are grown pretty
sensible of the importance of improving our lands, better than formerly; that
so we may not be beholden for our daily bread, unless it is to Him, to whom we
pray for it. It is not improbable, from the late experiments of some public
spirited Gentlemen, that we might have a valuable staple, by means of that
fruit which delights so much in our soil; as well as greatly lessen the
importation of foreign liquors. Something considerable has, of late, been done
toward the establishing of useful manufactures among us: none of which, it is
to be hoped, will fall through and miscarry, for want of proper encouragement
from the government. The fishery now of late projected, and carried on, from
this Capital, cannot fail to be of great Advantage to it, in the low and
declining state of its commerce; and, indeed, to the whole province; at least
as long as the mortifying religion of lent, is upheld in foreign countries. --

To these Things, which have a favorable aspect, may be added the zeal shown
by many for the introduction of foreign Protestants. It is large importations
of this sort, not of other European commodities, that has made one of our
British provinces rich and populous, in the course of a few years; so that, of
an inconsiderable settlement, it now vies with the greatest and most opulent.
And that which may, perhaps, render it the more expedient thus to increase our
numbers, is the probability that we shall, before long, have other employment
than agriculture, and the blessed arts of peace, for many of our own people: I
mean, in curbing and chastizing the insolence of our neighbors on the
Continent; neighbors, whose perfidy renders them a more formidable enemy even
in peace, than either their number or bravery in war.

IT is not a little surprising to many persons abroad, that this government has
been at no greater expense, and taken no more pains, to civilize the natives of
the country; and to propagate amongst them the glorious Gospel of our Redeemer:
Especially considering one professed design of our forefathers in coming
hither, our own high pretensions to religion, and our own interest. Indeed
there is some reason to fear, that even the donations of persons abroad, and
entrusted with others here, in America, for carrying on so pious and good a
design, have not always been applied with that care, impartiality and
faithfulness, which might have been justly expected But this not being a matter
wherein the government is immediately concerned, I shall say no more of it: and
some will, perhaps, think that even this is too much.

IT is to be hoped that You, our honored Rulers, will not neglect any means
that are proper to be used by the government, to humanize and christianize
these poor Salvages. Charity requires this, and requires it the more, because
they will, otherwise, be in great danger of apostatizing from their natural
paganism and barbarity, into that which is worse, the religion of Rome; a
religion, calculated rather to make men wicked, than to keep them from being
so, or to reform them after they are become so. We know the great pains, and
various artifices, that are used by the Romish missionaries, to convert them to
this wicked religion. Nor can One well help calling to mind here, the words of
our blessed Savior: Woe unto you; -- for ye compass sea and land to make one
proselyte; and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell,
etc.

BUT, as was intimated before, were compassion to the souls of these miserable
pagans wholly out of the case, even policy requires us to bring them, if
possible, to embrace the protestant faith. This would be one great means,
amongst others not so proper to be mentioned in this place, of attaching them
to the British interest: Whereas they will, otherwise, probably be our enemies.
And what sort of enemies we are to expect in them, is no hard matter to
conjecture, since the great duties which the missionaries of Rome inculcate
upon their savage converts, are those of butchering and scalping Protestans:
Generous enemies, doubtless, when their native ferocity is whetted and improved
by a religion, that naturally delights in blood and murder!

THAT which seems, at present, chiefly to engage the attention of the public,
is the British settlements on the Continent being now, in a manner, encompassed
by the French. And this is a matter of much more serious importance than it
would be, were it not for the numerous tribes of warlike natives on our back;
who, it is to be feared, are more generally disposed to fall in with that
interest, than with ours. The principal reason of which is, doubtless, this;
That our politic neighbors take much more pains to gain them over, than our
colonies have hitherto done. Nor can it be thought a thing of his importance
for us, by all means that are lawful and practicable, to secure the friendship
of the one, than it is to put a stop to the encroachments of the other. Indeed,
whoever has the friendship of most, or all, of these natives, may probably, in
time, become masters of this part of the Continent. Whether we, or they who are
now making such a resolute push for it, Heaven knows! Query, Whether, if the
Society for propagating the Gospel in foreign Parts, was well acquainted with
the state of religion in these parts of America, Gentlemen of so great piety,
charity, and loyalty, would not rather send Missionaries among the Salvages;
(by which they might, at once, both enlarge the Kingdom of Christ, and increase
the number of his Majesty's friends and subjects) than continue to support
missions here* where the people are already christianized; and also well able
to maintain their own Clergy? Some have suggested, that the Gentlemen of the
worthy and honorable Society mentioned, are not unacquainted with these
circumstances. But is not this supposition very injurious? For if that is
really the case, we must necessarily conclude they wretchedly pervert the
design of the Charities entrusted with them; and that their great aim in
supporting these missions, is not the converting of Heathens to Christianity;
but the converting of Christians of other protestant denominations, to the
faith of the church of England* An imputation, so irreconcilable with their
known probity, honor and catholicism that it can never be believed; and which
must certainly bring theme upon the authors of it, in the end!


The warlike preparations that are made and making, in our southern colonies,
prove that they are not unapprehensive of what may be the consequence of those
quick advances and gigantic strides, which the French are making toward us;
the consequence of the strict alliances they are forming with those Indians who
are already our enemies; of their endeavors to secure such as are yet neuters;
and of their practices, and many artifices, to corrupt those who are in amity
with us. We, surely, who have always distinguished ourselves by a jealousy of
our rights; by our loyalty; and our zeal for the common interest of his
Majesty's dominions on the Continent; We, surely, shall not be inattentive to
these commotions, nor inactive when the general good, yea, the very being, of
all these colonies is threatened. Shall not be inattentive and inactive, did I
say? We are not, we cannot be. We see from the late conduct of our neighbors,
from their recent encroachments, and unprovoked hostilities, (unless to breath
on our own territories be a provocation to such men) we see from these things,
in what manner all controversies about bounds and limits, are to be settled;
how very amicably! Punic faith! unless perhaps, Gallic is become sufficiently
proverbial. No one that is not an absolute stranger to their ambition, to their
policy, to their injustice, to their perfidiousness, can be in any doubt what
they aspire at.

AND, indeed, the progress they have made in a short time, might seem strange,
were it not for their union amongst themselves, and for the nature of their
government. The slaves are content to starve at home, in order to injure
freemen abroad, and to extend their territories by violence and usurpation.
Their late conduct may well alarm us; especially considering our disunion, or
at least want of a sufficient bond of union, amongst ourselves: An
inconvenience, which, it is to be hoped, we shall not always labor under. And
whenever all our scattered rays shall be drawn to a point and proper focus,
they can scarce fail to consume and burn up these enemies of our peace, how
faintly soever they may strike at present. What UNION can do, we need only look
toward those Provinces, which are distinguished by the name of the UNITED, to
know. But in the mean time, each government that considers its own true
interest, will undoubtly concur in such measures as are necessary and
practicable, for the common safety.

OUR present situation, my Fathers, calls to mind that of the tribes of Israel,
surrounded and harassed by their common enemies, at a time when they were under
no common direction. Then it was that Judah said unto Simeon his brother, come
up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I also
will go up with thee into thy lot; so Simeon went with him. Though peace is very
desirable, upon just and honorable terms, yet we know very well, that God's
ancient people were not wont to be frighted out of their possessions; nor
patiently to endure the incursions and ravages of their neighbors. And I am
sure there is not a true New-England-Man, whose heart is not already engaged in
this contest; and whose purse, and his arm also, if need be, is not ready to be
employed in it; in a cause, so just in the sight of God and man; a cause, so
necessary for our own self-defense; a cause wherein our liberties, our
religion, our lives, our bodies, our souls, are all so nearly concerned. We
have, indeed, of late done something to secure ourselves, and are doing more.
We have put our hand to the plough; and he that looks back, is so far from
being worthy the privileges of a citizen of Heaven, that he is not worthy to
enjoy the rights of an Englishman.

WE are morally sure from the steps which our neighbors are taking, that there
must, sooner or later, be some great turn of affairs upon this Continent, which
will put it out of our power, or out of theirs, to dispute about boundaries: We
have heard their threats, and insolent menaces; we have seen their more
insolent behavior. And what a turn may be given to the affairs of Europe,
should Heaven permit Gallic policy and perfidy to prevail here over English
valor, I need not say, and even tremble to think! We are peaceably extending
our settlements upon our own territories; they are extending theirs beyond
their own, by force of arms. We must meet at length; which cannot be without a
violent concusion: and the time seems not to be far off. In short, their
conduct must be very different from what it has all along been, especially of
late, before we shall have any reason to think, that we can live in peace and
good neighborhood with them, how much soever we may desire it. The continent
is not wide enough for us both; and they are resolved to have the whole. -- The
Court of Versailles, for extending the French dominions in America, has ever
adopted this maxim, Divide et Impera; and, in pursuing it, has stuck at no
measures of perfidy, One flagrant instance of this, appears in the murderous
manner of Capt. Howe's being killed, in the year 1750. at (...) by a party of
Indians in the interest, and under the direction, of the French, in presence of
Monsieur Le Corn, their Commandant, when he was received by them under the
protection of a flag of t^u^e: For which outrage, no other cause can be
assigned, than that he had distinguished himself by his activity in the service
of his King and Country, against the attempts of the French in those parts.
or violence, for rooting out their neighbors.

AND what horrid scene is this, which restless, roving fancy, or something of
an higher nature, presents to me* and so chills my blood! Do I behold these
territories of freedom, become the prey of arbitrary power? Do I see the motly
armies of French and painted Salvages, taking our fortresses, and erecting
their own, even in our capital towns and cities! Do I behold them spreading
desolation through the land! Do I see the slaves of Lewis with their Indian
allies, dispossessing the freeborn subjects of King GEORGE, of the inheritance
received from their forefathers, and purchased by them at the expense of their
ease, their treasure, their blood! To aggravate the indignity beyond human
toleration, do I see this goodly patrimony ravished from them, by those who
never knew what property was, except by seizing that of others for an
insatiable Lord! Do I see christianity banished for popery! the bible, for the
mass book! the oracles of truth, for fabulous legends! Do I see the sacred
Edifices erected here to the honor of the true God, and his Son, on the ruins
of pagan superstition and idolatry; erected here, where Satan's seat was; do I
see these sacred Edefices laid in ruins themselves! and others rising in their
places, consecrated to the honor of saints and angels! Instead of a train of
Christ's faithful, laborious ministers, do I behold an herd of lazy Monks, and
Jesuits, and exorcists, and Inquisitors, and cowled, and uncowled impostors! Do
I see a protestant, there, stealing a look at his bible, and being taking in
the fact, punished like a felon! What indignity is yonder offered to the
matrons! and here, to the virgins! Is it now a crime to reverence the hoary
head! And is he alone happy, that takes the little ones, and dasheth them
against the stones! Do I see all liberty, property, religion, happiness,
changed, or rather transubstantiated, into slavery, poverty, superstition,
wretchedness! And, in fine, do I hear the miserable sufferers (those of them
that survive) bitterly accusing the neglegence of the public Guardians! and
charging all their calamities, less upon the enemies, than upon the fathers, of
their country! O dishonest! profane! execrable sight! O piercing sound! that
enters into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath! Where* in what region! in what
world am I! Is this imagination? (its own busy tormentor) Or is it something
more divine? I will not, I cannot believe it is prophetic vision; or that God
has so far abandoned us!

AND how different a scene is now opening upon me, with clearer indications of
truth and reality! There, insolence and injustice punished! Here, "the meek
inheriting the earth!" Liberty victorious! Slavery biting her own chain! Pride
brought down! Virtue exalted! Christianity triumphing over imposture! And
another Great Britain rising in America! But I must not declare the whole --
The Lord God omnipotent reigns! just and true are all thy ways, O thou King
of saints. And them that walk in pride, thou are able to abase! "What has pride
profited! Or what good has vaunting brought you," ye restless disturbers of
our peace! What good, your masses? your relics? your crossings? your Ave
Maria's? And to which of your saints will ye now turn!

BUT we are not, my honored Fathers, to presume, on God's protection, much
less, on his giving us any signal advantages over them that are ever either
planing or executing mischief against us, without using the proper means for
obtaining that protection, and these advantages. As the apostle said to the
mariners, after assuring them of deliverance from the impending danger, "Except
these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved;" so it may be said to our British
colonies, Ye cannot be saved from the storm you are now threatened with, yea,
which is already begun, except ye are at union amongst your selves; and exert
your strength together, for your common interest. Upon this condition, you are
safe, even without a miracle: otherwise, nothing short of one can save you. And
can you, without the utmost indignation, think of becoming a prey to those who
are so much inferior to you in all respects, merely for want of unanimity,
public spirit, the manly resolution of your forefathers, and a little expense!

IT is not, may it please your Excellency, (for to You, Sir, I must now beg
leave more particularly to direct my discourse; It is not) one of the least
felicities of this province, to have at the Head of it, a gentleman so well
acquainted with its true interest, so capable of serving it, and so heartily
disposed to do it, as we have reason to think your Excellency is. We have had
experience of your warm zeal for his Majesty's service, and for the welfare of
this his most loyal province. In the long war during your administration, had
all concerned been, I will not presume to say, equally faithful, but, equally
successful, neither the European, nor the American Dunkirk* would probably have
been a port and fortification at this day; or, which is still better, they
might have been in other hands than they are at present. However we, in some
measure, reap the happy fruits of your subjecting the latter of them to the
British crown, in the change of our medium; and are likely, by God's blessing,
to reap them in much greater perfection hereafter, when time has matur'd them.

THE zeal which your Excellency has lately shown with relation to the
encroachments and hostilities of our bad neighbors, gives us assurance, Sir,
that nothing will be wanting, on your part, toward their meeting with timely
and effectual opposition. And the ready concurrence of the other branches of
the legislature, with what you was pleased to propose to the last General
Assembly, at once shows the confidence that is placed in you, and renders it
probable, at least, that no necessary supplies will be wanting hereafter, in
order to prosecute designs of this nature; whether of erecting fortresses for
our own security, or of demolishing in season, those of our injurious and
trespassing neighbors. Crown-Point, Crown-Point, will surely be a lasting
Monument of the danger of delays in such Cases!

IT is upon your Excellency, under God and the King, that we chiefly depend for
protection and happiness. We are sensible how much you have the union of these
colonies at heart. Nor can we, without an implicit taxing of your former
administration, which we would be far from doing, doubt but that, for the
future, you will use all your power and influence for the good of this province
in particular; and of all His Majesty's dominions on this Continent in general.
You will never forget, Sir, whose minister you are; what God, the King, and
this people, reasonably expect from You, considering the paternal relation in
which you stand toward us.

IN some respects we have peculiar need of a faithful and skilful pilot at this
time. By the looks of the clouds, we are to expect bad weather; such as will
require an experienced and resolute mariner to carry us safely and happily
through it. But if that which has the appearance of a long and violent storm
gathering, or rather actually breaking upon us, should soon blow over, and
leave us a clear sky; yet even when the Heavens are serene, and the gale
prosperous, it demands at least an upright heart, (such a one as we trust your
Excellency is possessed of) to keep the state in the right channel, and steer
her to her true felicity.

AND as we are confident, Sir, you will in all things do the duty of a good
Governor toward us; so it is to be hoped, that Your public services will
never meet with an ungrateful return from us. But I may venture, at least, to
assure Your Excellency, that none of Your good deeds shall be forgotten by our
common Master in Heaven. He, whose providence has put you into this place of
honor and trust, will surely recompense all the diligence and fidelity which
you have shown in it already, or shall show hereafter, at the resurrection of
the just. Nor can we wish You, Sir, any greater felicity, than that You may, in
every respect, discharge this important trust in such a manner, as to have His
approbation at the last; and to be accounted a good and faithful servant.

I could not, with propriety, and in due consistency with the established form
of our government, apply myself particularly to his Majesty's Council for the
present political year, now expiring, unless it were with relation to the new
Election this afternoon, wherein they are to bear a part. But having nothing to
add upon that subject, to what has been said already, to them in common with
others concerned; It is humbly hoped, that the omission of a particular address
to that honorable Board, will not be imputed even to forgetfulness, much less,
to any disrespect.

THE honorable House of Representatives, at the command of whose predecessors
it is, that I appear in this place, will indulge me in a short application to
them.

As You, honored Gentlemen, are delegated immediately by the good people of
the Province, to represent, and act for, them; You are, if possible, under a
nearer and stricter obligation, to regard their welfare, than the other
branches of the legislature. You are more particularly the guardians of their
rights and privileges. It is, therefore, to be presumed, that you will always
be zealous to maintain them; and not only so, but, in all things, studious of
their real and best interest. Private, personal interest, You are very
sensible, has nothing to do in the supreme Court of the province. You are not
deputed hereto by your constituents, Gentlemen, that you may prosecute your
particular interests, or the interests of others, any farther than they
coincide with the common good, and are involved in it. Nor can you be at any
loss, what ought to be done to the vile, mercenary tongue, that should toil;
what, to the guilty hand, that right hand of falsehood, which should either be
lifted up, or kept down, to serve the particular ends of any man or party
whatever, to the detriment of the public! Such things are indeed, almost too
infamous and horrid, to be supposed possible, in a Christian country. But alas!
it is a degenerate world, if not a corrupt age of it, that we live in! --

HOWEVER, it were very injurious to suspect, honored Gentlemen, but that You
are all assembled here, from different parts of the land, with upright views,
and an ardent love to your country. And if You mean to serve the public, as
doubtless you do, you will always study the things that make for peace, both
amongst yourselves, and with the other branches of the legislature: For it is
by these things only, that the commonwealth is edified: not, surely, by party
disputes and factions; not by indulged animosities, and studied oppositions;
which greatly dishonor and weaken any government; and have both their origin
and end in evil. They who promote and foment them, have always something else
in view than, what they would be though it to have, the public good. This is,
indeed, always the pretense; but private pique, or private interest, or a
general temper and turn to wrangling, is at the bottom. It is, usually at
least, the pursuit of separate, distinct interests, and a want of public
spirit, that is the source of party and contentions in any state. When all are
united heartily in the main end, having nothing so much in view, as the good of
the public; party names, distinctions, and disputes, vanish of course; and that
unanimity and harmony take place, which give both beauty and strength to
government; and without which, the public affairs cannot be carried on, to
advantage. A public spirit, is a spirit of union; and union is the source of
public happiness: and public happiness is the great end which you should have
in view.

As you, honored Gentlemen, have a distinct part in the legislature, nothing
considerable can be done without You, for the public good; and I may add, or
contrary to it: though I am far from thinking, that this is designed by any. God
forbid! But the granting of moneys, a thing of the utmost importance, lies more
immediately with You. And though you will always have a tender concern for the
interest of your respective constituents, yet You will have a greater, for the
good of the whole Province; to be sure, for the common interest of his
Majesty's dominions on this Continent. Nor will You be over thrifty, when that
calls for liberality. And this will probably be the case before it is long, if
it is not actually so already.

I speak now with particular reference to the necessary defense of this, and
all these colonies, against those who are making inroads upon us; and who have,
even within the space of a few weeks, had the hardiness to commit such
hostilities as are not to be endured, unless we are determined to sit down in
inglorious ease, and patiently to look on, while our trade with the natives is
ravished from us; our fortresses, taken; our friends and brethren, captivated,
butchered, scalped; our fields, laid waste; our territories, possessed by those
that hate us; and the British interest on the Continent brought to nothing.
Peace is a great blessing; peace is what we would choose; peace is the desire of
all who deserve the name of Christians. But shall the trumpet sleep? Shall the
sword rust? Shall our gold and silver lie cankering in our coffers? Shall our
military garments be moth-eaten for want of use, when such things are doing! It
is impossible, Gentlemen, you should be any ways backward, or parsimonious, in
such a cause as this; (...) cause wherein the glory of God, the honor of your
King, and the good of your country, are so deeply concerned; I might perhaps
add, a cause, whereon the liberties of Europe depend. For of so great
consequence is the empire of North America, (and that, you are sensible, is the
thing now aimed at by our neighbors) that it must turn the scale of power
greatly in favor of the only Monarch, from whom those liberties are in danger;
and against that Prince, who is the grand support and bulwark of them. Consider
then, Gentlemen, in the name of God, consider, what you owe Him, and to your
holy religion; what, to the protestant interest in general; what, to your King
and to Great Britain, in particular; what, to your native country; what, to the
honor of your Ancestors; what, to the present generation; what, to future
ones; what, to yourselves; and what, to those whom the God of nature has made
dearer to you than yourselves, your children. It is even uncertain, Gentlemen,
how long you will have an House to sit in, unless a speedy and vigorous
opposition is made to the present encroachments, and to the farther designs, of
our enemies! This, surely, is not a time to be saving, unless in our private
expenses.

AND while I am speaking of grants for the common good, I cannot but just add,
That neither the honor of the Province can be promoted, at present, nor its
true interest, in the end, by great parsimony toward those who serve the
public in a public capacity; and receive salaries from it. There is another
thing which I would beg leave to hint at here. So far, honored Gentlemen, as
fixing the proportion which the different parts of the Community are
respectively to bear in the public Expenses, lies with You, You will doubtless
be far from desiring, that any particular part, should bear a greater
proportion than is just and equal; being regulated by its ability and
circumstances relatively considered. You are too religious, just and impartial
to desire this. A certain part of this Community (which surely there is no need
of mentioning!) has fallen under such great decays and difficulties of late,
through that same Providence, which has been smiling upon the other parts of the
Province; that I verily believe righteous Heaven will be justly and greatly
provoked, unless some pity and relief is afforded to it. Poor BOSTON! once the
Glory of British America, What art thou coming to! What, rather, art thou come
to already! --

A marginal note, omitted in its proper place, page 30. where the introducing
of foreigners is spoken of, is inserted here, as follows*




Though the Province alluded to, has in fact been made both populous and rich, by
the introduction of foreigners; yet it is apprehended, that some
inconveniences may arise hereafter, if they have not arisen already, for want
of due precaution in the distribution of them, etc. Which inconveniences will,
doubtless, be guarded against, by any others of our British Colonies and
Plantations, which shall bring in great numbers of such Settlers; this not
being impracticable, though there may be some difficulty attending it. And although
it should be though it, that the Germans in Pensylvania, however they had been
disposed of, and whatever precautions had been taken with regard to them, are
too numerous in proportion to the other Inhabitants; yet the Province of the
Massachusetts is already so populous with English, that there see^s not to be
the least, or most remote, danger here, of too large importations of this
nature.
IN fine, honored Gentlemen, I persuade myself, that you will, in all your
debates and consultations, in all you do in your political, as well as private
capacity, remember you are to give an account of yourselves to the all-knowing,
all-just, and impartial Judge of the world. And if you keep this most solemn
and awful truth uppermost in your minds, it will be almost impossible for you
to do amiss. You will then act, in all respects, with such a disinterested view
to the common good of your country; with such unblemished, irreproachable
integrity, as will be both acceptable to God your Savior, and to those for
whom you act; with such prudence and fidelity, at least, as will afford no
handle to persons of captious tempers, and licentious tongues, under the
pretext of blaming former Houses, to couch a real and just sarcasm on the
present.

IF any thing has been said in this discourse, not sufficiently conformable to
the usual style of the pulpit; if, any thing that approaches too near to
politics; if the discourse has not been enough confined to matters altogether
spiritual; if our temporal and worldly concernments have been too long dwelt
upon; in fine, if there has been any greater liberty of speech used; if, any
greater pathos of expression, than becomes an English subject, a lover of his
country, and a protestant Minister, upon such an occasion, and at such a
juncture, as the present; if this is the case, as perhaps it is, the great
candor of the audience is humbly relied on, to make the most favorable
apology, that the nature of the thing will admit of, for him that has thus
transgressed. And that will be, at least, as good a one, as any he could make
for himself, should he attempt one. But an apology would certainly be necessary
in another respect, were this discourse protracted to a much greater length. My
Reverend fathers and brethren in the ministry, will therefore readily excuse
me, if I do not honor myself by a particular address to them, as is customary
upon these occasions: Though the subject I have been upon, is very applicable,
not only to civil Rulers; but also to those whom our blessed Lord has counted
faithful, putting them into the ministry.

HOWEVER, I cannot conclude without just reminding this great assembly, That
all men have certain talents committed to them, for which they are accountable
to him that gave them. The least and lowest of us need not live without
honoring God, in some way or other, and being, in a degree, serviceable to the
world. Nor shall any one that is faithful to his trust, lose his reward; though
he is so far from being in a capacity to do great and extensive good in his
generation, that he can only give a cup of cold water to a disciple in the name
of a disciple. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that he has not. As we have many
members in one body, and all members have not the same office; so we, being
many, are one body in Christ, and members one of another. Having then gifts
differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether ministry, let us
wait on our ministering; or he that exhorts, on exhortation; he that gives,
let him do it in simplicity; he that rules, with diligence; And, in all of us,
let love be without dissimulation, while we abhor that which is evil, and
cleave to that which is good. Thus, through faith, and patience in well doing,
shall we at length inherit the promises: for "he is faithful that has promised."

WE must unavoidably concern ourselves, in some measure, about the things of
this mortal life, so long as it shall please the Father of spirits to continue
us in it. But our great interest lies in another region, far beyond the sphere
and verge of mortality. And whosoever is faithful to the death, shall receive a
crown of life, that fades not. There is nothing here, Men, Brethren and
Fathers! there is nothing here, that can claim our highest love and affections.
"All that comes is vanity." Riches take to themselves wings; pleasures pall;
"favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain." All things are full of change, and
in perpetual rotation. The fashion of the world passes away; and God alone is
without variableness, and shadow of turning. Even all the kingdoms of the
earth, though they had their foundations laid in iron and brass and adamant, must
sooner or later, be dissolved; and their place be no where found. All empire
shall be blotted out, exceping HIS, of whom, and through whom, and to whom, are
all things. All shall terminate in a Monarchy, truly universal. The kingdom of
the glorious Mediator, shall first break in pieces, consume, and absorb all
inferior ones. And when He shall have put down all rule, and all authority,
and power, and subdued all things unto himself, then comes the end, when, as
the scriptures inform us, even He shall no longer reign; but deliver up the
kingdom to GOD, even the FATHER, that put all things under him; that GOD may be
ALL IN ALL.

THE END.
ERRORS of the Press, that have escaped, are left to the Judgment and Candor of
the Reader to correct.


