SOME CONSIDERATIONS On the KEEPING of NEGROES. Recommended to the PROFESSORS
of CHRISTIANITY of every DENOMINATION.

By JOHN WOOLMAN.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by JAMES CHATTIN, in Church-Alley. 1754.

INTRODUCTION.
CUSTOMS generally approved, and Opinions received by Youth from their
Superiors, become like the natural Produce of a Soil, especially when they are
suited to favorite Inclinations: But as the Judgments of God are without
Partiality, by which the State of the Soul must be tried, it would be the
highest Wisdom to forego Customs and popular Opinions, and try the Treasures of
the Soul by the infallible Standard Truth.

NATURAL Affection needs a careful Examination: Operating upon us in a soft
Manner; it kindles Desires of Love and Tenderness, and there is Danger of
taking it for something higher. To me it appears an Instinct like that which
inferior Creatures have; each of them, we see, by the Ties of Nature, love Self
by; that which is a Part of Self they love by the same Tie or Instinct. In them
it in some Measure does the Offices of Reason, by which, among other Things,
they watchfully keep, and orderly feed their helpless Offspring. Thus Natural
Affection appears to be a Branch of Self-love, good in the Animal Race, in us
likewise, with proper Limitations; but otherwise is productive of Evil, by
exciting Desires to promote some by Means prejudicial to others.

OUR Blessed Savior seems to give a Check to this irregular Fondness in
Nature, and, at the same Time, a President for us: Who is my Mother, and who
are my Brethren? Thereby intimating, that the earthly Ties of Relationship,
are, comparatively, inconsiderable to such who, through a steady Course of
Obedience, have come to the happy Experience of the Spirit of God bearing
witness with their Spirits that they are his Children: -- And he stretched
forth his Hands toward his Disciples, and said, Behold my Mother and my
Brethren: For whosoever shall do the Will of my Father which is in Heaven
(arrives at the more noble Part of true Relationship) the same is my Brother,
and Sister, and Mother, Mat. xii. 48.

THIS Doctrine agrees well with a State truly complete, where Love necessarily
operates according to the Agreeableness of Things on Principles unalterable and
in themselves perfect.

IF endeavoring to have my Children eminent amongst Men after my Death, be
that which no Reasons grounded on those Principles can be brought to support;
then to be temperate in my Pursuit after Gain, and to keep always within the
Bounds of those Principles, is an indispensable Duty, and to depart from it, a
dark unfruitful Toil.

IN our present Condition, to love our Children is needful; but except this
Love proceeds from the true heavenly Principle which sees beyond earthly
Treasures, it will rather be injurious than of any real Advantage to them:
Where the Fountain is corrupt, the Streams must necessarily be impure.

THAT important Injunction of our Savior, Mat. vi. 33. with the Promise
annexed, contains a short but comprehensive View of our Duty and Happiness: --
If then the Business of Mankind in this Life, is, to first seek another; if
this cannot be done, but by attending to the Means; if a Summary of the Means
is, Not to do that to another which, in like Circumstances, we would not have
done unto us, then these are Points of Moment, and worthy of our most serious
Consideration.

WHAT I write on this Subject is with Reluctance, and the Hints given are in as
general Terms as my Concern would allow: I knew it is a Point about which in
all its Branches Men that appear to aim well are not generally agreed, and for
that Reason I chose to avoid being very particular: -- If I may happily have
let drop any Thing that may excite such as are concerned in the Practice to a
close Thinking on the Subject treated of, the Cand(...) amongst them may easily
do the Subject such further justice, as, on an impartial Enquiry it may appear
to deserve; and such an Enquiry I would earnestly recommend.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS On the KEEPING of NEGROES.
Forasmuch as ye did it to the least of these my Brethren, ye did it unto me,

Matt. xxv. 40.
AS Many Times there are different Motives to the same Actions; and one does
that from a generous Heart, which another does for selfish Ends: -- The like
may be said in this Case.

THERE are various Circumstances amongst them that keep Negroes, and different
Ways by which they fall under their Care; and, I doubt not, there are many well
disposed Persons amongst them who desire rather to manage wisely and justly in
this difficult Matter, than to make Gain of it.

BUT the general Disadvantage which these poor Africans lie under in an
enlight'ned Christian Country, having often filled me with real Sadness, and
been like undigested Matter on my Mind, I now think it my Duty, through Divine
Aid, to offer some Thoughts thereon to the Consideration of others.

WHEN we remember that all Nations are of one Blood, Genesis iii. 20. that in this
World we are but Sojourners, that we are subject to the like Afflictions and
Infirmities of Body, the like Disorders and Frailties in Mind, the like
Temptations, the same Death, and the same Judgment, and, that the Alwise Being
is Judge and Lord over us all, it seems to raise an Idea of a general
Brotherhood, and a Disposition easy to be touched with a Feeling of each others
Afflictions: But when we forget those Thing and look chiefly at our outward
Circumstances, in this and some Ages past, constantly retaining in our Minds
the Distinction betwixt us and them, with respect to our Knowledge and
Improvement in Things divine, natural and artificial, our Breasts being apt to
be filled with fond Notions of Superiority; there is Danger of erring in our
Conduct toward them.

WE allow them to be of the same Species with ourselves, the Odds is, we are in
a higher Station, and enjoy greater Favors than they: And when it is thus,
that our heavenly Father endoweth some of his Children with distinguished
Gifts, they are intended for good Ends; but if those thus gifted are thereby
lifted up above their Brethren, not considering themselves as Debtors to the
Weak, nor behaving themselves as faithful Stewards, none who judge impartially
can suppose them free from Ingratitude.

WHEN a People dwell under the liberal Distribution of Favors from Heaven, it
behooves them carefully to inspect their Ways, and consider the Purposes for
which those Favors were bestowed, lest, through Forgetfulness of God, and
Misusing his Gifts, they incur his heavy Displeasure, whose Judgments are just
and equal, who exalts and humbles to the Dust as he sees meet.

IT appears by Holy Record that Men under high Favors have been apt to err in
their Opinions concerning others. Thus Israel, according to Description of the
Prophet, Isai. lxv. 5. when exceedingly corrupted and degenerated, yet
remembered they were the chosen People of God, and could say, Stand by thyself,
come not near me, for I am belier than thou. That this was no chance Language,
but their common Opinion of other People, more fully appears by considering the
Circumstances which attended when God was beginning to fulfill his precious
Promises concerning the Gathering of the Gentiles.

THE Most High, in a Vision, undeceived Peter, first prepared his Heart to
believe; and, at the House of Cornelius, showed him of a Certainty that God was
no Respector of Persons.

THE Effusion of the Holy Ghost upon a People with whom they, the Jewish
Christians, would not so much as cat, was strange to them: All they of the
Cirqumcision were astonished to see it; and the Apostles and Brethren of Judea
contended with Peter about it, till he, having rehearsed the whole Matter, and
fully shown that the Father's Love was unlimited, they are thereat sttuck with
Admiration, and cry out; Then has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance
unto Life!

THE Opinion of peculiar Favors being confined to them, was deeply rooted, or
else the above Instance had been less strange to them, for these Reasons:
First, They were generally acquainted with the Writings of the Prophets, by
whom this Time was repeatedly spoken of, and pointed at. Secondly, Our Blessed
Lord shortly before expressly said, I have other Sheep, not of this Fold, them
also must I bring, etc. Lastly, His Words to them after his Resurrection, at
the very Time of his Ascension, Ye shall be Witnesses, to me, not only in
Jerusalem, Judea, and Samaria, but to the uttermost Parts of the Earth.

THOSE concuring Circumstances, one would think, might have raised a strong
Expectation of seeing such a Time; yet; when it came, it proved Matter of
Offense and Astonishment.

To consider Mankind otherwise than Brethren, to think Favors are peculiar to
one Nation, and exclude others, plainly supposes a Darkness in the
Understanding: For as God's Love is universal, so where the Mind is
sufficiently influenced by it, it begets a Likeness of itself, and the Heart is
enlarged toward all Men. Again, to conclude a People froward, perverse, and
worse by Nature than others (who ungratefully receive Favors, and apply them
to bad Ends) this will excite a Behavior toward them unbecoming the Excellence
of true Religion.

To prevent such Error, let us calmly consider their Circumstance; and, the
better to do it, make their Case ours. Suppose, then, that our Ancestors and we
had been exposed to constant Servitude in the more servile and inferior
Employments of Life; that we had been destitute of the Help of Reading and good
Company; that amongst ourselves we had had few wise and pious Instructors; that
the Religious amongst our Superiors seldom took Notice of us, that while
others, in Ease, have plentifully heaped up the Fruit of our Labor, we had
received barely enough to relieve Nature, and being wholly at the Command of
others, had generally been treated as a contemptible, ignorant Part of Mankind:
Should we, in that Case, be less abject than they now are? Again, If Oppression
be so hard to bear, that a wise Man is made mad by it, Eccl. vii. 7. then a
Series of those Things altering the Behavior and Manners of a People, is what
may reasonably be expected.

WHEN our Property is taken contrary to our Mind, by Means appearing to us
unjust, it is only through divine Influence, and the Enlargement of Heart from
thence proceeding, that we can love our reputed Oppressors: If the Negroes fall
short in this, an uneasy, if not a disconsolate Disposition, will be awak'ned,
and remain like Seeds in their Minds, producing Sloth and many other Habits
appearing odious to us, with which being free Men, they, perhaps, had not been
chargeable. These, and other Circumstances, rightly considered, will lessen
that too great Disparity, which some make between us and them.

INTEGRITY of Heart has appeared in some of them; so that if we continue in
the Word of Christ (previous to Discipleship, John viii. 31.) and our Conduct
toward them be seasoned with his Love, we may hope to see the good Effect of
it: The which, in a good Degree, is the Case with some into whose Hands they
have fallen: But that too many treat them otherwise, not seeming concious of
any Neglect, is, alas! too evident.

WHEN Self-love presides in our Minds, our Opinions are bias'd in our own
Favor; in this Condition, being concerned with a People so situated, that they
have no Voice to plead their own Cause, there is Danger of using ourselves to an
undisturbed Partiality, till, by long Custom, the Mind becomes reconciled with
it, and the Judgment itself infected.

To humbly apply to God for Wisdom, that we may thereby be enabled to see
Things as they are, and ought to be, is very needful; hereby the hidden Things
of Darkness may be brought to light, and the Judgment made clear: We shall then
consider Mankind as Brethren: Though different Degrees and a Variety of
Qualifications and Abilities, one dependant on another, be admitted, yet high
Thoughts will be laid aside, and all Men treated as becomes the Sons of one
Father, agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ Jesus.

HE has laid down the best Criterion, by which Mankind ought to judge of their
own Conduct, and others judge for them of theirs, one toward another, viz.
Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them. I take
it, that all Men by Nature, are equally entitled to the Equity of this Rule,
and under the indispensable Obligations of it. One Man ought not to look upon
another Man, or Society of Men, as so far beneath him, but that he should put
himself in their Place, in all his Actions toward them, and bring all to this
Test, viz. How should I approve of this Conduct, were I in their Circumstance
and they in mine? A. Arsect's Considerations, Part III. Fol 107.

THIS Doctrine being of a moral unchangeable Nature, has been likewise
inculcated in the former Dispensation; If a Stranger sojourn with thee in your
Land ye shall not vex him; but the Stranger that dwells with you, shall be as
One born amongst you, and thou shall love him as thyself Lev. xix. 33, 34. Had
these People come voluntarily and dwelt amongst us, to have called them
Strangers would be proper and their being brought by Force, with Regret, and a
languishing Mind, may well raise Compassion in a Heart rightly disposed: But
there is Nothing in such Treatment, which upon a wise and judicious
Consideration, will any Ways lesser their Right of being treated as Strangers.
If the Treatment which many of them meet with, be rightly examined and compared
with those Precepts, Thou shall not vex him nor oppress him; he shall be as one
born amongst you, and thou shall love him as thyself, Lev. xix. 33. Deuteronomy xxvii.
19. there will appear an important Difference betwixt them.

IT may be objected there is Cost of Purchase, and Risque of their Lives to
them who possess 'em, and therefore needful that they make the best Use of
their Time: In a Practice just and reasonable, such Objections may have Weight;
but if the Work be wrong from the Beginning, there is little or no Force in
them. If I purchase a Man who has never forfeited his Liberty, the natural
Right of Freedom is in him; and shall I keep him and his Posterity in Servitude
and Ignorance? How should I approve of this Conduct, were I in his
Circumstances, and he in mine? It may be thought, that to treat them as we
would willingly be treated, our Gain by them would be inconsiderable: And it
were, in diverse Respects, better that there were none in our Country.

WE may further consider, that they are now amongst us, and those of our Nation
the Cause of their being here; that whatsoever Difficulty accrues thereon, we
are justly chargeable with, and to bear all Inconveniences attending it, with
a serious and weighty Concern of Mind to do our Duty by them, is the best we
can do. To seek a Remedy by continuing the Oppression, because we have Power to
do it, and see others do it, will, I apprehend, not be doing as we would be
done by.

HOW deeply soever Men are involved in the most exquisite Difficulties,
Sincerity of Heart, and upright Walking before God, freely submitting to his
Providence, is the most sure Remedy: He only is able to relieve, not only
Persons, but Nations, in their greatest Calamities.

DAVID, in a great Strait, when the Sense of his past Error, and the full
Expectation of an impending Calamity, as the Reward of it, were united to the
agravating his Distress, after some Deliberation, says, Let me fall now into
the Hands of the Lord, for very great are his Mercies; let me not fall into the
Hand of Man, 1 Chronicles. xxi. 13.

TO act continually with Integrity of Heart, above all narrow or selfish
Motives, is a sure Token of our being Partakers of that Salvation which God
has appointed for Walls and Bulwarks, Isa. v. 26. Romans xv. 8. and is, beyond
all Contradiction, a more happy Situation than can ever be promised by the
utmost Reach of Art and Power united, not proceeding from heavenly Wisdom.

A SUPPLY to Nature's lawful Wants, joined with a peaceful, humble Mind, is the
truest Happiness in this Life; and if here we arrive to this, and remain to
walk in the Path of the Just, our Case will be truly happy: And though herein
we may part with, or miss of some glaring Shows of Riches, and leave our
Children little else but wise Instructions, a good Example, and the Knowledge
of some honest Employment, these, with the Blessing of Providence, are
sufficient for their Happiness, and are more likely to prove so, than laying up
Treasures for them, which are often rather a Snare, than any real Benefit;
especially to them, who, instead of being exampled to Temperance, are in all
Things taught to prefer the getting of Riches, and to eye the temporal
Distinctions they give, as the principal Business of this Life. These readily
overlook the true Happiness of Man, as it results from the Enjoyment of all
Things in the Fear of God, and, miserably substituting an inferior Good,
dangerous in the Acquiring, and uncertain in the Fruition, they are subject to
many Disappointments, and every Sweet carries its Sting.

IT is the Conclusion of our blessed Lord and his Apostles, as appears by their
Lives and Doctrines, that the highest Delights of Sense, or most pleasing
Objects visible, ought ever to be accounted infinitely inferior to that real
intellectual Happiness suited to Man in his primitive Innocence, and now to be
found in true Renovation of Mind; and that the Comforts of our present Life,
the Things most grateful to us, ought always to be received with Temperance,
and never made the chief Objects of our Desire, Hope, or Love: But that our
whole Heart and Affections be principally looking to that City, which has
Foundations, whose Maker and Builder is God. Did we so improve the Gifts
bestowed on us, that our Children might have an Education suited to these
Doctrines, and our Example to confirm it, we might rejoice in Hopes of their
being Heirs of an Inheritance incorruptible.

THIS Inheritance as Christians, we esteem the most valuable; and how then can
we fail to desire it for our Children? O that we were consistent with
ourselves, in pursuing Means necessary to obtain it!

IT appears, by Experience, that where Children are educated in Fullness, Ease
and Idleness, evil Habits are more prevalent, than in common amongst such who
are prudently employed in the necessary Affairs of Life: And if Children are
not only educated in the Way of so great Temptation, but have also the
Opportunity of lording it over their Fellow Creatures, and being Masters of Men
in their Childhood, how can we hope otherwise than that their tender Minds will
be possessed with Thoughts too high for them? Which, by Continuance, gaining
Strength, will prove, like a slow Current, gradually separating them from (or
keeping from Acquaintance with) that Humility and Meekness in which alone
lasting Happiness can be enjoyed.

MAN is born to labor, and Experience abundantly shows, that it is for our
Good: But where the Powerful lay the Burden on the Inferior, without affording
a Christian Education, and suitable Opportunity of improving the Mind, and a
Treatment which we, in their Case, should approve, that themselves may live at
Ease, and fare sumptuously, and lay up Riches for their Posterity, this seems
to concradict the Design of Providence, and, I doubt, is sometimes the Effect
of a perverted Mind: For while the Life of one is made grievous by the Rigor
of another, it entails Misery on both.

AMONGST the manifold Works of Providence, displayed in the different Ages of
the World, these which follow (with many others) may afford Instruction.

ABRAHAM was called of God to leave his Country and Kindred, to sojourn amonst
Strangers: Through Famine, and Danger of Death, he was forced to flee from one
Kingdom to another: He, at length, not only had Assurance of being the Father
of many Nations, but became a mighty Prince, Genesis xxiii. 6.

REMARKABLE was the Dealings of God with Jacob in a low Estate, the just Sense
he retained of them after his Advancement, appears by his Words; I am not
worthy of the Least of all thy Mercies, Genesis xxxii. 10. xlviii. 15.

THE numerous Afflictions of Joseph, are very singular; the particular
Providence of God therein, no less manifest: He, at length, became Governor of
Egypt, and famous for Wisdom and Virtue.

THE Series of Troubles David passed through, few amongst us are ignorant of;
and yet he afterward became as one of the great Men of the Earth.

SOME Evidences of the Divine Wisdom appears in those Things, in that such who
are intended for high Stations, have first been very low and dejected, that
Truth might be sealed on their Hearts, and that the Characters there imprinted
by Bitterness and Adversity, might in after Years remain, suggesting
compassionate Ideas, and, in their Prosperity, quicken their Regard to those in
the like Condition: Which yet further appears in the Case of Israel: They were
well acquainted with grievous Sufferings, a long and rigorous Servitude, then,
through many notable Events, were made Chief amongst the Nations: To them we
find a Repetition of Precepts to the Purpose abovesaid: Though, for Ends
agreeable to infinite Wisdom, they were chose as a peculiar People for a Time;
yet the Most High acquaints them, that his Love is not confined, but extends to
the Stranger; and, to excite their Compassion, reminds them of Times past, Ye
were Strangers in the Land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. x. 19. Again, Thou shall not oppress
a Stranger, for ye know the Heart of a Stranger, seeing ye were Strangers in
the Land of Egypt, Exodus xxiii. 9.

IF we call to Mind our Beginning, some of us may find a Time, wherein our
Fathers were under Afflictions, Reproaches, and manifold Sufferings.

RESPECTING our Progress in this Land, the Time is short since our Beginning
was small and Number few, compared with the native Inhabitants. He that sleeps
not by Day nor Night, has watched over us, and kept us as the Apple of his
Eye. His Almighty Arm has been round about us, and saved us from Dangers.

THE Wilderness and solitary Deserts in which our Fathers passed the Days of
their Pilgrimage, are now turned into pleasant Fields; the Natives are gone
from before us, and we established peaceably in the Possesssion of the Land,
enjoying our civil and religious Liberties; and, while many Parts of the World
have groaned under the heavy Calamities of War, our Habitation remains quiet,
and our Land fruitful.

WHEN we trace back the Steps we have trodden, and see how the Lord has opened
a Way in the Wilderness for us, to the Wise it will easily appear, that all
this was not done to be buried in Oblivion; but to prepare a People for more
fruitful Returns, and the Remembrance thereof, ought to humble us in
Prosperity, and excite in us a Christian Benevolence toward our Inferiors.

IF we do not consider these Things aright, but, through a stupid Indolence,
conceive Views of Interest, separate from the general Good of the great
Brotherhood, and, in Pursuance thereof, treat our Inferiors with Rigor, to
increase our Wealth, and gain Riches for our Children, what then shall we do,
when God rises up, and when he visits, what shall we Answer him? Did not he
that made Us, make Them, and Did not one Fashion us in the Womb? Job. xxxi. 14.

TO our great Master we stand or fall, to judge or condemn is most suitable to
his Wisdom and Authority; my Inclination is to persuade, and entreat, and
simply give Hints of my Way of Thinking.

IF the Christian Religion be considered, both respecting its Doctrines, and
the happy Influence which it has on the Minds and Manners of all real
Christians, it looks reasonable to think, that the miraculous Manifestation
thereof to the World, is a Kindness beyond Expression.

ARE we the People thus favored Are we they whose Minds are opened influenced,
and governed by the Spirit of Christ, and thereby made Sons of God? Is it not a
fair Conclusion, that we, like our heavenly Father, ought, our Degree, to be
active in the far great Cause, of the Eternal Happin(...) of, at least, our
whole Families, and more, if thereto capacitated?

IF we, by the Operation of the Spirit of Christ, become Heirs with him in the
Kingdom of his Father, and are redeemed from the alluring counterfeit Joys of
this World, and the Joy of Christ remain in us, to suppose that One remaining
in this happy Condition, can for the Sake of earthly Riches, not only deprive
his Fellow Creatures of the Sweetness of Freedom (which, rightly used, is one
of the greatest temporal Blessings) but therewith neglect using proper Means,
for their Acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures, and the Advantage of true
Religion, seems, at least, a Contradiction to Reason.

WHOEVER rightly advocates the Cause of some, thereby promotes the Good of all.
The State of Mankind was harmonious in the Beginning, and though Sin has
introduced Discord, yet, through the wonderful Love of God, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, the Way is open for our Redemption, and Means appointed to restore us to
primitive Harmony. That if one suffer, by the Unfaithfulness of another, the
Mind, the most noble Part of him that occasions the Discord, is thereby
alienated from its true and real Happiness.

OUR Duty and Interest is inseparably united, and when we neglect or misuse our
Talents, we necessarily depart from the heavenly Fellowship, and are in the Way
to the greatest of Evils.

THEREFORE, to examine and prove ourselves, to find what Harmony the Power
presiding in us bears with the Divine Nature, is a Duty not more incumbent and
necessary, than it would be beneficial.

IN Holy Writ the Divine Being says of himself, I am the Lord, which exercise
Loving Kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth; for in those Things I
delight, says the Lord, Jer. ix. 24. Again, speaking in the Way of Man, to
show his Compassion to Israel, whose Wickedness had occasioned a Calamity, and
then being humbled under it, it is said, His Soul was grieved for their
Miseries, Judge x. 16. If we consider the Life of our Blessed Savior when on
Earth, as it was recorded by his Followers, we shall find, that one uniform
Desire for the eternal, and temporal Good of Mankind, discovered itself in all
his Actions.

IF we observe Men, both Apostles and others, in many different Ages, who have
really come to the Unity of the Spirit, and the Fellowship of the Saints, there
still appears the like Disposition, and in them the Desire of the real
Happiness of Mankind, has out-ballanced the Desire of Ease, Liberty, and, many
Times, Life itself.

IF upon a true Search, we find that our Natures are so far renewed, that to
exercise Righteousness and Loving Kindness (according to our Ability) toward
all Men, without Respect of Persons, is easy to us, or is our Delight; if our
Love be so orderly, and regular, that he who does the Will of our Father, who
is in Heaven, appears in our View, to be our nearest Relation, our Brother, and
Sister, and Mother; if this be our Case, there is a good Foundation to hope,
that the Blessing of God will sweeten our Treasures during our Stay in this
Life, and our Memory be savory, when we are entered into Rest.

TO conclude, It Is a Truth most certain, that a Life guided by Wisdom from
above, agreeable with Justice, Equity, and Mercy, is throughout consistent and
amiable, and truly beneficial to Society; the Serenity and Calmness of Mind in
it, affords an unparalled Comfort in this Life, and the End of it is blessed.

AND, no less true, that they, who in the Midst of high Favors, remain
ungrateful, and under all the Advantages that a Christian can desire, are
selfish, earthly, and sensual, do miss the true Fountain of Happiness, and
wander in a Maze of dark Anxiety, where all their Treasures are insufficient to
quiet their Minds: Hence, from an insatiable Craving, they neglect doing Good
with what they have acquired, and too often add Oppression to Vanity, that they
may compass more.

O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter End! Duet. xxxii. 29.

THE END.
BOOKS printed and sold at the Printing-Office, in Church-Alley.
THE Youth's Instructor in the English Tongue: Or a Spelling-Book, containing
more Words, and a greater Variety of very useful Collections than any other
Book of this Kind and Bigness. First designed for the Author's own Scholars,
and now published for general Benefit. By John Owen. The 3d Edition. To which
is added, A Practical English Grammar, by Thomas Dilworth. Price bound 2s. 6d.

The Royal Primer improved: Being an easy and pleasant Guide to the Art of
Reading. With 28 Cuts adapted to Children. The Second Edition. Price 9d. bound,
half-bound 6d.

Useful Miscellanies: Or serious Reflections respecting Men's Duty to God and
one toward another. With Advices civil and religious, tending to regulate
their Conduct in the various Occurrences of Human Life. Published for general
Service, by a Well-wisher to all Mankind. Free and hearty Admonition is a very
wholesome and excellent Medicine. CHARRON of Wisdom B. iii. C. 9. (For the Use
of Schools.) Price half-bound 18d.

Some Memoirs of the Life of John Roberts. Written by his Son Daniel Roberts.
The Fourth Edition. The Steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord; and he
delighted in his Way. He is his Strength in the Time of Trouble, Psalm xxxvii.
23, 39. Price 1s.

A Compassionate Call, and Hand reached forth in tender Gospel Love, to all
such Persons, as having once made Profession of the blessed Truth, yet by some
Misconduct or other have forfeited their Unity with the Society of Friends, in
what Capacity, Post or Station soever in the Church they may have been, or in
what Circumstance of Life soever they now stand in their present disunited
Situation. By David Hall. Price 3d.

The Travels and Labors of Richard Davies, with some Account of Ancient
Friends, and the Spreading of Truth in North Wales. Price bound 2s 6d.

Barclay's Catechism. Price stitched in blue Paper, 2s

A short History of a long Travel, from Babylon to Bethel. By S. C. Price 6d.
An Essay on Conduct and Education, by J. F. (in Verse) Price 6d.

The ART of CONTENTMENT. By the Author of the Whole Duty of Man, etc. It is but
lost Labor that ye haste to rise up early, and so late take Rest, and eat the
Bread Carefulness; for so he gives his beloved Sleep, Psalm. cxxxvii. 2. Price
nearly bound in Sheep, and lettered 2s. 6d.

Fuller's Catechism for Children. (For the Use of Schools.) Price 1s.

A Serious Address to the People of the Church of England, in some Observations
upon their own Catechism. Tenderly recommended to their Consideration. By John
Jeffrys. To which are prefixed, some Passages of his Life, written by himself.
Price 9d.

DAVIDEIS: The Life of David, King of Israel: A sacred Poem, in Five Books. By
Thomas Ellwood.

Note, Subscriptions are taken in by the Printer, for the Reprinting of the
Life of JOHN FOTHERGILL, which will be delivered to the Subscribers at 4s. a
Piece, well bound in Sheep.

Where may be had, Bibles of different Sizes, Testaments, and sundry other
Books. Also Writing Paper, Sealing-Wax, Ink-Powder, Ink, Blanks, Lampblack, etc.


