ANNALS OF NEW ENGLAND.

By Thomas Prince, A. M.

VOL. II. Numb. 1.

Deuteronomy. xxxii. 7, etc. Remember the Days of old, consider the Years of many
Generations: ask thy Father, and He will show thee; thy Elders, and they will
tell thee: When the MOST HIGH divided to the Nations their Inheritance, when he
separated the Sons of Adam, he set the Bounds of the People: -- He found Him in
a desert Land, in the waste howling Wilderness; he led him about, he instructed
him, he kept him as the Apple of his Eye: -- As an Eagle stirs up her Nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her Wings, takes them, bears
them on her Wings; So the LORD alone did lead him, and there was no strange God
with him.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND in Queen Street, and by J. and T.
LEVERETT in Cornhill

(Price Six (...) Lawful Money each Number.)

Advertisement.
HAVING brought our Annals of NEW ENGLAND down to the Settlement of the
Massachusetts Colony in the 1st Volumn; and having lately received a most
authentic and valuable Journal of Events relating to said Colony, -- From the
Time when their 1st Gov Winthrop, Dep. Gov Dudley, Eleven Assistants, with
their Charter, Four Ministers and about 1500 People were waiting at the Isle of
Wight and other Places in the South and West of England, to sail for this
desired Land; viz. From Monday March 29. 1630, to Jan. 11. 1648, 9: Wherein are
many Remarkables not to be found any where else; and whereby alone we are
enabled to correct many Mistakes, and ascertain the Dates of many Articles in
others; -- all wrote with the said Gov WINTHROP'S own Hand, who deceased in the
very House I dwell in on the 26th of March after: I may now proceed with a
further Enlargement of Intelligence, and with a greater Certainty and Exactness.

And for my Readers greater Satisfaction I shall also go on, as I did before,
to give them, not my own Expressions, but those of the Authors who lived in the
Times they wrote of; excepting now and then a Word or Note of mine for
Explanation Sake, distinguished from theirs by being enclosed in such Marks as
[These]. So that we may as it were hear those eminent Persons, Gov Bradford,
Gov Winslow, Gov Winthrop, Mr. Secretary Morton of Plymouth; Gov Bradstreet,
Mr. Secretary Nowell, etc. in the Massachusetts Colony Records; the Rev. Mr.
Hubbard, and Others, telling us the remarkable Events of the Times they lived
in.

But as I was unhapily obliged to close the former Volumn abruptly in September
1630, about 2 Months after our entering the 2d Section of the IId Part; I must
refer to That, and begin the IId Volumn with September 28, in Continuation of
the 2d SECTION Containing Articles from the Beginning of the Settlement of the
Massachusetts or 2d Colony, to the Settlement of the 7 th and last, by the
Combination of 41 Persons into a Form of Government at Piscataqua, on Oct. 22.
1640, afterward called the Province of New Hampshire.

Page 13. Line last -- for it is likely -- read 1st Member N.B. See the (...)

Annals of NEW ENGLAND. Part II. Sec. 2.
1630 K. of France. Lewis XIII. K. of Great Britain. Charles I. K. of Spain.
Philip IV.
Sept. 28. THE 3d Court of Assistants at Charleston. Present, the Governor,
Dep. Governor, Capt. Endicot, Mr. Ludlow, Nowell, Coddington, Brad-street,
Rossiter, Pynchon. Ordered that no Person permit any Indian to use any Piece
[or Gun] on any Occasion, under L. 10 for the first Offense; for the second, to
be Fined and Imprisoned at the Discretion of the Court: -- that no Person give,
sell, truck or send any Indian Corn to any English out of this Jurisdiction,
nor to any Indian, without License from the Governor and Assistants: --
English and Indian Corn being 10 s. a Strike, and Bever at 6 s. a Pound; we
made Laws to restrain selling Corn to the Indians; and to leave the Price of
Bever at Liberty, which was presently sold for 10 s. and 20 s. a Pound. (d)
That L. 50 be levied out of the several Plantations, for Mr. Patrick and Mr.
Underhill; [I suppose for some Military Purpose] viz. L. 1. Charlestown, to pay
7 2. Boston 11 [By this it seems as if the much greater Part of the People at
Charlestown were now removed to Boston, and the Rev. Mr. Wilson with them]
3. Dorchester 7 4. Roxbury 5 5. Waterton 11 6. Meadford, to pay 3 7. Salem 3
8. Wessaguscus, after called Weymouth 2 9. Natasket 1 (Mcr) 50

Sept. 30. Thursday, About 2 in the Morning, Mr. Isaac Johnson Dies: He was a
holy Man and wise, and died in sweet Peace; leaving Part of his Substance to
the Colony. (w) This Gentleman was a prime Man among us, having the best Estate
of any; zealous for Religion, one of the Five Undertakers, The five Undertakers
were Governor Winthrop, Dep. Governor Dudley, Sir Richard Saltonstall, Isaac
Johnson, Esquire and Mr. Revil. (d)
and the greatest Furtherer of this Plantation: He made a most godly End; dying
willingly; professing his Life better spent in promoting this Plantation, than
it could have been any other Way: He left to us a great Loss. (d) The first
Magistrate that died in the Massachusetts: (s d) [And Capt. Johnson says] The
Beginning of this Work seemed very dolorous; first for the Death of that worthy
Personage, Isaac Johnson, Esquire whom the Lord had endued with many precious
Gifts; insomuch as he was had in high Esteem among all the People of God, and
as a chief Pillar to support this new erected Building. He very much rejoiced
at his Death, that the Lord had been pleased to keep his Eyes open so long, as
to see one Church of Christ gathered before his Death: At whose Departure,
their were not only many weeping Eyes, but some fainting Hearts, fearing the
Fall of the present Work. (j)[And the late chief Justice Samuel Sewall, Esquire
informed me; That this Mr. Johnson was the principal Cause of settling the Town
of Boston, and so of its becoming the Metropolis, and had removed hither; had
chose for his Lot the great Square lying between Cornhill on the S E,
Treemount-Street on the N W, Queen Street on the N E, and School-Street on the
S W; and on his Deathbed desiring to be Buried at the upper End of his Lot, in
Faith of his rising in it, He was accordingly Buried there; which gave Occasion
for the first Burying Place of this Town to be laid out round about his Grave.]

[Oct.] The first Execution in Plymouth Colony: which is a Matter of great
Sadness to us, is of one John Billington; for Way-laying and Shooting John
Newcomen, a young Man, (br) in the Shoulder, (h) whereof he died: The said
Billington was one of the profanest among us: He came from London, and I know
not by what Friends shuffled into our Company. We used all due Means about his
Trial: was found Guilty both by Grand and Petty Jury: and we took the Advice of
Mr. Winthrop, and others, the ablest Gentlemen in the Massachusetts Bay, who
all concurred with us, that he ought to Die, and the Land be purged from Blood.
(br) [ N. B. This is the Order wherein Governor Winthrop sets this Article,
who was consulted about it: though Mr. Hubbard says. -- about September; and Gov.
Bradsord -- in the latter Part of the year.]


Mr. Phillips the Minister of Watertown, and others, have their Houses burnt.
(w)

October. 19. The first General Court of the Massachusetts Colony -- and this at
Boston: Present the Governor, Dep. Governor, Sir Richard Saltonstall, Mr.
Ludlow, Capt. Endicot, Mr. Nowell, Pynchon, Bradstreet. (Mcr) [ N.B. For the
Form of Government in the Massachusetts under Dep. Governor Endicot,
subordinate to the Governor and Company in England before they arrived with the
Charter; See April 20. 1628, and April 30. 1629: But since their Arrival Here;
the (1st) Form of their Government was that of Governor, Dep. Governor, and
Assistants; the Patentees with their Heirs, Assigns and Associates being
Freemen, etc. But now in this General Court, they agree on a (2d) Form as
follows -- ] Proposed as the best Course -- For the FREEMEN to have the Power
of choosing ASSISTANTS, when they are to be chosen: and the ASSISTANTS, from
among themselves to choose the GOVERNOR, and Dep. GOVERNOR, who with the
Assistants to have the Power of making Laws, and choosing Officers to execute
the same: This was fully assented to by the General Vote of the People. (Mcr)

And now the Mcr gives the first List of Persons desiring to be made Freemen,
to the Number of 108, as follows. Mr. Samuel Maverick, Mr. Edward Johnson, Mr.
Edward Gibbins [or Gibbons, after, Major General] Mr. William Jeffries, Mr.
Samuel Sharp, Mr. Thomas Graves [after, a Rear Admiral in England] Mr. Roger
Conant, Mr. Nathaniel Turner, Mr. Samuel Freeman, Mr. William Clerks, Mr.
Abraham Palmer, Mr. William Pelham, Mr. William Blackstone [formerly a
Minister; after, went to Providence. Mr. Richard Brown, Mr. George Ludlow,
James Penn [after -- Ruling Elder of the Is It Church in Boston] Henry Woolcot,
Thomas Stoughton, Roger Williams [a Minister, who went (1) to Plymouth (^) to
Salem (^) to Providence] Capt. Walter Norton, James Pemberton, Mr. John
Dillingham, John Johnson, George Alcock, Thomas Lamb, Mr. Charles Got, Mr.
George Phillips [Minister of Watertown] Mr. John Wilson [Minister of Boston.]
Mr. John Maverick And, Mr. John Wareham Ministers of Dorchester Mr. Samuel
Skeleton [Minister of Salem] Mr. William Colbron [after, Ruling Elder of the Is It
Church in Boston] Mr. William Aspinwall [after, Secretary of Rh. Island Colony]
Edward Converse, Richard Church, Richard Silvester, William Balstone, John
Phillips, Nathaniel Bowman, Daniel Abbot, Mr. Samuel Pool, etc.(Mcr)


[But many of them seem not to be made Freemen till May 18. 1631; which see.
But Capt. Johnson says, that] at the Court in October many of the Is It Planters
came and were made free; yet afterward none were admitted to this Fellowship,
but such as were at first joined in Fellowship with one of the Churches of
Christ; their chiefest Aim being bent to promote this Work altogether; [and
that] the Number of Freemen this Year was about 110. (j) [But he mistakes in
calling this their 2d Court on the S. Side of the River.]

Oct. 23. Mr. Rossiter, one of the Assistants Dies: (w) a godly Man, and of a
good Estate; which still weakens us: so that now there are left, of the 5
Undertakers, but 3, viz. Gov Winthrop, D. Gov Dudley, and Sir R. Saltonstall;
and 7 other Assistants, (d) [ viz. Capt. Endicot, Mr. Ludlow, Nowell, Pynchon,
Coddington, Bradstreet and T Sharp: See Oct. 20. 1629, March 23, Aug. 23. and
Sept. 7. 1630.]

Oct. 25. Mr. Colborn, who was chosen Deacon by the Congregation a Week before,
[is now] invested by Imposition of Hands of the Minister [i. e. Mr. Wilson] and
Elder [i.e. Mr. Nowell] (w)

The Governor, in Consideration of the Inconveniences which had grown in
England by Drinking one to another, restrained it at his own Table, and wished
others to do the like: so as it grows by little and little to [be] disused. (w)

Oct. 29. The Handmaid arrives at Plymouth; having been 12 Weeks at Sea, and
spent all her Masts: Of 28 Cows, lost 10: has about 60 Passengers, who come all
well. (w)

The first Recorded as Baptized in Boston Church, are said to be Baptized in
said Church in this Month, and are only 3; viz. Joy and Recompense, Daughters
of Brother John Milles; and Pity, Daughter of our Brother William
Baulstone.(bcr)

Oct. e. The Gov, D. Gov and Mr. [Samuel] Maverick join in sending out our
Pinace to the Narragansets, to trade for Corn to supply our Wants. After
doubling Cape-Cod, she put into the next Harbor she found: and there meeting
with Indians who showing their Willingness to truck, she made her Voyage there,
and bro't us an 100 Bushels of Corn, which helped us something. From the Coast
where they traded, they saw a very large Island 4 Leagues to the East, which
the Indians commended as a fruitful Place, full of good Vines, and free from
sharp Frosts; having one only Entrance into it by a Navigable River; inhabited
by a few Indians, which for a Trifle would leave the Island, if the English
would (...) them upon the Main. (d) [This is, no doubt, the (...), after called
Rhode Island.]

About November, the Gov, and Dep. Gov, with most of the Assistants, remove
their Families to Boston. (b)

Nov. 9. The 4th Court of Assistants, but the 1st at Boston: Present, Gov, D.
Gov, Mr, Ludlow, Capt. Endicot, Mr. Coddington, Pynchon, Bradstreet: Ordered
that every Englishman who kills a Wolf within this Patent, shall have I Penny
for every Beast and Horse, and 1 Farthing for every weaned Swine and Goat, in
every Plantation, to be levied by the Constables of said Plantations: And
whoever will first give in his Name to the Gov, that he will undertake to set
up a Ferry between Boston and Charlestown, and begin the same at such Time as
the Gov shall appoint; shall have 1 Penny for every Person, and 1 Penny for
every 100 Pound Weight of Goods he shall so transport. (Mcr)

Nov 10. Firmin of Weterton has his Wigwam burnt, (w) Diverse have their
Hay-Stacks burnt, by burning the Grass. (w)

Nov. 11. The Master [of the Handmaid] comes to Boston, with Capt. Standish,
and 2 Gentlemen Passengers who come to Plant Here; but having no Testimonials,
we would not receive them. (w)

Nov. 30. The 5th and last Court of Assistants this Year, but the 2d at Boston.
Present, Gov, D. Gov, Sir R. Saltonstall, Mr. Ludlow, Nowell, Pynchon,
Coddington, Bradstreet: 1 of the Assistants fined L. 5 for whipping 2 Persons
without the Presence of another Assistant, contrary to an Act of Court formerly
made: Ordered that a Man be whipped for shooting at Fowl on the Sabbath Day; and
that L. 60 be collected for the Maintenance of Mr. Wilson and Mr. Phillips;
viz. out of Boston L. 20 Waterton 20 Charlestown L. 10 Roxbury 6 Meadford L. 3
Winnesemet 1 (Mcr)

Of the People who came over with us, from the Time of their setting Sail from
England in April [this Year] to December, there Died by Estimation 200 at the
least: So low has the Lord brought us. Yet they who survived were not
discouraged, but bareing God's Corrections with Humility, and trusting in his
Mercies; and considering how after a lower Ebb he had raised up our Neighbors
at Plymouth, we began again, in December, to consult about a fit Place to build
a Town upon. (d)

Dec. 6. The Gov and most of the Assistants and others meet at Roxbury, and
agree to build a Town fortified upon the Neck between That and Boston: And a
Committee is appointed to consider of all Things requisite, etc. (w)

Dec. 16. The Committee meet at Roxbury: And upon further Consideration, for
[3] Reasons it is concluded we should not have a Town in the Place aforesaid;
(1) Because Men would be forced to keep 2 Families; (2) There is no running
Water; and if there are any Springs, they will not suffice the Town; (3) The most
of the People have built already, and would not be able to build again: So we
agree to meet at Waterton, this Day sennet, and in the mean Time other Places
should be viewed. (w)

Capt. Neale and 3 other Gentlemen come to us [at Boston]: He came in the Bark
Warwick this Summer to Pascatoway, sent as Governor There for Sir Ferdinand
Gorge and others. (w)

Dec. 21. We meet again at Waterton: And Here, upon View of a Place a Mile
beneath the Town, all agree it a fit Place for a fortified Town; and we take
Time to consider farther about it.

Dec. 24. Till this Time there was (for the most Part fair open Weather, with
gentle Frosts in the Night: But this Day the Wind comes N W very sharp and
some Snow; but so Cold that some have their Fingers froze and in Danger to be
lost. (w)

Dec. 26. [Lord's-Day] The Rivers are froze up: and they of Charleston could
not come to the Sermole at Boston till the Afternoon at High Water. (w)

Many of the Cowes and Goats are forced to be still Abroad for want of Houses.
(w)

Dec. 28. After many Consultations at Boston, Roxbury and Watertown, by Gov
Winthrop [D. Gov Dudley] and Assistants, about a fit Place to build a Town for
the Seat of Government, they this Day agree on a Place on the W [rather N W
Side of Charles-River, about 3 Miles W from Charlestown: And all, except Mr.
Endicot and [T] Sharp, [The former living at Salem and] the latter purposing to
return by the next Ship to England.(d)
oblige themselves to build Houses there the following Spring, and remove their
Ordnance and Munition thither: and first call the Place Newtown, but after -- [
viz. in 1638] Cambridge. ((...))

Dec. 22. Richard Garret of Boston, with 1 of his Daughters a young Maid, and 4
others, against the Advice of their Friends, went toward Plymouth in a
Shallop: and about the Gurnet's Nose, the Wind blew so much at N W, as they
were put to Sea, and the Boat took in much Water, which froze so hard as they
could not free her: so that they gave themselves for Lost; and committing
themselves to God, disposed themselves to die. But one of their Company espying
Land near Cape-Cod, they made a shift to hoist up Part of their Sail, and by
God's special Providence were carried through the Rocks to the Shore: where some
got on Land; but some had their Legs frozen in the Ice, so as they were forced
to be cut out. Being now on Shore they kindle a Fire; but having no Hatchet,
they can get but little Wood, and are forced to lie in the open Air all Night,
being extremely cold. In the Morning 2 of their Company go toward Plymouth.
(Supposing it within 7 or 8 Miles, where as it is near 50 from them) [and not
an English House nearer] By the Way they meet 2 Indian Squaws, who telling
their Husbands they had met 2 Englishmen that had been Shipwrack't, make after
them and bring them back to their Wigwam, and entertain them kindly: and one of
them [ viz. of the Indians] next Day goes with them to Plymouth: and the other
[ Indian] goes to find out their Boat and the Rest of their Company which are 7
Miles off: and having found them, helps them what he can, returns to his
Wigwam, fetches a Hatchet, builds them a Wigwam, covers it, gets them Wood:
(for they were so weak and frozen, as they could not stir) and Garret dies
about 2 Days after his Landing; and the Ground so frozen as they could not dig
his Grave, the Indian, with his Hatchet, hews a Hole about half a Yard deep,
[puts the] Corpse in it, and lays over it a great Heap of Wood to keep it from
the Wolves. By this Time the Gov of Plymouth sends 3 Men to them with
Provisions; who launched their Boat, (which the Wind had driven up to high
Water Mark) and with a fair Wind get to Plymouth: where another of their
Company dies, his Flesh being mortified with the Frost: and the 2 who went
toward Plymouth died also; one of them being not able to get thither, and the
other had his Foot so frozen as he died of it after. The Girl escaped best: and
one Harwood, a godly Man of the Congregation of Boston, lies long under the
Surgeon's Hand. (w)

APPENDIX to 1630.
I. Articles of Uncertain Dates.
HALF our Cowes and almost all our Mares and Goats sent us out of England died
at Sea; and those intended to be sent us out of Ireland, were not sent at all:
All which, together with the Loss of our 6 Months Building, occasioned by our
intended Removal to a Town to be fortified, weaken our Estates; especially the
Estates of the Undertakers, who were 3 or 4 Thousand Pounds [Sterling] engaged
in the joint Stock, which is now not above so many Hundreds: Yet many of us
labor to bear it as comfortably as we could; remembering the End of our coming
hither; and knowing the Power of God, who can support and raise us again, and
uses to bring his Servants low that the Meek may be made glorious by
Deliverance. (d)

It goes harder with this poor People in their Beginnings, because of the
Scarcity of all Sorts of Grain this Year in England: Every Bushel of Wheat Meal
standing them in 14 Shillings [Sterl.] and every Bushel of Peace 10 Shillings;
and not easy to be procured neither. (b) [And] coming into this Country, we
found some English at Salem, and some few at Charlestown, who were very
destitute: and Planting Time being past; shortly after, Provision was not to be
had for Money. And the unsubdued Wilderness yielding little Food, many were in
great Straits for want of Provision for Themselves and their little Ones. We
quickly built Boats, and some went a Fishing. Bread was with many a very scarce
Thing, and Flesh of all Kinds as scarce: And Oh the Hunger that many suffered,
and saw no Hope in an Eye of Reason to be supplied, but with Fish, Clams and
Muscles. But God caused his People to be contented with mean Things, and to
trust in him. (c)

II. A List of Ships which arrived in New England this Year.
No Names whence set sail when set sail when arrived where arrived England 1630
1630 New-Engl. 1 Lion Bristol Feb. (d) May c. Salem 2 Mary-John Plymouth March
20. May 30 Nantasket 3 Arbella Yarmouth at the Isle of Wight April 8 June 12
Salem 4 Jewel Yarmouth at the Isle of Wight ditto June 13 Salem 5 Ambrose
Yarmouth at the Isle of Wight ditto June 18 Salem 6 Talbot Yarmouth at the Isle
of Wight ditto July 2 Salem 7 May Flowr S. Hampton May July1 Charleston 8 Whale
ditto ditto July1 Charleston 9 Hopewell ditto ditto July 3 [Salem] 10
WmandFran. ditto ditto July 3 [Salem] 11 Trial ditto ditto July 5 Charleston
Salem 12 Charles ditto ditto July 5 Charleston Salem 13 Success ditto ditto
July 6 [Salem] 14 May e. Aug. 20 Charleston 15 Another (d) June (d) 16 Handmaid
Aug. 6 Oct. 29 Plymouth 17 Another set out by a private Merchant. (d)

These 17 Ships arrived all safe in New England, for the Increase of the
Plantation here this year 1630. (d).

III. Accounts of the 13 Magistrates who came this Year with the Charter, as
far as I have met with.
1. John Winthrop, Esquire Gov. His Ancestor was Adam Winthrop; a worthy Gentleman
[in England:] who had a Son of the same Name, a discreet, learned Gentleman,
eminent for Skill in the Law, not without Remark for his Love to the Gospel
under the Reign of K. Henry VIII; and [another Son] a memorable Favourer of the
Reformed Religion in the Days of Q Mary, into whose Hands the famous Martyr
Philpot committed his Papers, which afterward made no inconsiderable Part of
our Martyr Books. This Mr. Adam Winthrop had a Son of the same Name, Endowments
and Employments with his Father. And this 3d Mr. Adam Winthrop was Father to
this renowned John Winthrop, who is the Founder of a Colony, which on many
Accounts like him that founded it, may challenge the 1st Place among the
Glories of America. Born at the Mansion House of his Ancestors at Groton in
Suffolk on July 12 1587: [had] an agreeable Education: But the Accomplishments
of a Lawyer were those where with Heaven made his chief Opportunities to be
serviceable. Being at the Age of 18 made a Justice of the Peace, his Virtues
began to fall under a more general Observation [was] not only exemplary for his
Conformity to the Laws of Christianity in his Conversation, but also discovered
a more than ordinary Measure of those Qualities which adorn an Officer of human
Society. His Justice was impartial: His Wisdom excellently tempered Things
according to the Art of Governing: His Courage made him dare to do Right: All
which Virtues he rendered the more illustrious, by emblazoning them with the
constant Liberality and Hospitality of a Gentleman. This made him the Terror of
the Wicked, the Delight of the Sober, and the Hope of those who had any hopeful
Design in Hand for the Good of the Nation and the Interest of Religion.
Accordingly when the noble Design of carrying a Colony of chosen People into an
American Wilderness, was by some eminent Persons undertaken; this eminent
Person was, by the Consent of all, chosen for the Moses, who must be the Leader
of so great an Undertaking: Wherefore having sold a fair Estate of 6 or 7
Hundred [Sterling] a Year, He [now] transmitted Himself with the Effects of it
into New England; (cm) [in the 4^ st Year of his Age: Is the 1st Governor of
the Massachusetts Colony; one of the 5 Undertakers; the 1st Member who joined
in forming the Congregational Church of Charlestown and Boston, and the
Principal Cause of fixing on Boston for the Metropolis.]

2. Thomas Dudley, Esquire D Gov. Born at Northampton in 1574 [rather 1576] the
only Son of Capt. Roger Dudley; who being slain in the Wars left this our
Thomas; who in the Family of the E of Northampton [learn'd] the Points of good
Behavior, and fitted himself to do many Benefits to the World: Next became a
Clerk to Judge Nichols (who being his Kinsman by the Mother, took the more
special Notice of Him) [improv'd the] Advantage to attain such Skill in the
Law, as was of great Advantage in the future Changes of his Life: and the Judge
would have preferred him to higher Employments, whereto his prompt Wit not a
little recommended Him, if he had not been by Death prevented. But before He
could do much at the Pen, for which he was very well accomplished, He was
called to the Sword: For being a young Gentleman well known for Ingenuity,
Courage and Conduct; when Soldiers where to be raised by Order of Q Elizabeth
for the Service of K Henry IV [of France against the Sponiards on the Borders
of the Netherlands in 1597] none of the [Youths] about Northampton were willing
to enter the Service till a Commission was given to young Dudley to be their
Captain; and then presently 4 Score listed under him. At the Head of these he
went over; was at the Siege of Amiens; and thus came to be furnished for the
Field as well as the Bench: But [the French and Spaniards making Peace in June
1, 1598,] He returned to England, settled [near] Northampton; married a
Gentlewoman, whose Extract and Estate were considerable, and the Situation of
his [Dwelling] helped him to enjoy the Ministry of Mr. Dod, Cleaver, Winston,
and Hildersham, excellent and renowned Men: which Puritan Ministry so seasoned
his Heart with Religion, that he was a devout Christian, and a Follower of the
Ministers that most effectually Preached Real Christianity all his Days. The
Spirit of Real Christianity in him now also disposed him to sober
Nonconformity, and from this Time, (though none more hated the Fanaticisms and
Enthusiasms of wild Opinionists) He became a judicious Dissenter from the
unscriptural Ceremonies retained in the Church of England. Not long after this,
the Lords Say and Compton, and other Persons of Quality, made such Observations
on him as to commend him to the Service of the E of Lincoln, then a young Man
and newly come to the Possession of his Earldom: [whose] Grandfather had left
his Affairs under vast Intanglements, out of which his Father was never able to
extricate himself: which caused [the young Earl] to apply to Mr. Dudley for
Assistance; who proved so able, careful and faithful a Steward, that in a
little While the Debts of near 20 Thousand Pounds were happily [discharged.] By
this Means also a Match was procured between the young Earl and the L Says
Daughter, who proved a most virtuous Lady and a great Blessing to the whole
Family. In this [Business] Mr. Dudley continued about 9 or 10 Years: but then
growing desirous of a more private Life, retired to Boston [in England] where
the Ministry and Acquaintance of Mr. Cotton [were] no little Satisfaction to
him. But the Earl could be no more without Mr. Dudley, than Pharaoh without his
Joseph, and prevailed with him to resume his former Employment; till the Storm
of Persecution on the Nonconformists caused many Men of great Worth to
transport themselves to New England. Mr. Dudley was not the least of the worthy
Men [who] bore a Part in this Transportation, in Hopes that in an American
Wilderness they might peaceably enjoy the the pure Worship of Christ. And when
the Undertakers for [this] Plantation came to know him, they soon saw That in
him, that caused them to choose him their Dep Gov: In which Capacity he [now]
arrived (cr) [here, in the 54th Year of his Age: was one of the 5 Undertakers;
the 2d Member in forming the Congregational Church of Charlestown and Boston;
and a principal Founder of the Town of Newtown, after called Cambridge; being
zealous to have it made the Metropolis, and is one of the 1st who builds and
settles There in the Spring ensuing.]

3. Sir Richard Saltonstall. [was the Son or Grandson to Sir Richard
Saltonstall; who Mundy in his Chronicle mentions as L Mayor of London in 1597,
and Son to Gilbert Saltonstall of Hallifax in Yorkshire. He was the 1st
Associate to the 6 Original Patantees mentioned in K Charles I, his Charter of
the Massachusetts, of March 4. 1628, 9, and the 4th Assistant made therein: now
comes over their 1st Assistant, a worthy Puritan, one of the 5 Undertakers; and
the 1st Founder of the Town, and it is likely of the Congregational Church, of
Watertown]

4. Isaac Johnson, Esquire -- [He had married the Lady Arabella, of the House of
the Earls of Lincoln; was the 2d Associate to the 6 Original Patentees
mentioned in said Charter, and the 5th Assistant made therein: who now comes
over their 2d Assistant and one of the 5 Undertakers; was the 3d Member, who
joined in forming the Congregational Church of Charlestown and Boston; and the
principal Founder of the Town of Boston. And for the Rest, see July 25. Aug. e.
Sept. 7, and Sept, 30 1630.

5. Increase Nowell, Esquire [His Father or Grandfather was Brother to the famous
Alexander Nowell Dean of St Paul's in the Reign of Q Eliz, and Prolocutor of
her 1st Convocation: He was the 7th Associate mentioned in said Charter, and
the 8th Assistant made therein: And Capt. Endicot being the 3d Assistant, Mr.
Nowell, as their 4th now comes over: one of the Owners of the Jewel; a zealous
Puritan; the 5th who joins in forming the Congregational Church of Charlestown
and Boston; and the principal Person who continues at Charlestown.]

6. William Vassal, Esquire -- [The 18th Associate mentioned in said Charter, and
the 17th Assistant made therein: comes over as their 5th Assistant: But this
last Summer returned.]

7. William Pynchon, Esquire [a Gentleman of Learning and Religion: The 19th
Associate mentioned in said Charter, and the 13th Assistant made therein: as
their 6th Assistant now comes over: is the principal Founder of the Town of
Roxbury, and the 1st Member who joins in forming the Congregational Church
there.]

8. Edward Rossiter, Esquire [comes over as their 7th Assistant; 1st chosen Oct.
20. 1629; and

10. Roger Ludlow, Esquire as the 9th Assistant, 1st chosen Feb. 10. 1629, 30: Both
pious Gentlemen of good Families in the West of England; who are the principal
Founders of the Town of Dorchester; and the 1st who joined in forming the
Congregational Church, even at Plymouth in England, a little before they came
away, and bro't their Pastor, Teacher and whole Church with them. See at the
Beginning of this Year.

9. Thomas Sharp, Esquire [comes over as the 8th Assistant: 1st chosen Oct. 20.
1629; and is the 6th Member who joins in forming the Congregational Church of
Charlestown and Boston.]

11. John Revell, Esquire [comes over as the 10th Assistant: 1st chosen Oct. 20.
1629, 30; and was one of the 5 Undertakers: but returned this last Summer with
Mr. Wm. Vassal.]

12. William Coddington, Esquire [was on March 18. 1629, 30, chosen at Southampton
the 11th Assistant; in this Capacity now comes over; and is one who joins to
the Congregational Church of Charlestown and Boston]

13. Simon Bradstreet, Esquire Son of a Minister in Lincolnshire; and Born at
Horbling, March 1603. His Father (Son of a Suffolk Gentleman of a fine Estate)
was one of the 1st Fellows in Emanuel College, under Dr. Charderton; after
highly esteemed by Mr. Colton and Dr. Presiox; and was always a Nonconformist
at Home, as well as when a Preacher at Middleborough [in Zealand] Our
Bradstreet was bro't up at the Grammar School, till he was about 14 Years of
Age, [when] the Death of his Father put a Stop for the present to the Designs
of his further Education. But 2 or 3 Years after, was taken into the religious
Family of the E of Lincoln (the best Family of any Nobleman then in England)
where he spent about 8 Years under the Direction of Mr. Dudley, sustaining
successively diverse Offices. Dr. Preston, who had been my Lord's Tutor, then
moved my Lord, that Mr. Bradstreet might have their Permission to come to
Emanuel College, in the Capacity of Governor to the L Rich, Son of the E of
Warwick: which they granting, he went with the Doctor; who provided a Chamber
for him, with Advice that he should apply to Study till my Lord's Arrival. But
my L Rich not coming, Mr. Bradstreet after a Year returned to the E of
Lincoln's; and Mr. Dudley then removing to Boston, his Place of Steward was
conferred on Mr. Bradstreet. Afterward he with much ado obtained the Earl's
Leave to answer the Desires of the aged and pious Countess of Warwick, that he
would accept the Stewardship of her noble Family; which, as the former, he
discharged with an exemplary Discretion and Fidelity. [and] Here he married
[Mrs. Ann] the Daughter of Mr. Dudley. (cm) [By which Means, he became one of
the Massachusetts Company, and on March 18. 1629, 30 chosen at Southampton
their 12th Assistant; in this Capacity comes over, about the 27th Year of his
Age; and is the 7th Member who joins in forming the said Congregational Church
of Charlestown and Boston.]

[For John Endicot, Esquire Assistant being Here before; of the 18 Assistants,
there were 12 this last Summer Here together, besides the Gov and D. Gov.]

An Account of the Ministers now come over, I refer to the Appendix of the Year
ensuing, when we shall have more to join them, and conclude this Year with,

IV. The most material Events in England and Other Places which concerned this
People.
April 12. Dr. Laud, Bp of London, made Chancellor of Oxford. (s)

May 29. Saturday, Born at St. James's to K Charles I, [by his Q a Papist] a 2d
Son [the 1st being Dead:] Lord's Day, June 27, Christened by the Name of
Charles, [by Bp Lous:] his Godfathers being the French K Lewis [a Papist] the
Prince Palatine [a Protestant] and Godmother, the Q Mother of France (hs) [a
Papist [ Papists joined with Protestants -- 2 Papists to 1 Protestant -- and
why not one of the Protestant Kings and Queens of Sweden or Denmark?]
He is afterward K Charles II]

The Pope having made anti Bishops over all the Seas in Ireland, makes Richard
Smith (titulary Bp of Chalcedon) Bp over all the Romish Catholics in Eng; who
is now very Buisy in his Employment; and the Insolency of the Regulars daily
increases in England. (Fl)

Dr. Leighton a Scotchman, for Publishing a Book, entitled, An Appeal to
Parliament, or a Plea against Prelacy, sentenced (s) in the Star Chamber to be
whipped, have his Forehead branded, his Nose slit, and his Ears cut off, (Fl)
which is soon after inflicted. (pn)

Oct. 3. O S, [13 N S] Born [at the Hague] to Frederick the [Protestant]
Elector Palatine, by his Lady Elizabeth [only] Daugh. to K James I, the
Princess Sophia: [in the Time of their Banishment from the Palatinate by the
Popish Emperor] afterward married, viz. in 1658, to Ernest Augustus [the
Protestant] Duke of Hanover: by whom in 1660, she becomes the Mother of K
George I. (Anderson)

Dec. 5. O S, Being the Lord's Day, Peace between England and Spain proclaimed
at London; and at Madrid Dec. 15; (bs) [I suppose N S, the same Day with the
other. And Pointer and Salmon no doubt mistake in writing -- Nov. 27]

The War which was renewed between the Dutch and Spaniards in 1622, yet
continues.

The War having raged in Germany between the Emperor Ferdinand the II a Papist
and the Protestant Princes, ever since 1618; wherein the Emperor had reduced
Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia, conquered the Palatinate, banished the Protestant
Elector from his Dominions, and overrun the lower Saxony; beat the K of
Denmark, and forced him to a disadvantageous Peace; grievously oppressed the
Protestants, and in the fairest Way to subdue them entirely: and the Protestant
Princes having no Hope from Eng, and implored the Help of the pious and heroic
Gustavus K of Sweden; He this Year on June 24. N S, with an Army, lands in
Pomerania, bends down his Knees on the Shore, offers Thanks to the most High
for the prosperous Beginning of his Expedition, implores Him to succeed his
future Undertakings for the Help of his People: and then rising up, He quick
like Lightning, carries all before Him, and begins their Deliverance.

N. B. See the most accurate and concise Account of this German War in Alsted:
who thus begins this glorious Enterprise. -- July 24. Rex Suecioa instructus
numerosis Copiis appellit in Po-merania, Nominis sui Fama non mediocrem Timorem
Hostibus injicit: Inde Fulgure violentior omnia celerrime pervadit: Which I
have partly construed in the Words above.

1631.
[N.B. The Principal Stage of our Annals is from This Time forward, at BOSTON.]
Jan. A House at Dorchester burnt down. (w) Jan. 3. Dies [at Boston] the
Daughter of Mr. Sharp [I suppose Thomas Sharp Esquire one of the Assistants] a
godly Virgin, making a comfortable End after a long Sickness. The Plantation
here [i. e. I suppose at Boston] received not the like Loss of any Woman since
we came hither: and therefore she well deserves to be remembered in this Place.
And among those who died [at Boston] about the End of Jan, was the Daughter of
John Ruggles, a Girl of Eleven Years old; who in the Time of her Sickness,
expressed to the Minister and those about her, so much Faith and Assurance of
Salvation, as is rarely found in any of that Age; which I though it not unworthy
here to commit to Memory: and if any tax me with wasting Paper with Recording
these small Matters, such may consider, that small Things in the Beginning of
Politic Bodies, are as remarkable as greater in Bodies full grown. (d)

As the Winter came on, Provisions are very scarce [in the Massachusetts-Bay]
and People necessitated to feed on Clams and Musles, and Ground Nuts and
Acorns; and these got with much Difficulty in the Winter-Season. Upon which
People grow much tired and discouraged; especially when they hear that the Gov
himself has his last Batch of Bread in the Oven. And many are the Fears of the
People that Mr. Pierce, who was sent to Ireland for Provision, is either
Castaway or taken by the Pirates. Upon this a Day of Fasting and Prayer to God
for Relief is appointed [to be on the 6th of Feb.] But God, who delights to
appear in the greatest Straits, works marvellously at this Time: (ctr) For on

Feb. 5. (w) The very Day before the appointed Fast, in comes (ctr) the Ship
Lion, Mr. William Pierce Master, now arriving at Natasket, (w) laden with
Provisions. Upon which joyful Occasion the Day is changed, and ordered to be
kept [on the 22d] as a Day of Thanksgiving. (ctr)

Feb. 8. The Gov goes aboard the Lion riding at Long Island: [next Day] the
Ship comes to an Anchor before Boston [to the great Joy of the People] where
she rides very well, notwithstanding the great Drifts of Ice. (w) And the
Provisions are by the Gov distributed to the People proportionable to their
Necessities. (ctr)

The Lion [had] set Sail from Bristol Dec. 1, brought about 20 Passengers, and
had a very stormy Passage: yet through God's Mercy all the People come safe;
except one (w) of the Sailors, who not far from our Shore, in a Tempest having
helped to take in the Sprit-sail, as he was coming down fell into the Sea,
where after long Swiming, was drowned, to the great Dolor of those in the
Ship, who beheld so lamentable a Spectacle, without being able to help him; the
Sea was so high, and the Ship drove so fast before the Wind, though her Sails
were taken down. (d)

By this Ship (d) [we hear that] the Ambrose [having been] masted at
Charleston, [returning to Eng] spent all her Masts near Newfoundland, and had
perished if Mr. Pierce in the Lion her Consort had not towed her home to
Bristol. Of the other Ships which returned (w) last Summer (d) 3, viz. the
Charles, the Success and the Whale were (w) with 2 English Men of War (d) set
upon (w) by 14 Dankirks (d) near Plymouth in England: and after a long Fight,
having lost (w) 13 or 14 Men out of our 3 Ships (d) and being much torn,
especially the Charles (w) a stout Ship of 300 Tuns, so torn that she had not
much of her left whole above Water; (d) they got into Plymouth. Of those who
went back in the Ships [last] Summer for Fear of Death or Famine, many Died by
the Way, and after they were landed, and others fell very sick and languishing.
(w)

Feb. 10. The Frost breaks up in [Boston Harbour]: and it has been observed
ever since this Bay was planted by English, viz. 7 Years, that the Frost has
broke up every Year at this Day. (w)

The Poorer Sort of People who by long lying in Tents (w) and small Huts (j)
are much afflicted with the Scurvy, and many Die, especially at Boston and
Charleston. And it has been always observed here, that such as fell into
Discontent, and lingered after their former Conditions in England, fell into
the Scurvey and Died. Of the old Planters and such as came the Year before,
there were but 2 which have the Scurvy in all the Country. At Plymouth not any
have it, no not of those who came this [last] Year, whereof there were above
60: whereas at their 1st Planting there, near half their People died of it. (w)
Of which Mortality, it may be said of us almost as of the Egyptians, there is
not an House wherein there was not one Dead, and in some Houses many. The
natural Causes seem to be; the Want of warm Lodging and good Diet, to which
English [People] are habituated at Home; and the sudden Increase of Heat they
endured who landed here in the Summer; the Salt Meats at Sea having prepared
their Bodies thereto: For those only these 2 last Years Died of Fevers, who
landed in June and July; as those of Plymouth who [formerly] landed in Winter,
died of the Scurvy; as did our Poorer Sort, whose Houseing and Bedding kept
them not sufficiently warm, nor their Diet sufficiently in Heart. (d) But when
this Ship came, which bro't Store of Juice of Lemmons; many recover speedily.
(w)

Feb. 18. D Gov Dudley's printed Letter says Feb. 16: But I choose to keep to
Gov Winthrop's Mss Journal.
(w) Among others who died about this Time, was Mr. Robert Welden (d) a hopeful
young Gentleman, and an experienced Soldier, (w) whom in the Time of his
Sickness we had chosen to be Captain of 100 Foot: but before He [cou'd] take
his Place, He Dies (d) at Charleston of a Consumption, and is buried at Boston
with a Military Funeral (w) 3 Vollies etc, (d)

A Shallop of Mr. Glover's castaway on the Rocks about Nehant; but the Men are
saved. (w)

The Provisions came this [last] Year at excessive Rates, in Regard of the
Dearness of Corn in Eng; so as every Bushel of Wheat Meal stands us in 14 s.
Sterling. Pease 11 s; etc. (w) besides the Adventure (d) Tunnage L. 6 11s. (w)
which is 3 or 4 s. a Strike: An higher Price than I ever tasted Bread before.
(d)

Feb. 22. We hold a Day of Thanksgiving for this Ship's Arrival, by Order from
the Gov and Council, directed to all the Plantations (w) throughout the
[Massachusetts] Colony. d.

March 4. First Court of Assistant this Year at Boston: Present, Gov, D. Gov,
Sir R. Saltonstall, Mr. Ludlow, Capt. Endicot, Mr. Pynchon, Nowell, [T] Sharp,
Coddington, Bradstreet. (1.) Ordered that 6 Persons be sent to Eng in the Ship
Lion, now returning thither, as Persons unmeet to inhabit here; also that Sir
Christopher Gardener Sir Christopher Gardener; [who it seems came over the last
Year] a great Traveller, received his 1st Honor of Knighthood at Jerusalem,
being made Knight of the Sepulcher there, [who] came into these Parts under
Pretense of forsaking the World and to live a private Life in a godly Course;
not unwilling to put himself on any mean Employments and take any Pains for his
Living, and offers himself to join to the Churches in sundry Places; [had]
bro't over with him a Servant or two and a comely young Woman, whom he called
his Cousin, but (is) suspected to be his Concubine; [first sojourn'd] in the
Massachusetts (br)
and another be sent as Prisoners in her. (2.) A Man fined L. 5 for taking upon
him to cure the Scurvey, by a Water of no Value, which he sold at a very dear
Rate; to be imprisoned till he pay his Fine, or give Security for it, or else
be whipped; and shall be liable to any Man's Action of whom he has received Money
for the said Water. (Mcr)

March 8. From fair Daylight till 8 a m, fly over all the Towns in our
Plantations, so many Flocks of Doves; each Flock containing many Thousands; and
some so many that they obscure the Light; that it passes Credit, if but the
Truth should be written, they are all Turtles; -- somewhat bigger than those of
Europe; and fly from N E to S W. (d)

March 8. At a Court at Watertown: Present, Gov, D. Gov, Sir R. Saltonstall,
Mr. Ludlow, Nowell, Pynchon, Coddington, Bradstreet. (1.) Sagamore John and
[his Subject] Peter complaining of 2 Wigwams burnt, occasioned by a Servant of
Sir. R. Saltonstall; Ordered that Sir Richard satisfy the Indians; which he did
by 7 Yards of Cloth; and that his Servant pay him for it at the End of his Time
50 s. [Sterl.] [Said] Wigwams were not inhabited, but stood in a Place
convenient for their Shelter when they should travel that Way. By Examination
we found that some English Fowlers having retired into that which belonged to
the Subject [of the Sagamore] and leaving a Fire therein carelessly, which they
had kindled to warm them, were the Cause of Burning thereof. For that which was
the Sagamore's [own] we could find no certain Proof how it was fired: Yet least
he should think us not sedulous enough to find it out, and so should depart
discontentedly from us; we gave both Him and his Subject Satisfaction for them
both. (d)
: (2.) In Regard that the Number of Assistants is but few, and some of them are
going for Eng; Ordered, that when the Number of Assistants resident within this
Jurisdiction shall be fewer than 9; it shall be lawful for the major Part of
them to keep a Court; and whatever Orders or Acts they make, shall be as legal
and authentical, as if there were the full Number of 7 or more. (Mcr)

March 15. Dies at Salem, Mrs. Skeleton, the Wife of the Minister there: a
godly, helpful Woman, lived desired, dies lamented, and well deserves to be
honorably remembered. (d)

The Ship Lion now waits but for Wind, which when it blows [fair] there are
ready to go aboard for Eng; Sir R. Saltonstall, Mr. [T] Sharp, Mr. Coddington
and many others: the most of which purpose, if God will, to return to us again.
In the mean Time we are left a People, poor and contemptible; yet such as trust
in God, and are contented with our Condition; being well assured, that he will
not fail us nor forsake us. (d)

March 16. [In D. Gov Dudley's printed Letter it is March 17: but I keep to Gov
Winthrop's Mss.]
About Noon, the Chimney of Mr. [T] Sharp's House in Boston takes Fire; and
taking the Thatch, burns it down: and the Wind being N W, drives the Fire to
Mr. Colbron's House, [some] Rods off, burns that down also. (w) Which Houses,
as Good and as well furnished as the most in the Plantation, are in 2 Hours
burned to the Ground, with much of their Household Stuff, Apparel, and other
Things, as also some Goods of others who sojourned with them: God so pleasing
to exercise us with this Kind of Correction: For Prevention whereof, in our new
Town intended to be built this Summer; we have ordered that no Man There shall
build his Chimney with Wood, nor cover his House with Thatch; which was readily
assented to; for that diverse other Houses have been burned since our Arrival.
(d)

March 22. Court of Assistant at Boston: Present Gov, D. Gov, Mr. Ludlow,
Coddington, Nowell, Sir R. Saltonstall, Mr. Pynchon, [T] Sharp, Bradstreet.
Ordered (1.] That Artificers be left at Liberty to agree for Wages: [See Aug.
23. 1630] (2.) That every Town within this Patent, before April 5, take Care
that every Person in them (excepting Magistrates and Ministers) as well
Servants as others be furnished with sufficient Arms, allowable by the Captains
or other Officers; those who are able, to buy them; the Town to provide for
those who are unable, and to receive Satisfaction from them when they are able:
(3.) That all who have Cards, Dice or Tables in their Houses, shall make away
with them before the next Court. (Mcr)

March 23. Chickatabat [the chief Sachim of the Massachusetts] comes with his
Sannups and Squaws [i. e. married Men and their Wives] to Boston, Presents the
Gov with a Hogshead of Indian Corn. After they had all Dined, had each a Cup of
Sack and Beer, and his Men Tobacco; He sent away all his Men and Women: (though
the Gov would have stayed them in Regard of the Rain and Thunder) Himself and 1
Squaw and 1 Sannup stay all Night: and [He] being in English Clothes, the Gov
sets Him at his Table; where he behaves himself as soberly etc. as an
Englishman. Next Day, after Dinner, they return Home; the Gov giving him Cheese
and Pease, a Mug and some other Things. (w)

March 25. One of Watertown having lost a Calf; about 10 at Night hearing the
Howling of Wolves, raises his Neighbors out of their Beds, that by discharging
(...) Muskets, they might put the Wolves to Flight and save his Calf: the Wind
serving to carry the Report of the Muskets to Roxbury, the Inhabitants There
take an Alarm, beat up their Drum, arm themselves, and send in Post to us to
Boston: [But] in the Morning, the Calf is found safe, our Danger past, etc. (d)

March 28. D. Gov Dudley seals his Letter at Boston in the Massachusetts Bay to
the Countess of Lincoln; wherein he writes as follows.

Having some Leisure to discourse of the Motives for other Men's coming to this
Place, or their abstaining from it; after my brief Manner, I say this; That if
any come hither to Plant for Worldly Ends that can live well at Home, he
commits an Error of which he will soon repent him. But if for Spiritual, he may
find here what may well content him; viz. Materials to build, Fuel to burn,
Ground to plant, Seas and Rivers to fish in, a pure Air to breath in, good
Water to drink till Wine or Beer can be made; which with the Cows, Hoggs and
Goats bro't hither already, may suffice for Food. For Clothes and Bedding, they
must bring them with them, till Time and Industry produce them here. In a Word,
we yet enjoy little to be envied, but endure much to be pitied, in the
Sickness and Mortality of our People. If any godly Men out of Religious Ends
will come over to help us in the good Work we are about; I think they cannot
dispose of themselves, nor their Estates more to God's Glory, and the
Furtherance of their own Reckoning: But they must not be of the poorer Sort yet
for diverse Years. -- And for profane and debauched Persons; their Oversight in
coming hither, is wondered at, where they shall find Nothing to content them. If
there be any endued with Grace, and furnished with Means to feed themselves and
their's for 18 Months, and to build and plant; let them come into our Macedonia
and help us, and not spend themselves and their Estates in a less profitable
Employment: For others, I conceive they are not yet fitted for this Business.
(d)

March 29. Sir R. Saltonstall, and his 2 Daughters, and 1 of his younger Sons,
(his 2 Elder still remaining in the Country) come down to Boston, stay this
Night with the Governor: (w) and

March 30. This Morning, at 7, They, with Mr. Pierce and others in 2 Shallops,
depart [for] the Ship at Salem. Mr. [T] Sharp goes away at the same Time in
another Shallop. At 10, Mr. Coddington, Mr. Wilson, and diverse of the
Congregation, meet at the Governor's, and there Mr. Wilson praying and
exhorting the Congregation to Love, recommends to them [in their Necessity] the
Exercise of Prophesy [i.e. Exhorting to Christian Duties] in his Absence, and
designed those whom he thought most fit for it, viz. the Gov, Mr. Dudley, and
Mr. Nowell the Elder; [who were Men of eminent Piety and Learning.] Then he
desires the Gov to commend Himself and the Rest to God in Prayer: which being
done, they accompany him to the Boat; and so they go over to Charlestown, to go
by Land to the Ship: which sets Sail from Salem April 1. Mr. Hubbard therefore
mistakes, in placing their going from Boston, on April 1: as also in placing
after this, the Account of Capt. Pierce's carrying the Ambrose into Bristol,
and the Fight at Sea, mentioned under Feb. 5. last.
and arrives at London (all safe) April 29. (w)

April 4. Wahgumacut a Sagamore up the River Conaatacut, which lies W of
Narraganset, comes to the Gov at Boston, with John Sagamore and Jack Straw (an
Indian who had lived in England [with] Sir Walter Raleigh and diverse of their
Sannups, and brings a Letter to the Gov from Mr. Endicot to this Effect; that
the said Wahgum is very desirous to have some English to Plant in his Country,
and offers to find them Corn, and give them yearly 80 Skins of Bever; [says]
the Country is very fruitful, and wishes there may be 2 Men sent with him to
see the Country. The Gov entertains them at Dinner; but would send none with
him: discovers after, that the said Sagamore is a very treacherous Man, and at
War with the Pekash [or Pequots, under] a far greater Sagamore. His Country is
not above 5 Days Journey from us by Land. (w)

April 12. Court of Assistants at Boston: Present the Gov, D. Gov, Mr. Ludlow,
Nowell, Pynchon, Bradstreet. Ordered (1.) That a Watch of 4 be kept every Night
at Dorchester, and another of 4 at Watertown, to begin at Sunset: (2.) That
whoever shoots off any Piece after the Watch is set, shall forfeit 40 s; or if
the Court judge him unable, then to be whipped: (3.) That every Man who finds a
Musket, shall before the 18th of this Month, and so always after have ready 1
Pound of Powder, 20 Bullets, and 2 Fathom of Match, under Penalty of 10 s. for
every Fault: (4.) That every Captain shall train his Company every Saturday:
(5.) That none shall travel single between their Plantations and Plymouth; nor
without some Arms, though 2 or 3 together. (Mcr) (6.) Upon Information that they
of Salem had called Mr. [Roger] Williams to the Office of a Teacher; a Letter
is written from the Court to Mr. Endicot to this Effect; That whereas Mr.
Williams had refused to join with the Congregation at Boston, because they
would not make a public Declaration of their Repentance for having Communion
with the Churches of England while they lived There, and besides had declared
his Opinion that the Magistrate might not punish the Breach of the Sabbath, nor
any other Offense as it was a Breach of the first Table; therefore they, [i. e.
the Court] marvelled they would choose him without advising with the Counsel;
and withal advising him that they would forbear to proceed till they had
conferred about it. (w)

April 13. Chickatabot comes to the Gov, and desires to buy some English
Clothes for Himself: the Gov tells him that English Sagamores did not use to
truck; but calls his Tailor and gives him Order to make him a Suit of Clothes:
whereupon he gives the Gov 2 large Skins of Coat Bever: and after He and his
Men had dined, they depart, and said they would come for his Suit 3 Days after.
(w)

April 15. Chickatabot comes to the Gov again; [who] puts him into a good new
Suit from Head to Foot: and after, sets Meat before him; but he would not eat,
till the Gov had given Thanks; and after Meat, desired him to do the like, and
so departed. (w)

April 21. The House of Jo Page of Waterton burnt: by carrying a few Coals from
one House to another, a Coal fell by the Way and kindled the Leaves, (w)

May 3. Court of Assistants at Boston: Present Gov. D. Gov, Mr. Ludlow, Capt.
Endicot, Mr. Nowell, Pynchon, Bradstreet. [A Man] fined L. 10, and He and his
Wife, enjoined to depart this Patent before Oct. 20, under Pain of Confiscation
of Goods; for Contempt of Authority and confronting Officers. (Mcr)

Sir Christopher [ Gardener having been] accused to have 2 Wives in Eng, was
sent for; but had Intelligence and escaped, and traveled up and down among the
Indians (w) especially in Plymouth Colony (br) about a Month. But by Means of
the Gov of Plymouth, is taken by the Indians about Namasket, and bro't to
Plymouth: (w) [When] the Indians came to Gov [ Bradford and told where he was,
and asked if they might kill him; he told them No, by no Means, but watch their
Opportunity and take him: And so [after a vigorous Fray] they did, and bro't
him to Gov Bradford.] In his Lodging those who made his Bed, found a little
Notebook which by Accident had slipped out of his Pocket, or some private Place;
in which was a Memorial what Day he was reconciled to the Pope and Church of
Rome, and in what University he took his (...), and such and such Degrees. It
being bro't to Gov [Bradford;] he keeps it, and sends Him and the Notes to Gov
[Winthrop] (br) [being] bro't by Capt. Underhill, and his Lieut. on May 4. to
Boston. (w) Gov Winthrop takes (...) very thankfully, (br) and May 5. 1631,
writes to Gov [Bradford] the following Letter. (br)

Sir, It has pleased God to bring Sir Christopher Gardener safe to us, with
those that came with him. And howsoever I never intended any hard Measure to
him, but to respect and use him according to his Quality; yet I let him know
your Care of him, and that he shall speed the better for your Mediation. It was
a special Providence of God to being those Notes of his to our Hands. I desire,
you will please to (...) to all who are privy to them, not to discover them to
any one: for that may frustrate any further use to be made of them. The good
Lord our God, who has always ordered Things for the Good of his poor Churches
here, direct us in this aright, and dispose it to a good Issue. I am sorry we
put you to so much Trouble about this Gentleman; especially at this Time of
great Employment: But I knew not how to avoid it. I must again entreat you to
let me know what Charge and Trouble any of your People have been at about him;
that it may be recompensed So with the true Affection of a Friend; desiring all
Happiness to yourself and yours, and to all my worthy Friends with you, whom I
love in the Lord; I commend you to his Grace and good Providence, and rest

Your most assured Friend, John Winthrop. (br)

But after Sir Christopher gets to Eng, he shows his Malice; but God prevents
him. (br) [See next Year]

May 16. An Alarm to all our Towns in the Night, by a Piece shot off; (but
where, could not be known) and the Indians having sent us Word the Day before,
that the Mohawks are coming down against them and us.

May 18. Wednesday, [and not 17, as by a Mistake in Gov Winthrop General Court
at Boston: Present Mr. Winthrop Gov, Mr. Dudley D. Gov, Mr. Ludlow, Capt.
Endicot, Mr. Nowell, Pynchon, Bradstreet, Assistants. JOHN WINTHROP, Esquire chosen
Gov for this Year by the general Consent of the Court, and THOMAS DUDLEY, Esquire
D. Gov. In the like Manner did the Choice proceed among the Assistants. (b)
[And that which makes me think Mr. Bradstreet was again chosen Secretary, is;
that in the Mcr, the Title of Captain is always put before Endicot, and of Mr.
prefixed to every other Assistant, but before his own Name He in Excess of
Modesty only puts the Letter S.]
(1.) For Explanation of an Order of last General Court of Oct. 19, now Ordered
with full Consent of all the Company present; that once every Year at least a
General Court be holden, at which it shall be lawful for the Commons to
propound any Person or Persons whom they shall desire to be chosen Assistants.
(2.) The like Course to be held, when the said Commons shall see Cause for any
Defect or Misbehaviour to remove any one or more of the Assistants: And (3.) To
the End the Body of the Commons may be preserved of honest and good Men;
Ordered and agreed that for the Time to come, no Man shall be admitted to the
Freedom of this Body Politic, but such as are Members of some of the Churches
within the Limits of the same. (4.) Thomas Williams having undertaken to set up
a Ferry between Winnesemet and Charleston; he is to have 3 d. a Person, and
from Winnesemet to Boston 4 d. (5.) Chickatabot and Sagamore John promise the
Court to make Satisfaction for whatever Wrong any of their Men shall do, to any
of the English, to their Cattle or any otherwise. (6.) 116 take the Oath of
Freemen, of whom are

1 Mr. John Maverick, 2 Mr. John Warham, 3 Mr. William Blackstone, 4 Mr. George
Philips, Mr. Richard Brown, Capt. Daniel Patrick, Capt. John Underhill, 5 Mr.
Thomas Graves, 6 Capt. Walter Norton, 7 Mr. William Colbron, 8 Mr. Roger
Conant, 9 Thomas Stoughton, Robert Seely, William Agar, Mr. William Clarke,
William Noddle, [Perhaps Noddle's Island might derive its Name from him. [ N.
B. Those numbered are mentioned as desiring Freedom on Oct. 19. 1630; and now
as taking their Oaths to the Government.]
10 William Balstone, 11 Mr. George Alcock, 12 Robert Moulton, Mr. Edward
Belchar, 13 Roger Williams, Mr. Richard Saltonstall, 14 Edward Gibbons, 15 Mr.
William Jeffry, 16 Edward Converse 17 Mr. John Dillingham, 18 Thomas Lamb, 19
Mr. Edward Johnson, etc. (Mcr)
At Noon a House burnt down, all the People being present. (w)

May 27. There comes from Virginia into Salem a Pinace of 18 Tuns, laden with
Corn and Tobacco: was bound to the North; and [happily] put in here by fowl
Weather: she sells her Corn at 10 s. [Sterl.] the Bushel. (w)

June 14. Court at Boston: Present Gov, D. Gov, Mr. Ludlow, Capt. Endicot, Mr.
Nowell, Mr. Pynchon, S. Bradstreet. Ordered (1.) That none shall travel out of
this Patent by Sea or Land without Leave from the Gov, D. Gov or some
Assistant, under such Penalty as the Court shall think meet to inflict: (2.)
Mr. John Masters having undertaken to make a Passage from Charles-River to the
new Town, 12 Feet broad, and 7 deep; the Court promises him Satisfaction: (3.)
Ordered, that none buy Corn or other Provision, or any Merchantable Commodity
of any Ship or Bark that comes into this Bay, without Leave from the Gov or
some Assistant: (4.) Edward Converse having undertaken to set up a Ferry
between Charlestown and Boston; he is to have 2 d. for a single Person, and 1
d. a [Person] if there be 2 or more. (Mcr)

June 25. [not 14, as by Mistake in Mr. Hubbard] comes [to Boston] a Shallop
from Piscatoway, which brings News of a small English Ship come thither with
Provisions, and some Frenchmen to make Salt. By this Boat Capt. Neal Gov of
Piscatoway sends a Packet of Letters to Gov [Winthrop] directed to Sir
Christopher Gardener; which are opened because directed to one who is our
Prisoner, and had declared himself an Ill-Willer to our Government: which when
the Gov opened, he finds it came from Sir Ferdinando Gorges: in the Packet is
[another] Letter to Thomas Morton (sent Prisoner before to Eng) By both which
Letters it appears, He [i. e. Sir Ferdinand] had some Design to recover his
pretended Right to Part of the Massachusetts Bay, and reposed much Trust in Sir
Christopher. (w)

June 27. Come to Gov [Winthrop] Letters out of the White-Angel, lately arrived
at Saco: [which] bro't Cows, Goats, Hogs, and many Provisions both for the Bay
and Plymouth: Mr. Allerton returns [hither] in this Ship; and by him we hear
that the Friendship, which put out from Bastable [some] Weeks before the Angel
was forced Home again by a Tempest. (w)

July 4. The Bark which Gov [Winthrop] built at Mistick, launched; and called
the Blessing of the Bay, (w)

July 5. Court of Assistant at Boston: Present Gov, D. Gov, Mr. Ludlow, Mr.
Nowell, Mr. Pynchon, S. Bradstreet: (1.) Ordered there be levied out of the
several Plantations, L. 30 for making the Creek from Charles-River to Newtown,
viz. 1 Winesemet L.0 15 s 2 Wesagustus 2 3 Saugus 1 4 Natasket 10 5 Waterton 5
6 Boston L.5 7 Dorchester 4 10 8 Roxbury 3 9 Salem 3 10 Charlestown 4 10 30 0

[ M^adford omitted ]

(2.) That every Assistant have Power to grant Warrants, Summons and
Attachments: (3.) The Sagamore of Agawam [after, called Ipswich] is banished
from coming into any Englishman's House for a Year, under Penalty of 10
Beverskins. (Mcr)

July 6. A small Ship of 60 Tun arrives at Natasket, [T] Graves Master: brings
10 Passengers from London: They came with a patent for Sagadehock; (w) but not
liking the Place, they come hither: their Ship draws 10 Foot, goes up to
Waterton, but runs a-ground twice by the Way (w) and lays her Bones there. (h)
These were the Company called the Husbandmen, and their Ship called the Plow:
(w) their Patent called the Plow-Patent; (h) the most of them prove Familists;
and (w) soon after (h) vanish away. (w).

July 14. The Ship Friendship of Barstable arrives at Natasket; had been at Sea
eleven Weeks, and beaten back again by fowl Weather; set sail from Barstable
again, about the middle of May; [and] lands here 8 Heifers, 1 Calf and 5 Sheep.
(w)

July 21. The Gov, D. Gov, and Mr. Nowell, the Elder of the Congregation at
Boston, go to Waterton, to confer with Mr. Phillips the Pastor and Mr. Brown
the Elder of the Congregation there, about an Opinion they had published that
the Churches of Rome were true Churches: the Matter is debated before many of
both Congregations, and by the Approbation of all the Assembly, except 3, is
concluded an Error. (w)

July 22. The White-Angel comes into the Bay, [and] lands there 21 Heifers. (w)

July 26. Court at Boston: Present Gov, D. Gov, Mr. Ludlow, Capt. Endicot, Mr.
Nowell, Mr. Pynchon, S. Bradstreet. Ordered (1.) That there be a Watch of 6,
and an Officer kept every Night at Boston; 2 whereof to be of Boston, 2 of
Charleston, and 2 of Roxbury: (2.) That every 1st Thursday in every Month there
be a general Training of Capt. Underhill's Company at Boston and Roxbury; and
every 1st Friday in every Month, there be a general Training of the Remainder
of them [who] inhabit at Charleston, Mistick and the new Town, at a convenient
Place about the Indian Wigwams: the Trainings to begin at 1 p. m: (3.) Mr.
Francis Aleworth chosen Lieut. to Capt. Southcot; and Capt. Southcot has
Liberty to go for Eng, promising to return with all convenient Speed. (Mcr)

July 26. A small Bark of Salem of about 12 Tun, coming toward the Bay; 3 of
Mr. Cradock's Fishermen being in her, 2 Tun of Stores and 3 Hogsheads of Train
Oil, is overset in a Gust: and being buyed up by the Oil, floats up and down 48
Hours, and the Men sitting on her; till a Boat coming by, espies and saves
them. (w)

July 29. The Friendship sets sail for Christopher-Island. (w)

July 30. The white Angel falls down for Plymouth: but the Wind not serving
comes to an Anchor; and a Week after runs a-ground near the Gurnet's Nose. (w)

Aug. 8. The Tarrontines [i. e. Eastern Indians] to the Number of 100, come in
30 Canoes; and in the Night assault the Wigwam of the Sagamore of Agawam by
Merrimack, slay 7 Men, and wound John Sagamore, and Jones and some others
(whereof some, after, Dye) and rifle a Wigwam where Mr. Cradock's Men kept to
(...) Sturgeon, taking away their Nets (...)

N. B. (1.) IN the 2d Section, and thence forward we set the chief Stage of our
Annals at Boston.

(2.) The Articles of Plymouth Colony we shall distinguish by single Comma's;
and of Connecticut and New Haven Colonies by double Comma's.

(3.) The Moneys in this 2d Section are yet accounted Sterling.

(4.) As we are now about Foundations, we propose to be larger in these 2 Years
1630, and 1631, than others.

(6.) Our Marks of Reference are These,

At the Top of the Page --, Peace;, War. b, Beginning; m, Middle; e, End, of a
Month. bcr, Boston Church Records, in Mss. bp, Book of Patents, in Mss. btr,
Boston Town Records, in Mss. br, Gov Bradford's History, in Mss. c, Capt.
Clapp's Memoirs. Ccr, Connecticut Colony Records, in Mss. ctr, Charlestown
Records, in Mss. d, D. Gov Dudley's Letter to the Countess of Lincoln. fl,
Fuller's Church History of Britain. g, Ferdinando Gorges Esquire History of
New England, h, Rev. Mr. Wm. Hubbard's History of New-Eng, in Mss. hc, Harvard
College Records, in Mss. hcr, Hingham Church Records, in Mss. hs, Howes Annals
of England. j. Capt. Johnson's History of New England. im, Dr. Increase Mather.
mo, Mr. Morton Secretary of Plymouth-Colony's Memorial. Mcr, Massachusetts
Colony Records, in Mss. ml, Manuscript Letter. mss, Manuscript. Ncr, New Haven
Colony Records, in Mss. Pcr, Plymouth-Colony Records, in Mss. pn (...)'s
Chronological Historian. rcr, (...) Church Records, in Mss. Rr, Rhode Island
Colony Records, in Mss. s, Salmon's Chronological Historian. sd, Rev. Mr.
Samuel Danforth. w, Gov Winthrop's Journal, in Mss.


The other Marks are Common -- as, E, East; W, West; N, North; S, South; N E,
North East (...) D, Dukes, E, Earl; L, Lord; P, Prince; (...)

Boston, May 30. 1754.
PROPOSALS.

For Printing by Subscription the II Volumn of the Reverend Mr. PRINCE'S Annals
of NEW ENGLAND.

The Volumn will be printed on a good Paper and fair Character, in Octavo, and
will come out in successive Numbers, two Sheets in each Number, covered, which
shall be delivered to the Subscribers in Boston, as soon as published; and
Notice given thereof, that those who live at a Distance may send for them; at
six Pence Lawful Money for each Number; and it is expected that the Subscribers
pay for each Number when they are delivered: Those who subscribe for six Books
or Numbers, shall have a seventh gratis.

Subscriptions are taken in by S. KNEELAND in Queen Street, and by J. and T.
LEVERETT in Cornhill, Boston.

Just Published, and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street,
HISTORICAL MEMOIRS, Relating to the Houssatunnuk Indians: Or, An Account of
the Method used, and Pains taken, for the Propagation of the Gospel among that
Heathenish Tribe, and the Success thereof under the Ministry of the late Rev.
Mr. JOHN SERGEANT Together with the Character of that eminently worthy
Missionary; and an Address to the People of this Government relating to those
Indians, etc. etc.

Lately Published in LONDON,

EIght Numbers of a new Edition of the History and Survey of London,
Westminster, Southwark, and Places adjacent, to the present Time. By William
Maitland, F. R. S. and others: Which Numbers may be had of John and Thomas
Leverett in Cornhill, Boston, at the first Cost, which is Six Pence Sterling
each Number. Any Gentleman desirous of subscribing to the above Work (...) have
the Numbers in order as they well be sent for in the Vessels that come next
after they are published, at the above Price: The whole Work will make two
Volumns Folio illustrated with near one Hundred and fifty Copper Plates A
Specimen of said Work may be (...) at (...) Leveretts Where likewise may be
had, just Imported, Chamber's Dictionary in 4 Vol. last Edition, neatly bound;
and a Variety of BOOKS in Divinity, History, Physic, etc. (...)


