Mr. Mac Gregore's SERMON At the ORDINATION OF Mr. Alexander Boyd.

The Christian Soldier. A SERMON Preached at Newbury, AT THE ORDINATION of the
Reverend Mr. Alexander Boyd; To the Pastoral Office at New Castle, in the
Province of the MASSACHUSETTS BAY, September 24th, 1754.

By the Reverend Mr. DAVID MAC GREGORE, Of Londonderry.

Rev. ii. 10. Fear none of these Things which thou shall suffer. 2 Timothy iv. 7,
8. I have fought the good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the
Faith. -- Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day: And not to me only, but
unto them also that love his appearing. BOSTON: Printed by B. EDES and J. GILL,
at the New-Printing-Office in King Street, for S. KNEELAND in Queen Street.
1755.

AN Ordination SERMON.
2 TIMOTHY ii. 3. Thou therefore endure Hardness, as a good Soldier of JESUS
CHRIST.


CONSIDERING the vast Importance of the Ministerial Office, and what are like
to be the happy or unhappy Consequences of a faithful or unfaithful Discharge
of it; there is great Need that every Argument be used, that may most
powerfully excite to Ministerial Faithfulness.

And, as on the one Hand, a just View of the glorious Reward, consequent upon a
right Discharge of the Duties of that important Office, will, (its likely)
prove an animating Motive to Ministerial Faithfulness; So on the other, to
consider aright the many and great Difficulties which attend the faithful
Exercise of this Office, may have the like Tendency.

Such a View seasonably taken at the Entry of the sacred Office, may prevent
Ministers from repenting of their Undertaking, or from looking back after
having put their Hands to the Plough.

A right View of these Difficulties, and counting the Cost before Hand, may
prevent the unhappy Fate of the foolish Man, who began to build, but was not
able to finish. This, by the divine Blessing, may quicken Ministers to apply to
their Work with Vigor and Resolution; may excite them to put on the whole
Armor of God, and to take all due Care to be well equiped for the important
Service they are to be engaged in. With a View therefore to promote these good
Effects, I propose by divine Help, to introduce the present Solemnity, by
saying somewhat of the Difficulties that attend the fatihful Discharge of the
Gospel Ministry; and to that End, have chosen the Words now read, as the
Subject of Discourse, where the Apostle says, Thou therefore endure Hardness as
a good Soldier of Jesus Christ.

This Text and Context, contain an Address of the Apostle Paul, to the
Evangelist Timothy; in which, he gives him a Number and Variety of necessary
and seasonable Directions, with Respect to his fulfilling the several Parts of
his important Office; particularly the first Verse, he applies to him in these
Words, Thou therefore my Son, be strong in the Grace which is in Christ Jesus,
Be strong: i. e. be stout and courageous, fear not any Enemy, or Opposition
thou may meet with in the faithful Execution of thine Office. In the Grace
which is in Christ Jesus; q. d. don't depend upon thy own Strength, or natural
Courage; but place thy whole Confidence in the gracious Influence and Spirit of
Christ Jesus. Remember that it is in him that thou have both Righteousness and
Strength; that all thy Springs are in this blessed Head of Influence; and that
without Him thou can do nothing. Then in the second Verse, he gives the
Evangelist Direction concerning the important Work of setting apart fit Persons
to the Office of the Gospel Ministry. The Things that thou have heard of me
before many Witnesses: i. e. The Doctrines of the Gospel, and the Office of the
Ministry, which have been by me committed to thy Trust: the many Witnesses
before whom this was done, has Respect to the numerous Spectators who were
present at the Evangelist's Ordination. The same commit thou to faithful Men:
q. d. Take good Care, not only how thou fulfillest thy own Ministry, but also
who thou introducest into the Ministry; that they into whose Hands the sacred
Depositum is committed, be not only faithful, but able. Labor to have all the
Evidence that the Nature of the Case will admit of, not only that they be
Persons who have an honest Intention, but also that they are in some good
Measure qualified to speak as becomes the Oracles of God, and to perform the
other Parts of that weighty Trust.

Then in the Text he proceeds to say, Thou therefore endure Hardness as a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ. Here Is a Duty exhorted to, and the Manner in which it
is to be done. The Duty we have in that Precept, endure Hardness, or as it
might be literally rendered from the original Super-evil, viz. the Evil of
Affliction: q. d. Expect a Number and Variety of Difficulties in the faithful
Exercise of thy Ministry, and be ready to encounter them with Christian
Fortitude, and to bear them with Equanimity and Patience.

The Manner in which the Duty is to be done, we have in these Words, As a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ. q. d. to excite thee to endure Hardness with the more
Patience, Thou must remember that the Life of a Minister, is not a Life of Ease
and Pleasure; but on the contrary, a Life of Warfare, the Life of a Soldier;
that Ministers in the faithful Exercise of their Ministry, may rationally lay
their Account with the Dangers, the Fatigues and Encounters of a long and
hazardous Campaign.

The Subject being thus introduced and explained, in discoursing more largely
upon it, I shall Is It, Point to some of those Things that Ministers may
rationally lay their Account to meet with, in the faithful Exercise of their
Office; which will require their enduring Hardness. IIdly. I shall mention some
of those Qualitications which are mainly necessary, in Order to their enduring
Hardness, or encountering the Difficulties they may expect to meet. And then
make Application.


And according to the proposed Method,

I. I am to point to several of those Things, that it is likely Ministers will
meet with, in the Exercise of their Ministry, which will require their enduring
Hardness.

And here I would observe in general, that they may in the whole of their
Ministerial Work, expect to meet with those Things which will require their
enduring Hardness. For consider, that the present State of the visible Church
is militant; Christ's Disciples while here in this World, are in a State of
War, and need to put on the whole Armor of God, that they may fight the good
Fight of Faith. The Church in the present State is like a Flock of Sheep among
Wolves; she has her Situation among Lions Dens, and the Mountains of Leopards.
Believers, at present, are in a World that hates them, Job. 15.19. They have
many Enemies, and these hate them with a cruel hatred, Psalm. 25.19. This Enmity
began to break out very early in the Murder of righteous Abel, by his own
Brother: and wherefore slew he him? The Apostle tells us, 1 Job. 3.12. Because
his own Works were Evil, and his Brother's Righteous. And it has been
manifesting it self in every Age since these Words of God were pronounced. Genesis
3.15. I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and
her Seed: in so much, that in every Age, there has been Occasion for the
Apostle's Observation, Gal. 4.29, But as then he that was born after the Flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.

Our Lord tells his Disciples, that in the World they shall have Tribulation;
and that through much Tribulation they may expect to enter into the Kingdom of
God: And what he told them, they have found true. Hence it is observable, that
the World has proven an unkind Step-Dame to our Lord himself, and to many of
his dearest Followers. The Psalmist was not the only Saint who has had Reason
to complain, as Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I am in Meshech, and that I dwell in
the Tents of Kedar; or to say as Psalm. 57.4. My Soul is among fierce Lions, and
I dwell with them that are set on Fire. Believers in the present State have not
only Men, but Devils to oppose them; they have to encounter all the Legions of
Hell, with Satan at their Head; they wrestle not against Flesh and Blood only,
but also against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness
of this World, against spiritual Wickedness in high Places. Ephesians. 6.12.

And as the present State of the Church is militant, so Ministers are Officers
in this War, under Christ the Captain of Salvation: It is their Business to
animate and direct Christ's Soldiers to lead them out to Action; and while they
are doing so, not to shrink back themselves for fear of Danger; but to jeopard
their Lives in the high Places of the Field, and if Need be, bravely to expose
themselves in the Forefront of the hottest Battle, and to make a resolute
Stand against the united Powers of Earth and Hell.

And as in the heat of a Battle, we see that the Enemy do endeavor principally
to slay their Adversary's Officers, so it is not to be doubted but that the
Devil and his Party will bend their chief Force against the Officers in
Christ's Army. What our Lord says to Peter, is applicable in a peculiar Sense
to every faithful Minister, Luke 22.31. Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired
to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat. He who was bold enough to attack
the Captain of our Salvation, in the Manner we read of, Matt. 4.1 -- 11, will
no doubt, as far as he is permitted, try every Method with Ministers, that he
may either overpower them by Force, or circumvent them by Fraud.

From this general View of the Case, you may easily see that Ministers in the
Exercise of their Office, will need to endure Hardness. But I would be larger
on this Head, endeavoring to point to several of the particular Things which
will require their enduring Haadness. And,

1st. The Opposition, and the bitter Scoffs they may expect to meet with, in
their faithful laying down the Scheme of Salvation by Jesus Christ, will call
for their enduring Hardness.

It is true, there is nothing in this Scheme of Salvation which deserves
Opposition, or which is by any Means a fit Object of Ridicule: On the contrary,
it is the most benevolent, and withal the wisest Design. It is full of
Benevolence and breathes nothing but Love and Compassion to guilty polluted
perishing Creatures, in next Subordination to the Glory of God, according to
Luke 2.14; Peace and Pardon, and Holiness, high Honors and special Favors, to
the most unworthy Rebels. In a Word, considering the Benevolence of the Design*
it might reasonably be expected that the Gospel, instead of Opposition, would
meet with a universal Welcome; that every House, and every Heart would be open
to receive the Savior. It is certainly a faithful Saying, and worthy of all
Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save the chief of
Sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15. And as it is a benevolent, so it is a wise Design: the
Device of Salvation by Jesus Christ, contains in it the brightest Display of
divine Wisdom that ever the World was acquainted with; so far is it from having
any Thing foolish or weak in it, any Thing that is a proper Object of Ridicule:
Every Thing in the glorious Plan of the New Covenant, is so well ordered, as to
be worthy of a Being of infinite Perfection. Here Is Wisdom enough and enough,
to employ the richest speculative human Mind. Nay, the Angels of Heaven, though
not so nearly interested as Men are, yet they admire the manifold Wisdom of God
herein manifested, and love to pry into it. 1 Pet. 1.12. But then it is
likewise true, that the Glory and Beauty of the New Covenant. Way of
Redemption, and the excellent Wisdom therein displayed, are not discerned by
carnal Eyes: With Respect to them, it is called hidden Wisdom, the Wisdom of
God in a Mystery, which none of the Princes of this World knew. 1 Cor. 2.7.
Hence the Apostle had Occasion to say as he does, 1 Cor. 1.23. We preach Christ
crucified, to the Jews a stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness. He who
said so, although perhaps one of the best Preachers that ever opened a Mouth, was
yet counted a Babbler, when he preached Jesus, and the Resurrection from the
Dead.

And as the Minds of Men are naturally the same now that they were seventeen
Hundred Years ago, so the Gospel is apt to meet with the same Treatment; and
this not only from Jews, Mahometans and Heathens, but also from professed
Christians. Natural Men, however they may be born and brought up under a
Christian Dispensation, yet they cannot see into several of the important
Doctrines of Christianity. As for Instance, they cannot see into the Doctrines
of absolute Decrees, or Original Sin: How an absolute Predetermination is
consistent with human Liberty: How it is just or possible that by the
Disobedience of one many should be made Sinners: Or that by the Offense of one
Judgment should come on all to Condemnation. How it is consistent either with
infinite Wisdom or Justice, that a Sinner should be justified by imputed
Righteousness; or that the Just should suffer for the Unjust, that he might
bring Sinners to God. They cannot see into the Doctrine of Regeneration, as
importing the Supernatural Production and instantaneous Implantation of a new
living Principle of Action in the Soul, operating so powerfully as to produce
an immediate Change in all the Faculties.

These, and other the peculiar Doctrines of our holy Religion, are Foolishness
to them, and the Objects of their hearty Aversion. And therefore he who will
preach them up, with faithful Boldness, and apply them with Closeness, may
expect the Trial, at least, of cruel Mockings; and very probably will meet with
such Opposition and Contradiction, as will demand all the Christian Fortitude
he is Master of, to bear up under them.

2. The close and painful Application they should give to their private
Studies, will require their enduring Hardness. There is a Number and Variety of
Acquirements, needful to qualify for the Work of the Gospel Ministry, which
cannot be attained, without close Application to Study. It were to be wished,
(if practicable) that Ministers of the Gospel were versed in all the various
Parts of solid, useful Learning: That they were expert in the whole Compass of
Science, and what is known by the Name of universal Scholars, But this, with
Respect to Ministers in general, is, (I own) rather to be wished for, than
expected; especially in a young Country, where Things are yet, as it were, in
Embrio, or in an infant State. But even in our present State, Ministers should
have some Competency of human Learning: as for Instance, It is at least highly
expedient, that the Gospel-Minister understood so much of Grammar and
Rhetoric, as to know somewhat of the Congruity and Elegancy of Language: That
he have such an Insight into Logic and Metaphysics, as that he be capable of
making proper Distinctions of knowing when an Argument is, or is not
conclusive; of reasoning with some Pertinency and Clearness of detecting
Sophisms, and of Abstracting: That he did at least know so much of
Mathematics, as to render him capable of reading Books of natural Philosophy,
with Understanding: That he be well acquainted with moral Philosophy, and with
History, ancient and modern, civil and ecclesiastic; especially, it is needful
that he be acquainted with Divinity, Polemick and Systematick, as well as
Practical.

Now these Acquirements are not to be attained without Study, yea, much Study,
which Solomon observes, is a Weariness of the Flesh. Many an one has endured
that Hardness, by close Application to Study, that has brought on Disease, and
hastened Death in the Meridian of Life.

But this is not all: as the Study he prosecutes in order to attain ministerial
Qualifications, will require his enduring Hardness; so also will that, to which
he behooves, to apply himself in the Exercise of his Office. A conscientious
Minister cannot allow himself to put off People with a rude impremeditated
extemporary Effusion: On the contrary, he considers that the Interest of Souls
is at Stake; one of which, is of more Value than a World besides: That his
Preaching is about Matters of infinite Moment; that he is like to be the Savor
of Life unto Life, or of Death unto Death; the most glorious Life, or the most
dreadful Death, to them that hear him. And under the Influence of such
Considerations, he dare not offer to the Lord what cost him Nothing; but though
it should be a Weariness to the Flesh, he gives himself to close Study, that by
this Means he may bring beaten Oil, to cause the Lamps to burn. The Foresight
that this may soon wear out animal Nature, and hasten temporal Death, don't at
all deter him; he had much rather it should be worked out in such Employment,
than in any other; and hence he gives himself to Reading, to Meditation and to
Doctrine; and deeply sensible that he cannot prepare for the public Service of
the Sanctuary by his own Study, he is much in Closet Devotion, often pleading
with the Father of Lights, that he would enable him to find out acceptable
Words, directing him to seasonable Subjects, and the most profitable Way of
prosecuting them. In a Word, he who will make Conscience of private Preparation
for the public Exercise of the Ministry, will find Need to endure Hardness in
this Respect.

3. Faithful Reproof is another Part of his Work, in the Exercise of which the
Gospel Minister will need to endure Hardness, and has Occasion for much holy
Courage. Reproving and Rebuking are Parts of the Ministerial Office, as well as
Exhorting, 2 Timothy 4.2. He must cry aloud, and not spare, lifting up his Voice
like a Trumpet in showing God's People their Transgressions, and the House of
Jacob their Sins, Isai. 58.1. Yea, if there be Occasion for it, he must rebuke
sharply, Tit. 1.13. Yea, he must not only reprove publicly from the Pulpit,
but when there is Occasion for it, he is to practice private personal Rebuke.
The faithful Minister must not allow himself to respect Persons, or to give
flattering Titles to Men; but must faithfully reprove the Vices of the great,
as well as of the small. Though the Person that needs the Reproof be one in
great Power; one who has the Estate, or even the Life of the Reprover at his
Disposal, yet this must not hinder him from a faithful Discharge of his Duty.
The Baptist is herein a shining Pattern; he was no Stranger to the tyrannical
Disposition of Herod. It is not unlike that he was sensible that he ran the
Risque of losing his Head; and yet all this don't deter him from reproving the
Tyrant, on Account of his abominable incestuous Marriage. Ministers must follow
such an Example as this at their Peril; they must put their secular Interests,
and even their Lives in their Hand, leaving the Consequence to God. They must
sometimes minister those Reproofs which perhaps will be galling to the
Consciences of wicked Men, though they should like the Murderers of Stephen be
cut to the Heart, or angry even to Madness. It Is true, the faithful Minister is
to take Care that his Reproofs be wisely dispensed, with Respect to Time,
Place, Manner and other Circumstances. He is also carefully to avoid
Bitterness, to shun the Spirit even of a Moses, when he said, Hear now ye
Rebels, must we bring you Water out of this Rock. In a Word, he should
endeavor to apply these Causticks, with all that Tenderness, that the Nature
of the Operation will admit of. But on the other Hand, he had Need to take
Care, least under the Color of Prudence or Tenderness, he should be unfaithful.

This is another Branch of the sacred Office, in which the Gospel Minister will
have much Need to endure Hardness. He will be apt sometimes (it is likely) to
have the Mortification of finding, that although the Reproof has been administered
with all possible Wisdom and Tenderness; yet by his Faithfulness, he has lost
the Good Will of the Reproved, who is become his Enemy for telling him the
Truth, and ever after bears him a Grudge, and is ready to do him a Mischief.

4. The Gospel Minister needs to endure Hardness, in opposing Errors and
Errorists. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 11.19, That there must be Heresies,
that they that are approved may be made manifest. Sometimes we see the
sovereign and all-wise God, whose Ways are past finding out, does for some End
worthy of himself, see fit to permit false Teachers to enter into his Church;
Persons who make it their Business to corrupt the Word of God, and who are
industrious to draw away Disciples after them. It may be, the Errors they
promote, though of a very dangerous Nature, eating like a Canker, and
threatening the Vitals of Christianity; yet are so speciously gilded, that the
Poison is not easily discerned; fair Pretenses are made of Zeal for God; and
such guileful Methods used, that with good Words and fair Speeches, the Simple
are in great Danger of being deceived.

In such a State of Things, that Minister who would expect to be owned as a
good Soldier of Jesus Christ, must exert himself; he must not see grievous
Wolves entering in, not sparing the Flock, or the little Foxes spoiling the
tender Vine: and in the mean Time stand by as an unconcerned Spectator; but
when he sees Men arising, and hears them speaking perverse Things, to draw away
Disciples, he should consider himself as set for the Defense of the Gospel, and
not fly, leaving Christ's Sheep in the Power of Wolves; but to contend
earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, endeavoring with all
Learning and sound Doctrine, to convince the Gainsayers; using his best Skill
to establish the Flock in the laboring Truths of the Day, and to reduce any
that are wavering, and begin to be drawn aside from their Stedfastness.

5. Ministers need to endure Hardness, in that careful Watch they are to keep
over the Flock. Christ's Flock have much need of a careful Watch over them,
considering what foolish Sheep they are, how apt to go astray, and what
vigilant, subtle Enemies are engaged against them: And hence, although their
chief Safety is owing to the omniscient Eye of him that slumbers not, nor
sleeps, which is constantly exercised about them, without which, the Watchmen
would watch in vain; yet it has pleased the great Keeper of Israel, to appoint
his Ministers in the Station of Watchmen, Ezekiel. 3.17. Son of Man, I have made
thee a Watchman to the House of Israel. So likewise, Isa. 62.6. I have set
Watchmen on thy Walls, O Jerusalem, that shall never hold their Peace, Day nor
Night; and in the Exercise of this Part of their Office, they are to guard
against Drousiness. That Is a sad Character which we have of the Watchman of
Israel, Isa. 56.10. viz. Sleeping, lying down, loving to Slumber. As the
Minister of Christ would be owned by his divine Master at last, he should take
Care that this Character be not applicable to him. And in order hereto, he
should have his Eyes where Solomon tells us the wife Man's are, viz. in his
Head; carefully observing the State of the Church, what are the Practices of
her Enemies against her. In a Word, heedfully noticing what are the Phenomena
of the natural, the moral, and the religious World; so as to be always
qualified to give a right Answer to that Question, Watchman, what of the Night?
Now this is a Work which will require great Steadiness and Application of Mind:
And those who will discharge it faithfully, will, (I believe) be often awake in
a natural Sense, when the Flock in that Sense are asleep.

6. There is a great Variety of Labors belonging to the Ministerial Office,
besides what we have already touched upon, which will require their enduring
Hardness. Preaching the Gospel is a very laborious Work, as might be easily
seen, had we Time to view the Nature of it. To hold forth the Love of God to
Sinners in it is Origin and first Spring, viz. free sovereign Grace; to open up
the Nature of that Redemption purchased by Christ; to show what a wise,
gracious, glorious Device the New-Covenant-Way of Salvation is; what a glorious
Constellation of divine Perfections do shine forth in it; how well ordered it
is in all Things; how worthy in every Respect of it is divine Author: To display
aright the Manner of the Application of this precious Redemption: To preach the
Terrors of the Law to awakened Sinners; representing Hell naked before them,
and Destruction without a Covering; showing them what a fearful Thing it is to
fall into the Hands of the living God: To direct awakened enquiring Souls the
right Way to Christ, steering them safe by those fatal Rocks, upon which many
Souls have been wrecked and finally lost: To preach so as to suit a great
Variety of Cases among Believers, feeding Christ's Sheep, and feeding his
Lambs; giving Milk to Babes, and strong Meat to them who have their Senses
exercised: To make a judicious Choice of pertinent Subjects, well adapted to
the Times, that may lead not only to Truth, but seasonable Truth: To be instant
in Season, and out of Season, not willingly losing any Opportunity that
presents of serving Christ and Souls: To take due Care not only as to the
Matter, but also as to the Style and Manner of delivering divine Truth; with
the Preacher seeking to find out acceptable Words, using all the Arts of
persuading and animating; and leaving no Mean unessay'd to convince the
Judgments, and gain the Hearts of Men. This is Labor! this is Work! And he who
will follow it faithfully, must endure Hardness.

But this is not all: they who think the Whole of a Minister's Work is confined
to the Pulpit, and his Preparations for it, do greatly mistake the Nature of
it: How shall he know what to preach, except he know the State of the Flock?
And how can he know this sufficiently, without taking Pains to know it? It Is
needful therefore that he spend some convenient Part of his Time, not only in
occasional Visits to the Sick, and upon other Emergencies; but also in stated
Visitation and Catechizing, examining the Flock as to their Advances in
Knowledge, and conferring freely with them about Soul-Matters; stirring up the
ignorant and careless, warning the unruly, comforting the feeble-minded,
supporting the weak; teaching not only publicly, but also from House to House,
Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.

I might also have mentioned the exercise of the Key of Discipline, a Part of
the ministerial Office, which is often attended with great Difficulty, and
which requires much holy Courage, Impartiality and Faithfulness, as well as
Wisdom: as likewise, the administering the Seals of the Covenant, which supposes
an Enquiry into the Qualifications of the Subjects of these Seals: A Work this,
which some Ministers I know find very weighty and difficult. In a Word, he who
will faithfully apply himself to the various Labors of the ministerial Office,
will be apt to find it a Work of great and sore Labor and Fatigue.

7. The Gospel-Minister will need to endure Hardness, in bearing up under
sinking Discouragements, which are apt to attend him in the Exercise of his
Office. Some Ministers have more of these than others; but I believe none are
entirely exempt from them, and some feel these to be many and great; Sometimes
they feel the Weight of Souls lying on their Spirits, with an almost
insupportable Pressure; they feel a Degree of the same catholic Concern, which
the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 11.29. The general Interest of Christianity lies
near their Hearts; and it may be, they have the Affliction to see Religion low,
corrupting Errors prevailing, practical Godliness much decayed, and Matter
daily tending from bad to worse; so that the Things that remain, are even ready
to die. Upon such a melancholy View of Things, the faithful Minister cannot
stand by as an unconcerned Spectator: His seeing Zion in this Condition, will
cause him to bang his Harp on the Willow; his Heart trembles for the Ark of
God; he cannot prevent a good Deal of Dejection of Soul, and it may be, he
feels scarce enough of Faith in Exercise, to breathe out faintly such a
Petition as that, Amos 7.2. O Lord God, forgive, I beseech thee: By whom shall
Jacob arise? for he is small. Again, sometimes his Heart is ready to die within
him, to see so little Appearance of Fruit following his ministerial Labors; to
think that there is a sad Probability that he shall prove the Savor of Death
unto Death to some Persons, that are very dear to him; that he must appear
before Christ's Judgment Seat, and bear Witness against them, that they
despised the Grace of the Gospel, and trampled under Foot the great Salvation.
O! it is a cutting Thought. Sometimes he is sorely exercised with the Fear that
he has already proved, or shall prove unfaithful, in the Execution of some
important Branch of his Office; that he shall not be able to give any good
Account of the weighty Trust committed to him; that such Souls shall perish by
his Neglect; and that he shall neither save himself, nor them that hear him.
Sometimes he has unreasonable and wicked Men, Men that have not Faith, Men of
Beast-like Dispositions, to deal with; sometimes all Men seem to forsake him,
and none to stand by him; and what is worse still, sometimes his Master hides
his Face. In a Word, his Discouragements are innumerable, both from without,
and from within; so that on this Account also, he has Need to endure Hardness,
as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. And thus I have shown (as I proposed) some
of the Difficulties attending the Exercise of the Ministerial Office, which
will require enduring Hardness.

I proceed next to the other General Head; which is,

IIdly, To mention, and a little to insist on some of those Qualifications
which are mainly necessary, in Order to the Gospel Ministers enduring Hardness,
as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ.

And 1st. It is needful in order to his enduring Hardness, that he be a Man of
Faith. Without Faith it is hardly to be supposed, that he will fight the good
Fight, and steadily adhere to his Master's Interest, in the midst of
Difficulties, so many and great: But if he have some good Measure of this
divine Grace, it will have an happy Efficacy in enabling him to face and
surmount Difficulties. Faith enables him to balance the Things of Time and
Eternity, so as to give each its proper Weight; to put the Sufferings of the
present Time in one Scale, and the Glory which is to be revealed in the other;
and by this Means, evidently to discover that the light Afflictions of the
present Time, are but as it were for a Moment, and so not worthy to be compared
with the Glory that is to be revealed. Faith sometimes enables him to see his
divine Lord standing by him, and to hear him adressing him in such Words as
once he did one of his faithful Ministers, Act. 23.11. Be of good Cheer Paul.
Faith sometimes opens up the eternal World before him, and gives him such a
View as Stephen had, when he said, I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man
standing at the right Hand of God, Act. 7.56. By Faith he hears the Captain of
his Salvation saying, as Rev. 3.12. To him that overcomes, will I give to sit
down with me on my Throne; even as I also have overcome, and am set down with
my Father on his Throne. In a Word, Faith so fortifies the Soul, that he is at
Times carried in a Manner quite above Discouragement; so that on a Prospect of
the worst that can happen, he is able to adopt the Language of the Apostle,
Act. 20.22, 23, 24. And now I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing
the Things that shall befall me there: Save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in
every City, saying, That Bonds and Afflictions abide me. But none of these
Things move me, neither count I my Life dear unto my self, so that I might
finish my Course with Joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus.

Let those Ministers who would endure Hardness, as good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, put on the whole Armor of God; above all, let them take the Shield of
Faith; let them who have Faith, labor for an Increase of that divine Grace,
let them often pray the Disciples Prayer, Lord increase our Faith.

2. It is needful in order to his enduring Hardness, that he have a hearty Love
to Christ and Souls. Where this Grace is wanting, the Person will be apt to do
his Work grudgingly, and as of Necessity. Where Love is wanting, there will
scarcely be any Motive strong enough to engage him to adhere closely to his
Master's Cause, when his doing so is attended with peculiar Danger and
Difficulty. He Will hardly be contented to expose his Life, or even his Estate,
or his Name, for Christ and his Interest: On the contrary, his Behavior will
be apt to be like that, Joh. 10.12, 13. The Hireling flees, because he is an
Hireling, and cares not for the Sheep. But where this sweet Grace of Love is,
it has a constraining Influence on the Gospel-Minister; it ties him by the
Heart to the Service of his glorious Captain, so that he never thinks he can do
too much, or enough in his Cause. Under the powerful Influence of this Grace,
he can cheerfully risque his Life, when his Master's Interest requires it, with
him who said Act. 21.13. I am ready not only to be hound, but also to die for
the Name of the Lord Jesus. We see what a powerful Principle natural Affection
is in Parents toward their Children, with what Pleasure (under the Influence of
it) they go through a World of Fatigue and Sufferings to provide for them; such
a Disposition do those Ministers, who love the Lord Jesus Christ, feel toward
the Souls of their Flocks: So that the Expression of Paul, with Respect to
Timothy, is applicable to them, that they naturally care for their State, Phil.
2.20. Naturally, i. e. As a Parent under the Influence of natural Affection,
cares for his Children. A faithful Minister, when Love is in Exercise, does
really feel the Bowels of a Parent, and can say with Respect to the Flock of
Christ, as the Apostle does, Gal. 4.19. My little Children, of whom I travel in
Birth again, 'till Christ be formed in you.

3. They should be Persons who have made some considerable Advances in
Mortification. This likewise is a very needful Qualification for a good Soldier
of Jesus Christ. If a Minister have an inordinate Love to his carnal Ease,
he will hardly be willing to follow his Master in a thorny Path, or to engage
with great Difficulties in the Cause of Christ: When Tribulation or Persecution
arises because of the Word, by and by he will be offended. If he love the World
with a prevailing Love, it will be apt to take him off from the Cause of
Christ: See a sad Instance, 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas bath forsaken me, having loved
this present World. Hence that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.4. No Man that warreth,
intangleth himself with the Affairs of this Life, that he may please him who
has chosen him to be a Soldier. If he be excessively fond of worldly Honor
and Applause, he will hardly be willing to be accounted a Fool, to have his Name
cast out as evil, and to have all Manner of Evil spoken against him for
Christ's Sake. Hence that of our Savior, Joh. 5.44. How can ye believe, which
receive Honor from one another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God
only.

He then who would behave himself as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, should be
one who has made some Progress in the difficult, but necessary Duty of
Self-denial; one who has learned to make Poverty welcome, if it should fall to
his Lot; who knows how to be abased, as well as how to abound; one who can deny
his Appetites and Passions, when they become importunate and over-eagar in
their Cravings; or as the Apostle says, who keeps under his Body, and brings it
into Subjection; one who contrary to that Character, Joh. 12.43. Loves the
Praise of God, more than the Praise of Men. In a Word, The good Soldier of
Jesus Christ, is one who has learned to follow his Captain in Honor and
Dishonor, through good and evil Report; so that he thinks not strange of the
fiery Trial, but closely adheres to his divine Lord in Time of the greatest
Danger and Suffering.

4. Christian Courage and Steadiness of Mind, is a Qualification much needed in
Order to enduring Hardness. I join these two because they are near akin, and
often where the one is, the other will be found also. For want of the Grace of
Christian Courage, even faithful Ministers are apt sometimes in the evil Day to
give Way to sinking Dejection of Spirit: They faint in the Day of Adversity:
when Things have a discouraging and threatning-like Appearance, they are ready
to give all up for lost; they can scarcely think of any Thing but of leaving
their public Station, and flying into some hiding Place, where they may have
Shelter from the impending Storm. When Courage is wanting, every Difficulty is
viewed on the darkest Side. For Instance, a Minister sees little or no
Appearance of Fruit following his Labors: On the contrary, it seems as though
Sinners grew daily more secure and stupid; in this Case, he is apt to look on
his dealing with Sinners as to no Purpose, and perhaps is just on the Point of
resolving that he will make no more mention of the Name of the Lord. Or it may
be, he is situated as Lot was in Sodom, so that he sees gross Sins of almost
every Kind abounding, and his righteous Soul is vexed from Day to Day with
their unlawful Deeds: In this Case he is ready to say with Jer. 9.2. Oh that I
had in the Wilderness a lodging Place of wayfaring Men, that I might leave my
People and go from them, for they be all Adulterers, an Assembly of treacherous
Men, etc. Or perhaps he beholds evident Tokens of divine Anger; it seems as if
the Lord were about to come forth against his People with a Sword instead of a
Rod; that the Cloud gathers black and dreadful, and the Enemy is about to break
in like a Flood: In such a Case, through defect of Courage, he is ready to
think of Nothing so much as of flying from the Storm. But when Christian
Courage is in Exercise, it will improve all these discouraging Appearances, as
so many Arguments to dissuade from an inglorious Retreat. Christian Courage
will by no Means admit of Flight in any of the Cases abovenamed.

Are Sinners very secure and stupid, so that nothing that can be said appears
to have any abiding Impression on them? Says the good Soldier who has this
Grace in Act, "I Will nevertheless continue in the Use of Means with these stupid
Sinners, though at present they seem to be Hammer-hardned under the Word; he with
whom is the Residue of the Spirit, can send a divine Influence, which will soon
and effectually soften them; perhaps the Captain of Salvation, who is a King
mighty in Battle, may lend me a chosen Shaft from his Quiver, which will reach
the Joints and Marrow, so as to rouse them that are at present sleeping on the
Sides of the Pit, with a dreadful Sound in their Ears: But whatever the Event
may be, I Will (through Grace) do my Duty, whether these Sinners will hear, or
whether they will forbear; I have Reason to think that the sovereign Will of
God concerning them will have Effect by my Ministry, and that I shall be a
sweet Savor of God in them that perish, as well as in them that are saved." Or
is it a Time when gross Sins prevail to a high Degree? Though such a sad Scene
should open as that, Hos. 4.1, 2. When there is little or no Truth, nor Mercy,
nor Knowledge of God in the Land; when by swearing and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing Adultery, they break out and Blood touches Blood. In
this Case says the courageous Soldier, The more the Torrent of Wickedness
prevails, the more need I have to stand firm in my Station, endeavoring to
stem the rapid Stream. Or is it a Time when Things appear with a threatening
Aspect; when the Lord seems to have forsaken his People, and there are sad
Tokens of his Anger; or when the Enemies of Zion appear to be hatching some
formidable Plot; yea, though he should have Reason to think that their chief
Aim is against his Person: In either of these Cases says the good Soldier with
Neh. 6.11. Should such a Man as I fly? Nay, rather let me look on all these
threatening Appearances as so many loud Calls to keep my Station; let me stand
between the Living and the Dead, and do my utmost to appease incensed Heaven,
and so avert impending Judgments: Shall I fly for fear of the Plots of Enemies,
and leave Christ's Flock exposed? how then shall I look my glorious Captain in
the Face? how shall I clear my self of that Character he has given of an
Hireling, who flees because he is an Hireling, and cares not for the Flock?
rather let me put my Life in my Hand, and venture my all in the Service of my
divine Lord; firmly believing that he will stand by me, while he has any Work
for me to do, and then will receive me to himself: That he will make me a fenced
brazen Wall, against which, though mine Enemies fight, yet they shall never
prevail.

5. The good Soldier is one who is acquainted with his Weapons. Being skilful
in the Knowledge, and expert in the Use of the Christian Armor, is a necessary
Qualification of such an one as would expect to endure Hardness. That a Soldier
should know his Weapons, every one will grant: Nor is it enough that he be a
good Theorist in this Knowledge, but his Knowledge should be practical: He
should be capable of handling his Weapons, especially he should be dexterous at
the Use of his Sword. Even so every Christian Soldier (but especially the
Officers in Christ's Camp) should be acquainted with the Christian Armor;
particularly, they should know the Use of the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God; they should be able to adopt the Experience of him who said, Psalm.
119.97. O how love I thy Law; it is my Study all the Day. They should love not
only to study it as a Science, but to feed upon it: And while they receive it
in the Love of it, and derive Nourishment and Delight from it, to say as Ps.
119.103. How sweet is thy Word unto my Taste, I find it sweeter than Honey to
my Mouth. The good Soldier of Jesus Christ should be so well acquainted with
the Doctrines, the Precepts, the Promises and Theatnings of God's Word, as that
he may have a ready Recourse to it in every Time of Need; and know how to use
this spiritual Sword, either to defend himself and his Flock, or offend the
Enemy, as Need shall require: And if he has such a Knowledge as this, of the
Sword of the Spirit, he shall be enabled to stand in the evil Day, able to
master every Difficulty, to overcome every Temptation: He shall be an
over-match for all the Power of the Enemy; he shall both do great Things, and
shall still prevail.

Having spoken to the two General Heads proposed in the Doctrinal Part; I pass
on to the Improvement.

Inference 1. May Gospel Ministers lay their Account to endure Hardness, or to
meet with great Difficulties in their Work? Then it may be inferred, that
Persons should not be rash or hasty in running into the Ministry; it would
certainly be wise in them first to count the Cost, and to weigh maturely the
Difficulties, as well as the Encouragements which attend the sacred Station; to
make a close Enquiry about what are their Views in engaging in this Office?
Whether they have sufficient Ground to conclude, that therein they have a
single Eye? Whether they have those Qualifications, by which alone, they shall
be enabled to acquit themselves, as Workmen that need not to be ashamed? To
think of our Lord's Question to Peter and John, Matt. 20.22. Can ye drink of
the Cup that I shall drink; and be baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized
with? And to examine what Answer they are qualified to give.

Inf. 2. Are the Difficulties attending the Ministerial Office so many and
great? Then People should take Heed that they do not by any Part of their
Conduct, render them greater. It would be cruel to add a Load to a heavy
Burden: People may do this many Ways; as when they appear disposed to watch for
Ministers halting, to expose their human Frailties; representing every lesser
Infirmity in the blackest Color, as though it were the grossest Crime; when
they expect that a Minister should perform the whole of his vocational Labors
with the utmost Exactness, and yet do not afford him a competent temporal
Support; like the cruel Egyptian Taskmasters, who would allow no Straw, and
yet demanded the full Tale of Brick; or when they will not endure sound Doctrine
and ministerial Faithfulness, but count him an Enemy who tells them the Truth;
but especially, when they give a deaf Ear to the great Command of God in the
Gospel, to believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and so leave Ministers
lamenting their Want of Success with heavy Hearts, saying, Who has believed
our Report? And to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? People would do well
to consider that faithful Ministers are the Ministers of Christ; and that he will
resent the Neglect, and practical Contempt, or the ill Treatment of and Kind,
that they meet with; that he who despises them, despises not only Man but
God. Beloved, Ministers are engaged in difficult Posts, and they much need your
Sympathy and Prayers, and friendly Assistance: If you knew how hardly bestead
they often are, while without are Fighting, and within are Fears; you would
surely pity them, and do all you could to lighten their Burden.

Omitting other Uses which the Subject might afford, I proceed to the last,
viz. The Use of Exhortation: In which, I shall address my self (1.) to
Ministers. (2.) To Candidates for the Ministry. (3.) To the Candidate now to be
set apart.

And 1st. To You, My Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry; Permit me
to say, That God who has chosen us from among our Brethren, to come near to
him, and to minister in Things Sacred, has in so doing, highly honored us. We
are engaged in a Calling, which though mean and despicable in the Eye of a carnal
World, yet would be no Disgrace, but an Honor to Angels, to be employed in. To
be workers together with God in that Building of Mercy, the Plan of which was
projected in the Depth of infinite Wisdom, from the Morning of Eternity: to be
employed in the Quality of Ambassadors, to negociate between the King of Kings,
and immortal Souls, about Matters of the greatest Moment: What higher Honor!
And as ours is a Station of high Honor, so of high Trust and Importance; the
great Head of the Church has entrusted us with Souls which are his choicest
Jewels, and on whom he set so high a Value, as to shed his precious Blood for
them: He puts such Confidence in us, as to employ us in the Quality of
Officers, to head his Soldiers in the War against Earth and Hell. Let us think
of the Honor, and be humble; and let us think of the Trust, and be faithful:
Let us remember that all is Grace, that we have nothing but what we have
received, that one main Reason why we are thus highly honored, is, that by our
Meanness God might take Occasion the more illustriously to display the Glory of
his Grace; That he has put his Treasure in earthen Vessels, that it might the
more evidently appear, that the Excellency of the Power is of God, and not of
Man. Let us beware of any Action which looks like betraying our Trust; on the
contrary, let us be faithful to God and Souls; let us labor daily in the Use
of Means, for an Increase of Faith, for more Love to God and Souls, more
Mortification and Self-denial, more Christian Courage and Steadiness of Mind,
more Skilfulness in the Knowledge and Expertness in the Use of our spiritual
Weapons: In a Word, more of all those Qualifications whereby we shall be fitted
to endure Hardness, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ. And whatever ministerial
Qualifications it has pleased the Giver of every good Gift, and perfect, to
bestow on us, let us not bury them in the Earth, nor hide them in the
unprofitable Napkin: On the contrary, let us stir up the Gifts that are in us;
being instant in Season, and out of Season; not thinking much of our hard Study
or Toil, or bodily Fatigue and Expense of Spirits, if so be, that thereby we
may do any Service; not counting even our Lives dear, so that we may finish our
Course with Joy, and the Ministry committed to us of the Lord Jesus. Let us
remember that there will be Time enough to rest in Heaven, and hence, let us be
willing now to labor; and let us not only be willing to work our selves, but
let us do what we can to encourage others in their Work: Let all Christ's
faithful Ministers endeavor to strengthen one another's Hands.

If the Soldiers, but especially the Officers in Christ's Army, begin to turn
their Swords against one another, they are like to be an easy Prey to the
common Enemy. O that this were duly laid to Heart! It would powerfully
Influence us to cultivate that strict Unity, which (through the divine
Blessing) would greatly strengthen the common Cause, which would render us fair
as the Moon, clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army with Banners.

And to animate us to exert our selves to the utmost in our Master's Cause; let
us consider that our Charge is weighty; our Account will be solemn; and that
the Time when we must make it up, is fast approaching. Let us with the blessed
Apostle Peter, remember that we must shortly put off this our Tabernacle. Some
of us, (it is likely) have almost done; a few Years, or it may be Months, and
the present Scene with Respect to us, will for ever shut. O then, let us do
speedily and with our Might, whatever our Hands find to do: Let us crowd in as
much Service as we can, in the few remaining Days we have yet left. And to keep
up our Spirits under the Coldness and Ingratitude of the World, the
Contradiction and Opposition of unreasonable Men, all our Unsuccessfulness in
our Work, all the Temptations that arise from Satan and our own Hearts; In a
Word, all the Difficulties of the Campaign; let us look forward by Faith to
that happy approaching Day, when Christ who is our Life shall appear, and we
also shall appear with him in Glory; when they that be wise shall shine as the
Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the
Stars for ever and ever.

2. To Candidates: I would say, My dear Brethren, we who have been acting our
Part as Officers in Christ's Camp, must soon move off the Stage: These Mouths
that now speak to you, must in a short Time be stopped with the Dust of Death;
and we have our Eyes on you to succeed us. It Is you, and such as you, that must
fill up our vacant Places, in the Camp of the Saints. Blessed be God, for some
agreeable Prospect of a Succession! Be exhorted, Brethren, to labor for those
Qualifications by which you may be fitted to endure Hardness, as good Soldiers
of Jesus Christ: and in order hereto, give your selves to Reading, to close
Study, and to Prayer; and let all your Endeavors be used in Subserviency to
the promised Aids of the divine Spirit. Beware of a proud, self-sufficient
Disposition: Remember that a scriptural Bishop must not be a Novice, lest being
lifted up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil: Don't esteem
your selves to be already well enough qualified for the great Work of the
Gospel Ministry; but on the contrary, endeavor to maintain a low Opinion of
any Seize you have already arrived at; and forgetting the Things that are
behind, be pressing forward. Let it be your daily Labor, to add to the Fund of
Knowledge, either by getting some new Ideas, or those you have, better
digested: And let the governing Principle in all your Endeavors, be love to
God, and Concern for his Glory.

3. I Would address my self to the Candidate now to be solemnly set apart to the
Work of the Ministry.

You are now, Sir, about to engage in a Station of great Importance, and great
Difficulty: You are to have the preaching of the everlasting Gospel, and the
administering the Seal of the New Covenant committed to your Trust: You are to
have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven put into your Hand, with Authority
ministerially to open and shut, in the Name of him who opens, and no man
shuts, and who shuts, and no Man opens: You are about to take the
Charge of a Number of immortal Souls, each of which is of more Value than a
World; on this Condition, that if any should perish by your Neglect, it is to
be required at your Hand. I trust you have known these many Years, what it is
to be a Soldier of Christ, which is a Character that belongs to every
Christian; and that you are not now to begin the War with the Devil, the Flesh
and the World: But that you are this Day, in somewhat of a peculiar Sense,
taking up Arms against Satan and his Kingdom, viz. as an Officer in Christ's
Camp. And you may reasonably expect to have the Power and Policy of Earth and
Hell engaged against you. You are engaging in the ministerial Work, in an evil
Day, a Day of Trouble and of Rebuke, and of Blasphemy; a Day when Religion
appears to be low, and the Enemies of Christ and his Cause are apparently
prevailing; when a Spirit of Conviction seems to be much withheld, and the
Waters of the Sanctuary to have lost (in a great Measure) their healing Virtue;
so that the Ways of Zion mourn, and faithful Ministers with heavy Hearts
complain, that they have labored in vain, and spent their Strength for naught:
A Day, when many real Christians appear in a sad Degree, to have lost the
lively affecting Views of divine Things; when a worldly Spirit prevails, so
that there is too much Reason for the Apostle's Complaint, That all Men mind
their own Things, and none the Things that are Christ's: when Instances of
awful Impenitency and Hardness of Heart abound; when Sinners sin with a high
Hand, make light of their Danger, mocking at Fear, and laughing at the shaking
of God's Spear. In a Word, the Charge is weighty, and the Days are evil; and to
undertake such a Charge, at such a Time, is enough to make a frail Mortal
tremble.

And I make no doubt, My Brother, but your Spirits are weighted with it, and
have been so before this Day; that you have been carefully counting the Cost,
and revolving the Difficulties in your Mind. I mention these Difficulties not
to discourage you, but on the contrary, to animate you to apply to your Work
with the greater Vigor and Resolution: And for your Encouragement, I shall
propose a few animating Considerations.

1. Consider that though it is a very difficult, yet it is withal, a very
honorable Work you are engaged in. In the Time of the flourishing of the Roman
Commonwealth, it was thought a high Honor to fight under their Banner: But
you have the Honor of being enlisted this Day, and this, in a Place of some
considerable Distinction too, under the Banner of him who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, who esteems of the
Monarchs of the Earth, as Grasshoppers. The Apostle Paul esteemed this Honor,
an high Favor conferred on him, when he said, Ephesians. 3.8. To me who am less then
the least of all Saints, is this Grace given; that I should preach among the
Gentiles, the unsearchable Riches of Christ.

2. Consider that you are to have your Master's Presence with you in the whole
of your Ministerial Work. It Is true, the Work is great and difficult, and you
may apprehend your self weak and very unequal to it: But remember you have a
strong Lord to depend upon; and that as the Work you have to be employed in, is
his Work, on him therefore you may with a humble Confidence depend, for all
that Assistance you have need of; for who goes a Warfare at any Time at his
own Charges? He can give you the Wisdom of the Serpent, as well as the
Simplicity of the Dove; whereby you shall be able to countermine and baffle the
most insiduous Plots of the Devil and his Instruments, though they should work
like Moles under Ground, and dig deep as Hell to accomplish their Designs. He
can furnish you with a brave, heroic, undaunted Spirit; whereby you shall be
enabled to set your Face like a Flint, and with a calm intrepid Courage, to
face the most formidable Assaults of the Enemy. He can make you a fenced brazen
Wall, against which, though your Enemies should fight, yet they shall not be
able to prevail. He can temper your Zeal and Courage with Humility and
Prudence, and Self-denial: In a Word, he can give you the Christian Temper in
all its lovely Branches; so that you shall be able to contend for the Faith of
Christ, with the Spirit of Christ. Did I say he can? I may add, he will, if you
look on him by Faith, or depend aright upon him; for he has said, My Grace is
sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. This Promise belongs to every faithful
Minister to the End, as well as to him to whom it was first made.

3. Consider that if you be faithful to your Colors, you are sure of the
Victory. What Soldier would not fight with Courage, who is sure of a complete
Victory at last? But this is the Case of the good Soldier of Jesus Christ. It
must be so, for he has Omnipotence on his Side; the Captain of his Salvation,
is a King mighty in Battle, he will tread his Enemies in his Anger, and trample
them in his Fury; their Blood shall be on his Garments, and he will stain all
his Raiment.

The most formidable Party they can possibly make, is but as Briars and Thorns,
before devouring Flames: If then he erect his Banner in the Name of Christ, he
shall do valiantly; if he be strong in the Grace which is in Christ Jesus, he
shall both do great Things, and shall still prevail.

4. Consider that there is a glorious Reward consequent upon ministerial
Faithfulness. It Is true, I cannot propose any great earthly Reward for your
Encouragement: on the contrary, many faithful Ministers have been obliged to
endure Hardness, in this as well as in other Respects, to content themselves
with mean Fare, and some have been pinched for want of pure Necessaries. And
although Ministers should have a Competency, God having ordained, that they who
preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel; yet it would be unreasonable for
them to expect to live in the Pomp and Splendour of temporal Princes, seeing
their Lord has told them, That his Kingdom is not of this World. But consider,
that although you have no great secular Inducement, yet you have a Reward of a
higher Nature than the Crowns of Princes, and the peculiar Treasure of Kings
and Provinces, viz. A Crown of Glory that fades not away. Think my Brother of
that Day which is approaching, when the chief Shepherd shall appear, and you
shall appear with him in Glory; when you shall have a Number of saved,
glorified Souls, all shining in the Beauties of Holiness, like so many radiant
Gems to adorn your Crown of Glory. O think of that happy approaching Day! when
they that are wise shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and they
that turn many to Righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever. Or though it
should be your hard Lot to labor all your Days in vain, and spend your
Strength for naught, and never to be instrumental of turning any to
Righteousness, (which I cannot think your Master will suffer to be the Case);
Yet even in this Case, remember that your Judgment is with the Lord, and your
Work with your God; and that your faithful Endeavors will be well accepted.

5. Consider that the more you do in your Station, and the more Hardness you
are called to suffer in the Cause of your glorious Captain; it is likely the
more you will enjoy of his gracious spiritual Presence. When the Apostle Paul was
called before Nero, no Man stood with him, but all Men forsook him; yet he tell
us, that then the Lord stood by him, and strengthened him, so that he was
delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. It was when the
Apostle John was banished into the obscure remote Isle of Patmos, for the Word
of God, and for the Testimony which he held, that he was favored with those
glorious Visions and Revelations, which you have on Record in the last Book of
the New Testament. If your Lord call you to great Trials, you shall have
proportional Incomes of Grace; you shall be able to adopt the Experience of the
Apostle, and his Fellow Soldiers, 2 Cor. 1.5. As the Sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our Consolation also abounds by Christ: So that you will be
qualified from what you feel, to unriddle these Paradoxes, 2 Cor. 6.9, 10. As
dying, and behold we live; as chastned, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing; as having nothing, and yet possessing all Things.

These, Sir, are animating Considerations: under the Influence of them address
your self to your Work, with a cheerful Courage and Vigor. Take Heed to your
Ministry, that you fulfill it: Take Heed to your Self, and to your Doctrine; for
in doing this, you will both save your self, and them that hear you.

I should next address my self to the People, who are about to receive the
Candidate for their Minister, were they present. They had appointed some of
their Number to act in their Name, on the solemn Occasion; but it pleased that
wise Sovereign, who does every Thing for the best, to prevent their coming.
However, although not personally present, we have their Concurrence in the
Matter. Had they been here, I should have said to them; That after a sufficient
Time for Trial, they had proceeded to give a Call to this our Brother; and that
said Call had been proceeded in with as much Order as their Situation and other
Circumstances would admit of: that we rejoice with them, in that after a Series
of Events, in which they have been liable to a Variety of Difficulties, and in
which many Changes have passed over them; that a bountiful Lord is at Length
about to bestow on them a Minister, who we believe has obtained Help of God to
be faithful; and who we trust will be enabled to endure Hardness as a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ: That as they had been hearing that he is engaging in a
difficult Wurk, so we hope that they will not by any Part of their Conduct,
wilfully add to his Difficulties: On the contrary, that they would yield him
that limited Subjection and Obedience in the Lord, which they had solemnly
promised in their Call; regarding and obeying him as having the Rule over them,
and who watches for their Souls as one who must give an Account: That they
would remember whose Name he comes in, and whose Message he is charged with;
and would esteem him very highly in Love for his Master's Sake, and for his
Work's Sake; especially, that they would receive that Christ and Salvation he
offers to them, as they would not oblige him to appear as a swift Witness
against them at the great Day of Accounts: That they would be tender as to the
exposing any Frailties they may see in their Minister; especially such Things
as they have Reason to think are no more then Indiscretions, proceeding from
mere Inadvertency, without any criminal Intention; that they would kindly draw
the Veil of Charity over such Things: That they would wrestle with God in
Prayer on his Behalf, that he may be in every Respect an able and successful
Minister of the New Testament. And finally, that as he ministers to them in
Spirituals, that they would do to their utmost, cheerfully and liberally to
minister to him in Temporals.

May the Lord make Ministers and People mutual Blessings to one another; that
so the happy Day may come, when both he that sows, and they that reap, may
rejoice together.

FINIS.

