Mr. Byles's SERMON Occasioned by the late EARTHQUAKE.

Divine Power and Anger displayed in EARTHQUAKES. A SERMON Occasioned by the
late EARTHQUAKE, In NEW ENGLAND, November 18. 1755. And Preached, the next
Lord's Day, at Point-Shirley.

By MATHER BYLES, A.M.

Published at the pressing Importunity of the Hearers.

Ezekiel. xxvii. 2, 3, 28. O Thou that art situate at the Entry of the Sea -- Thy
Borders are in the Midst of the Seas, Thy Builders have perfected thy Beauty.
-- The Suburbs shall shake at the Sound -- Isai. xli. 5. The Isles saw it, and
feared, the Ends of the Earth were afraid, drew near, and came. BOSTON: Printed
and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. 1755.

Divine Power and Anger displayed in EARTHQUAKES.
JER. X. 10. -- At his Wrath the Earth shall tremble.
THE awful and unusual Providence of GOD in the Week past, in which he has
visited us with a remarkable Earthquake, has been the Occasion of my selecting
the Words before us, for our Meditation at this Time. If we should neglect to
take a proper Notice, or to make a suitable Improvement of an Event of this
Kind, we should undoubtedly act against the Light of Nature, the first
Principles, and most evident Dictates of Reason. Even these could teach Jonah's
Mariners in a Tempest, every one to arise and call upon his God: though they were
Heathen, unenlightned by Revelation, Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel. They who dwell in the uttermost Parts
of the Earth are afraid of his Tokens. Certainly therefore our Guilt and
Punishment would be enhanced and aggravated, if we should omit this natural
Duty in a Case of equal Distress and Danger; if we should incur the Character
of those who regard not the Works of the Lord, neither consider the Operation
of his Hands. We call our selves Christians, we profess the true Religion, and
enjoy the Means of Grace, the Oracles and Ordinances of God in their utmost
Purity and Perfection: It may justly therefore be expected that we should do
more than others who are not favored with the like Advantages, that we should
be more serious and circumspect in our Behavior on such an Occasion; more
frequent and fervent in our Addresses at the Throne of Grace, more careful and
critical in our Enquiries into the Grounds of the divine Displeasure, and
wherefore our God is thus contending with us.

The God of Patience is yet waiting to be gracious; He is loath to strike the
fatal Blow, to overwhelm us in universal and unavoidable Destruction. He has
Tho'ts of Pity toward us; his Heart is turned within him, his Repentings are
kindled together: How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee
Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? We may
yet be reconciled to him in and through our Lord Jesus Christ, the great and only
Mediator: But if thus having Space to repent, we yet repent not, we shall find
that it is a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the living God. If we
despise the Riches of Divine Goodness, Forbearance and Long-suffering; there
will be nothing before us but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and
fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. Be not deceived, God is
not mocked. He will again visit us with an Earthquake, or with some other
desolating Judgment; He has other Judgments in Store, other Arrows in his
Quiver: And verily, it will then be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, for
Sodom and Gomorrah than for us. After our hard and impenitent Heart, we shall
treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God. At his Wrath the Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall
not be able to abide his Indignation.

In handling the Words, I propose to consider two Propositions which are
evidently implied in them, and which may make Way for the Enquiry, What
Improvement we are to make of the awful Providence in the Week past. -- At his
Wrath the Earth shall tremble. -- This teaches us that an Earthquake is a Work
of Almighty Power, and a Token of Divine Anger.

I. An Earthquake is a Work of Almighty Power.

No Doubt natural Causes may be assigned for this Phenomenon. An imprisoned
Vapor too closely pent, or too strongly compressed in the Caverns beneath,
will, through a natural Elasticity, abhor Confinement, dilate and expand, swell
and heave up the Surface of the Earth, producing a Tremor and Commotion, till
it either finds Vent, or, from some other Cause, it is smothered, and its
Violence abated. Could we look into the Vaults below, over which we now walk
without Fear, and in so much seeming Security, to see the tremendous Apparatus
there: in some Places, immense Tracts of Sulphurous and Combustible Materials
that lie buried, and wait for Nothing but a single Spark to tear all before
them in a sudden and irresistible Explosion; In others, how thin the Arch which
interposes between us and a Furnace of Flame, which curls up against it, wastes
it away, causes it to grow thinner and thinner, and less able to support us:
Should we not shudder at such a Prospect, when the Imagination of it fills us
with so much Horror and Amazement! And yet this is very probably the State and
Condition of our Globe at present. It has a natural Tendency to a final
Conflagration. It is kept in Store and reserved unto Fire against the Day of
Judgment and Perdition of ungodly Men. And that same Disposition of Things
which fits it for this Catastrophe, renders it also liable to Earthquakes.

But we must not imagine from hence, that an Earthquake, because it may be
accounted for on Philosophical Principles, is a casual Event, or that some
Chance has happened unto us. It is God at Work, though he works by the
Intervention of second Causes. Though it is no Miracle, it is the Effect of
Almighty Power: This is frequently declared in the sacred Pages: Nay this is
taken for granted in the Context as an indisputable Point; and Jehovah proves
himself to be the only true God, in Opposition to all the Idols of the Heathen,
from this very Argument, The Lord is the true God; He is the living God, and an
everlasting King; at his Wrath the Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall
not be able to abide his Indignation.

How often do we find this wonderful and terrible Work ascribed to God in the
holy Scriptures? He looks on the Earth and it trembles; He touches the
Hills and they smoke. At his Command a Vulcanoe is lit up to the universal
Terror and Consternation of the guilty Inhabitants round it. Deep groans the
affrighted Earth, at his Presence; and the awful Sound is reverberated from
Cavern to Cavern through all its most intricate, gloomy and profound Recesses.
The whole Continent shivers and quakes to its remotest Foundations; the Pillars
of Heaven tremble and are astonished at his Reproof. Psalm. xxix. 8.
The Voice of the Lord shakes the Wilderness, the Lord shakes the Wilderness
of Kadesh. Psalm. xcvii. 4.
The Voice of thy Thunder was in the Heaven: the Lightnings lightened the World,
the Earth saw, trembled and shook. The Hills melted like Wax at the Presence of
the Lord, at the Presence of the Lord of the whole Earth. How exalted and
sublime these glowing Periods of Inspiration, in which the shaking of the Earth
is expressly asserted to be a Work of Almighty Power!

When the glorious God has, upon particular Occasions, made a miraculous
Descent upon our Earth, he has frequently been attended with an Earthquake, as
one of the Tokens of his special Presence. So at the Promulgation of the Law,
in all its Terrors, to the attending Tribes, Exodus xix. 19.
Mount Sinai was altogether on a Smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in
Fire: and the Smoke thereof ascended as the Smoke of a Furnace, and the whole
Mount quaked greatly. We have another Description of this memorable Event in
the Song of Deborah and Barak; Judge. v. 4.
Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the Field of
Edom, the Earth trembled, and the Heavens dropped, the Clouds also dropped
Water. The Mountains melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from before
the Lord God of Israel. So also the Psalmist, it is probable in Allusion to
this, expresses himself with Eloquence more than mortal, Psalm. cxiv. 1.
When Israel went out of Egypt, the House of Jacob from a People of strange
Language, Judah was his Sanctuary, and Israel his Dominion. The Sea saw it and
fled, Jordan was driven back. The Mountains skipped like Rams, the little Hills
like Lambs. What ailed, thee O thou Sea, that thou fleddest? Thou Jordan, that
thou wast driven back? Ye Mountains that ye skipped like Rams? and ye little
Hills like Lambs? Tremble thou Earth at the Presence of the Lord, at the
Presence of the God of Jacob. When God afterward appeared to Elijah in the
same Place, it was with the same terrible Circumstances. An Earthquake was his
Attendant. 1 King. xix. 11.
Behold the Lord passed by, and a great and strong Wind rent the Mountains, and
break in Pieces the Rocks before the Lord, and after the Wind an Earthquake.

This may suffice to illustrate the first Thing proposed, That an Earthquake,
though it may be accounted for on natural Principles, is notwithstanding the Work
of Almighty Power. The supreme Being first appointed and regulated the Laws of
Nature, with infinite Wisdom and uncontrollable Sovereignty. He overrules them
all, suspends or alters them as he pleases. He does his Pleasure among the
Armies of Heaven above, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth beneath; None
can stay his Hand, control his Counsels, disappoint his Purposes, or say unto
him, what do thou? He formed our Globe of such a Constitution as to be
liable to Earthquakes. And he produces them at such Times, in such Places, and
in such Degrees of Violence and Severity, as are (...)

of the Cities, and that which grew upon the Ground. This was the Punishment of
Korah, Dathan and Abiram, when they laid an impious Claim to the Employment,
the Honors and the Privileges of the Priesthood, which God had confined to the
Family of Aaron. The Anger of God was kindled against them for their
presumptuous and sacrilegious Attempt. At his Wrath the Earth trembled, and the
bold Conspirators were hurled headlong, plunged promiscuous and precipitant
into the hideous Vaults below. Down they sunk, as they were in the very Act to
sacrifice, and insolently withstood Moses in the View and at the Head of the
Rebel Congregation. Let us turn to the Account, as it is transmitted to us in
the Oracles of Inspiration: Numb, xvi. 28.
And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord has sent me to do all
these Works: For I have not done them of my own Mind. If these Men die the
common Death of all Men, or if they be visited after the Visitation of all Men,
then the Lord has not sent me. But if the Lord make a new Thing, and the Earth
open her Mouth, and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and
they go down quick into the Pit; then ye shall understand that these Men have
provoked the Lord. And it came to pass, as he had made an End of speaking all
these Words, that the Ground clave asunder that was under them: And the Earth
opened her Mouth, and swallowed them up, and their Houses, and all the Men that
appertained unto Korah, and all their Goods. They, and all that appertained to
them, went down alive into the Pit, and the Earth closed upon them, and they
perished from among the Congregation. And all Israel that were round about
them, fled at the Cry of them; for they said, Left the Earth swallow us up
also. So also when the Philistines invaded the Land of Israel in the Days of
Saul, God appeared for the Deliverance of his People, and the Confusion of
their Enemies. He resented their unreasonable and unrighteous Encroachments,
struck a Panic into them, and destroyed them by Means of an Earthquake. 1 Samuel
xiv. 15, 16.
And there was trembling in the Host, in the Field, and among all the People:
the Garrison, and the Spoilers, they also trembled, and the Earth quaked: so it
was a great Trembling. And the Watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked;
and behold the Multitude melted away; and they went on beating down one
another. Once more, when the glorious God would in the most effectual Manner
testify his Anger against the most enormous and execrable Crime that ever was
committed in our World, he did it by an Earthquake. At the Crucifixion of our
Lord Jesus Christ, we read particularly, Matthew. xxvii. 51.
that the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent. Thus we see that an Earthquake
is to be looked upon as a Token of divine Anger, since it appears, from the
sacred Pages, that the Sins of a People have been frequently punished by this
most terrible Judgment. Thus the Psalmist, Psalm. xviii. 7.
Then the Earth shook and trembled, the Foundations also of the Hills moved and
were shaken, because he was Wroth.

How often do we find this Judgment denounced by the Prophets, against a
degenerate and sinful People! Isai. xiii. 11.
Behold the Day of the Lord comes, cruel both with Wrath and fierce Anger, to
lay the Land desolate; and he shall destroy the Sinners thereof out of it. And
I will punish the World for their Evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquity. And
I will cause the Arogancy of the Proud to cease, and lay low the Haughtiness of
the Terrible. Therefore I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth shall remove
out of her Place, in the Wrath of the Lord of Hosts, and in the Day of his
fierce Anger. Isai. xxix. 6.
Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with Thunder, and with Earthquake,
and with great Noise, with Storm and Tempest, and the Flame of devouring Fire.
Jer. iv. 22.
This People is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish Children, and
they have none Understanding: they are wise to do Evil, but to do Good they
have no Knowledge. I beheld the Earth; and lo, it was without Form and void,
and the Heavens, and they had no Light. I beheld the Mountans, and lo, they
trembled, and all the Hills moved lightly. I beheld, and lo there was no Man,
and all the Birds of the Heaven were fled. I beheld, and lo, the fruitful Place
was a Wilderness, and all the Cities thereof were broken down at the Presence
of the Lord, and by his fierce Anger. Ezekiel. xxxviii. 14.
In my Jealousy, and in the Fire of my Wrath have I spoken, Surely there shall
be a great Shaking in the Land, so that the Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of
the Heaven, and the Beasts of the Field, and all creeping Things that creep
upon the Earth, and all the Men that are upon the Face of the Earth, shall
shake at my Presence; and the Mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep
Places shall fall, and every Wall shall fall to the Ground. Joel ii. 1, 10.
Blow the Trumpet in Zion, and sound an Alarm in my holy Mountain, let all the
Inhabitants of the Land tremble, for the Day of the Lord comes, it is nigh at
Hand. -- The Earth shall quake, the Heavens shall tremble, the Sun and the Moon
shall be dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining.

Upon the whole then, it evidently appears from what we have heard, that an
Earthquake is not only an Effect of Almighty Power, but a Token of Divine
Anger. It is a Judgment upon a Land, and it is to be looked upon as such. God
threatens it as such against a sinful and degenerate People: And in this Manner
he has in Fact frequently testified his Anger against Sin, and executed his
Purposes against the Sinner. It certainly follows, that whenever a People are
thus visited, they should acknowledge the mighty Hand of God, and humble
themselves under it; they should know the Rod, and who has appointed it. Some
of the Lessons it is expected we should learn from a Providence of this Nature,
and some of the Tempers it should produce in us, agreeable to what we have heard
at this Time, I Propose at present to mention.

I. Is it as we have heard, Is an Earthquake the Work of God? This should give
us awful Ideas and suitable Apprehensions of the Divine Majesty, and the
Necessity we stand in of his Favor.

Shall not his Dread fall upon us, and his Excellency make us afraid? Shall not
our Flesh tremble for fear of him, shall we not be afraid of his Judgments?
Fear ye not me, says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my Presence? Psalm. xcix.
1.
The Lord reigns, let the People tremble: He sits between the Cherubims,
let the Earth be moved. What little and contemptible Creatures are we in his
Sight? Behold the Nations are as a Drop of the Bucket, and are counted as the
small Dust of the Balance. Behold he takes up the Isles as a very little
Thing: He shakes the Mountains in his Anger; He heaves the solid Earth from
it is Basis.

What are all the magnificent Structures of Art, or stupendous Labors of Men,
before that God, who when he pleases, can tear them from their Foundation, or
plunge them into the gaping Abyss? What is all the Pomp and Grandeur of the
most magnificent Earthly Monarch, to that divine Description of the Prophet?
Hab. iii. 3, 6, 7, 10.
God came from Teman, and the holy One from Mount Paran. Selah. His Glory
covered the Heavens, and the Earth was full of his Praise. He stood, and
measured the Earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the Nations, and the
everlasting Mountains were scattered, the perpetual Hills did bow: his Ways are
Everlasting. I saw the Tents of Cushan in Affliction: and the Curtains of the
Land of Midian did tremble. The Mountains saw thee, and they trembled: the
overflowing of the Water passed by: the Deep uttered his Voice, and lift up his
Hands on high. So also at the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ from the
Dead, when he triumphed over Death and the Grave, and led Captivity Captive,
Matthew. xxviii. 2.
Behold, there was a great Earthquake

Shall we not, from what we have heard, endeavor after that Fear of the Lord,
which is the Beginning of Wisdom, and which will render us cautious how we
offend him? He is wise in Heart, and mighty in Strength, who has hardened
himself against Him, and has prospered? Who removes the Mountains, and they
know not; who overturneth them in his Anger. Who shakes the Earth out of her
Place, and the Pillars thereof tremble. Of what infinite Consequence and
Importance is it, that we have this God for our Friend, that we acquaint our
selves with him, and be at Peace. This will support us, give us a Presence of
Mind, a Courage, and a Dignity, amidst all the Convulsions of the Earth, the
Ruins of dissolving of Nature. How gloriously animating is that sublime Rapture
of the Psalmist! Psalm. xlvi. 1.
God is our Refuge and Strength; a very present Help in Trouble. Therefore will
we not fear, though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains be cast into the
Midst of the Sea. Though the Waters thereof rore and are troubled, though the
Mountains shake with the swelling thereof. There is a River, the Streams
whereof make glad the City of our God, the holy Place of the Tabernacles of the
most High. God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help
her, and that right early. -- The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is
our Refuge. -- The Man who has Testimony of a good Conscience, and who is
sensible that his Maker loves him; who sees God in Christ reconciling him to
himself, accepting him as Righteous, and not imputing his Trespasses to him; O,
with what sacred Serenity and Triumph, may he view these terrible Works of God,
and survey the Desolations which he has made in the Earth! And these are the
only Principles that will support and abide by us in an Earthquake, when the
gay Infidel, the licentious Libertine, and the bold Blasphemer, forget their
wonted Mirth and Frenzy, and tremble in the near Views of a miserable Eternity.
Where can we fly for Refuge, but to God our Maker, in and through our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great and only Mediator? Who else will be able to protect us in the
Day of the Lord's Anger, when the Earth shall tremble at his Wrath? This leads
me to say,

II. Is it as we have heard; This should teach us the Vanity of all Confidence
in the Creature, and the Uncertainty of all Earthly Enjoyments.

Let us not put our Confidence in an Arm of Flesh. Let us cease from Man, whose
Breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of. -- Man that is
a Worm, and the Son of Man that is a Worm. -- What Defense can we expect here,
when God arises to shake terribly the Earth? On what Creature can we depend
with Success, when even the Ground, on which we tread, is not able to support
us?

Where can we meet with a lasting Possession, when our very Lands, which one
would think would bid the fairest for it of any Thing here below, when even
these are liable to be sunk in an Earthquake, and their Place no more to be
found? How great the Folly of those who place their supreme Felicity in the
Possessions and Acquirements of a vain Earth! Who heap up Silver as the Dust,
and prepare Raiment as the Clay! Who say to Gold, Thou art my Hope, and to the
fine Gold, Thou art my Confidence! Their inward Thought is, that their Houses
shall continue for ever, and their Dwelling-Places to all Generations; they
call their Lands after their own Names. O the Deceitfulness of Riches! What is
it that thus inchants and infatuates the Generality of Mankind, for the
obtaining of which, they toil and labor, sacrifice all their Ease here, and
frequently forego all their Hopes of Happiness hereafter? Uncertain Riches,
which may make themselves Wings, and flee away as the Eagles toward Heaven, or
which may be suddenly overthrown by an Earthquake, and buried deep in the
Subteraneous Vaults; never more to see the Light, till they are illuminated by
the Flames of the last Conflagration. Let not the rich Man then glory in his
Riches, for he that trusts in his Riches shall fall. God shall destroy thee
for ever: He shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy Dewlling Place,
and root thee out of the Land of the Living. The Righteous also shall see and
laugh at him. Lo, this is the Man that made not God his Strength, but trusted
in the Abundance of his Riches! They profit not in the Day of Wrath, when the
Foundations of the Earth tremble. -- They that trust in their Wealth, and boast
themselves in the Multitude of their Riches; None of them can by any Means
redeem his Brother, or give to God a Ransom for his Soul. So at the Destruction
of Babylon, by an Earthquake, the Merchants of the Earth are represented as
utterly unable to help her, and as lamenting over her in all the dismal Accents
of Despair; Rev. xviii. 15.
The Merchants, which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off, for the fear
of her Torment, weeping and wailing. And saying, Alas, alas, that great City,
that was clothed in fine Linen, and Purple, and Scarlet,; and decked with
Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls: For in one Hour so great Riches is come
to naught!

Seeing then we have here not continuing City, shall we not be exhorted to seek
another, which is an heavenly, to lay up Treasure in Heaven, and to seek after
the true Riches, even durable Riches and Righteousness, those Things which
remain, for they cannot be shaken: That we may know what is the Hope of our
Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of our Inheritance among the Saints,
even that Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for us?

III. What we have heard teaches us the Evil of Sin, with the Necessity of
sincere Repentance, and thoro' Reformation.

We are a sinful and degenerate People, and the Love of many waxes cold. Where
is the Lord God of Elijah, the Spirit that animated our pious Predecessors?
Where is that exemplary, strict and uniform Devotion, that flaming Zeal for God
and Religion, which once so remarkably adorned and distinguished this People?
This, which was our Glory, is in a great Measure departed from us. We need to
be shaken out of our Sleep, to be roused out of our Lethargy, our supine
Indolence, our Carelessness and carnal Security. This no Doubt was the Design of
the alarming Providence in the Week past. We have heard a Voice of Trembling,
of Fear, and not of Peace. The Voice of God to us was as that of the Mariners
to Jonah; Jon. i. 6.
What meanest thou, O Sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God; if so be, that God
will think upon us, that we perish not. The Voice of God to us was as that to
the Church of Ephesus; Rev. ii. 5.
Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first Works, lest
I come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of its Place.

It was a terrible Night, the most so, perhaps, that ever NEW ENGLAND saw. When
we remember it, we are afraid, and Trembling takes hold of our Flesh. And it
was Sin that provoked God to appear against us in so awful a Manner; and the
Land to tremble and sorrow. -- At his Wrath the Earth trembled. -- Shall not
the Land tremble for this; and every one mourn that dwells therein? God might
justly have overwhelmed us in the Fierceness of his Anger, have crushed us in
our Beds, or buried us in the Bowels of the Earth. We might have served as a
fearful Example to some future People, of the pernicious Consequences, and
fatal Effects of Sin. So it is threatened to a rebellious and impenitent
People; Deuteronomy. xxix. 22.
The Generation to come of the Children that shall arise after you, and the
Stranger that shall come from a far Land, shall say, when they see the Plagues
of that Land, and that the whole Land is Brimstone, and Salt, and Burning, that
it is not sown nor bears, nor any Grass grows therein, like the Overthrow
of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his Anger,
and in his Wrath: even all Nations shall say, wherefore has the Lord done thus
unto this Land? What means the Heat of this great Anger? Then Men shall say,
because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers. Then
might have been made over us that Lamentation of the Prophet; Lam. ii. 1, 2, 5.
How has the Lord covered the Daughter of Zion, with a Cloud, in his Anger,
and cast down, from the Heaven to the Earth, the Beauty of Israel, and
remembered not his Footstool in the Day of his Anger! The Lord has swallowed up
all the Habitations of Jacob, and has not pitied; he has thrown down in his
Wrath the strong Holds of the Daughter of Judah, he has brought them down to
the Ground. The Lord was an Enemy, he has swallowed up Israel, he has
swallowed up all her Palaces; he has destroyed his strong Holds, and has
increased in the Daughter of Judah Mourning and Lamentation. This might justly
have been our Condemnation. Is it not then an evil Thing and a bitter, that we
have forsaken the Lord our God? Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, let us be
persuaded. Let the Sinners in Zion be afraid, let Fearfulness surprise the
Hypocrites thereof.

But behold the Goodness as well as Severity of God! and may this Goodness of
God lead us to Repentance. He is yet giving us Space to repent; he is yet
waiting to be gracious to us. He has not dealt with us as our Iniquities
deserve; the Day of Grace is not over with us, nor the Door of Mercy shut
against us. In the midst of Wrath, he has remembered Mercy, nor suffered the
destroying Angel to lay desolate the Habitations of his People. O may our
warmest Gratitude be excited upon this Occasion, and may we study what we shall
render. Let our future Lives be devoted, with double Diligence, to the Service
of our gracious Preserver, and our best Benefactor. Let us, without any Delay,
repent of our past Sins, with a sincere and thoro' Repentance; that Repentance
which is unto Life, never to be repented of. May we fly to the Mercies of God,
in and through our Lord Jesus Christ, the great and only Mediator between God and
Man. May we know and acknowledge the God of our Fathers; may we serve him with a
perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind.

How happy would it be, if this awful Providence should be blessed by God, to
the producing a universal Reformation of Manners, and a Revival of Religion
among us! When the Spirit was poured out upon the Apostles and Professors of
the primitive Church, it was attended with an Earthquake. So we read, Act. iv.
31.
And when they had prayed, the Place was shaken where they were assembled
together, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. May God grant such a
plentiful Effusion of his Spirit, at this Time, in his convincing and
converting Influences. May he pour out his Spirit upon his People, and his
Blessing upon their Offspring. So an Earthquake was sanctified to the
Conversion of the Jailor, who had Paul and Silas under his Custody; Acts xvi.
25.
And at Midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang Praises unto God: and the
Prisoners heard them. And suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so that the
Foundations of the Prison were shaken: and immediately all the Doors were
opened, and every ones Bands were loosed. And the Keeper of the Prison awaking
out of his Sleep, and seeing the Prison Doors open, he drew out his Sword, and
would have killed himself, supposing that the Prisoners had been fled. But Paul
cried with a loud Voice, saying, Do thy self no Harm; for we are all here. Then
he called for a Light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before
Paul and Silas; and brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be
saved? And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thy House. And they spoke unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all
that were in his House. And he took them the same Hour of the Night, and washed
their Stripes; and was baptized, he, and all his, straightway. And when he had
brought them into his House, he sat Meat before them, and rejoiced, believing
in God with all his House. Could we see the People of this Land, thus enquiring
what they shall do to be saved, and flocking as Doves unto their Windows, then
the Lord God of our Fathers would be with us, as he was with our Fathers, and
never leave us nor forsake us. Happy is that People that is in such a Case, yea
happy is that People whose God is the Lord! We might then pray with the
strongest Assurances of Success; Psalm. lx. 1.
O God, thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us, thou have been
displeased; O turn thy self to us again. Thou have made the Earth to tremble;
thou have broken it; heal the Breaches thereof, for it shakes.

But I hasten to say,

IV. What we have heard should teach us the Necessity of being in a constant
actual Readiness for a dying Hour.

A Sentence of Death is passed upon all. The Living know that they must die. We
know that thou will bring us to Death; but we know not the Time, nor the Manner
of our Death, nor in what Form the last Enemy shall approach us. We know not
when the Master shall call for us, whether at Evening, or at Midnight, at the
Cock-crowing, or in the Morning. Whenever it shall be, may our Loins be girt,
our Lamps trimmed and burning. May we so number our Days, as that we may apply
our Hearts unto Wisdom. May we devote all our Talents to the Glory of our Lord,
and employ them in his Service. May we be perpetually industrious in some Part
of that Work which he has allotted us. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord,
when he comes, shall find so doing.

When we scruple the Lawfulness of any Action, in which we are engaged, let us
imagine how we should feel if we were surpised, in the midst of it, by an
Earthquake; and not dare to do any Thing which we suspect would then give us
Cause of uneasy Reflection.

By thus going on in an uninterrupted Course of Duty, leading a holy and
conscientious Life, realising our own Dissolution, and habituating our selves
to the Thoughts of it, we shall by Degrees, with the Assistance of Divine
Grace, be greatly victorious over the Fears of Death, and in a constant actual
Readiness for its Approach: Nor need we be anxious as to the Time, the Manner,
or the Circumstances of it. Should we be soon alarmed, and taken away by the
fatal Stroke; the Difficulties and Temptations of Life will be the sooner over,
and our Passage through this Vale of Tears of a shorter Continuance. Should our
Attack from the last Enemy be sudden; our Transition will be so much the
quicker and the easier, to the Regions of immortal Glory: Should it be painful;
Heaven will be so much the more welcome, when we arrive there: Should it be
attended with the most formidable Circumstances; blessed be God, we may be
still secure: Though the Body should be crushed in an Earthquake, or sink deep in
the Subteraneous Vaults; the Soul shall be caught away, and tower aloft, upon
the Pinions of Guardian Angels; safe and unhurt, amidst this Discord of Nature,
this Convulsion of jarring Elements, the Wrecks of Matter, and the Crush of
Worlds. The Soul and the Body are indeed at present separated: but with a sure
and certain Hope of being again reunited, in better and more glorious
Circumstances; at that illustrious and tremendous Day, when the Earth shall
give up the Dead that are in it.

This leads me to say,

V. and Lastly, Earthquakes should remind us of the second Coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, at the Day of Judgment.

They are designed to be Warnings to the World, that this Day of the Lord is at
Hand: It is near, it is near, and it hastes greatly, when the Heavens shall
pass away, with a great Noise; 'and the Elements shall melt, with fervent
Heat.' As a Prelude to this, we read, Matthew. xxiv. 7.
There shall be Earthquakes in diverse Places; Luke xxi. 25.
There shall be Signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars; and upon
the Earth, Distress of Nations, with Perplexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring;
Men's Hearts failing them for Fear, and for looking after those Things, which
are coming on the Earth: for the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken. And then
shall they see the Son of Man, coming in a Cloud, with Power and great Glory.
Hag. ii. 6.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake
the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land: And I will shake all
Nations, and the Desire of all Nations shall come. Antichrist shall first be
destroyed by the Breath of the Lord, and by the Brightness of his Appearance.
An Earthquake shall be employed on this Occasion. So it is described by John in
his Revelations, Rev. xvi. 17.
And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the Air; and there came a great
Voice out of the Temple of Heaven, from the Throne, saying, It is done. And
there were Voices, and Thunders, and Lightnings; and there was a great
Earthquake, such as was not since Men were upon the Earth, so mighty an
Earthquake, and so great. And the great City was divided into three Parts, and
the Cities of the Nations fell: and great Babylon came in Remembrance before
God, to give unto her the Cup of the Wine of the Fierceness of his Wrath. And
every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found. Rev. xviii. 21.
And a mighty Angel took up a Stone like a great Millstone, and cast it into the
Sea, saying, Thus with Violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down,
and shall be found no more at all. And the Voice of Harpers, and Musicians, and
of Pipers, and Trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no
Craftsman, of whatsoever Craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the
Sound of a Millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee: And the Light of a
Candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the Voice of the Bridegroom, and
of the Bride, shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy Merchants were the
great Men of the Earth; for by thy Sorceries were all Nations deceived. And in
her was found the Blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain
upon the Earth.

What universal Consternation and Horror, will then overspread the Face of this
whole Earth! We had a little Emblem of this in that awful Night, which we now
commemorate: So shall the Coming of the Son of Man be, and so shall the Wicked
flee, even as they fled before the Earthquake. Isai. ii. 19.
They shall go into the Caves of the Earth, into the Clefts of the Rocks, and
the Tops of the ragged Rocks, for Fear of the Lord, and for the Glory of his
Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the Earth. Thus also the Vision of
the Prophetic Evangelist; Rev. vi. 12.
And I beheld when he had opened the sixth Seal, and lo, there was a great
Earthquake, and the Sun became black as Sackcloth of Hair, and the Moon became
as Blood; And the Stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth, even as a Fig Tree
casts her untimely Figs, when she is shaken of a mighty Wind: And the Heaven
departed as a Scrowl, when it is rolled together; and every Mountain and Island
were moved out of their Places: And the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men,
and the rich Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, and every bond
Man, and every free Man, hid themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the
Mountains; and said to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from
the Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb: For
the great Day of his Wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand? But where
can they fly for Shelter and Security in this awful and tremendous Hour? Psalm.
xxi. 8.
Thine Hand, O Lord, shall find out all thine Enemies; thy right Hand shall
find out them that hate thee: Thou shall make them as a fiery Oven in the Time
of thine Anger: The Lord shall swallow them up in his Wrath, and the Fire shall
devour them. Isai. xxiv. 17.
Fear, and the Pit, and the Snare are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the Earth. And
it shall come to pass, that he who flees from the Noise of the Fear, shall
fall into the Pit; and he that comes up out of the midst of the Pit, shall be
taken in the Snare: for the Windows from on high are open, and the Foundations
of the Earth do shake. The Earth is utterly broken down, the Earth is clean
dissolved, the Earth is moved exceedingly. The Earth shall reel to and fro like
a Drunkard, and shall be removed like a Cottage, and the Transgression thereof
shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall, and not rise again. Then the
Righteous shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air; there they shall sit
secure, and abide under the Shadow of the Almighty. From thence they shall look
down with holy Triumph, behold the wonderful Works of God, and view the
Desolations which he is making in the Earth. Joel. iii. 16.
The Lord also shall rore out of Zion, and utter his Voice from Jerusalem, and
the Heavens and the Earth shall shake: but the Lord will be the Hope of his
People, and the Strength of the Children of Israel. Nah. 1. 5.
The Mountains quake at him, the Hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at his
Presence, yea, the World, and all that dwell therein. Who can stand before his
Indignation? and who can abide in the Fierceness of his Anger? his Fury is
poured out like Fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him. The Lord is good, a
strong Hold in the Day of Trouble, and he knows them that trust in him If we
are so happy as to be of this blessed Number, and have secured this God for our
Friend, in and through our Lord Jesus Christ; we may then look and long for this
blessed Hope, this glorious Appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ. -- We may rejoice in all the Tokens of his near Approach; we may lift
up our Heads with Joy, for our Redemption draws nigh. -- We may be ardently
desirous that this Appearance of the Son of Man should be hastened. -- Why is
his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the Wheels of his Chariot? Then may we
unite, with Rapture, in that animating Prayer of the Prophet, with which I
close; Isai. lxiv. 1.
Oh that thou would rent the Heavens, that thou would come down, that the
Mountains might flow down at thy Presence; as when the melting Fire burns,
the Fire causes the Waters to boil; to make thy Name known to thine
Adversaries, that the Nations may tremble at thy Presence. When thou did
terrible Things which we looked not for, thou came down, the Mountains flowed
down at thy Presence. For since the Beginning of the World, Men have not heard,
nor perceived by the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God, besides thee, what
he has prepared for him that waits for him.

FINIS.

