A REMARK ON THE Disputes and Contentions IN This PROVINCE.

BY DAVID MARIN BEN JESSE, Pastor at AQUENONKA.

Thou shall not seethe a Kid in his Mother's Milk.

MOSES. NEW YORK: Printed by H. GAIN, at the Printing-Office, in Queen Street,
between the Fly and Meal-Markets, 1755.

A REMARK, etc.
WHOEVER is no entire Stranger in our Jerusalem, knows what Animosities,
Disputes and Contentions have arisen, and are still subsisting in the same; so
that it is almost become a Mesech. May the Love of Truth, constrain me to
ascribe them unto their real Cause! that they who have raised, may answer for
them. Our intended College is the Bone of Contention, all will grant: But how
it comes to be such, and who were the Instruments of changing and perverting,
what was by our Assembly intended for a Blessing, into a Curse, about that all
do not agree: The Case to me, notwithstanding, is as plain, as any Thing in
Nature can be; and will be evident, I believe to all, who open their Eyes to
the Light of Truth. Were my Neighbor, with whom heretofore I lived in good
Harmony, to come to my House, and in a peremptory and insolent Manner, to
demand of me something I esteemed the most valuable of all my Possessions,
seizing the same in these Words, Friend, this I must have, whether thou will
let me or not; And I were to return his Compliment; What meanest thou, insolent
Man? be gone; And so saying, snatch it out of his Hands: And this kind and
mannerly Neighbor of mine, thereon to go and alarm the Neighborhood,
complaining of my falling out and breaking with him: Would not the Case be
plain, my Neighbor behaved like an odd sort of a Man? Or, that I may set off
the Case yet in a clearer Light: There once lived two Sisters near by one
another, the Name of the one was Politessa, and the Name of the other
Prudentia. Politessa, one Day came to Prudentia, and in a gay Air, accosted her
thus; Ah! Lard bless me, Sister Prudentia, I don't know, what thou intendest to
do with thy Children, poor Creatures! I am afraid thou will make them all as
awkward Prudes as thy self; they never will be gay, if they stay with thee; let
them come to me, I will put them, in the first Place, to the dancing School;
and next, I shall take Care to learn them all my gay and grand Airs; and that
they may the better take them, to be sure, let them never come within thy
House, for they would be infected with thy low and mean Demureness. Nay, I
intend to make them such fine Ladies, that they shall for ever be ashamed to
own thee for a Mother: But thou see Sister, how much thou art obliged to me
for my Proposal, that I expect thee to pay for the Education of my Children, as
well as for thine: Don't look so grave, for do it thou shall; I have already
agreed with the dncing Master, to take all of them. Sister! Sister! replied
Prudentia, is it not enough that thou spoilest thy own Children; would thou
also do it to mine? No, Sister, no; that shall never be. Now Politessa began to
grumble, and scold, upbraiding Prudentia, with an unsisterly Behavior: Whereon
Prudentia withdrew into another Room, and Politessa went off in a mighty
Bustle, complaining grievously to all she met, how ill Prudentia had used her;
although, at the same Time, Prudentia had the greatest Reason to complain, I
think. Were I not afraid of muliplying too many Similitudes and Comparisons, to
illustrate one and the same Thing, which was self-evident before, I should here
bring in the Disputes at present subsisting between us and our Neighbors the
French. It was in Time of profound Peace, that they began to build Forts on the
Lands along the Ohio; we thereon are all in Arms, threatening them War: What if
the French should call us bad Neighbors, Promoters of War, Strife and
Contention; will not, must not every rational Person, ascribe the Cause of
those Commotions to them, on Account of their unjust Encroachments on our
Borders, and their Endeavors to take from us what is our Property?

Now, if any Man in his right Senses, who will not be duped, considers what
has happened among us, will he then any longer be at a Loss to ascribe our
Strifes, Quarrels and Contentions, to their real Causes? Was there not a Sum of
Money raised by our Assembly, in order to erect a College or Seminary of
Learning for the Education of Youth? And did not a certain Party petition for,
and obtain a Charter, in which the President is appointed for ever to be a
Member in Communion with the Church of England, and for Morning and Evening
Worship, to be used the Liturgy of the Common Prayer Book, or a Collection
taken out of the same, and by far the Majority of Trustees strenuous
Propugnators for the Church of England, as by Act of Parliament established in
South Britain, but not here? And will not our Youth, by this Constitution, be
under the sole Government of that Party (as yet not numerous in this Province)
and thereby be imbued with their Principles, so that High Church be brought in
a likely way to triumph over us? Were a Heathen Emperor, the Subjects of whose
Empire were half Heathens and half Christians, resolved to make the whole, or
by far the major Part embrace Heathenism, I think he could not fall upon a
better Scheme to accomplish his Design, than to entrust the Education of Youth
to Heathens. Should a popish King, whose Subjects were partly Papists, partly
Protestants, take a Resolution to make Popery prevail, what better could he do,
than appoint popish Presidents and Tutors in the Seminaries of Learning? And is
there a Country or Province, in which there are several Denominations of
Protestants, whose religious Liberties hang in Equilibrio, no one by Law
established above the rest; and were a certain Party a mind to saddle and ride
the rest; what could they contrive better, or what Stratagem invent more
adapted to promote their domineering Sway, than by grasping to themselves the
Ascendency, or Superheminence in the College or Seminary of Learning, erected
for the General Education of Youth? Will not the Youth be tinctured with the
Principles of those who teach them? And will this not soon model Church and
State?

When these Things are duly considered (which surely are very obvious to every
thinking Person) I hope they who belong to the Reformed Church, as constituted
by the Synod of Dordrecht, will no longer suffer themselves to be so much
imposed upon, as they have been for some Time of late: For my Part, I am not
more amazed, though I am much so, at the astonishing Imposition of the
incroaching Party, that would monopolize our intended College, than I am at our
own Infatuation, Stupidity and Lethargy, in doing so little as has been
hitherto done, in order to assert and secure the inestimable Blessing of
Blessings, by Treaties secured unto us, and now in Danger of being snatched
from us all at one fatal Grasp; I mean the Enjoyment of Liberty of Conscience
in public Worship, and in Church Discipline.

How in the Name of Wonder, comes it then to pass, that a pretended Friend of
the Dutch Church, should write, as I find he has done, in the Supplement to
the New York Mercury in No 140, subscribed, J. V. D. This Letter writer may
style himself as much a Well-wisher to his Country, and our Dutch
Establishment, as he pleases; I fear that in his Friendship there lies a
lurking Serpent, and if the Mask was thrown off, he would only be an Instrument
of that incroaching Party, endeavoring by Enchantment and Artifice, to lull us
asleep, while they despoil us of our Churches.

He exclaims, in the first Place, bitterly against the Independent Reflector
and the Watchtower, as Pests of the Peace of Society; and then signifies his
Surprise at many of his pretended Brethren of the Dutch Church, who countenance
those Writings, charging them with disturbing the Peace and Tranquillity of this
Colony; a Charge so just, as that wherewith in the Fable, a ravenous Wolf does
accuse an innocent Sheep, that stands below him in the Stream, of having
troubled the Waters; which, I think, may be more fully collected from the
Similitudes and Comparisons I have drawn above.

With Regard to the Independent Reflector, and Watchtower, (though I am not of
his Sect as to Principles in Religion) I believe the Lord in his wise and
gracious Providence, has been pleased to use him as a Means to bafle and
frustrate an incroaching Party, in their unjust Demands: Had the Independent
Reflector and Watchtower, prostituted his Pen, in encouraging the unreasonable
Pretenses of those, who now declare him the Bane and Pest of Society, he had
been by them extolled to the very Skies; he had been proclaimed a Wonder, a
Prodigy of the World! the happiest Phenomenon of the Age! no lucrative Job, no
gratifying Boon in the Province, had been too great for him: But now, while he
pleads and vindicates the Cause of persecuted Liberty and Rights, they seem to
envy him the vital Air he breathes in: May the Lord reward him for it! and I
hope, there will yet come a Time, when his Country shall see, how much they are
obliged to him.

In the next Place, our pretended Friend and Well-wisher (I fear such a one as
Sanballet the Horonite, Tobiah the Ammonitesh Servant, and Gashem the Arabian,
were to Jerusalem) throws a gloomy Glance on our Dutch Priests educated in
America. And why must they be the Butt of his Indignation? The Case is clear;
it is because, as they understand a little of the English Language, and see
what Ruin was meditated their Churches, they endeavor to avoid the fatal
Stroke, by forming themselves into a Reformed Classis, according to the Canons
of the Synod held at Dordrecht, in the Years of our Lord, 1618 and 1619, that
they may be capable of acting in a joint Body; which is likely to be of better
Consequence, than what is done by single Kerkenraet. The Necessity of this, for
our Preservation, I could easily evince by many valid Reasons; but our Friend,
the Letter-Writer, spares me that Labor at present, by his Endeavors to
prejudice our Church against it, being either so ignorant, or so malicious, as
to suggest, that when we set up a Classis of our own here, we have done with
Holland: As he styles the Classis of Holland, it seems as if he knew not that
there are many Classis in Holland, and two Synods of the Reformed Church,
either of which, no doubt, will be willing to form, constitute and acknowledge
us a Classis: But he seems to be under a terrible Apprehension, when this is
effected, the Jersey College will be encouraged, and ours at the same Time
neglected: I hope we will wish the Jersey College well, because their Aim at
grasping after all our Churches, has not hitherto been so glaring, as that of
the High Church College in this Province; and I believe the religious
Principles inculcated in the former, agree better with Holy Scripture, and with
the Confession of our Church, nay, even with the doctrinal Part of the Articles
of the Church of England, than I expect will be taught in the latter: Moreover,
they who erected it, have not as yet endeavored to impose the Charge of
keeping it upon us: But if our Friend had not been hasty, and had waited but a
little while longer, he would perhaps have been informed, that we don't choose
to have too near a Connection with either; but intend, please God, an Academy of
our own, for the free Education of our Youth (for which their Parents, their
Godfathers and Godmothers, even in their Baptism, did promise and vow before
God and his Saints, they should be instructed in the Doctrine of our Reformed
Church) And although this our Resolution be but just and equitable in itself,
and no more than what is manifestly our indispensible Duty, we may
notwithstanding, in a great Measure, thank our kind Sister Churches for it, who
by the whole of their late Conduct toward us, even by their Dreams and
Prophecies, have shown us the Necessity thereof, unless we resolve
ignominiously, to surrender and give up our Churches to them, and thus in order
to aggrandize our Sisters, suffer Annihilation ourselves, and perhaps be the
Means of putting our Sisters in a fair Way to ruin one another, and to work out
the Destruction of this whole Land.

As to our fictious Friend's Invention, of a Protesterian Synod; I leave the
Gentlemen he has in View, to answer for themselves; they are of Age, and every
Way a Match for him. What a Happiness, that a Man blessed with so lively an
Invention, is so sincere a Friend to us, in this our oppressed State, in which
sharp-ey'd Eagles hover over and about us on every Side! Who knows what
admirable Schemes, what un-thought of Projects, he may invent, and bring about
for our Good! I wonder so great a Friend, and so surprising a Genius, advises
us still to stick to our old, negligent, obsolete, exploded Plan; by which our
Church in New York, is got so much on the declining Hand, that the Grandeur of
the High Church consists in Proselytes, gained from her Sister Low Dutch
Church. It is possible this our Friend may be one of those, who plume
themselves on having prejudiced our Church in New York, against calling a
Reformed Minister to preach in English, because we were in Danger of one of the
Protesterian Sect. But what of that? It left us just where we were, all in the
Dumps! and still the Necessity appears, that a Minister of our own Order,
should preach in English in our Churches, to prevent the falling off from us,
such as do not understand Dutch (which if not prevented, must inevitably, in a
little while, prove our Ruin) and why does our Friend not show us the Way, how
we may do this safely? I pretend not to such Inventions as he; and yet I can
easily do it. Our Junior Minister is a known Orator, and as he has the Latin,
may soon learn English sufficient to begin with to preach; he will, when once
begun, improve very fast, or may not young Dordracensis, be called thereunto?
Why don't our Kerkenraet desire him to do it? We have already our Catechism and
Liturgy translated in English amongst us; and as I am informed, may have from
Rotterdam, even the Psalms of David translated in that Language, adapted to the
Meter and Music of Petrus Dathenus, which we use. This Scheme, I fear, will be
proposed and approved of, last of all by our Friend and his Party; they will
sooner advise a Church of England Minister, to go on as he does, to preach Low
Dutch in the Mohawk's Country, pressing on after the laborious Steps of his
Predecessor, who did the same in the City of Albany.

In regard to the true Specimen among our People, of one of our Dutch
Ministers, late of Long Island, but now of Bergen, in the Jerseys, I must
remark, that Jehu's Words to Joram, are very applicable; What Peace so long as
the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel, and her Witchcrafts are so many? As also
are the Words of our blessed Lord to his Disciples; Think not that I came to
send Peace on Earth: I came not to send Peace, but a Sword. For I come to set a
Man at Variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, and
the Daughter-in-Law against the Mother-in-Law. And a Man's Foes shall be they
of his own Household. It is well known this Clergyman waged War against the
Kingdom of Darkness. The Diabolians, in their Turn, attacked him fiercely, and
called into their Aid and Succor, some of his carnal Brethren, who plotted his
Ruin, and were in a likely Way to effect it, had not the Eyes of the Classis of
Amsterdam been opened, by a fair and candid Representation of the Case. And
this true Specimen shows us the Necessity of our being formed into a Classis
here, that the Enemies of experimental Religion, may not have it in their
Power, by their false and malicious Glosses and Misrepresentations, before the
Classis of Amsterdam, to hurt the Promoters of real Piety and Godliness. --
Whence came those Quarrels of a different Nature on Long Island, in former
Times? Whence those of another Nature, which broke out after his Removal, and
are as yet not come to an End? And what must we at last think of our sham
Friend's Advice, strictly to adhere to our Establishment, and not suffer the
least Change, or Alteration, by Priests or People? Is our Friend really of
Opinion, our Church is established here, or the Church of England either; why
does he then not prove it? Or would he have us, for the Sake of Establishments,
prepatriate to Holland, or to South Britain, from whence many emigrated to
avoid them? Oh! this mock Establishment is a Darling of theirs to enchant and
delude the Ignorant and Unweary! The Net is already thrown out round about us;
it has already encircled us; if we remain but quietly and tamely where we are,
no doubt, the High Church Party will make the greatest Draught; as our real and
honest Friend Phileleutheros has shown. -- But our Ulyssean Friend, it seems,
is not contented even with this; we must, like senseless and dumb Fishes, run
into the Net, of our own Accord, to facilitate the Labor and Toil of our
Fishermen, in drawing our own Ruin and Destruction upon us. We must, at the
same Time, unite with the Members of the Church of England, in promoting their
High Church College, in order to get our Youth so freely educated, that they
forever renounce their own Church, and when they get into the Assembly, make us
pay for it, and feel the Smart of it. Is this a Foundation to build a College
upon? Is this a Basis whereon to fix a Seminary of Learning, in a free Land,
designed for a Place of Refuge, for an Asylum to persecuted Souls, in which the
incroaching Party is perhaps scarcely a twentieth Man at present? Gracious God!
Was there ever before such a Demand made on thy rational Creatures! Merciful
Heaven! Thou who did forbid the Children of Israel, thy favorite People, of
old, To seethe a Kid in his Mother's Milk; let us rather suffer Martyrdom, than
pollute our Souls with so great an Abomination in thy Sight!

Come on then, my dear Brethren, of the Reformed Church, be aroused out of your
Lethargy; Start! O! start from your Enchantment. Consider, I beseech you, what
our pious and venerable Ancestors, have done and suffered for their Religion:
Shall we suffer ourselves ignominiously to be dispoiled of the same, by little
cunning low Craft, and hallow Artifice? Heaven forbid we should! -- His most
gracious Majesty, King GEORGE, whose liege and loyal, whose dutiful and
peaceable Subjects we are, in whose Cause we will cheerfully at all Times
venture our Lives and Fortunes, who allows us the Liberty of our Consciences in
public Worship, and in Church Discipline; will be graciously pleased, no doubt,
if we need and humbly pray it, to grant us a Charter too, for the Education of
our Youth, as well as any other religious Denomination whatsoever, tolerated in
his Dominions; whereas his most gracious Majesty, in this, as much as in any
Thing, the Resemblance of the Supreme Being, delights in the Happiness of his
loyal and loving Subjects, though of various religious Sentiments; among which
I believe, there is not one single individual disaffected, either to his sacred
Person, Family or Government. Let us Men, and Brethren, put our Trust in God,
and be unanimous among ourselves, and not hearken to domineering Parties, who
endeavor to divide us; we have no Business with their Colleges; they may erect
as many as they please, and must expect to maintain them too themselves. Let
every one provide for his own House; and such as are weak and poor, if they ask
an Alms of us, in a suitable Manner, let us not withold our Hand; but to
demand our Property, as their just Due, for ruining of us, we must, for the
future, treat with a silent Contempt. And let them say what they will, one
Thing we know, which is this, that we cannot be spoiled but by the Concurrence
of our own Assembly; and therefore we ought, for the future, to be more
cautious, and on our Guard, what Representatives we elect. I hope what has
happened, has opened our Eyes a little in this Particular, at least our sham
Friend seems to be afraid of it. Were I to give my Opinion, how we ought at
present to conduct ourselves, it should be this Maxim; whatever any incroaching
Party advises us to do, let us say Nothing, but not do it: Whatever they advise
us not to do, let us say Nothing, but do it: If we take the Contrary of their
Advice, I dare say, in the Main, we will do well by it. I know they will set up
a hedious Cry, a Huen-Cry, when they perceive this; but we must not mind that
neither. As it is now a Time in which we exert ourselves, to oppose, resist,
and repel our unjustly incroaching Neighbors, the French and their Indians,
let us consider, our God requires of us also, to make a Stand for our most holy
Religion, the Truth, as it is in Jesus, the Lord our Righteousness: And for the
Peace of Jerusalem, for Sion's Prosperity, and for the Safety of our Land, we
ought to watch and pray, to labor and suffer, and remain steadfast in the
Faith once delivered unto the Saints. And this is the Exhortation of your true
Friend.

David Marin Ben Jesse.

FINIS.

