EARTHQUAKES, The EFFECTS of GOD'S WRATH.

A SERMON PREACHED AT BRISTOL, The LORD's DAY after a very TERRIBLE EARTHQUAKE,
Which was on Tuesday, November 18. 1755. a few Minutes after Four o'Clock in
the Morning.

By JOHN BURT, A. M. Pastor of a CHURCH in BRISTOL.

NEWPORT: Printed by J. FRANKLIN, at the Printing-Office under the
Town-School-House.

EARTHQUAKES, The Effects of God's Wrath.
PSALM. xviii.7. Then the Earth shook and trembled; the Foundations also of the
Hills moved, and were shaken, because he was wroth.


THE Words now read, naturally lead your Thoughts to the awful Providence of
the Week past; when the Earth shook and trembled, and the Foundations also of
the Hills moved and were shaken: When, like the trembling Jailer, every one was
awakened out of his sleep with the Roar of an Earthquake, and threatened with
immediate Destruction. They also lead us to the Origin of that awful Event,
viz. the Wrath of God. He shook the Earth because he was wroth, and therein
expressed his Indignation at Sin, and Resentment of the Affronts that were
offered to his infinite Majesty, by a profane and rebellious World.

Accordingly, in speaking to the Words, I. I shall discourse to you upon
Earthquakes. II. Consider the Wrath of God as the Cause of them; and III. Make
some Application suitable to the Occasion.


I. I shall discourse to you upon Earthquakes; and shall consider them either
as universal or particular.

1. Earthquakes may be universal. That God who at the Beginning made the World,
can shake it at his Pleasure; and as his Power is infinite and irresistible, he
can shake all and every Part, as well as any particular Part of it. Nor is
there any Thing in Nature that militates against this Principle. The righteous
and wise Maker and Governor of the Universe has planted his Artillery in every
Part and Corner of the Earth, to preserve the Homage, and to suppress the
Rebellion of his Creatures; and the same natural Causes, by a Commission from
God, may as well operate and concur to produce an universal, as a particular
Earthquake.

Such an universal Earthquake there seems to have been, both at the Death and
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. We read in Matt. 27.50. that when Jesus
gave up the Ghost, the Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, from the Top to
the Bottom, and the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent. And Matt. 28.2. That
at his Resurrection from the Dead, there was a great Earthquake.

And no wonder that Nature was seized with an universal Convulsion, when the
God of Nature was struggling in the Agonies of Death. When his Soul and Body
were violently rending from each other, no wonder that the Rocks rent, and that
the Earth trembled. And why should not the whole Earth be equally affected,
when the Lord of Glory exerted a Divine Power, and burst the Doors, and broke
the Bars of the Grave asunder, and came forth? Nature owed her Lord that
Respect, to bear a Sympathy with him, both in the Agonies of his Death, and in
the Triumphs of his Resurrection.

And the second Coming of our Lord, will be attended with such an universal
Earthquake, at which the most hardy Sinner will be afraid, and trembling will
surprise the Hypocrite. Hence that Prediction in Isa. 24.17, 18, 19. Fear, and
the Pit, and the Snare are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the Earth. And it shall
come to pass, that he who flees from the Noise of the Fear, shall fall into
the Pit; and he that comes up out of the Midst of the Pit, shall be taken in
the Snare; for the Windows from on high are open, and the Foundations of the
Earth do shake. The Earth is utterly broken down, the Earth is clean dissolved,
the Earth is moved exceedingly. The Earth shall reel to and fro like a
Drunkard, and shall be removed like a Cottage, and the Transgression thereof
shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again. And of the same
awful Period, we read in Rev. 16.15, 18, 19. Behold, I come as a Thief. Blessed
is he that watches -- And there were Voices, and Thunders, and Lightnings; and
there was a great Earthquake, such as was not since Men were upon the Earth, so
mighty an Earthquake, and so great. And the great City was divided into three
Parts, and the Cities of the Nations fell; and great Babylon came into
Remembrance before God, to give unto her the Cup of the Wine of the Fierceness
of his Wrath. And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found.

But (2) Earthquakes may be particular, i. e. in particular Places, at
particular Times and Seasons. Before that awful Period, when universal Nature
shall struggle in its expiring Agonies, our Savior tells us, in Matt. 24.7.
That there shall be Earthquakes in diverse Places.

Now these are various in their Duration, Extent, and Degree. And it is said,
See Mr. Prince's Sermons after the Earthquake in 1727.
Sometimes there are threatening Simptoms, and sometimes they come suddenly, and
without any previous Notice. Sometimes in dreadful Tempests, but oftener in the
calmest and serenest Seasons. They are sometimes of a narrower, at others of a
larger Compass. Sometimes their Shocks are of a shorter, at others, of a longer
Duration. Some are of a lesser, others of a greater Violence. Sometimes they
quickly cease, and leave the Earth at Rest; at other Times they soon repeat
their terrible Efforts, and throw the Earth into new Convulsions. Sometimes
they make the Earth to jar and vibrate, and sometimes to waver like the Waves
of the Sea. In such a Manner was the Place shaken, where the Apostles were
assembled, Acts 4.31. And thus the Foundations of the Prison where Paul and
Silas lay bound, were shaken by a great and sudden Earthquake.

And how terrible are the Effects of Earthquakes! Whole Towns and Cities have
thereby been destroyed as in a Moment; and the Inhabitants have either been
buried in the Ruins, or gone down alive into the Pit. Whilst they blessed
themselves in their Security, and were ready to flatter themselves with an
uninterrupted Prosperity, their vain Hopes have been dismounted, and they have
been overtaken with swift Destruction. The Earth has opened her Mouth, and
swallowed them up quick, and they were no sooner surpised with a Sense of
their Danger, but they despaired of Relief.

How sudden and how terrible was the Destruction of Korah, and his Company, by
an Earthquake! After Moses had made an End of speaking, the Ground clave
asunder that was under them, and the Earth opened her Mouth and swallowed them
up, and their Houses, and all the Men that appertained unto Korah, and all
their Goods. They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the
Pit, and the Earth closed upon them; and they perished from among the
Congregation. And all Israel that were round about them, fled at the Cry of
them; for they said, Lest the Earth swallow us up also: Numb. 16.31, and
onwards.

O the Distress and Anguish of the guilty Inhabitants! when the Earth opened
her Mouth to swallow them up, and Heaven was inexorable to their Cries! When
Destruction from the Lord was a Terror to them, and they could see no Refuge
from the Storm of vindictive Justice! O the dolorous Shrieks and Outcries of
the People, when they saw themselves going down alive into the Pit, and that
there were none that could stay them! No wonder that Israel, when they heard
their Cry, were terrified and amazed, and fled, lest that they also should he
overtaken with the Destruction which they saw came upon Korah, and his Company,
from their incensed Sovereign. I proceed,

II. To consider the Wrath of God as the Cause of Earthquakes.

An Inquiry into the natural Causes of Earthquakes, would be inconsistent with
my designed Brevity, and might divert your Thoughts from the great first Cause
of All; I shall therefore only mention them as the Works of God, and the Means
he uses to accomplish his Pleasure.

Without Regard to second Causes, God the supreme Governor of the World, is to
be considered as the Author of these great Events; and they are to be esteemed
the Tokens of his just Displeasure: When God shakes the Earth, and causes the
Foundations of the World to tremble, it is because that he is wroth.

As Earthquakes are the Works of God, so he can produce them without the Help
of natural Causes. He who at first commanded the World out of Nothing into
Being, by the Lisp of his Pleasure, can dissolve its Frame, and make it a Place
of Desolation and Astonishment. Though he ordinarily makes Use of second
Causes, yet it is as easy for Omnipotence to work without them, as by their
Cooperation and Assistance.

If God who made the World at the beginning, should only suspend that Power by
which he upholds and preserves it, it would reel and stagger like a Drunkard,
and tumble into Ruin. Without exerting any Power for its Destruction, it would
as effectually answer his Design, to withdraw the Power by which he supports it.

The Frown of his Countenance, without the Concurrence of natural Causes, would
instantly bury the World in its own Ruins. Hence we read in Joh 9.4, 5. He is
wise in Heart, and mighty in Strength -- which removes the Mountains and they
know not; which overturneth them in his Anger: Which shakes the Earth out of
her Place, and the Pillars thereof tremble. And in what lofty Expressions does
the Psalmist speak of the Majesty and Power of God, Psa. 104.32. He looks on
the Earth, and it trembles; he touches the Hills, and they smoke.

But if we consider Earthquakes as the Product of natural Causes, of contrary
and disagreeing Elements in the Bowels of the Earth, that meeting, make a most
violent Concussion. I say, if we consider Earthquakes as the Product of natural
Causes, yet we must ultimately resolve them into the powerful Agency of God,
the great Governor of the Universe. For, who but he made those Causes which
produce such Effects, and sets them a Moving? Who planted that Artillery in the
Bowels of the Earth, and discharges it in so terrible a Manner? Who directs its
Course, and causes it to shake some Parts of the World, and not others? Who
gives it a Commission to destroy some Places, and at the same Time preserves
others? Shall we look upon these Things only as the Effects of Nature, or shall
we not rather ascribe them to a Divine Almighty Power? To that God who made all
Things, and has all Nature under his Command, to serve his Purposes in the
Government of the World.

Now, as Earthquakes are the Works of a divine and almighty Agent, so they are
some of the terrible Effects of his Wrath. He shakes the Earth, and causes the
Foundations of the Hills to be moved and shaken, when he is wroth, He who made
the World at first (...) his Power, and governs it by an indisputable
Authority, has placed his Artillery in the Earth and under the Earth, both to
chastise the Insolence of his rebellious Creatures, and by the commanding Awe
of his Judgments, to maintain the Homage and Obedience of his People.

As God is invisible, so his Displeasure is known by the Judgments which he
executes in the Earth. There is not any Number of his Armies; and from the
Magazine of his Fury, he brings out many Judgments to chastise a sinful People.
Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, stormy Wind fulfill his Word. Psa. 148.8. He
visits with Thunder and Earthquake, and great Noise, with Storm and Tempest,
and the Flame of devouring Fire. Isa. 29.6.

Though God is terrible in all the Judgments that he brings upon a sinful
People, yet in nothing does he appear so full of Dread and Terror, as when he
makes the Earth under us to tremble and quake. The Sword, and Famine, and
Pestilence, are very terrible Judgments, that have no Respect to Persons, that
devour one as well as another, and multiply the Slain of the Lord. But then
these Calamities are gradual in their Progress, and either give us Time to
escape them, or to prepare to meet them. But Earthquakes for the most Part come
suddenly, without any previous Notice, and surprise Sinners in the midst of
their Security and Ease. Whilst they are crying Peace to themselves, sudden
Destruction comes upon them, as Travail upon a Woman with Child, and there is
no escaping.

To what can we impute such terrible Events, but to incensed Omnipotence?
Judgment is God's strange Work, what he has an Aversion to, and seems to
proceed in with the greatest Reluctance. When he is about to bring Ruin upon a
sinful People, his Heart is oftentimes turned within him, and his Repentings
are kindled together; so that he does not execute the Fierceness of his Anger.
The Father of Mercies does not grieve and afflict the Children of Men
willingly, but for the Punishment of their Sins, to revenge the Affronts that
are offered to his infinite Majesty, and he sees that all other Means are
ineffectual to reclaim them.

How dreadful then is the Wrath of God! The Wrath of a King is as the Roaring
of a Lion, which strikes with Surprise and Amazement; but what is that to the
Anger of an incensed Deity? who removes Mountains, and they know not; which
overturneth them in his Anger, and at whose Reproof the very Pillars of Heaven
tremble, and are astonished. Hence says the Prophet, Hab. 3.10. The Mountains
saw thee and they trembled: Thou did march through the Land in Indignation.

The Prophet Ezekiel expressly mentions (chap. 38.19, 20.) the Anger of God as
the Cause of this particular Judgment. For in my Jealousy, and in the Fire of
my Wrath have I spoken: Surely in that Day there shall be a great Skaking in
the Land of Israel; so that the Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of Heaven, and
the Beasts of the Field, and all creeping Things that creep upon the Earth, and
all the Men that are upon the Face of the Earth, shall shake at my Presence;
and the Mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep Places shall fall, and
every Wall shall fall to the Ground. And the Prophet Jeremiah, after such a
particular Description of this Judgment, as if he had been an Eyewitness of
it, ascribes it to the Anger of an offended Deity. I beheld the Mountains, said
he, and lo they trembled, and all the Hills moved lightly. I beheld and lo
there was no Man, and all the Birds of Heaven were fled. I beheld, and in the
fruitful Place was a Wilderness, and all the Cities thereof were broken down at
the Presence of the Lord, and at his fierce Anger: Chap. 4.24, 25, 26.

Having considered Earthquakes as the dreadful Effects of God's Wrath, I proceed

III. To make some Application of the Subject, suitable to the awful Occasion.
And here,

1. In Earthquakes, we have a most lively and affecting Display of the glorious
Majesty of the Lord our God.

What more lively Display can there be of the Majesty of God, than to see the
inanimate Creation awakened out of its slumber at his Presence! To see the
Earth tremble, and the Mountains quake at his Rebuke! The Mountains skip like
Rams, and the little Hills like Lambs. The Earth trembles at the Presence of
the Lord, at the Presence of the God of Israel: Psalm. 114.4, 7.

2. We learn the wretched Stupidity of Sinners, who are regardless of God, and
the Operations of his Hands. If the Heavens are astonished, and the Earth is
afraid at the Anger of the Lord, it may well make Sinners tremble, and cause
their Hearts to be removed out of their Place. For he that shakes the Earth,
can shake them into Hell in a Moment, and torment them in the Fire of his
Jealousy forever.

But such is the unaccountable Stupidity and Hardness of Sinners, that
oftentimes they will provoke God to his Face: They mock the Thunder of his
Judgments, and despise the glittering Spear of almighty Vengeance. The Belief
of his Justice and Power makes the very Devils to tremble; and yet the
Judgments of God are oftentimes ineffectual to reclaim obstinate and
incorrigible Sinners, who dare to affront his infinite Majesty, as if they were
a Match for Omnipotence, as if they could resist his Fury, or support his heavy
Indignation.

3. We learn the dreadful Evil of Sin, and the woeful Folly of Sinners, which
provoke God's Wrath and Indignation.

Sin considered in itself, and abstracted from its woeful Consequences, is a
most tremendous Evil. As it is a Transgression of the Law, it is an Affront to
the supreme Lawgiver, and obscures the Glory of his Attributes, which are
exercised in the Government of the World. As it strikes at God, and provokes
his Jealousy, so it recoils upon the Sinner, and involves him in innumerable
Evils. It has stripped Man of his original Purity, and stained him with an
universal Pollution. It has degraded Man from that Honor and Dignity, in
which he was at first created; so that he is become like the Beasts that
perish, and exposes him to Death, in all its fearful and amazing Consequences.

The Evil of Sin, shows us the woeful Folly of Sinners, who daily provoke God's
Wrath and Fury. Though Sin is such an amazing Evil in it self, and such an
Indignity to the blessed God, as to raise his just Resentment, yet Sinners roll
it as a sweet Morsel under their Tongues; and, if we may judge by their
Conduct, they had rather lose their Souls, than abandon their Lusts. They turn
a deaf Ear to all the Warnings of God's Word, and despise the Grace of God,
which teaches them to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in the present World.

O the amazing Folly of Sinners! to indulge their Lusts at the Hazard of their
Souls! and to pursue their Sins with such Greediness, which, unless almighty
Grace prevents, will end in Shame and everlasting Death.

4. Is the Wrath of God the Cause of the most fearful Judgments, then let us
stand in awe, and not sin against him.

The Fear of God. and his Judgments, should create an unalterable Divorce
between us and our Sins, and we should have nothing more to do with the
accursed Thing which his Soul hates. Because there is Wrath, we should beware
of Sin, which an infinitely pure and holy God, cannot behold without the
greatest Indignation and Abhorrence.

5. Let us reflect with the highest Gratitude, upon the Mercy of God, which
interposed for our Preservation and Safety, at the very Instant of our Danger.

What a Consternation and Surprise were we in, when awakened out of our Sleep
with the Roar of an Earthquake! Every One's Lips seemed to quiver, and their
Knees to smite one against another, when we were apprehensive of instant
Destruction, and could see no Refuge in Nature for our Protection.

But in the midst of Judgment, God remembered Mercy for us, and appeared as a
present Help in the Time of our Trouble and Distress. When the Sorrows of Death
compassed us about, and the Pains of Hell threatened to take hold upon us;
before we had Time to call upon the Name of the Lord, he delivered us: He rode
upon the Heavens for our Help, and in his Excellency upon the Skies, as our
great Preserver. O that Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his
wonderful Works to the Children of Men.

The Goodness of God in our Preservation, appears most amiable and astonishing,
when we consider how we have provoked him by our Sins, and how his Justice
would have been glorified in our Destruction. If he had sent us quick into the
Grave, and into Hell, God and his Throne would have been guiltless and
unspotted forever, and we should have been justly and eternally miserable: And
his Mercy might have been extended to those who would have received it with the
highest Gratitude, and not abused it as we have done. But Mercy interposed for
us, who were the Objects of avenging Justice, and rejoiced against Judgment for
our Deliverance. It is of the Lord's Mercies that we are not utterly consumed,
even because his Compossions toward us have not failed.

And what enhances the Goodness of God, and our Obligations to love and admire
it, is the Desolations that Earthquakes have made in other Places, and to think
how often God has appeared for our Land, when in the like Danger. The most rich
and flourishing Cities have been depopulated as in a Moment, and buried in
their own Ruins. And besides other remarkable Judgments that our Land has been
visited with, this is the eleventh or twelfth Earthquake that has been
perceived since the Arrival of our Fathers here, and within 120 Years. Many
Shocks indeed have been smaller, and less extensive, but this is the fifth that
has been very awak'ning, and that has justly filled our Land with Terror and
Surprise. For a more particular Account, see the Rev. Mr. Prince's Letter on
Earthquakes, lately published.


And now, after so many Instances of remarkable Danger and Preservation, whilst
we tremble at his Rebukes; what Obligations are we under to love the Lord, and
to admire his Goodness. When his Judgments awaken us out of our Security, and
destroy our vain Confidence, we should be encouraged by his Goodness, to make
him the supreme Object of our Hope and Trust, and devote ourselves to his
Glory, to serve him in Righteousness and Holiness all the Days of our Lives.

6. When the Earth shakes and trembles, it teaches us the Vanity of the World,
and the Uncertainty of all its Enjoyments.

The World is the admired Idol that engrosses the Affections of the unthinking
Multitude, and engages them in the eager Pursuit of it. This they make the
Object of their supreme Dependence, their Views and Aims; their Hopes and
Desires are confined to the Things that are seen, and they vainly imagine that
they are sufficient to complete their Felicity. But sure I am, they are under a
most woeful Infatuation; they trust to Vanity, and their Hope will end in Shame
and Disappointment.

How vain is the World, which how permanent and durable soever, we may imagine
it, trembles at the Presence of the Lord, and is unable to support his heavy
Indignation! How empty and uncertain are its Enjoyments, that will afford us no
Relief in our greatest Extremity* The World is fickle and unconstant, the
Fashion of it passes away, anon it will vanish in Flame and Smoke; and those
that now admire it, will see it no more. The Apostle assures us, That the
Heavens and Earth which now are, are kept in Store, reserved unto Fire, against
the Day of Judgment, and Perdition of ungodly Men: 2 Pet. 3.7.

What an indelible Reproach is it then to the human Nature, that Men who are
endowed with reasonable Souls, should suffer themselves to be deluded and
imposed upon by a World, so false and uncertain, so empty and unsatisfying;
that they should embrace it as their supreme Good, and lose their Souls for the
Sake of gaining the World! If Men would take as much Pains for heavenly, as
they do for earthly Treasure, they would have a greater Probability of Success,
their Gains would be infinitely preferable, and their Rewards eternally
glorious; they would then be rich in Grace, and Heirs of a Kingdom, Heirs of
God, and joint Heirs with Jesus Christ, to an Inheritance which is
incorruptible, and undefiled, and which fades not away. But those who devote
themselves to the Service of the World, and are engaged in the eager Pursuit of
it, labor in vain, and spend their Strength for naught, and in vain. For, what
Profit will the Gains of this World be to a Soul which is spiritual, and of an
immortal Duration, which will survive the Ruins of Nature, and be unspeakably
blessed in the Enjoyment of God forever, or eternally miserable, under the
Weight of his dreadful Displeasure.

7. How happy are all those who have the everlasting God for their Refuge, and
are in a State of Peace and Favor with him.

They are happy in the most perilous Times, the Favor of God is their
Protection, and they are safe under the Shadow of the Almighty. They possess
their Souls in Peace, when all Nature is in Convulsions; and are fearless and
secure amidst the Wars of Elements and Crush of Worlds. They may say, as in
Psa. 46. beg. God is our Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble;
therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains
be carried into the midst of the Sea, tho the Waters thereof roar, and be
troubled, though the Mountains shake with the Swelling thereof. They know that if
their earthly Tabernacles be dissolved, they have a Building of God, an House
not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens: Or, that if the Earth should open
her Mouth, and swallow them up, it would afford them a quick and easy Passage
to a World of immortal Light and Love: Or, should such remain alive at the
Coming of our Lord, when he shall come in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and
great Glory, they will welcome the Day of his Appearance, as the Day of the
unspeakable Joy and Gladness of their Hearts. They will not be dismayed at the
Flames of a dissolving World, when the Heavens shall pass away with a great
Noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, and the Earth also, and
the Works that are therein, shall be burnt up.

8. Let us, from what has been said, enquire wherefore it is, that God is angry
with us, and endeavor by a speedy Repentance to appease his Wrath, and prevent
further Tokens of his Displeasure.

The Judgments of God, with which our Land is visited, are to be esteemed so
many Tokens of his Displeasure: Particularly, that he is calling us to draw the
Sword in our own Defense, and to maintain our Rights against the Encroachments
of a potent, subtle, and malicious Enemy: That, notwithstanding the Victory and
Success that have crowned some of our Forces, others have been frowned upon and
disappointed: That we have been called to lament the Fall of the Mighty, and
that so much of the Beauty and Glory of our Israel, have been slain in the high
Places of the Field: That most of our Attempts have hitherto proved abortive:
That the Sword of the Wilderness is unsheathed against us: That the unhappy
People upon our Frontiers, are in Jeopardy every Hour, and exposed to bloody
and deceitful Men, whose tender Mercies are cruel; and that we so frequently
hear of the Desolations that are made among them, of some butchered and
scalp'd, and of others carried into a doleful Captivity.

And now, as if all these Calamities were insufficient to awaken us out of our
Security, and to humble us for our Sins, God has been visiting with Earthquake,
and thereby summoned us to dread and reverence. He marched through the Land in
Indignation, and his Presence struck us with Terror and Surprise.

It becomes us then to enquire, wherefore it is that God is contending with us,
and to be humbled before him for our Sins, the Cause of his righteous
Displeasure. Instead of complaining of the Severity of his Judgments, we have
Reason to admire at the Patience and Forbearance of the most High toward us;
for our Iniquities are increased over our Heads, and our Trespasses are grown
up to the very Heavens, and cry for Vengeance against us. Should I attempt to
draw up a black Catalogue of the Crimes that prevail among us, I should scarce
know where to begin and when to end; and therefore, instead of enumerating
Particulars, I shall only mention two Things, as Aggravations of all our other
Abominations, and which threaten to deluge our Land in Misery and Woe, namely,
The Means of Grace that we enjoy, and our Impudence and Shamelesness in Sin.

The Means of Grace, if they are not effectual to reform a sinful People, serve
only to enhance their Guilt, and expose them a more fearful Prey to the
Judgments of God. The Light of the Gospel renders their Guilt inexcusable, and
their Contempt of his Grace, provokes God's dreadful Jealousy. As we are a
distinguished People, so, if we think that the Privileges we enjoy, and our
Relation to God, as his People, will skreen us from his Wrath, whilst we
continue to provoke him by our Sins, we deceive ourselves with a vain
Imagination. The People of the Jews gloried in their having the Temple, and
Temple-worship among them, as that which they thought would effectually secure
the Presence of God with them; but the Prophet tells them, That they deceived
themselves, and trusted in lying Words, whilst they cried, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we; as if that alone
would secure his Favor, and keep off his Judgments from them. If our
Fruitfulness is not in Proportion to what God has done for us, we may expect
that he will do by us, as he did by his Vineyard of old; that he will pluck us
up, and pull us down; that he will lay us waste and destroy us.

Shamelessness in Sin, is another Thing that has a very threatening Aspect upon
a People. Thus we read, Jer. 6.15. Were they ashamed when they had committed
Abominations? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush:
Therefore they shall fall among them that fall: At the Time that I visit them,
they shall be cast down, says the Lord. That this is very much our Case, is
too evident to need any Proof. Vice and Immorality are grown barefaced and
impudent, and so degenerate is the Age in which we live, that he that departs
from Evil, seems to make himself a Prey, by exposing himself to the Scoff and
Ridicule of profane and licentious Tongues. Many there are who declare their
Sin as Sodom, and hide it not, and even glory in their Shame. Now when Sinners
grow shameless and impudent in Sin, it looks as if no Laws were sufficient to
curb their Lusts, and restrain their Insolence; and the Cause of Virtue then
makes its Appeal to the righteous Judge and Governor of the World, to chastise
those Enormities which are too strong for the Laws of Men to correct and
restrain.

God seems to have taken us into his own Hands, to chastise us for our
Rebellion and Disobedience; and we have Reason to fear that the Earthquake with
which he has visited us, will be but the Beginning of our Sorrows, unless we
hearken to his Voice, and turn at his Rebuke.

Wherefore, let us all be persuaded to improve that awful Dispensation, as a
Motive to Repentance and Reformation. Like Saul in the midst of his
Astonishment, when he fell down trembling to the Earth, let us cry out, Lord,
what will thou have us to do? And like the Jailer, when he was surpised with
an Earthquake, let us make it our great Concern and Enquiry, What we shall do
to be saved? Let us all hear the Rod, and him that appointed it: Let us search
our Ways, and our Hearts: Let us consider what we have done to provoke the Holy
One to Anger against us, and how much we have contributed to the public Flames
and Judgments; and let us break off our Sins by Righteousness, and our
Iniquities by turning to the Lord. Let us all return unto the Lord as one Man,
and then we may depend upon it, that the Lord will have Mercy upon us, and that
our God will abundantly pardon us: As he has torn, be will heal us; as he has
smitten, he will bind us up.

Let us look to God, that he would sanctify this Dispensation to us, and that
his Holy Spirit may be poured out upon us, as it was when the Place was shaken,
where the primitive Christians were assembled; as we read Acts 4.31. And when
they had prayed, the Place was shaken where they were assembled together; and
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the Word of God with
Boldness.

What an happy Effect had the Earthquake in 1727, to awaken the Secure, to
reform the Vicious, and to make all solicitous about their spiritual and
everlasting Concerns, as the Account is transmitted to us by a Person See an
Appendix to the Rev. Mr. Prince's Sermons after the Earthquake in 1727.
of Observation and Integrity. Says he, The People are thereby thrown into the
utmost Consternation; and so mightily are many awakened, with the Sense of
their Danger, and the Divine Displeasure, as has produced a wonderful
Reformation. Profaneness, Drunkenness, and other Vices are abandoned, the
earnest Pursuits of the World discarded, the Places of public Religion
thronged, the Worship of God set up in prayerless Families, and great Numbers
continually added to the flourishing Churches.

What a Joy is there, even as the Joy of Harvest, and as Men rejoice when they
divide the Spoil! What an happy Effusion of the Holy Spirit! And O! how should
this excite us, not only to glorify God for his Goodness among them, but also
to desire and pray that the same Grace may likewise be showed to us, the same
Spirit poured out upon us and ours, in the same glorious Measures. And how
should their Examples stir us up to a wise and happy Imitation! For the Fear of
the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, and a good Understanding have all they
that do his Commandments. Thus he.

If the late Earthquake has the same Effect upon us and our Land, it will
eventually prove an inestimable Blessing, as it will turn away the Anger of the
Lord, and prevent further Tokens of his Displeasure.

Let us all then take the Alarm, and next to reforming ourselves, let us exert
ourselves in our respective Capacities, for the Suppression of Vice and
Immorality, and for the Encouragement of Virtue and Religion.

Thus, let those who are clothed with Authority, be persuaded to use it for the
Suppression of Vice and Immorality, and for the Encouragement of Virtue and
good Order among us. As you are the Ministers of God, so it is for the Good of
the People; and what greater Good can you do, than to punish Vice and
Immorality, which are a Reproach to a People, and involves them in the forest
Calamities.

Says the present Bishop of London, in a Letter about five Years ago upon a
like Occasion, I should be wanting in the Duty I owe to the Highest as well as
the Lowest, should I omit on this Occasion to remind those who are entrusted by
their Country with Government, how much the Welfare of the People depends upon
the faithful Execution of the Law. I pretend not to accuse them particularly of
Neglect, a general Neglect of this Kind, is one of the worst Symptoms of the
Times. Surely it is high Time to awake, and to let People once more know, what
seems to be almost forgotten, that Laws were made for the Punishment of
Wickedness and Vice, and for the Maintenance of true Religion.

Government is a great Trust, and the Powers of it are not intended merely to
do Honor to those who have them, but must be used for the Good of the
Community -- If a Regard for the Public is not a Motive strong enough in this
Case, let every Magistrate consider that there is another of infinite
Importance to himself; for if all Power be the Ordinance of God, he will
undoubtedly demand an Account of the Exercise of it. And who is he that has so
little to answer for upon his own Account, as willingly to subject himself to
be answerable for the Sins of others, which either by his Encouragement, or his
Connivance, he makes his own. Thus he

And not only should Rulers, by a faithful Discharge of the Trusts reposed in
them, be a Terror to evil Doers, but by their Examples, they should be a Praise
and Encouragement to them that do well. If Rulers are not Examples of Virtue,
it can never be expected that they will discourage Vice. With what Face can he
punish Vice, who is a Man of known Immorality, and of a most infamous and
abandoned Character? Rulers are called Gods, and therefore should endeavor to
imitate the blessed God in his moral Perfections. An unholy God is a
Contradiction in Terms: And how incongruous would it be, to see those who are
God's by Vicegerency and Deputation, live like Devils in the Indulgence of
their Lusts.

And thus also, let Parents and Heads of Families exert themselves in their
proper Places, and endeavor by their Example and Instruction, to recommend
Religion and Virtue to those under their Care. Great are the Obligations you
are under hereunto, and great are the Expectations of God, and his People from
you. If Youth are corrupted in their Religion and Morals, before they come into
the World, there is but little Hopes that ever the World will reform them.

Reformation must begin in private Families. The Law and the Magistrate can
only punish your Children when they become wicked, but it is you that must make
them good, by proper Instruction and proper Government.

The Judgments of God will eventually prove our richest Mercies, if they are
the Means of our Reformation and Amendment; for then Glory will dwell in our
Land, and God, even our own God, will delight to bless us.

9. Let what we have heard, lead our Thoughts to that terrible Day of the Lord,
which will come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall pass
away with a great Noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, and the
World, and all Things in it, shall be burnt up. Our blessed Savior has given
us frequent Warnings of that Day, and tells us, That when we hear of Wars, and
Rumors of Wars, and of Earthquakes, that these Things are but the Beginning of
Sorrows.

And now, Brethren, seeing that all these Things shall be dissolved, what
Manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness.
Looking for and hastening unto the Day of the Coming of God; wherein the
Heavens being on Fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent Heat -- Seeing that ye look for such Things, be diligent, that ye may
be found of him in Peace, without Spot, and blameless, AMEN.


