A Second LETTER To a FRIEND; Giving a more particular NARRATIVE of the Defeat
OF THE French Army at Lake-George, By the New England Troops, than has yet been
published: Representing also the vast Importance of this Conquest to the
American-British-Colonies. To which is added, Such an Account of what the
New England Governments have done to carry into Effect their Design against
Crown-Point, as will show the Necessity of their being helped by Great Britain,
in Point of Money.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by Edes and Gill, at their Printing-Office,
next to the Prison in Queen Street, M,DCC,LV.

A Second LETTER to a Friend, relating to the Defeat of the French and Indians
at Lake-George.
SIR,
IN my letter to you, relating to the Ohio-Defeat, I took a brief Notice of our
Crown-point expedition; discovering some uneasiness at its having been so long
delayed. I am now well pleased with that delay; as it has given occasion to the
greatest Action, in its kind, that ever happened in North America. Never was
such a battle fought here before! -- Never had we opportunity before of gaining
so glorious a conquest over so great an army! -- I gave it also as my opinion,
that the New England troops, by reason of this delay, would have the whole
power of Canada to contend with; in which I happened to make a right judgment.
For, the day you published my letter, an express arrived from General Johnson,
advising, that the spies he had sent out were returned, and bro't him
intelligence, that all Canada was in motion, the roads filled with wagons,
transporting all manner of stores to Crown-Point, and numbers of men
continually going there to reinforce Fort-Frederick Upon which the General went
on to say, that a large reinforcement was, in this situation of affairs,
absolutely necessary on our side; recommending it to the several New England
colonies "to be as speedy in making it as might be;" and assuring them, that,
in the mean time, instead of being idle, he would employ his men in building a
Fort at the entrance upon the carrying-place toward Lake George, or, as the
French call it, Lake Sacrament, and after that, clear a road through the
carrying-place to the head of the Lake, and build another fort at that
important pass, by which time he hoped the reinforcements would be raised and
sent, enabling him to proceed on his design. It was while our General was at
this pass, and before he had built the second fort, or received any
reinforcements, that he was attacked by the French and Indians.

You have probably seen his Letter to the Governors of the several Colonies
concerned in the Crown-point expedition; giving an account of his engagement
with, and success against, the enemy: For it was printed the very day it came
to hand, that every one might be acquainted with its contents. And if you have
seen this letter, you must be pleased with it, and conceive an high opinion of
the General's merit. Perhaps, the best bred regular could not have disposed
matters, under like circumstances, with greater wisdom. -- And the vein of
modesty that runs through his whole narrative cannot but recommend him to all who
are capable of discernment. -- But as his letter was wrote so soon after the
action, it was impossible the account of things should be particular enough to
satisfy the curiously inquisitive.

I shall therefore give you a summary Abstract of what we have more lately
received, that may be depended on for fact; from whence you will easily be let
into a clear and just Idea of this whole Matter. And, as you will probably
expect it from me, I shall hereupon add a few tho'ts tending to set the
importance of this conquest in a proper light before you; not forgetting,
before I finish, to acquaint you with the reinforcements the New England
colonies have raised and sent to guard against a disappointment as to the
present expedition: Upon which you will be at no loss to determine, that the
burden laid upon the New England colonies is, in point of charge, far beyond
what they are able to bear, if Great Britain does not interpose for our help.

I have been at the pains to consider and compare a number of letters, which
have been sent from the army, especially from the officers in it, and those
among them, whose Character I am acquainted with; I have likewise had personal
conversation with a Gentleman of distinction, who, a full week after the action
was over, was sent an express by the General to this town; and with another
also who came away about the same time: And the sum of what I have collected, I
shall relate to you under three divisions, answerable to the three engagements
our men had with the enemy.

On the 7th of this instant, a number of Mohawks, who had been out as scouts,
returned, and informed the General, that they had found three large roads from
the south-bay, which they were satisfied could not be made but by the marching
of so many considerable bodies of men, who were probably gone to attack our
fort at the carrying-place. The General, upon this, dispatched two expresses
Mr. Adams, the first express was killed by the enemy in going to the fort; and
General Johnson's letter sent by him to Col. Blanchard was found in the Aid de
Camp's Pocket.
that evening to Col. Blanchard, the commanding officer there, the latter of
which returned about 12 o'clock with this account, "that they had both heard
and seen the enemy, and that they were about four miles from the fort." A
council of war having been called the next morning, the result was, that a 1000
men should be detached from the army under the command of Col. Williams, with
200 Indians under the command of Hendrick the Mohawk sachem, and sent to annoy
the enemy, whether at the sort, or in their retreat from it, either as
victorious, or defeated. This was accordingly done, without any loss of time;
and it made way for, what I call, the first engagement. For this detachment had
not marched above 2 miles and an before they unexpectedly found themselves
within reach of the enemy. They were first discovered by an advanced Party of
Indians, with Hendrick at their head; who immediately fired upon them. This
gave the alarm to Col. Williams, who endeavored with a number of men to secure
a rocky eminence hard by, from whence, as from a kind of castle, he might annoy
the enemy. But, as they had intelligence of his march, by a scout they had sent
out, they had secured it before, lay there in ambuscade, and upon his approach
within sure reach of their guns, they rose up, fired, and killed him, and many
more, dead on the spot. By this time the fight became very fierce on both
sides. The advanced party of Indians behaved with the utmost intrepidity; but
perceiving they should be surrounded, and destroyed, they gave way; and as they
passed by our men, they told them of their danger, and advised to a retreat.
They went on notwithstanding, fighting with undaunted courage and resolution;
but finding themselves overpowered with numbers, and almost encircled, they
quitted the ground, firing as they gave back with constancy and fury. Five or
six Hundred of them retreated with such dexterity, and vigorous exertment, that
the return of this detachment to the camp was hereby rendered, in a manner,
safe and easy. The French General owned, that we killed more of his men in this
fight, than we lost of our own. And my informer assures me, this acknowledgment
of his was agreeable to the truth of fact. For he saw himself, the next day,
and counted, upwards of 140 dead bodies in the place where the fight first
began; though he could not tell the precise number that were French, because they
had been stripped by the Indians, and lay naked. And besides this heap, as it
were, of dead bodies, he tells me, they were scattered more or less the whole
way between the place where the engagement began, and the Camp. He further gave
me to understand, that he took out his watch, when the fire was first heard at
the camp; that he penciled the time; that it was precisely 11 o'clock wanting 5
minutes; and that the retreat was not finished till after 12: So that this
retreat, and the fight previous to it, continued one hour and 35 minutes; from
whence it appears, that our men were not over hasty in getting out of the way
of danger: For they were distant from the camp no more than 2 miles and an.
General Johnson, judging of the distance by the fire, says, it was 3 or 4
miles; but my informer assures me, he was present with the surveyer, when the
distance between the fort at the carrying-place, and camp, was accurately
measured with a chain; that it was 13 miles; and that the distance of the place
where this fight began, from the camp, was no more than 2 miles and an at
farthest.
To me it seems very wonderful, considering the superiority of the enemy in
number, and their coming upon our men unawares, that they were not entirely
routed.

Some have found fault with this detachment; supposing that they should rather
have been cut to pieces, than have turned their backs upon the enemy. But they
herein talk wildly. A good retreat is the next glory to a victory. When troops
are overpowered with numbers, and unawares too, the truest courage is
discovered in devising and executing the best methods to come off with as
little loss as may be. Had our men been upon equal terms with the enemy, I
should have though it they had acted unworthy of the Name of New England men, if
they had given way upon any consideration whatever. But they had now to
contend, not only with a large body of regular veterans, but with irregular
troops more numerous than themselves. And, under these circumstances, what
would bravery, conducted by wisdom, direct to, but to make as good a retreat as
they could. They might have stood, it is true, till they had all been killed;
but, in that case, they would have justly merited the character of madmen. It Is
probable, I own, this retreat (at least in regard of a number) might be
attended with surprise, disorder and confusion: And it must otherwise have been
miraculous; as many of our young Men were here, who never before heard a gun
fired in anger. Besides, there was not so much as one regular in our whole
army, either among the officers, or private men. -- And further, they were now
engaged, not with regulars only, but with Canadians and Indians, the manner of
whose fighting is irregular and confused. -- The wonder to me is, not that they
retreated, or that numbers of them might be disordered in their retreat; but
that they should be able, upon the whole, to make so good a retreat; annoying
the enemy all the while they were retreating, and yet managing their retreat so
as to come off with comparatively so small a loss. Col. Williams, Major Ashley,
Capt. Ingersol, Capt. Porter, Capt. Ferral, Capt. Stoddert, Capt. McGin, Capt.
Stevens, Lieuts. Burt and Pumroy, fell in this engagement, with a considerable
number of our private men. Hendrick, the noted Mohawk Sachem, fell likewise,
with a number of Indians.

It may properly eno' be observed here; -- when the Mohawks found their great
Sachem dead and scalped, they were exceedingly enraged; surrounding the tent
were the French General lay, and insisting that he should be delivered into
their hands, that they might scalp him also. It was with great difficulty he
was saved from falling a sacrifice to their fury. Our officers were obliged to
remove him from tent to tent to keep him concealed from them, and finally found
it necessary, notwithstanding the badness of his wounds, to transport him
privately to Albany; where he now is in a dangerous condition, if on this side
the grave. The French han't behaved thus humanly and kindly toward English
Prisoners. When they hear of this and other civilities toward their General,
and the other captives with him, it will, I hope, make them ashamed of their
past conduct, and teach them to treat our people in a more human way, should
any fall into their and the Indian's hands, while united in any action.

It was not long after the return of this detachment to the Camp, before the
enemy appeared in sight, and found our men in readiness to give them a warm
reception. This was owing to the notice they had of their approaching toward
them, and the gradual manner of it, occasioned by the above fight and retreat.
It might have been of dangerous consequence, had they suddenly made an attack
upon our camp; but as we had this warning, opportunity was happily given us to
throw up a breast-work of trees (as General Johnson calls it); to plant a
number of cannon in suitable places about it; to take possession of some
eminences on our left flank, under the guard of a field-piece advantageously
situated; to line our breastwork throughout with men; and, in short, to put
things in the best disposition, time and circumstances would permit, to defend
ourselves, and destroy the enemy. And now came on the second Battle, perhaps,
the most furious and resolute, on both sides, that ever was fought in
North America. It opened between 11 and 12 o'clock (keeping to the General's
account) with the fire of the French regulars; but in a few minutes, the fire
became general, and nothing was heard but the noise of guns. This part of the
attack was mostly made upon our left wing, bearing toward the center; and it
was principally sustained by the Connecticut troops, who behaved with great
activity and valor. When the French found, upon a long and obstinate trial,
that they must be destroyed if they continued here, they moved to the right of
our camp, where the Massachusetts regiments were posted; and upon this attack
also they maintained a brisk and resolute fire for a long time, but were so
weakened by the warm and dextrous opposition they met with, that their fire
gradually grew feeble, and with observable intermissions: Upon which our brave
men, together with the Indians, jumpt over the breast-work, resolutely fell
upon them hatchet in hand, drove them off the ground, pursued after them, slew
a great many, and took about 30 prisoners, among whom was Baron de Dieskau, the
General of all the troops lately come to Canada from France.

This Engagement, with the pursuit, lasted about 7 hours. Our loss was less
now, than in the former fight; but the loss on the side of the French was
greater: According to the best accounts we killed, in this battle, 3 or 4
hundred of their men, officers and private soldiers.

When General Johnson's letter first came to town, we were ready to think, the
French must have lost at least a thousand men; as the battle was of such long
continuance, and we had the advantage of Cannon, and a Breast-work of trees to
defend ourselves. Our Idea also of the bravery of the French was, by reason of
this advantage, very much enlarged; and it seemed nothing extraordinary that
our army, under the above circumstances, should get the better of them. But,
from Major Hoar, who came to this Government last week upon an Errand from the
army, is one of its officers, and was excellently active in the late fight; as
also from another Gentleman who came since, we were led to conceive more justly
of the matter. Our wonder now was, not that a 1000 were not killed, but that so
many as 3 or 400 should be slain in this battle. For their account is, "that
the battle was fought upon a plain, covered with pitch-pine trees, of various
sizes, some smaller, some greater, as is common in such plains, in their
natural state of wildness, and a thick under-growth of shrubs, intermixed with
brakes, as high as a man's waste; that no part of this plain was cleared,
except only the road we had made from the fort at the Carrying-place to the
Camp; that the French regulars marched in this road, and began the fight drawn
up in order; that they kept their order but a small space of time, not long
enough to receive a second discharge from our Cannon; and that the battle was
now carried on in the Indian way by the whole French army, regulars as well
irregulars, some fighting behind trees, and stumps, and others squatting so as
to be defended by the under-growth of shrubs and brakes." It Is easy, upon this
Representation of the Matter, to see, that the enemy were upon equal terms with
us, though we had a kind of breast-work; nay, as it was nothing more [so I am
informed by one that was present when it was made] than bodies of trees laid
singly upon the ground, round the Camp, and in many places so as not to touch
one another, I am ready to think, they had the advantage of us; especially as
the under-growth near the Camp had before been cut down for the convenience of
the army. And from hence also it will not appear strange, if our Cannon [three
or four of which were the only ones that could be used, and these not more than
3 or 4 rounds, it being to little purpose to fire them] did not do them the
damage, we, upon the first hearing of the story, might be apt to imagine. The
plain truth is, after the regulars became irregulars in the manner of their
fighting, there was no great slaughter made, either by our Cannon, or random
Musquetry. The chief execution was now done, partly by our men's watching for
opportunities to fire, when they could catch any of the French or Indians
within full view; for they are most of them so dextrous in the use of the Gun,
as to be pretty sure of taking a man down within an hundred yards distance: And
partly, by their rushing upon them, toward the close of the battle, and
pursuing them, not only with their Guns, but hatchets also. Perhaps the Hatchet
(a weapon our men were all armed with) is, in our way of fighting, a more fatal
instrument, than even the broad Sword, or Bayonet, if managed with skill. The
Indians will readily fasten it in a man's skull, at more than a rod's distance.
Many of our people are equally dextrous in the throw of it; and all our men
know its use so well, that it is certain death to a man to be within fair reach
of their aim, when stretched forth to strike with it.


Our men, after they had entered on action, were least fearful of any ill
consequence from the regulars; and they suffered least from them: Though none
among the enemy suffered so much from us as these regulars, through their
unacquaintedness with the American method of fighting. Few of them,
comparatively, whether officers, or private men, are though it to have escaped with
their lives. How else can it be accounted for, that the General should be taken
alone? So I was particularly informed he was by Major Hoar, whose account of
this fact is confirmed by several letters from the army, particularly by one
from General Lyman. It Is scarce credible, that the chief commanding officer, and
one of such importance to the French interest, should be left by all his
regulars, both officers and common soldiers, and in a wounded condition too, if
they were generally alive. One would think, they must, for shame, have kept
with him at all hazards. Thus much, I think must be allowed to be certain;
either that they were generally slain, or struck with such a panic, upon being
pursued by our men, as to be out of the possession of themselves.

General Johnson and Major Nichols were wounded in this engagement; and they
only among the field-officers. The General received a Ball in his thigh; but he
can now walk about, and we hope will be able to proceed in person in further
prosecution of our design, when the reinforcements are arrived. Col. Titcomb
was the only officer, at least above a Captain, that fell in this second
battle. He was shot dead on the spot. And his fall is the more to be regretted,
as he was well experienced in the method of battering forts. He had a principal
hand in the erection of all the batteries at Louisbourg, and commanded one at
that siege, which was known by his name, and was eminently galling to the
enemy. He went then, and now also, chiefly for the public benefit; and his
name ought to be transmitted to posterity with honor.

One thing more may be worthy of notice with reference to this battle; and that
is, that among the 2 or 300 arms that have already been bro't into the Camp, a
number appear to have been those that were taken from us at the Ohio-defeat:
From whence it is obvious to collect, that some of the Indians, or Canadians,
or both, that came off conquerors at the Monongahela, were slain at
Lake-George. -- This was the fate particularly of Monsieur St. Piere, whose
death is perhaps the greatest loss the French could have met with, at this day;
as he was the chief commander of the Indians, and had most influence to engage
them in any design against the English.

The third Engagement, as I may properly call it, was occasioned thus. -- Col.
Blanchard, the chief officer at the Carrying-place, not knowing but they might
need help at the Camp, detached to their assistance between 2 and 300 men,
mostly New Hampshire, some Yorkers, under the command of Capt. McGinnis.
Between 4 and 5 o'clock they reached the place were Col. Williams had been
attacked in the morning, and there they found about 500 of the enemy (chiefly
Indians), who had fled from the former battle, and were come hither to refresh
themselves, scalp our dead, take their packs, and get off. Our men fell upon
them with the greatest fury, made prisoners of some, killed a great many, and
entirely routed them; driving them off the ground, and recovering more of their
packs than they could carry with them to the Camp. This engagement was begun
near the place, where the French had encamped the night before, and where they
had left their baggage. Accordingly being thus driven off, our people the next
day, bro't in 4 or 5 wagon loads of Ammunition, Provisions, Blankets, etc. And
they since find, that their flight was so hasty, and so much in a fright, that,
as they fled, they dropped their blankets, bread, and even some of the scalps of
our men.
It can scarce be accounted for, that they should be able to accomplish all
this, upon any other supposition than that of the enemy's being dispirited with
the dressing they had received a little before, and multiplying, in their
fright, the numbers with which they were now beset. We lost but a few men in
this fight. General Johnson says, two were killed, eleven wounded, and five
missing. Among the wounded is Captain McGinnis, who behaved with prudence and
valor. He is since dead of his wounds. The slaughter of the enemy was very
considerable. The account we have received is, that we slew near an hundred of
them: Thus ended the memorable 8th day of this instant September.

Our loss, upon the whole, amounts to 187 English; 126 killed, and 61 missing:
Though, of the missing, 20 are returned, and probably more by this time. I cannot
learn, that the Indians lost more than from 15 to 20. The wounded are 94
English, and about 10 or 12 Indians. The Massachusetts-regiments are the
greatest sufferers, as they were most in action. Two of their 3 colonels were
killed, and one of their majors [another was wounded], besides several of their
Captains and Lieutenants; and among them, are the greater part of the private
men that were slain. The loss on the enemy's side was much greater than on
our's. We know not the number of their wounded; but between five and six
hundred were probably slain in all the engagements, and it may be yet more; for
our people are daily finding dead bodies. The account from New York, and Albany
is 700: But the precise number of the slain will never be known. The Indians,
we are all sensible, are strangely sollicitous to hide their dead, and will run
all hazards to this end. And they have doubtless concealed numbers of their
killed men. We are satisfied of this, not only from their known temper and
practice, but from our having found at least 40 biers, [poles with cross-sticks
of wood, hastily put together] besmeared with blood, upon which, it is
supposed, they carried off numbers of their slain. Our people have also found
some of their concealed dead, particularly 4 or 5 Indians in a sunk piece of
land.

I may properly take notice here of, what I esteem, an excess of civility in
our people toward the French. -- They sent out parties, as soon as they could
with convenience, not only to bury their dead, but to bury as many of them as
might be without the knowledge of the Indians, to prevent their being scalped.
This I call an excess of civility, not indeed considered in itself simply, but
comparing it with the conduct of the French toward us. They took no care to
save any of our men, who fell at the southward, this summer, from being
scalped; but suffered them all, officers as well as common soldiers, to have
this indignity offered to them by the Indians: And moreover, they left their
dead bodies upon the field of battle, as we have been well assured, to putrify
and rot there, unless they were devoured by the wolves and crows, and other
beasts and birds of prey. Considering this inhuman conduct of the French, I
cannot but think, we exceeded in our civilities to the dead at Lake-George. For
we have learnt by long experience, that unless we treat them as they treat us,
we may expect ill usage at their hands.

As to the Number of the French and Indians engaged in this battle, it remains
still uncertain. In the New York News-paper, that came to Town last post, they
are said to have been 3376. The account stands thus. Regulars, 1126. Militia,
1200 formed in 12 companies, with 20 regulars in each company. Indian Traders,
300. Militia officers volunteers, 30. Cadets, about 20. Indians 700. Total,
3376. It Is evident, I believe, from General Dieskau's papers, that he bro't
this number with him from Canada, thus particularly ascertained: But whether he
left any at Crown-point, or Ticonderogo, and if any, how many, cannot perhaps
be reduced to a certainty. Thus much we may venture to say, as he knew our
force, it is highly probable, he came with one that was superior. I cannot
therefore suppose, he had less than 2000 Canadians and Indians, besides 5 or
600 regulars at least. We had about 2100 New England men, and between 2 and 300
Indians. The rest of our men were partly confined by sickness, but mostly left
at the Carrying-place to take care of the fort there.

Having thus given you as particular an account, as you can reasonably expect,
at present, of this victory over the French and Indians, I cannot, in
consistency with the regard I have for my Country, restrain my self from going
on to represent, in a few words, the IMPORTANCE of it to the British Interest.

You will, at once, be sensible of its great Importance, if you only turn the
tables in your mind, and suppose the French had been victors, instead of our
army.

Some, by giving a loose to their imaginations, have strangely heightened our
melancholy condition, in this view of the matter. They have, in their fancies,
blocked up all communication with our Troops at Lake-Ontario, and delivered our
Governor, who is now there, a prey into French hands; -- they have looked upon
Albany as besieged, and taken; -- yea, they have transported the enemy to
New York, and entertained fearful apprehensions respecting the fate even of
that city. -- But these are vain imaginations, the imagery of mere fancy; and
must appear so to all, who will only call to mind, what was done at Albany,
Connecticut, and the western parts of this Government, when it was known, that
our army was attacked, but unknown what would be the issue. We have been well
assured, they were beating to arms, and would have been upon the enemy, with
trible their number, in a fortnight's time, had not tidings of our being
conquerors rendered their immediate progress needless.

But though these fancied consequences would not have taken place, had the
French come off victorious: yet others, and very mischievous ones too, must
have followed. Our fort at the Carrying-place would certainly have fallen into
their hands, and together therewith all the artillery, ammunition, and stores,
which had not been taken by them at the Camp; -- awful numbers of our men must
have been slain, and captivated; and, in a word, our whole army routed, and an
entire end put to our design against Crown-point, at least for this year: --
All which has been happily prevented, by its being ordered in providence, that
the victory should fall on our side.

The positive advantages of this conquest are also very signal, and may be
(...) worthy of particular notice.

Hereby the disgrace that was reflected on the British arms, on the banks of
the Monongahela, is wholly wiped away. Were 300 of the English slain there? A
much greater number of French and Indians (5 or 600) were slain here. -- Were
the English regulars struck with a panic, when attacked there by French and
Indian irregulars? The French Regulars, and veterans also, were seized with an
equal fright here, when pursued by New England Irregulars: Otherwise they would
not have fled so universally, and in such hurry, as to leave their first
officer alone, not having a single man to help him. -- Was the British General
mortally wounded in that engagement? So was the French General in this: (he is
supposed to be dead of his wounds, before this time) Only the advantage lies on
our side; for our General was carried off by his own men, whereas the French
General was left to fall a prisoner into his enemies hands.

Hereby an happy turn has been given to the spirits of our men on the one hand;
and an unhappy one to the enemy's on the other. Our people, to an observing
eye, were plainly under a depressure, occasioned by the horrid slaughter at the
southward, the like whereto had never before been seen, or heard of, in the
Country; while, on the other hand, the French and Indians were flusht with the
victory they had obtained, and disposed therefrom to undertake any thing,
imagining there would be no standing before them: But, by what was done at Lake
George, this state of mind has luckily been inverted. We are now raised in our
spirits, they sunk in their's: -- We go on, in our design, animated with new
life and vigor; they oppose us discouraged and intimidated: -- We act against
them as conquerors; they against us as having been fairly beat from the field
of battle, and quite routed.

In fine, hereby the strength of the enemy has been greatly weakened. They have
lost their General, an experienced warrior, who was purposely sent from France
to be at the head of their military affairs; and they have lost also, together
with him, most of their officers of distinction and worth, and a great number
of their common soldiers. It Is true, 2 or 3 of our chief officers, and 10 or 12
inferior ones, all men of bravery, were slain in the same field of battle, as
well as a considerable number of our private men: But the loss on their side,
with respect to officers as well as common soldiers, is far greater than on
our's. Their prisoners say, their army is ruined. And, perhaps, after a
deduction of their dead, their wounded, their captivated, their deserters,
their lost and perished in the woods, their number (fitted for action) will not
be more than half what it was, when they came forth against us. This is
certainly a great advantage to us, and an equal disadvantage to them. They will
doubtless, be reinforced from Canada; but so will our army from New England:
And Canada, we know, cannot supply such numbers of men, as it is in the power of
New England to do. And, by reason of this effort of the French, in which they
were entirely disappointed, we are better able to judge, what reinforcements
may be necessary, and are more warmly spirited to raise and send them, with the
quickest dispatch.

And this minds me of my promise, not to forget to give you such an account of
these reinforcements, as may be sufficient to open to you the absolute
necessity of a large remittance from Great Britain. And to this end, I need not
be particular. It might be imprudent, under present circumstances, to be so:
Though I may tell you, the General-Assembly of this province, who are now
sitting, have, this week, acted the part of wise and kind fathers to this
people, in sending home a representation of what has been done, with reference
to this affair; and I cannot but hope, and believe, it will procure a removal
of that heavy weight of charge that is now lying on us, and must sink us into
ruin, if we don't receive support from out mother country.

I shall therefore only say in general, that the reinforcements already gone,
and now going, to our army, will make it a very formidable one, I mean, for
this part of the world; and the charge, arising from the pay, and subsistence,
[almost doubled in its cost, by the difficulty of transportation] of such a
body of men, must appear, to all who will allow themselves to think, to be far
beyond the utmost ability of a few poor, infant, colonies; as the New England
ones certainly are. They are all engaged in the present expedition; they will
all therefore need assistance. Though this is emphatically true of the
Massachusetts-Province: Nor can it be denied, that they have the first and best
claim [I would not say an exclusive one] to the pity and help of Great Britain.
They are the Principals in the enterprise on foot, and bear the greatest part
in it. But this is not all: The better half of each of the Regiments raised,
this spring, upon the establishment, under Major General Shirley, and Major
General Pepperrell, were inhabitants of the Massachusetts Bay; and the other
two regiments, which are gone to Nova Scotia, were almost wholly made up of men
of the same Province. It Is true, these regiments are in the pay of the crown:
But still, the benefit of the labor of so many men, in their proper business,
is lost to the Province; and further, the proportion of the tax that would have
fallen to their share, must now be taken from them, and fastened upon the other
members of the Government; which, you are sensible, will greatly increase their
burden. Besides, no longer ago than last year we were at the expense of
erecting a fort on the banks of Kennebeck-River, under the cover of 8 or 900
men raised for the purpose, principally with a view to secure our Sovereign's
rights in those parts; the expense of which fort, in its erection, and
maintenance to this day, has amounted to Two Hundred Thousand Pounds, our
money, at the lowest computation. Nor is this all yet: As we are at war, not
only with the Indians near Canada, but with all the tribes of eastern Indians,
(the Penobscots excepted, against whom also we are upon the point of
proclaiming war,) we are obliged to keep a considerable number of our men
constantly scouring the woods, from east to west, in a line of 2 or 300 miles,
to defend our out-settlements against their depredations. -- In short, one
sixth part of the effective men in the Province are, at this day, in military
service; and more than double the number in our own pay, than when we went
against Cape-Breton: And if the burden of that expedition was justly though it too
heavy for us, much more is this the truth of the case at present. -- We stand
indeed a sad chance of being an undone people, if we are not pitied, and
relieved from the other side of the water. -- 'Twill otherwise be certainly
impossible for us to engage in any enterprise the next year. -- We shall have
neither a heart-disposing us, nor money enabling us, thereto: Whereas, if we
are reimbursed this charge, and properly assured, that any other attempts shall
be carried on at the expense of the Crown, it will give a spring to our vigor,
and we shall join heart and hand in exerting our whole power to promote the
service of our King in scourging his and our enemies.

And if we are thus supplied with money, let the southern colonies sleep on;
let New York government in particular, ingloriously sit still, and do nothing
Though New York supplied only 800 men upon the present expedition (300 of which
they did not raise in their own government, being unwilling to lose so much of
the labor of their people): yet when a large reinforcement was found
necessary, even a greater number of men than was at first sent, they chose to
lay upon their oars, not troubling themselves to raise a single man: So that
the whole reinforcement of our army has been from the New England colonies,
who, to their honor be it spoken, have exerted themselves beyond what could
have been expected. It Is plain, from the spirit and conduct, our southern
brethren have discovered, that if any thing is done to purpose against the
French, it must be done by New England. And shall they not be assisted, in
point of money, from Great Britain? -- Can it, in the name of reason, be though it
equal, that these colonies should be diminished and impoverished, while the
growth of the southern ones, in number and riches, is hereby promoted? -- From
the character we have of Governor Hardy, and the spirit he has already
discovered, we hope New York, under his administration, will act more like
friends to the common British interest.
, while the New England Governments are raising and sending large
reinforcements in defense, even of those territories that are frontiers to
them, and in the defense of which they especially should lay themselves out to
the utmost: I say, if we of the Massachusetts-Province, together with the other
New England colonies, are properly encouraged and strengthened with money from
home, we shall nothing regard the strange conduct of the southern Governments,
but cheerfully and resolutely undertake any enterprise for the common good; and
doubt not, but we shall soon be able, without any assistance from them, under
the smiles of providence, to bring down the pride of the American French, and
make them glad to be at peace with us upon any terms.

Wishing soon to hear good tidings from our brethren, who, by this time, we
would hope, are gone from Lake-George, properly reinforced, in further
prosecution of their design, I am, with great Respect,

Your affectionate Friend, and humble Servant. T. W.
BOSTON, September 29 th 1755. P. S. The Indians have all left our Camp; though
not through disgust, but in compliance with a custom they have of going home
after a battle, to rejoice and mourn, as there is occasion for both, or either.
They passed through Albany with many scores of scalps, mostly French, fastened on
poles, and carried along in solemn triumph. They seemed highly pleased also
with the laced (...) and clothes, the guns, the watches, the pocket-money, and
other plunder, our people were willing to let them have for their
encouragement; and it very much added to their pleasure to bear, that Governor
Hardy had bro't a noble present for them from his Britannick Majesty. Their
return is expected in about a fortnight, with a much greater number from their
several tribes, when Governor Hardy will, WITHOUT FRAUD, in person, in the name
of his royal Master, deliver the present to them: Upon which they will rejoin
our army. It is said, and I believe with truth, that they design to send to all
the tribes of Indians in subjection to, and alliance with them, to sharpen
their arrows, and come forth to revenge the death of their Sachem. -- The fall
of this Indian Chief is a great loss to us, as well as them. For he was a fast
friend to the English, as an inveterate hater of the French; having too much
understanding not to see through their designs, which he was convinced would
finally end, if accomplished, in the reduction of the Indians, to a state of
slavery. It was very much owing to his influence, that the Six-Nations,
notwithstanding the abuses they have suffered from some Yorkers, have been so
firmly attached to our interest -- Perhaps, there is not left, among all the
Indians on the continent, a man equal to him in policy; and he had the strength
and courage of a Lion.

T. W.




