A REMONSTRANCE; BY David Marin Ben Jesse, PASTOR At AQUENONKA.

Virtus et in Host laudatur. Printed in the Year, MDCCLV.

A REMONSTRANCE.
I Think it is evident, beyond all Reason of Controversy, that no Order, Office
or Profession among Mankind, has been treated more roughly, and with more
satyr and Sarcasm, by the Independent Reflector, in his Weekly Essays, than
the Clergy; yet I, who am a Clergyman, and besides, one that openly accepted
the Reflector's Challenge, not from a Spirit of Litigiousness and Contention,
but to take away the Reproach from the Armies of Israel, do, notwithstanding,
condole the Reflector's Fate; nor could I have imagined his Catastrophe would
have been such, as the Event has ascertained; I thought an Author of so
masterly a Pen, who besides is so zealous an Advocate for Liberty, would have
met with more Applause, and better Encouragement, than that his own Printer
should find it his Interest to cast him off. For my Part, I had my own Reasons,
for not making any Encomiums upon his Performances, though at the same Time I
could not help admiring them, which, I think, in Point of masterly Writing,
have not hitherto been equalled by any in the Province, if in the Land: I do
therefore, sincerely acknowledge both the Delight and the Improvement I have
received by them, and heartily wish he may again resume his Theme, where he
broke it off. I have heretofore confessed, that I thought him not so
independent in his secular Animadversions, as in his religious Rhapsodies, and
am of Opinion, it is Pity, the Public should be deprived of his Reflections,
notwithstanding some of them prove very unwarrantable in Point of real
Religion: I say, real Religion; for as to the Arminion and Latitudinarian
Scheme, it is so notoriously countenanced and preached up, even by some of the
Clergy in this Land, that the Independent Reflector cannot possibly say worse;
nor have I ever discovered any Thing in him, more diametrically contrary to the
Tenor of holy Scripture, and more directly repugnant to the Articles of the
Church of England, than I have since found in the Writings of some Clergymen in
our Parts of the World; wherefore, as the Fear of his broaching false Doctrine
and Heresy, was the chief Reason, which constrained me to attack the Reflector,
and as he has now been silenced almost a Year, I could wish he would begin
again: I remember to have heard when I was in Holland, that when a Minister of
our Church, publicly teaches any erroneous Doctrine, the Classis to which he
belongs, o^ the Synod, behave toward him in this Manner: They first silence
him, for the Space of six Weeks, then permit him to preach again; if he desist
from his Error, all is well; but if he still persist therein, he is silenced
for a longer Time; and at length, after much Admonition, in vain, is deposed,
when he is judged quite incorrigible. Ain't it then too hard, that the
Reflector should be at once silenced and deposed for ever? It Is true, he is no
Clergyman; what then? We know very well, the old English Law, relating the
Benefit of the Clergy, was of such vast Circumference, that it included all
those who could read Latin; Legit ut Clericus, said they; and it was enough:
And I dare say of the Reflector, Scribit ut Clericus, which I am sure is more;
besides, who knows, but the Reflector may have seen his Errors, and may have
heartily repented of them? Or if he has not as yet, who knows but he may in
Time to come? Indeed, when I consider, what a Blessing he might be to this
Land, if he was really converted and become a new Creature of God, my Soul is
inspired with Tenderness toward him; and methinks, I see already by
Anticipation, him throwing away that arrogant and opprobrious Title of
Independent; (for the Lord knows, we are all poor dependent Creatures, did we
but know it too!) contenting himself with commencing Reflector only, and
besides his Reflections on secular Affairs, pleading the Necessity of
Regeneration, Conversion and Holiness of Life, in order to obtain eternal
Salvation. Oh! if this should happen, methinks we would be blessed with a
Watts, a Doddridge, or a Hervey in our Land; nay, so sanguine are my Hopes,
that I even flatter myself, he would yet perhaps, enter into Holy Orders, and
combat the Empire of Chaos, and ancient Night, from the Pulpit. I do then
heartily wish, he may begin again, to set about his Reflections, after this
Year's Meditation and Pause; but with this Proviso, that the Press be free and
open to all those who think they discover any Errors and Heresies in his
Lucubrations, and that the Clergy especially, who are the Watchmen on the Walls
of Jerusalem, keep a good Look-out, and have a watchful Eye over him.

And while I am on this Head, I cannot forbear putting my Reverend Brethren, in
mind of their Duty, to watch over one another also. Our Land is at present, in
a critical Conjuncture; we are preparing to resist and repel our incroaching
Neighbors; we are about erecting a College for the Education of Youth; the
Doctrines that are taught among us, will have a near Connection with the good or
bad Success of both those important Enterprises. I sincerely thank the
Reflector, that he has been so watchful over the Public, as to point out in
his Preface, some of the enormous Doctrines, that have been taught by Clergymen
at h^^e; and I most earnestly entreat him, when he begins again, to be so good
as to put up on that Score one lately come abroad in our Land, of which we may
say, there is no Smith in Israel; and it is this: As for you, who are yet under
the Direction of others, if you behave so as to merit the Esteem of your
Parents, Instructors, and good Men, that you are conversant with, you need not
doubt of meriting also the love of God in Christ. Thus, however early your
Summons from Life maybe, you shall neither fall unprepared nor unlamented. If
unsullied Innocence and Purity of Manners, be the Means of Happiness.

This Doctrine I take to be such, that the bare Reading of it, must give some
Shock to a pious Mind; wherefore, I am of Opinion it may met with a
Reprehension, from the right Reverend Father in God the Bishop of London; for I
am certain it has a worse Tendency, than the rankest Enthusiasm, which is so
often checked from that venerable See. Notwithstanding, in the mean while, as
the Word of God is the Standard, by which we are to judge concerning those
Things, which lead to our eternal Peace, it may not be amiss to open and unfold
it a little, and then to compare it to holy Scripture, and to the Articles of
the Church of England, that the Contrast may appear.

The Persons here spoken of, or spoken unto, are those who are yet under the
Direction of others, that is, the Youth in the Academy, and a Supposition is
made, if they behave so as to merit the Esteem of their Parents, Instructors,
and good Men they are conversant with, (which I think no one will deny, or can
deny, they may do; nay, they hardly behave so ill as to forfeit the Esteem of
their Parents, Instructors, and good Men they are conversant with; for, who can
forbear esteeming them, if they are not guilty of any gross Immoralities?) and
upon this Supposition, upon this Condition, and upon these Terms, they need not
doubt of meriting also the Love of God in Christ; and that in such a Manner, as
however early their Summons from Life may be, they shall not fall unprepared.
Was there any such Thing (as there is not) of merting the Love of God in
Christ, I believe the behaving so as to merit the Esteem of our Parents,
Instructors, and good Men we are conversant with, would come very far short of
it, and to expect to Merit the love of God in Christ, at this rate, would be
Sacrilegiously depreciating the same. But come on; let us look into our Bibles,
and if I mistake not, we shall find, beyond all Doubt, there is no such Thing
as meriting the Love of God in Christ. We read, Isai. lxvi. 6. But we are all
as an unclean Thing, and all our Righteousness are as filthy Rags, and we all
do fade as a Leaf, and our Iniquities, like the Wind, have taken us away. We
also read, Jer. xxiii. 6. In his Days (that is, in the Days of the Messiah)
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: And this is his Name
whereby he shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness. And, Luke xvii. 10. So
likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those Things which are commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable Servants: We have done that which was our Duty to do.
And especially, Ephesians. ii. 8, 9. For by Grace ye are saved, through Faith, and
that not of yourselves: It is the Gift of God: Not of Works, lest any Man
should boast. For my Part, I cannot see how the Doctrine aforesaid, can be ever
reconciled to this Doctrine of holy Scripture, or be rendered compatible
therewith; they appear to me diametrically opposite, and eversive of one
another.

Let us next see, what Account we shall find about the Doctrine, in the
Articles of the Church of England, which are very scriptural. The XI. Article
contains these Words: We are accounted righteous before God, only for the Merit
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our own Works, or
Deservings. Wherefore, that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome
Doctrine, and very full of Comfort, as more largely is expressed in the homily
Justification. The XIIIth Article is thus: Works done before the Grace of
Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch
as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make Men mute to
receive Grace, or (as the School Authors say) deserve Grace of Congruity; yea,
rather for that they are not done as God has willed and commanded them to be
done, we doubt not but they have the Nature of Sin.

Now behold how the Doctrine aforesaid, agrees with the Doctrine of the Church!
the one says, (if you behave so as to merit the Esteem of you Parents,
Instructors, and good Men that you are conversant with,) you need not doubt of
meriting also the Love of God in Christ; the other says, we are accounted
righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
by Faith, and not for our own Works or Deservings. The modern Doctrine
teaches, as for you, who are yet under the Direction of others, if you behave
so as to merit the Esteem of your Parents, etc. you need not doubt of meriting
also the Love of God in Christ. The Church teaches, Works done before the
Grace of Christ* and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God,
forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ, and so forth, as in the
Article is expressed; and surely, I think it cannot be believed, that all those
who being yet under the Direction of others, behave so as to merit the Esteem
of their Parents, Instructors, and good Men they are conversant with, have
received the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit: Consequently
some are so far from meriting the Love of God in Christ, that they are by
meriting the Esteem of Men, not so much as rendered mute to receive Grace, or
deserve Grace of Congruity, but their best Works have the Nature of Sin: Which
of these two widely different Doctrines are we then to believe? It is possible
we should behave, and that without doubt, a Docrine set up in manifest
Contradiction against the Oracles of sacred and unerring Truth, and against the
Articles of the Church? For my Part, I am so far from believing that upstart
Doctrine, that I doubt not in the least but it is false, and besides Soul
destructive to those who are so unhappy as to believe it: And as such I
complain of it; I remonstrate, I protest against it, before God and all his
Saints.

O! it grieves me to the Heart, to see a Clergyman of the Church of England,
run so directly counter to holy Scripture, and to the Articles of his own
Church, which he has subscribed, if not sworn to: What must the World think of
it? How many despise all Religion for it, and think it is all a Sham, a Farce?
Pious and well grounded Minds, who have Truth inwardly, and are inbued with
salutary Principles of Religion, will consider that there must be Offenses
given, on the one Hand, that the faithful be made manifest; and on the other,
that there be Stumbling Blocks for those who walk not Upright; but Woe to them
by whom they are given! I am not bigoted to the Articles of any Church upon
Earth, so as not to recede from them, if I could discover them, to be false.
But holy Scripture, the Nature and Fitness of Things, and the Dictates of my
own Conscience, assure me, the Love of God, in Christ, is free, undeserved, and
unmerited; and from the contrary Doctrine, Good Lord deliver us!

What shall we then say, of unsullied Innocence, and Purity of Manners, being
the Means of Happiness; that is, of Happiness after Death, or eternal
Happiness. I believe there is no such Thing among the perverse Race of Adam, as
unsullied Innocence, Purity of Manners; they are all and every one guilty
Mortals, polluted and defiled with Sin. (...) the Tenderness and Goodness of
Heart, manifested by Persons so young, atone for far greater Faults than any
of them can well fall into? I fear this unsullied Innocence, and Purity of
Manners, which is absolved in meriting the Esteem of our Parents, Instructors,
and good Men we are conversant with, (how amiable soever it renders our
Character) will, if we confide therein, as the Means of our eternal Happiness,
in the End, prove a Shadow without Substance, an illusory Phantom, an erring
Metior, an Ignis fatuus, to bewilder us into the Paradise of Fools. O my God!
my Soul is cast down within me, to see such mortal Poison and deadly Bane,
dealt out with an unsparing Hand, to poor unwary dear Souls, who are so very
eager to swallow the fatal Bait! Let me believe the Doctrine of the blessed
Jesus, that whoever will be his Disciple, must deny himself, take up his Cross,
and follow Jesus. Save thine Elect, O Lord, from giving Credit to false and
soul-ruining Doctrines, and let as many as are chosen unto eternal Salvation,
be brought to experience the convincing and converting, the renewing and
regenerating Operations of the holy Spirit, working in them Faith and Love,
that they may confess; -- Thy Merit.
Imputed shall absolve them who renounce
Their own both righteous and unrighteous Deeds,
And live in thee transplanted; and from thee
Receive new Life. --
MILTON.

Far be from me a Cacoethes of Criticism, upon a pious Oblation of Tears; God
forbid, I should be actuated by a Spirit of Detraction, Envy, or Malevolence!
No, I take Heaven to Witness, the Reluctance with which I make this
Remonstrance. I sympathize in the Loss of that lovely Youth; every tender
Passion thrills my Breast: I wish him Rest; a happy Place among the eternal
Blessed! I hope he has built upon a better Foundation, than the Esteem of Men, or
his own unsullied Innocence, and Purity of Manners; upon the Rock of Ages, the
Merits of the Lord our Righteousness, may he have rested his dear Soul! I
condole with the Tutor; esteem his excellent Talents; I admire the greatest
Part of his Performance; did not the Love of my God, the unfeigned Zeal for his
Cause, the Desire for the eternal Happiness of precious immortal Souls,
constrain me to bear my Testimony against Doctrines of such pernicious
Consequence; this my Writing had been silent as the Grave. But while we are in
a Land of Liberty, in which the most enormous and quite monstrous Doctrines are
broached without Control, I will fight against them the Battles of the Lord. I
shall bespatter no Man's Character: I war not against the Persons, but against
the Doctrine. What halt we any longer between two Opinions? If Baal be God, let
us serve him; but if the Lord be God, let us serve him. That by meriting the
Esteem of Men, we do not merit the Love of God in Christ, so as not to fall
unprepared by Death; that unsullied Innocence, and Purity of Manners, will not
do, to those who are wise, to venture upon into Eternity; I take upon me, in
the Fear of the Lord, diffident of my own Strength, to maintain, against the
contrary Doctrine. I will preach, I will write, I will remonstrate, I will
protest, without Regard to Person, or Merit, or Genius, or Station, or Office,
while God shall enable me so to do; about Opinions which have no Connection
with our eternal Concerns, trahit suaquemque dolusstes, let every one think as
he lists, for aught I care; but here let us stand with undaunted Courage and
Magnanimity of Soul, glowing with the Love of Truth, until I either conquer, or
am conquered; which last should it happen, I shall not be wanting to ascribe
its true Cause, my own Weakness and Incapcity; for though I fall, Truth will
stand firm and unshaken for ever; and if it stands, I care not whether I stand
or fall. I hope an abler Hand and a stronger Arm from among my faithful
levitical Brethren, will succeed me: And if we who persevere yet to worship at
Jerusalem, are not a Match for them, who are gone astray after the Golden
Calves, erected at Dan and Bethel, I wish the Independent Reflector, may come
over to us as our Auxiliary. And after all, and in fine, I leave the whole to
the Father of Lights, most humbly beseeching him, to lead us into his Truth,
and to save us from Soul destructive, Error and Delusion. Thus Prays,

David Marin Ben Jesse.
Aquenonka, November 4, 1754.
FINIS.

