RELIGION AND PATRIOTISM THE CONSTITUENTS OF A GOOD SOLDIER.

A SERMON preached to Captain Overton's Independent Company of Volunteers,
raised in Hanover County, Virginia, August 17, 1755.

By Samuel Davies, A. M. Minister of the Gospel there.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JAMES CHATTIN. 1755.

RELIGION and PATRIOTISM the CONSTITUENTS of a good SOLDIER. A SERMON, etc.
2 Samuel x. 12. Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men, for our People, and
for the Cities of our God: And the Lord do that which seems him good.


AN Hundred Years of Peace and Liberty in such a World as this, is a very
unusual Thing; and yet our Country has been the happy Spot that has been
distinguished with such a long Series of Blessings, with little or no
Interruption. Our Situation in the Middle of the British Colonies, and our
Separation from the French, those eternal Enemies of Liberty and Britons, on
the one Side by the vast Atlantic, and on the other by a long Ridge of
Mountains, and a wide, extended Wilderness, have for many Years been a Barrier
to us; and while other Nations have been involved in War, we have not been
alarmed with the Sound of the Trumpet, nor seen Garments rolled in Blood.

But now the Scene is changed: Now we begin to experience in our Turn the Fate
of the Nations of the Earth. Our Territories are invaded by the Power and
Perfidy of France; our Frontiers ravaged by merciless Savages, and our
Fellow Subjects there murdered with all the horrid Arts of Indian and Popish
Torture. Our General unfortunately brave, is fallen, an Army of 1300 choice Men
routed, our fine Train of Artillery taken, and all this (Oh mortifying
Thought!) all this by 4 or 500 dastardly, insidious, Barbarians.

These Calamities have not come upon us without Warnings. We were long ago
apprized of the ambitious Schemes of our Enemies, and their Motions to carry
them into Execution: And had we taken timely Measures, they might have been
crushed, before they could arrive at such a formidable Height. But how have we
generally behaved in such a critical Time; Alas! our Country has been sunk in a
deep Sleep: A stupid Security has unmanned the Inhabitants: They could not
realize a Danger at the Distance of 2 or 300 Miles: They would not be
persuaded, that even French Papists could seriously design us an Injury: And
hence little or nothing has been done for the Defense of our Country in Time,
except by the Compulsion of Authority. And now, when the Cloud thickens over
our Heads, and alarms every thoughtful Mind with its near Approach, Multitudes,
I am afraid, are still dissolved in careless Security, or enervated with an
effeminate, cowardly Spirit. When the melancholy News first reached us
concerning the Fate of our Army, then we saw how natural it is for the
Presumptuous to fall into the opposite Extreme of unmanly Despondence and
Consternation; and how little Men could do in such a Pannic for their own
Defense. We have also suffered our poor Fellow Subjects in the Frontier
Counties to fall a helpless Prey to Blood-thirsty Savages, without affording
them proper Assistance, which as Members of the same Body Politic, they had a
Right to expect. They might as well have continued in a State of Nature, as be
united in Society, if in such an Article of extreme Danger, they are left to
shift for themselves. The bloody Barbarians have exercised on some of them the
most unnatural and leisurely Tortures; and others they have butchered in their
Beds, or in some unguarded Hour. Can human Nature bear the Horror of the Sight!
See yonder! the hairy Scalps, clotted with Gore! the mangled Limbs! the ript-up
Women! the Heart and Bowels, still palpitating with Life, smoking on the
Ground! See the Savages swilling their Blood, and imbibing a more outrageous
Fury with the inhuman Draught! Sure these are not Men; they are not Beasts of
Prey; they are something worse; they must be infernal Furies in human Shape.
And have we tamely looked on, and suffered them to exercise these hellish
Barbarities upon our Fellow-Men, our Fellow Subjects, our Brethren? Alas! with
what Horror must we look upon ourselves, as being little better than
Accessaries to their Blood?

And shall these Ravages go on unchecked? Shall Virginia incur the Guilt and
the everlasting Shame, of tamely exchanging her Liberty, her Religion, and her
All, for arbitrary Gallic Power, and for Popish Slavery, Tyranny and Massacre?
Alas! are there none of her Children, that enjoyed all the Blessings of her
Peace, that will espouse her Cause, and befriend her now in the Time of her
Danger? Are Britons utterly degenerated by so short a Remove from their
Mother Country? Is the Spirit of Patriotism entirely extinguished among us? And
must I give thee up for lost, O my Country, and all that is included in that
important Word? Must I look upon thee as a conquered, enslaved Province of
France, and the Range of Indian Savages? My Heart breaks at the Thought. And
must ye, our unhappy Brethren in our Frontiers, must ye stand the single
Barriers of a ravaged Country, unassisted, unbefriended, unpitied? Alas! must I
draw these shocking Conclusions?

No; I am agreeably checked by the happy, encouraging Prospect now before me.
Is it a pleasing Dream? Or do I really see a Number of brave Men, without the
Compulsion of Authority, without the Prospect of Gain, voluntarily associated
in a Company, to march over horrendous Rocks and Mountains, into an hideous
Wilderness, to succor their helpless Fellow Subjects, and guard their Country?
Yes, Gentlemen, I see you here upon this Design; and were you all united to my
Heart by the most endearing Ties of Nature, or Friendship, I could not wish to
see you engaged in a nobler Cause; and whatever the Fondness of Passion might
carry me to, I am sure my Judgment would never suffer me to persuade you to
desert it. You all generously put your Lives in your Hands; and sundry of you
have nobly disengaged yourselves from the strong and tender Ties that twine
about the Heart of a Father, or a Husband, to confine you at home in inglorious
Ease, and sneaking Retirement from Danger, when your Country calls for your
Assistance. While I have you before me, I have high Thoughts of a Virginian;
and I entertain the pleasing Hope that my Country will yet emerge out of her
Distress, and flourish with her usual Blessings. I am gratefully sensible of
the unmerited Honor you have done me, in making Choice of me to address you
upon so singular and important an Occasion: And I am sure I bring with me a
Heart ardent to serve you and my Country, though I am afraid my Inability, and
the Hurry of my Preparations, may give you Reason to repent your Choice. I
cannot begin my Address to you with more proper Words than those of a great
General, which I have read to you: Be of good Courage, and play the Men, for
your People, and for the Cities of your God; and the Lord do what seems him
good.

My present Design is, to illustrate and improve the sundry Parts of my Text,
as They lie in order, which you will find rich in sundry important
Instructions, adapted to this Occasion.

The Words were spoken just before a very threatening Engagement by Joab, who
had long served under that pious Hero King David, as the General of his Forces,
and bad shown himself an Officer of true Courage, conducted with Prudence. The
Ammonites, a neighboring Nation, at frequent Hostilities with the Jews, had
ungratefully offered Indignities to some of David's Courtiers whom he had sent
to condole their King upon the Death of his Father, and congratulate his
Accession to the Crown. Our holy Religion teaches us to bear personal Injuries
without private Revenge: But national Insults and Indignities ought to excite
the public Resentment. Accordingly King David, when he heard that the Ammoni^^^
with their Allies, were preparing to invade his Territories, and carry their
Injuries still farther, sent Joab his General, with his Army, to repel them and
avenge the Affronts they had offered his Subjects. It seems the Army of the
Enemy were much more numerous than David's: Their Mercenaries from other
Nations were no less than 31,000 Men; and no Doubt the Ammonites themselves
were a still greater Number. These numerous Forces were disposed in the most
advantageous Manner, and surrounded Joab's Men, that they might attack them
both in Flank and Front at once, and cut them all off, leaving no Way for them
to escape. Prudence is of the utmost Importance in the Conduct of an Army: And
Joab, in this critical Situation, gives a Proof how much he was Master of it,
and discovers the steady Composure of his Mind, while thus surrounded with
Danger. He divides his Army, and gives one Party to his Brother Abishai, who
commanded next to him, and the other he kept the Command of himself, and
resolves to attack the Syrian Mercenaries, who seemed the most formidable; he
gives Orders to his Brother in the mean Time to Fall upon the Ammonites; and he
animates him with this noble Advice: Be of good Courage, and let us play the
Men for our People and the Cities of our God, which are now at Stake: And the
Lord do what seems him Good.

Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men: -- Courage is an essential
Character of a good Soldier: -- Not a savage ferocious Violence: -- Not a
foolhardy Insensibility of Danger, or headstrong Rashness to rush into it: --
Not the Fury of enflamed Passions, broke loose from the Government of Reason:
But calm, deliberate, rational Courage; a steady, judicious, thoughtful
Fortitude; the Courage of a Man, and not of a Tiger: Such a Temper as Addison
ascribes with so much Justice to the famous Malborough and Eugene: Whose
Courage dwelt not in a troubled Flood
Of mounting Spirits, and fermenting Blood; -- But
Lodged in the Soul, with Virtue overruled,
Inflamed by Reason, and by Reason cooled The Campaign.
.


This is true Courage, and such as we ought all to cherish in the present
dangerous Conjuncture. This will render Men vigilant and cautious against
Surprises, prudent and deliberate in concerting their Measures, and steady and
resolute in executing them. But without this they will fall into unsuspected
Dangers, which will strike them with wild Consternation: They will meanly shun
Dangers that are surmountable, or precipitantly rush into those that are
causeless, or evidently fatal, and throw away their Lives in vain.

There are some Men who naturally have this heroic Turn of Mind. The wise
Creator has adapted the natural Genius of Mankind, with a surprising and
beautiful Variety to the State in which they are placed in this World. To some
he has given a Turn for intellectual Improvement, and the liberal Arts and
Sciences; to others a Genius for Trade; to others a Dexterity in Mechanics, and
the ruder Arts, necessary for the Support of human Life: The Generality of
Mankind may be capable of tolerable Improvements in any of these: But it is
only they whom the God of Nature has formed for them, that will shine in them,
every Man in his own Province. And as God well knew what a World of degenerate,
ambitious, and revengeful Creatures this is; as he knew that Innocence could
not be protected, Property and Liberty secured, nor the Lives of Mankind
preserved from the lawless Hands of Ambition, Avarice and Tyranny, without the
Use of the Sword; as he knew this would be the only Method to preserve Mankind
from universal Slavery; he has formed some Men for this dreadful Work, and
fired them with a martial Spirit, and a glorious Love of Danger. Such a Spirit,
though most pernicious when ungoverned by the Rules of Justice, and Benevolence
to Mankind, is a public Blessing, when rightly directed: Such a Spirit, under
God, has often mortified the Insolence of Tyrants, checked the Encroachments of
arbitrary Power, and delivered enslaved and ruined Nations: It is as necessary
in its Place, for our Subsistence in such a World as this, as any of the
gentler Genius's among Mankind; and it is derived from the same divine
Original. He that winged the Imagination of an Homer or a Milton, he that gave
Penetration to the Mind of Newton, he that made Tubal-Cain an Instructor of
Artificers in Brass and Iton Genesis iv. 22.
, and gave Skill to Bezaleel and Aholiab in curious Works Exodus xxxv. 30, 31,
etc.
; nay, he that sent out Paul and his Brethren to conquer the Nations with the
gentler Weapons of Plain Truth, Miracles, and the Love of a crucified Savior;
HE, even that same gracious Power, has formed and raised up an Alexander, a
Julius Caesar, a William King William the Third, the Deliverer of Britain from
Popery and Slavery, and the Scourge of France and her haughty Grand Monarque.
, and a Malborough, and inspired them with this enterprizing, intrepid Spirit,
the Two first to scourge a guilty World, and the Two last to save Nations on
the Brink of Ruin. There is something glorious and inviting in Danger, to such
noble Minds; and their Breasts beat with a generous Ardour when it appears.

Our Continent is like to become the Seat of War; and we, for the future (till
the sundry European Nations that have planted Colonies in it, have fixed their
Boundaries by the Sword) have no other Way left to defend our Rights and
Privileges. And has God been pleased to diffuse some Sparks of this Martial
Fire through our Country? I hope he has: And though it has been almost
extinguished by so long a Peace, and a Deluge of Luxury and Pleasure, now I
hope it begins to kindle: And may I not produce you my Brethren, who are
engaged in this Expedition, as Instances of it As a remarkable Instance of
this, I may point out to the Public that heroic. Youth Col. Washington, whom I
cannot but hope Providence has hitherto preserved in so signal a Manner, for
some important Service to his Country.
? Well, cherish it as a sacred Heaven-born Fire; and let the Injuries done to
your Country administer Fuel to it; and kindle it in those Breasts where it
has been hitherto smothered.

Though Nature be the true Origin of military Courage, and it can never be
kindled to a high Degree, where there is but a feeble Spark of it innate; yet
there are sundry Things that may improve it even in Minds full of natural
Bravery, and animate those who are naturally of an effeminate Spirit to behave
with a tolerable Degree of Resolution and Fortitude, in the Defense of their
Country. -- I need not tell you that it is of great Importance for this End
that you should be at Peace with God and your own Conscience, and prepared for
your future State. Guilt is naturally timorous, and often struck into a Panic
even with imaginary Dangers; and an infidel Courage, proceeding from Want of
Thought, or a stupid Carelessness about our Welfare through an immortal Duration
beyond the Grave, is very unbecoming a Man (...) a Christian. The most
important Periods of our Existence, my Brethren, lie Beyond the Grave; and it
is a Matter of much more Concern to us, what will be our Doom in the World to
come, than what becomes of us in this. We are obliged to defend our Country;
and that is a sneaking, sordid Soul indeed that can desert it at such a Time as
this: But this is not all; we are also obliged to take Care of an immortal
Soul; a Soul that must exist, and be happy or miserable, through the
Revolutions of eternal Ages. This should be our first Care: and when this is
secured, Death, in its most Shocking Forms, is but a Release from a World of
Sin a Sorrows, and an Introduction into everlasting Life and Glory. But how can
this be secured? not by a Course of impenitent Sinning; not by a Course of
stupid Carelessness and Inaction: But by vigorous and resolute striving; by
serious and affectionate Thoughtfulness about our Condition, and by a
conscientious and earnest Attendance upon the Means that God has graciously
appointed for our Recovery. But we are Sinners, heinous Sinners against a God
of infinite Purity and inexorable Justice. Yes, we are so; and does not the
Posture of Penitents then become us? Is not Repentance, deep, brokenhearted
Repentance, a Duty suitable to Persons of our Character? Undoubtedly it is: And
therefore, O my Countrymen, and particularly you brave Men that are the
Occasion of this Meeting, REPENT: Down upon your Knees before the provoked
Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, against whom you have rebelled. Dissolve and
melt in penitential Sorrows at his Feet; and he will tell you Arise, be of good
Cheer; your Sins are forgiven you. But will Repentance make Atonement for our
Sins? Will our Tears wash away their Guilt? Will our Sorrows merit Forgiveness?
No, my Brethren, after you have done all, you are but unprofitable Servants:
After all your Sorrows, and Prayers and Tears, you deserve to be punished as
obnoxious Criminals: That would be a sorry Government indeed, where Repentance,
perhaps extorted by the servile Fear of Punishment, would make Atonement for
every Offense. But I bring you glad Tidings of great Joy, To you is born a
Savior, a Savior of no mean Character; He is Christ the Lord. And have you
never heard that he has (...) Reconciliation for Iniquity, and brought in
everlasting Righteousness; (...) he suffered, the Just for the Unjust; that God
is well pleased for (...) Righteousness-Sake, and declares himself willing to
be reconciled to all that believe in him, and cheerfully accept him as their
Savior and Lord? Have you never heard these joyful Tidings, O guilty,
self-condemned Sinners? Sure you have. Then away to Jesus, away to Jesus ye
whose Consciences are laden with Guilt, ye whose Hearts fail within you at the
Thought of Death, (...) Tribunal of Divine Justice; ye who are destitute of all
personal Righteousness to procure your Pardon, and recommend you to the divine
Favor: Fly to Jesus on the Wings of Faith, all (...) you, of every Age and
Character; for you all stand in the most absolute Need of him; and without him
you must perish every Soul of you. But alas! we find ourselves utterly unable
to repent and fly to Jesus: Our Hearts are hard and unbelieving, and if the
Work depend upon us, it will for ever remain undone. True my Brethren, so the
Case is; but do ye not know that this guilty Earth is under the Distillings of
Divine Grace, that Jesus is entrusted with the Influences of the Spirit, which
can work in you both to will and to do; and that he is willing to give his Holy
Spirit to them that ask him? If you know this, you know where to go for
Strength; therefore cry mightily to God for it. This I earnestly recommend to
all my Hearers, and especially to you Gentlemen, and others, that are not about
generously to risque your Lives for your Country. Account this the best
Preparative to encounter Danger and Death; the best Incentive to true, rational
Courage. What can do you a lasting Injury, while you have a reconciled God
smiling upon you from on high, a peaceful Conscience animating you within, and
a happy Immortality just before you! Sure you may bid Defiance to Dangers and
Death in their most shocking Forms. You have answered the End of this Life
already by preparing for another; and how can you depart off this mortal Stage
more honorably, than in the Cause of Liberty, of Religion, and your Country?
But if any of you are perplexed with gloomy Fears about this important Affair,
or conscious you are entirely unprepared for Eternity, what must you do? Must
you seek to prolong your Life, and your Time for Preparation, by mean or
unlawful Ways, by a cowardly Desertion of the Cause of your Country, and
shifting for your little Selves, as though you had no Connection with Society?
Alas! this would but aggravate your Guilt, and render your Condition still more
perplexed and discouraging. FOLLOW THE PATH OF DUTY wherever it leads you, for
it will be always the safest in the Issue. Diligently improve the Time you have
to make your Calling and Election sure, and you have Reason to hope for Mercy,
and Grace to help in such a Time of Need. -- You will forgive me, if I have
enlarged upon this Point, even to a Digression; for I thought it of great
Consequence to you all. I shall now proceed with more Haste.

It is also of great Importance to excite and keep up our Courage in such an
Expedition, that we should be full satisfied we engage in a righteous Cause, --
and in a Cause of great Moment; for we cannot prosecute a suspected or a wicked
Scheme, which our own Minds condemn, but with Hesitation and timorous
Apprehensions; and we cannot engage with Spirit and Resolution in a trifling
Scheme, from which we can expect no Consequences worth our vigorous Pursuit.
This Joab might have in View in his heroic Advice to his Brother; Be of good
Courage, says he, and let us play the Men, for our People, and for the Cities
of our God. q. d. We are engaged in a righteous Cause; we are not urged on by
an unbounded Lust of Power or Riches, to encroach upon the Rights and
Properties of others, and disturb our quiet Neighbors: We act entirely upon
the defensive, repel unjust Violence, and avenge national Injuries; we are
fighting for our People, and for the Cities of our God. We are also engaged in
a Cause of the utmost Importance. We fight for our People; and what Endearments
are included in that significant Word! Our Liberty, our Estates, our Lives! our
King, our Fellow Subjects, our venerable Fathers, our tender Children, the
Wives of our Bosom, our Friends, the Sharers of our Souls, our Posterity to the
latest Ages! And who would not use his Sword with an exerted Arm, when these
lie at State? But even these are not all: We fight for the Cities of our God.
God has distinguished us with a Religion from Heaven; and hitherto we have
enjoyed the quiet and unrestrained Exercise of it: He has condescended to
become a gentilitial God to our Nation; and honored our Cities with his
gracious Presence, and the Institutions of his Worship, the Means of making us
wise, good and happy: But now these most invaluable Blessings lie at Stake;
these are the Prize for which we contend; and must it not excite all our active
Powers to the highest Pitch of Exertion? Shall we tamely submit to Idolatry and
religious Tyranny? No, God forbid: Let us play the Men, since we take up Arms
for our People, and the Cities of our God.

I need not tell you how applicable this Advice, thus paraphrased, is to the
Design of the present associated Company. The Equity of our Cause is most
evident. The Indian Savages have certainly no Right to murder our
Fellow Subjects, living quiet and inoffensive in their Habitations; nor have
the French any Power to hound them out upon us, nor to invade the Territories
belonging to the British Crown, and secured to it by the Faith of Treaties.
This is a clear Case. And it is equally clear, that you are engaged in a Cause
of the utmost Importance. To protect your Brethren from the most bloody
Barbarities -- to defend the Territories of the best of Kings against the
Oppression and Tyranny of arbitrary Power, to secure the inestimable Blessings
of Liberty, British Liberty, from the Chains of French Slavery -- to preserve
your Estates, for which you have sweat and toiled, from falling a Prey to
greedy Vultures, Indians, Priests, Friars, and hungry Gallic Slaves, or
not-more-devouring Flames -- to guard your Religion, the pure Religion of
Jesus, streaming uncorrupted from the sacred Fountain of the Scriptures; the
most excellent, rational and divine Religion that ever was made known to the
Sons of Men; to guard such a dear precious Religion (my Heart grows warm while
I mention it) against Ignorance, Superstition, Idolatry, Tyranny over
Conscience, Massacre, Fire and Sword, and all the Mischiefs, beyond Expression,
with which Popery is pregnant -- to keep from the cruel Hands of Barbarians and
Papists, your Wives, your Children, your Parents, your Friends -- to secure the
Liberties conveyed to you by your brave Forefathers, and bought with their
Blood, that you may transmit them uncurtailed to your Posterity -- these are
the Blessings you content for; all these will be torn your eager Grasp, if this
Colony should become a Province of France. And Virginians! Britons! Christians!
Protestants! if these Names have any Import or Energy, will you not strike home
in such a Cause? Yes, this View of the Matter must fire you into Men; methinks
the cowardly Soul must tremble, lest the Imprecation of the Prophet fall upon
him, Cursed be the Man that keeps back his Sword from Blood. To this
shocking, but necessary Work, the Lord now calls you, and cursed is he that
does the Work of the Lord deceitfully; that will not put his Hand to it, when
it is in his Power, or that will not perform it with all his Might Jer. xlviii.
10.
. The People of Meroz lay at home in Ease, while their Brethren were in the
Fleld, delivering their Country from Slavery. And what was their Doom? Curse ye
Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof,
becanse they came not to the Help of the Lord, to the Help of the Lord against
the Mighty Judges v. 23.
. I count myself happy that I see so many of yo engaged in such a Cause; but
when I view it in this Light, I cannot but be concerned that there are so few
to join you. Are there but 50 or 60 Persons in this large and populous County
that can be spared from home for a few Weeks upon so necessary a Design, or
that are able to bear the Fatigues of it? Where are the Friends of human
Nature, where the Lovers of Liberty and Religion? Now is the Time for you to
come forth, and show yourselves. Nay, where is the Miser? let him arise and
defend his Mammon, or he may soon have Reason to cry our with Micah, They have
taken away my Gods, and what have I more? Where is the tender Soul, on whom the
Passions of a Husband, a Father or a Son, have peculiar Energy? Arise, and
march away; you had better be absent from those you love for a little while,
than see them butchered before your Eyes, or doomed to eternal Poverty and
Slavery. The Association now sorming is not yet complete; and if it were, it
would be a glorious Thing to form another. Therefore, as an Advocate for your
King, your Fellow Subjects, your Country, Your Relatives, Your earthly All, I
do invite and entreat all of you, who have not some very sufficient Reason
against it, voluntarily to enlist, and go out with those brave Souls, who have
set you so noble an Example. It will be more advantageous to go out in Time,
and more honorable to go out as Volunteers, than to be compelled to it by
Authority, when perhaps it may be too late.

The Consideration of the Justice and Importance of the Cause may also
encourage You to hope, that the Lord of Hosts will espouse it, and render its
Guardians successful, and return them in Safety to the Arms of their longing
Friends. The Event however is in his Hands; and it is much better there, than
if it were in Yours. This Thought is suggested with beautiful Simplicity, in
the remaining Part of my Text. The Lord do that which seems him good. This
may be looked upon in various Views, as, 1. It may be understood as the
Language of Uncertainty and Modesty. q. d. Let us do all we can; but after all,
the Issue is uncertain; we know not, as yet, to what Side God will incline the
Victory. Such Language as this, my Brethren becomes us in all our Undertakings;
it sounds Creature-like, and God approves of such self-diffident Humility. But
to indulge sanguine and confident Expectations of Victory, to boast when we put
on our Armor, as though we were putting it off, and to derive our high Hopes
from our own Power and good Management, without any Regard to the Providence of
God, this is too lordly and assuming for such feeble Mortals; such Insolence is
generally mortified, and such a haughty Spirit, is the Forerunner of a Fall.
Therefore, though I do not apprehend Your Lives will be in any great Danger in
Your present Expedition to range the Frontiers, and clear them of the skulking
Indians; yet, I would not flatter You, my Brethren, with too high Hopes either
of Victory or Safety. I cannot but entertain the pleasing Prospect of
congratulating You will may of Your Friends, upon Your successful Expedition,
and safe Return: And yet it is very possible our next Interview may be in that
strange untried World beyond the Grave. You are, however, in the Hands of God,
and he will deal with you as it seems him good: And I am persuaded You would
not wish it were otherwise; You would not now practically retract the Petition
You have so often offered up, Thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. 2.
This Language; The Lord do as seems him good, may be looked upon as
expressive of a firm Persuasion that the Event of War entirely depends upon the
Providence of God. q. d. Let us do our best; but after all, let us be sensible
that the Success does not depend on us; that is entirely in the Hands of an
all-ruling God. That God governs the World, is a fundamental Article of
natural, as well as revealed Religion: It is no great Exploit of Faith, to
believe this: It is but a small Advance beyond Atheism, and downright
Infidelity. I know no Country upon Earth, where I should be put to the Expense
of Argument to prove this. The Heathens gave striking Proofs of their Belief of
it, by their Prayers, their Sacrifices, their consulting Oracles, before they
engaged in War; and by their costly Offerings and solemn Thanksgivings, after
Victory. And shall such a plain Principle as this, be disputed in a Christian
Land? No; we all speculatively believe it; but that is not enough; let our
Spirits be deeply impressed with it, and our Lives influenced by it; Let us
live in the World, as in a Territory of Jehovah's Empire. Carry this Impression
upon Your Hearts into the Wilderness, whither You are going. Often let such
Thoughts as these recur to your Minds, I am the feeble Creature of God; and
blessed be his Name, I am not cast off his Hand as a disregarded Orphan to
shift for myself. My Life is under his Care; the Success of this Expedition is
at his Disposals Therefore, O thou all-ruling God, I implore thy Protection; I
confide in this Care; I cheerfully resign myself, and the Event of this
Undertaking, to thee. Which leads me to observe, 3. That these Words, The Lord
do what seems him good, may express a humble Submission to the Disposal of
Providence, let the Event turn out as it would. q. d. We have not the Disposal
of the Event, not do we know what will be: But Jehovah knows, and that is
enough. We are sure he will do what is best, upon the whole; and it becomes us
to acquiesce! Thus, my Friends, do You resign and submit yourselves to the
Rules of the World in the present Enterprise. He will order Matters as he
pleases; Oh! let him do so by Your cheerful Consent. Let Success of
Disappointment, let Life or Death be the Issue, still say, Good is the Will of
the Lord; let him do what seems him good: Or if Nature biasses Your Wishes
and Desires to the favorable Side, as no Doubt it will, still keep them within
Bounds, and restrain them in Time, saying after the Example of Christ, Not my
Will, but thine be done. You may wish, you may pray, you may strive, you may
hope for a happy Issue: But Your must submit; Be still, and know that he is
God, and will not be prescribed to, or suffer a Rival in the Government of the
World he has made. Such a Temper will be of unspeakable Service to You, and You
may hope God will honor it with a remarkable Blessing: For Submission to his
Will is the readiest Way to the Accomplishment of our own. 4. These Words, in
their Connection, may intimate, that let the Event be what it will, it will
afford us Satisfaction to think, that we have done the best we could. q d. We
cannot command Success; but let us do all in our Power to obtain it, and we
have Reason to hope that in this Way we shall not be disappointed: But if it
should please God to render all our Endeavors vain, still we shall have the
generous Pleasure to reflects, that we have not been accessory to the Ruin of
our Country, but have done all we could for its Deliverance. So You my Brethren
have generously engaged in a disinterested Scheme for Your King and Country:
God does generally crown such noble Undertakings with Success, and You have
Encouragement to hope for it: But the Cause You have espoused, is the Cause of
a sinful impenitent Country; and if God, in righteous Displeasure, should on
this Account blast your Attempt, still you will have the Pleasure of reflecting
upon Your generous Views and vigorous Endeavors, and that You have done Your
Part conscientiously.


Having thus made some cursory Remarks upon the sundry Parts of the Text, I
shall now conclude with an Address, first to you all in general, and then to
you Gentlemen and others, who have been pleased to invite me to this Service.
And I hope You will forgive my Prolixity: My Heart is full, the Text is
copious, and the Occasion singular and important. I cannot therefore dismiss
You with a short hurrying Discourse.

It concerns you all seriously to reflect upon your own Sins, and the Sins of
your Land, which have brought all these Calamities upon us. If You believe that
God governs the World, if You do not abjure him from being the Ruler of Your
Country, You must acknowledge that all the Calamities of War, and the
threatening Appearances of Famine, are ordered by his Providence; There is no
Evil in a City or Country, but the Lord has done it. And if You believe that
he is a just and Righteous Ruler, You must also believe, that he would not thus
punish a righteous or a penitent People. We and our Countrymen are Sinners,
aggravated Sinners: God proclaims that we are such by his Judgments now upon
us, by withering Fields and scanty Harvests, by the Sound of the Trumpet and
the Alarm of War. Our Consciences must also bear witness to the same melancholy
Truth. And if my Heart were properly affected, I would concur with these
undoubted Witnesses: I would cry aloud, and not spare, I would lift up my Voice
like a Trumpet, to show You Your Transgressions and Your Sins. O my Country, is
not thy Wickedness great, and thine Iniquities infinite? Where is there a more
sinful Spot to be found upon our guilty Globe? Pass over the Land, take a
Survey of the Inhabitants, inspect into their Conduct, and what do you see?
what do you hear? You see gigantic Forms of Vice braving the Skies, and bidding
Defiance to Heaven and Earth, while Religion and Virtue is obliged to retire,
to avoid public Contempt and Insult -- You see Herds of Drunkards swilling down
their Cups, and drowning all the Man within them. You hear the Swearer venting
his Fury against God and Man, trifling with than Name which prostrate Angels
adore, and imprecating that Damnation, under which the hardiest Devil in Hell
trembles and groans. You see Avarice hoarding up her useless Treasures,
dishonest Craft planning her Schemes of unlawful Gain, and Oppression
unmercifully grinding the Face of the Poor. You see Prodigality squandering her
Stores, Luxury spreading her Table, and unmanning her Guests; Vanity laughing
aloud, and dissolving in empty, unthinking Mirth, regardless of God and our
Country, of Time and Eternity; Sensuality wallowing in brutal Pleasures, and
aspiring with inverted Ambition, to sink as low as her four-footed Brethren of
the Stall. You see Cards more in Use than the Bible, the Back-Gammon Table more
frequented than the Table of the Lord, Plays and Romances more read than the
History of the blessed Jesus. You see trifling and even Criminal Diversions
become a serious Business; the Issue of a Horse-race, or a Cock-fight, more
anxiosly attended to than the Fate of our Country. Or where these grosser Forms
of Vice and Vanity do not shock your Senses, even there you often meet with the
Appearances of more refined Impiety, which is equally dangerous. You hear the
Conversation of reasonable Creatures, of Candidates for Eternity, engrossed by
Trifles, or vainly wasted on the Affairs of Time: These are the eternal
Subjects of Conversation, even at the Threshold of the House of God, and on the
sacred Hours devoted to his Service. You see Swarms of Prayer-less Families all
over our Land: Ignorant, vicious Children, unrestrained and untaught by those
to whom God and Nature has entrusted their Souls. You see Thousands of poor
Slaves in a Christian Country, the Property of Christian Masters, and they will
be called, almost as ignorant of Christianity, as when they left the Wilds of
Africa. You see the best Religion in all the World, abused, neglected,
disobeyed and dishonored by its Professors: And you hear Infidelity scattering
her ambiguous Hints and Suspicious, or openly attacking the Christian Cause
with pretended Argument, with Insult and Ridicule. You see Crowds of professed
Believers, that are practical Athiests; nominal Christians, that are real
Heathens; many abandoned Slaves of Sin, that yet pretend to be the Servants of
the Holy Jesus. You see the Ordinances of the Gospel neglected by some,
profaned by others, and attended upon by the Generality with a trifling
Irreverence, and stupid Unconcernedness Alas! who would think that those
thoughtless Assemblies we often see in our Places of Worship, are met for such
solemn Purposes as to implore the Pardon of their Sins from an injured God, and
to prepare for an awful all-important Eternity? Alas! is that Religion for the
Propagation of which the Son of God labored, and bled, and died, for which his
Apostles and Thousands of Martyrs have spent their Strength and shed their
Blood, and on which our eternal Life depends, is that Religion become such a
Trifle in our Days, that Men are hardly serious and in earnest when they attend
upon its most solemn Institutions? What Multitudes lie in a dead Sleep in Sin
all around us? You see them eager in the Pursuit of the Vanities of Time, but
stupidly unconcerned about the important Realities of the eternal World just
before them: Few solicitous what shall become of them when all their
Connections with Earth and Flesh must be broken, and they must take their
Flight into strange unknown Regions: Few lamenting their Sins: Few crying for
Mercy and a new Heart: Few flying to Jesus, or justly sensible of the
Importance of a Mediator in a Religion for Sinners. You may indeed see some
Degree of Civility and Benevolence toward Men, and more than enough of
cringing Complaisance of Worms to Worms, of Clay to Clay, of Guilt to Guilt:
But Oh! how little sincere Homage, how little affectionate Veneration for the
great Lord of Heaven and Earth! You may see something of Duty to Parents, of
Gratitude to Benefactors, and Obedience to Superiors: But if God be a Father,
where is his Honor? If he be a Master, where is his Fear? If he be our
Benefactor, where is our Gratitude to him? You may see here and there some
Instances of proud, self-righteous Virtue, some Appearances of Morality: But
Oh! how rare is vital evangelical Religion, and true Christian Morality,
animated with the Love of God, proceeding from a new Heart, and a Regard to the
divine Authority, full of Jesus, full of a Regard to him as a Mediator, on
whose Account alone our Duties can find Acceptance? O blessed Redeemer! what
little Necessity, what little Use do the Sinners of our Country find for thee
in their Religion? How many Discourses, how many Prayers, how many good Works
are performed, in which there is scarce any Thing of Christ? And this Defect
renders them all but shining Sins, glittering Crimes. How few pant and languish
for thee, Blessed Jesus! and can never be contented with their Reformation,
with their Morality, with their good Works, till they obtain an Interest in thy
Righteousness, to sanctify all, to render all acceptable! -- You may see
Children sensible of their Dependence on their Parents for their Subsistence,
you see Multitudes sensible of their Dependence on Clouds and Sun and Earth for
Provision for Man and Beast: But how few sensible of their Dependence upon God,
as the great Original, the Primum Mobile of natural Causes, and the various
Wheels of the Universe. You see even the dull Ox knows his Owner, and the
stupid Ass his Master's Crib: You see the Workings of Gratitude even in your
Dog, who welcomes you home with a Thousand fondling Motions: But how is
Jehovah's Government and Agency practically denied in his own Territories! How
few receive the Blessings of Life as from his Hand, and make him proper Returns
of Gratitude? You see a withering, ravaged Country around you, languishing
under the Frowns of an angry God; but how few earnest Prayers, how few
penitential Groans do you hear? Pass rover the Land, and bring me Intelligence,
is not this the general Character of our Country? I know there are some happy
Exceptions; and I hope sundry such might be produce from among you: But is not
this the prevailing Character of a great Majority? Does not one Part or other
of it belong to the Generality? The most generous Charity cannot hope the
Contrary, if under any scriptural or rational Limitations. May it not be said
of the Men of Virginia, as well as those of Sodom, They are wicked, and Sinners
before the Lord exceedingly? And thus, alas! it has been for a long Time: Our
Country has sinned on securely for above 150 Years, and one Age has improved
upon the Vices of another. And can a Land always bear up under such a Load of
accumulated Wickedness? Can God always suffer such a Race of Sinners to go on
unpunished from Generation to Generation? May we not fear that our Iniquities
are now just full, and that he is about to thunder out his awful Mandate to the
Executioners of his Vengeance, Put ye in the Sickle; for the Harvest is ripe;
come get ye down, for the Press is full, the Vats overflow; for their
Wickedness is great.

And is there no Relief for a sinking Country? Or is it too late to administer
it? Is our Wound incurable, that refuses to be headed? No, blessed be God; if
you now turn every one of you from your Evil Ways, if you mourn over your Sins,
and turn to the Lord with your whole Hearts, then your Country will yet
recover. God will appear for us, and give a prosperous Turn to our Affairs; he
has assured us of this in his own Word, At what Instant, says he, I shall speak
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down,
and to destroy it; if that Nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their Evil, I will repent of the Evil that I thought to do unto them, Jer.
xviii. 7, 8. Therefore, my Brethren, as we have all rebelled, let us all join
in unanimous Repentance, and a through Reformation. Not only your eternal
Salvation requires it, but also the Preservation of your Country, that is now
bleeding with the Wounds you have given it by your Sins. The Safety of these
our Friends, who are now engaged in so generous a Design, requires it: For an
Army of Saints or of Heroes, cannot defend a guilty, impenitent People, ripe
for the Judgments of God. If you would be everlastingly happy, and escape the
Vengeance of eternal Fire, or (to mention what may perhaps have more Weight
with some of you) if you would preserve yourselves, your Families, you
Posterity, from Poverty, from Slavery, Ignorance Idolatry, Torture and Death;
if you would save yourselves and them from all the infernal Horrors of Popery,
and the savage Tyranny of a mongrel Race of French and Indian Conquerors; in
short, if you would avoid all that is terrible, and enjoy every Thing that is
dear and valuable, REPENT, and turn to the Lord. This is the only Cure for our
wounded Country; and if you refuse to administer it in Time, prepare to perish
in its Ruins. If you go on impenitent in Sin, you may expect not only to be
damned for ever, but (what is more terrible to some of you) to fall into the
most extreme outward Distress. You will have Reason to fear not only the Loss
of Heaven, which some of you perhaps think little of, but the Loss of your
Estates, that lie so near your Hearts. And will you not repent, when you are
pressed to it from so many Quarters at once?

And now, My Brethren, in the last Place, I have a sew parting Words to offer
to you who are more particularly concerned in this Occasion; and I am sure I
shall address you with as much affectionate Benevolence as you could wish.

My first and leading Advice to you is, Labor to conduct this Expedition in a
Religious Manner. Methinks this should not seem strange Counsel to Creatures,
entirely dependent upon God, and at his Disposal. As you are an Independent
Company of Volunteers under Officers of your own choosing, you may manage your
Affairs more according to your own Inclinations, than if you had enlisted upon
the ordinary Footing: And I hope you will improve this Advantage for the
Purposes of Religion. Let Prayer to the God of your Life be your daily
Exercise. When Retirement is safe, pour out your Hearts to him in secret; and
when it is practicable, join in Prayer together Morning and Evening in your
Camp. How acceptable to Heaven must such an unusual Offering be, from that
desert Wilderness! Maintain a Sense of divine Providence upon your Hearts, and
resign your selves and all your Affairs into the Hands of God. You are engaged
in a good Cause, the Cause of your People, and the Cities of your God; and
therefore you may the more boldly commit it to him, and pray and hope for his
Blessing. I would fain hope, there is no Necessity to take Precautions against
Vice among such a select Company: But lest there should, I would humbly
recommend to you to make this one of the Articles of your Association, before
you set out, that every Form of Vice shall be severely discountenanced, and if
you think proper, expose the Offender to some pecuniary or corporal Punishment.
It would be shocking indeed, and I cannot bear the Though It, that a Company formed
upon such generous Principles, should commit or tolerate open Wickedness among
them; and I hope this Caution is needless to you all, as I am sure it is to
sundry of you.

And now, my dear Friends, and the Friends of you neglected Country, In the
Name of the Lord lift up your Banners: Be of good Courage, and play the Men for
the People and the Cities of your God; and the Lord do what seems him god.
Should I now give Vent to the Passions of my Heart, and become a Speaker for my
Country, methinks I should even overwhelm you with a Torrent of good Wishes,
and Prayers from the Hearts of Thousands. May the Lord of Hosts, the God of the
Armies of Israel, go forth along with you! May he teach your Hands to War, and
gird you with Strength to Battle! May he bless you with a sase Return, and long
Life, or a glorious Death in the Bed of Honor, and a happy Immortality! May he
guard and support your anxious Families and Friends at home, and return you
victorious to their longing Arms! May all the Blessings your Hearts can wish
attend you wherever you go! These are the Wishes and Prayers of my Heart; and
Thousands concur in them: And we cannot but cheerfully hope they will be
granted, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

