THE Present STATE OF North America.

I. The Discoveries, Rights and Possessions of Great Britain. II. The
Discoveries, Rights and Possessions of France. III. The Encroachments and
Depredations of the French upon his Majesty's Territories in North America, in
Times when Peace ^^^sisted in Europe between the Two Crowns, etc. etc.
LONDON, Printed 1755. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND. Reprinted and Sold by D. FOUL in
Ann-Street, and by Z. FOUL in Middle-street. 1795.

THE Present State of North America.
CHAP. I. The Discoveries, Rights, and Possessions of Great Britain.
THE CABOTS, with other Subjects of the Crown of England, North America first
discovered by the English.
did in 1496 and 1497 discover and take possession of, according to the Forms
used in those Times, all the Eastern Coast of North America from Cape Florida
to the North Polar Circle, for, and in the Name of, the Crown of England. They
had a Gr^nt from the Crown of the Property of all Lands they should discover
and settle Westward of Europe; but they made no Settlements in consequence of
that Grant. This Discovery of the Continent of North America was prior to that
of any other Europeans; for COLUMBUS did not discover the Islands in the Gulf
of Mexico till 1498, and it was 1504 before the French discovered any Part of
North America.

In those Days Priority of Discovery, even without a continued Occupancy or
Possession, Prior Discovery a good Claim.
was deemed a good Claim. It is true, we did not immediately make any
Settlements there, nor did we so much as navigate the Coast for near a Century
following, Henry the VIIIth being too much engaged in the Difficulties which
attended the Progress of the Reformation, to be at leisure for foreign
Undertakings; Edward the VIth being a Minor; Queen Mary being bent upon the
Re-establishment of Popery; and Queen Elizabeth being constantly employed in
guarding against the Variety of Dangers to which the internal State of her own
Kingdoms, the Power of the Crown of Spain, and the general State of Europe,
exposed her. But notwithstanding this Inattention to North America, and the
little Regard England at first showed to the Discovery of the CABOTS, I have
showed it to have been the earliest Discovery made; nor can it be annulled by
any subsequent Discovery pretended by any other Country, nor by a neglect of
the Improvement of it on our own part. However, as several European Treaties
have since been made, establishing by Stipulation that Right acquired at first
by this Discovery to great Part of North America, I shall not dwell upon the
Effect of the Discovery, as confirming a Right, but proceed to state the
several European Treaties, since made, relative to this Country; the
Conveyances made to Great Britain of Part of it by the Natives of the Country;
the consequential Grants of the Crown, and the Settlements made by his
Majesty's Subjects.

In consequence of the Treaty of Utrecht, Commissaries from the Crowns of
Great Britain and France determined the Boundaries of the HUDSON'S-BAY
Company's Territories, The Bounds of Hudson's-Bay Company's Territories
ascertained by Treaty with France.
to be all that Country from the North Pole to a certain Promontory upon the
Atlantic Ocean in N. Lat. 56 Degrees 30 M. to run S. W. to Lake Mistasin, and
from thence continued still S. W. to N. Lat. 49 D. and from thence continued
still S. W. indefinitely; which S. W. Line takes in Part of Lake Superior,
which is as large as the Caspian Sea. Though the Sieur D'Anville has in his Map
of America, published in 1750, under the Direction and Authority of the
Government of France, marked the South Boundary of the above Company's
Territories due West from the above Promontory, which is so far injurious.

The Limits of NEW-BRITAIN, or Labradore, The Limits of New Britain or
Labradore not settled by Treaty, and his Majesty's Right to that Country.
are not on the South and West Sides ascertained by any Treaty between
Great Britain and France; it being with the Remainder of North America, the
Boundaries whereof were not settled by the Treaty of Utrecht, referred to
Commissaries of the two Crowns, who were to settle all American Disputes,
concerning Boundaries Nothing can be more impolitic, when we are engaged in a
Confederacy against France, than to leave any Point to be determined after the
Conclusion of a Peace: for if we cannot get it conceded while the Confederacy
stands and our Force is united, how can we obtain it when we are left alone
upon the Dissolution of the Confederacy? The French have so often experienced
the Benefit of this Imprudence on our side, that in all their Treaties they use
every Artifice in their Power to obtain this Advantage, and they seldom miss
it. But when we recollect the weak and traitorous Ministry of this Country, who
negociated the infamous Peace of Utrecht, we cannot wonder that the Interests
of America, etc. should be referred to Commissaries after a Conclusion of a
Peace. This Weakness and Treachery in our Managers of the Treaty of Utrecht,
when it was in our Power to command our own Terms, has given Being and Support
to most of the Evils that have since happened in America between us and the
French. And one would have hoped the ill Success of this Part of the Treaty of
Utrecht would have deterred us from the like impolitic Conduct at the Treaty of
Aix La Chapelle. But no, the Necessity of our Situation then obliged us to
submit to the same Mistake once more, and we now see and feel the Consequences
of it. For the French refuse to settle any one Point in Dispute with us, unless
upon such Terms as are abhorrent to our Honor and Interest; they are
constantly committing Depredations on our Fellow Subjects, and making
Encroachments, on us in America, and will not recede from any one of their
Encroachments, though his Majesty's Claim to most of the Territories they have
invaded is indisputably just; and they have at last pushed Affairs to such an
Extremity, that a European War with them seems to be inevitable.
and the Dominion of the Indians, in twelve Months after the Ratifications of
that Treaty were exchanged. Commissaries did accordingly meet at Soissons and
Cambray, but never settled one Point relative to the Limits of North America,
and the Dominions of the Indians therein, except the Boundary of the
Hudson's-Bay Company I have just mentioned. But if prior Discovery and frequent
Visitation of a Country gives Title to it, we have an indubitable one to all
that Country called New-Britain or Labradore, extending Southward from the
before mentioned Promontory in N. Lat. 56. D. 30 M. to the North Side of the
Entrance into the Streights of Belle-Isle, and from thence due West till it
meet the Southern Boundary of Hudson's-Bay Company's Territories. Though the
French have been careful to color the whole of this Country upon their Maps
for themselves. Three Years ago a Number of wealthy Merchants of the City of
London petitioned for an exclusive Grant of this Country, for a Number of
Years, on Terms that would have been very beneficial to the Public, as well as
themselves. Their Petition was referred to the Right Honorable Lords for Trade
and Plantations, who reported in favor of the Project, and proved his
Majesty's Title to the Country; but for political Reasons it was afterward
dropped. And since that there have been several bolder Attempts than ever of
private Traders, Subjects of his Majesty, to establish Commerce with the
Eskineaux Indians, who reside on and near the Sea Coast of this Country, which
has from one End to the other been often explored by his Majesty's Subjects;
but there never was any Establishment made in it by any European Nation; for
the Natives have an invincible Antipathy to all Foreigners, and destroy all
those that happen to be wrecked on their Coast, or attempt to trade with them,
whenever it is in their Power.

By the Treaty of Utrecht, which in this respect is confirmed by that of Aix La
Chapelle, Newfoundland ceded to the Crown of Great Britain by the Treaty of
Utrecht.
NEWFOUNDLAND was ceded to Great Britain, reserving to the French, through the
good Officers of our iniquitous Administration in 1712, Liberty to visit and to
erect Huts and Stages for drying Fish from Cape Bonavista to the Northermost
Point of the Island, and from thence down the Western Side to the Point Rich,
contrary to the Treaty of Peace and Neutrality for America concluded in
November 1656, between England and France, wherein it is stipulated, that the
Subjects of each Crown (...) not to trade, fish, or harbor (except in Cases of
Distress (...) ^air, wood and water) in one another's Districts. (...) is
inserted also a Clause, in the 15th Article of the Treaty of Utrecht with
Spain, whereby a Pretense is given to the Spaniards to claim a Right to fish at
Newfoundland, in direct Contradiction to the 7th and 8th Articles of the
Treaties made with that Crown in 1667 and 1670, whereby it is agreed that
Great Britain shall enjoy for ever, with plenary Right of Sovereignty, all
those Lands and Places whatsoever, being or situate in the West Indies, or in
any Part of America, which the Subjects of Great Britain do at present hold or
possess. And that the Subjects and Inhabibitants, Merchants of the Kingdoms and
Dominions of each Confederate respectively, shall forbear to sail and trade in
the Ports and Havens which have Fortifications, Magazines, or Warehouses, and
in all other Places whatsoever, possessed by the other Party in the
West Indies, or in any Part of America. The Board of Trade being consulted on
the Spaniards claiming a Right to fish at Newfoundland, returned the following
Answer to Lord Dartmouth, Secretary of State, dated June 13, 1712. We have
considered the Extract of a Memorial from the Marquis de Montelon, relating to
a Claim of the Inhabitants of Guypuscoa to fish on the Coast of Newfoundland;
and thereupon take leave to inform your Lordship, that we have discoursed with
such Persons as are able to give Information in that matter; and we ^ind that
some Spaniards are come hither with Passes from her Majesty, and others may
have fished there privately; but never any, that we can learn, did do it as of
Right belonging to them. By the Act to encourage the Trade to Newfoundland,
passed in the Tenth and Eleventh of his late Majesty, when we were in Amity and
Alliance with Spain, it is declared and enacted, Tha^ no Alien or Stranger
whatsoever, not residing within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall at any time hereafter take Bait, or use any
sort of Trade, or Fishing whatever, in Newfourdland, or in any of the Islands
adjacent. Pursuant to which Act Instructions have been every Year given to the
Commodores of the Convoys, to prevent Foreigners coming thither. The Secret
Committee of the House of Commons, in 1715, confess in their Report, that they
were at a loss to account for the Reasons that prevailed with the Ministry to
admit the Insertion of the above Article into the Treaty of Utrecht, for the
Management of it was entrusted with an Irish Papist who was sent to Spain for
this Purpose, and to negociate what was expected from that Crown relating to
the Pretender, and no Papers concerning it were to be found in the public
Offices. Upon the Foundation of the above Article in favor of Spain, we find
Don UZTARIZ, formerly Privy Counselor to the King, and Secretary in the
Council and Chamber of the Indies in Spain, in his most excellent Theory and
Practice of Commerce, etc. advising the King his Master to avail himself of
that Right whenever he has Power sufficient to make good his Pretensions.

ACADIE, Acadie, or Nova Scotia, ceded to Great Britain by the Treaty of
Utrecht.
extending from the River of St. Lawrence to the River Pantagoit or Penobscot,
was not only first discovered, but first settled by the English; for in 1602 we
had, both by the Accounts of English and French Historians, a Settlement in
that Country, which is two Years before ever a French Family settled in any
Part of it, as appears from the same Authority. In 1620 all that Part of Acadie
as far as the 48 D. of N. Latitude, was granted by the Crown to the Council of
Plymouth or New England, which Company I shall have further occasion to speak
of. In 1621 the Council of New England resigned to the Crown all Parts of their
Grant to the Northward of the River St. Croix, when it was then granted with
the rest of Acadie to Sir William Alexander, Secretary of State of Scotland,
and called Nova Scotia. In 1623 King Charles the Is It, marrying a Daughter of
the French King, gave all Acadie or Nova Scotia to France in 1627 it was taken
from the French by Sir David Kirk. In 1632 it was again ceded to France by the
Treaty of St. Germain. In 1654 Cromwell sent and reduced it. In 1662 it was
again delivered up to the French King by Charles II. and confirmed to France at
the Treaty of Breda in 1667, notwithstanding a Remonstrance against it from the
Parliament of England and the People of New England. In 1690 it was taken by
700 New England Men, at the Expense of that Country, which was never reimbursed
them. In 1697 it was again ceded to France. In 1710 it was reduced again by
Forces from Great Britain and New England, and confirmed by the Treaties of
Utrecht and Aix La Chapelle to the Crown of Great Britain, With its ancient
Boundaries, as also the City of Port Royal, as fully as ever France possessed
them by Treaty or other Means.

From this Summary of Facts there cannot be any Doubt of Great-Britain's Right
to the whole of the Country called Acadie or Nova Scotia. And as the
Sovereignty and Possession of it has been so often changed by Treaty and other
Means, one would have imagined it impossible any Doubt could have arose about
the Extent of it. But it is certain that France has ever since the Treaty of
Aix La Chappelle insisted on its ancient Boundaries to have never extended
beyond the South-Eastern Peninsula, and have accordingly taken possession of
all the Country we claim as Acadie or Nova Scotia, except the above Peninsula,
which is not one third of the Country both Crowns always possessed for Acadie
or Nova Scotia before and since its precise Bounds were ascertained in
consequence of the Treaty of Breda, as appears by both English and French
Historians, etc. though no Bounds were expressed in the Treaties of St. Germain
and Breda. However, a Dispute arising in the Execution of the Treaty of Breda,
a Discussion of its Limits ensued, and it was then stipulated by the two
Crowns, that St. Lawrence River should be its Northern Boundary, the Gulf of
St. Lawrence and Straight of Canso its Eastern, Cape Sable-shore its
South-Eastern, and the River Pantagoit its Western. Which Limits France always
possessed as Acadie, and it ever retained down to the Treaties of Utrecht and
Aix La Chappelle, when it was confirmed to the Crown of Great Britain with its
ancient Boundaries, as fully as ever France possessed it by Treaty or other
Means.

Now to proceed regularly and clearly with respect to his Majesty's further
Rights in North America, I must state the Process of Grants, etc.

CABOT's Grants being dropped, Sir Walter Raleigh did obtain of Queen Elizabeth
in 1584 a Patent for exploring and planting Lands in North America, His
Majesty' s further Right to all the Country, from the Atlantic to the Pacific
Ocean, lying between 34 D. and 45 D. N. Lat.
not actually possessed by any Christian Prince: and when he returned to
England the next Year, the whole Country from Cape Florida to St. Lawrence
River, which before went under the general Name of Florida, was called
Virginia, in Honor of the Virgin Queen, there being yet no distinct
Settlements which gave particular Names to the several Places along the Coast.
Upon Sir Walter's Attainder, his Patent being forfeited, several Adventurers
petitioned King James I. for Grants, and a Grant was made in 1606 to two
Companies (one of London, the other of Bristol) in one Charter, of all the
Country lying from thirty-four to forty-five Degrees of Northern Latitude on
the Atlantic Ocean, and the Islands within a hundred Miles of the Sea Coast,
and from the said Coast inland indefinitely, if not actually possessed by any
Christian Prince or People. Neither the French nor any other Christian People,
but us, had at that Time any Settlements South of St. Lawrence River, but in
Acadie, where the French begun to settle two Years before the Date of this
Charter, as appears by De La^t of Antwerp, by Pere Charlevoix, and several
other of their, and by several of our own, Historians. Nor had the French, as
appears from the same Authority, made any Discoveries or Settlements at this
Time higher up the River St. Lawrence than Montreal. Nor had any European
Power, but the English, any Settlements in any Part of this Grant at that Time.
The Grant extends upon the Atlantic Ocean from the Cape now called Cape Fear to
the Mouth of Pantagoit River, which is the Western Boundary of the Country we
claim as Acadie or Nova Scotia. Indeed P. Charlevoix says, M. Monts entered
Kennebeck, or Sagadahoc River, which is within this Grant, in 1604; but he also
says, he and all the Adventurers with him immediately removed to Port Royal in
Acadie, and in 1606 they all returned to France.

Both the London and Bristol Companies began, immediately after their Grant, to
make Adventures in Trade and Settlements. The London Company pursuing them to
the Southward of the Bay called Chesapeak, and the Bristol Company to the
Eastward, beginning at Sagadahoc River.

In 1620 a Dispute arose between those Companies about the former's Right to
fish at Cape-C^d, His Majesty's further Right three Degrees more to the
Northward.
upon which a new Patent was granted to the latter, and several other Noblemen
and Gentlemen, for all the Country lying from 40 D. to 48 D. North Latitude,
which is three Degrees further to the Northward than the former Grant, and
takes in the greatest Part of Acadie or Nova Scotia. The Grant extends due West
from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, if not then actually possessed by any
Christian Prince or People. And this new Company was called the Council of
Plymouth or New England; which latter Name was given to this Country upon Capt.
Smith's presenting a Plan of it to the Court of England on his Return in 1614,
and it retains the Name to this Day from twenty Miles East of the City of
New York as far as the River St. Croix, and is now divided into the four
Provinces of Massachuset's-Bay, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Connecticut.
Capt. Smith surveyed the Coast well, and gave Names to many of the Head Lands,
Bays and Rivers, which are mostly continued to this Time.

The North Line of this Grant crosses the North Side of St. Lawrence River a
little above Saguen^y, and running due West strikes the North Side of Lake
Superior, to which the South Boundary of the Hudson's-Bay Company's
Territories do extend. But as the French were before this settled at Quebeck,
Trois Riviers, and several other Places on the North Side of St. Lawrence below
Montreal, which are within this Grant, all that Part of the Grant to the
Northward of the River St. Lawrence as high as Moutreal is invalid. But as they
had not made any Settlements prior to this Grant higher than Montreal, they
have no Right to any part of the Country to the Southward of the River St.
Lawrence below Montreal, nor to the Southward of the North Bounds of this Line
above Montreal.

This New England Company made many Grants of Land, one of which, in
particular, in 1629, gives to Sir Ferdinando Gorge and Captain Mason all that
Tract of Land lying from the Heads of Merrimack River, and Sagadaboc or
Kenebeck River to the Lake Iroquois, now called by the French Champlain, and
the River which empties itself from the said Lake into St. Lawrence River
opposite to St. Peter's Bay, to be called Laconia. Part of this Grant was
afterward sold to the Agent of the Massachuset's-Bay Province, and confirmed
by the Crown in 1639.

The London and New England Companies, being disappointed in their Hopes of
vast Wealth from their Projects, surrendered their Patents to the Crown in
1635. And in the Beginning of Charles I. new Grants were procured: but by
reason of the ensuing Civil Confusions and Divisions in England the Conditions
of these new Grants were not complied with, and People set down at pleasure and
at random. Upon the Restoration of Charles II. those Settlers petitioned for
peculiar Grants, and had them; but it is not pertinent to my present Subject to
trace Royal and other Grants for Lands to the Northward of 34 D. of Latitude
any further. But it is necessary to mention three other Species of his
Majesty's Right to a very large Part of the same Country, which he derives from
European and Indian Treaties.

While the London and Bristol Companies were engaged in trading and settling at
the two Extremes of their Grant, His Majesty's further Right etc.
the Swedes, Fins, and Dutch in 1609 crept into that part of it lying from the
Lat. of about 38 D. to the Lat. 41 D. N. comprehending the present Provinces of
New York, New-Jersies, and some part of Pennsylvania. In 1618 the Governor of
Virginia had several Bickerings with the Dutch, etc. settled in, and trading
to, this Country, as interfering with his Master's Grant. However this served
no other purpose than to frighten the Swedes and Fins under the Protection of
the Dutch, who soon after had a Governor appointed by the States of Holland,
and the Country was called New-Netherlands. The Court of England complained,
but the States disowned it, and said it was only a private Undertaking of an
Amsterdam West India Merchant. Upon which King James I. commissioned a
Governor, and called the Country New-Albion, to which the Dutch submitted. But
during the Civil Troubles in England in Charles I. Reign, and in the
Administration of the Republican Party, the Dutch again established a
Government there, till it was reduced by England in 1664. In 1667 at the Peace
concluded at Breda, between England and the United Provinces, it was stipulated
by the third Article of the Treaty that the English were to remain in
Possession of that whole Country, in Exchange for the Country of Surinam, which
the Dutch had taken from the English. In 1672 the Dutch reduced New-Albion, but
the Year following, at the Treaty of Westminster, it was restored to England,
with whom it has continued ever since. Neither the Treaty of Breda, nor that of
Westminster, specifies the Bounds of New-Netherlands, or New-Albion, but in
general Terms cedes to England all the Rights and Possessions of the Dutch in
North America.

The first Year the Dutch begun to settle in this Country, they entered into an
Alliance with, and by Treaty did acquire the Protection and Sovereignty of, the
Five Nations of Indians then living on the South Side of St. Lawrence River,
opposite to Montreal; who are known to the English under the Names of Mohawks,
Oneydoes, Onondagas, Cayugas, and Senekas; and to the French by the general
Name of Iroquois. This Alliance and Subjection continued without a Breach on
either Side till 1664, when the English upon the taking of New-Netherlands,
which from this time was called New York, immediately entered into a strict
Friendship with those Five Nations, which has held without the lest Breach to
this Day. Notwithstanding the Duke of York, Proprietor of this Country from the
Time it was taken in 1664 to his Accession to the Throne, ordered the Governors
of New York to give the French Priests all the Encouragement in their Power to
settle among the Five Nations. But Col. Dungan, who was his Governor when he
mounted the Throne, though a Roman Catholic, was so much of an Englishmen that
he ever persuaded the Indians not to receive them, prevailed on them not to
make Peace with the French in 1687, and effectually prevented them from
becoming the Subjects of the French King. But his Measures were not agreeable
to those his Master had taken with the French Court, at whose Request he was
soon after removed from his Government, because he had not procured a Peace
with the Indians for the French, and admitted them to settle and gospelize
among them, as the King his Master had ordered him.
The Five Nations by this Treaty acknowledged to the Governor of New York at
Albany, That they had given their Lands and submitted themselves to the King of
England. And in a few Years after they desired and had the Duke of York's Arms
put up at each of their Castles, as Tokens of their being Subjects and under
his Protection. The above Treaty was made three Years preceding the first the
French ever made with them, for they were constantly at War with the Five
Nations, as appears by their own, as well as our, Historians, from 1603, when
they first settled at Canada, to 1667, when they entered into a Treaty of
Friendship only, which continued till 1683, when the French most perfidiously
broke it. The above Right of Sovereignty and Property, conveyed to us, the Five
Nations recognized by a Treaty in 1684, and by another at Albany in 1687. And
at this last Treaty, when Col. Dungan, Governor of New York, could not support
them openly, having positive Orders from King James II. to procure Peace for
the French, they expressed themselves to the Governor and Commissioners of
New York in these Words, Brethren, you tell us the King of England is a very
great King, and why should not you join with us in a very just Cause, when the
French join with our Enemies in an unjust Cause? O Brethren, we see the Reason
of this; for the French would fain kill us all, and when that is done they
would carry all the Beaver Trade to Canada, and the King of England would lose
the Land likewise; and therefore, O great Sachem, beyond the great Lake, awake
and suffer not those poor Indians that have given themselves and their Lands
under your Protection, to be destroyed by the French without a Cause. All which
Grants they further confirmed by several subsequent Treaties, and a Deed of
Sale of all their hereditary and conquered Country, for a valuable
Consideration, in 1701. Which was also renewed 1726; and again, very
particularly so, at a Treaty held at Lancaster in the Province of Pennsylvania
in 1744. But as Treaties with the Natives of America by European Powers may not
be thought sufficient, or be admitted, in support of a Claim to Property and
Jurisdiction, in a European national Discussion, unless confirmed by a European
Treaty between contending Nations for American Rights, I have not quoted any,
or shall I, (though there are many subsisting in almost every part of his
Majesty's North-American Dominions, as much to the Purpose of Property and
Jurisdiction as those of the Five Nations) but those that relate to the
Iroquois, because they are fully and amply confirmed by France to Great Britain
in the Treaties of Utrecht and Aix La Chapelle. They are there acknowledged to
be Subjects of, and the Dominion over them is ceded to, the Crown of
Great Britain; and it is stipulated that neither they, nor any other Indians,
who were Friends to the English should be molested by the French, but that the
Subjects of both Crowns should enjoy free Liberty of going and coming to the
Colonies of either, for the Promotion of Trade as a common Benefit. But as the
Treaties of Utrecht and Aix La Chapelle refer the Dominion of each Crown over
all the Indians in North America, except the Iroquois, to be settled by
Commissaries after the Ratifications were exchanged, the Treaties that have
from time to time been made by his Majesty's Governments in North America with
the Indians, will be of great Service if ever this Affair should come upon the
Tapis. And if our Governors had known the Importance of such Treaties, they
might have improved the Opportunities they have had with more Clearness and
Precision than they have done in some Instances, both as to Dominion and
Property.

Those Cessions of the Five Nations confirmed by France to Great Britain are of
infinite more Importance than they appear to be at first sight; for they are
further and conclusive Proofs for the utter Exclusion of any French Pretensions
to the Five great Lakes, all the Country between the Lakes, all the River and
Country of the Ohio, And a vast Extent of Territory besides. But to have a
nearer View, and to convey a more adequate Idea of the vast Importance of these
Cessions, we must ascertain what is the Extent of the Five Nations, Hereditary
and Conquered Country.

The French Historians tell us, that when they settled at Canada in 1603, The
Hereditary Country of the Five Nations.
which is six Years before the Dutch possessed themselves of New-Netherlands,
now called New York, the Iroquois lived in that Part of the Country extending
upon the South Banks of the River St. Lawrence from the Mouth of the Iroquois
or Sorrel, River, as high up St. Lawrence as to be opposite to the West End of
Lake Sacrement, and from the West End of the said Lake through that and Lake
Iroquois or Champlain, and Iroquois River to its Mouth, which is opposite to
St. Peter's-Bay. This being the earliest Account any Europeans have of them, we
may fairly conclude this to be their hereditary or native Country.

The same Authority acquaints us, The conquered Country of the Five Nations.
that they found the Iroquois engaged in a just and necessary War with the
Adironda^s or Algonkins, a powerful Nation of Indians, who then lived where the
Utawawas are now situated, and forced the Iroquois to leave their own Country
and fly to the Banks of the Lakes Ontario and Erie; which, with the Country
lying between those Lakes and Hudson's River, as low as Albany, and the Forks
of the Rivers Delaware, Susquchanah and Ohio, they have ever since made their
chief Residence, and do now continue in the Possession of; except those Parts
they have sold to the English and made particular Grants of, especially upon
Mohawks River, upon Lake Ontario, where the English Fort Oswego was built in
1727, and those Parts about the Forks of the Rivers Delaware, Susquchanah and
Ohio in the Province of Pennsylvania that they have sold to the Proprietors of
that Province. Upon their Removal to this Part of the Country the Satanas, or
Shacuonons, who then lived round the Lakes Ontario and Erie, warred against
them; but the Iraqu^is soon drove them out of the Country, and they fled as far
to the Westward as the Banks of the Mississippi. By this Breach with the
Satanas the Iroquois improved so much in the Art of War, and so far recovered
their Spirits, which were before depressed by the Algonkins, that now they
thought themselves a Match for them: and as Indians never forget an Injury, nor
rest till their Revenge is satiated, they immediately after their Victory over
the Satanas renewed the War with the Algonkins, in which they had such Success
as not only to recover their hereditary Dominions, but also to drive the
Algonkins from their own Country to that where Quebeck now stands, and never
rested till they had destroyed the whole Nation, except a few who put
themselves under the Protection of the French at Quebeck; and those that have
descended from them that escaped the Fury of the Iroquois are still in the
Neighborhood of Quebeck; but the Algonkins have never been considered as of
any Consequence in either Peace or War, since their Wars with the Iroquois.

Fire Arms and Tools of Iron and Steel having never been seen in this Part of
the World till the French introduced them, the Novelty and Usefulness of them,
together with their alluring Toys and Tins^ls, and the French Demand for the
Indians Furs and Skins, brought all the Indians between Quebeck and the Lakes,
except the Iroquois, to the French to trade: but as the French had protected
the Algonkins and actually assisted them against the Iroqu^^ they could not be
prevailed upon to have any Com^^rce with the French, who thereupon commenced
the Allies of all the Indians that came to Quebeck, and prevailed on them to
join in a War against the Iroquois, whom they were now determined to extirpate,
never dreaming of much Difficulty to accomplish it, as they had the Advantage
of Fire Arms and a vast Superiority in Numbers of Indians.

The first Action after this Coalition happened upon the Banks of Lake
Iroquois, and proved to the Disadvantage of the Iroquois; for the French kept
themselves undiscovered till the Moment they begun to join battle, and their
Fire Arms surprised the Iroquois so much that they were put into Confusion.
This Victory and the Fire Arms giving the French Indians new Confidence, they
became fierce and insolent, despising the Commands of their Captains, and on
all Occasions rashly attacked the Enemy, who were obliged to keep themselves
upon the defensive, and to make up what they wanted in Force by Stratagem and a
skilful Management of the War, in which they succeeded so well that they
destroyed great Numbers of the Enemy, and lost but very few of their own
People. One Stratagem they made use of in this critical Conjuncture, was an
Acceptance of an Offer made them by the Governor of Canada to send some French
Priests among them; but as soon as they got them in their Possession, they made
no other Use of them than as Hostages to oblige the French to stand neuter. And
being now furnished with Fire Arms from the Dutch, they gave full scope to
their Revenge against their Enemy Indians. The first they met with were the
Quatoghies or Hurons, as the French call them, and the Remains of the
Algonkins, whom they defeated in a dreadful Battle fought within a few Miles of
Quebeck. The French own if the Iroquois had known their Weakness at that Time,
they might have easily destroyed their whole Colony.

This Defeat in Sight of the French Settlements struck Terror into all their
Indian Allies, who at that Time were very numerous, because of the Trade which
supplied them with many use^ Conveniences. The Nipiceriniens who then lived on
the N^^th Banks of St. Lawrence River, fled upon this to the Northward as far
as Lake Abitibis. The Remainder of the Quatoghies or Hurons, with the Utawawas
and several other Nations, scampered off South-Westward. But soon after they
began to be in want of the European Commodities from the French, and in order
to supply themselves they returned to Quebeck; and by this Means the Places of
their Retreat was discovered to the Iroquois, whose Revenge not being yet
satisfied, they immediately after attacked them in their new Settlements, and
by the Year 1650 entirely extirpated or adopted all the Nations of Indians that
resided on both Sides the River St. Lawrence above Quebeck, and on both Sides
the Lakes Ontario, Erie, and Huron: which they never could have accomplished
had they not strictly followed one Maxim formerly in use among the Romans, viz.
the encouraging the People of other Nations to incorporate with them. Like them
also when they have subdued any People and satiated their Revenge, by some
cruel Examples, they adopt the rest, who if they behave well enjoy the same
Rank and Privileges with their own People, so that some of their Captives have
afterward become their greatest Sachems and Captains. In 1672 they conquered
and incorporated the Illinois Indians residing upon the River Illinois, which
rises near Lake Michigan, and disembogues into the Mississipi. And they also
then incorporated the Satanas that they formerly drove from the Lakes Ontario
and Erie. And the Rivers Illinois and Mississipi make the Western Bounds of
their Conquests, and of their Deed of Sale to the Crown of Great Britain in
1701. They also conquered the New York or Hudson's-River Indians, the Delaware,
Susquehanah, Ohio, and other Indians in the Provinces of New York,
Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia by 1673. The Twightwees, or Miamis,
residing on the River Oubache or St. Jerome, they conquered in 1685.

In short the nearest Indians, as they were attacked, fled to those that were
further off, where they followed them, and not only entirely subdued the
vanquished, but them that received them. And they carried their Arms and
Conquests as far as New England and the Utawawas River to the Eastward, to
Hudson's-Bay Company's Territories to the Northward, to the Illinois and
Mississipi Rivers Westward, and to Georgia Southward, adopting those whom they
did not destroy, and making them their Vassals and Tributaries. The Tusearoras,
that formerly lived in Carolina, upon their Expulsion from thence by the People
of Carolina in 1711, fled to the Iroquois, and were incorporated with, and to
this Day reside among them. And since that they are generally called the Six
Nations. The Cowetas or Creek Indians that reside in Georgia are in the same
Friendship with them.

These Conquests of the Five Nations have not proved temporary, or merely
nominal, for all the Nations round them have for many Years entirely submitted
to them, and pay a yearly Tribute to them in Wampum, or Indian Money; they dare
neither make War nor Peace without their Consent, except those who quit their
Nations, and get under the immediate Protection and Support of the French. Two
old Men commonly go about every Year or two to receive this Tribute; and their
Sach^ms are often seen issuing their Orders with as arbitrary an Authority as a
Roman Dictator.

For further Proof of their Right to the Country they have conquered, they have
in all their Treaties with his Majesty's Governments respecting it, reserved to
themselves a Right to demand a further Consideration for all unsettled Lands
that they, nor their Ancestors, have not made particular Grants of to distinct
Governments and received a valuable Consideration for; and they always do
demand a Consideration and have it, as our Settlements do extend further into
their Country, before they will execute a Deed of Conveyance, insisting that
the Country belongs to them in Right of Conquest, having bought it with their
Blood, and taken it from their Enemies in fair War. Thus the Proprietors of
Pennsylvania in 1736 bought of them all the Land on both Sides the Forks of the
Susquehanah River as far South as the Province extends, and to the Northward to
those called the Endless Mountains or Kitiochtinny Hills as far as the Province
extends that Way. This Purchase Includes all that Part of the River and Country
of the Ohio that lay^ in this Province, which gives us a further Right to such
Part. The Government of Maryland also purchased the Remainder of all their
Claims in that Province in 1744. And the Government of Virginia paid them in
1744, two hundred Pounds in Goods at Market Price, and two hundred Pounds in
Gold, for a D^ed of Sale for the Remainder of all the Lands that are, or may
be, by the King's Appointment in Virginia; which is another Proof of the rest
of the River and Country of the Ohio, which is in this Province, belonging to
his Majesty. But they desired a further Consideration when the Settlements
increased much further back, which the Commissioners were at last obliged to
give them Encouragement to hope for. The Particulars of which Grants, and the
Indian Manner of nogociating about Lands, with a full Account of their
Treaties, may be seen in Colden's judicious History of the Five Nations.

From this Detail of historical Facts, it is plain that the Five Nations have a
fair and indubitable Title to their hereditary and conquered Country, and they
have on all Occasions availed themselves of the Advantages resulting from it.

The Extent of their Right by Inheritance and Conquest is to the Eastward, on
the South Side of St. Lawrence, the Western Bounds of New England, and on the
North Side of that River, the Utawawas River and Lake Abitibis. Its South
Western Boundary is from Lake Abitibis to the North East End of Lake Michigan,
and from thence through that Lake to the River Illinois, and from thence down
that River to the Mississipi. And its Western Boundary is from the Confluence
of the Rivers Illinois and Mississipi, as the latter runs South to Georgia.
This is a vast Country, extending about twelve hundred Miles in Length from
North to South, and from seven to eight hundred Miles in Breadth, where the
Five Nations destroyed many Nations, of whom there are now no Accounts among
the English. But the French Geographers, D'Lisle, Du Fur, etc. have in their
late Maps limited their Rights Northward, to a South West Line they have drawn
from Montreal to Lake Toronto, where they also bound them to the Westward, and
allow them only the Country between this Line and our Settlements. However, to
point out the Mistakes, or rather designed Encroachments, of the Maps of
America published in France, of late Years, by Authority, would be almost to
copy the whole of them. Therefore it must give every Briton great Pleasure to
see our Countryman Dr. Mitchel, F. R. S. detecting their Mistakes and designed
Encroachments, and almost wholly restoring us to our just Rights and
Possessions, as far as Paper will admit of it, in his most elaborate and
excellent Map of North America just published; which deserves the warmest
Thanks and Countenance from every good Subject in his Majesty's Dominions.

The Five Nations never alienated any Part of their hereditary or conquered
Country to any but his Majesty and his Subjects. But in 1672 the French, when
at Peace with the Five Nations, persuaded them to allow a House to be built on
the North Side of the East Entrance into Lake Ontario, under the Pretense of a
Store for Merchandise. Under the same Pretense they built several other Houses
the next Year about the Lakes; but they soon converted these trading Houses
into such Forts as the Five Nations could not reduce without Cannon and knowing
how to use them. However they complained to the Governor of Canada of this
Usurpation, and told him, They could place no Confidence in the French, for
under the Pretense of building Houses that might be a Rendezvous for Merchants,
and that only Beavers and Merchandise should enter them, they had made them
Places of Retreat for Soldiers, and for Arms and Ammunition of War; whereby
they had stopped the Growth of the Tree of Peace that had been planted, and
prevented its Branches from covering their Countries. And the Governor of
New York protested also against these Forts as Encroachments upon the King of
Great-Britain's Territories. But notwithstanding this, in 1684, the Year a
Rupture broke out again with the French and Five Nations, they built another
Fort, with four Bastions, at Naigara Falls in the Straight between Lakes
Ontario and Erie; which was also protested against by the Governor of New York
as P. Charlevoix, etc. do confess. In 1725 they built Crown-Point or St.
FREDERICK'S Fort on Lake Iroquois or Champlain. And since the Peace of Utrecht
and that of Aix La Chapelle they have built several other Forts, so that now
they have twenty Forts, besides Block-Houses, or Stockade Trading Houses, and
one Fort they lately took from us on the Ohio River, in the Country of the Five
Nations which France ceded to the Crown of Great Britain at the Treaty of
Utrecht, and confirmed by that of Aix La Chapelle. Which finishes what I have
to remark on his Majesty's Rights and Possessions to the Northward of Latitude
34 D; and now for our Rights to the Southward of that Latitude.

We not only fust explored the Eastern Coast from Cape FLORIDA to the North
Polar Circle, His Majestys Right from 29 D. to 34 D. N. Lat.
but from Sir Walter Raleigh's Grant in 1584, the Coast to the Southward of
Chesapeak-Bay has been constantly visited, and most of our first Settlements in
North America were to the Southward of that Bay, and in that Part now called
North Carolina; the Particulars and Success of which may be seen at large in
most Collections of Voyages to, and Histories of, North America. From these
Settlements the People spread to the Southward of N. Lat. 34 D. and established
themselves without any Grant from the Crown, but what had been forfeited or
resumed, till 1630, when King Charles I. granted all the Country and the
Islands on the Sea Coast of the Atlantic Ocean lying between 31 D. and 36 D. N.
Lat. and from thence due West to the South Seas, to Sir Robert Heath by the
Name of Carolina.

In 1665 King Charles II. granted to several Noblemen and Gentlemen all the
Country lying on the Atlantic Ocean between 29 D. and 36 D. 30 M. N. Lat. and
from thence due West to the Pacific Ocean, no Christian Prince or People
intervening, by the Name of Carolina. This Grant comprehends the present
Provinces of North and South Carolina and Georgia, and all the Province of
Louisiana, since usurped by the French. In School Col. Welsh traveled from
Charlestown, South Carolina, to the Mississipi River just below Old Kappa,
where Ferdinand Soto, a Spaniard from Florida, first discovered the Mississipi
in 1541. In School also, Sir Daniel Cox intended to revive a dormant Title to the
Country granted as above to Sir Robert Heath, but finding the Eastern Coast
already planted, he sent two Ships into the Gulf of Mexico, under the Command
of Capt. William Bond, to explore the South Coast of Carolina, and to make a
Settlement there. One of the Ships entered the Mississipi River, and ascended
it above one hundred Miles, taking Possession of the Country in the King's
Name, leaving in several Places the Arms of England for a Memorial thereof. And
Capt. Bond took several Draughts of the Coast and River as far as he
discovered. And it was not till the Year following, when Sir Daniel Cox was
soliciting a new Patent in England, that M. D' Iberville on the Part of France
hit upon the Mouths of the Mississipi, and built a Fort at one of the
Entrances, as would have been done the Year before by the English if one of
their Ships had not deserted them. From these Particulars relating to the South
Coast we derive a further Right to the Country lying between the 29 and 36 D.
30 M. N. Lat. And on the Western Side of it that is bounded by the Pacific
Ocean, we still have a further Right, founded on the Discoveries of Sir Francis
Drake in 1578, who explored the whole Sea Coast, took formal Possession for
England, and called the Country New-Albion.

To great Part of this Country both the French and Spaniards have not only laid
claim, but have availed themselves of; therefore I shall now consider the
Merits of their Claim.

During the Inattention of England to North America, The Spaniards Right to
Florida.
from Cabot's Discovery of it in 1496 to Sir Walter Raleigh's Patent in 1584,
the Spaniards got footing i^ this Territory on the Eastern Coast, and in 1565
utterly extirpated the French out of it, who had been endeavoring to establish
a Colony there from 1555. And the Spaniards were in Possession of a large Part
of Carolina under the Name of FLORIDA when the Treaties of 1667 and 1670 were
concluded between England and Spain. By those Treaties both Nations were to
hold whatever each then possessed in America, whereby Spain has a Right to part
of Carolina, still called Florida A propos, by the fame Authority, we have an
undoubted Right to the Bays of Compeache and Honduras; for at the Conclusion of
those Treaties we had Colonies. actually planted by the Government of Jamaica
at both those Bays. Upon which his Majesty's Claims to both of them, and his
Subjects Right to cut Logwood, etc. there, is as justly founded as the Spanish
Claim is to any part of Florida. But notwithstanding the Spaniards have drove
us from both, and are effectually preventing us from recovering our footing
there by fortifying and planting Colonics.
. In 1702 and 1703 the Spaniards, and Indians of this Country in Alliance with
them, were defeated in two memorable Battles, drove to the Southward of St.
John's River in South Carolina, which is just to the Southward of the South
Boundary of Georgia, by his Majesty's Subjects of Carolina, and would have been
utterly extirpated out of FLORIDA, if Governor Moore had not precipitately
raised the Siege of Augustine at the Appearance of two Spanish Frigates which
could have done him no Injury. And in 1714 the Creek Indians completed their
Extirpation out of FLORIDA, the Town of Augustine only excepted. Therefore in
1738, when the Court of Spain claimed a vast Tract of Country to the Northward
of this River to prevent our settling it, as the Colony of Georgia was forming,
it was stipulated between the two Crowns that Great Britain should not extend
her Settlements to the Southward of the South Branch of St. John's River. But
the Charter for Georgia granted to the late Trustees, and the Commission and
Instructions lately given to the Governor of Georgia, does not extend the South
Bounds of this Province beyond the South Branch of the River Altamaba; so all
the Country to the Southward of the Altamaba to the South Branch of St. John's
River continues part of South Carolina Province.

In the late War with Spain the Spaniards erected several Forts and Settlements
to the Northward of St. John's River, Spanish Encroachments in Georgia since
the Peace at Aix La Chapelle.
which General Oglethorpe demolished. But I have advice from Georgia that since
the Peace of Aix La Chapelle they have again built several Forts to the
Northward of St. John's River, and last Summer a considerable Number of
Families came from the Havanah to settle upon the Appalation Fields, the finest
Country in the World perhaps, which are absolutely to the Northward of the
Stipulation in 1738, and consequently within his Majesty's Territories. This
Usurpation, with their unwarrantable Expulsion of us from the Bay of Honduras,
and the searching and seizing many of o^^ Ships upon the High Seas, pursuing no
other Traffic but from one part of his Majesty's Dominions to another, since
the Peace of Aix La Chapelle, seems to portend the same Evils to us that we now
experience from French Encroachments and Depredations, if we are not speedily
restored to our just Rights and Possessions, and effectually secured against
future Insults and Encroachments of the like sort. But if on the contrary we
tamely submit to them, what are we not to expect next? Does not pocketing one
Affront or Injury always give an Invitation to another? Has not fatal
Experience convinced this Nation of the Truth of this?

P. Charlevoix says, in 1555 the French turned their Thoughts to planting of
Colonies in the South part of North America, The Claims of France to Carolina,
etc.
and in 1562 Admiral Colinie undertook a Settlement in Florida, but did not
succeed. In 1562 also, M. Rebeaut went to Florida, and built a Fort at
Port Royal, and called it Charles-Fort, established a Colony there which he
afterward destroyed, and returned to France in 1563. In 1563 M. Laudinea went
to Florida and built a Fort which he called Carolini, and went on settling till
1565 when Don M^nendez destroyed the whole Establishment, since which the
French have not had the least Footing on the Eastern Coast of Florida, or more
properly speaking the Provinces of North and South Carolina and Georgia, nor do
they lay any Claim to any part of this Coast that I know of. Now let us follow
them to the South Coast of Carolina, where they have usurped a vast Territory
belonging to the Crown of Great Britain, and planted a powerful Colony, to
which they have given the name of Louisiani.

By M. Joliet's Journal of the French Enterprises to discover and get footing
on the great River Mississipi, The Origin and Progress of the French Discovery
and Settlement of the Mississipi, or Louisiani.
it appears that he in 1673 traveled from Canada over Land, and discovered
some part of the River Mississipi, upon which he returned. The next French
Adventurer was the Sieur De La Salle, who in the Years 1679, 1680, 1682, and
1683, went from Lake Ontario, through the Lakes Erie, Huron, and Michigan, and
the River Illinois, to the Mississipi, and returned to Canada. In 1684 he went
from Rochelle in Old France, with two hundred Soldiers, in hopes of finding out
an Entrance into the Mississipi in the Gulf of Mexico, but he missed it, and
fell in with the Bay of St. Bernard, or St. Louis, between 28 D. and 29 D. N.
Lat. just to the Southward of the South Line of Carolina Ch^^ter granted by
Charles II. in 1665. Here he built a Fort, and in traveling by Land in pursuit
of the Mouth of the Mississipi, he was murdered by his own People, who
afterward abandoned the Fort at St. Bernard, and went to C^^^da, without
discovering the Entrance into the Mississipi. Thus fell that bold,
enterprising, and valuable Gentleman the Sieur De La Salle, who was an Honor
to his Country, after which the Mississipi was neglected by the French till the
latter End of School, when M. D'Iberville made an attempt to discover its Mouth
in the Gulf of Mexico, and in 1699 he did discover an Entrance, and built a
Fort near the Mouths. In 1701 the next Establishment was made at the Mibile
River. In 1702 Isle Dauphin begun to be settled. But all these Settlements took
no Form till 1708. In 1712 Louis XIV, granted the Sieur Crozat a Patent for all
Lands bounded by New-Mexico, and by the Lands of the English of Carolina, all
the Settlements, Ports, Havens, Rivers, and principally the Port and Haven of
the Isle Dauphin, heretofore called Massacre; the River of St. Louis,
heretofore called Mississipi, from the Edge of the Sea as far as the Illinois;
together with the River of St. Philip, heretofore called the Missourys; and of
St. Jerome, heretofore called the Oubache. With all the Countries, Territories,
Lakes within Land, and the Rivers which fall directly or indirectly into the
above part of St. Louis. In the Preamble to this vague, loose, and
indeterminate Grant, the King sets forth no other Title to it than the Sieur De
La Salle's Voyage in 1683, as the first Discovery of the Mississipi,
acknowledging also that the King did not give Orders for the establishing a
Colony till after the Peace of Ryswick in 1697. And the King also expressly
declares the principle Object of this Grant to be, that a Communication may be
made between Canada and Louisiani by help of the Lakes and Rivers, which of all
things we ought to prevent the Continuance of, or adieu to the Peace and
Prosperity of our Colonies. When this Patent is dated we were at War with both
France and Spain, and that we took no Notice of it at the Treaty of Utrecht is
not to be wondered at, when we call to mind the Characters and Abilities of the
Negociators on our Part of that Treaty. In 1714 they built a Fort, which now
mounts fourteen Cannon, at Alibamous in the Heart of our Subjects the Upper
Creek Indian^, and in the Center of that part, to the Eastward of the
Mississipi, of the Province we now call Georgia, which Spot we actually
possessed thirty Years before by trading Houses for the Indians. In 1717 the
Capital of Louisiani, called New-Orleans, was founded. And that Year the
Patentee, finding his Enterprise very unprofitable, relinquished his Patent to
the Regent of France, upon which the famous, or rather infamous Mississipi
Company, or Bubble, was formed. This failing, to the Ruin of Th^^sands, the
King took it into his own Hands where it has continued ever since, and is now
vastly increased in Inhabitants and Fortifications. This is the Account of the
Origin and Progress of the French Usurpation of the Mississipi that they have
been so obliging as to publish to the World themselves. And certainly if there
be any such thing as Law or Justice upon this earthly Ball between Nation and
Nation, the French have just as much Rign to that Part of Louisiani to the
Northward of twenty-nine Degrees of North Latitude, as a Frenchman would have
to one of the King's Forests in this Island upon coming from France, walking
through it, finding only a Notice stuck up at each End that no Person must enter
there without a Ticket from the Ranger, and then returning to the Middle and
impudently setting himself down.

As to the Sieur De La Salle's Discovery of St. Bernard, or St. Louis, Bay, The
French Settlements in NewMexico a Usu^ pation on the Spaniards, and replete
with the worst Consequences to the Crown of Spain.
to the Southward of the South Bounds of Carolina, and the French claiming it
in Consequence of that Discovery, it behooves the Spaniards to attend to that
especially as it is within three hundred Miles of some of the richest Mines of
New-Mexico, which perhaps they will experience, before long, the French have as
keen an Appetite for as any Spaniard whatever. And no Man I believe can treat
this as a chimerical Suspicion, when he recollects the constant Encroachments
the French have made upon the Spaniards in the Island of Hispaniola or St.
Domingo ever since they got footing there, and upon all their Neighbors in all
Parts of the Globe at all Times. But if they should not further encroach on the
Spaniards in New-Mexico, if they settle St. Bernard's-Bay, there cannot be any
Doubt but they will avail themselves of the greatest Part of the Trade of
New-Mexico; for by their Settlements at the Mississipi, they are come into a
pretty handsome Share of it already, as fully appeared by the Capture of the
Golden Lion from the Mississipi in the late War, which Ship had an immense Sum
of Money on Board that she took in at the Mississipi. And this could not come
from thence if the French had not exchanged their European Manufactures for it
with the New-Mexicans. Therefore it is of the utmost Importance to Spain to
deprive them of that Part of New-Mexico which they claim; and why they did not
oblige France to annihilate this Claim at the Treaty of Utretcht is very easily
accounted for, when we recollect Louis XIV. had just put his Grandson on the
Throne of Spain.

From the Account I have thus collected of the Discoveries, Rights and
Possessions of the Crown of Great Britain in North America, it is clear that
France cannot have any just Pretensions to any Part thereof from the North P^^
to the twenty-ninth Degree of North Latitude on the Atlanti^^ ^cean, and from
thence due West to the South-Seas; except to fish and cure Fish at
Newfoundland, to the Isles in the Galf of St. Lawrence, and to Canada or
New-France. And these they could never have had any Pretensions to if
North-Ame^r^ca had from the original Discovery of the Cabots been properly
attended to by England.

By the above State of his Majesty's Rights, The Limits of Canada or NewFrance
which the French availed themselves of by the Neglects of England.
Canada is pared down to very narrow Limits, compared with what the French
Historians and Map-makers (under the Authority of Government) delineate it to
be. But there is no Foundation for any Pretense to extend this Province to the
Northward beyond the South Bounds of Hudson's-Bay Company's Territories and
New-Britain or Labradore; to the Westward beyond Lake Abitibis and the Course
of the Utawawas River that disembogues directly opposite to Montreal; to the
Southward beyond the North Side of the River of St. Lawrence; and to the
Eastward beyond the Limits of New-Britain or Labradore. I say this is Canada or
New-France, and no Authority can be produced for its Extention any way. And
this is the only Footing the French are entitled to upon the Continent of
North America. And I do repeat that they never would have had even this if the
Court of England had but attended to its Interests in North America. For the
Cabots first explored the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and two English Ships went up
the River in 1527. Secretary Walsingham being informed of an Opening South of
Newfoundland, fitted out Sir Humphry Gilbert, who sailed up St. Lawrence River
and took Possession for the Crown of England in 1583. And it was 1603 before
the French begun to settle any where within the Gulf of St. Lawrence, according
to their own Historians. In 1629 Canada was taken from the French by Sir David
Kirk, but it was given them by the Treaty of St. Germain in 1632 without any
Specification of Limits, which gives them all the Right they have to any Part
of it. And Queen Anne in 1711, when ^he purposed the Reduction of it, dispersed
a Manifesto in the Country, setting forth, That Canada belonged to the English
by Priority of Discovery, and what the French possessed there was by Grants
from the English, and consequently held it only as a Fief, therefore where the
Possessors turn Enemy, it reverts. I am not Lawyer enough to determine the
Validity of such a Claim, but we may be assured nothing but the longest Sword
will ever settle the Limits of this Province.

Thus the Crown of Great-Britain's Rights and Possessions in North America
stand in Opposition to those of France; and by the Law of Nations our Claims
are certainly valid with Europeans against Europeans that encroach upon
American Claims thus founded.

But methinks I hear the sober and thinking Part of Mankind say, His Majesty' s
Colonies accused of Frauds, Abuses, and Cruelties to the Indians, and the Crown
of having no Title to America from them.
Though our Claims may be valid against France, how came we by those Rights and
Possessions? They did not come to us by Inheritance? Prior Discovery and
Pre-occupancy gives only a Right to derelict Lands, which those of
North America were not, being full of Inhabitants, who undoubtedly had as good
a Title to their own Country as the Europeans have to theirs. Nor could our
Right arise from Conquest, if we did conquer the Natives; as it is hard to
conceive how a Conquest, where there was no preceding Injury or Provocation,
could create a Right. Therefore all a European Power could give, was an
exclusive Grant to particular Subjects for negociating and purchasing from the
natural Lords and Proprietors, and thereupon a Power of Jurisdiction. We fear
the first Settlers of our Provinces never treated the Savages well, but
encroached upon their Lands by Degrees till they fraudulently or forcibly
turned them out of all, using the barbarous Methods, in some measure, practiced
by the Spaniards on the Southern Continent of America, which have made them
detestable to the whole Christian World.

These and such like Enquiries, Doubts and Fears, I have often met with since I
came to Europe. Nay, this very Week a Pamphlet has been published, calle^ the
State of the British and French Colonies, etc. which accuses his Majesty's
Colonies with committing Frauds, Abuses, Encroachments, Murders, and every
Species of Villainy, against the poor Indians of North America, by which they
have been alienated from, and induced to take up Arms with the French against
Us; and all the Evils America labors under have been thus produced. All these
Accusations are authorized by some of, what are called, the Histories of
New England and other Parts of North America, wrote by Subjects of his Majesty.

Every Person that knows any thing of North America in general, Most Histories
of North America by his Majesty's Subjects exploded.
or of any one Province in particular, must be sensible that the Histories or
Works of Mather, Oldmixon, Neal, Salmon, etc. who have chiefly copied each
other, and of all that have copied after them, relative to North America, might
almost as properly have called their Works Histories of Prester John's, or the
Hottentots Country, and their Manners and Conduct, as Histories of
North America, or any other Title they bear. Even Mather himself, said Oldmixon
in his British Empire in America, had eighty-seven Falsehoods in fifty-six
Pages. In short, there is not one Work yet published to the World in our
Language that in any Degree deserves the Title of a History of North America,
but Smith's History of Virginia, and Douglas 's Summary, Historical and
Political, of the first Planting, progressive Improvements, and present State
of the British Settlements in North America, etc. published a few Years ago at
Boston in New England. And this last is valuable for being the best Collection
of Facts in general, for a future Historian, that was ever made or published.
But -- as to Histories of the Indians, there is not one published in our
Language that deserves the Title, nor any Accounts of them, that I have seen,
are worth reading, but that of Colden, which is justly called a History of the
Five Nations, and is a Masterly Performance. Therefore I am very glad the
Author of the State of the British and French Colonies, has no other Authority
to found his Accusation against the Colonies in general than the exploded
Historians, or rather Anti-Historians, of North America, Most, if not all, our
Maps also, preceding that by Dr. Mitchell, are very erroneous and injurious to
his Majesty's just Rights.

Such erroneous Books and Maps, upon such important Subjects, are of worse
Consequence than People generally imagine; for, besides misleading ourselves,
the French quote them against us, even in National Discussions, as Authorities.
Therefore I am sorry to see the Author of the State of the British and French
Colonies, etc. who, I am confident, wrote with a View to inform and serve his
Country, attempting to prove the Independency of the Five Nations of Indians,
who in almost every Treaty they ever made with his Majesty's Governments have
acknowledged themselves the Subjects of Great Britain, and have yielded their
Dominions to the Sovereignty of this Crown; though it is true some of their Great
Men, when they have been exasperated on particular Occasions, have insisted in
Debate that they were born free, and would be so. And this is the only
Authority, with a few of them having gone over to the French, that can be
produced for their denying their Subjection, since it took place in 1664, or of
their disputing his Majesty's Right to their Territories since their Deed of
Sale for them in 1701, except when the Conditions of their Deed has not been
complied with, which sometimes has happened till a Congress could be held by
the Provinces with them. This Author has also proposed a Plan for settling the
Limits of North America with the French, whereby he gives the French Two Thirds
of the Whole, for the Sake of enjoying the other Third in Peace and Quiet. Now
can any Man, upon cool Reflection, imagine, that if the French are suffered to
avail themselves of, and settle, Two-Thirds of North America, we shall enjoy
the other Third in Peace? No; if we submit to this, and may judge of the future
by what is past, they will soon have the other Third also. And by making such
Proposals, does it not look as if we doubted the Validity of our Right to the
Whole of our Claim? Good God! why should we give up an Inch of that Territory
which is our just Right, when we are not only able to secure it to ourselves,
but to make the French hold what properly belongs to them by no other Tenure
than that of the Mercy of the Crown of Great Britain? Therefore may Perdition
seize every Proposal that gives them an Acre of his Majesty's just Rights and
Possessions.


and some particular Instances, from other Authorities, of Cruelty and
Injustice between private Persons and the Indians, from which we ought not to
form an Opinion of any People.

I thought myself obliged to make this Preface, before I came to wipe off the
unworthy Aspersions that have been cast on the first Settlers of North America
in direct Terms, supported by Evidence.

Our first Settlers, far from Spanish Injustice and Cruelty, His Majesty's
Subjects in North America acquitted of the Charge of Frauds, Abuses and
Cruelties to the Natives, and his Majesty's Title to North America acquired
from the Indians proved to be just and fair.
sought to gain the Natives by strict Justice in their Dealings with them, as
well as by all the Endearments of Kindness and Humanity. To lay an early
Foundation for a firm and lasting Friendship, they assured the Americans that
they did not come among them as Invaders but Purchasers, and therefore called
an Assembly of them together to enquire who had the Right to dispose of their
Lands; and being told it was their Sachems or Princes, they thereupon agreed
with them for what Districts they bought, publicly and in open Market. If they
did not pay a great Price for their Purchases, yet they paid as much as they
were worth. For it must be considered that Lands were of little Use to the
Natives, and therefore but of little Value. They lived chiefly on Fish and Fowl
and Hunting, because they would not be at the Pains to clear and break up the
Ground. And as for their Meadows and Marshes, they were of no Use at all, for
want of Neat Cattle to feed them, of which there were none in those Parts of
the World. The English had no sooner made some necessary Provision for
themselves, than they applied their Cares for the Benefit of the Indians, by
endeavoring to bring them from their wild Manner of Life to the civil and
polite Customs of Europe. For this Purpose they marked out Land to build Indian
Towns, supplied them with all proper Utensils for Building, prescribed to them
Forms of Government, and above all omitted no Pains to bring them acquainted
with the Gospel; for whatever the first Adventurers to North America might be,
the first real Settlers were industrious, peaceable, conscientious Persons,
dissenting from the Discipline of the established Church, though agreeing with
it in Doctrine, who removed into those remote Regions, upon no other View than
to enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences without Hazard to themselves, or
Offense to others; they were not Criminals, nor were they necessitous; nor had
they, with their Brethren, made any Attempt to overthrow the Church and State
at Home, and being disappointed therein went to America to secure a Retreat for
their Brethren, as the high-flying Mr. Salmon vainly imagines, and most falsely
and injuriously asserts they did. And what I say of them, their uniform proper
Conduct, and meek Principles of Obedience, on all Occasions, fully prove. After
they were arrived some time, and it was found necessary, they made Laws to
forbid any Person purchasing Lands without the Approbation of the Legislature,
to prevent the Natives being overreached, or ill used in their private
Bargains: And those Lands, lying most convenient for them, have in most of our
Colonies been made unalienable, and never to be purchased out of their Hands,
than which nothing could more demonstrate the Colonies Care and Concern for the
Natives. And this their Conduct to them is fully and conclusively proved by the
Laws of almost every one of our North-American Colonies. Yet nothing could
oblige the Indians to Peace and Friendship in some of our Provinces. They were
alarmed with strong Jealousies of the growing Power of the English, therefore
began a War with a Resolution to extirpate them, before they had too well
established themselves, which forced our People to pursue them through all
their Recesses, till they obliged them to enter into a solemn Treaty of Peace.
Such however was the perfidious Nature of some of the American Savages, that
they soon renewed their Hostilities, though to their own fatal Cost. And ever
since the Settlement of the French at Canada, many Tribes of Indians have
almost constantly, both in Peace and War with the Two Crowns, been animated and
assisted by them to war against some one or other of our Colonies, and have
given them but few Intervals of Peace, and those very short ones, to this Day.

But notwithstanding all the wise, just, and humane Conduct of our Colonies, in
a legislative Character, which has also been extended to all Dealings and
Intercourse with the Natives, I am sensible great Frauds and Abuses have been
imposed upon the Indians by private People, in Defiance of the severest Laws,
and the most punctual Execution of them on Offenders when detected. But
Experience daily convinces us that in the wisest and best regulated Societies,
Laws framed with the greatest Care, and the nicest Judgment, are eluded and
violated; and therefore no wonder if Infant Colonies should find the same
Disregard to Laws, which is to be seen uncorrected under Governments of the
longest Duration and most improved Policy. Consequently there would be just as
much Propriety in charging the People of Great Britain with being Sharpers,
Thieves, Robbers, and Murderers, because every Month a Dozen or two of Persons
in this Kingdom are convicted of, and punished for, these Crimes, and many more
escape both; as it is to charge the Colon^s with Frauds, Abuses, Encroachments,
and Murders upon the poor Indians of America, because a few among them have
been so hardy and diabolical as to perpetrate such Villainies, some of whom
have been punished, and some have escaped.

Upon the whole, his Majesty's Claims in North America are not only valid in
Opposition to those of France, but he also derives a Right from the native
Proprietors of the Soil, his Subjects there having purchased part with their
Money, and the rest has been yielded to them by the true Owners, who have put
themselves and their Lands under the Superintendency and Protection of the
Crown of Great Britain, that they might be secured against the Encroachments
and Depredations of the French. And the Right resulting from the Purchases and
Cessions of the Natives, as much as it is decried and undervalued by some
People, is in fact the only just and equitable one. Therefore I am extremely
sorry to see any of his Majesty's Subjects, at this critical Conjuncture
especially, endeavoring to prove that we derive no Title from the Natives, and
that they are not the Subjects of the Crown of Great Britain; for it not only
gives France a handle against us, but it makes many of his Majesty's sober and
thinking Subjects doubt the Justice of our Cause, and when this is the Case
they do not assist in the common Cause with that Spirit and Ability they
otherwise would do, and which was never wanted to be exerted to the utmost,
more than at this present Time.

CHAP. II. The Discoveries, Rights, and Possessions of France.
THE first French that ever appeared in North America, according to their own
Historians, were some Fishermen from Normandy, who fished on the Banks of
Newfoundland in 1504. In 1506 the Sieur Denis discovered the Entrance into St.
Lawrence River. In 1508 Thomas Aubart entered the River St. Lawrence, The first
Discoveries of the French, and their Right to Canada, or New France
and brought some Savages from thence to France. In 1523 Verazani, a Florentine
in the French King's Service, coasted along the East Side of North America,
going ashore in several Places, and taking Possession for France, according to
the Forms used in those Times, from 37 D. to 50 D. N. Lat. He also sailed up
the River St. Lawrence, and then returned to France without making any
Settlement. In 1534 Cartier discovered Newfoundland, Baye Chaleur in the Gulf
of St. Lawrence, cruized along the Coast of Acadie, and went up the River St.
Lawrence as high as Montreal, taking Possession for France, but made no
Settlement. In 1540 Roberval built a Fort at Cape-Breton, but soon abandoned
it. He made no new Discoveries, and returned to France. In 1598 the Marquis De
La Roche disembarked at the Isle of Sable in Acadie, but made no Establishment
any where. In 1602 Chauvin sailed up the River St. Lawrence as high as Trois
Rivieres. In 1603 Monts entered Port-Mutton in Acadie, visited the ^sle of St.
Croix, sailed as far as Kennebec River in New England, then went to Port Royal
in Acadie, and returned to France in 1606 with all his People. In 1603 the
French first began to settle on the River St. Lawrence, on the North Side near
Trois Rivieres, and in 1608 at Quebeck. They went on settling on the North Side
of the River only, between Quebeck and Montreal, till 1629, when Sir David Kirk
reduced Quebeck and its Dependencies, called Canada or New-France, to the
Obedience of the Crown of Great Britain, which was restored to France by Treaty
in 1632, and they have remained in Possession of it ever since. But certainly
they derive no Right by this Cession to any further Extent of Territory than
what was taken from them, which was only the District and Settlements between
Quebeck and Montreal on the North Side of the River. This is the Way France
acquired Canada, the Limits of which I have stated in Page 28.

By the Treaty of Utrecht, so far confirmed by that of Aix La Chapel, The
Right of the French to the Islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, founded on the
Treaty of Utrecht. The Limits of Acadie or N.-Scotia, specified by the French
in M. Subercass 's Commission.
the Islands of Cape-Breton, St. John's, Anticosta, and all other Islands in
the Gulf of St. Lawrence, were ceded to France; notwithstanding they were again
ours by the Conquest of Acadie or Nova Scotia in 1710, which was surrendered to
her Britannic Majesty with all its Depences expressed in the Governor's
Commission, and all the Islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence were actually
specified in his Commission, and the Limits of Acadie or Nova Scotia were
therein delineated to be what I have stated them in Page 7. But yet our
iniquitous Managers of the Treaty of Utrecht had so far thrown the Power of
stipulating the Terms of Peace into the Hands of the French, that when the
Queen of Great Britain condescended to share, what she had a Right to the whole
of, Cape-Breton with them, and insisted neither Side should fortify, but the
whole remain open for the Convenience of each Nation's Fishery, the French had
so far go^ the Ascendancy as to exclude her from any part of this Island, and
to obtain the pernicious Liberty to fortify it. Mr. Moore, one of the Lords for
Trade and Plantations, was so barefacedly corrupt upon the Discussion of this
Point as to say, to those who urged the Necessity and Utility of excluding the
French from this Island, "Must the French then have nothing?"

By the Treaty of Utrecht also the French have Liberty to fish within thirty
Leagues of Nova Scotia to the Eastward, The French Right to fish within thirty
Leagues of Nova Scotia, founded on the Treaty of Utrecht.
beginning at the Isle of Sables. And,

By the same Treaty also, our corrupt Administration granted to the French
Liberty to catch and cure Fish in the most advantageous Places on that Part of
Newfoundland, from Cape Bonavista running down by the Western Side to Point
Rich.

But, Their Right to catch and cure Fish at Newfoundland derived from the
Treaty of Utrecht.
thank God, these are all the Rights they have any Foundation for in
North America. And by this Deduction of Facts it is plain, that we are indebted
to the constantly Frenchified Royal Stuarts, (among innumerable other of the
severest Curses) for the French Footing on the Continent of North America, and
to our corrupt Frenchified Managers of the Treaty of Utrecht for their Right to
the Islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and to catch and cure Fish at
Newfoundland; which, I say, is all the Rights they have in North America. But
what they have obtained by Encroachments will fully appear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. The Encroachments and Depredations of the French upon his Majesty's
Territories in North America in Times when Peace subsisted in Europe between
the Two Crowns, etc. etc.
I SHALL state the French Encroachments and Depredations in each of his
Majesty's Provinces of North America, as the Continent is now divided by the
Authority of the Crown, beginning to the Northward; whereby we shall have a
clearer Idea of their Situation and Importance, and of the Propriety of the
Measures hereafter to be humbly proposed for extirpating the French and their
Indians out of his Majesty's Territories.

Since the Peace of Aix La Chapelle they have erected in Nova Scotia one Fort
at Beau bassin in the Cod of the Bay of Fundy, French Encroachments and
Depredations in his Majesty's Province of Nova Scotia
and on the South Side of the Isthmus of the South Eastern Peninsula. And
another Fort at Baye Verte on the North Side of this Isthmus, which is not more
than twelve Miles wide between these two Forts. From hence they have furnished
the Cape Sable, or Mickmac, and the Island of St. John's Indians, who make
about three hundred fighting Men, with Arms, Ammunition, Provisions and
Clothing. Upon our Attempt to colonize this Province immediately after the
late War with France, they spirited up these Indians to war against us, by
their ample Supplies; by their giving them a large Bounty for every English
Prisoner they brought to them, and a much larger for every English Scalp they
could produce; by their promising to protect them in their Forts; and by
disguising themselves and occasionally joining the Indians in their Enterprises
against our Settlements. With these three hundred Indians they have constantly
harrassed our infant Colony of Nova Scotia, so that we have made no Settlements
but what have been fortified and picketed all round, which has been attended
with vast Expense. Indeed it is hard to conceive what Distress this handful of
Indians have reduced this Colony to. They cannot clear and break up the Ground,
nor plant nor sow without their Pickets, nor go from one Village to another for
Relief without imminent Danger, from skulking Indians, of being killed and
having their Scalps carried away for the French Bounty, or of being taken and
either put to Death in the most cruel Torments that savage Brutality can
invent, or of being carried away Captive to the French, who have afterward
insisted on a Price for their Redemption, equal to the Price black Slaves are
sold for in our Colonies, under the specious Pretense of their having paid it
to the Indians to save from being put to Death. Thus the French have made us
pay the very Bounty they gave the Indians for captivating our People. The
Indians surprised the Village of Dartmouth one Night, and although it had a Guard
of Soldiers and was picketed in, they burnt the Houses, and put both Men, Women
and Children to death. And from our first Attempt to settle it since the late
War with France, the Indians have been killing or captivating our People
whenever Opportunity presented.

The French also, as soon as they had built those two Forts, threatened to
destroy all the French Subjects of his Majesty and burn their Settlements
without their Forts on the Peninsula, if they did not retreat into the Country
within their Forts; therefore they, who have always inclined to the French on
account of their Religion, etc. though ever indulged in the free Exercise of that
and every thing else, burnt their Houses, destroyed their Plantations, and went
under the Prorection of the French, who assured them of ample Amends for their
Losses and Sufferings. Here they are protected and nourished in an Antipathy to
his Majesty, his Government, and his People, and prove as good Subjects to the
French King as any he has in America. These People became the Subjects of the
Crown of Great Britain when Nova Scotia was reduced in 1710, upon Condition
they did not take up Arms for, nor against us. But, contrary to their Oaths of
Allegiance, many of them have been detected in joining the French and Indians
both in Peace and War against his Majesty's Subjects. There may be in this
Province about ten thousand of these French Neutrals, as they are called,
though some make them amount to fifteen thousand, and others but to seven
thousand. Thus the French have a powerful Colony in the Heart of this his
Majesty's Province.

The French have also rebuilt a Fort in this Province since the Peace of Aix
La Chappelle, at the Entrance into the ^iver of St. John's, on the Western Side
of the Bay of Fundy opposite to, and distant ten Leagues from Annapolis-Royal;
by which they have the Command of the River St. John's Indians, being about an
hundred and fifty fighting Men, whom they occasionally issue upon the People of
the North-East Parts of New England. At the Entrance into this River there is a
capacious Road for Ships of any Burden, and on the North-Side of the Road is a
Straight, not Pistol Shot over, through which there is no passing but at the
Top of the Tide when the Water is upon a Level, for at other times the Fall is
so considerable, especially at low Water, as to make a Descent of thirty Feet.
This Entrance on which the French Fort stands, is lined on both Sides by a
solid Rock, and has more than forty Fathom of Water in its Middle. When you
have passed this Straight the River spreads itself half a Mile in Width, and
with a gentle Current toward its Outlet admits a delightful Navigation for
large Ships, sixty Miles into the Country, and much further for smaller
Vessels; taking its Source from three parts of St. Lawrence River, one of which
is directly opposite to Quebeck. The French have often conveyed Succors and
Merchandise from Old France to Quebeck, both in Peace and War, up this River,
to avoid the Difficulty and Risque of the Navigation of St. Lawrence River. By
this River also they, as Occasion requires, convey Troops and Stores from
Quebeck to the Neutral French, the Indians, and their other Forces in
Nova Scotia. And if they are suffered to remain in Possession of this River
they may always have a Communication between France and Canada in Winter, which
they cannot have only from May to October by St. Lawrence River, and they will
at all times have a much more safe and easy Conveyance to and from Canada than
by St. Lawrence. But what is more material they will be furnished with a
Harbor, more commodiously situated for annoying the British Colonies, by Men
of War and Privateers in Time of War, than that American Dunkirk Louisbourg
itself; and at all times a convenient Port near the Ocean for furnishing Naval
Stores to Old France, and their Sugar Colonies with Lumber of all sorts for the
Construction of Dwelling Houses, Sugar Mills, and Cask to contain their Islands
produce, which is what they have long aimed at, but never could secure before.
In short there is not one Advantage we derive from the four Provinces of
New England, that they will not reap from this River when the Country comes to
be fully settled by them. And they are bent upon securing a Footing upon or
near the Atlantic Ocean, as they have not one Port, or any Territory in their
own North-American Colonies near it, but the Islands in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, which yield them nothing but a Security for their Fishery, and a
Situation to distress and annoy our Colonies, and their Trade and Navigation,
in Time of War. The French also deny our Right to navigate or visit any Part of
Nova Scotia in the Gut of Canso and Gulf of St. Lawrence, or to visit and
settle Canso, which we settled soon after the Peace of Utrecht as part of
Nova Scotia, and carried on our principal Fishery at, till the late War when
they took it from us; but Sir William Pepperell recovered it in his way to the
Siege of Louisbourg. And every Year since the Peace of Aix La Chapelle the
Governor of Louisbourg, and the Commanders in Chief of the Men of War that have
been stationed there, have given public Notice that they will seize and
confiscate all English Vessels they find at Canso, the Gut of Canso, or in the
Gulf of St. Lawrence.

By those three Forts they have availed themselves of all the Province of
Nova Scotia, except the South-Eastern Peninsula. And although they do not
dispute our Right to this, except Canso and the Harbors in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, they have not suffered us to enjoy it since the Peace of Aix La
Chapelle, but by their Encroachments and Depredations have so annoyed and
distressed us, that we have not been able to do any more toward settling, even
the Peninsula, than to establish four small Towns, and build four small Forts,
which has been accomplished with vast Expense of Blood and Treasure. I think
the Parliament of Great Britain have granted since the late War 450,000 l. for
settling and securing Nova Scotia, and all we have to show for this immense Sum
is the above four Towns or Villages, and four Forts.

Since the Peace of Utrecht the French have settled seven Villages in the
Province of the Massachusets-Bay on the South Banks of St. Lawrence River
between the Isle of Orleans and the Mouth of Iroquois, or Sorrel River. French
Encroachments and Depredations in his Majesty's Province of the Massachusets-Bay
Some of these Villages are picke^ed in, but none of them have any Forts, or
other Defense.

The French have Missionaries among the Penobscot or Pantagoit Indians, who do
not exceed one hundred and fifty fighting Men, and generally reside near the
Bay of Penobscot. They have also Missionaries among the Norridgwaog Indians,
who are about one hundred and fifty fighting Men, and do reside upon Kennebec
River about one hundred and twenty Miles from its Mouth. These Indians have,
both in Peace and War with the French, been provoked by them to annoy and
distress our young Settlements on the Eastern Frontier of this Province, and
they have killed, scalped, and captivated many of our People, even since the
Peace of Aix La Chapelle; but the Government of the Massachusetts, by building
two Forts last Year on Kennebec River, and posting one hundred Men in each,
keep them in great Awe, and they dare not act against us at present. These
Indians have often acknowledged themselves Subjects of the Crown of
Great Britain, and the Government of the Province they reside in has taken the
greatest Care to accomm^date them with every thing they require, and to prevent
Frauds and Abuses being imposed upon them by private Persons; for no one is
allowed either trade with them or to purchase Lands, but by the Government's
Appointment. For the Management of Trade with them, a Commissary General is
appointed by the Legislature, and convenient Store Houses have been many Years
built, where they may at all times be accommodated with every thing they
require at no more than Five per Cent. advance upon the original Cost at Beston
by wholesale for ready Money, and they are allowed the full Price their Furs
and Skins will yield at the Boston Market, which is vastly more profitable to
them than the French can possibly submit to. But notwithstanding all these wise
and just Regulations, and frequent Subsidies, the Address, Ingenuity, and
unwearied Pains of the French Priests, who live among them, and conform to
their Manner of Life in every respect, by which they are so disguised as
frequently to be taken for Indians, has proved superior to all our Efforts, and
they will do nothing without their Advice and Consent, but when awed by Force;
therefore the Governor of the Massachusetts carried one Thousand Soldiers with
him last Year to force them to renew Treaties, and permit the two Forts to be
built, and nothing but a superior Force will ever be able to rival French
Priestcraft and Usefulness, for most of these Priests are good Mechanics, and
prove vastly serviceable to the Indians in the common Concerns of Life.

Since the Peace of Aix La Chapelle the French have built a Fort at Cowass or
Cohosser on Connecticut River in the Province of New Hampshire, French
Encroachments and Depredations in his Majestys Province of New Hampshire.
which is one hundred and forty Miles South of St. Lawrence River, and as many
Miles deep in his Majesty's Territories.

There are no friendly nor enemical Indians in this Province, except a few
Straglers, but the French have harrassed his Majesty's Subjects in the Frontier
Settlements almost every Year since the Peace of Aix La Chapelle with the
Incursions of the Indians that reside about Lake Iroquois or Champlain,
belonging to the Province of New York, who do not exceed sixty ^ighting Men,
and who have killed, scalped, and captivated many of our People in this
Province.

As to the Province of New York and the Five Nations hereditary and conquered
Country, French Encroachments and Depredations in his Majestys Province of
New York.
the French have got Possession of all that Part of it that lays to the
Northward of St. Lawrence River and the Five great Lakes, and all that Part of
it to the Eastward that lays between our Fort of Oswego on the Lake Ontario,
and the Mouth of the Iroquois or Sorrel River upon the South Side of the River
St. Lawrence, and as far South from the Banks of this River, as River Iroquois
and Lakes Iroqu^is, or Champlain, and Sacrement. They usurped all this vast
Extent of Territory,

By one Fort built on the North Side of the East Entrance of Lake Ontario in
1672.

By one Fort situated at Misilimakinac near the Lakes Huron, Michigan and
Superior in 1673.

By one Fort built on the Straight between Lakes Erie and Huron in 1683.

By one Fort erected at Naigara Fall on the Straight of Lakes Erie and Ontario
in 1684, and another Fort on the same Straight in 1720.

By one Fort on the West Side, and another on the River St. Joseph on the East
Side, of Lake Michigan, another on the West Side of Lake T^ronto, and three
more Forts and a regular fortified Town, with a Citadel, called St. Frederic or
Crown Point, at the Lake and River of Ir^quois, or Champlain Lake, and
Richlieu, or Sorrel River, all of which Forts, etc. were built between the
Peace of Utrecht and the Commencement of the late War.

The French have in this Province also, several other Towns and Villages
between the Mouth of Ir^quois River and Montreal on the South Side of St.
Lawrence River; in which, with the seven Villages they have in the Massachusetts
Province, there are twenty-eight Parish Churches. And they have besides the
Forts already mentioned, many Stockade Forts, or Block-houses, for Trading
Lodges, in this Province.

Two hundred French Indians, accompanied by some Canadeans disguised like
Indians, made an Irruption into this Province last Year, surprised the Town of
Housack, sacked and burnt it, and massacred and captivated both Men, Women and
Children, except a very few that ran away.

The French have since the Peace of Aix La Chapelle seized several of our
Traders in the Country of the Five Nations, confiscated their Effects, and made
them pay the Price of Slaves for their Redemption.

They have been continually, since the Peace of Aix La Chapelle, using every
Artifice, and frequently Force, to draw off the Indians in this Province as
well as in all the rest from the British Interest. Last Year they persuaded one
half of the Onondago Indians, one of the Five Nations, with several from the
other Nations, to remove from the Place of their usual Residence to a Place
called Osweegachic on the River Cadaraqui, where they have built them a Church
and Fort. Many of the Senekas, the most numerous Nation of the Five, appear to
be wavering and rather inclined to the French. In short, a great Defection
manifests itself among all the Five Nations, for not more than a hundred and
fifty of the several Nations attended the Congress held at Albany last Year,
though they had notice that all his Majesty's Governments would have
Commissioners there with Presents from most Provinces as well as from the King,
and on all preceding like Occasions there were never less than six or seven
hundred. The utmost that could be obtained of them at this Meeting, was an
Agreement to stand neuter in our Disputes with the French, for they unanimously
declared, that so far from acting against the French they should be obliged to
make the best Terms they could with them, in order to preserve themselves and
their Country from being destroyed by their powerful Arms. The English, they
observed, would not fight for themselves, and as for them they could not defend
their own Country and that of the English too. But if they saw the English act
powerfully, and that their own Country, Wives, and Children were safe while
they went forth to War, they then should be glad to meet the Governor of
New York and the Commissioners again, for it was against their Inclination to
treat with the French, but Necessity compelled them. Therefore if some bold
Stroke is not soon made to retrieve our lost Reputation and the wonted
Confidence and Friendship of this brave and faithful People, who upon all other
Occasions have been our best Friends and have it in their Power to be our worst
Enemies, so as to act in our Favor and to influence their Allies and
Tributaries, who, together with the Five Nations, make seventeen thousand Men,
to do the same, we shall not only lose the Assistance of the whole Indian
Interest of North America, but have it turned against us. For Indians, like
more refined and politer Nations, will not join the Weakest, especially when
their own Country is in danger from the Strongest in the Field; and it is
impossible for their Sachems to restrain their young Men, who delight in War
more than any thing else, when all their Neighbors are engaged, and the Sound
of War echoes from Hill to Hill all around them.

The French have since the Peace of Aix La Chapelle built two Forts on Beef
River, French Encroachments and Depredations in his Majestys Province of
Pennsylvania.
which issues from the South Side of Lake Erie in his Majesty's Province of
Pennsylvania; and last Year they forcibly attacked and took a Fort built by his
Majesty's express Command at the Confluence of the Rivers Mohongala and Ohio in
this Province, which they remained in Possession of when the last Advices came
away. They also have seized several of the Traders among the Indians in this
Province, and made them pay for their Redemption, and confiscated all their
Effects to a very great Value, for one of these Confiscations amounted to
upwards of 18,000 l.

In 1750 the French built a Fort in his Majesty's Province of Virginia on the
River Oubache or St. Jerome, French Encroachments and Depredations in his
Majesty' s Province of Virginia.
in the Heart of the Country of the Twightwees, or Miamis, Indians, in strict
Friendship with his Majesty; and last Year they sent three hundred French
Families to settle about this Fort. In 1751 they built another Fort at Sandoski
on the South Side of Lake Erie in this Province. They have also one Fort upon
the River Illinois, one at the Confluence of the Rivers Oubache and Ohio, one
at the Junction of the Rivers Missouri and Mississipi, one higher up the River
Missouri, and one at the Confluence of the Rivers Kaskakins and Mississipi, all
built in Times of Peace since the Treaty of Utrecht, and within this his
MAJESTY's Province.

Last Year they marched a Body of regular Troops, Militia and Indians into this
Province, and attacked and defeated four hundred of his MAJESTY's Forces at the
Great Meadows. They compelled our Comm^^der in Chief of those four hundred Men
to enter into Articles of Capitulation and give Hostages, in as formal a Manner
as if War had actually been proclaimed between the two Crowns. But the very
Night they were signed the French broke them, which we have great Reason to
rejoice at, for they were the most infamous a British Subject ever put his Hand
to.

The French have for these two or three Years past set their Indians loose upon
the Inhabitants of this Province also, and killed, scalped, and captivated many
of them, seized some of their Effects, and forced those that were settled
without the Mountains, together with some of our friendly Indians, to break up
their Settlements and retire within the Mountains. And,

They continued to have, by the last Advices, two thousand two hundred regular
Troops and Militia, and six hundred Indian Warriors at their Forts in this
Province and Pennsylvania that are near the Ohio, and threatened a further
Irruption, for which they were preparing.

The Northern Boundary of Georgia extending to the Northernmost Branch of the
River Savanah, French Encroachments in his Majesty' s Provinces of North and
South Carolina.
and from thence due West indefinitely, the inland Frontier of the Carolinas is
very narrow, but as narrow as it is the French have mounted two Forts in it on
the Mississipi River in Times of Peace, and since the Treaty of Utrecht.

In his MAJESTY's Province of Georgia the French have one Fort built at the
Mouths of the Mississipi in 1699; French Encr^achments and Depredations in his
Majesty' s Province of Georgia.
another Fort and Settlement as the Bay of Mobile begun in 1701; another Fort
and Settlement at the Isle Dauphin begun in 1702; another Fort, with a
Settlement round it, at Alibamous, at the Confluence of the Rivers Mobile and
Loeusachee in the Heart of our fellow Subjects the Upper Creek Indians Country,
which was begun in 1714 under the old Pretense of a Trading Lodge; the City of
New-Orleans well fortified on the Mississipi River founded in 1717; another
Fort and Settlement at Pansacola on the Gulf of Mexico; two more Forts on the
Mississipi River, besides many Stockade Forts, or Block-houses, for Trading
Lodges among the innumerable Indians in this Country; and they have several
other small Towns or Villages, besides those I have mentioned, on and near the
Mississipi River, built in Times of Peace since the Treaty of Utrecht.

In 1730 they utterly extirpated the whole Tribe (except a few that escaped to
the Chickasaws) of Indians called Nautchee, that resided about the Forks of the
River Yasou which rises in this Province not very far from, and empties itself
into, the Mississipi. The French did this when they were in profound Peace with
these Indians under the Sanction of a formal Treaty; but finding they continued
an Intercourse and Trade with the English, they fell upon them in the Night,
and massacred Men, Women, and Children, not sparing even those they took alive,
but put them to death in the most inhuman and cruel Torments. This Perfidy and
Cruelty of the French being communicated to the Chickasaw Indians who reside a
little to the Northward of the Nautchees Country, and they fearing the like
Fate, as they were in the strictest Friendship and constantly traded with the
English, they declared War against the French, and it has not been in the Power
of all their own Force and Policy to prevail on them to make Peace to this Day,
nor could they ever prevail on any other Indians to join against them, as they
are remarkable for Faith and Bravery, as their War is esteemed just and
necessary, and as they are highly revered for their Military Achievements.
These Chickasaws have been as severe a Scourge to the French Colony of
Louisiani, as any of their Indians have been to any of our Colonies; but their
long and constant Hostilities against the French have reduced them to four
hundred fighting Men only, who continue the War with as much Spirit and
Intrepidity as ever.

The French of Louisiani have entirely alienated the Chauctas from our
Interest, who reside in their Neighborhood between the Mobile and Mississipi,
and amount to five thousand fighting Men.

And by their Fort at Alibamous they have obtained such Influence among the
Upper Creek Indians, amounting to one thousand two hundred Men, that they would
have broke out against Carolina and Georgia several times, if it had not been
for the Interposition of the Lower Creeks, who amount to one thousand three
hundred Men, and are our fast Friends.

From this Deduction of French Encroachments it appears that they have drawn a
Line, The French have surrounded his Majesty's Colonies with Forts, etc.
and have a Chain of Forts and Settlements, all along the Back of our
Settlements from the Gulf of St. Lawrence to the Mouths of the Mississipi in
the Gulf of Mexico, whereby they have accomplished their ancient Design of
surrounding the British Northern Colonies Settlements, of fortifying themselves
on the Back thereof, of taking Possession of the most important Passes of the
great Rivers and Lakes, and of drawing off the Indians to their Interest, who
they have more or less constantly, both in Peace and War, issued from their
Forts on our Frontier Settlements, some of which they have destroyed, others
they have impeded the Progress of, and in most of our Provinces prevented the
projecting or making new Establishments. For there is nothing more terrible
than Indian Wars, and whenever they happen the Inhabitants eat their Bread in
continual Fear and Trembling; no Man is sure when out of his House of ever
returning to it again; while they labor in the Fields they are under terrible
Apprehensions of being killed and scalped, or of being seized and carried to
the Indian Country, there to end their Days in cruel Torments, or be turned
over to the French to be redeemed at the Price of Black Slaves. They are many
times obliged to neglect both their Seed Time and Harvest. The Landlord often
sees all his Land plundered, his Houses burnt, and the whole Country ruined,
while they cannot think their Persons safe in their Fortifications. In short,
all Trade, Business, and Commerce is at an entire Stand, while Fear, Despair,
and Misery appears in the Faces of the poor Inhabitants.

I say, this Conduct of the French is in Consequence of an ancient Design or
System, and it certainly is so, for all their Governors and Writers of the
Northern Colonies have constantly recommended it to the Court of France, who,
we are now fatally convinced, have carried it systematically into Execution.
And our Colonies have as constantly remonstrated to the Court of Great Britain
these Encroachments and Depredations, and the further terrible Consequences
they had the utmost Reason to expect from them. But it is now too late in a
great measure, and therefore to little Purpose, to enquire further why we
neglected to exert the Power God and Nature put into our Hands to prevent these
Evils, or to remove them whenever and wherever they appeared. Therefore I shall
enter into this Enquiry in the Course of these Sheets no further than by
pointing out some of the Causes, His Majestys Colonies injuriously charged with
Neglects, etc.
which if removed, the Effects will cease, and to acquit his MAJESTY'S COLONIES
of the cruel Accusation, from Persons of all Ranks almost in this Country, of
having neglected their own Defense, and, by other criminal Conduct, having
invited the Calamities they suffer. This has been very industriously propagated
by some People, who have found it necessary to blame the Colonies, the better
to excuse themselves; and by others who have had support in their Clamours from
a late Pamphlet called, a Brief State of the Province of Pennsylvania, which I
shall say no more of at present than that it is calculated for private
Purposes, at the Expense of a very respectable Body of People called Quakers,
to whom this Country is more obliged than most People at present know or can
imagine, and who will very soon be acquitted, with Honor, of the exceptionable
Conduct laid to their Charge. Some People would do well in never losing sight
of this, being, of all others, the most improper time to inflame the Passions
and alienate the Hearts of even the most remote and insignificant of his
Majesty's Subjects, and of its being the most proper and necessary Measure at
this critical Conjuncture to reconcile all jarring Interests, and to please and
oblige every Class of his Majesty's Subjects in every part of his Dominions,
that they may act with their Heads, Hearts, Hands, and Purses unanimously for
the Recovery of his just Rights, and for permanently securing him in the
Possession of them.

It is certain not any one of the Colonies are to blame, as will appear when I
come to speak of their Conduct, Temper, and Disposition, so it must lay
elsewhere.

The Affairs of North America are become of the last Importance to his
MAJESTY's Northern Colonies in particular, The Affairs of North America at a
very important Crisis.
and the British Empire in general, by the French Enterprises, and the Success
of them I have stated; by their having gradually increased their Troops in
Canada and Louisiani since the Peace of Aix La Chapelle down to 1753,
transporting them in their Ships of War, which returned to France with a bare
Complement of Men, leaving the rest in their Colonies, and by this Means they
have been less observed by the Powers of Europe than if they had been sent in
Transport Ships; by sending two thousand five hundred regular Troops to Canada,
and three thousand five hundred to the Mississipi in 1753; This I know to be
true from Authority.
and by the vast Armament that has been so long preparing at Breast, and perhaps
now sailed, confessedly for Canada.

Let any Man reflect on these things, taking into his View at the same time the
Conduct of the French in respect to the Neutral Islands in the West Indies; In
1749 the Courts of Great Britain and France entered into a new Convention
respecting these Islands, which the French were very busy in settling contrary
to Treaty. And for the Sake of Peace Great Britain still condescended to let,
what she has a sole and just Right to, remain N^uter; that is, neither We nor
France should attempt the Settlement of either of them, and that France should
immediately break up what Settlements were made there, and her Subjects should
immediately evacuate the Islands. Orders were sent accordingly to the Governor
of Martinico, but he dying before they reached Martinico, his Successor said
the Orders were not directed to him, and he would not execute them. Upon this
new Orders went, and some of our Men of War saw them executed. Since this they
have again seized upon, and are settling them with a high Hand. They have
already got four thousand Souls on St. Lucia, near two thousand Souls on
Dominico, and near one thousand Souls on St. Vincent, and they have fortified
each of these Settlements, and have lately begun to settle Tobago, another of
these Islands.

In 1754. By the best Account a Gentleman could obtain at Barbados, of the
Settlement of the four Neutral Islands; there was at St. Lucia, Whites 5,000,
Negro's 30,000, and 4,000 Indians. On Dominico 4,000 Whites, 25,000 Negro's,
and 5,000 Indians. On St. Vincent 3,000 Whites, 18,000 Negro's, and 40,000
Indians. On Tobago 17 French Men, 10 Negro's, and 120 Indians. The Whites on
St. Lucia, Dominico, and St. Vincent, mostly French.


in respect to the Bahama Islands, which they have trumped up a Claim to since
the Peace of Aix La Chapelle, and did two Years ago set up Crosses upon some of
them; with Copper Plates, containing the French King's Arms, and a Declaration
that they were to preserve the Rights of Louis XIV, which Rights we never heard
of before; in respect to our East India Company in Asia; and in respect to the
Coast of Africa; and it is impossible for him to doubt the Justice of our
Cause, or the Necessity of our going to War, if the French will not immediately
relinquish the whole of their Encroachments upon his Majesty's Territories, and
make Individuals in particular, The Satisfaction, the Honor and Justice of the
Nation requires from the French
and the Nation in general, ample Satisfaction for the Losses they have
sustained, and the vast Expense we have been at in Asia and America, and for
the Expense of our present Armaments both by Land and Sea; which amounts to
infinitely more than it will require to drive them out of the New-World. Can
the Honor and Justice of the Nation put up with less? If we do except of less,
may not the Nation expect, and will not it deserve, to be used by other Nations,
as a noted Coward is, bullied and male-treated by every little Fellow?

But notwithstanding the bad Condition of our Affairs we ought not to Despair;
His Majesty's Declaration upon the present State of Affairs in America.
On the contrary, thank God, we may now cheer up, for behold his Majesty
gloriously declaring in his late Speech to Parliament, that I never could
entertain a Thought of purchasing the Name of Peace, at the Expense of
suffering Encroa^^ments upon, or of yielding up, what is justly belonging to
Great Britain, either by ancient Possession, or by solemn Treaties. Your Vigor
and Firmness, on this important Occasion, have enabled me to be prepared for
such Contingences as may happen. If reasonable and honorable Terms of
Accommodation can be agreed upon, I shall be satisfied.

It cannot be imagined that the French will give up their Encroachments, No
Satisfaction can be expected from the French.
by any Man that knows their infinite Importance to them; and all that they
have hitherto done, or can be expected they will do, is to make Proposal after
Proposal, taking care the last is more favorable than the preceding, knowing
you cannot except the most favorable they will make, till they have gained
further footing, and time to be prepared for all Events, and then you may seek
Redress in the Uncertainties of a War that they are prepared for. For
Experience teaches us, that the French always employ Times of Negotiation, not
in endeavoring to efface the Remembrance of past Outrages, but in concerting
the Operations for new ones. However, Great Britain has been so long a Sufferer
by French Perfidy, and so often deluded by the treacherous Negotiations of that
faithless Nation, that it cannot be supposed that she will any longer listen to
their insidious Proposals, than till we are ready at Home and Abroad to give
them a decisive Blow; therefore continuing to negotiate with them, while we are
preparing for War, can do us no Injury, but may be very political. Nor can it
be supposed that Great Britain will suffer herself to be again deceived by
entering into a Treaty of Accommodation with that perfidious Power, but what
settles every Point in the Treaty, and does not refer the least Particular to
Commissaries, that can possibly be disputed, in Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America; and not even this till his Majesty is restored to his just Rights and
Possessions, No Accommodation with the French till we have Satisfaction, and
Security, against future Encroachments and Depredations.
and has accumulated so much additional Power into his own Hands, as can at all
times compel them to an exact Execution, and punctual Observation, of the
Treaty. For to come to an Accommodation with them on any other Terms is only
purchasing the Name of Peace, and giving Being and Support to new Encroachments
and a new War. But this the haughty and insolent Gallic will never submit to
till heartily drubbed into it. And certainly there never was a greater
Necessity, nor we cannot expect a more proper Conjuncture for this Nation's
entering upon the Work than the present, whether we consider the Nature and
Greatness of the Object we are to contend for, or our Ability, compared with
theirs, to carry on a War however remote and discontiguous.

This Nation has often entered into War to revenge the Insults and Injures
affecting its Merchants and Seamen; and often only to defend Foreign Princes,
and to support the Balance of Power in Europe, The Necessity of going to War
with France.
in Consequence of Treaties, when neither its Trade, Navigation, Territories,
nor Subjects were affected. But the War that is now just and necessary we
should engage in against France, is of such a Nature as to demand all our
Resentment, arouse all our Courage. Your Provinces are invaded, your Towns are
burnt, many of your Plantations destroyed or deserted, your ancient and
faithful Indian Allies and Subjects cut off from all Communication with you;
others of your Fellow Subjects murdered, scalped, captivated, and fold at the
Price of Black Slaves, and many of the rest in imminent Danger of the like
melancholy Catastrophe; your fairest and best Revenues endangered. And all
these Insults, Injuries, and Barbarities committed by the very People we have
the Name of Peace with. Your Fathers resented every Infringment upon British
Liberty, and shall the Blood of British Subjects, shed in an unjust and cruel
Manner, cry for no Vengeance from you?

Besides these Commands to War, The Nature and Greatness of the Object we are
to contend for.
if we have not reasonable and honorable Terms of Accommodation secured to us
by the French forthwith, which is as vain to expect as that they will yield us
up Cape-Breton and Canada voluntarily, we have the vast Importance of the
Northern Colonies, upon which also depends the very Being of your Sugar
Colonies, that calls for our closest Attention and the most vigorous Efforts of
the combined Nerves of the whole Empire. It is from the American Colonies our
Royal Navy is supplied in a great Measure with Masts of all Sizes and other
Naval Stores, as well as our Merchant Ships; it is from them we have our vast
Fleets of Merchant Ships, and consequently an increase of Seamen; it is from
them our Men of War in the American World are on any Occasion manned, and our
Troops there augmented and recruited; it is from them we have most of our
Silver and Gold either by their Trade with Foreigners in America, or by the Way
of Spain, Portugal, and Italy, in Payment for their immense Quantities of Fish,
Rice, etc. it is from them we have all our Tobacco, Rice, Rum, and most of our
Sugars, Dying and other valuable Woods, Cotton-Wool, Pimento, Ginger, Indico,
Whale and Liver Oil and Whale-Bone, Beaver and other Furs, Deer Skins, and
innumerable other Articles, and many of them in such Abundance as not only to
be sufficient for our own Consumption, which otherwise must have been bought of
Foreigners at excessive Prices in hard Money as formerly, but a great Excess to
export to Foreigners, which increases the Balance in our Favor with some
Countries, and lessens the Balance against us in others; it is from them our
whole African Trade receives its Support, which Trade requires vast Quantities
of the Produce and Manufactures of this Country, and East India Commodities in
return for Gold-Dust, Ivory, Gums, and several Sorts of Dying Woods imported
into Great Britain; but were it not for the Colonies this could not be done, as
the Trade could not be supported was it not for the vast Assistant Profit of
Black Slaves for America; it is from the^^ we shall receive, as has been proved
by Experiments, all the Silk, (...), Flax, Iron, Potashes, Wine, Fruit, Olive
Oil, Drugs, and in short all the Commodities we are now dependent upon, and
have from Foreigners in the same Parallels of Latitude in Europe, Barbary, and
Persia; it is from them great Part of the Revenue of these Kingdoms is derived;
and it is from them great Part of the Wealth we see, that Credit which
circulates, and those Payments that are made at the Bank and the Bankers in
London results; and they are so linked in with, and dependent upon, the
American Revenues and Remittances, that if they are ruined and stopped, the whole
System of Public Credit in this Country will receive a fatal Shock. But what
will your Landholders, Manufacturers, Artificers, Merchants, etc. say of the
Importance of your Colonies, and the Necessiy of going to War to regain and
preserve them entire, if it cannot be done by other Means, when they reflect
that if they are lost, they will lose one Third of their Property and Business
in general; for it is certain, that full one Third of our whole Export of the
Produce and Manufactures of this Country is to our Colonies, and in proportion
as this diminishes or increases, their Estates and Business must increase or
diminish; for as in the Body Natural a Finger cannot ach but the whole feels it,
so in the Body Politic the remotest and most insignificant of your Colonies
cannot decay, but the Nation must suffer with it. Therefore the Mother Country
must needs rejoice in the Security and Prosperity of every one of her Colonies,
because it is her own Security and Prosperity; and the Colonies are to her as
the Feet are to the Natural Body, the Support of the whole Political Frame. And
they have enabled us to make the Figure we do at present, and have done for
upwards of a Century past, in the Commercial World, from whence we have derived
Wealth, Power and Glory, and the greatest Blessings given Man to know. Consider
then, if you ought not to direct the whole of your Counsels and Arms to support
a War, wherein, with the Being of your State, you assert the Dignity of your
Reputation, the Safety of your Friends, the best Branches of your Revenue, and
the Properties of your Fellow Subjects.

Thus much for the Necessity of going to War, Our Ability to carry on a War
against France.
and the Nature and Greatness of the Object we are to contend for: And now for
our Ability to support a War vigorously and effectually.

It is certain that the Excess of the Sinking Fund, arising from the Reduction
of the Interest of the National Debt, amounts to 1,300,000 l. per Annum at
present, which with the Land Tax raised to four Shillings in the Pound will
yield 2,300,000 l. per Annum over and above the ordinary Services of
Government. The Proprietors of the National Debt defire no Part of their
Capital, but only the Interest; therefore this Sum may be applied to carry on a
War, and whatever it falls deficient for the Purpose to 1757, may undoubtedly
be borrowed at Three per Cent. per Annum. For such a sacred Regard has been
paid to public Faith and private Property, on all Occasions, since the
Revolution, that Public Credit has gradually extended from that glorious Epoch
to the present Time, and we were convinced the other Day that it never was so
extensive as at present. But in 1757 the Excess of the Sinking Fund will be,
from the Reduction of Interest, the Salt Duty which will then be redeemed, and
the Land Tax at Four Shillings in the Pound, 3,200,000 l. over and above the
ordinary Exigences of Government, which is sufficient to carry on such a War as
this Country ought, if possible, to carry on, I mean a Naval War in all Parts
of the Globe without borrowing a Shilling. But if it should be found necessary,
as it always has been, to divert the Power of France in Europe from being
wholly bent against this Island, which if it was you would be obliged to keep
great Part of your Naval Force at home for your own Defense, and consequently
annoy and distress the Enemy the less abroad, by attacking them in Europe on
the Continent, and you should want to borrow a Million or two per Annum: Such
is the flourishing Sta^^ of Public Credit, and must continue to be, from a
Sen^^ that (...) extraordinary Expense can be but temporary, (...) that (...)
venue of 2,200,000 l. per Annum to pay off (...) of Peace is perpetual, that
you can never want it. (...) however great a Paradox it may appear at first
Sig^^ (...) ^^untry p^^ver was, in point of Finances, so capable (...) wh^ it
did not owe a Shilling, as at this (...) it (...) 72,000,000 l. For when was it
that we had a standing Revenue of 2,200,000 l. besides the occasional (...)
from the Land Tax raised to four Shillings in the P^^nd, and the ordinary
Services of Government? Or when was Public Credit so extensive for new Loans as
at this present Time, though to all Appearance we are at the Eye of a War with
the most formidable Nation in Europe? And has it not often happened in former
Times, when the Nation owed little or nothing, and Government was in the
greatest Distress for Supplies, that the People could not, or would not, either
pay or lend them?

But what a great Aid will this Ability receive if the Economy of our American
Colonies is put upon a wise and solid Foundation for the mutual Interest of
Great Britain and her Colonies? Then they will require neither Troops nor Money
from this Country for their own Defense, or to drive the French out of the New
World, or any other Assistance, but that of Men of War and the Maintenance of
the regular Troops that have been ordered there from hence, let the War be ever
so long or discontiguous, which will be not only preventing a vast future
Expense, but the saving of the whole of the present for all America, except the
regular Troops and Men of War.

A Fund more than equal to these great and necessary Services in America may be
raised in his Majesty's Colonies in such a Manner,

As will free their Trade and Commerce from injudicious and destructive Imposts
and Restrictions;

As will put a complete and final End to all illicit Trade in all our Colonies,
whereby Foreign Produce and Manufactures, clandestinely introduced, shall be
utterly excluded, and British Produce and Manufactures substituted in lieu of
them;

As will highly please and oblige the landed and trading (...) of America in
several considerable Branches, and be (...) them in others than any moderate
Tax for Self-(...) etc. is to the bravest and most loyal People?

As will (...) ^^ortioned as to demand no more of each (...), than a just and
equal Share, ac(...) ^^^spective Abilities, compared with the (...)

As (...) ^^ear of all the Difficulties, to the Satisfaction of (...) People,
in appropriating and issuing public Money (...) of by the Crown, which has
created the greatest ^^^^siness in the Colonies;

As will not oppress, plague, and harrass them in the Collection, or be mostly
sunk by the Collectors; And,

As will enable Government to apply it in any Part of America, so that the
Strongest shall support the Weakest, and the unexposed the exposed, Colony; and
all of them shall act in Concert against the Common Enemy, without any of the
Risques and Disadvantages of the Albany Plan of a Union.

Upon these Principles and with these Views, I shall humbly propose a Plan in
my last Chapter that appears to me to be adequate to these importanat Objects;
and if it is carried into Execution, or some other that will produce the like
Effects, we need not fear driving the French out of the New-World, for in our
Northern Colonies we have upwards of 300,000 effective Men, and the French have
not 30,000 in all New-France and Louisiani.

Now let us turn the Tables and look into the Finances of France; The State of
the French Finances.
and here we find from Authority that they have anticipated, or sunk, their
whole Revenue till 1761, so that the King has not a single Branch but what is
mortgaged down to that Year at six or seven per Cent. Interest, and which even
he cannot resume without destroying the whole System of public Credit in his
Kingdom. But by renewing some Taxes he took off soon after the late War, and
levying the twentieth Penny upon the Clergy, he will be enabled to borrow, at
exorbitant Interest, immense Sums till his other Revenues are redeemed. However
this must make his People, with the other peculiar Distresses accompanying a
War with us, very uneasy; and his Power must be greatly enervated to what it
would be if his usual Revenues were unincumbered. And as to his North-American
Colonies, he cannot raise a Shilling in them for their Defense, which with his
paying upwards of 1,000,000 l. Sterling per Annum in Subsidies to foreign
Princes, gives the best Opportunity we can ever expect, from his Finances, to
attack and reduce his dangerous Power.

Our Fleet consists of more than double the Number of Ships and Guns that the
French Fleet does. The British and French Fleets compared.
But if the French go on upon the Plain for restoring their Navy, that they
have pursued ever since the Peace of Aix La Chapelle, their Fleet will in 1761
consist of a hundred and twenty Ships of the Line, and it does not exceed
sixty-four of that Size now in the Water and building. Therefore nothing but a
War can prevent this Branch of their Power from becoming too great for our
Control, and whenever this shall be the Case, adieu to all that is dear and
valuable in this Country.

Notwithstanding the Dutch are sunk lower in the Political World, British and
French Alliances compared.
than ever their Country was in the Watery, we have a new and more powerful
Ally of our own creating than ever they were by Land, in the Empress Queen; to
her we are to add the Empress of Russia, the King of Poland, who is a
Subsidiary Ally of ours, the King Elector of Hanover, the Prince of Hesse, the
Elector of Bavaria, who is a Subsidiary Ally of ours also, and the King of
Sardinia. In opposition to these, France has the Kings of Sweden, Denmark, and
Prussia, to whom the pays annually in Subsidies 725,000 l. Sterling; and the
Elector of Cologne, who has also a Subsidy from her, who it is more than
possible are all the Allies she can depend upon in case of a War with us; for
Spain, it is almost impossible to imagine will interfere as she can have no
Interest in the Quarrel, and it is more essential to her to preserve Peace with
Great Britain than all the other Powers of Europe; and if she does not meddle,
it is highly probable neither Parma nor Naples will, as those two Courts are
greatly supported and influenced by Spain. But to admit Spain does join France
and declare against us, her Navy added to that of France will then be no more
than equal to that of ours in Ships and Guns, and the Spaniards cannot man
their Fleet, nor the French victual theirs, in time of War, so as to act with
full and combined Force at once. Therefore if this should be the Case, we shall
have nothing to fear but upon the Continent of Europe, where there can be no
other Authority at present than mere Conjecture for what part our Allies, or
those of France, will act, or how far either Side shall make it the Interest of
some of the Powers in alliance to maintain a Neutrality, and others to take the
Field. But I believe no Person that knows the Interest and Abilities of the
several Allies mentioned, will deny, but that we are now not only more able to
divert the Force of France from this Island, than in the late War, but that we
shall be capable of acting offensively, and perhaps so effectually, as to give
us an Opportunity to employ the whole of our Fleet in annoying and distressing
the Enemy at Sea in all Parts, and to be able to retain whatever we recover or
conquer in the New-World. But to suppose we and our Allies should be beat and
distressed upon the Continent of Europe, it is only giving up some one or other
of our Conquests in America, and we may whenever we please, or the general
State of Europe requires it, reconcile jarring Interests and purchase Repose.
This was experienced in the late War by the Redition of Cape-Breton. And as
this was the case by the single Conquest of Cape-Breton, when France was in
Possession of Madrass and the Netherlands, and Holland lay at their Mercy, with
an infinitely superior Army in the Field to that of the Allies, flushed with a
long Course of uninterrupted Victories, what Terms cannot you command for
yourselves and your Allies, when you have all their American Colonies in your
Possession; which, with proper Conduct, and the Blessing of God, that we are
the more entitled to expect from the Justice of our Cause, must be the Case in
a few Years after War commences?

To these Considerations it may not be mala'propos to add, The Zeal and
Unanimity of his Majesty's Subjects, a further Encouragement for us to go to
War.
that his Majesty having ever made the Laws of the Land the Rule of his
Actions, and exercised the Prerogatives of the Crown with that Mildness,
Justice, and Propriety as on all Occasions to make them, what they were by our
excellent Constitution of Government intended for, a Blessing to the People;
and his having employed for a Number of Years that upright, moderate,
impartial, prudent and wise Minister, who was lately too suddenly snatched to
Glo^^^, the Minds of Men have been reconciled, and his Majesty, his Family, and
his Government are established in the Hearts and Affections of his Subjects
unanimously, which is the strongest and best Basis a Throne can be founded
upon. Therefore France, nor any other Enemy of his Majesty, his Government, and
these Kingdoms, cannot have the least Encouragement to hope for a Rebellion in
this Country, or the least Countenance and assistance in invading it from
amongst ourselves. And a War with France must appear so just and necessary to
every Man, and our Ability to carry it on so superior to whatever it was at any
other time, that it is impossible but the whole People should be unanimous for
it, and their whole Thoughts bent upon no other public Enterprise, but
revenging the Wrongs and Indignities imposed upon us by France. And this they
have given an Earnest of, by the unparallelled Spirit and vigorous Assistance
all Ranks, in all Parts, have exhibited on the Prospect of a War.

Upon the whole, such is the State of our Affairs in every part of his
Majesty's Dominions, the State of France, and the general State of Europe, that
we never can expect such another favorable Coincidence of such a Variety of
Considerations for entering into a War with France, to maintain our Honor and
Influence, our Colonies, our Commerce and Riches, indeed our Lives and
Liberties. And it is absurd to suppose we shall ever be stronger for a War, in
Proportion to the growing Power of France, than we are now.

The End of the THIRD CHAPTER.
The Author of the foregoing gives Notice, that the rest of this Work will be
pubished with all possible Dispatch in London; and as we may expect the other
Copy by the first Vessel from thence, it will be published here for the great
Benefit to the Plantations in general.

To be Sold by D. FOUL, A Summary, Historical, and Political, Of the first
Planting, progressive Improvements, and present State of the British
Settlements in North America.

By WILLIAM DOUGLASS, M. D. The First Volume contains,

I. Some general Account of ancient and modern Colonies, the granting and
settling of the British Continent and West India Island Colonies, with some
transient Remarks concerning the adjoining French and Spanish Settlements, and
other Remarks of various Natures. II. The Hudson's Bay Company's Lodges, Fur
and Skin Trade. III. Newfoundland Harbors, and Cod Fishery. IV. The Province
of l'Accadie or Nova Scotia; with the Vicissitudes of the Property and
Jurisdiction thereof, and its present State. V. The several Grants of
Sagadahock, Province of Main, Massachusetts Bay, and New Plymouth, united by a
new Charter in the present Province of Massachusetts Bay, commonly called
New England.

The Second Volume Contains,

I. New Hampshire, including the Northern Settlements of Massachusetts Bay,
lately adjudged to the Crown, and annexed to that Province. II. Rhode Island,
including a Part of Plymouth late Colony, lately adjudged to Rhode Island
Colony. III. Connecticut, according to the Boundaries respectively settled, by
Commissioners with Massachusetts Bay, New York, and Rhode Island; and confirmed
by the King in Council. IV. New York, according to their divisional Line
settled with the Proprietors of East-Jerseys, Anno 1719, by Commissioners
appointed by the Legislatures of both Provinces, and confirmed by the King in
Council. V. The East and West Jerseys, two distinct Grants: the Proprietors
surrendered the Government to the Crown, Anno 1702. Being small the Crown has
united them, under one Jurisdiction or Government. VI. Pensylvania; Two
distinct Governments or Legislatures, but under one Governor; because the
Property of one Family. VII. Maryland, Lord Baltimore's Property. The
Boundaries not as yet settled with Penn's Family.

* * In the Course of this History, the Author is very particular in his
Accounts of the French Colonies in America, their Discoveries and Settlements,
their Attempts upon Annapolis: Also the French and Indian Wars; which may be of
great Service, at this Time if carefully perused by those who have the Good of
their Country at Heart.

N. B. The Second Vol. may be had without the First.


