Dr. Chauncy's SERMON Occasioned by the late terrible EARTHQUAKE.

EARTHQUAKES a Token of the righteous Anger of GOD. A SERMON Preached at the
Old-Brick-Meeting-House in BOSTON, the Lord's Day after the terrible
Earthquake, which suddenly awoke us out of our Sleep in the Morning of the 18th
of November, 1755.

By Charles Chauncy, D. D. One of the Pastors of the first Church in said Town.

The Earth shook and trembled, because he was wroth. King DAVID. Knowing the
Terrors of the LORD, we persuade Men. Apostle PAUL. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and
Sold by Edes and Gill, at their Printing-Office, next to the Prison in
Queen Street. M,DCC,LV.

Earthquakes a Token of GOD's Anger.
JOB IX. v, vi. Which removes the Mountains, and they know not; which
overturneth the Earth in his Anger; which shakes the Earth out of her Place,
and the Pillars thereof tremble.
THE shaking of the earth, when it arises to any great degree, is one of the
most awful events in all nature. It is attended with danger, which none can
either withstand, avoid, or make their escape from: And the destruction it
threatens is sudden, and dreadful, and equally extends to all the various
ranks, conditions, and ages of men; whether high or low, rich or poor, bond or
free, old or young. It is therefore an occurrence that is singularly fitted to
strike the mind with surprise; and whether we will or no, it alarms our fears,
and awakens in us a quick and pungent sense of the power and greatness of God.
The most hardened sinners, those who have mocked at fear, and laugh't at
destruction, are hereby roused into astonishment. Even the dumb creatures are
affected with a kind of horror, and very significantly express it by their
dolorous roars, though not modulated into articulate sounds.

Of this we had a very lively illustration the last week, when God arose, and
suddenly awoke us out of our sleep, by terribly shaking the earth. We were all
thrown into a state of trembling. Horror took hold of us, and we were afraid of
this tremendous judgment of God; not knowing but we should sink down quick into
some deep cavern below, or be buried in the ruins of our own habitations. May
we never forget the distress of that awful morning, and our deliverance out of
it!

It is with a view to assist both you, and myself, in making a wise and
religious improvement of so extraordinary a providence, that I have selected
this text to employ our present meditations. It obviously contains two things
well worthy of our special notice, namely, I. That it is GOD who makes the
earth to shake, and the pillars thereof to tremble. II. That he ordinarily does
this in testimony of his righteous anger.


I. It Is GOD who makes the earth to shake and tremble.

And this he does, either by an immediate exertment of his almighty power, or
by concurring with such second causes as are fitted, in the natural course of
their operation, to produce so wonderful an effect.

There may have been miraculous earthquakes, earthquakes that took rise from
the immediate hand of God. The earthquakes which accompanied Israel's passage
through the red sea, and the river Jordan, commemorated by the Psalmist, Psalm.
114, might be of this sort. The earthquake, which swallowed up Corah and
company, recorded Numb. 16. 30 -- 33, might be another instance of the same
kind. So, when the God of Israel descended on Sinai, and published his law from
thence, it might be miraculously, that the whole mount quaked greatly, Exodus
19. 18. In allusion to this wonderful event the Psalmist says, Psalm. 68. 7, The
earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God: even Sinai itself
was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel. And of the same kind still
might be the earthquake which happened at the crucifixion of our Lord, spoken
of in that language, Matt. 29. 51. And behold, the vail of the temple was rent
in twain, from the top to the bottom; and the Earth did quake, and the rocks
rent: And that also which was felt at his resurrection, recorded in those
words, Matt. 28. 2, And behold, there was a great earthquake! These
earthquakes, it is observable, were all produced in an age of miracles, at a
time when the great God, in other instances, exerted his immediate almighty
power; for which reason it may probably eno' be supposed, that these also were
effected by a supernatural operation.

But more commonly the great God makes use of second Causes in the production
of earthquakes; exerting his power, not immediately, but by concurring with
these Causes. There are stores of them, no doubt, in the bowels of the earth:
But know thou, O man, what they are, or how they operate to the production
of these amazing events? Much has been said, upon the origin of earthquakes, by
men of learning; but, after all that yet has been said, and by the greatest
Philosophers too, perhaps, this work of God may justly be ranked among those
mavelous ones, which cannot be comprehended; and in contemplation on which we
may take to ourselves words, and say, Behold, God is great, and we know him
not! The noise of his voice, in the deep caverns of the earth, who can explain!
That amazing power, which causes the earth, in a circle of hundreds of miles,
to quiver and tremble, or undulate in waves like those of the sea, who can
understand! But though we cannot penetrate into the secret springs of an extensive
terrible earthquake; yet we have no reason to think, but that it takes rise
from sufficient second Causes, in common with the other phenomenon of nature:
Only these causes must always be considered as having the first Cause of all
things for their director and Governor. The shaking of the earth, in every
instance, is bro't to pass under the superintending guidance, and almighty
concurrence, of the supreme regent of nature. Second Causes may, while working
in a natural way, produce this effect; but still God is more a great deal the
cause of them than they. 'Twas he who at first established the laws of nature,
giving to all second causes their respective powers of operation, and assigning
to them their several spheres of acting. -- It Is he who upholds them all in
being and operation; for by him do all things consist. -- It Is he who concurs
with them in their influence, so as that without him they could not act at all.
-- It Is he who directs and governs all their motions and springs of action; and
so overrules them, as that they shall exert their force in this, or that
place, to this or that degree, just as he pleases, and as may best serve his
designs in the kingdom of providence.

So that though earthquakes are ordinarily produced, in a natural way, by a
concurrence of suitable and sufficient second causes; yet it is God who
produces them: He is more properly their Cause, than any secondary one, or than
all secondary ones together: For they are all his; he made them; he upholds
them; he commands them; he controuls and overrules them: They act by him, and
for him; and can do nothing without him.

And it is on such accounts as these, that the scripture so frequently speaks of
Earthquakes as the work of God; representing him as that glorious being, who
shakes the earth, and overturneth the mountains. That is the language, in
which the pious Psalmist has taught us to speak of an earthquake, Psalm. 60. 1,
2, O God, thou have made the earth to tremble. So, when he would describe an
earthquake, it is in such words as those, Psalm. 104. 32, He looks on the
earth, and it trembles; he touches the hills, and they smoke. In like manner,
holy Job, speaking in my text, of earthquakes, carries our tho'ts beyond all
second Causes to the glorious first Cause of all things: Which removes the
mountains; which overturneth them in his anger; which shakes the earth out of
her place, and the pillars thereof tremble. Agreeable whereto is that of the
prophet, Amos 9. 5, And the Lord of hosts is he that touches the land, and it
shall melt; and it shall rise up wholly like a flood; that is, it shall appear
with a motion like that of the waves in a flood. -- But it would be needless to
enlarge here. You are all, I believe, convinced not only of the being and
perfections, but of the providential government of God; that his throne is
prepared in the heavens, and that his kingdom rules over all, extending even
to the motion of a sparrow, and the falling of a hair from off our heads; much
more to those violent concussions in the deep caverns of the earth, which make
it to tremble.

Only, let me, as the proper improvement of this part of my subject, put you
upon attending to this truth, and exercising an affectionate awakened faith in
it, with respect to the great event of the other morning. Seriously carry your
tho'ts beyond all second Causes, and fix your eye on God as the supreme author
of the dreadful earthquake that then filled you with distress; and encourage in
your minds the most lively apprehensions both of his power and goodness, which
were eminently displayed at that time, taking care to pay him those religious
acknowledgments that are his due.

There is, perhaps, no work in the kingdom of providence, that renders the
great God more awfully glorious, than this of his terribly shaking the earth
under us, and our houses over us. A most mavelous display is hereby made of
his almighty power. How weak and feeble do all creatures appear in comparison
with him! If he does but touch the mountains, they tremble; the hills, and they
are moved at his presence! One of the first tho'ts that arises in the mind,
upon the shock of an earthquake, is that, "the Lord is a mighty God; what God
is there in the heaven, or in the earth, that can do according to his works,
and according to his might"? Let us, from what we saw, and felt, in the late
earthquake, entertain in our hearts an awakened apprehension of him as clothed
with power; and be in a disposition to fall down before him with such religious
acknowledgments in our mouths as those, "Thou art great, O Lord; there is none
like thee, neither is there any God besides thee: Thou have a mighty arm, and
strength is in thy right hand: Thou art the Lord God omnipotent." And let us
fear to offend this great and holy Lord God, whose is the power, and the
greatness, and the majesty; who can do whatsoever he pleases in heaven, and
earth, and all deep places, and in a moment, at any time, destroy our Souls as
well as bodies, and this in hell. --

The goodness of God has likewise been wonderfully manifested in this event of
providence. To what else can it be ascribed, that, when he so awfully shook our
houses, he so proportioned the force with which he did this, as that they
should not be shattered to pieces, and bury us in their ruins? How easy would
it have been with him to have increased the impe^^^ which caused the earth to
shake, which if he had done but a few degrees more, the effect would inevitably
have been our sudden and general destruction? And to what can we attribute it,
but to his unmerited goodness, that he thus restrained his wrath, and did not
suffer it to involve us in common ruin? O how infinitely indebted are we to the
mercy of a good God? -- How should we call upon our Souls, and all that is
within us to bless his holy name! -- O let us never be unmindful of this
mavelous mercy of God, to which alone it is owing we were not consumed. How
should Sinners, such in special who are conscious to themselves that they are
heinously so, acknowledge and adore this rich patience of God toward them,
which has lengthened out their lives, and their space for repentance? Had the
earth, in its late agitation, instantaneously swallowed you up in some wide
chasin, or put an end to your lives by the crush of your falling houses, where
had you been now? Whither would your Souls have gone? O most important enquiry!
-- Oh be thankful to a good God, that you are yet alive, and yet within the
reach of mercy! And be instant in your care to make your peace with him, through
Jesus Christ, and to get into a state of safety, with respect to another world;
and it will now be well with you, should God ever so suddenly, or awfully, call
you hence to be here no more. -- But I must now go on to the other observation,
namely,

II. That when God makes the earth to shake and tremble, it is ordinarily in
testimony of his anger. I say ordinarily, because the anger of God has not
always been the more special reason of his causing an earthquake. He has
sometimes designed this to answer other ends besides testifying his displeasure.

Sometimes he may have had it in view to declare his own infinite greatness and
majesty. This seems to have been the more special reason of his making the
earth terribly to shake, when he published the law from the top of Sinai. It
was not because he was now angry with the Jewish nation; for he was showing his
word unto Jacob, and his statutes and his judgments unto Israel; and dealing
with them, in a way of favor, beyond what he had ever before done to any other
people. But it became the divine being to appear with the ensigns of majesty;
and it was, that he might gloriously display his greatness and power, that he
made the mount to quake so terribly, when he came down upon it.

Sometimes his more immediate intention has been the Salvation and deliverance
of his people, and to give proof of his signal presence with them to protect,
defend, and bless them. So, when Israel went forth out of Egypt, the Lord
appeared marvellously for them, and their deliverance was very much owing to
the dreadful earthquake, which swallowed up Pharaoh and his host. For that
their destruction was bro't about by an earthquake is very plain from those
words, in Exodus 15. 12, Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, and the earth
swallowed them. It Is true, there might be a double intention in the production
of this earthquake. If it was designed as a testimony of God's anger against
the Egyptians, and sent in judgment to destroy them; it was intended also, and
this primarily, for the salvation of Israel: So, when this same people had
entered into Canaan, it was by earthquakes that God sometimes displayed his
power in favor of them, to defend and protect them. In allusion to this is
that acknowledgment to the supreme majesty, Judge. 5. 4. 5. Lord, when thou
wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth
trembled, the mount melted before the Lord. It was probably by an earthquake,
that God threw down the walls of Jericho, and delivered that city into the
hands of the Israelites; the story of which we have at large in the 6th Chapter
of Joshua. And the earthquake which shook open the door of the prison, were
Paul and Silas were confined, was designed in mercy to those Servants of the
most high God; to vindicate their character, and make way for their release,
and the furtherance of the Gospel thereby. In all these earthquakes, there
might be an exhibition of the divine anger against the enemies of religion; but
still the principal intention seems to have been to give proof of the presence
of God with his servants to make way for their salvation.

In fine, sometimes God has though it fit to accompany an extraordinary out-pouring
of his spirit with the shock of an earthquake. So, when the Apostles were
united in solemn prayer, there was the noise as of a mighty rushing wind, which
shook the place where they were assembled together: Upon which it follows, Acts
4. 31. they were all filled with the holy Ghost.

But these things notwithstanding, earthquakes more commonly are sent in
judgment, and because God is angry. This is very plainly intimated in my text;
and there are numerous other scriptures which speak to the same purpose. Psalm
xvi. 7. The earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills moved,
and were shaken, because he was wroth. Ezekiel. xxxviii. 19, 20, compared with
Nahum i. 5, 6. The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is
burnt at his presence; yea, the world, and all that dwell therein. Who can
stand before his indignation? And who can abide in the fierceness of his wrath?
His fury is poured out like fire; and the rocks are thrown down by him.

But had the scripture been silent upon this head, we might easily have known,
that earthquakes are a token of the divine anger. They are, in their operation,
the most fearful events, and carry with them the most lively signatures of
displeasure. How can we do any other than conclude, that the majesty of heaven
is angry, when we behold him throwing the earth into such a state, as that it
struggles and heaves, as though all over convulsed? This indeed is the
sentiment of all hearts, at such an awful time. Who is there that is not filled
with concern, from an apprehension of the great God as angry? How do our sins
now fly in our faces? How conscious are we of guilt? How distressed lest God
should be about to execute upon us the fierceness of his wrath? There is scarce
a sinner so profligate and abandoned, but fearfulness now takes hold of him;
and however thoughtless he was before of God, he now realises his being and
providence, has awakened in him a sense of his obligations to him, and cant
help trembling at the thought that he is angry, and may now be about to take
vengeance on him.

It Is true, when the shaking of the earth is comparatively light, and attended
with no bad effects, men may not look upon it, at least not consider it, as an
evidence of God's displeasure; but its agitations are sometimes so violent, and
the effects following thereupon so dismal, as to convince all, even the most
obdurate, that God is, and that he is displeased; yea, filled with indignation.
Blessed be God, we, in this land, have not as yet been visited with earthquakes
that have done any more than solemnly warned us; though they have often been
sent upon other places, not only to the filling men's minds with horrible
consternation, not only to the throwing down here and there a house, and taking
away here and there a life; but to the ingulsing large cities, and numerous
villages, in one common desolation. The rocks have been rent, the hills moved,
the mountains overturned, and the earth so opened as to take down her
inhabitants by hundreds and thousands. No less than an hundred thousand souls
have been destroyed, in a few moments, by one dreadful earthquake. And can this
be, and God at the same time not ^^^ched with anger? Wherein could the holy
righteous God more awfully make it evident, that he is displeased? War,
famines, pestilences are spoken of in scripture as the great judgments of God;
but they are neither of them to be compared with earthquakes. These, of all
God's judicial dispensations, are the most terrible; and the surest indication
of his righteous anger.

But you will ask, it may be, what is the reason of this anger of God? From
whence is it excited? Why is it stirred up?

To this I would say, when the prophet Habakkuk saw the tents of Cushan in
affliction, and the land of Midian in a state of trembling, he at once
concluded, that God was angry; but, at the same time, was far from imagining,
that it was at the inanimate earth. Says he, chapter iii. ver. 8. Was the Lord
displeased against the rivers? Was thine anger against the rivers? Was thy
wrath against the sea? Far be it from the all-wise God to be angry at the
rivers, or earth, or sea! He is capable of anger, in the figurative sense it is
applied to him, with man only on this earth, and with nothing in man but sin.
Sin is the ground, and the only moral ground, of the anger of God, that anger
of his, which causes the earth to shake and tremble. It Is this that
transgresses his law, opposes his will, affronts his sovereignty, reflects
contempt upon his government, and brings confusion into the moral world: It Is
this therefore that excites his displeasure, and to such a degree sometimes, as
that he is provoked to bring on the shock of an earthquake to warn, or punish,
the sinful sons of men. To this purpose are those words of the prophet, Isa. v.
24, 25. Because they have cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and despised
the word of the holy one of Israel, THEREFORE is the anger of the Lord kind^^^
against his people, and he has stretched forth his hand against them; -- and
the HILLS DID TREMBLE.

But as the scripture takes notice of some sins in special, which have excited
the anger of God, and been the occasion of earthquakes, either in his
threatenings, or the execution of them; I shall not think it unseasonable to
point them out to you at this time, as particularly worthy of your most serious
consideration.

The sins included in the term, uncleanness, have so offended God, as that he
has testified his anger against them by an earthquake. I mention these sins
first, because they are the sins in special, which occasioned the first
earthquake, we have an account of, in the bible; and a very tremendous one it
was. You all know, what the sins of Sodom and Gomorrha were; and you know also,
what sudden and terrible destruction was brought on them herefor. Besides the
fire and brimstone, which God rained on them from heaven, there (...), a
sinking down of the earth, whereby these fornicators, and adulterers, and
abusers of themselves with mankind, were entirely swallowed up. The manner in
which the scripture describes the destruction of these cities, with their
inhabitants, seems to point out an earthquake, as well as an horrible tempest
of fire; for it is said, Genesis 29. 25, The Lord overthrew these cities, and
their inhabitants. And it is observable, the prophet Jeremiah, speaking of this
event, says, Lament. 4. 6, They were overthrown as in a moment; which perfectly
agrees with the operation of an earthquake. And it is certain, that these cities,
with the country round about, for many miles in breadth, and more in length,
were not only burnt, but also sunk down; and in the place where they stood,
there is now a nauseous lake, called the dead, or salt sea: And it remains to
this day.

I will not presume to determine, that it was for the sins comprehended in
uncleaness, in distinction from others, that God was provoked the last week
terribly to shake the earth; but this I will venture to say, that as these sins
are shamefully prevalent all over the land, and emphatically in this town, we
might do well to esteem ourselves warned of God against uncleanness, in all its
various branches, and called upon to flee these filthy lusts, lest, after the
manner of Sodom, we also should be set forth as an example, for giving our
selves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh.

Sabbath-breaking is likewise a sin, God has threatened to testify against by
shaking the earth. The prophet brings in the people of Israel, expressing
themselves in that language, Amos 8. 5, When will the new moon be gone, that we
may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat? And then follows
an awful denunciation from God, v. 7. 8, The Lord has sworn by the excellency
of Jacob, Surely I will not forget any of their works: shall not the land
tremble for this?

And it is no wonder he has been so severe in signifying his displeasure at the
violation of his Sabbath. For it is one of the laws he published from Sinai, and
with more awful pomp than he ever before, or since, published any of his laws.
And it is a law, the due observation whereof has a near connection with the
religious observation of the other divine precepts. If men are sacredly careful
to sanctify the Sabbath in their hearts, closets, and families, as well as in
the place of public worship, it will have an happy influence on their general
temper and conduct, to render them amiable and lovely: Whereas, if they have
upon their minds no serious sense of Sabbath-sanctification, and make little or
no difference between Lord's-'Days, and other days, neglecting religion in
themselves and families, as well as in the sanctuary; or attending on
sabbath-duties in a formal superficial manner, the same unhallowed spirit will
be likely to run through their whole behavior in the world. And it seldom
happens, but men are loose and profane in other regards, if they are so with
respect to the Sabbath. This therefore of remembering the sabbath day to keep it
holy, is a duty of greater importance, than many may be ready to imagine; and
the neglecting, or profaning, the day by idleness, recreation, or unnecessary
worldly employments, is highly displeasing to God: And we may the rather think
so, because he has threatened this sin with so awful a judgment.

And suffer me to remind you here, it was on the evening of the sabbath, about
eight and twenty years ago, that we were surprised with the most fearful
earthquake that was ever before known in the country; it was on a sabbath day
also, and while in the place of worship, that we were again surprised, about
ten years since, with a like, though more moderate, shaking of the earth; and the
last evening, which we esteem a part of the sabbath, we were yet again alarmed
with an agitated earth. Ought we not to take occasion from hence to reflect
upon our Sabbath-sins as particularly provoking to God? May we not learn the
meaning of the threatening in providence by the timeing of it? Are not our
tho'ts naturally pointed to the dishonor we have done God, by disregarding that
law of his which binds us to sanctify the sabbath?

It cannot be pretended, that the sabbath is observed among us with that
conscience and care, which might reasonably be expected, considering our high
professions to regard it as a day to the Lord. -- Are not many too ready to say
with the Jews, in the text we just now mentioned, when will the sabbath be
gone, that we may go about our worldly business? Are not many as free to take
their diversions on this day, as on any other? Do not many neglect the public
worship on this day, and take as little care to cultivate religion in their
families, or in their own souls? We have certainly reason, we especially of
this town, to call our selves to account for our breaches of the holy sabbath,
to consider of our past omissions of duty, and commissions of sin, and to
humble ourselves herefor before God: Nor would this be a misimprovement of the
present dispensation of God.

Pride is another sin God has testified his anger against by earthquakes. To
this purpose is that of the prophet, Isa. ii. 12, 17, 21. For the day of the
Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud, and lofty; and upon every
one that is lifted up: And he shall be brought low. And the loftiness of man
shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of man shall be made low; and the Lord
alone shall be exalted in that day, -- when he shall arise to shake terribly
the earth.

And it is no more than might be expected, that God should thus signify his
displeasure against the sin of pride. For it is a sin that God has mentioned by
name, and spoken of as an abomination to him. And it is the source of most other
sins. It Is this that gives rise to that extravagance of dress, and those
troublesome, not to say indecent fashions, which the daughters of Zion so
generally run into: It Is this that puts so many upon exceeding their ability,
as well as proper station, in expensive living; the end whereof must be their
reduction to poverty in a little time, if they don't grow more humble: It Is
this that leads men to think more highly of themselves than they deserve, and
to treat their neighbors with such insolence and contempt: In a word, it is
this that disposes men to imagine, that even God himself has as great a regard
for them, as they have for themselves, by which means they are discontented and
unthankful. We might properly take occasion to consider wherein, we may have
been chargeable with this vice, in any of its branches, that we may humble our
selves therefore, repent, and no more, in this way, excite the anger of God.

Unrighteousness is another sin still, which God has threatened with an
earthquake; however it be committed, whether by downright oppression and
violence, or the more secret arts of fraud and knavery. These ways of dishonest
dealing are particularly mentioned as the moral ground of God's causing the
earth to tremble, by the prophet Amos. He speaks, in the third chapter of his
prophesy, ver. 4. 6, of those who swallowed up the needy, and bought the poor
for silver: Here is cruel extortion, downright oppression. In the 6th ver. he
speaks of those who made the ephah small, and the shekel great; falsifying the
balance by deceit: Here is the more sly and artful way of tricking and
cheating in commerce. And now follows the threatening, in the 8th verse, shall
not the land tremble for this?

We may possibly think it a matter of no great importance, whether we are
honest, or not. We may esteem honesty nothing more than a pagan virtue. But we
ought to know, that a real principle of righteousness is a christian grace, and
of absolute and indispensible necessity. Our Savior has said, Whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye the same to them: Nor unless we are, in
some good measure, formed to such a temper as this, are we worthy the name of
christians? Righteousness, in all its branches toward our neighbor, as well
as toward God, is what we must practice; or we shall certainly expose
ourselves to that anger of heaven, which may cause the earth to tremble and
sink under us. This may be especially worthy of our consideration, in such a
day of awful rebuke as this is; and the rather, because it may be feared,
whether unrighteousness, open or secret; in the ways of violence, or under the
disguise of art, is not emphatically the sin of New England in general, and of
this Town in particular. Says the prophet, Isa. v. 6. Woe unto them that join
house to house, and field to field! He is speaking of those who do it by unfair
means, in the methods of dishonesty. The reason of this Woe follows in the 25th
verse, The hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the midst of the
streets; that is, by the falling of scattered pieces of the houses upon them.

Moreover, Drunkenness is another sin, it might be expected, God would visit
with an earthquake. Reeling too and fro is the characteristic of one that is
drunk. And it is observable, the prophet, when describing an earthquake, speaks
of it in much the same language. Jer. xxiv. 19, 20. The earth is moved
exceedingly, the earth shall reel to and fro like a Drunkard, and shall be
removed like a cottage. But the manner of motion in an earthquake, the analogy
between this judgment and drunkenness, is not the only reason we have to think,
that this is a sin God would testify against. It is mentioned, by name, in
scripture, especially when committed in company, and with noisie vain
merriment, as that which will expose to the woe of an earthquake. Isai. v. 11,
12. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong
drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame them. And the harp, and the
viol; the tabret, and the pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: But they regard
not the work of the Lord; neither consider the operation of his hands. The
threatening follows, in the 25th verse, Therefore is the anger of the Lord
kindled against his people, and the hills did tremble.

An awakening consideration this to the people of New England! among whom there
are so many, of whom it may with truth be said, that they follow strong drink,
and continue at it till they are enflamed by it. How general is the practice of
drinking to excess? What large quantities of spirituous liquors are there
consumed in this land, and in this town! Do not many of our people spend too
much of their time, and too much of their substance, in taverns! Are there none
of them that walk in rioting and drunkenness, in addition to chambering and
wantonness? Have we never seen drunkards reeling to and fro in the streets, as
we have passed along? And can it be thought strange, if God, in testimony
against this enormous vice, should cause the earth to reel also? And it were
well for sinners, in this kind, if this was all they might expect from a
provoked God. But it is far from being so. They are particularly marked, in the
revelations of scripture, as persons that shall be excluded heaven; as we read,
1 Cor. vi. 9. Drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom of God: Nor is this the
worst of their case; for unless they repent in time, they shall have their
part, as it is declared, Rev. xxi. 8, in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone.

In fine, Enmity to Christ, and ill treatment of him, has been testified
against by an earthquake. The next thing recorded after the death of our
Savior, which was bro't about by the hatred and malice of the Jews against his
person, and religion, is that, Matt. 27. 51, The earth did quake, and the rocks
rent. It might be to do honor to Christ, as the Son of God and Savior of men,
that the earth groaned, and trembled, when he gave up the ghost; but his design
also, in this event, at this particular time, no doubt, was, to signify his
high displeasure at the Jews, who, by wicked hands, had crucified and slew the
Lord of glory. And if we justify their conduct by our hatred of him; if we
neglect his great salvation; if we refuse him who has spoken to us from heaven;
if we reject his person and counsel; and if, by obstinately continuing in those
sins for the expiation of which he died, we virtually crucify him afresh, and
put him to open shame: -- shall not we also be justly liable to the resentments
of God? and would it be any wonder, if he should testify his anger, by visiting
us with the shocks of an earthquake? While we refuse to have this man to reign
over us, and express our disregard to him by our unbelief and disobedience, we
are in danger not only of judgments in this world, but of the damnation of
hell. O that we had upon our minds a due sense of this! And that we might
herefrom be awakened to a speedy flight to Christ, in the Gospel way! We shall
then be safe from evil here, and secure from the divine wrath hereafter.

Enough, I believe, has now been said to satisfy us, that the anger of God is
that which excites him to send earthquakes; as also to point out those sins
which may eminently be the ground of his displeasure, testified by these
judicial dispensations.

And now, from what has been discoursed, may we not justly fear, that God is
angry with his people in this town and land? When he shakes the earth, it is
because he is angry: And why is he angry? Surely, not at the earth which
trembles: no; but at the sins of the people who dwell on it. And as we are a
sinful and degenerate people, we have all the reason in the world to conclude,
it is because God is angry with us for our sins, that he has thus arose to shake
terribly the earth under us, and our houses over us: Nor need we be at any loss
to know what the sins are, that have excited his displeasure, and the
manifestations of it, in this way, against us. The sins of Sodom are to be
found, even in this land of Gospel Light and advantages. -- We are as weary of
the Lord's sabbaths, and as remiss and negligent in our attendance on the
duties proper to them, as were the Jews of old. -- We are become shamefully
defective in the government, instruction and religion of our households. Our
children and servants are many of them vile, and we restrain them not. God, the
founder of our families, is not so generally acknowledged in them, as might
reasonably be expected, considering the example of our fathers. There are many
houses, it may be feared, especially in this town, in which the worship of God
is not upheld; in which, perhaps, scarce ever a prayer was put up to almighty
God. -- And what sins are there that are not committed in the land? We have
risen up, in our father's stead, a generation that know not the Lord, that have
done evil exceedingly in his sight. We are indeed, to an high degree of guilt,
addicted to profaneness, worldliness, dishonesty, pride, extravagance, luxury,
intemperance, and all other immoralities, which ought not to be so much as
named among christians. -- And shall not God visit us for these iniquities? It
cannot be, but he should be angry with us. We may depend, our earth was terribly
shook, because he was wroth. We were, in the moral sense, ripe for this awful
judgment: And it is a wonder of mercy, the force which caused the late trembling
of our houses, was not heightened in its degree, so as to bury us in their
ruins. This had certainly been the case, had God dealt with us according to our
deserts. Blessed, forever blessed, be his name, that in wrath he remembered
mercy. It was owing to this, and to this only, that we were not involved, as
other places have often been, in sudden and general destruction.

What therefore remains, but that we immediately endeavor, by repentance, to
remove away the ground of God's displeasure. That is the voice of the shaking
we have heard and felt, Repent, and turn from your transgressions, that so
iniquity may not be your ruin. And this is the voice also of the other
threatening aspects of divine providence at this day. To day therefore, while it
is called to day, let us hear God's voice, and not hearden our hearts, nor
suffer them to be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. The call is
universal: It extends to Churches, to Courts, to Colleges, to Schools, to
Families, to the whole land; and to all orders, ages, and conditions of persons
in it; to high and low, rich and poor, old and young; to all without exception,
or discrimination: And it were to be wished, that we would all, in our
respective places, pay a due regard to it; that the reformation may be general.
It would be well, should we each one smite upon his own breast, and say, What
have I done? How far am I chargeable with the public guilt? And wherein we may,
upon serious enquiry, be conscious of having transgressed against the Lord, we
should immediately repent, and amend our doings which have not been right, and
make it our care, for the time to come, to obey all God's precepts, whether
they relate to our duty, to our Maker, our selves, or one another. Nothing
short of a general thorough change of our manners should satisfy us; for
nothing short of this will afford us just ground of hope for a change in the
dispensations of God.

Are any of you, my friends, walking in the way of your own hearts, and in the
sight of your eyes, thoughtless of God, and of the great concerns of religion;
let me beseech you, as you love your lives, as you love your souls, instantly
to come to a stop in your career in sin. How dare you provoke that glorious
powerful being, who removes the mountains in his anger, and makes the pillars
of the earth to tremble! How amazing is your boldness! How stupid your folly!
Have thou an arm like God? Can thou resist that power, which shakes the
foundations of the earth? Can thou bear that indignation, which overturneth
the mountains, and sets universal nature a trembling? Can thou escape that
presence, which dwells in the most secret caverns of the earth, and commands
all the materials of destruction that are lodged there? Oh! who can stand
before this mighty Lord God? Behold! he sets upon the circle of the earth,
and none can stay his hand! He makes the earth to shake and tremble, and
moves the foundations of the hills, because he is wroth! And will you be
fearless of so great and dreadful a God, in comparison with whom the
inhabitants of the world are as grasshoppers; yea, nothing, and less than
nothing! Will you rise up in rebellion against his sovereign authority, defying
his power, and daring his vengeance? Oh! be advised to agree quickly with this
almighty adversary. Be incessant in your prayers, and endeavors, in the use of
all appointed means, that you may be humbled, reformed, and thoroughly
converted. And give yourselves no ease, till you have had that moral change
accomplished in you, which will make you the friends of God, and secure your
safety, though the earth should be removed, and the mountains be carried into the
midst of the seas. --

Were none of you, the other morning, in anxiety and concern of mind, from an
apprehension of God as angry with you? When you felt the earth so awfully
shaking under you, and your houses over you, threatening you with immediate
destruction, did you not perceive also the agitations of an accusing
conscience? Were none of your sins then brought to your remembrance? Did none
of them fly in your faces? Had you in your hearts no fear of the Almighty? I
cannot suppose, but you were most of you struck with an awful dread of the
power and majesty of God; and I cannot but hope, that some of you though it within
your selves, that, if God should spare you, and give you opportunity therefore,
you would, without delay, set about the necessary work of repentance, and
serving him. I cannot but hope, that one and another of you came into some such
pious resolution as that, wherein I have done iniquity, I will do no more. If I
now speak the inward sense and feeling of any of your minds, in that awful
hour, as I trust I do; think it not unseasonable, if I urge upon you a care to
cherish such good impressions as these, and to guard against every thing that
may have a tendency to erase them out of your minds: Otherwise your goodness
will be as the morning cloud, and the early dew, which soon pass away. This was
too much the case about eight and twenty years ago, when God arose, and shook
the earth more terribly than had been known in the land before. The fears of
multitudes were then alarmed; they called on God; made fair promises of a
reformation; and, for a while, were externally very serious and devout: But
they soon lost the impressions of piety, forgot their good resolutions, and
returned to their former folly. Some, I would hope, were thoroughly humbled,
and turned from their sins to God: But, for the generality, their goodness was
nothing more than a transient business. As the earth grew quiet, their fears
went off, and, together with them, all their concern about the one thing
needful. And must it not be said of some, notwithstanding the horrible anguish
they were then in, that they afterward turned out abandoned sinners! The
latter end was much worse with them than the beginning. Let me therefore
beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus, and in his name, to make a wise and
good improvement of the warning God is now giving you, and the fear and concern
you may herefrom have excited in you. Cultivate the serious sense you have of
God and religion on your minds. -- Be earnest in your prayers to the throne of
grace, for those assistances you will need. -- Take care you don't grieve the
good spirit of God. -- With the Jailor, who was made to tremble by the
earthquake, which shook the prison he had the charge of, enquire with a
becoming solicitude of soul, What shall I do to be saved? And do not rest
satisfied, until you have been enabled, under the influence of the divine
spirit, to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ: And, to your faith, add all other
christian graces, and live in the daily exercise of them; and you need not then
be afraid, let what will come: For you are prepared for all events, whether of
time, or eternity.

Though I should be thought tedious, I shall, upon this occasion, address a few
words to those, who have made God their fear, and are walking in the way of his
commandments. Some such, we would hope, there are among us. The good Lord
increase their Number! To you I would say* your state is happy: The supreme
regent of nature, through Jesus Christ, is your friend. His perfections are all
engaged on your behalf. When you hear the noise, and feel the shock of an
earthquake, you have no reason to be dismayed. Let not your hearts be troubled;
you believe in God, you believe in Jesus Christ. You ought indeed to be
possessed of an holy awe and reverence of the power and majesty of God: But you
ought not to have upon your minds a slavish fear and dread. It is below your
character, and hope; and will argue a low degree of faith; at least, that you
have not faith in exercise. Your chief concern should be, to take occasion,
from such an extraordinary providence, to be upon your watch; to give all
diligence to get, and keep yourselves, in a state of actual readiness for the
coming of your Lord. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes,
shall find so doing.

I conclude with saying, the shaking of the earth is a lively emblem, and will
be one of the amazing forerunners, of that awful day of God, in which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements melt with fervent
heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein, be burnt up. And since
this day of God will come, and is hastening upon us, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness! Wherefore, beloved,
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in
peace, without spot and blameless.

AMEN.
AN APPENDIX; Giving a summary Account of the late EARTHQUAKE.
ON the morning, November 18th, about 15 minutes after 4, the air calm and the
heavens bright, came on the most surprising shock of an earthquake that was
ever felt, so far as we know, in this part of the world. I did not my self
perceive any noise distinct from that which was occasioned by the crackling of
the house where I was, and the disturbance of the movables in it; but many
others, and, among these, such as were awake, and had risen from their beds to
prosecute their business, say, that it was both preceded, and accompanied, with
a considerable noise, like that of distant thunder, or a sudden hard gust of
rushing wind. The shock was gradual, increasing in its strength for about a
minute. It then very sensibly abated, giving us room to hope it was going off;
when, on a sudden, it returned with greater violence than before, so as that
our houses heaved, and rocked, as if they would have fallen to pieces. It
continued at this height not above half a minute, gradually decreasing till we
had no more any perception of it.

There are various opinions concerning the precise time of its continuance.
Some say, it lasted 4, or 5, or 6 minutes. Others think it was over in one.
Those, as I imagine, come nearest to the truth, who fix it at about 3 minutes.

The effects were very considerable. Not to mention the fearful clattering that
was made by our doors, windows, and walls; nor the damage we received by the
breaking of our brittle ware, and the bruising of our pewter, which was thrown
from the shelves: I say, passing over these smaller articles, many chimnies, it
is though it several scores, were broken off near the top of our houses, and thrown
down. A less number, it may be 20, were cracked through, all round, a few feet
from the top; and some of them strangely dislocated, and turned from their
former position. Perhaps, a 1000 or 1500 chimnies have been more lightly
damaged in various degrees. The roofs of some houses, and the gable ends of a
few others as far as the caves, were broken in, either by the violence with
which they were shook, or by the falling of the chimnies on them. It is said,
that many clocks and watches were stopped, by the sudden and great agitation
that was given them; though this was not the case with mine. And some wells have
not since yielded any water, the springs that fed them having been, in one way
or another, stopped. One more effect worthy of notice, a gentleman has thus
published from his personal view of it. "A distiller's cistern, made of plank,
almost new, and very strongly put together, was burst to pieces by the
agitation of the liquor in it; which was thrown out with such force as to break
down one whole side of the shed that defended the cistern from the water, as
also to stave off a board or two from a fence, at the distance of 8 or 10 feet
from it."

These are the principal effects of this great Earthquake in this town. We now
know, that it was of very large extent; reaching from Casco-Bay northeastward
to Philadelphia southwestward, a line, on the seacoast, of more than 500
miles: And it was felt also within land a great way. We have not had accounts
as yet from the most distant English settlements; but doubtless they had all a
very strong perception of it. It does not appear to have been equally violent
in all places throughout this extent; though it was more so than was ever known
before. From Casco-Bay, on the northeast, it is said, "the shock was much as we
had it in this town." From Philadelphia on the southwest, they write, "On
Tuesday morning, Nov. 18th, we had a smart shock of an earthquake, which lasted
about two minutes." And in all the intermediate places it arose to a surprising
height.

The effects, in many of our towns, were as considerable as in this, if not
more so. In Pembroke, besides the breaking down of a number of chimnies, there
were 4 or 5 chasms, or openings, made in the earth, from whence both water and
sand were thrown out. In Situate, near the large dwelling house of Mr. Bailey,
there was 7 openings of the ground, which still remain perceptible; one of them
within 20 yards of the house, and the whole 7 within a few rods of it. From
these have issued large quantities of water, and (at the lowest computation) 10
cart loads of a strange sort of earth, as fine as flower, and of a whiteish
complexion. The house itself was most awfully shook; the chimney levelled with
the roof; most of the ceiling fractured into small parts, and in many places
separated from the sides of the rooms; a new case of drawers thr^^^ ^own, and
though it to be irreparably shattered: Besides which, 70 square feet of a firm
cellar wall was burst from its former position, and another considerable part
of it thrown to the ground. At Newington, in New Hampshire, there was an
eruption, near the house for public worship, 60 rods long, and 2 feet wide;
the most hideous chasm we have yet heard of. In one place and another, the old
springs were shut up, and new ones opened; and in all places the stone fences
were, more or less, shaken down. The damage, in this article only, is set,
moderately computing, at about fifty thousand pounds, in the common way we
reckon money.

The agitation occasioned by this earthquake was not confined to the dry-land.
The vessels in the harbor of this town, and I suppose in other harbors also,
were made fearfully to quiver and shake; and it seemed to those, who were in
them, as though they were a-ground, and beating upon small ballast. Some that
were in the bay, coming in from sea, though it they had unhappily struck upon the
rocks or sands. A gentleman, who came passenger in a vessel from Cadiz, says,
that, 70 leagues to the east of Cape-Ann, they were suddenly surprised, about
the time the earthquake came on here, supposing they had run foul of a wreck,
or got upon a bar, till, on throwing over the lead, they found they had more
than 50 fathom water. As the morning light came on, they saw 3 large whales on
the top of the water, and by their continuing perfectly still, they was ready
to think, they were dead; though they could not reduce this to a certainty,
having no bullets to fire at them. They saw also great numbers of other fishes,
both great and small; frightened, as it was though it, from the bottom.

In about an hour and 20 minutes after this great shock, we had another; which,
though comparatively small, was yet felt by most that were up. And on the 22d of
this same month, at 40 minutes after 8, in the evening, we were alarmed with
another still; which, though not to be compared with the first, was very
affecting to most people. These are all the shocks we have had in this town;
though elsewhere they have been more numerous. In some places they have felt 5 or
6; in others 10 or 11; and in others still, at least 20.

May we all sing aright both of mercy and judgment! And while we fear before
that God, who makes the earth to shake and tremble, let us love him also for
his goodness: And may the riches of it, as they have been displayed toward us
in our late deliverance from sudden and general destruction, lead us to
repentance.

Boston, December 3, 1755.

