Universal Love recommended IN A SERMON Preached before the Ancient and
Honorable SOCIETY OF Free and Accepted MASONS, IN Trinity-Church, BOSTON, ON
Wednesday the 1st of October, 1755.

By Arthur Brown, A.M. Missionary from the SOCIETY, for propagating the Gospel
in Foreign Parts, at PORTSMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE.

Published at the Request of the Society.

1 Epist. Joh. ii. 10. He that loves his Brother abides in the Light. BOSTON;
NEW ENGLAND: Printed for J. and T. LEVERETT, in Cornhill. M,DCC,LV.

At a GRAND LODGE, Held in the Concert-Hall, in BOSTON, on Wednesday the 1st
Day of October, 1755.
It was unanimously Agreed, THAT our Right Worshipful Brothers, Henry Price,
Benjamin Hallowell, James Forbes, Robert Jenkins, and Hugh McDaniel, be a
Committee, to wait upon our Brother, the Rev. Mr. Arthur Brown, and return him
the Thanks of this SOCIETY for his Sermon, Preached this Day before them; and
that he be Requested to give a Copy of the same for the Press.

John Leverett, Grand Secretary

To the Right Worshipful JEREMY GRIDLEY, Esquire Provincial Grand Master of
NORTH AMERICA; Mr. BENJAMIN HALLOWELL, Deputy Grand Master; Mr. JAMES FORBES,
Mr. ROBERT JENKINS, Grand Wardens.

The Right Worshipful PETER LEIGH, Esquire Provincial Grand Master of
SOUTH CAROLINA; And Others the Worshipful BROTHERS and FELLOWS Of the Ancient
and Honorable SOCIETY OF Free and Accepted MASONS: This SERMON, Preached and
Published at their Request, is DEDICATED, By their most affectionate Brother,
and humble Servant, ARTHUR BROWN.

Universal Love recommended.
13th St. JOHN 34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another.


AS it is highly probable, that I am upon this occasion, to discourse to
persons of several denominations, I have pitched upon a subject equally
interesting and obligatory upon all. For though we may differ and dispute about
things of an inferior nature, yet in the duty of universal benevolence, which
St. Paul makes the fulfilling of the law; (and is the chief cornerstone, on
which this ancient fraternity is founded; at whose desire I appear ^^^e this
day:) It would be uncharitable even to suspect a disagreement.

WE are sent into this world, necessitous weak creatures, necessarily depending
upon one another for the supply of manifold wants, and a great part of the
positive comforts and enjoyments of life; It has therefore pleased the
infinitely wise and good Author of our beings, to provide a remedy against
those evils, to which the indigency and frailty of our state subject us, by
forming us with dispositions of charity, with tender, social, friendly, and
generous affections for one another, which ought carefully to be cherished and
cultivated, in order to remove, at least alleviate the miseries that abound in
the world, and to promote the ease and happiness of every individual.

THIS love according to a great Aristotle.
philosopher, results from the grounds of affinity and resemblance among men.
And if so, must be a branch of the primitive law of nature.

AND it appears from Lev. xix. 18. that it was an acknowledged precept of the
Jewish Religion. -- How then comes it to pass, that love is enjoined as a new
commandin the gospel, and is made a peculiar characteristic of the christian
religion? The answer is, both Jews and Gentiles (it is allowed) did adopt this
precept into their respective religions, but they maintained it in a very
limited and contracted sense: They made all their concerns terminate in
themselves. As to the Gentiles, this in some measure appears, from our blessed
LORD'S reasoning with his disciples in the IVth of St. Matthew's gospel, upon
this very subject; where he informs them, that if they did not extend their
love to such as were their enemies, they had no distinguishing excellency: for
if they loved those only who loved them, what Reward had they? Do not even
Publicans (who were heathens by profession) do the same? You see the foundation
and extent of the duty as observed by the Gentiles.

AND the Jews were as shamefully deficient: for by one another, or neighbor,
which seem to be terms equivalent, they understood only a Jew, one of their own
nation or a proselyte at most; and the law, Lev. xix. that enjoins, the duty
favors this sense: Thou shall not bear any grudge against the children of thy
people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. The children of thy
people, and neighbor, seem to express the same thing. GOD had fenced them in
with ordinances, on purpose to keep them a separate and distinct nation from
all other nations, who were stigmatized as aliens from the commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise.

BUT now, blessed be GOD! the wall of partition being broken down, and GOD
discovered to be no respecter of persons; the laws of our common LORD, and the
mercies of redemption, extending at least to all, within the sound of the
gospel: For as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free-gist came upon all
men to justification of life. The blood of CHRIST cementing all mankind
together, by his tasteing death for every man, and the favor of GOD being so
universally extended, as to invite all men, to mercy: Our duty must necessarily
be co-extended with his grace, and our charity must con^^^ in imitating our
LORD and Savior.

By the laws of our religion therefore, we are to carry on benevolence to the
utmost compass and extent; to enemies as well as friends; to all without
exception within the sphere of our authority.

Well then, and with the greatest propriety did our blessed LORD call this duty
of loving one another, a new commandment, since to the extent and measure of
it, the world were altogether strangers before.

A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another.

In discoursing on the words, I shall first endeavor to show, wherein this
love to one another consists.

In the second place, shall consider the object of this love.

Thirdly, The excellency of it.

AND, in the last place, hope I shall be able to make it appear, that the
ancient fraternity of free and accepted MASONS, is governed by the principle of
universal love; and other, the most important principles of morality in all
their proceedings.

First, I am to endeavor to show, wherein love to one another consists.

MORALISTS usually distinguish between a love of esteem, and complacency, and
of benevolence and goodwill: And the distinction is just, for it is impossible
in the very nature of the thing, to love every individual with complacency and
esteem; but benevolence may, and ought to be extended to all. The actions and
qualities of men, do not only differ in their own nature, but in some respects
are often contrary to one another. Good and evil are as opposite as pain and
pleasure, the nature of things is unalterable. Some persons must therefore
appear amiable and agreeable, others disagreeable and odious: If men are
unjust, and injurious, we can neither approve their actions, nor be delighted
with their characters: If they are debauched and profane, we are obliged to
withdraw from their society and conversation, because consorting with, and
delighting in the company of such persons, if it does not discover an entire
approbation of their ways, yet, at the least, it argues a very indifferent
concern for the honor of GOD.

BUT however we may disapprove of the conduct of such persons, and detest their
proceedings; yet we are to wish well to them, to promote their temporal, and
spiritual happiness, as we have opportunity, and that fervently, and with a
pure heart. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth, (says St.
Peter,) through the spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren; see that ye
love one another with a pure heart fervently. 1 Pet. i. 20, 21.

AND have we not a glorious example to imitate, the Father of all spirits, the
almighty architect of heaven and earth, who is loving, and gracious unto all,
showers down his blessings, without distinction upon the just, and on the
unjust; is bountiful even to his professed enemies, the objects of his wrath and
indignation.

But still his favor and esteem without reformation cannot be expected; so far
from it, that such iniquity is an abomination to him, yet, notwithstanding he
earnestly seeks their recovery, and desires their welfare. So plain is the
distinction between that love which consists in benevolence, and that of
complacency and esteem.

BUT instead of duly observing this distinction, men are led to entertain very
false notions of the duty; and by confounding these ideas, do represent it to
themselves and others, in a very wrong light, and thereby magnify the
difficulty of putting it in practice. -- Is it possible say they, for a man to
love his enemy! one that injuriously treats him, and would willingly ruin and
destroy him? Is this consistent with the great law of self-preservation? Is it
reconcilable with reason?

Now I readily allow, that our corrupted nature instead of submitting to, and
acknowledging the reasonableness of the precept, seems to dictate quite the
reverse, represents it highly unreasonable to love such as would ruin or
destroy us. -- Before any man can discover the fitness and propriety of such
practice, he must be freed from the influence of natural corruption, and raised
above the level of human reason; he must entertain a very exalted opinion of
the christian religion; must be possessed with a generous love for the author
of it, with true faith in him, and the promises of another life, in order to
overballance his natural sentiments, and aversions in the case, to qualify him
to think and practice so disagreeably to nature.

THERE can be no such love, (it is granted) where the fleshly principle rules,
and acts. For all its motions and suggestions have respect only to self; the
pleasures, the honors, the riches of this life. And while these things are
only pursued; and the law in the members prevails, this rule will be altogether
impracticable: For it is not to be conceived, that a covetous, or intemperate
man should love others, as well as he does himself. But when once this corrupt
principle, and the suggestions that spring from it are mortified and corrected,
and grace gains the ascendant; when the spirit of GOD once takes possession of
the man, it will produce true christian love; for one of the fruits of the
spirit is love. This will attract our minds to GOD, kindle in us a lively flame
after him, and necessarily unite us to such as bear his image; not from any
mean, pitiful motives of interest, but from the spiritual alliance we contract
with him, and one another; which disposes us to perform his commands, to desire
his favors, to imitate his actions and example, as well as those of his
beloved SON, resembling them both, as much, and as near as possible. -- This is
loving one another, according to the new commandment; i. e. from and upon a
christian principle.

OH! the infinite goodness of GOD! notwithstanding our baseness, our
ingratitude for all his favors; yet He still discovers a disposition of doing
us good, is grieved at our folly and misery; freely forgives the one, and cures
the other, upon our sincere endeavors of returning to him. Oh! the
incomprehensible love of CHRIST the REDEEMER! who died for us, when we were
enemies to him. And shall not we love one another, love the very worst of men,
wish them well, pray for them, do them good, forgive them, though they curse,
hate, and dispitefully use us? Nay, lay down our lives for their service, (if
need be) after the example of our gracious SAVIOR. What generous, what
disinterested love is this that the christian religion inculcates and displays
to the world? Upon what exalted motives and considerations does it turn. A
perfect contempt of all earthly interest, all temporal applause.

SUCH a love was certainly new, when it first appeared among our LORD's
disciples: And I am sorry to say that an exertion of it in its full extent
would appear as new now, as it was then, even among those that profess
themselves his most zealous followers.

HAVING shown wherein a due discharge of the commandment in the text consists,
I shall now consider the object of this love, one another. That is, all
mankind; all who partake of the common nature with ourselves wherever
dispersed. But because our powers are limited, the sacred writings with the
greatest propriety recommend this benevolence to our neighbors more
particularly; to those with whom we are more immediately converse, and are
acquainted. The Jews by neighbor, as has been already observed, understood one
of their own nation. And when this duty was pressed upon them, they were wont
to confider it in a very confined and limited sense.

BUT our blessed LORD corrected their contracted notion of the duty, and set it
in a more extensive and just light, in answer to a question proposed by a
lawyer; which was exactly to the Point.

THE question was, and who is my neighbor?

HERE I beg leave to observe, that as the eternal SON of GOD descended from the
bosom of his father, to instruct the world in a new righteousness, to lay
before them many unacceptable doctrines to flesh and blood; He often chose to
address them in the parabolick way, as the most engaging method to win over the
well disposed to hear and apply, and to print his lessons in the most lively
and lasting characters on their minds.

THUS he proceeds in the present case, and resolves the lawyer's question, by
proposing a parable, which is expressed in the strongest, and most engaging
manner. Luke x. 30, etc. A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and
fell among thieves, who stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and
departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance, there came down a certain
priest that way; and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. And
likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came, and looked on him, and
passed by on the other side. But a certain Samaritane, as he journeyed, came
where be was. And when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him,
and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast,
and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. And on the morrow, when he
departed, he took out twopence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him,
take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will
repay thee. Which now of these three, think thou, was neighbor unto him
that fell among the thieves? And he said, he that showed mercy on him. Then
said JESUS unto him, go, and do thou likewise. i. e. Thou have answered
thyself: Every person that stands in need of thy relief, be he Jew or
Samaritane, is thy neighbor; and to him are thy good offices to be extended.

BUT is our benevolence to be equally extended to all? This I do not maintain.
-- We are undoubtedly to do good unto all men, but the Text gives a preference
to some, especially to them that are of the household of faith.

IT IS highly reasonable that the most lovely objects should be the greater
partakers of our love. There is nothing so amiable as true goodness.
Commensurate then to this, ought the degree of our love to be. GOD is the
object of our greatest love, because he is perfectly and originally good. As
men then more or less resemble him, the greater or the less complacency ought
we to take in them, and the less ardently to desire, or endeavor to promote
their welfare. True christian love chiefly consists, in loving his image, from
whom we are denominated christians: Where that displays itself with most
advantage, there, in a proportionable degree, is our love to take place. Indeed
nature as well as scripture prescribes different degrees of love, in proportion
to the amiableness and value of the object. But this does not at all affect the
point I have in view, which is, that our love is to extend to all, though not
in the same degree, that we are to desire, and as far as is in our power, to
promote the happiness of every man living.

THE excellency of this duty is now to be considered. The beloved disciple
seems to be in raptures, whenever he discourses of love; he makes it the very
essence of the Deity. GOD is love. He makes it the only sure mark of our
regeneration; we know, that we have passed from death to life, because we love
the brethren. St. Paul also earnestly inculcates the same duty. -- Owe no man
any thing, (says he,) but to love one another, for he that loves another, has
fulfilled the law. In short, he prefers this grace to all other endowments, and
accomplishments; indeed none of them in his judgment were of any consequence
without it. 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 2, 3, 4. For though I speak with the Tongues of men
and angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, and a
thinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing: And though I bestow all
my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not
charity, it profits me nothing. Here we have the excellency of charity
sufficiently displayed; but our blessed SAVIOR gives it the finishing stroke,
being pleased to make it the distinguishing character of his disciples. Joh.
xiii. 35. By this (says he,) shall all men know, that ye are my disciples, if
ye have love one for another; He likewise particularly prays, that this Grace
might animate and influence them, that they may be all one, as thou father art
in me, and I in thee; i. e. united in love, having one heart and one soul: And
for this be assigns a most important reason; that the world may believe, that
thou have sent me. Joh. xvii. 21. Here are the highest encomiums conceivable,
passed upon this grace; and this without any other, is a sufficient proof of
its excellency, since it evinces the truth of christianity, when it manifests
itself in the lives of its professors.

I am now to show, that the ancient fraternity of free and accepted MASONS is
governed by the universal love; and make it with other moral principles of the
greatest importance, the rule of all their proceedings.

FOR the truth of this assertion, I must refer the inquisitive to the book of
constitutions, published by the authority and approbation of the whole society
of MASONS, wherein it is thus declared;

You must avoid all wrath, malice, and rancor, not saying or doing any thing
that may hinder either the continuance, or the renewal of brotherly love and
friendship, which is the glory and cement of this ancient fraternity; that we
may show to all the world the benign influence of MASONRY; all, all wise and
true brothers have done from the beginning of time, and will do, 'till
architecture be dissolved in the general conflagration. -- Again, free and
accepted MASONS have been ever charged to avoid all slandering and backbiting,
all malice or unjust resentment. -- But in nothing does this spirit of
universal love more clearly manifest itself, than in the admission of members
into the society; from which neither rich nor poor are excluded, provided they
are duly qualified; i. e. are good men and true, men of honor and honesty, by
whatever names, religion, or persuasions they may be distinguished; which
excellent institution has been a means of conciliating persons, who otherwise
must have lived (without extraordinary interposition,) in perpetual discord and
contention. In that book we are also directed to speak evil of no man, to heal
all differences, to compose all animosities, and diligently and faithfully to
perform all social duties, as good husbands, good parents, good sons, and good
neighbors. -- With regard to the dispensing of charity so very common among
us; we are governed by that apostolic rule, (which all charitable societies we
presume, strictly observe,) of preferring those, who are more nearly related to
us; and then indiscriminately extending our relief to the necessitous and
indigent, according to their several circumstances and recommendations.

THIS I think sufficient to show how great a regard MASONS pay to the duty of
universal love. And as to other duties of morality, be it known; that
profaneness, and all manner of vice are destructive to the very genius of
MASONRY; it is repugnant to the beauty and harmonious order of this honorable
society to admit tale-bearers, bablers, or liars, litigious or quarrelsome
persons, habitual drunkards, enemies to religion or government among them. Nor
can any member, that rightly understands, and acts agreably to his profession,
be a disbeliever of GOD and his providence, or refuse due honor and obedience
to the King, and all that are in authority under him.

As a civil society, it is true, we do not presume to meddle with the religion
of the blessed JESUS, nor concern ourselves with politics: To this prudence
directs; we are no strangers to the various tempers and dispositions of men;
and therefore decline interfering with things of so nice, so delicate, and
tender a nature, in which we have no right to determine, and which we very well
know may create animosities, and disturb the peace, union, harmony, and love
that prevails among us; upon the account of which we do rejoice, yea, and we
will rejoice. --

IN points therefore of so concerning and important a nature, every member is
left to the enjoyment of his own private opinion, to the persuasion of his own
mind. -- And I think it may not be amiss to observe upon this occasion, that
the religion of the ever blessed JESUS, is too solemn, too sacred a subject to
be made the topic of common conversation. To discourse idly, flippantly, and
inconsiderately upon it, is doing it dishonor. Certain preparation is
necessary to qualify us for this work; to which I fear, many of its most
zealous espousers are altogether strangers.

SUCH are the principles, such the practices, upon which this ancient society
is established; such the regulations by which it is supported, such the ends
for which it i calculated; to investigate and propagate useful knowledge; to
promote, to continue unity, peace, and love, by a faithful discharge of all the
offices of an unfeigned charity, and generous friendship. And all these in due
subordination to the most excellent, and everlasting precepts of the grand
master, the glorious, the incomparable builder of the christian church.

WE are neither so wicked, or so vain, to imagine that human injunctions can
carry such authority, such influence, as those that are divine; but think we
are entitled to the same natural rights which all other well constituted
societies do claim, of making such laws and regulations, and even
distinguishing ourselves, by some peculiarities, that may secure our
constitution from violence and encroachment; without impeachment, or
reflection, without giving offense either to GOD or man.

AND now it might be expected, that even envy itself could find no objection to
so inoffensive, so useful a fraternity! But, why should we expect to escape the
censure, and reproach of licentious and reviling tongues; when the great, the
glorious author of the christian scheme, the only begotten, the everlasting SON
of the FATHER, without sin, without guile, met with the most violent
opposition, which ceased not but with his death, from the bands of ignorant
men; as St. Peter testifies, Act. 3. 17. And now brethren, I wot, that through
ignorance ye did it, as did also their rulers.

LET us follow the steps of this unparallelled pattern, who when he was
reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. Such behavior will recommend us to
the approbation of the generous, and impartial; and at least put to silence our
adversaries, though their prejudices and aversion should still subsist and
continue.

AFTER all, we are not ashamed to acknowledge, that our constitution is
imperfect, and liable to abuse; the best of human institutions is so, and may
suffer accidentally in the opinion of the world through the indiscretion of their
members: But surely the unworthiness of an individual should never reflect
dishonor upon a whole body, or profession of men: If so, farewell
christianity, farewell the perfect and unerring law of GOD.

THROUGH the carelessness and negligence of watchmen, persons of impure lives and
manners may creep into our society, and bring disgrace to our most friendly
structure, but candor and generosity will cease to impute their crimes to us,
when we openly renounce, and bear testimony against them.

AND may You RIGHT WORSHIPFUL (to whom the inspection and care of the lodges in
North America are so safely entrusted) be directed to the most effectual
methods of guarding against all such impositions; may you fall upon such
expedients (in conjunction with the worshipful masters and wardens of the
several lodges) as may not only improve and perpetuate MASONRY, but also
suppress all immoralities (if any such prevail or subsist among us) in
conformity to the most excellent and unexceptionable pattern on the Mount;
which prescribes the most equitable and wholesome rules of living: In a just
observation of which, MASONS will undoubtedly square all their actions aright,
and bring their passions upon a level with the excellent rules that are there
laid down. "Then may we expect to taste and see, how good the LORD is." For the
practice of religion may well be compared to the river of the Psalmist; the
streams whereof make glad the city of GOD.

AND to you my well respected BRETHREN, a few words of ADDRESS may not be
improper. -- Let love be without dissimulation; let it be extended to all men,
without regard to party disputes, or religious differences; and let this
important truth be frequent in your thoughts; that before the almighty JUDGE,
all must stand or fall, according to their works, with or without our censure.
-- Use the blessings of Heaven with temperance and moderation; set bounds to
your pleasures, and avoid all manner of excess: Let all spots and blemishes be
absent from your meetings, more particularly from the entertainment provided
for our present refreshment: And as our assembly is here begun in the house of
GOD, let it be continued in his fear, and conclude in promoting his honor and
glory.

AND shall I be condemned! Will it now be thought improper! at the conclusion
of a discourse calculated to promote universal love, and withal to display the
affectionate tender regard that the brethren of this society are presumed to
bear to one another: I say, can it be thought improper to manifest the thing in
fact, by dropping a few tears on the grave, and doing some justice to the
memory of a departed brother; I mean the Rev. Mr. Charles Brothwell. -- A few
words upon the occasion, will not, I flatter myself, be thought impertinent or
tedious; (although I am sensible I have sufficiently trespassed on your patience
already) For I know he was dear to some of you, in the several capacities of a
good man, a good christian, a faithful pastor, and I will add upon the account
of the craft (however mysterious it may be!) as a good MASON.

HE was an honest and an orthodox man, noted for his zeal, which was according
to knowledge; a workman that needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the
word of truth; boldly rebuking vice, and espousing the cause of the GOD of
Israel upon all occasions.

WHETHER we have respect to the faith, the life, the doctrine of our departed
brother, we shall find cause to glorify GOD, and to comfort ourselves with a
wellgrounded hope, that he still continues to live in CHRIST; the souls of the
righteous are in the hands of GOD. -- His views were not earthly; his treasure,
his heart was in heaven; so that when the alarming summons came (as I have been
credibly informed) he discovered no reluctance in obeying it, but patiently
submitted to the stroke, with hopes full of immortality, and a joyful
expectation of a glorious resurrection. -- Let us not lament then, but
congratulate one another upon the glorious exchange our brother has made: He is
parted from us for a while, but we may meet again in Glory. In the mean time,
Let us show our regard and affection to him, by extending our pity, compassion
and charity to the distressed Relict, who addresses us in the words of one of the
wives of the sons of the Prophets; 2 Kings 4. 6. Thy servant my husband is
dead, and thou know that thy servant did serve the LORD. -- Take the case
into consideration; remember the hands that have been lifted up at the altar:
Lay up for yourselves treasures in Heaven, by extending your christian
benevolence to the widow of your pastor, and your brother.

Now to GOD the FATHER, GOD the SON, and GOD the HOLY GHOST, be ascribed all
power, glory, might, majesty, and dominion, now and for evermore.

AMEN.

