Mr. BURR's DISCOURSE, etc. January 1, 1755.

A DISCOURSE DELIVERED At NEW-ARK, IN NEW JERSEY. JANUARY 1, 1755. Being a Day
set apart for solemn Fasting and Prayer, on Account of the late Encroachments
of the French, and their Designs against the British Colonies in AMERICA.

By AARON BURR, A. M. President of the COLLEGE of NEW JERSEY.

O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turns their Backs before their Enemies.

Jos. vii. 8. And the Lord said unto Joshua, fear not, neither be thou
dismayed; take all the People of War with thee, and arise, and go up to Ai,

Jos. viii. 1. NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by HUGH GAIN, at the Printing Office
in Queen Street, between the Fly and Meal-Market, M,DCCLV. [ Price, ONE
SHILLING, AND THREE COPPERS.]

THE PREFACE.
THE Substance of what is here offered to the Public, was the Application of a
Sermon, preached in the former Part of the Day, from Hosea ix. 12. Woe also to
them, when I depart from them; which is suppressed, lest it should swell the
Pamphlet too much, and the Discourse thrown into such a Form, as to have no
necessary Dependence upon it.

MY constant Hurry of Business, made it doubtful for some Time, whether, or
not, I should comply with the Importunity of those Friends who requested this
Publication: Which is the Reason why it was delayed.

BUT, when, on farther Reflection, I though it it might be a Means of awakening in
my Countrymen, some Sense of their Danger, and Duty, in this dark and critical
Day, I readily consented.

FOR though this has been, and no doubt will still be done in a better Manner, by
those who have more Leisure, and a further Acquaintance with our political
Affairs; yet, as it appeared of Importance, that these Things should be set in
various Lights, and made as public as possible at such a Season, when so much
depends on our being unanimously alarmed, to the Defense of our Lives and
Properties; I cheerfully offer this Mite, such as it is, to the Abundance
others are doing, toward saving their Country from impending Ruin.

A DISCOURSE, and c.
WE have this Day, My Brethren, sanctified a Fast, called a solemn Assembly, to
humble ourselves before God, for the crying Sins of the Times; to deprecate
impending Judgments, and implore Direction and Assistance from Heaven, against
our Enemies, who, by their unrighteous Encroachments, on our Properties, and
the Preparations they are making against us, seem to threaten the Ruin of our
Country.

I PRESUME, it will not be thought unsuitable to the Occasion, to give you some
historical and political Account, of the Power and Policy of our Enemies, and
their wicked Designs against us; that we may have a proper Sense of our Danger,
and be excited to our Duty, in the present critical Juncture. To this Purpose,
it will be proper we should look back to the Source and Spring of our present
Troubles; which are well known to be the boundless Ambition of the late Kings
of France, and their insatiable Thirst after arbitrary Power, and universal
Monarchy.

WHOEVER considers, that France, from a small and inconsiderable Kingdom, in a
few Centuries, is become one of the most numerous and powerful in Europe, and
by what arbitrary and unrighteous Methods, her Dominions have been extended;
will be convinced, that all Encroachments from such a dangerous Enemy, should
be guarded against, with the utmost Precaution.

IN King HENRY the VIth's Time, the English possessed a great Part of their
present Dominions Normandy, Picardy, Champaine, and the Isle of France.
, and even Paris, the Metropolis, where he was crowned 1431.
. Their Territories since that Time, have been vastly enlarged, and very much
at the Expense of the just Rights of their Neighbors; especially by the
present reigning Family, who are known by the Name of the House of Bourbon. --
The first indeed of this Race, Henry IVth, who came to the Throne 1589, while a
Protestant, discovered a very different Spirit, from his degenerate Offspring.
-- Though, from Reasons of State, he was induced to declare himself a Roman
Catholic, yet he had so great a Regard to Justice and Gratitude, as to
establish the famous Edict of Nantz So called, because published in that City,
1598.
, in Favor of the Protestants, who had advanced him to the Throne. This has
done more Honor to his Memory, than all the warlike Exploits, whereby he
acquired the Name of GREAT. But his Successors and Posterity, the Lewis's,
have, for above one Hundred Years past, been the Plague and Scourge of Europe,
and rendered their Reigns infamous, by persecuting the Protestants, in
Violation of the most solemn Engagements; whom Lewis the XIVth, in a Letter to
Cromwell, acknowledged, were some of the best and most peaceable Subjects he had.

THE Scheme for absolute Power, and universal Monarchy, was concerted, in the
Minority of Lewis the XIIIth He succeeded his Father, 1610, at about 9 Years of
Age.
, by that haughty and aspiring Minister, Cardinal Richlieu. By Bribes and
Force, depriving the Parliament of Paris of their Privileges, he endeavored by
every Stratagem, to render the King absolute, and to enslave the Subject;
envying the Protestants the Privileges granted them by Henry IVth, he raised a
severe Persecution against them; took away all the Places given as a Security,
that the Edict of Nantz should be observed; the last and most important of
which, viz. Rochelle, (being shamefully forsaken by King Charles the Is It.
notwithstanding repeated Assurances of Assistance) after a terrible Siege of
two Years, surrendered October 8th, 1628. Here we may date the Beginning of
arbitrary Power, in France. In this Reign also, her Territories were
considerably enlarged, and the Foundation of her future Greatness and
tyrannizing over her Neighbors, was then laid.

LEWIS XIVth, being in the 5th Year of his Age, at the Death of his Father,
1643, Cardinal Mazarine (equally noted for his Pride and Covetousness) was
admitted into the Administration, who effectually prosecuted the Plan laid by
his Predecessor; rendered the Crown wholly absolute; bereft the Subjects of the
little Remains of Liberty; and upon them, and their Posterity, rivetted the
Chains of an abject Slavery.

IN the Beginning of his Administration, France made herself dreaded among her
Neighbors, by a Series of Victories obtained in Flanders, against Spain, under
the celebrated Prince of Conde, at a prodigious Expense of Blood. Though, in the
End, very little Advantage was derived from them, yet they served to show how
little Regard was had to the Lives of their Fellow Creatures. Soon after,
indeed, his proud Designs, of extending the French Dominions, were, for a While
obstructed, by the civil Broils and intestine Wars, which, at that Time,
prevailed in the Nation: They also met with an effectual Check, for a Season,
by the Valor of the English, under Cromwell, when Disputes with France were
easily and speedily settled, without any Bloodshed. Witness, that haughty
Minister's being obliged, by a single Message, contrary to his Intentions, to
deliver up Dunkirk to the English Ambassador Delivered to Lockhart, 1659.
; and to stop the Duke of Savoy from persecuting the Protestants, though he
pretended it was not within his Jurisdiction. But, notwithstanding the
Confusion of a Civil War, at the celebrated Treaty of Westphalia, he had the
Art and Policy to secure the Sovereignty of Alsace, and some Parts of Lorrain,
to the Crown of France.

No sooner had Lewis XIVth taken the Reins of Government into his own Hands,
than he acts the Tyrant over his own People, and discovers his ambitious
Designs of enslaving the Rest of Europe. Finding no better Pretense for falling
on his Neighbors, he lays claim to Flanders, and Franche-Comte, by his Wife
(Maria Theresia of Spain) though she had expressly renounced all claim to it, on
her Marriage; which, by a Series of bloody Battles and Sieges, at the Expense
of Millions of Lives, he subdued: Though he was obliged to resign the latter;
yet, at the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle 1668.
, he got confirmed to the Crown of France, almost all the Places he had taken
in Flanders.

IN 1672, without the least plausible Pretense for War, he makes the most
formidable Preparations, to subdue the United Netherlands, and wholly to
extirpate the Dutch Commonwealth. The States General, in a very submissive
Manner, requested that his Majesty would let them know, if those mighty
Preparations were designed against them: To whom that haughty Monarch made no
other Reply, but, That he should employ his Troops in such a Manner, as his
Dignity deserved, which did not require him to give an Account to any one.

ALL the Places that lay in his Way, fell an easy Prey to his victorious Arms.
The Provinces of Utrecht, Overissel, and Guelders, with all the adjacent
Places, being subdued, Amsterdam, the Metropolis, was just on the Point of
being surrendered. So near and evident did their Ruin appear, that the most
noted Families, who were fond of their Liberties, had actually prepared for a
Remove to the East Indies; choosing rather to live in the Extremities of the
Earth, than become the Slaves of a Tyrant. But divine Providence prevented
their total Overthrow, which seemed inevitable, by sundry favorable
Interpositions. Heaven raised up at that Time, the great Hero of his Day, King
WILLIAM, then Prince of Orange, who, by his singular Wisdom and Valor, put a
Stop to that (...), which seemed to threaten all Europe. In these wicked and
ambitious Designs, of destroying the Dutch, and enslaving Mankind, to the
Amazement of all Europe, he was assisted by King Charles the IId, who, as
Voltaire justly observes, "was active in nothing, but his Pleasures;" unless,
as he might have added, in persecuting his own Subjects, and promoting the
Grandeur and Power of France, which it was so evidently the Interest of England
to humble. To support the Expense of his extravagant Pleasures, and this
unnatural War with the Dutch, which in scandalous Violation of public Faith,
he had undertaken, he sold those very important Places, Dunkirk and Mardyke, to
the King of France 1662.
; at a Price, says the above mentioned Author, glorious to the Purchaser, and
shameful to the Seller: And to complete the Scandal of that debauched and
effeminate Reign, soon after added Nova Scotia 1667.
.

THE King of France, although obliged to quit most of his Conquests in the
Netherlands, yet at the Treaty of 1678.
Nemiguen, acted like the Arbiter of Europe, and had confirmed to his
Dominions, several advantageous Places The Country of Burgundy, Valenciennes,
Cambray and Ypress.
. The barbarous Orders he gave, for reducing to Ashes, that sine large Country
the Palatinate There were about fifty Castles, many well built Towns and
Villages, in it.
, showed his Cruelty to be equal to his Ambition. The wretched People drove off
in the dead of Winter February 1689.
; their Houses, and their very Graves ransacked by merciless Soldiers, afforded
such a tragical Scene, that even a French Author, who labors to set all his
Conduct in the most favorable Light, says, "all Europe looked upon it with
Horror;" and that those who hitherto only blamed, while they admired his
Ambition, now exclaimed aloud against his Barbarity.

THE King of Spain's 1700.
dying childless, and leaving his Dominions, by Will, to the Duke of Anjou,
Grandson to Lewis XIVth, gave a new Specimen of his Treachery, and boundless
Ambition. Some of the Powers of Europe, being sensible of the Danger that would
arise from the Union of two such powerful Monarchies, entered into what is
known by the Name of the Partition Treaty August (...), School.
. To this the King of France acceded, with pompous Expressions of his Desire to
preserve the Peace of Europe, declaring that a Will, from the King of Spain, in
Favor of his Family, should not alter him. But his own, and his Father's
solemn Renunciations, (on their Marriages) his public Faith twice given,
appeared to him as solemn Trifles, when a new Opportunity presented, of
aggrandizing his Family. Immediately on the Death of Charles, he accepts the
Will, seizes the Kingdom of Spain, in Right of his Grandson, though advised
against it, by one of his principal Ministers, as what might involve him in a
bloody and expensive War; but the Prospect of so greatly increasing his
Grandeur and Power, had too many Charms to be resisted. The Execution of his
ambitious Designs, was for some Time prevented, by the Grand Alliance This was
made by the Union of the Emperor, Great Britain, the Dutch, and the King of
Sardinia.
formed by King William. Surprizingly successful were the Consequences of that
Confederacy, in the succeeding Reign of Queen Anne. That renowned General, the
Duke of MARLBOROUGH, by his Valor, and good Conduct, almost reduced France to
the last Extremity; and had he been continued, might, the next Campaign, have
carried his Arms to the Gates of Paris; dictated Terms of Submission to that
baughty Monarch, and so prevented the sad Calamities of the last War, and the
Grounds of our present melancholy Apprehensions. But the Queen, under the
Influence of wicked Counselors, taking an unhappy Turn, at the Close of her
Reign, discarded one of the bravest Generals the English ever had; turned out a
wise, faithful, and truly patriot Ministry, and put in a Set of mercenary and
treackercus Men, who miserably betrayed her, and sacrificed to Gain, the Honor
and Interest of their Country; shamefully abandoned their Allies, and patched
up a separate Peace with France At Utrecht, 1713.
, on Terms the most scandalous, and disadvantageous. To behold the Manner in
which England, after all her glorious Conquests, accepted Conditions of Peace,
from a vanquished Tyrant, it is hard to say, whether among our Neighbors, it
created more Mirth or Contempt. To hear the King of France, talk of
acknowledging the Queen's Title; -- insisting on an equivalent for Dunkirk; --
demanding and receiving Cape-Breton as an Equivalent for Newfoundland, with
many Hardships on our Trade; -- and to see the Pretender banished no farther
than Lorrain, was Matter of Astonishment to all who knew that he had been a
little before humbly suing for Peace, and that it was in our Power to have
prescribed to him what Terms we pleased.

-- Quid non mortalia Pectora cogis
Auri sacra Fames?
THE sad Effects of the treacherous Conduct of that Ministry, we groan under to
this Day; and had not the sudden Death of the Queen, and Accession of King
GEORGE the Is It, to the Throne, prevented, should have felt it in a very
different Manner. For, as Voltaire says, (who cannot be suspected of Prejudice
against them, since he endeavors to justify that scandalous Peace they made)
It is certain, that the new Ministry of Queen ANNE, had secretly formed a
Scheme for establishing the Son of James IId, on the Throne. Queen Anne
herself, influenced by her Ministers, began to listen to the Voice of Nature,
and entered into the Design, of settling the Succession on her Brother, whom
she had proscribed against her Inclination. And indeed this has appeared beyond
all Contradiction, by a Letter of Lord Bolinbroke's, lately published.

THE Duke of Burgundy, Great Grandson to Lewis XIVth, succeeding to the Throne
on his Death 1715.
, when a Minor of about five Years old, the Duke of Orleans was appointed
Regent of the Kingdom, under whose Administration Europe enjoyed a little
Respite from the Treachery and Ambition of France. But, as soon as the present
King Lewis XVth, was capable of taking the Government into his own Hands, he
discovered the same aspiring Spirit and Thirst after universal Power, for which
his Predecessor was so remarkable.

IT IS still fresh in our Memory, what Wars and Tumults he raised in Europe
1733, under a Pretense of revenging the Affront he received, by the Rejection
of his Father-in-Law Stanislaus, from being King of Poland, and Choice of the
Elector of Saxony in his Room. Though the Russian Army was the principal Cause of
this, he takes no Notice of them, but instigates the King of Spain and
Sardinia, to join him, in falling on the Emperor CHARLES VIth; -- takes away
his Dominions in Italy; -- procures the two Sicilies for the King of Spain's
second Son, Don Charlos, a Branch of the House of Bourbon; -- and gets the
Dutchies of Barrois and Lorrain, annexed to the Crown of France. To this, more
by his Policy, than his Power, he persuaded the Emperor and Duke of Lorrain, to
consent, upon a solemn Engagement, that he would join the King of Prussia, and
other Powers of Europe, in guaranteeing what is called the pragmatic Sanction;
by which all the hereditary Dominions of the late Emperor, were secured to his
eldest Daughter Maria Theresia married to Francis Stephen, Duke of Lorrain,
afterward Grand Duke of Tuscany, now Emperor of German.
. But in open Violation of his public Faith, as soon as she had succeeded to
the hereditary Dominions of the House of Austria, on the Death of her Father
1740.
, he joins the King of Prussia, in taking away Silesia and Bohemia; got the
Duke of Eavaria chosen Emperor; carried his Arms even to the Gates of Vienna,
and would have stripped that Lady of the greater Part, if not all, her
Dominions, had not Providence interposed, and given a new Turn to the Affairs
of Europe, by the Death of the Duke of Bavaria, and King GEORGE the IId coming
seasonably to her Relief: whose Example Holland, Sardinia, and even Russia,
soon after followed. This put a Stop to the aspiring Views of France, raised
the Queen of Hungary from the Brink of Ruin to which she was reduced, and by
the Election of her Husband, to the Head of the Empire September 1745.
, restored to her Family, the Imperial Dignity. The Assistance his Majesty
afforded the House of Austria, in Faithfulness to his Engagement, of
guaranteeing the Pragmatic Sanction, which the King of France had so
perfidiously violated, provoked him to declare War against us March 4th, 1744.
, when we had been already for some Years engaged in one with Spain. The
repeated Insults and Injuries we received from that Nation, in which they have
been always aided and countenanced by France; their searching and plundering
our Ships in the West Indies; seizing the Effects of our South-Sea-Company,
etc. after much Patience, and many fruitless Complaints, obliged us to declare
War against them October 1739.
, and we should easily have brought them to Terms, and got Restitution for the
many Abuses we received, had not France come to their Assistance, which put us
under a Necessity of maintaining the War against both Nations, for many Years.
I need not acquaint you, with the various Success, and Event of that dangerous
and expensive War; it is fresh in every one's Mind; and how little to the Credit
and Interest of our Nation, it ended, is no Secret. It is true, we gained some
Advantages by Sea, and were signally smiled upon, in taking Cape-Breton, an
Acquisition which will be celebrated by Posterity, to the lasting Honor of
New England! Had it continued in our Possession, such is its Situation, and
Strength, that it would have been an unspeakable Loss to the French, and a vast
Security to us, against any future Insults from them. Was that Key of their
Part of America, yet in our Hands, it would not be in their Power, to give us
new Troubles at this Day. But the King of France carried all before him in
Flanders; was every where victorious over the Allied Army, far inferior to his
own in Number. This Superiority was much increased, by the Duke's being obliged
to withdraw his Forces, for the Nation's Defense, against a dangerous
Rebellion, formed in Favor of the Pretender 1743.
, so that at the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle 1748.
, we were forced to deliver up that important Fortress and Harbor, for the
Return of those Places he had taken in Flanders, to the Queen of Hungary. The
giving up his Conquests at this Place, Voltaire mentions, as a most unexpected
and unparallelled Instance of Moderation, in the King of France. I confess, if
there had been any Moderation in it, it would have been unexpected, and
unparallelled, in a French King; but had he considered the vast Importance of
Cape-Breton, to France, he would have seen, it was Necessity, not Moderation,
that induced him to quit his Acquisitions. Thus after a great Expense,
increasing the national Debt to above 70,000,000, with the Loss of a Multitude
of Lives; France and Spain, were left in the Possession of all their former
Territories. FRANCE, says the above mentioned Writer, at the Peace, was
re-established on the same Footing, as at that of Utrecht, and became more
flourishing; consequently more dangerous.

THE House of Bourbon, the present reigning Family, is now arrived to a very
high Pitch of Grandeur and Power, being in Possession of France, Spain, Italy,
Sicily, and Naples, together with large Dominions in America; and they are so
connected together, that it is highly probable, they would join against any
other Power in Europe. I know that Alliances by Blood and Marriage, signify
little with the Princes of this World, unless, as is the Case with France and
Spain, they are united in Interest too: I may add also, in the same ambitious
Design of aggrandizing their Family. And what makes them the more to be
dreaded, is the Prospect, that the King of Prussia may join them on a new
Rupture, who, seems at present, to hold the Balance of Europe, in his Hands;
and is supposed to have no less than 150,000 well disciplined Troops at Command.

SINCE the Revolution, Great Britain has been the principal Means of
restraining the lawless Ambition of France, and preventing her farther
unrighteous Encroachments, on her Neighbors: It may therefore be expected,
that every Scheme which their Policy can invent, or Perfidy execute, will be
attempted to weaken and destroy us.

WE are well assured, that Lewis XIVth, made repeated Efforts, to restore King
James; and at his Death, declared his pretended Son, King of England, contrary
to his solemn Engagement, at the Treaty of Ryswic 1697.
: And indeed France has, at the Expense of her public Faith, from Time to Time,
secretly countenanced, and encouraged the Pretender; even in Times of Peace,
keeping up the Spirit of the jacobitish Party, who are madly bent upon
enslaving themselves and their Country; and stands always ready at any
favorable Juncture, openly to assist him.

JUST before the breaking out of the last War, the King of France fitted out a
Fleet at Dunkirk, with 16,000 Troops to invade England, in Favor of the
Pretender; and had not Providence raised a Storm, which prevented their
Landing, just as they were on our Coasts, it is not improbable they might have
accomplished their wicked Design, as the Nation was at that Time, unconcerned
about, and unprepared for, such an Event. It Is hard to say, whether such a
perfidious Enemy is most to be dreaded, in War or Peace. Certain, however, it
is, that Experience teaches us the Necessity of keeping a watchful Eye upon
him, at all Times; and of what Importance it is, that we should endeavor to
crush his pernicious Schemes in the Bud.

THE French, not only exceed us in Times of Peace, in extending their Trade,
and augmenting their Forces, but use every Art and Stratagem to acquire some
new Advantage, against a Time of War; while we lie asleep, and are utterly
unconcerned about it. -- That pernicious Fort at Crown-Point, built in a Time
of Peace, and evidently in our King's Dominions, still remains, as well a
Monument of our Weakness and Stupidity, as of their Treachery and Policy. What
Mischief it has done, and is still like to do, to our Frontiers, our Trade and
Interest with the Indians, none can tell. Our fatal Error in not seasonably
preventing that, might, methinks, learn us Wisdom in the present Day.

EVER since the Peace, our Public Prints have been filled with Accounts of the
various Methods France has taken, in Conjuction with Spain, to increase their
naval Force, and put themselves in a Posture of disputing with us, the Dominion
of the Seas. By the best Advices the Ships of War they have built since the
Peace, amount to above 100 Sail. -- In Lewis XIVth's Time, 1664, a French
Author says, They were in want of Officers, Sailors, Manufactures, and in
short, every Thing necessary for the Construction and Equipment of Shipping,
not having above 15 or 16 Ships of the lowest Rate. But they have made so great
Improvements since, that they bid fair to rival, if not exceed the English, in
that which has hitherto been their great Security and Glory. -- By these brief
Hints, it appears exceeding evident, that France is grasping at a universal
Monarchy, and bent, per Fas, et Nefas, on accomplishing the wicked Design. And
as her Schemes for effecting this in Europe, have hitherto, by the
Interposition of divine Providence, and the Strength of the Alliance formed
against them, been defeated; she is now undoubtedly making the same Attempt in
America.

WE have heard of the Policy and Perfidy of France, of her arbitrary Power,
Popish Tyranny and Bigotry; we are now like to feel the bitter Fruits that flow
from them. The Cloud gathers thick and dark upon us. It Is manifest beyond
Dispute, that the King of France has for these many Years, been laying Schemes
to enlarge his Dominions in America, and distress us. Though, by the Treaty of
Aix-laall Things were to remain on the same Footing, as before the War; yet, no
sooner was it ratified, than he begins to send Colonies to neutral Islands; --
projects a Settlement in Nova Scotia; -- raises a Dispute about the Limits;
embroils the Affairs of our Indians; -- labors to draw them off from our
Alliance; -- and enters unreasonable Claims, utterly inconsistent with the
Safety and Prosperity of our infant Colonies. To lull us asleep, he made sham
Pretenses of settling a Line between the French and English Territories in
America: Commissioners were appointed; much Time and Money spent, in fruitless
Negotiations at the Court of France; which answered no End, unless to convince
every Body, that he never had a Design of settling it any otherwise than by the
SWORD: And for a Decision this Way, he has made the most artful and diligent
Preparation. It is now sufficiently known, that the French have been fortifying
themselves on our back Parts; laying in great Quantities of Provision, and
Magazines of warlike Stores, as if they had actually concluded on War. While we
have been wholly secure. The Masterpiece of their Policy has been lately
discovered, though long since concerted, viz. their completing and securing a
Communication between St. Lawrence's River and the Missisippi. They are in
Possession of two Forts on the Lake Ontario, and have lately built two or three
below the Lake Errie, on a Branch of the River Ohio, that empties into the
great River Missisippi; the Mouth of which they have long possessed. By the
best Advices they have very much fortified, and well-manned these Forts; so
that now they have actually surrounded the British Colonies, and are in
Possession of a vastly extended Country, from Cape-Breton to the Bay of Mexico.
Enough has been said of late in the public Prints, to render it indisputable,
that their Settlements on the Ohio are within our King's Dominions. It Is
sufficient to observe that they were made without their Consent, and against
their Inclination, on Lands belonging to the Indians in our Alliance, which
have been confirmed to them, under the Protection of Great Britain; and so, are
inconsistent with both the Letter and Spirit, of their Treaties: And if we
suffer them quietly to possess what they have so unrighteously seized upon, and
to go on fortifying themselves, there requires no Spirit of Prophesy to
foretell, that it must sooner or later prove fatal to these Colonies. All
Communication with the powerful and numerous Tribes of our Indians, will
unavoidably be cut off; our profitable Trade with them wholly lost, and our
Frontiers constantly exposed, to all the barbarous Cruelties which woeful
Experience has taught us, those savage People, under the Influence of French
Policy, are capable of committing. The Line of Forts they have already between
Canada and the Missisippi, gives them an unknown Advantage, to draw off the
Natives from our Alliance. To effect which, no Pains or Cost, are spared, no
Stratagem is left untried. We are well assured, they keep Missionaries
constantly among them, to inculcate the distinguishing Principles of their
Religion; and what appears still more important in their Eyes, to infuse into
their Minds, Prejudices against the English, and attach them to the French
Interest. They have been unwearied in their Pains, since the last Peace, in
alienating their Affections from us. For this Purpose, they have desired
Liberty to send Missionaries among the Six Nations, and have lately sent them
an Invitation to come and settle at Canada. Should they succeed in these
Attempts, the Consequence would be very pernicious. Our Frontier Settlements
would be broke up, and all Hopes of driving the French from their
Encroachments, be very much at an End.

THEY are a warlike People: Governor SHIRLEY in one of his Speeches, if I don't
mistake, supposes they have 16,00 or 17,00 fighting Men; and having the most of
the other Tribes under their Influence, are powerful Friends, and would be very
dangerous Enemies.

THE Twightwees, a numerous Tribe, in whose Country the French have lately
built Forts, some Years ago entered into an Alliance with the Governor of
Pennsylvania, which they have hitherto faithfully preserved. In 1751, they
espoused our Cause, and revenged the Affront, which the French put upon us, in
siezing and imprisoning our Traders, by bringing two of theirs to Philadelphia,
and delivering them up to the Government. But unless some speedy and vigorous
Step be taken to secure them and ourselves, their Friendship will be inevitably
lost, as they will be obliged to join the French in their own Defense. -- Our
weak and ill-concerted Measures to dispossess the latter, have very much sunk
our Interest with the Indians. Since Colonel Washington's Defeat, they appear
wavering and show an unusual Degree of Coldness. Our formal Way of Treaties,
and giving Presents, signifies very little; half the Money well laid out in
erecting Fortresses in their Country, and supporting proper Missionaries to
reside among them, would be much more to the Purpose. However, at present, it
is Madness for us, by our dilatory Methods of proceeding, to increase the
Advantage the French already have in their Hands, for depriving us of those
necessary Allies, who will have it very much in their Power, to turn the Scale
in the present Dispute. Our Eyes must surely, by this Time, be open, to see
that the Schemes they have hitherto, so secretly laid, and artfully conducted,
tend to, and if not seasonably prevented, will issue in, the utter Destruction
of all our Provinces. And if we view our Enemies, in a religious, as well as
political Light, we shall see the Necessity of guarding against them with all
possible Care.

THEIR established Religion is Popery; which, beside all it is other
Corruptions, disposes them from Principle, to be cruel to Protestants. They are
early taught as undoubted Truths, That there is no Salvation out of the Church
of Rome; -- That all who separate from it are damnable Heretics; -- That no
Faith is to be kept with them; -- That it is highly meritorious to use the most
cruel Methods of reclaiming such, and bringing them back into the Bosom of that
Mother of Harlots; -- and that all such as are obstinate, ought to be
extirpated from the Face of the Earth. And what we are to expect, if God should
deliver us into their Hands, we may learn from what our Brethren have suffered,
whose Lot has been cast among them.

THE beginning of the Reformation in France, was A. D. 1124; which spread very
much, 1160, by Means of one Peter Waldo, of Lions, from whom they were called,
Waldenses. And though there was a Persecution raised against it, from its first
Commencement, it was, by divine Providence, wonderfully preserved, and carried
on. To pass by numberless cruel and inhuman Methods, to destroy the
Protestants, and suppress the Reformation, in the four following Centuries, I
have only Time now to remark, That in 1572, there was the most barbarous
Massacre, committed on the Protestants, at Paris, where some of their chief
Men, being invited, under an Oath of Safety, to solemnize the Marriage of the
King of Navarre, were, at a Signal, by the Toll of the Bell, fallen upon, and
inhumanly butchered by the Papists, their being at the same Time an
Insurrection against them in the other Parts of the Kingdom. By all Accounts, a
great Number, and by some, not less than 100,000, were slain in this perfidious
Manner. But detestable as their Conduct was, the News of it was received with
Joy, at Rome. They found a great Deliverer in King HENRY IVth; who, as has
been observed, was indebted to the Protestants, for his Crown, when the
Papists, with the King of Spain, under the Influence of the Pope, were in
League against him. To reward their Fidelity, or rather, being sensible how
just and equitable it was, he established the Edict of Nantz, by which free
Liberty of Conscience, in religious Matters, and Access to all Places of Honor
and Trust, were secured to them; declared it to be perpetual and irrevocable;
put 100 fortified Places into their Hands, as a Security, that it should ever
be observed. This was confirmed, by LEWIS XIIIth, though it was repeatedly
violated in the Course of his Reign. The same Edict was confirmed also by LEWIS
XIVth, and by him too declared perpetual and irrevocable; yet by the continual
Remonstrance of the Clergy, and Insinuations of the Jesuits, a cruel
Persecution was carried on against them, through a great Part of his Reign,
which was very much increased, toward the Close of it, when he acted, as if he
was determined to extirpate them from his Kingdom.

IN 1681, he published a Declaration, by which their Children were permitted,
at the Age of 7 Years, to renounce their Religion. In Consequence of this, (
says a French Writer Voltaire's Life of Lewis XIVth.
) great Numbers of Children were seized in the Provinces, with a View to make
them abjure, and Troops quartered on their Parents. At the Close of the Year
1684, he set on foot the Hellish Method of converting them, by Dragoons. The
principal Men were assembled together, and ordered to abjure their Religion;
and upon such as refused, the Soldiers were let loose to treat them in the most
inhuman and barbarous Manner. According to some Accounts near 500,000 Families
were plundered. And to cut them off from that last and only Refuge, flying
their Country, a Proclamation was issued, confiscating all Estates that were
sold, if the Seller departed the Kingdom within a Year after: And as if this
was not enough, Soldiers were quartered on the Frontiers, to seize any that
attempted to make their Escape; and such as they could apprehend, were confined
to the Galleys. Multitudes however found Methods of escaping, and took Refuge
in England, Holland, and other Protestant Countries, where they were kindly
received, especially by King William, their great Patron; 50,000 Families (says
Voltaire) in the Space of three Years, left the Kingdom.

To convince you that I don't aggravate the Matter, hear the Words of a Letter
from his Prime Minister The Marquis de Louvois.
, dated 1685, It is his Majesty's Pleasure, that such as refuse to conform to
his Religion, be proceeded against with the utmost Rigor, and that not the
least Indulgence be shown to those who affect the foolish Glory of being the
last to comply. And to use the Words of the above mentioned Author, While all
the Churches of the Reformed, were thus every where demolished, and Abjurations
demanded in the Provinces, with an armed Force, the Edict of Nantz was at last
revoked, in the Month of October, 1685; which completed the Ruin of the
Protestant Cause, already weakened and undermined on all Sides. This may
satisfy us, that no Security from a Popish Prince, for our religious Liberties,
can ever be obtained. Promises and Oaths, even Edicts, declared perpetual,
stand for nothing, when made with Heretics. With such Bigotry and blind Zeal,
does their Religion inspire them, that they will persecute their Subjects,
against all the known and consest Rules of good Policy.

THEY had indeed some Respite from the Fury of their popish Adversaries, while
the Duke of Orleans was Regent of the Kingdom: But it has since been renewed
again with the same Cruelty, under his present Majesty, Lewis XVth; who, in the
Year 1745, published an Edict, making it immediate Death, for any Ministers
that officiated; perpetual Imprisonment for the Women, and Galleys for the Men,
who attended; and few of the succeding Years, to the present Time, have been
without Instances of the barbarous Treatment they have met with from popish
Bigots.

IN the Year 1752, a Gentleman from Languedoc, writes thus, The Persecution is
fiercer than ever, the Papists demand Abjuration of all that have been married,
or had their Children baptized in Protestant Assemblies, and on the Refusal,
the Mothers are proclaimed Whores, and the Children Bastards. They seize on
Father, Mother, and Children, and force them into Romish Churches, etc. And by
the latest Advices, Persecutions still continue in France, as furious as ever.
A Letter from Paris, dated September 25, 1754, gives the following melancholy
Account. The Persecution of the unhpapy Protestants, has been long carried on
with great Rigor, and no Measures are neglected, either to disturb their
Assemblies, or seize their Ministers. This appeared very particularly the 19th
of June last, near St. Foy, in the Perigord, where an Assembly of Protestants
being held the Night before, a Detachment of Troops lay in Ambuscade near the
Place, to wait for their breaking up, and then fell upon these unhappy People,
who could make no Resistance, and dangerously wounded a great many of them:
But, this is nothing to the Distress occasioned in Languedoc, and the Cevennes,
by a general Search which was ordered to be made there the 3d of August last,
for which all the Troops that were in those Provinces, were employed, except
those which serve to garrison the Forts and Citadels: They were ordered to
march in the Dead of the Night, and with all imaginable Silence, to invest
certain Towns, Villages, and Country Houses; a List of which was given to every
commanding Officer. At Break of Day, the Search was begun with all Rigor
imaginable. The Soldiers burst the Doors open with their Muskets, and entering
with their Bayonets at the End of them, ransacked every Corner of the Houses,
destroying every Thing that came in their Way, and sparing neither Furniture
nor Persons. In short, the Places they went to, could be compared to nothing
but a Town taken by Storm.

THUS you see, My Brethren, the Power and Policy, the Treachery and Cruelty, of
our Foes, have a dark and threatening Aspect upon us. But I have a more
distressing and affecting Scene to open to your View: I mean, our Exposure to
the angry Resentments of Heaven, from those crying Abominations, which, at this
Time, so greatly abound. To declaim against the prevailing Iniquities of the
Day, is far from being a delightful Theme; but should we, who are set as
Watchmen on the Walls of God's Jerusalem, neglect to declare to his People,
their Transgressions, and their Sins, we should betray our Trust, act beneath
our sacred Character, and involve our selves deeply in the public Guilt.

IT IS no less lamentable to be thought of, than true in Fact, that our Nation
is greatly degenerated, and become extremely corrupt. We are a sinful People,
laden with Iniquity. From what kind of Heaven-daring Wickedness are we free? If
we begin at the Height of Atheism, and descend to the lowest Pitch of
Sensuality, and beastly Uncleaness, what Exception can be made? Are we not in
all these Respects defiled? To such a Degree of Wickedness have some profane
Sinners arrived, as not only, like the Foot, to say in their Heart, but openly
proclaim, That there is no God; and employ the very intellectual Powers he has
given them, in disputing against the Author of their Being. And what Multitudes
live and act, as if they believed not his Existence; or, as if they thought he
was altogether such an one as themselves? How many make a Scoff and Banter of
revealed Religion, pouring Contempt on the Gospel, and all its Glories; denying
the Lord that bought them, and bringing swift Destruction on themselves.

INFIDELITY, has of late Years, been spreading fast in the Kingdom, and is
evidently growing on the present Generation. Books, that turn the divine
Oracles into Ridicule, and tend to unhinge Men's Minds, from all Principles of
Religion, have been industriously propagated.

THE lamentable Increase of Profaness, in our Day, must be manifest to the most
careless Observer. What Numbers of thoughtless, stupid Sinners, show an utter
Disregard to all that is sacred and solemn; fill the Ears of all that hear
them, with their vain Oaths, and horrid Imprecations; interline their filthy
Discourses, with the venerable Name of the ever blessed Deity; and in mere
Sport, or, on every slight Provocation, wish Damnation to themselves, and all
around them. It Is easy to see, how this infamous Practice destroys all
Reverence for an Oath; opens a Door to Perjury, and the whole Train of direful
Consequences that flow from it. And what shall we say, as to the various Kinds
of Luxury, Lewdness, and vile Debauchery, which so much prevail? It is a Shame
to speak of the sordid Methods invented by corrupt Minds, for the Gratification
of their brutish Lusts; though many of these unclean Wretches, glory in their
Shame, declaring their Sin, like Sodom, and hide it not. -- Nay, too often many
turn Factors for the Devil, and labor to promote his Kingdom, by spreading
their fatal Infection among all with whom they converse: Affecting, to this
Purpose, are the Words of the present Bishop of London: Have not, says he, all
the Abominations of the public Stews, been opened to View, by lewd Pictures,
exposed to Sale at Noon Day? Have not Histories or Romances of the vilest
Prostitutes, been published? intended merely to display the most execrable
Scenes of Lewdness; Lewdness represented without Disguise, to inflame the
corrupt Passions of the Youth of the Nation; and the quick Sale those Pictures
and Books had, is a deplorable Circumstance, and sad Instance of the corrupt
Disposition of many among us. And that this excellent and pious Letter, should
be lampooned in the public Newspapers, is a flagrant Evidence to what a Height
Impiety is arrived. And if the Sinners of our Land have not gone the same
Length in all those beastly Pleasures, and detestable Abominations, it is
evident they make swift Advances, and great Improvements in those Mysteries of
Iniquity.

TIME would fail me, to speak of the open Contempt, every where cast on God's
holy Day; all the Ordinances of his House, and all the Riches of his Grace,
offered in the Gospel; nor can I easily describe the Gluttony and Drunkenness,
Robbery and Deceit, Oppression and Violence, Pride and Covetousness, for which
our Land mourns. We look far Judgment, but behold Oppression; for
Righteousness, but behold a Cry. -- Will any enquire, where are those
Enormities to be found? Have we not Reason rather to say, where are they not to
be seen? What sad Defects and Corruptions, are to be found among all Ranks and
Degrees, Sexes and Denominations; among Rulers and ruled; high and low, rich
and poor. -- It Is not my Business to accuse and condemn; nor would I here
affirm any Thing. Would to God, that Pride and Ambition, Bribery and Extortion,
Debauchery and Uncleanness, were banished from the British Court. O! that just
and righteous Men always stood around our King, who feared God, and bated
Covetousness. -- How lamentable is it, when Vice comes recommended to the lower
Sort of People, by the Practice of the Great, and is connived at, and even
countenanced by those, whose Business it is to suppress it! Would to God there
was nothing of this found among the Rulers of our Nation and Land; -- that they
were all Terrors to evil Doers, as their Office obliges them to be!

ARE those of the sacred Profession free from a Share in the public Guilt; who
should be the Salt of the Earth, the Light of the World, to keep it from
Darkness and Corruption? Are all God's Ministers clothed with Salvation, then
may his Saints shout for Joy. But if it be too evident to be denied, that the
Pride and Covetousness, the Ignorance and Sloth, the carnal and sensual Lives
of too many among those of that Order, have made the Offerings of the Lord to
be abborred, and deeply wounded Religion in the House of its Friends. What
shall we say? Must we not confess? Must we not lament, with the Prophet Isaiah,
i. 5, 6.
, That the whole Head is sick; the whole Heart is faint; from the Sole of the
Foot, even to the Crown of the Head, there is no Soundness, but Wounds, Bruises
and putrefying Sores. These Things bring the Wrath of God on a guilty World.
Sin is the fatal Source of all the Calamities and Woes that have ever
overspread the human Race. When ever it prevails, it threatens the Destruction
of a People, both from its natural Tendency; and as it lays them open to the
desolating Judgments of Heaven. This may be affirmed of all Kinds of Iniquity,
especially of that abominable Luxury, and extravagant Taste for lawless
Pleasures, which are so much the Source of all the Corruptions of our Day. We
may well say with the Poet, Soevior Armis incubuit Luxuria More fatal than
destructive Arms, -- fell Luxury prevailed.
.

IN sacred and profane History, we meet with mournful Accounts, of ruined
States and Kingdoms, whose Destruction sprung from this Cause. In the Days of
Noah, they were eating and drinking; marrying, and giving in Marriage: wholly
regardless of the divine Threatenings; so immersed in sensual Pleasures, that
the Imaginations of their Hearts, were wholly evil, till God was provoked to
destroy them from off the Face of the Earth, by a Deluge. Sodom and Gomorrah
set forth as an Example, suffering the Vengeance of eternal Fire; are a
standing Monument to a guilty World, of the awful Danger arising from sensual
and luxurious Indulgences. -- Fullness of Bread, Idleness, and the too common
Consequences, abominable Uncleanness, brought that tremendous Judgment of
Heaven, on their guilty Cities. This drew down sudden and surprising
Destruction on Babylon CYRUS got into the City, by the Stratagem of turning the
Course of the River, that run through it; seized on the King and Nobles, as they
were feasting in the Palace, and so buried in Luxury and Sensuality, that they
were not able to make any Resistance.
, of old, the most powerful and magnificent City, in the then known World. It Is
affectingly described by the Prophet Isaiah, xlvii. 8, 9. Therefore hear now
this thou that are given to Pleasures; that dwell carelessly, that say in
thy Heart, I am, and none else besides me. I shall not sit as a Widow, neither
shall I know the Loss of Children. But these two Things shall come to thee in a
Moment; in one Day, the Loss of Children, and Widowhood; they shall come upon
thee in their Perfection, for the Multitude of thy Sorceries, and for the great
Abundance of thine Enchantments. This was exactly accomplished, in the Night
when the King saw the Hand Writing on the Wall. God's ancient People the Jews,
are a moving Instance of this Kind, on whom Wrath came to the utmost, when they
had filled up the Measure of their Iniquity; as also the Romans, who were the
Instruments of executing upon them, the Judgments of Heaven. That powerful
State which was so long the Wonder, Terror, and Envy of the World, which the
most powerful Enemies could not subdue, fell a Sacrifice to their own Lusts and
Corruptions, as all acquainted with their History, well know. And does not
Destruction threaten the British Nation, and her American Colonies, from the
same Quarter? Such Vices as now prevail, sap the very Foundation of a Society,
exhaust its Riches, weaken its Power; destroy a Spirit of Industry, Frugality,
and good Economy; introduce Idleness and Effeminacy; Discontent with, and
Contempt of Authority; which are the Bane of a People, and render them an easy
Prey to their ambitious Neighbors. And do not these Things cry to Heaven, for
Vengeance, and lay us open to the Displeasure of an angry God? Shall I not
visit for these Things, says the Lord? And shall not my Soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? Jer. v. 9. The Psalmist speaks of it, as the usual
Method of divine Providence, to turn a fruitful Land into Barrenness. for the
Wickedness of them that dwell therein, Psalm. cvii, 34. It Is true, public
Judgments are executed in a Way of Sovereignty, on some Nations sooner, and in
a lesser Degree, as a Warning to Repentance; on others, who are more ripe for
Vengeance, later, but in a more terrible Manner: However, national Sins
persisted in, unreformed, and unrepented of, will sooner or later bring down
the Judgments of Heaven. -- The Reason is plain. As to particular Persons,
although Rewards and Punishments should be ever so promiscuous here, yet all will
be rectified at the great Day; but Societies will be disbanded; and if ever
they are punished as such, it must be in this World. And, indeed, the
Experience of all Ages, has verified the Observation of the wise Man,
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a Reproach to any People.

IN this View, our Case looks dark; but blessed be God, not desperate. Sentence
against our evil Deeds is not yet executed. Though God might in righteous
Severity long before this, have cast us off and left us to all the Misery of a
People, wholly abandoned by him, which we heard described in the former Part of
the Day, yet he affords a Season of Repentance, and waits to be gracious. He
seems, with an amazing Condescension, and Kindness, to say to us as to Ephraim
of old, How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? How
shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine Heart is
turned within me, my Repentings are kindled together. Our Danger from our
Enemies, and especially from our Sins, is great; so is our Encouragement from
the sovereign boundless Mercy of our God, and the many Tokens of his favorable
Presence which yet remain with us. We may apply to ourselves the Words of the
Prophet Jerem. li. 5. For Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God,
of the Lord of Hosts, though the Land was filled with Sin against the holy one of
Israel.

I TRUST there is yet Mercy in Store for us. God has in his sovereign Goodness,
chosen the British Nation to be the Bulwark of the Reformation; to hold up a
Standard against those Delusions, Superstitions, and Impostures, which the
Church of Rome has been for above a thousand Years, spreading in the Christian
Church, and distinguished it above all the Nations of the Earth, by the
peculiar and constant Care of his Providence; by numberless signal
Deliverances, and Salvations, which Time does not allow me to recount

AND I cannot but esteem it a Token for Good, and Ground of great Encouragement,
that, notwithstanding all our mournful Declensions, there are still among us, a
Generation that fear God, whose righteous Souls are vexed from Day to Day, with
the filthy Conversation of the Wicked; who are jealous for the Lord of Hosts,
and plead his Cause against the Workers of Iniquity, who are laboring by their
Prayers, by their Example and Influence, to reform a degenerate Age. How
melancholy soever our Case is, it is not so bad as theirs, of whom God
complains Ezekiel. xxii. 30, 31.
: And I sought for a Man among them, that should make up the Hedge, and stand
in the Gap before me, for the Land, that I should not destroy it; but I found
none: Therefore have I poured out my Indignation upon them: I have consumed
them with the Fire of my Wrath; their own Way have I recompensed upon their
Heads, says the Lord God. We may indeed say with another Prophet Isai. i. 9.
, Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us a very small Remnant, we should
have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. But blessed be
God, such a Remnant is left, who have an Interest at the Throne of Grace, and
improve it in daily Supplications, not only for themselves, their Families, and
the Church of God, but for the Land of their Nativity, that God would save it
from deserved Ruin, and not come out against it, and destroy it with a Curse.

HAVING thus, my Brethren, laid before you something of our Danger, from the
Power, the Pride, and the Policy of our Enemies, the Greatness of our Sins, and
at the same Time, what Grounds we have to hope, that we are not forsaken by
God; but that there is yet Mercy in Store for us. It only remains, that I
briefly point out our Duty in this important Season, which it becomes us to
hear, with Hearts fully disposed to a ready and unfeigned Compliance: And I
think it lies plain before us, and may be concisely summed up under the
following Particulars.

I. WE ought to humble ourselves; repent as in Dust and Ashes, before God, and
return to him with all our Hearts, from whom we have so grievously revolted.
The Voice of divine Providence to us, at this Time, may well be expressed in
the Words of the Prophet Joel 11.12, 13, 14.
, Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me, with all your Heart,
and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, and rent your Heart, and
not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, and repents him of the Evil.
Who knows, if he will return, and repent, and leave a Blessing behind him,
even a Meat Offering, and a Drink Offering, unto the Lord your God. It Is not
enough that we speak of public Sins, as being Matter of Lamentation, and
confess them in a formal Way, in our Prayers, on such an Occasion as this; but
we should in our private, as well as public Addresses to the Throne of Grace,
bring our Case before God, with broken Hearts, and contrite Spirits, saying
with the great Reformer of Israel Ezra IX. 7, 10, and 15.
, O! our God, we are ashamed, and blush to lift up our Faces to thee; for our
Iniquities are increased over our Heads, and our Trespasses are grown up into
the Heavens. The following Words we may adopt, with a little Variation: Since
the Days of our Fathers have we been in a great Trespass, unto this Day, and
for our Iniquities, we, our Kings, and our Priests, our Nobles and our Commons,
may justly be delivered into the Hands of the King, who seeks our Ruin, to the
Sword, to Captivity, to a Spoil, and to Confusion of Face. -- And now, O our
God! what shall we say after this; for we have forsaken thy Commandments. -- O
Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous; for we remain yet escaped, as it is
this Day, behold we are before thee in our Trespasses, and we cannot stand
before thee, because of this.

IN such a Day, Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, and all his People
weep, between the Porch and the Altar; and let them say, Spare thy People, O
Lord, and give not thy Heritage to Reproach, that the Heathen should rule over
them. Wherefore should they say among the People, where is their God? Then will
the Lord be jealous for this Land, and pity this People.

II. We should labor after a thorough Reformation. Our Fastings, Humiliation,
and Shows of Repentance, will signify Nothing without this. O! how much is a
general thorough Reformation, to be desired! how vigorously should it be
attempted, by all that have the Honor of God, and Interest of their Country at
Heart! When our Land is sinking under the Load of public Guilt, and Iniquity is
coming in upon us, like a Flood, shall we not lift up a Standard against it,
and labor to prevent the Ruin we fear and deserve, by removing the Cause? Did
but an holy Ardor, and Zeal for this noble Work, begin to kindle among every
Order and Rank of Men, it would be a Token for Good; it would enliven our
Hopes, and invigorate all our Attempts for the Protection and Defense of our
Country. For how little soever we may think of it, our worst Enemies are those
of our own House; our multiplied Transgressions, which expose us to the Angry
Resentments of Heaven: And were these subdued, these that now rise up against
us, and seek our Ruin, I doubt not would soon be made to flee before us.

How desirable a Prospect would it therefore afford, should all according to
their various Stations and Capacities, cordially unite in this necessary Work.

1st. THE civil Magistrates in the Land, are loudly called upon in such a Day,
to exert the Authority God has put into their Hands, for the Suppression of
Vice and Immorality. They are appointed to execute Wrath on evil Doers Romans
xiii. 3.
, and did they conscientiously put in Execution the many excellent Laws we have
against Vice, and strike a Dread into presumptuous Sinners, by restraining
their enormous and scandalous Crimes, it would be of unspeakable Service to the
public Interest; give Life and Vigor to all Attempts for a Reformation. When
Men of superior Characters and Influence, appear against Sin, it puts it out of
Countenance, and the Vicious are ashamed to show their Heads. They might do
much toward putting a Stop to that Torrent of Iniquity, that threatens the
Ruin of our Land. And surely they are not only by the sacred Solemnity of their
Oath, but by a Regard to the dying Cause of their Country, and as they would
not have the Public Guilt crying against them at the last Day, bound to exert
themselves at such a Season, and not bear the Sword of Justice in vain. And
should they add to their Authority, the engaging Force of their superior
Example, for the Encouragement of Piety toward God; Justice and Charity,
toward Men; Sobriety, Frugality and Chastity, -- who can say how far the kind
Influence might extend?

2dly, AND surely it concerns those of the sacred Order, of every Denomination,
most heartily to engage in such a Design. It Is justly expected, that we should
appear on the Lord's Side, against the Workers of Iniquity. Our Profession
obliges us to give the Alarm of impending Judgments; to show to God's People,
their Transgression and Sin, as the procuring Cause of all the Calamities we
feel, or fear. -- Methinks at such a Day, we should lay aside all Bigotry, and
Party Disputes, about lesser Matters, and unite our Endeavors, to reform a
degenerate Age. We may soon be Companions in suffering, and see all our
Differences buried in one common Ruin. There has perhaps scarce ever been a
Time, when Ministers were more loudly called upon, to unite their Activity and
Diligence, in awakening a secure Generation from the Lethargy into which they
are sunk, and exciting them to a speedy Repentance and Reformation, as the
necessary Means of saving a guilty Land. When we look around, and see how
Iniquity abounds; how God is dishonored; the Cause of our glorious Redeemer
despised and ridiculed by some; slighted and disregarded by most; can we be
unaffected with the mournful Scene? Shall we stand as unconcerned Spectators,
of all the Profaneness and Security which is so visible and lamentable, in
thoughtless Sinners? Of all the Hypocrisy, Formality and Apostacies among
Professors? Where is our Zeal for the LORD OF HOSTS? our Bowels of Compassion
for perishing Sinners? our Concern for the sinking Interest of the
Commonwealth? When the Ark of God is just ready to depart from us, and with
it, all our Privileges, to be careless and unconcerned about removing the Cause
of the divine Displeasure, must be unpardonable Stupidity. We have every Thing
to awaken our Zeal, and animate to Diligence in our great Work. Our Mouths may
soon be stopped, and we called to seal our Testimony with our own Blood. What
therefore we have to do for God, the Souls of our Hearers, and for our Country,
we should do quickly, and with all our Might.

3dly, PARENTS and Governors of Families, should use their Authority and
Influence, for the reforming a corrupt and wicked Generation. Upon a careful
Enquiry, we shall find, that almost all the prevailing Corruptions of the
Times, spring from the Want of proper Government, Discipline, and Instruction
in Families, which are Nurseries where Youth are sormed for the Public, when
they are most susceptible of any Impressions, and most like to retain them.
Then the Foundation is most commonly laid for their being Blessings or Plagues,
to the World. -- It cannot easily be expressed, how much the Welfare of Church
and State depends on the proper Management of the rising Generation. The first
Part of Education enters much farther into Life, has a greater Influence on the
Whole of Persons future Conduct, than most imagine; and an Error here is often
attended with a long Train of pernicious Consequences. Ungoverned Families,
where Children and Servants are not instructed in the great Things of Religion,
but trained up in Ignorance, and suffered to walk in the Ways of their own
Heart, and in the Sight of their own Eyes, are the Bane of Societies, and do
unknown Mischief in the World; and such should tremble to think, how much of
the common Guilt will be found at their Door, and how deep a Share they will
have in the Ruin of their Country, if, when their Sons and Daughters make
themselves vile, they don't restrain them. Would Parents and Masters
conscientiously discharge their important Trust to their Children and Servants,
open to them the great Truths of Christianity, and solemly impress them on
their Consciences, paint out the fatal Consequences of Sin; the Beauty of
Holiness, the Excellency of a Life spent in serving God and their Generation;
with affectionate Exhortations, Warnings and Entreaties, and prohibit them from
such foolish Diversions, and extravagant Pleasures, as debauch their Minds, and
spoil their Morals; innure them to Temperance, Sobriety, Industry and
Frugality, enforcing all by an Example of Piety and Virtue; what happy
Influence would it have, to produce the Reformation, that is so much wanted!
What delightful Prospect would it afford, to behold a Generation rising up to
serve God, to support his Cause, and hand down Religion to those that are yet
unborn! Surely such as have any Regard for the Glory of God, the Welfare of
their Posterity, or the Felicity of their Country, dare not live in the Neglect
of so reasonable and necessary a Duty. In a Word, Persons of every Station,
Character and Relation in Life, should think themselves concerned, to
contribute all that lies in their Power, toward reforming this corrupt and
licentious Age. And surely, if we feel any warm Zeal for the Honor of
Religion, any due Affection for our dear Country, or any Compassion to those
abandoned Sinners, who are pulling down the Wrath of God on themselves and us,
we shall be vigorous and active, in this laudable Design. I cannot leave this
Head, without adding my earnest Wish, that Men of Influence and public Spirit,
would, according to the Example set them in their Mother Country, endeavor to
set up in the several Parts of the Land, Societies for Reformation of Manners,
founded on such a Plan, as that Persons of different Denominations might unite
in them.

III. WE ought to acknowledge our Dependence on God, and look to Heaven for
Direction and Assistance, against our Enemies; with a deep Sense of the
Insufficiency of human Wisdom and Strength, without divine Help. Nothing is
more provoking to God, than for a People to cast off their Dependence upon him;
overlook his Hand in all the signal Dispensations of his Providence, and act as
though the Source of their Safety was wholly in themselves. Too much of this
Spirit of Infidelity has evidently appeared in the British Nation, which I look
upon as one of the darkest Symptoms upon us. It was Matter of Grief and
Astonishment, to all that had any Sense of Religion left, to observe how very
little Regard we showed to an overruling Providence, by our public Conduct in
the late War The Conduct of New England, in taking Cape-Breton, must be
excepted. See Mr. Prince's excellent Sermon, on the Occasion.
, how we seemed to ground all our Expectations on our own Wisdom and Power, and
as it were, bid Defiance to God and Man. This mournful Observation is
abundantly confirmed, by the ingenious and serious Author of a Pamphlet,
entitled, Britain's Remembrancer: Having mentioned some such Passages in the
public Prints, as these, viz. "Our Fleets are in high Spirits, etc." We only
desire the Arm of Flesh may decide the Quarrel. Let England but take Care of
her Fleets, and what has she to fear? In all which, says he, there is so far
from any Appearance of a Sense of Dependence upon Heaven, that we seem rather
desirous to stand by our own Strength, than be beholding to the God of Battles.
And speaking of declaring War with Spain, he adds, I appeal to Thousands, who
saw it declared, whether there appeared in the Behavior and Conversation of
the People of London, on that Occasion, the least Sense of Humanity for their
Fellow Creatures, that were like to perish in it, or the least Dependence on
Heaven, for the Success of it; or whether the Spirit which reigned at that Time
in England, was not a Spirit of Insolence, and Defiance both of God and Man.
That an Account of one of the most remarkable Transactions in the whole War, in
which there was such a Series of eminent Dangers, and signal Deliverances,
should be wrote by a Clergyman Vide Anson's Voyage, by his Chaplain.
, with scarce the least Acknowledgement of the Hand of God, in any of them,
shows what a Spirit of Impiety and Infidelity reigned in the Nation; and it is
hard to say, whether the Stupidity, or Wickedness of such a Conduct, be the
greater. -- Who that has the least Acquaintance with ancient or modern History,
but must observe, that the Rise and Fall of States and Empires, spring from
unforeseen Causes, and turn on such Incidents, as the Sagacity of the wisest
Politicians could not discover, nor the greatest human Power prevent! How
constantly is the Observation of the wise Man verified 1 Cor. i. 3 and 18.
, The Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong. Vain Man thinks
himself so very wise, his Schemes so well-concerted, so secretly laid, that
nothing can defeat them; but, God says, He will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise,
and bring to nothing the Understanding of the Prudent. Where is the Wise, the
great Statesman and Politician? Where are all his fine Schemes? Has not God
made foolish, the Wisdom of this World? Does he not often suffer them to take
such foolish and destructive Counsels, as tend to their own Ruin? He makes
Diviners mad, turns the wise Men backward, and makes their Knowledge foolish
Isai. xliv. 25.
Ahitophel, was a great Politician; the Oracle of his Day; how confident were
many, that his superior Sagacity, would have secured Success to Absolom's
Conspiracy; but how easily was it, by a Method altogether unexpected, turned
into Foolishness.

WE may boast of our Strength, by Sea and Land; of our Valor and Wisdom;
imagine our Schemes are so well contrived, that nothing will prevent their
Success: Yet if God be not for us, our Strength will be but Weakness; our
Wisdom, but Folly; and we shall fall an easy Prey to our ambitious Foes. It Is
infinitely easy with God, to defeat the Devices of the deepest Policy. What
Madness therefore and Folly, as well as great Wickedness, is it, to put our
Confidence in an Arm of Flesh? And we should tremble at the Thoughts of it,
when God has said, Cursed be he that puts his Trust in Man, and makes Flesh
his Arm. And surely we shall be more inexcusable, than any Nation under Heaven,
if we cast off our Dependence upon God, when he has repeatedly, in a most
remarkable Manner, appeared for our Deliverance and Salvation. Let us labor
therefore to feel in our selves, and to raise in others, a Disposition, humbly
to acknowledge God, in all our public Concerns, at this critical Juncture,
saying with the Prophet Hosea xiv. 3.
, ASHUR shall not save us; we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say
any more to the Work of our Hands, Ye are our Gods, for in thee the Fatherless
finds Mercy.

IV. WHILE our Eyes are to Heaven, for Direction and Assistance, we should
vigorously exert ourselves in our own Defense, by all those Means that the
Providence of God has put into our Power. To pretend to rely on the Almighty
for Protection, in Time of Danger, while we carelessly neglect those Methods of
securing ourselves, which are pointed out in his Providence, is not to trust,
but to mock and tempt him. When Jacob was in eminent Danger, from the Fury of
his enraged Brother, he goes to God as his only Refuge; but at the same Time,
contrives the most politic Method to divert, or to stand the Shock of his Wrath
Genesis XXXII. 9.13.
. DAVID went forth in the Name of the God of Israel, to meet the insulting
Philistine, but did not go without the Instruments of Death, which he could
best use; a Sling and a Stone 1 Samuel xvii. 45, 49.
. And why need I speak of Joshua, Gideon, Jephtha, and the Worthies of old, who
did such Wonders by Faith; was it not in the Use of proper Means? They waxed
valiant in Battle, and put to flight the Armies of the Aliens.

WHEN God has appointed Means for our Safety, carelessly to neglect them,
vainly imagining Deliverance will come in some miraculous Way, is not Faith,
but Folly; not Confidence, but Madness. And who does not see, that the present
Defenseless State of our Southern Provinces, is not the Effect of Trust and
Dependence on God, but either of mere Sloth, or sordid Covetousness.

WE shall not, I presume, pretend that our present Security arises from our
having so much a greater Sense of Religion; Disposition to acknowledge God, and
depend upon him, than our Neighbors. Must we not rather confess, it flows from
the Want of a becoming Sensibility of the invaluable Privileges we enjoy, and
of the Greatness of our Danger, though it be so near and apparent. -- But I
trust, after all that has been said, to open our Eyes and alarm our Fears, we
shall not any longer fold our Hands together, and cry, A little more Sleep, and
a little more Slumber. It Is high Time to look about us, and vigorously fall
upon every proper Method of Defense.

WHAT a Pity, that at such a Time, there should be any Contention between our
Governors, and respective Assemblies, but who should be most forward and
zealous in the Service of their King and Country. All private and selfish
Designs; all petty Disputes and Contentions, should be swallowed up in a
disinterested View to, and Concern for, the public Good. Of what Importance is
it, that our Representatives should have enlarged Views, of the public
Interest, and a deep Sense, how much the Welfare of their Country, depends upon
their Conduct, in this difficult Day. -- Nothing can be plainer, than that a
parsimonious Spirit, at such a Time, opens a Door to the most extravagant
Expense. To do Things by Halves, is worse, than doing nothing at all. This we
have learnt by fatal Experience. What L. 10,000 would have done, when we first
had the Alarm, L. 100,000, it is probable, will not now effect; and it is
constantly increasing on our Hands, through the Vigilance, Activity, and
continual Preparations of our Enemies. And should they by our Delays, and
stingy Provisions for Defense, through Fear of putting the Country to Charges,
make it the Seat of a long distressing War, there is no computing the Expense,
and Number of Lives it may cost. War is, indeed, to be deprecated; both
Conquerors, and Conquered, are sure to feel the sad Effects of it, more or
less; and Peace is so great a Blessing, that it is to be pursued by all just
and rational Methods. But the Way to have Peace in the present Case, is to make
a speedy and vigorous Preparation for War: Had this been done more seasonably,
it might have prevented all we now fear. There seems but two possible Ways
left, to avoid the War we are threatened with from France. The one, tamely to
submit to their unrighteous Encroachments; quietly resign up our Possessions,
and all our Privileges, into the Hands of a lawless Tyrant; and expose
ourselves and Posterity, to the mad Zeal and Fury, of cruel persecuting Bigots.
-- The other is, to let them speedily know, that we have it in our Power to
force them, to reasonable Terms, and oblige them to keep within their own
Limits; and I need not say which, both Duty and Interest, lead us to take.

WERE the several Provinces thoroughly engaged, to take some speedy, vigorous
Steps, for the Protection and Defense of the Land, it might strike such Dread
into our Enemies, whose Insolence and Courage, arise chiefly from our Sloth and
Stupidity, as might divert the Storm that is now gathering fast upon us. And
methinks we have every Thing to awaken our Fears, and animate our Hopes. On the
one Hand, there is Poverty, Slavery, Persecution and Death; on the other, a
fruitful Country, pleasant Habitations, British Liberty, and what is dearer
than all, undefiled Christianity. And do not let us put far away the evil Day.
Delays may prove of the most fatal Consequence; our Danger may be much nearer,
and much greater than we imagine.

SHOULD the French, agreeable to their known Perfidy, before they declare War,
send a Fleet, with a large Army of well-disciplined Troops, to lay waste, and
destroy our Coasts; while the savage Natives, whose tender Mercies, are
Cruelty, join them in falling on our Frontiers, what a a distressing Scene
opens to our View? Our Seaport Towns sacked, and laid in Ashes! -- Our Country
ravaged! our Houses plundered! -- The Voice of Lamentation and Woe heard in our
Streets! -- Our Men slaughtered! -- Our Wives and Daughters delivered to the
Lusts and Fury of a lawless Soldiery! -- Our helpless Babes dashed against the
Stones! -- Men looking on the right Hand for Help, and on the Left there is
none to deliver! Their Hearts failing them for Fear, while they hear the
confused Noise of War; see Garments rolled in Blood, and the insulting Foe
spreading Desolation and Ruin all around! -- But I must stop: -- The tragical
Scene is too distressing, even in distant Prospect! And is there a emote
Probability, is there apparent Danger, of our being thrown into such universal
Tumult and Confusion and shall we not exert ourselves, in making the most
speedy and effectual Preparation against it? What Folly, what Madness; nay I
may say, what Cruelty to ourselves and Posterity, is it, to run the Risk of
having Desolation, Anguish and Despair, spread through the Land, by a sudden
Invasion, while we are so shamefully unprepared, to make any proper Defense.

WE have every Thing to alarm, to rouse and animate us, in such a Day as this,
when all that is valuable, all that is dear, lies at Stake. Shall we tamely
suffer our delightful Possessions, to be taken from us? -- become the Dupes and
Slaves of a French Tyrant? What! -- sacrifice our precious Liberty, our
Property, and what is more, our Religion, to our Sloth? entail Misery, Slavery,
and Ruin, on our Posterity, by our Indolence and Cowardice! God forbid! It Is
high Time, to awake, to call up all the Briton in us, every Spark of English
Valor; cheerfully to offer our Purses, our Arms, and our Lives, to the Defense
of our Country, our holy Religion, our excellent Constitution, and invaluable
Liberties. For what is Life, without Liberty? without the Enjoyment of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, depending on the Will of a Tyrant and exposed to all
the Insults of persecuting Bigots? It Is not worth having. A freeborn Briton,
should disdain the Life of a Slave; -- better, -- far better, bravely to
sacrifice it to the Defense of our Religion and Country, than to survive the
dismal Day, when these Regions of Light and Liberty, shall be overspread with
Ignorance, Superstition, and Tyranny. And had we but the Spirit of our brave
Ancestors, who cheerfully ventured their Lives, and resigned all the Comforts
thereof, in an howling Wilderness, that they might hand down to us the
inestimable Privileges we now enjoy: Were we, I say, animated with the same
heroic Spirit, in the Defense of them; with the same ardent Desire of leaving
them inviolate to our Posterity; -- did but the noble Ardor kindle from Breast
to Breast, I doubt not, by the Smiles of Heaven, we should soon make our
Enemies flee before us, and again sit quietly under our Vines and Fig Trees,
and eat the Good of the Land. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc. AMEN.

FINIS.

