Mr. Dickinson's Election SERMON.

A SERMON Preached before the General ASSEMBLY OF THE Colony of Connecticut, at
HARTFORD On the Day of the Anniversary Election, May 8 th, 1755.

By Moses Dickinson, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Norwalk.

NEW LONDON, Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR, and
COMPANY of the Colony of CONNECTICUT, 1755.

AT a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of His Majesty's English
Colony of Connecticut, in New England, in America, Holden at Hartford, in said
Colony on the Second Thursday of May, (being the Eighth Day of said Month)
Anno' Domini, 1755. ORDERED,
THAT ANDREW BURR Esquire and Mr. JAMES FITCH, Return the Thanks of this Assembly,
to the Reverend Mr. MOSES DICKINSON, for his Sermon Delivered before the
Assembly on the 8 th Instant, and Desire a Copy thereof that it may be Printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

AN Election SERMON.
I TIMOTHY II. 1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all; Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and Giving of Thanks, be made for all Men: For Kings,
and for all that are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet, and peaceable
Life, in all Godliness and Honesty.
THE End of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure Heart. And Acts of
Kindness, and Good Will to Men as the Offspring of GOD, are the proper Fruits
of Charity. When therefore our Minds are effectually Influenced by this
God-like Virtue, instead of saying, go, be warmed, be filled; we shall
sincerely Endeavor as we have Opportunity, to do good to all Men. But in as
much as we have not the same Advantages, to show the Effects of our Charity to
some, as to others, (for some are raised to such a Pitch of Grandeur, and
Dignity, that they are above our Reach; others are at such a Distance from us;
that we don't so much as know them, or the Nation they belong to; and our
Enemies by their Perverseness, and ill Nature, may render themselves incapable
to receive Benefit by us;) the only way therefore for us to show our Christian
Temper in such Cases, is by our fervent Addresses at the Throne of Grace on
their Behalf. But whether we can actually do good to Men, or no; the great Duty
of Intercession for others is not to be neglected; for the most that we (or
indeed the very Angels themselves,) can do for them, is just nothing at all, in
Comparison of that great Good, that GOD may bestow upon them, in Answer to our
Prayers. We need not marvel therefore, that the Apostle speaks of this, as a
Duty of such great Importance. I exhort therefore, that first of all,
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made for all
Men. We must pray for all Men, Friends, and Enemies, Relations and Strangers,
Bond and Free. But as our own Peace, the civil and religious Interests of the
Community, and the best good of Rulers themselves, depend upon their Conduct;
therefore we are especially to pray for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority. And we are directed what to pray for on their Account; viz. That
they may be Influenced by GOD's Grace, and have his Blessing upon their
Persons, and Administrations, that under their Protection we may lead quiet and
peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty.

There are sundry things of very great Importance, that we may observe from
these Words. Particularly,

That civil Government is a divine Institution, and therefore we must pray for
GOD's Blessing upon all that are in Authority, as being GOD's Ministers.

That the Work of Rulers is of great Concernment, and attended with peculiar
Difficulties, and accordingly they stand in need of the Prayers of good Men.

That good Rulers are a great Blessing to a People, since under their
Influence, and Protection, their civil and religious Interests are Secure; so
that they may lead quiet and peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty.

That the People owe Obedience, and Subjection to then Rulers; without which
they can have no Peace, Godliness, for Honesty.

That Subjects ought not only to acquiesce in, but be thankful for, the good
Offices of their Rulers; for Thanksgiving is to be joined with Supplications,
Prayers, and Intercessions.

That People are not animated with a christian Spirit, nor truly sensible of
their own Interest, when they neglect to pray for their Rulers.

And that all Men ought to Improve the Advantages they enjoy under a good
Government, by leading a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty.

Each of these Observations might be improved as a p^oper Entertainment, for
such an Occasion as this; yet I shall not expatiate upon either of them: But
what I have chiefly in View as the Subject of my Discourse, is this; --

That when civil Rulers are influenced by the Grace of GOD, they will sincerely
endeavor to promote not only the Peace, and outward Prosperity; but likewise
the religigious Interests of the People under their Government.

The Rulers of the World, when this Epistle was Written, were Heathen; and the
great Thing that their Subjects were to pray for on their Behalf was, that they
might be Converted, and so become sincere Christians, and then it would follow,
that under their Government they might lead a quiet, and peaceable Life, in all
Godliness and Honesty. And we must now pray for them that rule over Men, that
they may be just, ruling in the fear of God; for if this be their true
Character, we may rest Satisfied that their Endeavors will not be wanting, to
secure to us our just Rights, Civil, and Religious.

But that I may express my Sentiments upon this Subject, with as much
Clearness, and Brevity as I can; I shall endeavor to show,

I. That the good of Society in this present State, (next to the Glory of GOD,)
is the direct End of civil Government.

II. Although Religion is not the direct, and immediate Object, of the Concern of
civil Rulers in their political Capacity; yet the good of Society can never be
effectually promoted by them, unless they are sincerely concerned for the
Interest of Religion.

And therefore,

III. When civil Rulers are influenced by the Grace of GOD, to do their Duty;
they will sincerely endeavor to promote Religion; as there is such a necessary
Connection, between this, and the good of Society.

I. That the good of Society in this present State, (next to the Glory of GOD,)
is the direct End of civil Government. Government was not appointed, that some
Men might enjoy Riches, Dignity, and Power above others, exclusive of the good
of the Public: That some might become as Beasts of Prey, to the weaker part of
the Herd while others must be Beasts of Burden: That some might be clothed in
Purple, and fine Linen, and fare Sumptuously every Day; while others must be
fed with the Crumbs that fall from their Table. No; Societies were not formed
for the sake of Rulers, but Rulers were made for the sake of Societies; that
the good of all, (Rulers and Ruled) in Conjunction, might be Promoted. And as
civil Government was not appointed for the good of any Part of a Community, in
Opposition to the Rest; so it was not designed for the good of any Community as
such, in the World to come. For tho the chief End of Man, is to glorify God and
enjoy him for ever: And the chief End of Government, as well as all other Means
that GOD is using with Men; is His Glory, and their everlasting Good; and
therefore every Man, of every Community, ought to improve this, together with
all other Advantages, that he may be made meet to be a Partaker, of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light: Yet no Society as such will have a future
Existence, in that Kingdom which can never be moved, and therefore can receive
neither Good, nor Harm, from this, or any thing else in that Respect. For when
the Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements shall Melt
with fervent Heat, and the Earth also, and the Works that are therein, shall be
burnt up; When all Nature shall fall on Sleep, Time shall expire, and Death it
self shall die; then Empires, and Kingdoms, and States, and Communities, shall
be no more; but glorified Saints shall be united in another Manner of Society,
when God will be all in all. But Men in this present State of Weakness, and
Depravity, have a mutual Dependence one upon another, and cannot Subsist without
the Advantages of civil Society; and this necessarily implies, that there must
be some Government: For an animal Body could as well live without an Head, as a
political one could subsist without Government. For without it we should be in
a state of Confusion; like an Herd of wild Beasts; the Strongest, and most
Mischievous, would Domineer over and Oppress others. There would be no Peace,
to him that should go out, or to him that should come in; our Lives, and
Properties, and all that is dear to us, would hang in Suspense, and depend upon
the ungoverned Lusts of the Sons of Fraud, and Violence. When a People
therefore grow uneasy under Government, and endeavor to overthrow the
Foundations of it; they are like a Pond that being weary of Confinement,
contends for Liberty, with the Dam upon which it depends for it is very
Existence. Government is so necessary to the very Being of a Society; that it
is not at all Probable, that ever any great Number of People continued long
together, without it in some Form or other. To suppose (as some have done,)
that Mankind were ever in such a mere State of Nature; as to have had no Laws,
no Regulations, no sort of Government; is to suppose a Contradiction; for such
a wild, and savage State, could not with any Propriety be called a State of
Nature; for it would be a very unnatural State. And therefore it follows that
Government was not brought in by Improvement, and Cultivation, as the Arts and
Sciences were. For tho it is true, the different Modes, and Forms, of it, (as
they are suited to the Genius, Inclination, and Circumstances of every
Community,) depend upon Agreement, and Compact: Yet Government itself, was
instituted at the beginning of the World, by the great Author of our Natures;
as is evident from the Word of GOD; and is even implied in those Words, It is
not good the Man should be alone. For Adam was to have had a sort of Government
over his Wife and over his Children, if they had been Born in Paradise: For the
Fifth Commandment would have been binding then as well as now. But after that
Sin entered into the World, and Mankind multiplied upon the Earth, the
Necessity of it became more apparent. As known unto God therefore, are all his
Works from the Beginning of the World; and as he had a tender Concern for
Mankind as his Offspring, he made Provision for our Peace, and Safety, under
the Protection of them who are Ministers of God to us for good. As the civil
good of the Community then, ought to be the great Thing aimed at by Rulers as
such; so every thing that has a direct Tendency to promote it, ought to be the
immediate Object of their Concern. There are many things that in their own
Nature are absolutely Necessary to promote the good of Society; tho all of them
come within the Compass of civil Liberty; or at least are implied by it.

Good Laws ought to be provided; being wisely adapted to the State, Situation,
and Circumstances of the People, and being established, and promulgated, they
should be the Stated Rule of Government, and Obedience. Their Sovereign
Authority over all Men, from the Lowest to the Highest, ought to be Supported;
that the meanest Beggar, as well as the man in Power, may find Refuge under
their Protection.

The Doctrines of the unlimited Power of Princes, to govern without Law, and of
the Obligations that Subjects are under to submit to their lawless
Determinations, upon Pain of eternal Damnation; were in Times past greatly in
Vogue in our Nation, and taught for precious Gospel Truths.

But their mighty Zeal to propagate these Doctrines, by a vile Prostitution of
Pulpits, Presses, and Courts of Justice, was (methinks,) but a poor way of
complimenting the then reigning Princes, for it evidently implied a
Consciousness that they were endeavoring to oppress their Subjects, by
trampling the Laws under their Feet. But such was the blind Ambition of those
worthless Princes, that instead of being affronted they were flattered by these
Men; for they wanted such Instruments to carry on their Designs. And if that
Lawless Power which (like original Sin) was propagated from Father to Son, had
not been sent to its own Place, by the glorious Revolution, and the happy
Accession of the present royal Family to the Throne; it would (long before now)
have been more safe for Protestants to have dwelt in Turkey, than in any Part
of the british Dominions. This is the Lord's doing, it is mavelous in our
Eyes!

We find then by Experience, as well as from the Nature of Things, that there
can be no civil Liberty, where the sacred Authority of the Laws is disregarded
by any Order of Men. For as christian Liberty does not consist, in turning the
Grace of our God into Wantonness; but in such due Obedience to the Laws of
Christ, that we may Serve God without Fear, in Holiness, and Righteousness, all
the Days of our Lives; so civil Liberty does not consist in Licentiousness; (a
wanton abuse of Power on the one Hand, or a fearless Contempt of Authority, on
the other) but in such due Obedience of all Ranks, and Orders of Men, to the
wise and good Laws of the State, that all Men, (Rulers, and Ruled,) that are
free from Guilt, may be free from Fear; and may discharge the Duties of their
respective Stations, and enjoy every thing that they have a Right to, without
any Concern about a Lion in the Way, a Lion in the Streets. Civil Liberty
therefore is so essentially necessary, that the great End of Government can
never be obtained, unless this be inviolably preserved.

In Order to which the Laws should not ly by like neglected Armor, but be
duly, and impartially executed. Justice should be done, between Man, and Man;
without Fear or Favor, without Bribes, multiplying Charges, or unnecessary
Delay. No Special Pleadings should be admitted, when the Design is to keep the
Merits of the Cause out of Sight; and to stop the Course of Justice. But
Judgment should run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream.

Transgressors of the Law should be punished, according to the Demerit of
their Crimes; for their Amendment if they ben't incurable, and that others may
hear, and fear. And Mercy should never triumph over Judgment, unless in
doubtful Cases, or when extreme right may be extreme wrong.

Industry and Frugality ought to be promoted, the Poor should be employed,
Children should be brought up to some proper Business; that every Member of the
Community may serve it is Interests. Trade and Navigation should be encouraged,
but withal duly regulated, that a great Part of the Produce of a Country, that
affords all the Necessaries of Life, ma'n't be foolishly bartered away, for
such things as only tend to promote Idleness, Luxury, and Intemperance; whereby
they will unavoidably lose the Balance of Trade, and Poverty will rush on like
an armed Man.

A fixed Medium of Trade should be provided, that Men may not defraud one
another under Color of Law; at the Expense of the public Faith, and Credit.

Schools and Colleges should be Supported, for the educating Youth in the
learned Languages, and in the liberal Arts, and Sciences; that Darkness may not
cover the Land, and thick Darkness the People; and that some may be fitted from
Time to Time, for public improvement.

A mutual Dependence between every Part, and Member of the political Body,
should be preserved; that the Head may direct, and influence the Members, and
that all the Members may be subject to the Head; and mutually assist each
other. When ever this Dependence is lost; so that the Eye says to the Hand I
have no need of thee, and the Head says to the Feet, I have no need of you; the
Light of civil Liberty will become dim, and the Health of the Body will be so
impaired, that there will be a Stagnation of the vital Fluids, and every fatal
Symptom of approaching Death.

And lastly, proper Measures should be concerted, for the Defense of the Lives,
and Properties of the People, against the open Invasions, or secret Attempts of
Enemies; for tho no War ought to be made to gratify the Lust of Ambition, to
obtain Dominion, or enlarge Territories, or even for the Propagating Religion
itself: Yet self Defense is agreeable to the Law of Nature, and an Offensive
War is lawful, so far as it is necessary, in the just Defense of ourselves and
others. The Doctrine of the unlawfulness of a Defensive War, which some have
placed among the Articles of their Creed; is contrary both to the Old Testament
and the New. When the Soldiers being concerned about their eternal Salvation,
enquired of John Baptist what they should do; he was so far from telling them
that their Employment was unlawful, that he gave them Directions how they
should behave in it. And when Peter was sent by the immediate Command of GOD,
to instruct Cornelius the Centurian in the Doctrins, and Duties of the
Christian Religion; he said nothing against the service he was in as a military
Officer; but his whole Conduct showed that he approved of his continuing in the
Calling, wherein he was called. And by the Way, if ever it was lawful and
necessary to draw the Sword, it appears to be so now; when our Religion, our
Liberties, our Properties, our Wives, our Children, and every thing that is
dear to us, are in Danger of being buried under the Ruins of our Country. Must
we as idle Spectators, behold one of the most treacherous, and enterprizing
Nations in the World, surrounding us with an armed Force; fortifying themselves
in our Provinces; destroying our Forts; and instigating the Savage Nations to
join with them in murdering us in a Time of Peace? Must we sit still, and
tamely suffer our Country to be possessed, by Men who never knew the Pleasure
of having any thing that they could properly call their own; our Towns to be
filled with unwelcome Inhabitants; our Houses to become the Habitations of
Cruelty; our Wives and Children to be murdered, our Men to have their Garments
rolled in Blood; our Churches demolished, or turned into Mass-Houses; and our
selves if suffered to breathe, to become the Servants of Servants; must we
counteract all the sentiments of Humanity; all the Principles of
Self-Preservation, all natural Affection for our Posterity, and all Concern for
our Country, Friends and Neighbors? No, we have not so learned Christ; the
Gospel it is true, requires us to love our Enemies, but it does not require us
to express it, by being accessory to their Wickedness, or by being cruel to
ourselves, and to our Friends. But to return,

II. Although Religion be not the Direct, and immediate Object, of the Concern of
civil Rulers in their political Capacity; yet the good of Society, can never be
effectually promoted by them, without being Sincerely concerned for the
Interest of Religion. Civil Rulers considered as Men, and Christians, are under
as great Obligations to be concerned about Religion, as any of their fellow
Mortals; (the Ministers of Religion only excepted)

They are by Nature Children of Wrath even as others. Tho David was raised up
on high; yet he says, Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother
conceive me. High, and Low, have the same natural Depravity, the same evil
Inclinations, the same Lusts and Passions, the same Blindness of Mind, and
Hardness of Heart. And Men in Power, are as unable to inlighten their own
Minds, change their own Hearts, and renew their own Natures, as other Men; and
therefore stand in as much need of converting Grace, that they may be created a
new in Christ Jesus to good Works, that they may walk in them.

The Guilt of Sin will ly as heavy upon their Souls, as upon the Souls of
others; and they never can have Peace with God, unless they are justified by
Faith in a Glorious Redeemer.

The same Means, and Endeavors must be used by them, that are necessary for
others; that they may perfect Holiness in the Fear of God.

They are exposed to as great Temptations, and to as great Trials, and
Afflictions; and therefore stand in as much need of the Comforts of Religion to
Support them; that in the Multitude of Thoughts within them, God's Comforts may
delight their Souls. They will find as (...) others, that all Comforts that
don't Spring from the true Fountain, will prove no better when their Tents are
in Affliction, than deceitful Streams, that will dry up when they most need
them. The Crown of manhood is a Winter Joy
An Ever-green that Stands the northern-Blast,
And Blossoms in the Rigor of our Fate.
Night Thoughts.
And it is appointed for them as well as for all other Men, once to die. Tho
they are called Gods, yet their Dwelling is in Flesh; and they must die like
Men. He that rides upon the pale Horse, will with as much Rudeness, and
Violence, break into the Palaces of Princes; as into the Cottages of Beggars,
and treat them with as little Respect, and Complaisance. And then they must
appear before God the Judge of all, who will pour Contempt upon Princes, and
not regard the Rich, more than the Poor; for they are all the Work of his
Hands. Then, O then! they will be either found of their Judge in Peace, and be
welcomed with that Euge, well done good and faithful Servants; or be driven
away with that Anathema, take the unprofitable Servants, and bind them Hand and
Foot, and cast them into utter Darkness; there shall be Weeping, and Gnashing
of Teeth. So that if they ben't concerned about Religion, they show as great
Stupidity as many other Men; who say let us eat and drink for tomorrow we
shall die; and as much greater, as their Talents, and Advantages are greater,
for which they must give an Account. But yet in their political Capacity, they
are not properly the Ministers of Religion. -- There is another Order of Men,
who are appointed, and commissioned for this very End, that they may explain
the great Things of Religion, and impress them upon the Minds, and Consciences
of Men; that in this Way, they may (as Instruments,) open Men's Eyes, and turn
them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto GOD; that they
may receive Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among all them that are
Sanctified, by Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

But although in this Sense, civil Rulers have no Right to intermeddle with the
things of Religion, by invading the ministerial Office; yet in another
Intendment, they ought to be greatly concerned about Religion by Virtue of
their Office; as they never can effectually promote the Peace, and Prosperity
of the Community, without being concerned for the Interest of Religion. For if
Rulers and People have no Religion, no fear of GOD, no Regard to the Rewards,
and Punishments of the World to come, what Security can they have? What Trust;
what Confidence, can they put one in another? Their firmest Promises will
signify nothing; and their most solemn Oaths, will bind them no more than so
many Cobwebs. Without Religion civil Society must disband; or prove no better
than a Combination of Pirates, and High-way-men, who agree to rob and plunder
others, and then treat one another by the same inhuman Maxims, of Fraud, and
Violence. From whence come Murders, Treasons, Rebellions, Seditions, Frauds,
and Oppressions? From Religion? No; but from the want of it. Who are Murmurers,
and Complainers? Who despise Dominion, and Speak evil of Dignities; but ungodly
Men, that walk after their own Lusts? Who are Quarrelsome, and Contentious? Who
are Tale-bearers, Back-biters, and Slanderers? Whose Tongues set on fire the
whole Course of Nature, and are set on fire of Hell? Who are Busybodies in
other Men's Concerns; and idle Drones in their own? Who are false, treacherous,
and deceitful? Who would Sacrifice the good of the Public, to some private
Lust? Who Spend their Time, consume their Estates, deprave their Minds,
enfeeble their Bodies, and dig their own Graves; by Loudness, Excess, and
Intemperance? Who will mourn at the last, when their Flesh and their Bodies are
consumed, saying how have we hated Instruction, and our Hearts despised
Reproof? Who I say, do these Characters belong to, but to Men who are void of
Religion?

To say nothing here, of the moral Consequence of Vice, and Wickedness; though it
is certain that in the End they will bite like a Serpent, and sting like an
Adder; and because of these things comes the Wrath of God, upon the Children
of Disobedience; and often too upon Kingdoms, States, and Communities; so that
God is Known by the Judgments, that he executes. But I say without bringing
this into the Reckoning; every Vice in a political View, injures the Public;
for it is so far from being true, (as has been pretended Fable of the Bees.
) that private Vices, are public Benefits; that it will remain an unchangeable
Truth, that Righteousness exalts a Nation, and Sin is a Reproach unto any
People, and tends to the Destruction of both Rulers, and Subjects. For when a
Storm of Vice, and Wickedness, (ascending from the Mouth of the bottomless
Pit,) breaks in upon a People, so as to shake the very Pillars of Government,
and move the Foundations of the State, if the Body of the People have no
Religion, and the Magistrate is unconcerned whether they have any or no; what
can he do to save a tottering, or falling State? He may punish some Vices it is
true, and be hated and reviled for his Pains, until there will be a literal
Fulfillment of that Prophecy, they shall fret themselves, and Curse their King,
and their God, and look upward; and they shall look unto the Earth, and behold
Trouble and Darkness, Dimness of Angu^^^ and they shall be driven to Darkness.
In a word, Religion is like an Ax laid at the Root of the Tree; but all other
Means without it, will do but little more than lop off some of the luxuriant
Branches; and be but a small Check, to its Growth, and Fruitfulness. I
therefore add,

III. When civil Rulers are influenced by the Grace of GOD, to do their Duty,
they will sincerely Endeavor to promote Religion, as there is such a necessary
Connection, between this, and the good of Society. The Grace of GOD is that
Wisdom that is from above, which is first pure, and then peaceable gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of Mercy, and good Fruits, without Partiality, and
without Hypocrisy. It is absolutely necessary, to make Men really good, in
every Business, and in every Relation of Life. It will make Men good Masters,
good Parents, good Neighbors, good Ministers, good Magistrates, and good
Subjects. It has a mighty transforming Efficacy; It will turn Rebels, and
Traitors, into loyal and obedient Subjects: fierce and cruel Savages, into kind
Benefactors: and Tyrants, Persecutors, and Oppressors, into nursing Fathers.

The Grace of GOD will refine the Minds, and enlarge the Hearts, of Men in
Power. It will raise them above any low, selfish, mercenary Views; and give
them more exalted and sublime Sentiments; so as to consider themselves as God's
Ministers, vested with his Authority, and acting for Him, and their greatest
Concern will be, not to lade themselves with thick Clay; nor to gain the vain
Applauses of Men, (whose Tongues are vendible, and whose Affections are as
mutable as the Wind) but the Approbation of GOD, whom they consider as their
Witness, and Judge, their Shield, and exceeding great Reward.

Their Aims, and Views will not be confined to this little Spot of Earth; or
within the Compass of a few Moments of Time; but their Prospect will extend to
the Enjoyments of a boundless Duration.

It will fill them with a tender Affection, and sincere Concern for all
Mankind; but more especially for the People that they are so nearly related to,
and will give them a fellow Feeling, and Sympathy with the rest of the Body,
both in Prosperity and Adversity.

It will enliven their Zeal, animate their Courage, and quicken their Activity,
to promote the public good: And as they know by Experience the Necessity of
Religion, to make Men good Members of Society, they will exert themselves to
promote it.

But then the great Question is, Since Religion is not the direct Object of the
Concern of the civil Magistrate in his political Capacity, what may he, or what
ought he to do to promote it?

A full Discussion of this important Question, would take more Time than this
Occasion will allow: And besides I am not so sanguine, as to imagine, that I
can draw the Line with such Clearness, and Exactness that the contending
Parties will abide by it, as the true Boundary. But however, I shall venture to
suggest a few things, which may perhaps, give some Light, in the Case. And
accordingly I would Observe,

1. That no civil Magistrate has Authority to punish Men, for their religious
Principles, or Practices, provided they don't disturb the civil Peace. The
Right that all Men have as moral Agents, and accountable Creatures, to think,
and act for themselves in those things that relate to their own eternal
Salvation, is now much better understood, and more freely acknowledged, than
formerly, when Bigotry was too often Substituted, in the Room of that Zeal,
which Springs from the Love of GOD, and our Neighbor. It is now generally
acknowledged by Protestants, of every Denomination, that all Persecution merely
upon the Account of Religion, is an unmerciful Violation, of the Law of Nature,
and of the Law of Christ. And as there are eternal Rewards, or Punishments
annexed to our Belief, and Practice; that civil Magistrate, who would compel
Men to comply with his religious Sentiments, should give them good Security,
that if they are misled, he will suffer for them a vicarious Punishment, in the
World to come, and that they shall be guiltless. For if we must believe by
Proxy, what Reason can be given why we should not be rewarded, or punished by
Proxy? If the Magistrate had a just Claim to Infallibility, he aught have
something more to say, for afflicting Men's Bodies for the good of their Souls.

But as we are (at best) but in a very imperfect State, while we dwell in
Houses of ^^ay, the Condition of our Nature might teach us Humility, and mutual
Forbearance, rather than to assume to ourselves (what the Apostles utterly
disclaimed) a Dominion over Men's Faith. Men's Minds ben't all cast in the same
Mould; but they have different Capacities, different Tempers, and different
Advantages, of Education, Reading, and Conversation; and therefore different
Principles: And all the Severities that can be inflicted upon Men's Bodies, will
in no wise enlighten their Minds, and change their Hearts: The utmost that can
be done therefore in this way is to bring Men to a Conformity in Hypocrisy. But
besides if one Magistrate has a Right to punish Men for their Heterodoxy,
another who sustains the same Office, has as much Right to use the same Power,
and upon this Foot, all the Persecutions that have ever been in the World, may
be justified.

Among the Jews Idolaters were to be put to Death, it is true; but then they
were a Theocracy, and Idolatry so far as it was received, so far it destroyed
their Polity, civil, as well as religious. But now as there is not the same
Reason, there cannot be the same Law.

The christian Religion never was promoted by persecuting others. The Church
may be made Drunk (as the Scripture expresses it) but will never thrive, by
being fed with the Blood of human Sacrifices; instead of the sincere Milk of
the Word.

Such was the Meekness and Gentleness of Christ, that he never forced any Man
to receive his Religion, tho he could have employed, more than twelve Legions
of Angels to compel Men to come in, if this method had been agreeable to the
Nature and Design of it: But instead of this; when his Disciples discovered a
persecuting Temper, toward Men who Worshipped they knew not what; He severely
reproved them; Ye know not (says He) what manner of Spirit ye are of.

And the Apostles when they went forth to propagate the Gospel, (being then
fully acquainted with the Nature, and Design of it) assured their Hearers, that
the Weapons of their Warfare were not Carnal, but Spiritual; and that if the
Mighty Works that were wrought by them, and the Preaching of the Gospel with
Demonstration, and Power, were not sufficient to convert them, they would leave
them to the Delusions of a reprobate Mind. But if their Hearers had known at
the same Time, that when once the Rulers of the World would join with them; it
was their real Design; and agreeable to their true Principles, to convert Men
with Fire, and Sword, Bonds and Imprisonments; I guess, they would hardly have
thought, they were as harmless as Doves; how much so ever they might have, of
the Wisdom of the Serpent: Neither would they have thought, they deserved the
Character our Savior gave them, when he said* behold I send you forth, as
Lambs among Wolves. But I add,

2. The civil Magistrate has no Right to make any Alterations, either in the
Doctrins, Discipline, or Ordinances of Religion; for the sake of promoting the
good of the State, or for any other Pretense whatsoever. The christian Religion
in its native Purity, and Simplicity, has not been at all agreeable to the Gust
of, curious Projectors: And hence Work enough has been found for the fruitful
Inventions of Men, that they might mix some Ingredients to make it more
palatable; either from a Pretense of Order, Unity, and Decency; or to
accommodate it to the Temper of the People; or to promote the Schemes of
Politicians. King JAMES the first from political Views, had a great Fondness
for the episcopal Form of Church Government. It was his darling Maxim, no
Bishop, no King. But another (who was so far from being a Puny in Politics,
that he placed himself at the Head of three Kingdoms, and caused himself to be
worshipped, not only among, but even by the Gods of the Earth) had a very
different View, he thought it was absurd, and dangerous to set up Imperium in
Imperio; a Form of Government in the Church, to rival that of the State. But I
imagine they were both very wrong, in making Religion the Creature of the
State, when it ought to have be'n the Pillar, and Foundation of it. For the
christian Religion does not depend upon the capricious Fancies of States men;
or the Refinements of Politicians; (for if so, it would be as fluctuating as
the Waves of the Sea) but it is, what it is, a glorious Scheme of Salvation,
contrived, and instituted by infinite Wisdom, in all the Parts of it; to
promote the Glory of its divine Author, and the present Peace, and everlasting
Happiness of Men.

There is a resplendent Glory, that Shines round the christian Religion; so
that it is all glorious without; as well as all glorious within. The Angels
behold it with humble Admiration, though men, ungrateful Men treat it as an old
fashioned thing without Form, and Comeliness. But as counterfeit Colors, how
artfully soever laid on, would tarnish, and deface an exquisite natural Beauty;
so all the Ornaments, and Decorations that have be'n, or can be contrived, to
make Christ's Institutions more decent, and fashionable; serve to no other
Purpose, but to hide their true Beauty, and Glory; and to show the Presumption,
and distempered Imaginations of the Authors and Contrivers of them. And indeed,
it would be a bold Invasion of Christ's Kingly Office, and a daring Impeachment
of his Wisdom, to pretend to make any Amendments in his Ordinances, let the
Pretense be ever so Specious. In these things then, we must call no Man Master
on Earth, for one is our Master, even (...), and we must stand fast in the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and not be entangled with the Yoke
of Bondage. When we do whatsoever Christ has commanded, we are in a state of
Liberty; but when we are so beguiled as to Submit our Necks to the Yoke of
human Impositions, in the Worship of GOD, as our Worship will be so far a vain
Worship; so we shall oe in Bondage to Men, who may without End, make one
indifferent Thing Necessary, as well as another. The same transubstantiating
Power, that can change the Nature of one indifferent thing can another, until
all the Fopperies of the Church of Rome, will become necessary Gospel
Ordinances. In a Word then, whatsoever Christ has required of us, either by the
Law of Nature, or by his Written Word, ought to be a Part of our Religion; but
whatsoever is more than these comes of evil; and therefore indifferent things
ought to remain as they are, without any Stamp of human Authority to give them
a Currency. This is (I think) the only firm Foundation, on which the Peace, and
Purity of the Church can be Built.

3. The Magistrate has no Right by Virtue of his Office, to intermeddle with
the Discipline of the Church. As Christ is the only King in his Church, He has
appointed a different Order of Men to be Officers therein: And he has committed
unto them the Key of Discipline, as well as the Key of Doctrine. All therefore
that would live Godly in Christ Jesus, are required to obey them who have the
Rule over them, and submit themselves* for they watch for their Souls as they
that must give Account. CHRIST's Kingdom is not a Worldly, but a Spiritual
Kingdom, set up in the Hearts, and Consciences of Men; and all his true
Subjects are a willing People: And no external Force, or Violence is to be used
with Men to keep them within the Church, any more than to bring them in. But
when Discipline (which is a Spiritual Thing,) has been used with such as are
guilty of Heresy, or Scandal, for their spiritual Good, and the Good of others;
for Edification, and not for Destruction; if after all, the unbelieving depart,
let them depart, and remain as Heathen Men and Publicans. If they should be
brot to a Submission, by Fines, and Imprisonments, it would be an Argument of
their Hypocrisy; but not of their Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore such a forced Submission, would in no wife
qualify them for Communion with the Church of CHRIST. But these things being
premised, I proceed to say; that there are many things notwithstanding, that
ought to be done by civil Rulers by Virtue of their Office, to promote Religion.

For,

(1) They ought to publicly own and Support the christian Religion, in such a
Way as they think, (according to the best Light they can get from the Word of
GOD) to be most agreeable to the Mind, and Will of the great Governor of the
World; and therefore would best answer the Ends of Government. There is a great
Difference between a Toleration, and an Establishment. Every Religion that
don't disturb the civil Peace ought to be tolerated, but not established, and
supported at the public Charge. But as the christian Religion ought to be
owned, and professed by all Men, so it should be established and supported by
public Authority. The glory of GOD, and the good of Society, as well as the
eternal Salvation of the Souls of Men; make it evident that such a pure and
merciful Religion, which was published by the Son of GOD, ought to be publicly
received with due Deference, and Respect; and not be put upon a Level with mere
Heathenism. But if civil Rulers have nothing to do to provide for the Support
of Religion, but every Man must be allowed to act in this Case, as his own
Prejudice, or Avarice may incline him; what can they do by virtue of their
Office, to show their Respect to the Christian Religion more than to mere
Heathenism? And how can Rulers answer the Character that is given of Christian
Magistrates, in the Word of GOD; if they are not to provide for the Support of
Religion? Don't we read, that kings should be Nursing Fathers, and Queens
should be Nursing Mothers, to the Church, and People of GOD, under the Gospel
Dispensation?

But then, the religious Establishment ought to be founded upon such a broad
Bottom, and understood in such a Latitude, that all good Christians
notwithstanding their different Sentiments, may receive Benefit by it. Men may
be sincere Christians, and therefore very useful Members of the political Body;
though they may be mistaken with Respect to some circumstantial things in
Religion: They may build Wood, Hay, and Stubble, (as the Apostle expresses it)
upon the true Foundation. In this Case the Law of Charity, (which is in a
peculiar Manner the Law of Christ) requires us to bear one another Burdens,
and receive one another, as Christ also receives us. Uniformity in all the
Externals of Religion, would be very desirable, if we could all think alike;
but as this is not to be expected in this present State of Imperfection; a Law
of Comprehension, would be much more agreeable to the Design of the christian
Religion, (which is to unite Men to Christ by Faith, and to one another by
Charity) than a Law of strict Uniformity, whereby Men must be obliged to act
alike, whatever their Thoughts are. And therefore as the Terms of Christianity,
and Nothing else, ought to be the Terms of Communion in the Church of Christ;
so the Religion of CHRIST, and Nothing else, ought to be established under the
Notion of Religion in a christian State. And as all christian Churches have a
Right to Judge for themselves, what are the Terms of Christianity, and
therefore what Qualifications are necessary in their own Members; so the
Legislature of every christian State, have a right to judge what is the
Religion of CHRIST, and what Principles, and Practices may justly exclude Men
from the Privileges of a religious Establishment. For if every Man ought to
have the Liberty of private Judgment, then every Community ought to have the
Liberty of public Judgment: The Legislature ought to have as much Liberty of
Conscience to think for themselves, what will be for the public good, as every
Man ought to have; that he may think for himself what will be for his own good.
And therefore it will follow, that if the Legislature must be obliged to
receive Men as Christians, (who profess a Religion that tends to the best good
of the State) when they believe in their Conscience, that their professed
Principles, and Practices, are inconsistant with Christianity, and so with the
good of the State; they have no Liberty of Conscience: And upon the same
Supposition, there could be no Discipline in the Church, nor any Religion at
all established, and supported in the State; but every Man must be left to his
own Fancy, or Humor, and be entitled to equal Authority, and equal Privileges
with others, let him be an Atheist, or a Deist, a Papist, or an Heathen, any
Thing, or Nothing. And indeed upon this Supposition, there could be no such
thing as a christian State, unless there may be a Christian State, that do'n't
(as such,) profess the christian Religion. But upon the whole, as the religious
Establishment, ought to be founded upon charitable Principles, otherwise it
would not be Suited to the Temper of the Gospel; so they who don't think fit to
comply with it, ought to lead a quiet, and peaceable Life, and be contented
with a Toleration. And they not think it hard, if they are obliged to bear a
Part in the public Charges, that are thought necessary by the proper Judges to
promote the good of the Public; for in the Peace thereof, they themselves shall
have Peace. Again,

(2.) They who are in Authority, ought to take care of the public Worship of
GOD, and oblige all that are under their Government, to steadily, and orderly
attend upon his public Worship, in some way, and manner agreeable to their
Profession; when they have the Advantage, and Opportunity for it. It is absurd,
to speak of allowing Atheists Liberty of Conscience. Because he who professes
himself to be an Atheist, at the same Time professes that he has no Conscience.
For what Conscience can a Man have; who believes there is no GOD, no moral
Obligations, no future Rewards, and Punishments? But whatever Men Profess with
their Mouths, their refusing to worship GOD in Public, is a practical
Profession of Atheism. For although there have been some, who have so far sunk
into Brutality as to deny the Being, and Perfections of GOD; Yet there never
were any that did believe the Being of a GOD, of infinite Perfections, and at
the same Time believe that he ought not to be Worshipped. And as GOD has
appointed one Day in Seven, for his more immediate Worship, and Service, due
care should be taken by civil Rulers, that the Christian Sabbath be not
Profaned. Experience shows, that a due Sanctification of the Lord's Day, has a
mighty Influence upon the Manners of the People; and that all practical
Religion, will stand, or fall according as it is observed.

I add,

(3.) Every Word, and every Action, that in an open and profane Manner,
discovers a Contempt of GOD, and Religion, is an Iniquity that ought to be
punished by the Judge. Not only vile Swearers, who set their Mouth against the
Heavens; and profane Despisers of GOD, who in a way of Defiance, call upon
their Maker, to exert his Almighty Power in the Damnation of themselves, and
others; but even Scoffers, who make a mock of Sacred Things, ought to be
treated as Enemies to GOD, and human Society. Religion is a very serious Thing,
and it would be very unchristian, as well as uncivil, to Mock and Deride Men
for their religious Principles, and Practices, supposing them to be wrong:
instead of this, we ought to pity them, and pray for them, and use proper
Methods to convince them of their Mistakes. But as the christian Religion will
certainly stand its Ground, if it may have a fair Trial at the Bar of Reason,
and is publicly owned as the Religion of the State; no Man ought to be allowed
with Impunity to treat it in a flouting, and scoffing Manner. And the like may
be said with respect to the Rule of our Faith, the Holy Scriptures; and the
Ordinances of Religion; which are sometimes treated with such railing
Accusations, as Michael the Archangel would not bring against the Devil
himself. This Method has be'n the principal Engine that has be'n made use of,
to batter down the Bulwarks of our Faith, and to propagate Infidelity. Tho I
hope this has not been so common among us, as in some other Places; but if the
Floodgates should be set open, or the Banks should be removed, what can we
expect, but to be deluged with a Flood of Impiety? And,

(4.) Civil Rulers should use all proper Endeavors to strengthen the Hands,
and encourage the Hearts, of the Ministers of Religion. Thus King Hezekiah,
spoke comfortably to all the Levites, that taught the good Knowledge of the
Lord. The magisterial, and ministerial Authority, are very different, in their
Nature, and Kind; but yet instead of rivaling one another, when they are duly
improved, they will be very helpful; and subservient each to the other. Thus
God led his People like a Flock, by the Hand of Moses, and Aaron. The civil,
and ecclesiastical Authority, were united in promoting the good of that People.
If Ministers are faithful, and successful, they will be greatly Instrumental to
preserve the Peace of the State, and to promote the Honor, and Obedience which
the People owe to their Rulers. For the more real Success they have in their
Work, the more Conscientious People will be, to discharge every Duty, in every
Relation of Life, that they may render to all their Dues: Tribute to whom
Tribute is due; Custom to whom Custom; Fear to whom Fear; Honor to whom
Honor. And therefore good Policy, as well as the express Command, and
Ordination of Christ, requires that they should be Encouraged, and Supported.

I trust we are not seeking great things for ourselves: We are not in the
Pursuit of Riches, nor worldly Promotions. We don't want the Assistance of the
secular Arm, that we may lord it over God's Heritage; Nor do we desire to make
the civil Magistrate, the Instrument of our religious Vengeance, to oblige Men
to submit to our Dictates. No; all that we desire is, that we may be
considered, (as we always have be'n) upon the Account of our Office, as useful,
and necessary Members of the Community; and that as such, we may be enabled to
lead a quiet and a peaceable Life, not in Pomp, and Luxury, but in the humble
and decent Exercise of our Ministry, which calls for all our Time and Talents.
Again,

(5.) Civil Rulers ought to provide, Support, and regulate the proper Means of
Education; that there may be a Succession of well qualified Men in the Sacred
Ministry. Schools, and Colleges for the Education of Youth, are necessary that
Men may be fitted for public Offices in the State; (as I observed) but they are
more especially necessary that Men may be fitted for the Service of the
Sanctuary. We that are now on the Stage of Action are going off; and must not
continue by Reason of Death: The Eyes of them who now see us, in a little Time
must see us no more. And it would give us a very gloomy Prospect, if we had
Reason to think, that when our heads are laid, our People will be led, (as one
expressed it,) by dark Lanthorns, or erratic Fires.

There are some (we know,) who despise Learning, and speak of Colleges with the
utmost Contempt. But if Ignorance be such a precious thing, as to be the Mother
of Devotion in the Church of Rome; yet it is not the most necessary
Qualification in a Gospel Minister; who according to the Direction of the
Apostle, must give himself to Reading, that he may be apt to teach; able to
instruct others; and able to resist Gainsayers.

It was Jeroboam's Sin, that he made Priests of the meanest of the People. And
Julian the Apostate; that he might destroy Christianity, endeavored to
Suppress Learning among the Christians, as much as lay in his Power. Socrat.
Hist. ecclesiast. Lib. 2. Cap. 13.


But as Learning is not the only necessary Qualification for the Gospel
Ministry, therefore Colleges, and Schools of Learning should be kept under,
such religious Regulations, that they may be Nursuries of Virtue, and true
Religion. For if these Fountains are poisoned with Error, or corrupted with
Vice, what can we expect of the Streams that are to water the Sanctuary?

(6.) Civil Rulers of the highest Rank, ought to employ Men that are friendly
to Religion, in subordinate Places of Power, and Trust. Men of corrupt
Principles, subversive of the Religion of the State; or that are irreligious in
their Behavior, are unfit to be employed in Places of Power, and Trust. Men
who have no Self-Government, should not be set to govern others. David's
Conduct in this Case, was agreeable to the Character of a good Politician, as
well as of a good Man Mine Eyes, says he, shall be upon the Faithful of the
Land, that they may dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect Way, he shall
serve me. And the Advice that Jethro gave Moses, made his Name to become better
than precious Ointment: Thou shall Provide, says he, out of all the People,
able Men, such as fear GOD, Men of Truth, hating Covetousness, and place such
over them. I shall add but once more,

(7.) Civil Rulers should endeavor to promote Religion by an unblemished,
exemplary Conversation. Examples operate in a Way that is hard to describe, but
yet they have a very powerful Influence upon others, and especially the
Examples of Men of high Rank and Dignity. If the Sins of Rulers go before hand
to Judgment; if they show a Contempt of GOD, and Religion, and live in the
Indulgence of fleshly Lusts; their Examples will be a Destruction that will
wast at Noonday; and they themselves instead of being Lights in the World,
will be no better than an Ignis fatuus, a false Blaze, to bewilder others in
the Darkness of the Night; until they go out in utter Darkness, and their
deluded Followers stumble upon the dark Mountains. But on the other Hand, when
they become bright Examples of undissembled Piety, and of all that is truly
great, and good; they will appear as burning and shining Lights, to revive, and
cherish Religion in others. And as their Lights thus shine before Men, others
seeing their good Works, will glorify their Heavenly Father.

But I proceed to make some Improvement of my Subject. And,

I. We may learn from what has be'n observed, that it ought to be the great
Care, and Concern of them who are in Authority in this Community; to suppress,
or remove every thing that is hurtful to Religion among us. That there are many
abounding Iniquities among us, we cannot but be Sensible, notwithstanding the
many Means that have be'n used to promote a Reformation. Good Laws have be'n
enacted, Days of Fasting, and Humiliation, have be'n observed, and these things
have be'n testified against by them who are set as Watchmen, and required to
cry aloud, and lift up their Voice like a Trumpet. And what has been the Event?
Are we now a reformed People? A People devoted to the Service of GOD? No; but
our Transgressions are multiplied, and our Iniquities testify against us, and
forebode the severe Rebukes of a Sin-revenging GOD. We may look for Salvation;
but what Reason have we to expect, but that it will be far from us, unless our
Repentance prevent our Ruin? And is there nothing further to be done by our
Rulers, and Guides in this deplorable Case? Must they now come to that sad
Conclusion; let him that is unjust be unjust still; and let him that is filthy
be filthy still?

But notwithstanding there are so many GOD-provoking Sins to be found in our
Skirts; I don't Suspect that we are Sinners above all Men that dwell in New
England; unless it be in one Instance, and how that is God knows. But I greatly
fear, (I tremble to Speak it!) I greatly fear, that the Sin of false Swearing,
is more common among us than many People imagine. An enormous Crime! The Weight
of a Mountain of Lead, would be no more than a Feather, in Comparison of that
Load of Guilt that lies upon the Souls of such Men, as do in the most explicit
Manner, renounce the Mercy, and imprecate the Vengeance of that Almighty Being
to whom Vengeance belongs! The very Heathen by the Light of Nature, were taught
the Religion of an Oath; and looked upon Perjury as a Sin of the deepest Dye.
Machiavel in one of his Discourses upon the first Decad of Livy; says that
whoever will peruse the extraordinary Actions of the City of Rome collectively;
or of several Romans in particular; will find that they were more tender of
falsifying an Oath, than of violating the Laws; judging an Offense against God,
more heinous than an Offense against Men; and God more able to punish it. And
to the same Purpose Cicero, Our Ancestors (says he) could never find out any
thing stronger than an Oath, to bind us to the faithful Discharge of what we
had engaged. Diodorus Siculus (Lib. 1. c. 77) relates of the Egyptians; that by
their Laws, Persons that had forsworn themselves, were Adjudged to capital
Punishments, as guilty of the two greatest Crimes, in violating that Piety they
owed to God, and destroying Faith from amongst Men, the strongest Pillar of
human Society. See a Pamphlet entitled the Nature and Importance of Oaths and
Juries.


But though I charitably believe, there are but few that would dare to call the
great and everliving GOD to witness, to the truth of what they know to be
false: These are abandoned Sinners, whose Consciences are seared as with an hot
Iron: Yet have we not Reason to fear, that there are too many, that bring
themselves under the Obligations of a promissary Oath; who but little consider,
that God will not be mocked? But as Sermons upon these Occasions, are not
designed for mere Parade, and Show; I would with Suitable Deference to the
Legislature, humbly propose it to their Consideration; whether some petty
Offices might not be discharged as well without the solemnity of an Oath? Or
whether the levying a Fine, upon such as are Unfaithful might not be as
effectual to secure their Fidelity? An Oath is a very solemn thing, and ought
not to be trifled with, and there is infinite Danger in these Cases, that too
great Familiarity may breed Contempt. Nothing has raised the Character of the
present King of Prussia more among foreign Nations, or rendr'd him more a
Father to his People; than the Reformation that he has made, in the Laws of his
Country, and in the Courts of Justice. I shall transcribe one Passage out of a
Letter from Berlin, (dated March 11th, 1755,) which is to my Purpose. The King
has provided, that the Sacredness of Oaths, which the Law admits only as an
extreme Remedy, to come at the Truth, do not degenerate into a public Abuse; by
too lightly multiplying Oaths, the criminal Custom of which, brings the Wrath
of God upon States. The Publisher of this Letter remarks satyrically enough,
that his Countrymen (the English) need not take notice of any thing said in it;
no not even of the Abuse of Oaths; since some Folks are so wise, as to think
the Revenue cannot be collected without that dangerous Expedient. See N. York
Gazette, N. 644*
.

And I would beg Leave to propose further, whether in the Oath commonly called
the Freemans Oath, sufficient Allowance is made for the Weakness, and
Infirmities of Human Nature; in some of the Expressions of it. The Judges (it
is true,) are as much bound by their Oath, not to show Favor to any Man in the
Execution of their Office; as the Freemen are in giving their Vote. But then it
may be considered, 1st, That the mobile Vulgus, the unthinking Part of Mankind,
are no more fit to take the Judges Oath, than to execute the Office. 2dly, The
Law makes allowance for the Infirmities of human Nature, in the Case of Judges,
and discharges them from setting in Judgment, when they are under visible
Temptations to break their Oath. But in this Case a man may Vote for himself,
or his nearest Relations. And 3rdly, Severe Penalties ar^ provided by the Law
to Guard the Oath of Judges that it may not be violated. And our History will
furnish us, with a Number of Instances of Judges, who have be'n severely
punished, for not executing their Office according to their Oath. But in this
Case Men may give their Vote for the greatest Knaves in the Country, and for
the most dangerous Enemies to the State, without any Fear of Punishment from
Men.


I make no Question, but that Oaths may be necessary in some Cases to secure
the Government; tho Experience shows, they are not so great a Security as might
be reasonably expected. Trajan the roman Emperor was very sensible of this; and
being conscious of his own good Intentions; instead of taking an Oath, as usual
of the Captain of the Pretorian Guards; when he delivered the Sword to him; he
said, Draw this for me if I deserve it, otherwise draw it against me.

But tho they are necessary, in some Cases, (as I observed;) yet (it appears to
me,) they ought to be so expressed that every honest Man that is a Friend to
the Government, may take them without any Scruple of Conscience; and that every
honest Man that does take them, may freely act upon them, without having any
Uneasiness in his Mind afterward. As in the Marriage Covenant, it is thought
sufficient for the Man to Swear, that he will be a loving, and a faithful
Husband; but if he should proceed further, and Swear that he would never treat
his Wise with any Unkindness, in any one Instance, notwithstanding any
Temptations, or Provocations that he might meet with; it would be a very
unadvised Oath. How far this is applicable in the present Case, I shall leave
to the Judgment of my Superiors: But with Submission, I would make this Remark;
if it be found upon due Inquiry, that there are some Expressions, that are too
strong for the present state of Weakness, and Depravity that we are in; and so
become an Occasion of laying wast Men's Consciences, they ought no Doubt to be
altered. A Medicine may be very good, and very proper to cure a Disease; but
yet if the State of the Patient be'nt duly considered, it may prove present
Death; instead of a Relief. I know that our worthy Ancestors had a good End, in
forming the Oath as it now stands: And Moses had a good End too, in making the
brazen Serpent, he did it by the divine Command, and it was the Medium by which
GOD dispensed a miraculous Mercy to his People; and it was moreover; A special
Type of the great Redeemer of the World; and yet when it became the Occasion of
the Peoples Sinning against GOD, the good King Hezekiah break it in Pieces, and
called it Nehushtan; i. e. A brazen thing by way of Contempt. And if Perjury is
become common among us, by the Occasion of this Oath, and the Legislature use
no Endeavors to prevent it; the Community as such, are involved in the Guilt
of it, and may expect the heavy Judgments of GOD. This is a Sin that will cause
the Land to mourn: for how can we expect but that GOD will curse our Blessings,
if we don't endeavor to purge out such an accursed thing from our Tents? As
there is a GOD that judges in the Earth, He will surely vindicate the Honor
of his Name. We find Instances in Scripture of Public Judgments, that were
inflicted upon a whole Nation upon the Account of this Sin. In the Days of
David GOD sent a Famine three Years, year after Year, because under the Conduct
of Saul, they had violated the Oath, that their Fathers made to the Gibeonites,
above two Hundred Years before. And afterward by breaking the Oath, that their
profane Prince made in their Behalf to the King of Babylon, they filled up the
Measure of their Iniquities, and their Land was left desolate.

When this Sin becomes common among a People, and is connived at, it is in vain
for them to expect that the LORD will be their GOD. Will ye (says GOD by the
Mouth of his Prophet) -- Swear falsely -- and come and stand before me, in this
House that is called by my Name!

But I shall add but one Remark further upon this head, and that is, that if
ever this Case required the Attention of the Legislature, without Doubt it does
now; as there are so many Persons, that have their Minds so much ruffled, with
Prejudice, and Passion, that they appear to be utterly incapable to act with
that Seriousness, and Solemnity that they ought to do, when they have given
their Souls as a Pledge, to be disposed of by Him who judges righteously,
according as they observe their Oath; and when they are in such amazing Danger,
of treasuring up to themselves Wrath, against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation
of the righteous Judgment of GOD.

But, whether it be thought, that what I have Suggested, proceeds from a well
regulated Zeal, or from an overheated Imagination; I have this to say, I have
no worse Motive (that I know of;) than a compassionate Concern for the Souls of
Men, and an hearty Regard to the best good of the Community; and I pray GOD
that all that are under the Obligations of this, or any other Oath, may duly
consider, that the Judge stands before the Door; and that the Time is
approaching, when GOD will certainly distinguish, between him that Swears,
and him that fears an Oath; and that he will not hold him guiltless that
takes his Name in Vain.

But,

II. If civil Rulers in their political Capacity, ought to use their sincere
Endeavors to promote Religion, we may then learn, what inviolable Obligations
the Ministers of Religion, are under to devote themselves wholly to the Service
of it. Religion ought to be the direct, and immediate Object of our Concern, as
Ministers of CHRIST, and Stewards of the Mysteries of GOD. We are employed in
this Work, that we may be the Means of enlarging the Redeemer's Kingdom, and of
making ready a People prepared for the LORD.

As it pleases GOD by the Foolishness of Preaching, to Save them that believe;
we must warn every Man, and teach every Man, in all Wisdom, that we may present
every Man, Perfect in CHRIST JESUS. Our Work is great, and of vast Importance
to the Souls of Men: To some we are a savor of Life, unto Life; and to others
a savor of Death, unto Death; and who is sufficient for these things?

May GOD give us a due Sense of the Importance of our Work, the Worth of
precious and immortal Souls, and the great account that we must give of our
Stewardship.

And may we have Grace, that we may be found faithful, that the Blessings of
Souls ready to perish may come upon us; and when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, may we receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

Again,

III. From what we have heard, we may learn that as good Rulers are a great
Blessing, we ought to be thankful to GOD for them, discharge the Duties, we owe
to them, and suitably improve the Advantages we enjoy under them. Good Rulers
are decyphered in the divine Oracles, by such significant Expressions, as
convey a very grand, and sublime Idea, of their great Usefulness. They are
called Lights to comfort, and direct the political Body; Shields to protect,
and defend it; Nursing Fathers to provide for it; and the very Breath of our
Nostrils, to preserve its Life, and Vigor. And the very Light of Nature, as
well as the Word of GOD, makes it evident, that there are correspondent Duties,
that Subjects owe to their Rulers. Instead of being Murmurers and Complainers;
Instead of reviling the Gods, and speaking evil of the Rulers of our People;
Instead of listening to the groundless Surmises, and evil Reports of designing
Men; instead of being fickle, and given to Change, like Weather-cocks, that
turn with every Breath of Wind, until they wear themselves out, with their own
Motion: (the Bane of popular States!) I say instead of these things, we ought
with the most unfeigned Gratitude, to pay our Vows to the Father of Mercies;
for the Provision that He has made for our Peace, and Safety, under them who
naturally care for our State.

We ought to Honor our Rulers, and esteem them very highly in Love, for their
Works Sake. Support them honorably, according to their Character, that neither
their Persons, nor Office may be despised: Submit to their just and legal
Authority: Defend their Persons, and good Names, against all the Assaults of
Malice and Envy: And lastly fervently pray for them to the God of all Grace,
that they may be blessed with all the Blessings of his Grace, and Goodness, and
that they may be to us, as the Light of the Morning when the Sun rises, even a
Morning without Clouds: As the tender Grass springing out of the Earth by clear
Shining after Rain. And the best Improvement, we can make of the Advantages we
enjoy under them is, to lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness, and
Honesty.

But to conclude; let us all endeavor to do the Work of the Day, while the Day
lasts; and to serve our Generation in our various Stations, by the Will of GOD
before we fall on Sleep.

GOD has distinguished us above any other People, by the innumerable temporal,
and spiritual Blessings, and Privileges that we enjoy. Our Air is healthful to
breathe in, and our Soil is sufficiently Fruitful, to liberally reward the
diligent Husbandman, and Supply us with all the Necessaries, and most of the
Conveniences of Life. Our civil Privileges are so great, as to make us the
Envy, (not to say of our Enemies,) but even of our Neighbors. Our Laws, are
very well calculated to secure our Lives, and Properties, and to reward the
good, and punish the bad. Our Rulers were born, and educated among our selves,
and have no foreign Attachments, to counteract the Love of their Country; no
Separate Interests to draw off their Attention from the good of the public. And
indeed, we shall be guilty of inexcusable Ingratitude, if we don't freely
acknowledge, that the Government has be'n served from Time, to Time, by Men of a
public Spirit, and of great Wisdom, and Probity. So that instead of having the
Bramble to rule over us, to scratch and tear us, (as in Jotham's Parable,) we
have sat under the Shadow, of the spreading and fruitful Vine.

Our Ministers are learned, and orthodox, and have supported their Character,
by their evangelical Preaching, and by the Regularity of their Lives; as well
(to speak Modestly) as any such Number of Men of their Order, in any Part of
the World. So that our Zion, does not set Solitary, stretching forth her Hands
and looking until her Eyes fail, for some to relieve her from beyond the Seas;
for her own Sons stand ready to comfort her and take her by the Hand.

Our religious Constitution is very good, if not in all Respects perfect; and
is well fitted to preserve religious Liberty, Unity, and good Order amongst the
Ministers, and Churches of Christ: And one of the peculiar Excellencies of it
is, that Men may differ in Opinion about some circumstantial things in
Religion, and yet be owned as united Brethren.

We are watered with the Rains and Dews of GOD's Ordinances, administered
according to their Original Institution; that in them we may see CHRIST, as
though evidently set forth as Crucified before our Eyes. And GOD has very often
appeared for us, in a very signal Manner in the Way of his Providence; and be'n
as a Wall of Fire round about us.

Surely we have Reason to say, on this Day of the Gladness of our Hearts, how
precious are thy Thoughts unto us O God! How great is the Sum of them! when we
count them over, they are more in Number than the Sand which is upon the Sea
Shore, and when we awake we are still with thee. The Lines are fallen unto us
in pleasant Places, and we have a goodly Heritage! O how happy should we be, if
we did but know our own Happiness! What can make us unhappy, if we don't make
ourselves so? And now what shall we render to God for all his Benefits? Should
not the Mercies of God excite us, to present not only our Bodies, but even our
Souls as living sacrifices, holy and acceptable unto God? Can we content
ourselves with a mere Form of Godliness, while we deny the Power of it? Can we
satisfy ourselves one Moment, without a good hope through Grace that we have laid
the Foundation of a religious Life, by a saying Conversion to GOD, in a way of
Humiliation, and Faith in a glorious Redeemer? And can we rejoice in this Hope,
unless we have the Testimony of our own Conscience, that in Simplicity, and
godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom; but by the Grace of God, we have our
Conversation in the World? We may value ourselves very much upon our
Privileges, and upon our Profession; but we should consider, that it is a Truth
that will remain more firm, and unshaken, than the Pillars of Hea^^^, or the
Foundation of the Earth, that without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord.

We ought to be greatly concerned about the Sins of others, and even mourn in
Secret Places, that there are so many Land-defiling Sins, that break in upon
us, like a Flood: And as GOD's Hand is now lifted up, and he is showing us the
Rod of his Anger, our Flesh might well tremble for fear of GOD, and we might be
afraid of his Judgments.

But however GOD may deal with us as a People, or as a Community, it infinitely
concerns every one of us in particular, to know the Plague of our own Hearts
and to mourn over our own past Sins; and to fly for Refuge, to lay hold on the
Hope set before us. We are all hastening to that Place, from whence we shall
never return, and we have something to do, of greater Importance, than to blow
Feathers about in the Air. We may live in Jest, but we must die in earnest; and
there is no trifling in Heaven, or Hell. There is an awful Seriousness, that
may be observed in all the Parts of the visible Creation. Every thing (Man
excepted,) tends to promote the great End for which it was made; and all things
with one united Voice, call upon us to be serious, and work out our own
Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Through the infinite Patience, and
Long-suffering of GOD, we have yet an accepted Time, and a Day of Salvation,
let it therefore suffice us, that we have spent so much of our Time, either in
the vain Amusements, or criminal Indulgences of a sensual Life, and let us
endeavor to press forward, toward the Mark for the Prize, of the high Calling
of God in Christ Jesus: That we may finally receive the End of our Faith, the
Salvation of our Souls.

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling; and to present you
faultless, before the presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy; to the only
wise God our Savior, be Glory, and Majesty, Dominion and Power; both now, and
ever,

AMEN.
THis Colony having Ordered the Election Sermon preached this Year, to be
printed, (other Election Sermons for more than 40 years before, year after year
having been printed) this is to give Notice, a number of all said Sermons
(excepting when 2 or 3 Copies could not be obtained) are bound in 4 Volumes,
(length and breadth of their pages being alike, an Instance in all the American
Colonies, it is supposed cannot be produced like to this,) Sold at the
Printing House in New London.


