OBSERVATIONS On the late and present Conduct of the French, WITH Regard to
their Encroachments upon the British Colonies in North America. TOGETHER With
REMARKS on the Importance of these Colonies to Great Britain.

To which is added, wrote by another Hand; OBSERVATIONS concerning the Increase
of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND in Queen Street, 1755.

To His EXCELLENCY WILLIAM SHIRLEY, Esquire Governor in Chief and Captain General
of His MAJESTY'S Province of the Massachusetts Bay; and Major General in his
Land Forces, etc.
SIR,
AS the professed Design of the following Observations is to show the great
Value and Importance of the British Colonies in North America, and the unjust
Encroachments of the French upon his Majesty's Territories there, they can be
addressed to no One with so much Propriety as to your EXCELLENCY, who has so
largely contributed to explain and enforce the one, and to oppose and prevent
the other.

With your Views fixed to the British Interest in these Respects, it would be
extremely difficult, if not impossible, to describe the incessant Labors, you
have gone through, while you had the Weight of three Expeditions at once upon
you; that of Nova Scotia, twice before relieved and maintained by your Succors
and Vigilance; of Crown-Point, so absolutely necessary to secure the Friendship
and Fidelity of the Six Nations; and of Niagara, the Key of the Entrance into
the great Lakes, and of the French Communication with the Missisippi; for the
successful Execution of which last Expedition, you are now hazarding your
Person.

You will permit me, Sir, to say, that it is very much owing to your
Representations, that the Interest of these Plantations is made the great
Object of the Attention of their Mother Country, and that Spirit raised, which
so happily prevails in Great Britain, for their Preservation from the
destructive Schemes of the French.

The Wisdom of your Councils, and the Integrity of your Conduct, always
employed for the general Welfare of these Colonies, have gained you a
Confidence through them all; without which the best concerted Plans would be
ineffectual in our present Circumstances. In Consequence of this, the Northern
Governments so speedily raised the large Number of Troops now gone upon the
Expedition against Crown-Point; and your own Province those Troops, which in
Conjunction with a Number of his Majesty's Forces there, have already
dispossessed the French at Nova Scotia of all their Forts in that Province,
having again exerted that noble Spirit, which heretofore called forth by you,
compelled Louisbourg to surrender, and gave Peace to Europe.

I might add, as a Reason of this Address, my Personal Attachment, founded upon
a long Knowledge of your superior Abilities, your Learning, Humanity and
Politeness, and every benevolent Affection, that render your private Character
amiable; but I wave this for public Considerations, your Regard to which you
esteem your first Felicity, and think none of your Talents deserving of any
Estimation, in Comparison with those, which you employ for the Benefit of
Mankind.

May Success, under the Protection of the Divine Providence, attend your
Enterprise upon Niagara, by reducing which, and securing that important Pass,
may you be the Instrument of securing to Great Britain, the Dominion of the
Lakes and rich Countries beyond the Apalachian Mountains: And by cutting off
the French from their ambituous Schemes, may you lay the Foundation of a
lasting Peace. This may you soon see, and continue long to enjoy, and by
cultivating the Arts thereof, adorn that Country, which you shall have saved by
your Councils and Arms.

I am with the utmost Regard Your EXCELLENCY'S most obedient humble Servant,
William Clarke.

PREFACE
THE Observations on the late and present Conduct of the French etc. were wrote
toward the latter End of the last Year; but the Publication of them has been
unavoidably deferred 'till this Time; they might have been more seasonable when
they were first wrote, but it is hoped that even now they will not be entirely
without their Use.

The Author's Design did not lead him to ascertain the precise Boundaries of
the English and French Territories in North America, nor yet to lay any Plan
for driving the French from their late and present Encroachments upon the
British ones, much less to make any long Deductions from the Facts he has laid
down.

His only View was, in the most concise Manner, consistent with Perspicuity, to
show, that the French had made many unwarrantable Encroachments upon the
British Territories in North America, contrary to the Treaty of Utrecht and
Aix-la-Chapelle; that if they were suffered to go on, or but feebly opposed,
they would greatly distress the British Colonies, and in Time become absolute
Masters of them all; and finally to show from the State of the Colonies with
Relation to Great Britain, how far she her self would be affected by such a
Change of Dominion in North America.

The great Armament the French have fitted out since that Time, and sent hither
at such a vast Expense, confirm the Observations upon the Plan of the French
Court with Regard to this Part of the World, and the near Approaches they have
made to the actual Execution of a great Part of it, and are a convincing Proof
of the Danger, to which these Colonies must be always exposed, from the
boundless Ambition of that Court, unless a watchful and constant Attention be
given to all their Motions by the Crown of Great Britain.

If this Attention had not been given at this Juncture, Nova Scotia, now more
than ever secured to the Crown of Great Britain, would before this Time have
been in the Hands of the French. Of what fatal Consequence that would have been
not only to the rest of his Majesty's Colonies in North America, but to
Great Britain it self, enough is said in the following Pages. Neither is it to
be imagined, that we are altogether free from Danger from that Part of the
Squadron that has escaped the Vigilance of Admiral BO^CAWEN: Though indeed
their Grand Scheme seems to be broke by the seasonable Arrival of the English
Squadron upon this Coast.

Great Part of these Observations are taken from Memorials and other Papers of
his Excellency Governor SHIRLEY, which he was so kind as to put into the
Author's Hands; neither has he made less free with any other Papers he could
get into his Possession.

The first Part of a Treatise upon the present State of North America, lately
published in London, wrote with the greatest Perspicuity, Judgment and Spirit,
(for which every Englishman is greatly obliged to the ingenious Author) did not
come into my Hands, till the greatest Part of this was printed off. Had I (...)
it before, it would have induced me, in some Measure to have altered my Plan.
But though the Author has greatly superseded me, by exactly ascertaining the
Boundaries of the British and French Territories in North America, and by
giving an Account of the more early Encroachments of the French upon the
British Rights and Possessions, and going into many other Things beyond my
Design (which I was in some such able Hand would do) I still flatter my self
the following Observations may have some good Effect toward promoting the
British Interest.

The Observations concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries
etc. were wrote some Years ago, but the ingenious Author would never suffer
them to be made public till now, when he has been prevailed upon to consent
to it by some of his Friends, who thought the Publication of them would be of
general Benefit and Advantage.

OBSERVATIONS on the late and present Conduct of the French, in NORTHAMERICA.
THE late and present Conduct of the French in North America, is now very
justly become the Object of Attention of the British Nation. They are sensible
that their unjustifiable Encroachments, must be attended with bad Consequences
to the British Colonies there; and that in the Event, GreatBritain itself must
be greatly affected. But the Sense of these Things is, however, so general and
indeterminate, that it may not be amiss at this Juncture, plainly and
particularly to show the Importance of the British Colonies in North America to
the Mother-Kingdom; and the necessary fatal Consequences of the present
Measures the French are pursuing, unless a speedy and final Stop be put to them.

To render the whole more plain and intelligible, it seems proper, previously
to mention his Majesty's undoubted Right to those Territories, that the French
have been, and are now invading, and fortifying themselves upon; and to give a
succinct Account of the Encroachments they have made since the Treaty of
Utrecht, and the later one of Aix-la-Chapelle, with some other occasional
Remarks.

Sebastian Cabot, who sailed from England, with a Commission from Henry the
VII. first discovered the Northern Continent of America, in 1497; and took
Possession of it for that Monarch.

It is needless to take Notice of what particular Parts of this Continent the
French have since at different Times possessed themselves, which have been
afterward confirmed to them by Treaty; or to ascertain the exact Boundaries of
all his Britannick Majesty's Territories in North America.

It will be sufficient for the present Purpose, to observe, that the Province
of NovaScotia, or Accadia, was first granted by King James I. under certain,
determinate Bounds.

That the French were afterward in Possession of it; that during the Time of
their Possession, they understood the Limits to extend every Way as far at
least, as those described in King James's Grant.

That at the Negotiation for the Treaty of Utrecht, it was expressly insisted
upon by the French King; that Accadia, extended Westward of St. John's River.

That by the Treaty of Utrecht, the said Province was ceded to the Crown of
GreatBritain, according to its ancient Limits, which was confirmed by the
Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle; though Commissaries were to be appointed by the
respective Crowns, to settle the precise Limits.

That the Iroquois, or Indians of the Five (now Six) Nations, as they are
commonly called, had voluntarily put themselves under the Protection of the
Crown of GreatBritain, from the first Settlement of the English in that Country.

That it never was disputed before the Treaty of Utrecht, but always agreed by
all Authors, whether English or French, that Lake Iroquois, by the French
called Lake Champlain, Lake Cadaraqui or Ontario, and Lake Erie, with the
Country adjacent, was the proper Country of the Iroquois.

That Part of the Iroquois formerly inhabited on the North Side of the Lake
Ontario, and are in the French Maps called Iroquois du Nord.

That that Part of the River St. Lawrence, as it is now called, between Lake
Cadaraqui, and where the River Outawawa, falls into it near Mont-Real was
formerly called the River Iroquois.

That the Iroquois have conquered most of the other Tribes inhabiting between
them and the River Missisippi; and therefore those Lands by right of Conquest
belong to the Iroquois, and as such are considered by them.

That by the Treaty of Utrecht the Iroquois and their Country are expressly
acknowledged to belong to, and be under the Dominion of, the Crown of
Great Britain.

That in 1744, at a Conference between the Commissioners of the Colony of
Virginia, and the Deputies of the Six Nations at Lancaster in Pennsylvania, the
Deputies of the Six Nations expressly asserted their right to the Soil of the
Country claimed by the Colony of Virginia from the Mountains backwards; and for
a valuable Consideration at that Time sold it to that Colony.

That the Colonies of the Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Virginia claim Extent
as far West, as the South Sea founded originally on a Grant of King James 1st.
in 1606.

Notwithstanding the notoriety of these Facts, and these express Stipulations,
the French did, after the Treaty of Utrecht, make some Encroachments on the
North East Part of the Province of Nova Scotia for carrying on a Fishery there.

In the Country of the Iroquois they erected several Fortresses, one between
Lake Erie and Lake Ontario, on the East of the great Falls of Niagara, to
Command the Indians that should pass by the South Side of the Lakes; another at
the West End of Lake Erie; and a very strong one at the South End of Lake
Iroquois or Lake Champlain, commonly called Crown-Point. This last is of the
more Importance, as it gives the French the Command of that Lake; serves for a
Barrier to Mont-Real on that Side; and as a Magazine for Stores, and a
Rendezvous for Troops whenever the French, or their Indians make any Incursions
into the Colony of New York, or the Western Frontiers of the Massachusetts Bay,
and New Hampshire. It Is about One Hundred and twenty Miles from the City of
Albany, all Water Carriage saving a small Carrying Place; and Eighty six Miles
from the nearest Part of Connecticut River.

These Encroachments made in Time of Peace before the last War, they pretend to
hold, 'till the Limits of the Territories belonging to the two Crowns
respectively in North America are settled by Commissaries. This is common
French Policy, or rather Perfidy.

The French Court seem always to have made North America an Object of great
Attention; and long ago to have formed a Plan, which they have been steadily,
though slowly, carrying into Execution.

Since the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle they have been more hasty; well knowing of
what Advantage it would be to their ambitious Views of universal Monarchy to
accomplish it. Their Encroachments have been more numerous, their Hostilities
more violent.

In the Province of Nova Scotia, they have erected a Fort near Bay-Vert; from
whence they have a Communication by Water with Louisbourgh, and Canada, and
other French Settlements. They have erected another strong one upon the Istmus
of the Peninsula, mounted with 26 Cannon, which commands the Basin and Harbor
of Chiqnecto or Bobaussin; and within very near Cannon-Shot of an inferior one
built by the English on the other Side of the Basin. They have seized St.
John's River, and erected two Forts there; from one of which they had lately
the Insolence to fire upon one of the King's Ships. They have engrossed the
whole Furr-Trade of that River to themselves; which, before the late Peace, was
wholly carried on by the English. So that in Reality, considering the
Disposition of the French Inhabitants, and the Indians that are under their
Influence and Direction, they are more effectually Masters of that whole
Province than the English. They have, in Conjunction with the Indians, who have
been instigated by them, committed many Acts of Hostilities against his
Majesty's Troops, and other Subjects in that Province; killed many, and taken
others Prisoners; besides plundering Vessels and then burning them.

Since the Treaty of Utrecht, they have settled a considerable Village on both
Sides the River Chaudiere; The River Chaudiere empties itself into the River
St. Lawrence, on the South Side, a League and an half above the City of Quebec.
At some Leagues distance from the Southerly Bank of the River St. Lawrence,
about twenty Leagues up this River ( Chaudiere) there is a Land Carriage of a
few Miles to the River Kennebeck. At this Place, if they have not already built
a Fort, there has been good Intelligence that they had designed one. From hence
the whole Force of Canada might, in a few Days, be poured into the Eastern
Parts of the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay; the great Nursery of Trees for
Masts, Yards, and Bowsprits, for the Royal Navy.

Since the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, they have erected several more Fortresses
in the Country of the Iroquois: One upon the North Side of the Lake Ontario
directly opposite to the English Fort at Oswego on the South Side, (called by
them Fort Trunto) at the Place where the Indians, that come by the North Side
of the Lakes, used to pass this Lake in order to Trade at Oswego. They have
built a large strong Stone trading House between the Lakes Erie and Ontario, to
the Westward of the great Falls of Niagara, to prevent the Indians passing the
South Side of the Lakes to Oswego.

In the Year 1753, they marched a large armed Force, consisting of Regulars,
Militia and Indians, from Mont-Real into the Country of the Iroquois; although
forbid by the Indians by three several Messages, and threatened to destroy all
the Indians that should oppose them: The same Year they built two Forts, one
upon a River that empties itself into the Lake Erie, the other at fifteen Miles
distance on the River Obeuf, which falls into the River Ohio. The River Ohio,
in the Indian Language, means the same as Belle Riviere in the French. It is a
smooth easy River, not interrupted with Falls; for what is called the Falls
near where it is joined by the River Oubasche, is nothing more than a Ripling.
It takes its Rise in the Country of the Iroquois, and runs upon the Back of the
English Settlements, and after a Course of more than 200 Leagues, according to
the Accounts of the Indian Traders, it is joined by the River Oubasche, and
after a Course of 80 Leagues more, it falls into the River Missisippi. In its
Course it receives many Rivers from the North and the South: The Savannahs or
Interval Lands adjoining to this, and some of the other Rivers, that run into
it, are in many Places of such large Extent, that it is agreed by all, they
form a complete Horizon. The Country about it, abounds with Deer, Moose, Elks,
etc. the Climate temporate, and the Soil fruitful and easy of Cultivation.

The far greater Number of the Indians, live upon those Branches of this River
that come into it from the Northward, and still further to the Northward; the
English Settlements are to the Southward: This River therefore with the River
St. Lawrence, and the intervening lakes, form a perfect Communication between
Quebec and Missisippi, and a Line of Separation when filled with French Forts
and Settlements between the far greater Number of the Indians, and the English
Settlements.




Early the next Year, the French marched to a small English Fort at the Forks
of Mohongahala, lower down the River Ohio; garrisoned by a small Number of
People from Virginia, who were obliged to surrender upon Terms on the first
Summons.

Some Time after the same Year, a Body of eleven Hundred Men, French and
Indians attacked Major Washington, Commander of the Virginia Forces, whose
Corpse consisted of but about three Hundred Men, and obliged him to surrender
upon Articles of Capitulation.

They have built another Fort at the Forks, where the River Oubasche falls into
the River Ohio. How many more Fortresses they have erected lower down toward
the River Missisippi, and on that River, I do not pretend to know. They have
likewise built two Vessels like our Brigantines, of about 60 or 70 Tons for
Transportation on the Lake Ontario. These Lakes are large Inland Seas,
navigable by Vessels of a considerable Burden.

By the Treaty of Utrecht, confirmed by the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, it is
expressly stipulated that the French shall have Liberty of passing into the
Country of the Five Nations, and other Indians in Friendship with
Great Britain, for the sake of Commerce; and that the English shall have the
same Liberty of passing into the Countries of the Indians in Friendship with
the French on the same Purpose.

Since the last Treaty, the French have plundered several of his Majesty's
Subjects trading, not in the Countries of the Indians in Friendship with the
French, but in the Countries of the Iroquois, and other Indian Nations in
Friendship with Great Britain, of Goods to a very great Value; killed some,
made others Prisoners, and transported several to Old-France. They have lately
avowed in the most public Manner, their determined Resolution to make
Prisoners all his Majesty's Subjects, that they shall find trading in those
Countries, and to confiscate their Effects.

This Conduct of the French has deterred all the Traders of his Majesty's
Colonies, from passing into the Indian Countries for the sake of Commerce;
although before these Hostilities of the French, three Hundred Traders went
yearly from the single Colony of Pennsylvania.

Besides these open Hostilities, and Barefaced Encroachments, the French are
continually making use of every Art, Policy can suggest, with the greatest
Industry humane Nature is capable of, to seduce the Indians in Alliance with
the English, and draw them over to their Interest. For this Purpose, the most
artful and zealous of their Missionaries are sent among them: The lower People
are encouraged to live amongst and intermarry with the Natives. The Priests
after they are admitted amongst them, soon gain a great Ascendency over them.
They make use of the Religion they teach them, to inspire them with the
greatest hatred to the English, and Attachment to the French. In this they have
had but too much Success; assisted as they have been, by the bad Conduct of
some of the English Governments, to the Indians of the most Consequence.

Many Years ago, a Number of the Iroquois, the most ancient and faithful Allies
of the English, and the most Warlike of all the Indian Nations; went off and
settled above Mont-Real. They have lately persuaded one Half of the Onondago
Tribe, with many other Indians to remove; and have built them a Church and
Fort. Many of the Seneka's, the most numerous Tribe of the Six Nations, appear
to be much inclined to the French; and there is great Reason to fear that the
whole Body of the Six Nations, will soon be lost to the Crown of GreatBritain,
and gained by the French; unless some proper Measures be taken to prevent them,
and to regain those that are lost.

The Indians in the French Interest are, upon all proper Opportunities,
instigated by their Priests, who have generally the chief Management of their
public Councils, to Acts of Hostility against the English, even in Time of
profound Peace between the two Crowns. Of this there are many undeniable
Instances: The War between the Indians and the Colonies of the
MassachusettsBay, and New Hampshire, in 1723; by which those Colonies suffered
so much Damage, was begun by the Instigation of the French; their Supplies were
from them, and there are now original Letters of several Jesuits to be
produced; whereby it evidently appears, that they were continually animating
the Indians, when almost tired with the War, to a further Prosecution of it.
The French not only excited the Indians and supplied them, but joined their own
Forces with them in all the late Hostlities that have been committed within his
Majesty's Province of Nova Scotia.

From an intercepted Letter this Year from the Jesuit at Penobscot, and from
other Information, it is certain that they have been using their utmost
Endeavors to excite the Indians to new Acts of Hostility against his Majesty's
Colony of the Massachuetts-Bay, and some have been committed. Since the writing
this, the Indians at the Instigation of the French have committed numerous
Hostilities upon the English, in the Governments of Virginia, Maryland,
New York, New Hampshire, MassachusettsBay, and the two last Governments have
declared War-against several Tribes of the Abinaqui Indians.


The French not only excite the Indians to Acts of Hostility, but Reward them
for it, by buying the English Prisoners of them; for the Ransom of each of
which, they afterward demand the Price that is usually given for a Slave in
these Colonies. They do this under the specious Pretense of rescuing the poor
Prisoners from the Cruelties and Barbarities of the Savages; but in Reality to
encourage them to continue their Depredations; as they can by this Means get
more by hunting the English, than by hunting Wild-Beasts; while in Reality the
French at the same Time, keep up a large Army of Indians entirely at the
Expense of the English, without any to themselves.

It is very uncertain, and difficult to guess, what may be the Number of
Indians scattered upon the back of the English and French Settlements, through
this vast Continent. But if the Account be true, or near true that was given in
an open Council of the Six Nations at Turpehawkie, on their return from the
Treaty at Philadelphia, in 1742, there must be a great many Thousand of them.

And although the Indians live scattered, as a Hunter's Life requires; they may
be collected together from almost any Distance, as they can find their
Subsistence from their Gun in their Traveling.

But let the Number of the Indians be what it will, they are not formidable
merely on Account of their Numbers; there are many other Circumstances that
give them a great Advantage over the English.

(...) is a great Chance, whether in a Country consisting of Woods and Swamps,
which the English are not acquainted with, the Enemy do not lay in Ambush for
them in some convenient Place, and from thence destroy them. If this should not
be the Case, but the English should pursue them, as soon as they have gained
the Rivers, by Means of their Canoes, to the Use of which they are brought up
from their Infancy, they presently get out of their Reach: Further, if a Body
of Men were to march into their Country to the Places where they are settled,
they can, upon the least Notice, without great Disadvantage quit their present
Habitations, and betake themselves to new ones.

Bnt to return from these occasional Remarks, and to point out the Consequences
of the present Measures of the French, if they are suffered to pursue them:

The first and most immediate will be the engrossing the whole Furr and Pelt
Trade. The Furrs and Pelts imported into England, have been computed to amount
to about L. 90,000 Sterling per Annum, besides what are used in the
Plantations, which is no inconsiderable Quantity; but I believe greatly exceed
that Sum. What Part is imported from North America, and what from the Nothern
Parts of Europe, I cannot tell. The whole Indian Trade of North America, is
carried on entirely by Barter; and that chiefly, and indeed almost wholly for
Strouds, Duffils, Blankets, and other Manufactures of Great Britain.

The present Trade therefore is of great Consequence, and if it was properly
prosecuted, the Advantages arising to GreatBritain, would be in Proportion to
its Increase; not only as it would occasion a greater Consumption of British
Manufactures, but likewise as it would bring in a greater Quantity of those
valuable Commodities, which Great Britain must otherwise Purchase from other
Powers at a dearer Rate, and Pay for in Money too. The Indians may be supplied
cheaper from the English, than from the French; this is very evident, inasmuch
as the French are frequently supplied from Albany, by the Means of their
Indians (who are really Factors for the French) with great Part of their Goods
at an advanced Price, and yet have their own Profit upon them, when they sell
them to the Indians. -- The English Colonies are better situated, were it not
for the French Encroachments, to carry the Trade into the Indian Country, than
those of the French; and are therefore capable of increasing and extending this
Trade to a greater Advantage than they. But notwithstanding the Advantages of
the English, and the Disadvantages of the French, the latter have always pushed
it on with greater Vigor, and have always had by much the largest Share of it:
Neither is this much to be wondered at, since the French of Canada have scarce
any other Trade but this; and this is so essential to that Settlement, that if
they were once to be cut off from it, that must soon languish and decay:
Besides that the Tax paid by the Company on this Trade, is one of the principal
Funds from whence the Supplies are raised for defraying the Charges of that
Government.

The Pelts and Furrs imported into France, amounted some Years ago, to no less
than L.135,000 Sterling per Annum; and since that Time, the French Trade in
those Commodities has been continually increasing, whilst that of the English
has been diminishing; and in a little Time will, very probably, nay, must
necessarily be entirely lost to the English and gained by the French, if the
latter are suffered to continue possessed of their present Encroachments, and
to strengthen themselves in them.

Whoever will compare the Account already given of these Encroachments, with
the Map of the Country, must see at the first View that they have taken, and
are taking Possession of, and fortifying all the most important Places upon the
Lakes and Rivers, upon the Back of all the Northern Colonies; by which the
Indians must pass from their Country to Trade with the English, or the English
into the Indian Country on the same Purpose.

When they shall have sufficiently strengthened themselves in these, they will
effectually cut off all Communication between the Indians and the English
Settlements; and oblige the Natives to Trade solely with them, whether they
will or no. Besides, the Natives will find it more for their Advantage in that
Case to Trade with the French, than with the English: For as the French, with
their Forts, will carry their Trade into the different Parts of the Indian
Country, can any one imagine the Indians will carry their Goods many Hundred
Miles, attended with great fatigue and difficulty; to exchange them for those
very Commodities that they can be supplied with for the same Goods, in a Manner
at their own Doors? No certainly they will not.

Besides the engrossing this Trade to themselves, the French will, in a little
Time, draw all the Indians entirely off from the English, and firmly attach
them to their Interest. The cutting off the Communication between the English
and the Indians by the French Forts and Settlements, will oblige the Indians to
Trade with the French, whether they will or no. Their carrying the Trade into
the Indian Country, and supplying them with the Commodities they want at their
own Doors, will make it their Interest to Trade with them. This Exchange of
Commodities, if properly regulated, will attach the Indians to the Interest of
those that supply them with what they cannot subsist without. But above all,
the Vigor and Resolution of the French in carrying on Settlements, building
Forts and strengthening themselves in them at such a Distance from their
present Country, few as their Inhabitants are, will give them a high Opinion of
the French Courage, and create a Dependence upon them. On the other Hand, the
tame Behavior of the English in looking quietly on, or in making but a feeble
Resistance against these violent Encroachments, while their Interest is so
deeply concerned, their Colonies are so many, and their Inhabitants so
numerous, will give them a mean, contemptible Opinion of them: They will look
upon the English as dastardly Cowards; upon the French as brave Men; upon the
one as fit to be relied upon for Protection; on the other as unworthy of the
least Confidence, and rather wanting Assistance and Protection from them, than
capable of affording them any.

A Sachem of one of the Tribes of the Six Nations, publicly Reproached the
English with this at the late Conference between Commissioners from the British
Governments, and the Six Nations, at Albany. Addressing himself to the
Commissioners: "You talk, said he, of your Strength, where do we see it? The
French build Forts, and keep them when they have done; the English do not
hinder them: The French behave like Men, the English like Women."

The Six Nations are the bravest Warriors of all the Indians. They have always
been in Alliance with the English, and had formerly the greatest Aversion to
the French. They once not only threatened, but had very near completed the
Destruction of Canada: But from the Neglect of the English to cultivate this
Temper, and indeed from a direct contrary Conduct in some of the Governments,
and from the Industry and Assiduity of the French to gain them to their
Interest; many went off and settled amongst the French a long Time ago; a great
Number are lately gone off; those that remain are very wavering in their
Affections to the English, and there is not the least Doubt to be made but that
they will entirely abandon us; and that in a very little Time, if they have not
already agreed to do it, unless we behave with more Discretion and Justice
toward them, and more Vigor and Resolution against the French.

If this should be the Case; if these Indians should be gained to the French
and the numerous Tribes in Alliance with them, all the rest of the Indians upon
the whole Continent would infallibly be brought into the same Interest. What
Use the French would make of these new Allies, we know too well from past
Experience. They would most certainly employ them even in Time of profound
Peace between the two Crowns, against any or all the British Settlements as
would best suit their ambitious Views and Designs.

It has been already remarked, that the Tribes of Indians living upon the Lakes
and the Rivers that run upon the Back of the English Settlements in
North America, are very numerous, and can furnish a great Number of fighting
Men; all perfectly well acquainted with the Use of Arms as soon as capable of
carrying them; as they get the whole of their Subsistence from hunting; and
that this Army, large as it may be, can be maintained by the French without any
Expense.

Fom their Numbers, their Situation and the Rivers that run into the English
Settlements, it is easy to conceive that they can at any Time make an Attack
upon and constantly Annoy as many of the exposed English Settlements as they
please; and those at any Distance from each other.

The Effects of such Incursions have been too severely felt by many of the
British Colonies, especially in the Eastern Parts of New England, not to be very
well known. The entire breaking up Places that had been for a considerable Time
settled at a great Expense, both of Labor and Money; burning the Houses,
destroying the Stock, killing and making Prisoners great Numbers of the
Inhabitants; with all the cruel Usage they meet with in their Captivity, is
only a Part of the Scene. All other Places that are exposed are kept in
continual Terror; the Lands lay waste and uncultivated from the Danger that
attends those that shall presume to Work upon them: Besides the immense Charge
the Governments must be at in a very ineffectual Manner to defend their
extended Frontiers; and all this from the Influence the French have had over,
but comparatively a few of the Indians. To the same or greater Evils still will
every one of the Colonies be exposed whenever the same Influence shall be
extended to the whole Body of them.

South Carolina may be easily annoyed in this Manner by the Indians that live
near the French Settlements upon the River Missisippi, and the Branches of the
other Rivers that run into it. South Carolina, indeed has this Advantage at
present, that these Indians have been for a long Time, and are still in strict
Alliance with them; and whilst they continue closely attached to their
Interest, they will be a Barrier to them against the French and their Indians:
But this is a very precarious Dependence, considering how easy it will be for
the French, after they have gained the rest of the numerous Tribes, to secure
them also to their Interest, or else to employ their Indians to cut them off.

The late and present Enterprises of the French, with the Assistance of the
Indians upon the Borders of Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and
North Carolina; are too strong Proofs how much they are exposed.

New York is not more secure; but on the contrary, if the French should gain
the Six Nations to their Interest (of which there is the greatest Danger) as
these are the most Warlike of all the Indians, as they are perfectly well
acquainted with that Country, and might perhaps have a particular Resentment
against that Colony; and at the same Time can be easily supplied by Water from
the French Magazine at Crown-Point, with Ammunition and Provisions; this Colony
would perhaps be more exposed than almost any other to the most cruel Ravages
and Depredations.

The Colonies of New-Jerseys, Connecticut and Rhode Island, are at present
secured, by having some of the other Colonies as a Barrier to them.

The Western Parts of the Colonies of the Massachusetts Bay, and New Hampshire,
lay open to the Incursions of the Indians, that may be supplied from
Crown-Point, it being not quite ninety Miles from that Fort to
Connecticut-River. But the Eastern Parts of these Provinces, especially the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, are still more exposed, and have been often
and for a long Time together, through the Instigation of our good Allies the
French, the Theater of War.

The St. John's and other Nova Scotia Indians, whom the French have gained to
an entire Dependence upon them, may be employed either against the Eastern
Parts of New England, or the Province of NovaScotia.

The Damage the Province of Nova Scotia has already suffered from them, at the
Instigation and with the Assistance of the French, has been such, as has
hitherto prevented their making Settlements back into the Country, whereon they
might raise their own Subsistence, and threatens, if not remedied, to prevent
any future Settlement of that Country by the English.

Upon the whole, it cannot be doubted that if the French should engross the
Furr Trade to themselves, and attach the Indians firmly to their Interest, they
would never want Inclination nor Power to employ them, even in Time of profound
Peace between the two Crowns, to harrass any Number of the English Colonies as
should best suit their Purposes; which, besides all the other Evils already
mentioned, would be attended with this, that it would effectually hinder the
Increase and Settlement of his Majesty's Territories, whilst it would give the
French an Opportunity to increase and settle their own, and not only their own,
but such Part of his Majesty's as they have unjustly taken Possession of.

But the Calamities of the English Colonies would be greatly increased under
these Circumstances in Case of a War between the two Crowns.

As the Fort at Crown-Point, where the French may collect a sufficient Number
of Forces for their Purpose, is within little more than a hundred Miles of the
City of Albany, and much nearer to many of their other Settlements, as there is
an easy Passage by Water from this Fort, it would be no difficult Matter for
the French, with the Assistance of the Indians, especially of the Six Nations,
who border upon and are intimately acquainted with, every Part of that Colony,
not only to burn and destroy the out Settlements, but even the City of Albany
it self, before they could receive Assistance from the other Parts of the
Government: At the same Time their Neighbors may be prevented from giving them
any, by having Employment enough at Home, to defend their own Frontiers against
other Parties of Indians.

The same Remark may be made with Regard to the Western Frontier of the Colony
of the Massachusetts Bay: But it is in the Eastern Part that this Colony and
the Province of New Hampshire is most exposed in Time of War to the Ravages of
the French and their Indians.

Quebec, the Capital of all the French Governments, is so near to this Part of
the Massachusetts, that whilst other Parts of the Country, and their Neighbors
too, are kept in a continual Alarm by Parties of Indians, the whole Force of
Canada, with as many Indians as they see Cause to join with them, may very
suddenly and secretly make their Attack here, burn and destroy many Towns,
break up others, kill many of the Inhabitants, and make more Prisoners, destroy
their Stock, and return back with great Security, before a sufficient Force
could be sent against them. They might at the same Time destroy the King's
Woods, from whence Masts, etc. are supplied for the Royal Navy, unless they
should hope one Day to be Masters of them themselves, and on that Account
reserve them for their own Use. But in Case of a War between the two Crowns,
the Province of Nova Scotia will not only feel all the forementioned calamitous
Effects; but under its present Circumstances, would be in Danger of being
totally lost to the Crown of GreatBritain, and gained by the French. As
Louisbourg, which is in the Neighborhood of this, is on all Accounts a proper
Place of Rendezvous for regular Troops and a Navy to be sent from France, as
the French have already a Fort upon Bay Vert, and another upon the Basin of
Chignecto, as they have secured the River of St. John's, and attached the
Indians of that River, and the other Indians, to their Interest, as the French
Inhabitants are well known to be better inclined to the French than the English
Government, and must eternally be so, as long as they are suffered to have
French Roman Catholic Priests, Subjects of the French King, and under the
Direction of the Bishop of Quebec, among them; and as the English have not one
Fort, except Annapolis-Royal, that can hold out one Day against a proper Number
of regular Forces provided with sufficient Canon, if the French should, before
the English are a ware of it, send a large Body of Troops, with necessary
Artillery, and a Number of Men of War to protect them, the French Inhabitants,
who amount to many Thousands, would upon their first Appearance, universally
revolt, and the Conquest of that whole Province would not take up one
Fortnight. When the French have once made a Conquest of this Province, and
strengthened themselves in it, they will have laid a good Foundation for
dispossessing the English, in some future Time, of all their other Colonies in
North America, and securing them to themselves, with all the Advantages of them.

That the French have had this in View from the Beginning of their Settlements
in North America, seems clear from their surrounding the English Colonies, and
building Forts upon the Lakes, and most convenient Rivers on the Back of the
English Settlements from St. Lawrence-River to Missisippi, and claiming an
exclusive Navigation in those Lakes and Rivers, and the Property of all that
Part of the Continent.

What a Value France sets upon the Colony of Nova Scotia, and how essential a
Territory she esteems it for the Support of her other Settlements, and for
compassing the Design she has upon the whole Continent of NorthAmerica,
plainly appears from the extreme Reluctance with which she made the Cession of
it to Great Britain at the Treaty of Utrecht; and it is clear from that
Negotiation, that nothing but the feeble State in which she then felt herself,
nothing but the last Necessity could have reduced her to make it. What an
attentive Eye she has kept upon it ever since it has been in the Possession
of the English, appears from the continual Practices of the Governor of
Canada, the Bishop of Quebec, and the French Missionaries from thence in Time
of Peace, to seduce the French Inhabitants from their Allegiance to the Crown
of Great Britain. The same is evident from the repeated Attempts of the French
during the late War; some of them very expensive and hazardous to a very
considerable Part of her Navy, for the Reduction of it; as also since the
Conclusion of the Peace, from her Encroachments upon the Isthmus and St.
John's- River, in manifest Violation of her most solemn Stipulations at
Aix-la-Chapelle; and with an apparent View of holding her self in Readiness to
take the first favorable Opportunity upon a Rupture between the two Crowns of
surprising the Colony.

One great, and indeed main Security of the English Colonies in North America,
against the fatal Effects of the French Encroachment, consists in this, that
the French Settlements at present are not capable of subsisting a Body of
Troops strong enough to overrun the English Settlements; but should the French
make themselves Masters of Nova Scotia, which is a Country fruitful of all Kind
of Grain and Provisions; they would be in a Condition to introduce and subsist
a Body of Troops strong enough with the French Acadians, and Inhabitants of
Cape-Breton and Canada, together with the Indians, to reduce all the English
Colonies.

Another great Security to the English Colonies, is that the French have no
convenient Harbors, but only in the Island of Cape-Breton; but should they
make themselves Masters of Nova Scotia, they might from their Possession of so
large a Seacoast extending from Cape-Sable to Cape-Canceau, ninety Leagues
upon the Atlantic Ocean, abounding with most commodious Harbors for Ships of
the largest Burden, be in a Condition to dispute the Mastery of those Seas.
Those who know the Situation and State of the Colonies upon the Continent of
North America, will not doubt but that the immediate Effect of the French
gaining Nova Scotia, would be the Loss of the New England Cod-Fishery, and the
intercepting and destroying the greatest Part of the Trade of those Colonies,
the Loss of the King's Woods in the Province of the MassachusettsBay and
New Hampshire, which contain all the Nurseries of white Pine Trees; from whence
the British Navy is at present supplied with Masts, Yards and Bowsprits; and
occasion the breaking up all the English Settlements within the Province of
Maine, which is the Eastern Part of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, as
also of Albany and the Settlements about it, which makes the Western Part of
New York: And that thus by Degrees with a proper Force and the continual
Incursions of the Indians, all the English Colonies might probably be overrun
in a few Years, unless they were strongly supported with regular Troops from
Home.

This may appear very extraordinary at first View, considering the superior
Number of Inhabitants within the English, to those of the French Colonies,
especially as the English are Masters of such a large SeaCoast: But if the
Advantages which the Form of Government in the French Colonies gives them, over
that of the English Colonies in Time of War is considered, this will not seem
an improbable Supposition. All the French Settlements in North America, how
many small Governments soever they may be divided into, are under the absolute
Command of the Governor of Canada.

The English Colonies, exclusive of Georgia and Nova Scotia, are divided into
eleven distinct Governments, within each of which nothing of any Consequence
can be transacted but by their respective Assemblies. They are independent of
each other, some of them very remote from the other, those which are near are
generally disunited in their Councils upon the Manner of acting against the
common Enemy, disagreeing about the Quota of Men and Money which they should
respectively contribute; and considering themselves as more or less concerned,
according to the Distance of their Colonies from immediate Danger, so that it
is very difficult for them to agree upon any one Plan, and as difficult to
execute it, if one could be agree don. Of this there is a most melancholy
Proof at this very Time, since not with standing the present common Danger, no
two Governments can agree upon any Measures, nor has any one Government
separately, except the MassachusettsBay, acted with any Degree of Vigor; much
less with that Vigor that the present Circumstances demand. At that Time the
Expedition to Crown-Point was not on Foot.


It is easy therefore to conceive, that a large Body of Men, Part of them
regular Troops, with the Assistance of the Indians, scattered through the
Continent, upon the Back of all the English Colonies, (as the French
Settlements likewise are) when under the absolute Command of one
Governor-General, who upon all Emergencies can direct their Force as he
pleases, may reduce a Number of disunited independent Colonies, unsupported
with regular Troops, though much superior to them in Point of the Number of
Inhabitants.

The Effects of this Difference of Government within the French and English
Colonies were most sensibly felt in the late War. And if we may judge by the
late and present Proceedings of the French upon this Continent, they design we
shall feel them more sensibly still, and that perhaps sooner than we imagine.

It is therefore highly necessary that the most vigorous Measures should be
speedily and unitedly projected and pursued, to oppose any further
Encroachments of the French, and to oblige them to relinquish those they have
already made. The Safety and Security of all the English Colonies in
North America, their very Being as English Colonies, make such Measures
absolutely necessary, and that without any Loss of Time. And how far the
Interest of Great Britain it self may make such Measures necessary, will appear
from considering the Importance of these Colonies to the Mother-Kingdom.

That the present Grandeur of Great Britain is owing to its large and extended
Commerce, is agreed on all Hands.

That it is by this large Commerce that she is enabled to keep up so large a
Naval Force, and that the Superiority of her Naval Force maintains her present
Power and Independency, is equally certain.

What Addition is made to her Commerce, and Consequently her Wealth, Strength
and Superiority of Naval Power, by her being possessed of so many large
Colonies, and particularly how far her Colonies in NorthAmerica conduce to the
Support and Increase of these, will appear from the following Remarks.

The Inhabitants of the Colonies in NorthAmerica make a large Addition to the
Subjects of Great Britain. The Extent of these Colonies, exclusive of the
Island of Newfoundland, and measuring it upon the Seacoast from Nova Scotia to
Georgia, inclusive of both, is about five Hundred Leagues, and the Depth of
them as far back as the South Sea.

The Settlements, which are chiefly on the Seacoast, may be computed to
contain above One Million Inhabitants, exclusive of Indian Savages and Negro
Slaves.

These Inhabitants within the Compass of one Hundred and forty Years, from
which Time the utmost Era of the eldest of these Colonies is to be dated, have
from small Drafts made out of the Mother Country and her Dependencies, chiefly
in the Beginning of their Settlements, grown to their present Number by the
natural Increase of the People, saving what Addition they have received by such
as have transplanted themselves from the Northern Parts of Germany.

It has been found by Assessments made from Time to Time of the rateable Polls
in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, where there are now near two hundred
Thousand Inhabitants, that taking their Increase at a Medium, from the first
Settlement of the Colony to the Year 1743, they have doubled their Number once
in twenty Years.

If this should not be thought an equitable Rule of estimating the future
Growth of the Inhabitants within this Province, when their Number is so large,
(though it seems it should hold good as long as there is Room enough for them to
spread) yet it seems a moderate Computation to reckon, that their present
Number may be doubled at the End of thirty Years, and if that is a just Rule
for rating the Increase of the Inhabitants within the other Colonies, as it
seems to be, then the Number of Inhabitants within all the British Colonies in
North America, may be expected from their natural Increase, and without making
any Allowance for the transplanting of Protestant Families from the Palatinate,
Swiss Cantons, and other Northern Parts of Germany, to amount at the End of
that Period to near three Millions.

More distant Calculations may seem too remote and uncertain; it may suffice to
Remark that from the general Healthfulness of the Climate through the whole Range
of these Colonies, and the immense Tracts of Lands fit for all Kind of
Agriculture, that this Territory is capable of supporting as many Inhabitants
at least as any Kingdom in Europe.

The Advantage accruing to the MotherCountry from the great Number of
Inhabitants in her Northern Colonies, will appear from the Consideration of the
Consumption they will occasion of British Manufactures, and also of all other
European Commodities in general, which last must be landed and reship'd in
Great Britain (which is by the Acts of Trade made the Staple of them for all
the English Colonies) before they can be imported into America.

I shall not enter into a Detail of the European Commodities which are consumed
within the Colonies, or a Computation of what Number of Hands their present
Inhabitants may employ in England, for furnishing them with the British ones:
Extracts from the Custom-House Books of the Goods exported for the Colonies,
have shown them to be very large at present; what is exported for New England
only amounting to Four Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling per Annum; and the
future Vent of them continually increasing in Proportion to the Growth of its
Inhabitants, must of it self in Time become a more considerable Trade, and of a
more beneficial Nature in every Respect to GreatBritain, than all its Branches
of Commerce with Foreign States, put together. It is computed that near Half
the present Shipping of Great Britain is improved in the Commerce carried on
with her Plantations, which Trade alone will in Time employ a much greater
Quantity of Shipping, than all the present Shipping of Great Britain. Besides,
this Trade will enable her with greater Advantage to extend her Commerce with
other Countries.

Another Remark relates to the Fisheries carried on in the adjacent Seas: Very
particular Estimates have been made of the New England Cod-Fishery, whereby the
Returns of it appear to be (exclusive of the Newfoundland Fishery, for all of
which there is a sufficient Market) above One Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling
per Annum. All this Fish, except what is consumed in America, which is but an
inconsiderable Part of it, is exported to Portugal, Spain, and Italy, and there
sold for Gold, or Bills of Exchange payable in Great Britain, from whence
Returns are made to the Colonies in English Goods; so that the Produce of the
Fishery, as well as the Profit of furnishing the Outset of it, center in the
Mother Country.

Besides this, a Whale-Fishery is carried on within the Province of the
MassachusettsBay, from whence considerable Quantities of Oil are yearly
exported to England, perhaps to the Amount of Twenty Thousand Pounds Sterling,
or more annually, the prime Cost in New England.

The Profits of these Fisheries are the more Beneficial, as they are gained out
of the Sea, (a Fund not to be exhausted) and find Employment for a great Number
of Hands, many of which might be useless, or but of small Account on Shore; as
is found to be the Case of most Countries with Respect to the Refuse Part of
their Inhabitants: And Fisheries are more particularly advantageous to a
Maritime Power, as they breed up the best of Sailors. The Cod-Fishery of
New England has therefore been ever justly esteemed a good Nursery of Seamen
for the Royal Navy, and it has the Advantage even of the English Colliery in
this Respect, that whereas five or six Hands are sufficient to navigate a
Collier of a large Burden, a greater Number of Hands is necessary to be
employed on Board a Fishing Vessel of fifty Tons, for navigating it, and
catching and curing the Fish; all of whom may bereckoned good Seamen, or at
least very fit for immediate Service on Board the King's Ships.

The next Remark relates to the Naval Stores: Every Species of these is of the
Growth and Produce of the Northern Colonies. The Royal Navy is almost wholly
supplied from the Province of the Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, with
Masts, Yards and Bowsprits; as the Shipping of England in general is with Pitch
and Tar from Carolina.

Upon this Article it may be observed, that it is an invaluable Advantage to a
Maritime Power to have its Naval Stores of the Produce of it is own Dominions,
independent of a Foreign State, and not liable to be cut off from them by the
Accident of War, or Prohibition of the Prince, in whose Dominion they must be
purchased: To have them likewise imported in it is own Shipping, at reasonable
Rates, and in Exchange for it is own Manufactures.

The Difference between being dependent upon a foreign Power for any of these
Stores, and having them of the Growth of the British Territories, is remarkable
in the Article of Tar. When Great Britain was obliged to take that Species from
the Northern Powers, the Price of it rose to five Pounds Sterling per Barrel;
and Sweden in the Year 1710 refused to let it be exported in English Vessels.
This Imposition occasioned a Bounty to be given by Parliament for the
Encouragement of raising Tar in the English Colonies in North America, the
Effect of which has been to lower the Price of it to a tenth Part of what was
before given; and to be paid for to Subjects of Great Britain in British
Manufactures, instead of being paid for to Foreigners in Silver and Gold.

Great Britain may likewise in Time be supplied from her Northern Colonies with
Bar Iron, Hemp and Pot-Ash. Pot-Ash has been made in New England, and that of
the best Quality and imported from thence to England: And was the Method of
making it publicly known, Great Britain might be supplied from her Colonies in
North America with her whole Consumption of that Article.

The next Remark relates to the rich Commodities of Furrs, Tobacco There are
about 85,000 Hogsheads of Tobacco exported annually from Virginia and Maryland.
and Rice, which are the Produce of these Colonies. There is likewise a fair
Prospect of Carolina's raising sufficient Plantations of Mulberry Trees for the
Production of Raw-Silk; they have already got to a confiderable Perfection in
the raising and making Indigo: It Is Oranges are found to be near as good as
those of Seville; and it is not to be doubted but that the Climate and Soil of
the British Northern Colonies is capable of producing a variety of Wines that
may vie with those of Europe.

The next Thing to be remarked is, that the Lumber, Horses and Fish (not to
mention the Flower and Pork) with which NorthAmerica supplies the Sugar
Colonies, are necessary for carrying on the Sugar Works in the Plantations
there, and for the Subsistence of their Negroes, so that the Support of these
Islands, depends upon that of the English Northern Colonies: Were those to be
lost, the Sugar Islands, independent of their being conquered by the French,
would soon languish and decay to such a Degree as to be of little Service to
the Mother Country.

The last Remark to be made is, that the Prince, who holds Possession of the
English Colonies in North America, will be in a Condition to keep the
Sovereignty of the Atlantic Ocean, through which the homeward bound Trade from
the East and West Indies generally passes: This evidently appears from the
Extent of the Seacoast, which the Colonies of North America take up, abounding
with most commodious Harbors, from whence the Ships passing through those Seas,
may be intercepted. France most sensibly felt the Effects of it during the last
War in the Captures made by the English of their Trade in general, returning
from those Parts: And it is well known that the Harbor of Louisbourg is the
Rendezvous of the French East India and South Sea Trade in their Passage home
to France. It is evident from what has been mentioned, how much the Shipping,
Trade and Maritime Power of Great Britain, must be increased by the Advantages
arising to her from her Colonies in North America: And on the other Hand, how
much her Power would be diminished, and that of France aggrandized, if she
should ever happen to lose them to the French.

The Observation therefore, which has been made by some, That England
maintained her Power and Sovereignty at Sea before she was augmented with her
Colonies, and therefore may as well support it now without them, is
ill-founded. It is true, was the Consequence of her losing them only to be,
that they would become vacant, or which is the same Thing with Respect to the
Powers in Europe, be occupied only by Indian Savages, (which was the State of
North America before the English and French entered into Possession of it)
Great Britain, though much weakened by the Loss of her Colonies, might still
(supposing the Marine of France to be as much inferior in all other Respects to
that of Great Britain, as it was before the two Crowns acquired their
respective Possessions in NorthAmerica) support her Power at Sea in the same
State she did before the Acquisition of them. But that is not the Case; if the
English should lose Possession of them, the French would gain it; and the
Question is, What Alteration in the State of Power, this Change might make to
the Prejudice of England; and whether the French, after England had suffered
this Diminution in her Trade and Maritime Strength, would not by their
Acquisition of it, in Addition to the Resources of Wealth and Power which
France already has in her self and her American Territories, have laid a sure
Foundation for a general and lasting Dominion by Sea as well as Land?
Undoubtedly if this should ever be the Case, the Trade and Commerce of France,
and with it her Naval Power, would increase to such a Degree of Superiority
over that of Great Britain, as must entirely destroy her Commerce, reduce her
from her present State of Independency to be at last nothing more than a
Province of France. The French court are very sensible of this, and have long
been purfuing such Measures as may finally bring about this Event, though perhaps
at a distant Time.

With this View, Maps of this Country have been from Time to Time published
under the Direction of that Court, in every later one of which they have been
making greater Excisions of his Majesty's Territories, and tacking them to
those of the Grand Monarch; and at the same Time actually taking Possession of
them, settling and fortifying upon them.

Upon the whole, it is evident that the French have been, and are now, in
manifest Violation of the most solemn Treaties, making the most hostile
Encroachments upon his Majesty's undoubted Territories.

That the Consequences of these Encroachments, if the French are suffered to
keep Possession of them, and strengthen themselves in them, will be;

1. The engrossing the whole of the Furr Trade of North America to themselves.

2. The attaching all the Indians scattered through that vast Continent upon the
Back of all the English Settlements to their Interest.

3. The employing those Indians when thus attached to them, even in Time of
profound Peace between the two Crowns, to annoy any or all his Majesty's
Colonies, as may best serve their Purposes.

4. That they will one Day make themselves Masters of all the British Colonies
in North America.

That these Colonies are of such Consequence to the Trade, Wealth and Naval
Power of Great Britain, and will in future Time make so much larger Additions
to it, that whilst she keeps them entire, she will be able to maintain not only
her Independency, but her Superiority as a Maritime Power. And on the other
Hand, should she once lose them, and the French gain them, Great Britain
herself must necessarily be reduced to an absolute Subjection to the French
Crown, to be nothing more than a Province of France.

OBSERVATIONS concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.
1. TAbles of the Proportion of Marriages to Births, of Deaths to Births, of
Marriages to the Numbers of Inhabitants, etc. formed on Observaions made upon
the Bills of Mortality, Christnings, etc. of populous Cities, will not suit
Countries; nor will Tables formed on Observations made on full settled old
Countries, as Europe, suit new Countries, as America.

2. For People increase in Proportion to the Number of Marriages, and that is
greater in Proportion to the Ease and Convenience of supporting a Family. When
Families can be easily supported, more Persons marry, and earlier in Life.

3. In Cities, where all Trades, Occupations and Offices are full, many delay
marrying, till they can see how to bear the Charges of a Family; which Charges
are greater in Cities, as Luxury is more common: many live single during Life,
and continue Servants to Families, Journeymen to Trades etc. hence Cities do
not by natural Generation supply themselves with Inhabitants; the Deaths are
more than the Births.

4. In Countries full settled, the Case must be nearly the same; all Lands
being occupied and improved to the Height; those who cannot get Land, must
Labor for others that have it; when Laborers are plenty, their Wages will be
low; by low Wages a Family is supported with Difficulty; this Difficulty deters
many from Marriage, who therefore long continue Servants and single. -- Only as
the Cities take Supplies of People from the Country, and thereby make a little
more Room in the Country; Marriage is a little more encouraged there, and the
Births exceed the Deaths.

5. Europe is generally full settled with Husbandmen, Manufacturers, etc. and
therefore cannot now much increase in People: America is chiefly occupied by
Indians, who subsist mostly by Hunting. -- But as the Hunter, of all Men,
requires the greatest Quantity of Land from whence to draw his Subsistence,
(the Husbandman subsisting on much less, the Gardner on still less, and the
Manufacturer requiring least of all), The Europeans found America fully settled
as it well could be by Hunters; yet these having large Tracks, were easily
prevailed on to part with Portions of Territory to the new Comers, who did not
much interfere with the Natives in Hunting, and furnished them with many Things
they wanted.

6. Land being thus plenty in America, and so cheap as that a laboring Man,
that understands Husbandry, can in a short Time save Money enough to purchase a
Piece of new Land sufficient for a Plantation, whereon he may subsist a Family;
such are not afraid to marry; for if they even look far enough forward to
consider how their Children when grown up are to be provided for, they see that
more Land is to be had at Rates equally easy, all Circumstances considered.

7. Hence Marriages in America are more general, and more generally early, than
in Europe. And if it is reckoned there, that there is but one Marriage per
Annum among 100 Persons, perhaps we may here reckon two; and if in Europe they
have but 4 Births to a Marriage (many of their Marriages being late) we may
here reckon 8, of which if one half grow up, and our Marriages are made,
reckoning one with another at 20 Years of Age, our People must at least be
doubled every 20 Years.

8. But notwithstanding this Increase, so vast is the Territory of
North America, that it will require many Ages to settle it fully; and till it
is fully settled, Labor will never be cheap here, where no Man continues long
a Labourer for others, but gets a Plantation of his own, no Man continues long
a Journeyman to a Trade, but goes among those new Settlers, and sets up for
himself, etc. Hence Labor is no cheaper now, in Pennsylvania, than it was 30
Years ago, though so many Thousand laboring People have been imported.

9. The Danger therefore of these Colonies interfering with their Mother
Country in Trades that depend on Labor, Manufactures, etc. is too remote to
require the Attention of Great Britain.

10. But in Proportion to the Increase of the Colonies, a vast Demand is
growing for British Manufactures, a glorious Market wholly in the Power of
Britain, in which Foreigners cannot interfere, which will increase in a short
Time even beyond her Power of supplying, though her whole Trade should be to her
Colonies: Therefore Britain should not too much restrain Manufactures in her
Colonies. A wife and good Mother will not do it. To distress, is to weaken, and
weakening the Children, weakens the whole Family.

11. Besides if the Manufactures of Britain (by Reason of the American Demands)
should rise too high in Price, Foreigners who can sell cheaper will drive her
Merchants out of Foreign Markets; Foreign Manufactures will thereby be
encouraged and increased, and consequently foreign Nations, perhaps her Rivals
in Power, grow more populous and more powerful; while her own Colonies, kept
too low, are unable to assist her, or add to her Strength.

12. It Is an ill-grounded Opinion that by the Labor of Slaves, America may
possibly vie in Cheapness of Manufactures with Britain. The Labor of Slaves
can never be so cheap here as the Labor of working Men is in Britain. Any one
may compute it. Interest of Money is in the Colonies from 6 to 10 per Cent.
Slaves one with another cost 30 L. Sterling per Head. Reckon then the Interest
of the first Purchase of a Slave, the Insurance or Risque on his Life, his
Clothing and Diet, Expenses in his Sickness and Loss of Time, Loss by his
Neglect of Business (Neglect is natural to the Man who is not to be benefited
by his own Care or Diligence), Expense of a Driver to keep him at Work, and his
Pilfering from Time to Time, almost every Slave being by Nature a Thief, and
compare the whole Amount with the Wages of a Manufacturer of Iron or Wool in
England, you will see that Labor is much cheaper there than it ever can be by
Negroes here. Why then will Americans purchase Slaves? Because Slaves may be
kept as long as a Man pleases, or has Occasion for their Labor; while hired
Men are continually leaving their Master (often in the midst of his Business,)
and setting up for themselves.. 8.

13. As the Increase of People depends on the Encouragement of Marriages, the
following Things mustdiminish a Nation, viz. 1. The being conquered; for the
Conquerors will engross as many Offices, and exact as much Tribute or Profit on
the Labor of the conquered, as will maintain them in their new Establishment,
and this diminishing the Subsistence of the Natives discourages their
Marriages, and so gradually diminishes them, while the Foreigners increase. 2.
Loss of Territory. Thus the Britons being driven into Wales, and crowded
together in a barren Country insussicient to support such great Numbers,
diminished 'till the People bore a Proportion to the Produce, while the Saxons
increased on their abandoned Lands; 'till the Island became full of English.
And were the English now driven into Wales by some foreign Nation, there would
in a few Years be no more Englishmen in Britain, than there are now People in
Wales. 3. Loss of Trade. Manufactures exported, draw Subsistence from Foreign
Countries for Numbers; who are thereby enabled to marry and raise Families. If
the Nation be deprived of any Branch of Trade, and no new Employment is found
for the People occupy'd in that Branch, it will also be soon deprived of so
many People. 4. Loss of Food. Suppose a Nation has a Fishery, which not only
employs great Numbers, but makes the Food and Subsistence of the People
cheaper: If another Nation becomes Master of the Seas, and prevents the
Fishery, the People will diminish in Proportion as the Loss of Employ, and
Dearness of Provision, makes it more difficult to subsist a Family. 5. Bad
Government and insecure Property. People not only leave such a Country, and
settling Abroad incorporate with other Nations, lose their native Language, and
become Foreigners; but the Industry of those that remain being discouraged, the
Quantity of Subsistence in the Country is lessened, and the Support of a Family
becomes more difficult. So heavy Taxes tend to diminish a People. 6. The
Introduction of Slaves. The Negroes brought into the English Sugar Islands,
have greatly diminished the Whites there; the Poor are by this Means deprived
of Employment, while a few Families acquire vast Estates; which they spend on
Foreign Luxuries, and educating their Children in the Habit of those Luxuries;
the same Income is needed for the Support of one that might have maintained
100. The Whites who have Slaves, not laboring, are enfeebled, and therefore
not so generally prolific; the Slaves being worked too hard, and ill fed, their
Constitutions are broken, and the Deaths among them are more than the Births;
so that a continual Supply is needed from Africa. The Northern Colonies having
few Slaves increase in Whites. Slaves also pejorate the Families that use them;
the white Children become proud, disgusted with Labor, and being educated in
Idleness, are rendered unfit to get a Living by Industry.

14. Hence the Prince that acquires new Territory, if he finds it vacant, or
removes the Natives to give his own People Room; the Legislator that makes
effectual Laws for promoting of Trade, increasing Employment, improving Land by
more or better Tillage; providing more Food by Fisheries; securing Property,
etc. and the Man that invents new Trades, Arts or Manufactures, or new
Improvements in Husbandry, may be properly called Fathers of their Nation, as
they are the Cause of the Generation of Multitudes, by the Encouragement they
afford to Marriage.

15. As to Privileges granted to the married, (such as the Jus trium Liberorum
among the Romans,) they may hasten the filling of a Country that has been
thinned by War or Pestilence, or that has otherwise vacant Territory; but
cannot increase a People beyond the Means provided for their Subsistence.

16. Foreign Luxuries and needless Manufactures imported and used in a Nation,
do, by the same Reasoning, increase the People of the Nation that furnishes
them, and diminish the People of the Nation that uses them. -- Laws therefore
that prevent such Importations, and on the contrary promote the Exportation of
Manufactures to be consumed in Foreign Countries, may be called (with Respect
to the People that make them) generative Laws, as by increasing Subsistence
they encourage Marriage. Such Laws likewise strengthen a Country, doubly, by
increasing its own People and diminishing its Neighbors.

17. Some European Nations prudently refuse to consume the Manufactures of
East India: -- They should likewise forbid them to their Colonies; for the Gain
to the Merchant, is not to be compared with the Loss by this Means of People to
the Nation.

18. Home Luxury in the Great, increases the Nation's Manufacturers employed by
it, who are many, and only tends to diminish the Families that indulge in it,
who are few. The greater the common fashionable Expense of any Rank of People,
the more cautious they are of Marriage. Therefore Luxury should never be
suffered to become common.

19. The great Increase of Offspring in particular Families, is not always
owing to greater Fecundity of Nature, but sometimes to Examples of Industry in
the Heads, and industrious Education; by which the Children are enabled to
provide better for themselves, and their marrying early, is encouraged from the
Prospect of good Subsistence.

20. If there be a Sect therefore, in our Nation, that regard Frugality and
Industry as religious Duties, and educate their Children therein, more than
others commonly do; such Sect must consequently increase more by natural
Generation, than any other Sect in Britain. --

21. The Importation of Foreigners into a Country that has as many Inhabitants
as the present Employments and Provisions for Subsistence will bear; will be in
the End no Increase of People; unless the New Comers have more Industry and
Frugality than the Natives, and then they will provide more Subsistence, and
increase in the Country; but they will gradually eat the Natives out. -- Nor is
it necessary to bring in Foreigners to fill up any occasional Vacancy in a
Country; for such Vacancy (if the Laws are good, 14, 16) will soon be filled by
natural Generation. Who can now find the Vacancy made in Sweden, France or
other Warlike Nations, by the Plague of Heroism 40 Years age; in France, by the
Expulsion of the Protestants; in England, by the Settlement of her Colonies; or
in Guinea, by 100 Years Exportation of Slaves, that has blackened half America?
-- The thinness of Inhabitants in Spain, is owing to National Pride and
Idleness, and other Causes, rather than to the Expulsion of the Moors, or to
the making of new Settlements.

22. There is in short, no Bound to the prolific Nature of Plants or Animals,
but what is made by their crowding and interfering with each others Means of
Subsistence. Was the Face of the Earth vacant of other Plants, it might be
gradually sowed and overspread with one Kind only; as, for Instance, with
Fennel; and were it empty of other Inhabitants, it might in a few Ages be
replenished from one Nation only; as, for Instance, with Englishmen. Thus there
are supposed to be now upwards of One Million English Souls in North America,
(though it is thought scarce 80,000 have been brought over Sea) and yet perhaps
there is not one the sewer in Britain, but rather many more, on Account of the
Employment the Colonies afford to Manufacturers at Home. This Million doubling,
suppose but once in 25 Years, will in another Century be more than the People
of England, and the greatest Number of Englishmen will be on this Side the
Water. What an Accession of Power to the British Empire by Sea as well as Land!
What Increase of Trade and Navigation! What Numbers of Ships and Seamen! We
have been here but little more than 100 Years, and yet the Force of our
Privateers in the late War, united, was greater, both in Men and Guns, than
that of the whole British Navy in Queen Elizabeth's Time. -- How important an
Affair then to Britain, is the present Treaty for settling the Bounds between
her Colonies and the French, and how careful should she be to secure Room
enough, since on the Room depends so much the Increase of her People?

23. In fine, A Nation well regulated is like a Polypus; take away a Limb, its
Place is soon supplied; cut it in two, and each deficient Part shall speedily
grow out of the Part remaining. Thus if you have Room and Subsistence enough,
as you may by dividing, make ten Polypes out of one, you may of one make ten
Nations, equally populous and powerful; or rather, increase a Nation ten fold
in Numbers and Strength.

And since Detachments of English from Britain sent to America, will have their
Places at Home so soon supplied and increase so largely here; why should the
Palatine Boors be suffered to swarm into our Settlements, and by herding
together establish their Language and Manners to the Exclusion of ours? Why
should Pennsylvania, founded by the English, become a Colony of Aliens, who
will shortly be so numerous as to Germanize us instead of our Anglifying them,
and will never adopt our Language or Customs, any more than they can acquire
our Complexion.

24. Which leads me to add one Remark: That the Number of purely white People
in the World is proportionably very small. All Africa is black or tawny. Asia
chiefly tawny. America (exclusive of the new Comers) wholly so. And in Europe,
the Spaniards, Italians, French, Russians and Swedes, are generally of what we
call a swarthy Complexion; as are the Germans also, the Saxons only excepted,
who with the English, make the principal Body of White People on the Face of
the Earth. I could wish their Numbers were increased. And while we are, as I
may call it, Scouring our Planet, by clearing America of Woods, and so making
this Side of our Globe reflect a brighter Light to the Eyes of Inhabitants in
Mars or Venus, why should we in the Sight of Superior Beings, darken its
People? why increase the Sons of Africa, by Planting them in America, where we
have so fair an Opportunity, by excluding all Blacks and Tawneys, of increasing
the lovely White and Red? But perhaps I am partial to the Complexion of my
Country, for such Kind of Partiality is natural to Mankind.

THE END.

