The Work of a Gospel-Minister, and the Importance of approving himself to GOD
in it:

A SERMON Preached at the ORDINATION OF THE Rev. Mr. COTTON-MATHER SMITH, TO
The Work of the Gospel Ministry, in SHARON, August 28, 1755.

By EBENEZER GAY, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Suffield.

^ TIM. ii. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a Workman that
needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth.

TITUS ii. 7.8. In all Things showing thy self a Pattern of good Works: In
Doctrine showing Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech, that cannot
be condemned; that he that is of the contrary Part may be ashamed, having no
evil Thing to say of you.

NEW HAVEN: Printed and Sold by James Parker, at the Post Office, 1755.

AN ORDINATION SERMON.
1 THESSALONIANS, ii. 4. But as we were allowed of God to be put in Trust with
the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing Men, but God, which tries our
Hearts.


THE GOSPEL is a rich and sacred Treasure, containing the glad Tidings of
Salvation to sinful Men, and wisely adapted to promote their spiritual and
eternal Interests. St. Paul tells us, It is the Power of God unto Salvation, to
every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek, Rom i. 16.

To preach this Gospel, is one of the greatest and most important Trusts that
ever was committed unto Men: And, to do it faithfully, so as to please, and be
approved of, the Heart-searching GOD, is no easy Task. The Difficulties that
attend this Work, and the many Temptations to Unfaithfulness in it, render the
Performance of it uncommonly hard, and require superior Measures both of Gifts,
and Grace. In both these Respects, the Apostles of our Lord were eminently
qualified for this Office, being endued with Power from on high: And in nothing
did the Apostle Paul come behind the very chiefest of them: 2 Cor. xii. 11.
But the Grace of GOD, which was bestowed on him, for this Purpose, was not in
vain; but he labored more abundantly than they all 1 Cor. xv. 10.
, and was very successful, chiefly among the Gentiles, to whom in special he
was sent: For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
Circumcision, the same, says he, was mighty in me toward the Gentiles. Gal.
ii. 8.

As to the extraordinary Efficacy and Success of his Ministry, in particular,
among the Thessalonians, he takes a thankful Notice hereof, in this his first
Epistle so them, wherein he joins Silvanus or Silas, and Timotheus, his
Companions and Fellow Laborers, with himself. For our Gospel, says he, came
not unto you in the Word only, but also in Power and in the Holy Ghost, and in
much Assurance; as ye know what manner of Men we were among you for your Sake.
And ye became Followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the Word in
much Affliction, with Joy of the Holy Ghost; so that ye were Ensamples to all
that believe in Macedonia and Achaia. Chap. i. ver. 5, 6, 7. For the Truth
hereof he appeals unto them, Cap. ii. v. 1. For yourselves, Brethren, know our
Entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain.

And, as a subordinate Reason of the Gospel's being so successful among them,
he goes on to remind them, with what Fortitude and Zeal, Purity and Sincerity,
it was preached unto them, ver. 2, 3. But even after that we had suffered
before, and were shamefully entreated, as you know, at Philippi, we were bold
in our God to speak unto you the Gospel of God with much Contention. For our
Exhortation was not of Deceit, nor of Uncleanness, nor in Guile.
Notwithstanding the severe and shameful Treatment, which they had met with just
before, at Philippi, for preaching the Gospel, they were not at all
disheartened, but rather animated to greater Courage and Fervency, at
Thessalonica, in the Face of the like Opposition and Danger; knowing the Truth
and Purity of their Doctrine; and being concerned to preach, not so, as to
sooth the unreasonable Humors, and gratify the vile Lusts of Men, but to
please and gain the Approbation of the Omniscient, and Heart-searching GOD,
whose Ministers they were; and unto whom they were accountable: For so he adds
in the Words of my Text, But as we were allowed of God to be put in Trust with
the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing Men, but God, which tries our
Hearts. And herein they acted as faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus, and very
suitable to the great and important Trust committed unto them, and are an
Ensample to all who succed them in the sacred Office of the Evangelical
Ministry.

Wherefore, in discoursing upon these Words, I shall endeavor to show.

I. That the Gospel is committed in Trust unto the Ministers of it. II. What is
implied in being allowed of God to be put in Trust with the Gospel: And III.
That it greatly concerns these, who are entrusted with the Gospel, to preach
the same, not as pleasing Men, but God, who tries their Hearts.
Here then I am to show,

I. That the Gospel is committed in Trust unto the Ministers of it.

Ministers of the Gospel are a particular Order of Men, in the Christian
Church, appointed by Christ, to officiate in his Name and Stead, as Pastors and
Teachers in it. They are mentioned as the precious Gifts of Christ, which he
bestowed on his Church, for their spiritual Benefit, when he left this World,
and ascended to the FATHER, Ephesians. iv. 8, 12, 13. When he ascended up on high, he
led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto Men. -- And he gave some, Apostles;
and some, Prophets; and some, Evangelists; and some, Pastors and Teachers; for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of
the Body of Christ.

These Ministers, whether exraordinary, as Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists,
or ordinary, as Pastors and Teachers, were ex Officio, entrusted with the
Gospel. But as we were allowed of God to be put in Trust with the Gospel, says
St. Paul, in the Text, speaking of himself and his Fellow Laborers. And, with
Regard to himself in particular, he says of the glorious Gospel of the blessed
God, yet it was committed to his Trust, 1 Timothy i. 11. And all that succeed him
in the Work of the Gospel Ministry, being regularly called, and solemnly
separated thereunto according to Gospel Order, are, in like Manner, put in
Trust with the Gospel.

These are specially set for the Defense of the Gospel, Phil. i. 17.
and are required faithfully to keep and hold fast the same -- to vindicate the
Truths of it, to the utmost of their Ability, against the dangerous Errors and
Corruptions, the vain Fables, and wicked Attemps of ignorant and designing Men,
who by false Glosses, superstitious Innovations, or bad Principles and
Practices, seek to adulterate and pervert it, -- and to transmit it pure to
faithful Successors, agreeable to those several Charges given to Timothy, 1 Timothy i. 20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy Trust: 2 Timothy i.
13.14. Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me, in Faith
and Love which is in Christ Jesus: And Chap. ii. ver. 2. The Things which thou
have heard of me among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful Men,
who shall be able to teach others also.

They are, in a particular Manner, entrusted with the Ministry of the Word:
Hence they are called Stewards of the Mysteries of God 1 Cor. iv. 1.
; whose special Business it is wisely and faithfully to dispense the Word of
Life unto others, for their spiritual Instruction and Nourishment; warning
every Man, and teaching every Man, in all Wisdom, that they may present every
Man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. i. 21.

They are likewise by virtue of their Office, to administer the Sacraments of
the New Testament: And, as good Overseers of the Flock and Rulers in the House
of GOD, to manage the Discipline, and apply the Censures of the Church, as
Occasion requires.

In all which Respects, the Gospel may be considered as a sacred Charge,
specially committed in Trust unto the Ministers of it.

I proceed to show,

II. What is implied in being allowed of God to be put in Trust with the Gospel?

This Phrase, I apprehend, implies something more than barely a Permission,
even an Approbation of Persons for, and Appointment of them, unto the
Ministerial-Office. -- That St. Paul and his Fellow Laborers, of whom the Text
particularly speaks, were approved of GOD, as Persons duly qualified for and
authorized to the Work of the Ministry, which they employed themselves in. And
considered in Relation to Ministers, in general, it may denote the same Thing.
So then, in order to Ministers being allowed of God to be put in Trust with the
Gospel, they must be suitably qualified for, and authorized, or solemly
separated unto the Work of the Gospel Ministry.

1. They must be suitably qualified for this Work. In Order to which, it is
requisite,

1. That they be Men of sincere Piety: Sanctified in Christ Jesus -- and
prepared unto every good Work. This is as necessary for Ministers, as for
others, in order to their being true Christians, and in a State of Favor and
Acceptance with GOD. And if it be not absolutely necessary to the Being of a
Gospel Minister, it is of very great Importance in the Ministerial-Office, and
requisite to a right and faithful Discharge of it. Surely those, whose special
Business it is, to minister in holy Things in the House of God, which is the
Church of the living God, should be holy themselves. Men of clean Hands, and a
pure Heart; whose Conscience is purged from dead Works to serve the living God:
Nor can they, otherwise, answer the Scripture Character of Pastors according to
God's own Heart Jer. iii. 15.
, or be truly denominated Vessels unto Honor, sanctified and meet for their
Master's Use, and prepared unto every good Work. 2 Timothy ii. 21. And not only
true Grace and Holiness, but eminent Degrees thereof, are requisite to their
being well-finished for so great and important a Trust. They should not be
Babes, or Novices, in Religion, but strong in Faith, and in the Grace that is
in Christ Jesus: Of such Age and Seize in the spiritual Life, as by
Reason of Use, to have their spiritual Senses exercised to discern both Good
and Evil. Heb. v. 14,


Not that I think the Efficacy and Success of the Gospel depends upon the
internal Sanctity of the Dispensers of it, but upon the Power of GOD
accompanying it. 1 Cor. iii. 7. So then, neither is he that planteth any Thing,
nor he that waters: But God that gives the Increase. Or, that GOD never so
far approves of the Administrations of unsanctified Ministers, as to make them
instrumental of saving Good to others. For, as it cannot be denied, that the
saving Truths revealed in the Gospel, may be preached by them; so, neither can
it be proved to be inconsistent with the Purity and Goodness or any of the
Perfections of GOD, to bless those Truths, for saving Good, to such as
sincerely embrace them, though dispensed by Ministers of unsanctified Hearts. But
how often, or how rarely GOD confers this Honor upon such Ministers, no Man
knows.

2. That they be furnished with competent Gifts and Abilities.

Every sincere Christian is not fit to be a Minister: Nor are ignorant and
illiterate Men qualified for Instructors and Guides in the Church of Christ.
No: They should be Men of good natural Abilities, cultivated and improved by
Study, and enriched with suitable Degrees of useful Knowledge: Not only
faithful Men, but able to teach others also 2 Timothy ii. 7.
. The Priest's Lips, now, as well as in ancient Times, should keep Knowledge,
and the People should seek the Law at his Month; for he is the Messenger of the
Lord of Hosts. Mal. ii. 7.
And such a Messenger, whose special Business it is to interpret the Oracles of
GOD, and to teach Jacob his Statutes, and Israel his Law, should be one of a
Thousand: A Man of Parts and Learning; especially, learned in the Holy
Scriptures, -- well instructed in the Way of the Lord, the great Mysteries, and
important Truths of the Gospel, -- skillful in the Word of Righteousness; so as
to be capable, by a clear Explanation, right Distribution, and proper
Application thereof, to suit it to the various Circumstances and Exigences of
Persons; to instruct the Ignorant; to warn the Unruly; to comfort the
Feeble-minded; to support the Weak; to establish the Wavering; to reduce the
Wandering; and, by sound Doctrine, to convince, and stop the Mouths of
Gainsayers.

3. That they be sound and steadfast in the Faith.

It is certainly a Matter of great Importance, that Ministers be well-grounded
in the Principles of Religion, and firmly established in the Belief of those
great and weighty Truths of Divine Revelation, which they are to preach to
others: How else can they be qualified for this Trust? If they preach not the
Truth as it is in Jesus, they are likely to destroy, and not to confirm, the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, -- to ruin, and not to save the Souls of
Men. Surely then, they should be sound, and steadfast in the Faith; holding fast
the faithful Word, even, that Form of sound Doctrine, which is delivered in the
Holy Scriptures; and not erroneous, or fickle: Neither giving Heed to Fables,
and those Doctrines of Men, which turn from the Truth, nor suffering
themselves, to be wheedled about with every Wind of Doctrine.

4. That they be blameless, and virtuous in their Behavior.

For they are, not only, to feed the Flock with sound doctrine, good and
wholesome Instructions, but also, to be Ensamples unto them of all that is
virtuous and ^^^able; going before them in the steady Practice of that holy
Religion, which they teach and inculcate, 1 ^^m. iv. 12, But be thou an Example
of the Believers, in Lord, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in
Purity. And verily, no Man is qualified for the Ministry, or fit to be employed
in it, that is not of a blameless and good Behavior: For a Preacher of
Righteousness to yield himself the Servant of Sin, -- an immoral Minister, --
one visibly bad, yielding himself to unrighteous Practices and fleshly
Defilements, -- is a mere Inconsistency and Absurdity! To such a One it may be
said, as in Rom ii. 21, 22, 23, 24. Thou therefore which teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a Man should not steal, do
thou steal? Thou that say a Man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit
Adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Thou that
make thy Boast of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? For
the Name of God is blasphemed, -- through you.

Nor is it enough, that they be free from visible Scandals; but they should
moreover be exemplary in their Life and Conversation, showing themselves
Patterns of good Works, and causing their Lights to shine before Men, that they
may see their good Works, and be induced thereby to glorify God their heavenly
Father: For a Bishop, says St. Paul, must be blameless, as the Steward of God;
not self-willed, not soon angry, not give to Wine, no Striker not given to
filthy Lucre; but a Lover of Hospitality, a Lover of good Men, sober, just,
holy, temperate. Tit. i. 7, 8.

Not that it is ever to be expected of any of them, that they should be
entirely without Fault, or perfect in any Christian Grace and Virtue, in this
World: For they are Men of like Passions and Infirmities, with others; and all
reasonable Allowances are to be made for them, as for other Men, on the Score
of humane Frailties, and the Temptations, both from within and from without,
which befall them in the World. But I go on to say,

2. They must be authorized, or regularly called and separated unto this Work.

Merely a Man's being qualified for, does not give him a Right or Authority, to
execute the Ministerial Office. In order to this, there must be a regular
Introduction into it. Heb. v. 4. And no Man takes this Honor to himself, but
he that is called of GOD, as was Aaron. It is very assuming, and dangerous
Presumption, for any to thrust himself into this sacred Office!

The Apostles received their Commission and Authority immediately from Christ,
the Supreme Head of the Church; As, during his personal Ministry on Earth, he
gave them a temporary Commission to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, with
this express Command, And as ye go, preach, saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is at
Hand, Mat. x. 7; so, after his Resurrection, he renewed and enlarged their
Commission, saying, All Power is given unto me, in Heaven and in Earth. Go ye
therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all Things
whatsoever I have commended you; and lo, I am with you, always, even unto the
End of the World. Amen. Mat. xxviii. 18, 19, 20. And them he specially
qualified for this Trust, by conferring on them the extraordinary Gifts of the
HOLY GHOST; and to them, and to the World, he gave abundant Testimony of the
Truth of their Mission.

St. Paul also, was immediately called and sent by Christ, to preach the
Gospel: Wherefore he styles himself, Paul an Apostle, (not of Men, neither by
Man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the Dead,)
Gal. i. 1. Nevertheless, he was, by the special Direction of the Holy Ghost,
separated unto the Work of the Ministry, by the Prophets and Teachers at
Antioch; to whom, as they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost
said, separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the Work whereunto I have called them.
And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their Hands on them, they sent
them away. Acts xiii. 2, 3. Hence, perhaps, it is, that he styles himself, Romans
i. 1. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto
the Gospel of GOD.

But we do not read of any, since the Apostolic. Age, that were immediately
called and sent by Christ, to preach the Gospel: Nor has Christ, any where,
intimated in his Word, that he would, in this Manner, send forth his Ministers
in Time to come. But he left it with his Apostles, under the Inspiration of the
HOLY GHOST, to settle the Order of the Churches, which they should gather, and
found, in his Name, and to order Elders, or Pastors and Teachers, in them. And
it is evident, that those whom the Apostles chose, and set apart to the Work of
the Ministry, had Authority likewise to ordain others to it; particularly, that
Timothy and Titus had: To the former of which, St. Paul gave this express
Charge, 2 Timothy ii. 1, 2. Thou therefore, my Son, be strong in the Grace that is
in Christ Jesus. And the Things that thou have heard of me among many
Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach
others also: And to the latter he writes, Tit. i. 5. For this Cause left I thee
in Crete, that thou should set in Order the Things that are wanting, and
ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. And this Power of
Ordination, is (as it was doubtless designed to be) conveyed down in the
Christian Church; and those who, according to Gospel Order, are called and
separated to the Work of the Ministry, may be said to be allowed of God to be
put in Trust with the Gospel.

And whatever Disputes there have been and are, about the Right and Power of
Ordination, and in whose Hands it is lodged; yet that there is such a Power,
somewhere in the Christian Church, is generally allowed: And since we find no
Examples in Scripture, of any being ordained to the Work of the Ministry, but
only by authorized Ministers, nor any particular Directions given, relating
hereunto, but only to such; we may, I think, safely conclude, that the Power of
Ordination, if it be not absolutely limited and confined to them, does yet in
some special and peculiar Manner belong unto them; and that however particular
Churches may have a natural Right to elect their own Pastors, yet it is
requisite, that they should be solemnly separated to the Pastoral Office over
them, by the Pastors of other Churches invited thereunto, with Fasting and
Prayer, and Imposition of Hands.

And as for those who thrust themselves, or are thrust by others, into the Work
of the Ministry, in a disorderly Way and Manner, which the Holy Scriptures do
not direct to, or countenance, they are, in my Opinion, to be looked upon and
treated not as true Ministers of the Gospel; but as bold Intruders, the
Authority of whose Mission, and the Validity of whose Administrations, want
Proof.

But I must proceed to show,

III. That it greatly concerns those that are entrusted with the Gospel, to
preach the same, not as pleasing Men, but God, who tries their Hearts.

For the Illustration of this Point, I shall undertake to show,

First, How the Gospel is to be preached so as to please, not Men, but GOD. And,

Secondly, That it greatly concerns those that are entrusted with the Gospel,
so to preach the same, not as pleasing Men, but God, who tries the Hearts.

First, I am to show, how the Gospel is to be preached, so as to please not
Men, but GOD.

Now this evidently intends, that the Gospel be preached by the Ministers of
it, with a special View, not to sooth and gratify the vain Humors and Fancies
of Men, or to court their Approbation and Applause, but to honor and please
GOD, and to gain his Approbation and Acceptance: Otherwise the Apostle Paul
did, and every Minister should, seek to please Men, for their Spiritual Good,
by becoming all Things to all Men, as far as is allowable and consistent with
the faithful Discharge of his Office; and endeavoring to please all Men in all
Things, not seeking his own Profit, but the Profit of many that may saved, 1
Cor. x. 33.

To preach the Gospel in this Manner, is to preach it according to the Will of
GOD, and as his Oracles direct. Particularly,

1. Purely and truly: And that both as to Matter and Manner.

As to the Matter; it must be the true and pure Gospel. Jer. xxiii. 28. He that
has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully. As it is the Gospel, and
Nothing else, that is committed in Trust unto the Ministers of it, so this is
what they are to preach in the Simplicity and Purity of it, without adding to,
or diminishing from it. They must not preach for Doctrines, the Commandments
and mere Opinions of Men; but their Discourses should be taken from, and framed
to the Gospel-Model. Tit. ii. 1. But speak thou the Things which become sound
Doctrine. This will please GOD, who is a Being of infinite Truth and Purity,
however it may displease Men, whose Lusts and Corruptions are hereby opposed
and irritated,

As to the Manner; it must not be handled craftily and sophistically, to
gratify the unreasonable Humors and distempered Appetites of Men; but rightly
divided and truly dispensed; -- the Truths of it set in a just and convincing
Light, and sincerely and faithfully urged, so as will be most likely to take
Effect, and reach its true End. For we are not (says St. Paul) as many, which
corrupt the Word of GOD; But as of Sincerity, but as of God, in the Sight of
God, speak we in Christ, 2 Cor. ii. 17. But have renounced the hidden Things of
Dishonesty, not walking in Craftiness, nor handling the Word of God
deceitfully, but by Manifestation of the Truth, commending ourselves to every
Man's Conscience in the Sight of GOD. 2 Cor. iv. 2.

2. With all suitable Plainness and Clearness.

As it is the Duty of Ministers to explain and set home the Truths of the
Gospel, so it should be their Concern, to speak in a clear and distinct Manner,
and to adapt their Discourse and Language to the Understanding of Men, and the
Capacities of their Hearers. We, says St. Paul, use great Plainness of Speech,
2 Cor. iii. 12. And Ministers should, in like Manner, in their Pulpit
Discourses, study Plainness of Speech; not, indeed, in Opposition to that which
is correct, decent, graceful, nervous, and pungent, but to that which is
obscure, lofty and unintelligible, loose and incoherent: Instead of darkening
Counsel, by Words without Knowledge, and using Words of awful Sound, without
any Meaning, and affecting an intricate Style, they should endeavor, by plain
and wholesome Language, to set the Truths of the Gospel, which they preach, in
a clear, distinct and naked Light, so as they may not lose their native Force
and Efficacy upon the Hearts and Consciences of Men; but that all may learn and
understand them. And I, Brethren, says St. Paul to the Corinthians, when I came
to you, came not with Excellency of Speech, or of Wisdom, declaring unto you
the Testimony of GOD, -- and my Speech, and my Preaching was not with enticing
Words of Man's Wisdom, but in Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power: That
your Faith should not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of GOD. 1
Cor. ii. 1, 4, 5.

3. With all becoming Confidence and Boldness.

As Ministers are to speak GOD'S Word, and in GOD'S Name, so they should speak
with Confidence and Boldness, becoming the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts.
They should not be ashamed of the Gospel, or mealy-mouthed in delivering the
Messages of it, but declare them faithfully and courageously, whether Men will
hear, or whether they will forbear; not regarding the Persons, or fearing the
Displeasure and Threats, and Ill-treatment of Men; but imitating the Apostle
Paul, and his Fellow Laborers, who tells the Thessalonians, Verse 2, of the
Context, But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully
entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God, to speak unto you
the Gospel of God, with much Contention.

4. With Affection and Zeal; animated by a pure Love to GOD and Christ, and a
tender Compassion to the Souls of Men.

As it is the special Work of Ministers, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of
God, and to unfold the Mysteries of Divine Love to fallen Men, in their
Redemption by Jesus Christ; so their Hearts should be deeply impressed, and
duly inflamed with this Love: And with this Spirit should they preach the
Gospel; not out of Envy and Strife, but of Good Will; not by Constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind; not seeking Glory from
Men, but out of sincere Love to GOD and JESUS CHRIST, and a holy Jealousy for
and Concern to promote the Honor of GOD and the REDEEMER. This is clearly
intimated to us in that Question, which our blessed LORD so often put to Peter,
when he committed to him the Care of Feeding his Sheep and his Lambs, John xxi.
15. Simon, Son of Jonas, love thou me more than these? And happy the
Minister, that can, by the like solemn Appeal, answer and say as he did, Lord,
thou know all Things; thou know that I love thee, ver. 17. And with the
same Spirit or Compassion and Tenderness, which the kind and benevolent
Redeemer showed to precious and immortal Souls, whom he dearly purchased with
his own Blood, should his Ministers dispense the Word of Life unto them;
Traveling as it were in Birth for them, till Christ be formed in them;
Laboring diligently and fervently among them; and willingly spending their
Time and Strength for the Good of their Souls, and promoting their Salvation.
In this Manner, and with this Spirit did St. Paul preach the Gospel: (See V. 7,
8, of the Cont.) But we were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her
Children: So, being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have
imparted unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because
ye were dear unto us. And the like extraordinary Affection and Zeal should all
Ministers, in the Course of their sacred Ministrations, exercise and discover
toward the Souls, committed to their Care and Charge: So, as to be able to say
as he did, Phil. i. 8. God is my Record, how greatly I long after you all in
the Bowels of Jesus Christ.

5 Fully, in the whole Compass of it.

As the Gospel is a perfect and complete Rule of Religion, so the Whole of it
is to be preached. GOD virtually says to every Gospel-Minister, as he said, by
his Angel, to the Apostles Acts V. 20. Go, stand, and speak in the Temple unto
the People, all the Words of this Life. The Whole of it is of Use, and designed
for spiritual Good and Benefit. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God,
and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness; that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good Works. ii Tim. iii. 16, 17. And the Whole is to be declared, and nothing
of Importance to be concealed or designedly omitted. The lesser Matters of the
Gospel should not be passed over in Silence, but the more weighty and important
Truths thereof are chiefly to be insisted upon: Such as concern the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, his personal Characters and Glories, his Mediatoreal Kingdom, Offices,
and Benefits -- The Grace and Love, and other Perfections of GOD, shining forth
in his Works, especially in the Gospel-Scheme of Salvation -- The Nature and
Office of the HOLY-SPIRIT, and the Necessity of his Agency and Influence, in
the Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, and forming them to a divine Temper
and Life -- Man's Apostasy, Depravity, and Guilt -- The Nature and Necessity of
Repentance toward God, and of Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and of
Evangelical Obedience, in Order, either, to our being justified, and received
to a State of Peace, Favor and Acceptance with God, and enjoying the Comforts
and Satisfactions of Religion here, or to our inheriting eternal Life hereafter.

In a Word; all the Doctrines and Instructions, all the Councils and Warnings,
all the Precepts and Duties, all the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel
should be carefully set in a true and just Light, and Men's Faith in, and
Compliance with them urged and inculcated, and nothing kept back, through Deceit,
or Fear of offending and displeasing Men, which is necessary for them to know,
believe, and do, in Order to their escaping the Wrath to come, and obtaining
the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal Life; so as to be able, in the
Review, to appeal to their Flock, and say, in the Words of St. Paul, Acts xx
26, 27. Wherefore I take you to Record this Day, that I am pure from the Blood
of all Men: For I have not shunned to heclare unto you all the Counsel of God.

Thus must Ministers preach the Gospel, if they would do it, not as pleasing
Men, but God.

Wherefore I proceed to show,

Secondly, That it greatly concern those, that are entrusted with the Gospel,
to preach the same, not as pleasing Men, but God, who tries their Hearts.

In doing this, I shall confine my self to what is suggested to us in the Words
of the Text.

The Gospel is committed in Trust to the Ministers of it, which implies a
special Obligation upon them to preach it faithfully. Let a Man, says St. Paul,
so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries
of God. Moreover it is required in Stewards, that a Man be found faithful, 1.
Cor. iv. 1, 2. As this Trust is committed unto them, not by Man merely, but by
GOD of whom they are allowed to be put in Trust with the Gospel, so it greatly
concerns them, to discharge it to his Honor, Approbation, and Acceptance,
whose Servants they especially are; and not to betray it, by an unfaithful
Execution of it, or seeking chiefly to please Men. For do I now persuade Men,
or God? Or do I seek to please Men? For if I yet pleased Men, I should not be
the Servant of Christ, is the Language of our Apostle Gal. i. 10.

Moreover, They are accountable to God for the Discharge of this sacred Trust,
which is committed unto them: They watch for Souls, as they that must give
Account. Heb. xiii. 17. They are entrusted with the Care of their own, and
other's Souls for which they are accountable to GOD; that neither the one, nor
the other, be lost, through their sinful Carelessness, and Neglect: Which further
shows the vast Importance of their not pleasing Men, but GOD, so as to be able
to give up their Account with Joy, and not with Grief.

And what greatly adds to the Importance hereof, and makes it a Matter of
infinite and everlasting Concernment unto them, is, that herein they have to do
with that GOD, who tries their Hearts. The GOD, whom Ministers serve in the
Gospel, and with whom they, as well as others, have to do, is no other than the
omniscient JEHOVAH, who claims it as his Prerogative to search the Hearts, and
try the Reins, even to give every Man according to his Ways, and according to
the Fruit of his Doing Jer. xvii. 10.
, and who, in the great Day of Reckoning, will manifest his Approbation, or
Disapprobation of them, according as they have been upright, and faithful to
him or not: Their being Ministers of the Gospel, will not prevent their being
accursed, and meeting with a heavy Doom, if they are of unsanctified Hearts and
Lives, and have done the Work of the Lord deceitfully: How much soever they may
have pleased, and gained the Applause of Men, they will be disowned and
rejected by GOD, with whom there is no Respect of Persons, in the Day when he
shall judge the Secret, as well as open Actions, of Men by Jesus Christ,
according to the Gospel Romans 11.10.
: However instrumental they may have been in saving other's Souls, they will
lose their own: Or however they may be able to plead in that Day, as we read
many shall, Matt. vii. 22. Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? And
in thy Name have cast out Devils? And in thy Name done many wonderful Works? He
will publicly disown them, and will profess unto them, as in ver. 23. I never
knew you: Depart from me, ye that work Iniquity.

But if they have uprightly and faithfully preached the Gospel, not as pleasing
Men, but God, and adorned it by a holy and well ordered Conversation, they
shall be approved and accepted of him, and shall receive a Prophets Reward in
the Kingdom of Heaven, and be made to shine, with the Wise, as the Brightness
of the Firmament, and with them that turn many to Righteousness, as the Star
for ever and ever. Dan. xii. 3.

The Words, thus considered, afford several useful Reflections, suitable to the
solemn Occasion of this Day* Such as,

The Divine Wisdom and Goodness in the Institution of the Gospel Ministry; not
only in Regard to the special Design of it, viz. The spiritual Instruction and
eternal Salvation of ignorant and sinful Men; but also, in committing this Work
to Men of like Passions with others, and so, Speaking to them, and carrying on
his Treaty of Peace and Reconciliation with them, in a Manner best accommodated
to their Frame and Make, by such Ambassadors, whose Terror does not make them
afraid, and with whom they may freely and familiarly converse, about their
eternal Interest and Concerns, without any Amazement --

The vast Weight and Importance of the Ministerial Office; as it immediately
relates to the Souls of Men, and their future eternal Interests, and the great
Difficulty of performing it, in a right and acceptable Manner, so as to be unto
God a sweet Savor of Christ, both in them that are saved, and in them that
perish. -- A deep and awful Sense of which made an Apostle, and may well make
the most able and best qualified Minister, cry out who is sufficient for these
Things? 2 Cor, 11.10.
--

The Care and Concern which Candidates for the Ministry should use, in
furnishing themselves for this sacred and important Trust, and acquiring all
necessary and suitable Qualifications for it --

The Caution incumbent upon Ministers, to lay Hands suddenly upon no Man, and
not to introduce into the Ministry any, who are ignorant, or vicious, or in any
other Respect, manifestly unqualified and unfit for it --

The great Hazard and Presumption, of weak, illeterate, and unqualified Men,
disorderly, thrusting themselves into this, so sacred, and tremendous an
Office; and the sinfulness of countenancing and Encouraging them herein --

Finally, The Gratitude and Joy, with which People ought to receive the
Ministers of the Gospel, who come to them in Christ's Name, bringing the glad
Tidings of Salvation, and preaching Peace by Jesus Christ, -- the singular
Affection and Esteem, which they should show to them, and treat them with, for
their Work's Sake, -- and the Respect and Submission, which it concerns them,
to yield to them, in all their sacred Ministrations, so as that they may prove
a Savor of Life unto Life, and not a Savor of Death unto Death, unto their
Souls --

But waving all Enlargement upon these Things, I shall finish the Discourse,
with a particular Address; First, To the Person who is now to be solemnly
separated unto the Work of the Gospel Ministry in this Place; and Secondly to
the People, that have invited him to receive this Trust, and herewith the
Pastoral Care and Charge of their Souls.

And First, To you Dear Sir, who are now to be put in Trust with the Gospel, by
being solemnly separated unto the Work of the Ministry in this Place,

As it is, at your earnest Request, that I stand here your Monitor, on this
solemn, but joyful Occasion, so what has been said, in the preceding
Discourse. with a special View to your Instruction, may serve, in some Measure,
to give you a Representation of the Nature and Importance of that great and
difficult Work, which you are engaging in; and also to quicken you to a just
Concern to perform it, not as pleasing Men but God, who tries your Heart.

I doubt not, Sir, but you have been deeply pondering the Greatness, and the
Difficulties of this Work, and the awful Consequences of it, both to your own
Soul, and the Souls of others, so as that it is, with much Fear and Trembling,
self Diffidence, and an humble Dependence on the Grace and Strength of the
All-sufficient Redeemer, you undertake it. It certainly behooves you to
consecrate yourself unto GOD, in this Service, under a deep and awful Sense of
the Solemnity and Importance of it, and your own Insufficiency for it. And
having received this Trust, now to be committed to you, it will lie upon you to
discharge it, with the utmost Integrity and Faithfulness, becoming a Minister
of JESUS CHRIST.

You will therefore, according to that Apostolic Exhortation 1. Tim. iv. 16.
Take heed unto thy SELF and unto thy DOCTRINE; Continue in them: For in doing
this, thou shall both save thy SELF, and THEM that hear thee.

You will see to it in the first Place, that your own Soul be formed and
attempered to the Religion of the Gospel, That you gain an intimate,
experimental, and saving Knowledge of, and Acquaintance with those divine
Truths, which you are to preach unto others: Lest, by any Means, when you have
preached to them, you your self should be a Castaway.

You will labor to furnish your self with all Ministerial Gifts and
Accomplishments, and to increase in them, by giving your self to Reading,
Meditation, and Prayer.

You will diligently consult the sacred Oracles, and make them the Rule of your
Preaching, and of all your sacred Ministrations: and study to show your self
approved unto God, a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing
the Word of Truth; and giving unto every one his Meat in due Season.

You will be concerned to preach the Gospel truly and purely, plainly and
distinctly, affectionately and zealously, boldly and fully, so as to instruct
and establish your Hearers in the firm Belief, and steady Practice, of all the
important Truths of Christianity, and to make them fruitful in all the Branches
and Duties of the Christian Temper and Life.

You will faithfully warn the Wicked and Impenitent, set before them their Sin
and Danger, and endeavor, by all the powerful Persuasives of the Gospel to
bring them to Repentance, and to espouse them to Jesus Christ: Lest they should
die in their Sins, and their Blood should be required at your Hands.

You will Labor to build up Believers in the most holy Faith, and animate them
to Stedfastness and Perseverance in well doing; constantly affirming, that they
which have believed in God, should be careful to maintain good Works.

You will let none be beneath, nor any above, your Watch and Care; but, with a
godly Jealousy for them all, will exhort, and comfort; and charge every one, as
a Father does his Children, that they would walk worthy of God, who has called
them unto his Kingdom, and Glory. -- Warning every Man, and Teaching every Man
in all Wisdom, that you may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus.

In a Word, you will be careful to adorn and recommend the Doctrine of Christ
Jesus, by a blameless and well-ordered Conversation; giving none Offense in any
Thing, that the Ministry be not blamed; but in all Things approving your self
as a Minister of God in much Pattence. in Afflictions, in Necessities, in
Distresses, -- in Labors, in Watchings, in Fasting, by Pureness, by Knowledge,
by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the
Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by the Armor of Righteousness on the Right
Hand, and on the Left.

And for your Support, Comfort, and Encouragement, remember, that however weak
and insufficient you are, in your self, for this Work; yet he, who has called
you unto it, is able to make all Grace abound toward you, in spiritual as well
as temporal Regards; that you always having all Sufficiency in all Things, may
abound to every good Work: In a continual Dependence therefore upon his Aid and
Assistance, go forth, and stand, and feed both the Sheep, and the Lambs, of
this Flock, in the Name and Strength of the Lord.

So doing, you shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ, and may humbly hope
for his Presence with, and Blessing upon you, in your Ministry. This at least,
you may be assured of; that you shall be unto God a sweet Savor of Christ,
both in them that are saved, and in them that perish; that, though Israel should
not be gathered, yet, you shall be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord; and, when
the chief Shepherd shall appear, to reward his faithful Servants, you shall
receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

I would now, secondly, address my self, to the Church and People of God in
this Place.

As this Servant of the Lord, is this Day, solemnly consecrating himself to the
special Service of Christ, and of your Souls, in the Work of the
Gospel Ministry, it concerns you to receive him as a precious Gift of our
ascended Lord and Savior, with all Joy and Thankfulness: As it is written, How
beautiful are the Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad
Tidings of good Things! May he come to you in the Fullness of the Blessing of
the Gospel of Christ, and you receive, and long enjoy, a rich Blessing in him.

Take Heed that you do not despise him; but esteem him very highly in Love for
his Work's Sake: And be at Peace among your Selves.

And considering the Greatness and Importance of his Work, and how much your
own Souls, as well as his, are concerned in the faithful Performance of it, be
ye Helpers together with him, by doing all that is any way incumbent upon you
to encourage, and nothing to dishearten him.

While therefore he is ministering to you spiritual Things, cheerfully minister
unto him of your carnal Things, sufficient for his outward Support and Comfort;
that he, being free from too much worldly Encumbrance, may give himself to the
Ministry of the Word: For even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1. Cor. ix. 14.

Watch not with envious Eyes for his Halting; but diligently mark, and follow
his Virtues; and cast the Mantle of Charity over his Infirmities.

Brethren, Pray for him: Pray much and fervently for the Presence of Christ
with him, and a Divine Blessing upon his Ministry; that the Word of the Lord,
dispensed by him, may have free Course, and be glorified among you.

Diligently attend on his Ministry, and receive the Word of the Lord, at his
Mouth; not as the Word of Man, but (as it is in Truth) the Word of God, which
effectually works also in you that believe.

As nothing will be more dangerous to your own Souls, so nothing will be a
greater Grief and Burden to his, than for you to slight, despise, and forsake
his Ministry. And as then only you can expect to profit by his Ministry, when
you duly attend upon it, and receive and obey the Messages he brings you from
GOD; so not (...) will more encourage and rejoice his Heart, while he is (...)
longing for and seeking your Salvation, than to behold your Order, and the
Stedfastness of your Faith in Christ. This will cause in him through Christ many
Thanksgivings to God for you: This will greatly delight, and enliven him in his
Work. For then will he say, now I live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. In a
Word, then will you be his Hope and Joy here, and his Crown of Rejoicing
hereafter: For, to use the Apostles Words in the 19th and 20th Verses of the
Context, what is his Hope, or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing? Are not even ye in
the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye being (fruitful
under his Ministry) are his Glory and Joy.

And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are
sanctified. May the great Head of the Church, the Head of all Divine
Influences, bless the Labors of this his Servant among you, and make them
abundantly succesful, for your spiritual Edification, and eternal Welfare; that
so you may enjoy much mutual Comfort here, in each other's Faith and Love; and
finally be received to the Realms of perfect Light and Felicity above, where
you shall eternally rejoice together with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
Faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy, to the only wise
God our Savior be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and ever,
Amen.

FINIS.

