A LETTER To a FRIEND; Giving a concise, but just, Account, according to the
Advices hitherto received, OF THE OHIO-Defeat; AND Pointing out also the many
good Ends, this inglorious Event is naturally adapted to promote: OR, Showing
wherein it is fitted to advance the Interest of all the American British
Colonies. To which is added, Some general Account of the New England Forces,
with what they have already done, counter-ballancing the above Loss.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by Edes and Gill, at their Printing-Office,
next to the Prison in Queen Street, M,DCC,LV.

A LETTER relating to the OHIO-Defeat.
SIR,
AS you live at a distance from the seat of news, and may know nothing of the
Ohio-Defeat but from hearsay-reports, which, having passed through a variety of
hands before they have reached you, must be very uncertain, and mixed with a
great deal that is not true, I have been at the pains, for your gratification,
to put together, from the best accounts, the whole of what may be depended on
for fact, in relation to this interesting affair to all the British American
Governments: And if I should hereupon add a few thoughts, tending to point out
to you wherein this defeat, however inglorious in itself, is yet naturally and
powerfully adapted to serve these Colonies in the end, it may give some relief
to your anxious mind, and dispose you to wait, with a becoming submission, the
issue of those military operations which are but just begun.

The first news of this defeat was bro't us in a letter from Col. Innes, dated
July 11th, in these words, I have this moment received the melancholy news of
the defeat of our troops, the General killed and numbers of our officers, our
whole artillery taken. In short, the account I have received is so very bad,
that, as please God, I intend to make a stand here. It Is highly necessary to
raise the militia every where to defend the Frontiers. It at once appeared to
every one, from the general air and strain of this letter, that the aged
Colonel was under the influence of a strong panic when he wrote it, for which
reason we were disposed to hope, that matters were not so bad as he had
suggested; and by after contradictory accounts we were encouraged in this hope,
till the second of this instant, when, upon the arrival of the western post, it
was put beyond all doubt, by a variety of letters, that the Ohio-reincounter
was, on our side, every way as disadvantageous as we were at first led to
conceive it to be.

By comparing the accounts we have hitherto received, it appears, that the
General proceeded from the little meadows with about 1300 men, mostly British,
besides the necessary artillery, ammunition, and provisions, leaving the main
body of the convoy under the care of Col. Dunbar, with orders to join him as
soon as possible; that on the 9th of July the Monongahela was passed first by
300 men* then by 200, then by the General himself, with the column of
artillery, baggage, and main body of the army, about one o'clock; that
immediately upon this a quick and heavy fire was heard from the front; that the
detachments of the 2 and 300 men gave way, and fell back in great consternation
upon the main body, who were hastening to sustain them; that this struck the
men with such a panic, and bro't on such confusion as could not, by any
expedients, be afterward remedied; and that in consequence of this,
notwithstanding the courage and resolution of the officers, the enemy obtained
a complete victory, killing and wounding a great many, At the lowest
computation, between 6 and 700 soldiers, officers and private men, were killed,
or wounded, besides pioneers, waggoners, servants, and c.
and obliging the rest to quit the ground, leaving behind them the artillery,
ammunition, provisions, and whole baggage.

The number of the enemy remains still somewhat uncertain. One of the officers
writes, "it was impossible by the disposition of the French and Indians to
judge of their number." Another is pretty certain, "that they did not exceed
above 3 or 400." A Gentleman from Philadelphia of good intelligence says, "by
the best accounts there were about 400 Indians and 80 French." I am inclined to
think, they were not much more numerous; for if they had, they would probably
have cut off the whole army, as they had so great an advantage against them,
and fired, not in the European way, but by taking aim, in which method of
firing the Canadians, as well as Indians, are very dextrious.

But whether their number was great, or small, they made sad havoc of our men.
Perhaps, all circumstances considered, history will scarce furnish an instance
of such a dreadful carnage. To be sure, the like was never before seen in
North America: Nor could it have happened, humanly speaking, without great
misconduct, either in the officers, or soldiers, or both. Some are pleased to
lay the blame on the soldiers; speaking of them as cowards, and as leaving
their officers to fall a sacrifice to the enemy. Others seem to think, the
chief commander was rather principally faulty in not using due caution, and a
prudent forecast, to guard the men against the surprise which involved them in
destruction.

It does not come within my present design to enter upon an enquiry into the
blameable source of this mischief; though you will unavoidably perceive my
opinion about it, by reading what I have to offer with respect to the tendency
of it finally to serve the interest of even all the British American Colonies.

I readily own, this defeat, in many respects, is a terrible evil. Great
dishonor has been reflected on the British arms; -- the Indians will be more
strongly attached to the French than ever; -- the French are inspired with
greater courage and resolution, while, at the same time, their strength is very
much increased by the artillery, ammunition, and stores, bro't by us, within 7
miles of their fort, at an immense expense of labor and money: Besides all
which, our southern colonies are thrown into perplexity and confusion, and lie
doubly exposed to the depredations of the savages of the wilderness. -- But
these things notwithstanding, it may be best, in the end, we have met with this
loss. Shameful and mischievous as it is, it may be one of the grand links in
that chain of causes, by which Heaven may intend to chastise the French, curb
their insolence, drive them out of the encroachments they have made on us, and
reduce them to a necessity of keeping within their own boundaries without
disturbing us in the possession of ours. These, I would hope, are the
beneficial consequences aimed at by providence: Nor, as I imagine, could any
thing have happened more naturally and strongly adapted to bring into effect
such happy events.

It Is too evident to be disputed, that the southern Colonies needed something
EXTRAORDINARY to rouse them out of that deep security I very justly speak of
them as in deep security; for though it was the greatest part of a year from the
time of Col. Washington's defeat to the arrival of General Braddock in
Virginia, yet they had not raised so many as one 1000 men to join the troops
from England; which we, in these parts, can attribute to nothing but their
being, to an high degree, careless and secure: Especially when we consider,
that this is not one fifth part of the men that have been raised in the
Massachusetts-Province only, in a much less time, though they were not under the
like necessity.
they were unhappily sunk into. Had they had a just sense of their danger from
the French, who were settling and fortifying on their back-lands; had they in
time wisely concerted, and vigorously executed, measures for driving them off,
they might easily have done it, and at a comparatively small expense. It was
unaccountable inattention to their own safety that bro't them into those
circumstances, which gave rise to the embarkation of troops from home, and a
greater national charge following thereupon than has ever been expended upon
the northern Colonies, from their first settlement to this day. And the
destruction of these troops, in so striking a way, accompanied with such loss
and disappointment, is eminently fitted to alarm their fears, awaken in them a
sense of danger, and constrain them to speed and vigor, in prosecuting
methods, both for guarding themselves, and annoying the French. And should it
operate to the production of these good effects, as it naturally tends to do,
the damage in the end, would be more than counter-ballanced. For there are more
than 40 Englishmen in the southern settlements to one Frenchman; and where the
disproportion is so great, they must be capable, under a common blessing, of
putting it out of the power of the French to do them any harm, Pennsylvania
only contains more inhabitants than the Province of the Massachusetts. And it
would be strange, if that province, with Maryland, Virginia, and the two
Carolinas, were not vastly more than a match for the comparatively few French,
who are such bad neighbors to them. Had we, in New England, no settlements and
fortresses behind us superior to those on the back of them, we should esteem
ourselves quite safe, not thinking we had any thing to fear from the French,
though we had no assistance from Great Britain.
unless they are madly resolved to continue careless and inactive; which cannot
well be supposed after the late occurrence, so powerfully suited to excite in
them a becoming concern for the security of their liberties and properties One
would have though it it could not be supposed, but that the southern colonies, by
what has happened among them, should have been excited to an immediate care for
their own safety; but we hear, to our very great surprise, that Maryland and
Virginia have done nothing as yet; that Philadelphia is in a wrangle about the
method of supplying money; and that New York have revoked their vote to raise
400 men, though they had forwarded this vote to the Massachusetts-Government:
Upon which I would only say, they are in a more profound sleep than I imagined;
but I doubt not, they will be tho'-roughly roused, when they find, that the
people in their out-settlements are killed, or captivated, or obliged to retire
into the heart of their country for safety, as will soon be the case, and the
sooner for their present carelessness, and to their far greater cost.


Our southern brethren, it must be acknowledged, have not been used to military
expeditions. The sooner therefore they are put upon them the better. For their
being used to them will, I believe, be found the ONLY STABLE FOUNDATION upon
which, under the smiles of Heaven, and the well conducted assistance of
Great Britain, they may expect to hold their possessions without molestation
from the French. And providence may be opening the way for THIS STABLE
FOUNDATION by the present evil event, the rather adapted to this purpose,
because so extraordinary in its circumstances. The steps by which it leads
hereto are easily discernable, though they may be though it tedious and burdensome.
They will, by means of this disaster, be more liable than they ever were before
to the incursions of the Natives, set on and strengthened by the perfidious
French; this will put them under, what I may call, an happy necessity of
raising considerable numbers of men to protect their Frontiers, and scour the
Woods; this will inure their men to hardships, and insensibly teach them the
art of war, as it ought to be carried on in a wilderness-land: and, in
consequence of these things, they will soon have within themselves a power
sufficient for their own defense, and capable of being employed offensively
too, as there may be occasion.

This is the way in which the northern colonies have had numbers of men, from
generation to generation, trained up for war, and inspired with martial courage
disposing them, with all readiness, to go forth against the enemy, whether
French, or Indian, or both, as they have been called thereto. And were the
southern colonies, in the same way, formed for military exploits, it would be
an easy thing, with comparatively little help from home, wisely conducted, to
drive the French, not only out of their encroachments, but out of these parts
of the earth. And perhaps this may be the view of providence; and the
Ohio-defeat may be one of the grand steps leading to it, by alarming the
English colonies, the southern ones in special, and putting them upon the
acquirement and exercise of martial skill and valor, even from necessity.

This defeat has an obvious tendency also to answer another very good purpose,
it may be, the most important of any in order to success in our attempts
against the French; and this is, the effecting an alteration in some material
articles, as they respect the military power that may be employed to this end.

It has been though it necessary, that the chief Command should be lodged in a
British Officer of known courage, and experience in the art of war as practiced
in Europe. This gave rise to the appearance of General Braddock in Virginia, as
Head of all his Majesty's forces in North America. And to this, I believe, it
may principally be attributed, that we met with such ill success on the banks
of the Monongahela. Not that I question the personal valor of this Gentleman,
or his military skill in the regular way: But he had no Idea of the manner of
fighting in use here, and therefore wholly neglected the only effectual
expedients to guard against the fatal consequences that arose from it. It does
not indeed look very likely, that a stranger to the country, and one altogether
unacquainted with its warlike methods, which are known to be quite different
from what they are in Europe, should be the best qualified person to have the
chief hand in planing, and executing, the hostile schemes necessary for our
protection and security, The present melancholy event is, all circumstances
considered, surprizingly calculated to give instruction and warning upon this
head: Nor, after such dear bought experience, is it probable we shall again
have our first military officer from home. Or should this be still though it
necessary, we may reasonably hope, he will be so restrained as not to have it
in his Power to act, but with the advice of some thoroughly experienced
American actually present with him. Had General Braddock been thus restrained,
it is morally certain, he would not have been so shamefully surprised and beat.
It does not appear, that he wanted good advice; and some are of opinion, that
if he had hearkened to it, not holding those in too great contempt, who, though
inferior to him in regular military skill, were yet better acquainted with the
methods proper to be used with such an enemy as he had to engage with, he might
have been alive at this day, and in circumstances to have forced Du Quesne out
of the hands of the French.

The American provincial troops, the New England ones in particular, who have
exposed themselves to hardships and hazards for their King and Country, and by
their bravery done eminent service for both, may have been too much neglected,
I mean in those appointments which are the proper reward of military merit. The
Regiments upon the establishment ordered to be raised this year, in these
colonies, were so supplied with British officers, that room was left for only
here and there one of an American descent; and perhaps room would not have been
left even for these few, had it not been a necessary expedient in order to the
filling up of the regiments. Nor is this the first time, that as brave men as
any in the world have been treated with like neglect. It Is well known,
New England gave peace to Europe, not many years ago, by the valor of their men
in reducing Cape-Breton; and yet, these very men were strangely overlooked in
the appointment of officers for the two Regiments that were raised, even from
among themselves, for the securing that important acquisition; that is to say,
New England men did all the service, both in taking and keeping this strong
fortress, and one and another from Great Britain were put into most of the
posts of honor and profit, to the exclusion of those who had merited them, and
were, without any reflection; as well capable of filling them. A different
conduct seems necessary; if any thing is ever intended to be done to good
purpose against the French, in these parts of the world. And the late horrid
slaughter of British officers, as well as private soldiers, may have a tendency
to bring it about. It is certainly adapted to such a purpose. For it is now
made manifest, and in a way that cannot fail, one would think, of convincing
even all England, that neither British officers, nor private soldiers, without
American assistance, can be depended on for success against American enemies.

Had General Braddock been opposed by French Regulars only, he would probably
have met with little interruption in his progress; but, as he had to do with
the Canadians and Indians, who fought in a way he was an entire stranger to, he
soon fell a prey into their hands: Nor would numbers have served him; they
would only have given occasion for a more horrible slaughter of men. The plain
truth is, Regular troops, in this Wilderness-country, are just the same that
irregular ones would be in Flanders. American irregulars would easily be
confounded by regular troops in the open fields of Europe; and regular troops
would be as easily reduced to the like confusion by American irregulars in the
woods here.

I would not be understood to mean by what I here say, as though we did not need
regular troops, or could not make use of them to good purpose. For, as France
has sent over a considerable number of their regulars, it is highly proper
there should be regulars to oppose them; and, in laying seige to their
fortifications, regulars are the fittest to be employed: But, as there is no
way of marching to the French fortresses, or to their regulars, either in, or
out of them, but through the American woods and thickets, the best regular troops
that could be sent us would, without all doubt, be attacked in their march; and
should this be the case, they would probably be soon destroyed, or obliged to
retreat with loss, not being skilled in the only method of fighting that would
be of any real service to them. General Braddock's defeat is a practical
instance that must forever silence all dispute upon this head.

And what is more naturally and obviously deducible herefrom than this, that
American irregulars, in an American war, are full as necessary as British
regulars. And if American irregulars are thus necessary, it must be evident, at
first sight, that it will argue the want of policy, if that is done which has a
direct tendency to cool their zeal, and damp their spirits; and this most
certainly will be done, if they are obliged to see regiments raised, upon the
British Establishment, even among themselves, with so many officers appointed
from home, as almost wholly to exclude them from being sharers in any thing
that is either honorable, or profitable. If one of the good effects following
upon the Ohio-defeat, so inglorious to the British arms, as well as hurtful to
their interest, is not a greater care to distinguish American merit, it will
not be because it is not, in all respects, fitted to point out the political
Wisdom of such a conduct: Nor, unless such a conduct should be consequent
thereupon, can it reasonably be expected, that any military attempts will be
carried on here with that resolution, vigor, and spirit, which are necessary.

I may pertinently add to what has been hitherto said, it is possible some of
the rules and articles for the further governing his Majesty's forces, given
out the last year, extending to America, and the troops serving here by
commission only from the Governors of the several provinces, would not have run
exactly in their present form, if the importance of these troops, in an
American war, had been so thoroughly considered then, as it probably will be
now. Perhaps, upon this supposition, it would not have been thought absolutely
necessary to be so explicit in saying, "that the general or field-officers of
the provincial troops shall have no rank with the general and field-officers
who serve by commission from us;" or, that "the captain and other inferior
officers of the British forces shall, in all duties, take post of the
provincial officers of the like rank, though their commissions should be of
elder date." Such a distinction, so formally made between British and
Provincial officers, however just in it self, may, in present circumstances, be
of great disservice, and certainly will, should it unhappily prove an occasion
of jealousy, disaffection, and contempt, in these officers toward each other.

The subjection also of the Provincial troops to Courts-martial, "in like
manner with the officers and soldiers of the British troops, when acting in
conjunction with them," may probably tend to render the enlistment of soldiers
a much greater difficulty, than if they were left to be tried conformably to
the laws of the provinces to which they belong. For it is to be considered,
nine in ten of the men, who must compose our Provincial troops, in any
important expedition, if to be depended on, are such as go upon principle, from
loyalty to their King, love to their country, and a just concern for the
welfare of their families, and the security of their liberties and estates; and
these are the men that would be most startled at the thought of being subjected
to Martial-law, as practiced at home: nor would they easily be persuaded to
come under such subjection.

The unhappy event that has lately taken place in America is well fitted to
convey to the Mother Country just Ideas of what is proper to be done here: and
it will accordingly, as we may reasonably trust, be productive of those
determinations, which shall, in the best manner, tend to support the honor of
the Provincial, as well as British troops, and give them all the weight and
encouragement that can be desired.

You are satisfied, I believe, by this time, that the Ohio-defeat is naturally
adapted to serve the American English Colonies in the end, however grievous it
may be for the present: Though I should not do justice to New England in
general, and the Massachusetts-Province in particular, if I did not suggest my
fears, least, by means of this disappointment, they would be subjected to one
very great hardship, unless his Majesty, in his paternal wisdom and goodness,
should do that which will, in a good measure, prevent its being so. To explain
my self here.

New England in general, and the Massachusetts-Province in special, are the
chief, I may say the only, sources that may be relied on for a supply of
effective men to carry into execution any future designs against the French.
There are no men in the American Colonies so well qualified, or spirited, as
these to engage in warlike enterprises: And this is so well known, that the
other Colonies, as well as Great Britain, have their expectations mainly from
us. The danger therefore is, lest our men should be called into military
service beyond our ability, as well as proportion. This indeed is the case at
present. The Massachusetts-Government only has more men employed in the several
expeditions now on foot, than all the other Colonies put together. One full
eighth part of our people (the flower of them too) are in active service at
this day, and a greater number of them in our own pay than when we undertook
the reduction of Louisbourg. Such, in truth, is the spirit reigning in the
Province, that every third man, I believe, would be in readiness, upon very
short warning, to engage in an enterprise I could name, if put upon it, and
duly encouraged in it. It is therefore obvious, at first sight, that, in the
present situation of affairs, we shall be singularly liable to have our men
taken off from their labor in their respective callings, the effect whereof
will be the rise of all the necessaries of life; an incapacity to pay those
taxes, which are already tribled upon us; and, what is still worse, the
stopping our growth for twenty or thirty years, by the loss of our young men,
either by death, or their going where they will be exposed to fewer hardships,
and less charge.

It is in the power of his Majesty to prevent, in a great measure, these
inconveniences, I don't mean by not calling upon us for our men; [this,
considering the present temper and character of the Southern Colonies, may be
necessary] but by employing them at the charge of the crown; at the same time,
making us the special object of his paternal regards, in proportion to our
greater zeal and activity in the defense of our Sovereign's rights against the
French-Encroachments.

It does not seem equitable, that this Province, because more loyal and active
than the other Provinces, should be drained of its men, and burdened with a
weight of charge beyond what we are able to bear. We may, I think, reasonably
expect all proper care will be taken to guard against this: Nor otherwise will
it be long in our power to be of any service, either to his Majesty, or the
other Colonies under his dominion. We shall sink under the burden that is laid
upon us, and unavoidably fall into ruin.

I cannot help observing here, though this Province has been the Grand Barrier
to all the American Colonies for more than an hundred years, and has, in that
time, expended immense sums of money, in the wars it has carried on with the
French, and Indians, for the common good, as well as its own; yet it has never
received the least help, in respect either of men, or money, from any of the
southern Governments: Nor has the Mother Country, in all that time, made them a
donation of so much as one thousand pounds, so far as I remember, to assist
them in their own proper defense: Which we take the more hardly, as we have
been publicly told, that no less a sum than ten thousand pounds sterling. was
given the last year to Virginia, (and without their asking for it) to encourage
them in their attempts against the French at Ohio; while yet, this is the first
time they have been called to any difficulty of this sort, or put to any charge
worth mentioning. Were we, in this Province, to meet with proportionable
encouragement from home, we should not think much of any thing we might be
called to for the common benefit of the American British Colonies.

I believe, Sir, you think it high time I should come to a close of this
letter; but I must beg your patience, though I may already have trespassed upon
it, while I mention to you what our New England forces have done this summer
for the service of his Majesty, and turning the scale in favor of the English,
notwithstanding our loss at Ohio.

Let me then congratulate you upon the reduction of all the French forts One of
these Forts was much stronger in its make than Du Quesne, and defended with
more and heavier Cannon; and our troops, while bombarding it, and at work in
preparing to cannonade it, were attacked, from the woods, by perhaps as great a
number of Indians as surprised and defeated our army at the southward. And what
was the effect? Our New England men, instead of being affrighten'd by the
Indian's yelling, and standing as marks to be shot at, while they could do them
little or no hurt, took them in their own way, bravely followed them into the
woods, and soon obliged them to retreat, without ever attempting again to give
them the least disturbance.
at Nova Scotia, and St. John's River. In some complimental addresses to the
Governor of Hallifax, NEW ENGLAND was kept so entirely out of view, that a
stranger would have guessed, that British Troops only had merited the honor of
this exploit: Whereas the plain truth is, it was done by two regiments (of a
thousand each) sent from New England, with the assistance of only two or three
hundred of his Majesty's regular troops. This could not well have been
disguised, even in a compliment, if a New England officer had had the chief
command, as we were universally led to expect. How the matter came to be
otherwise ordered, I presume not to say: But thus much is certain, the honor
of New England was not thereby advanced, nor the most likely step taken to
promote his Majesty's service in future enlistments. I have no view in what I
now say to suggest the least reflection on Col. Monckton; for, by all accounts,
he is every way equal to the place he holds, and has behaved excellently well
in it: But it must be though it reasonable, that New England should have had the
honor of a Chief-Commander from among her own sons; especially as it is known
here, that they enlisted upon this supposition, and would have been persuaded
upon no other.

I need not observe to you the importance of these acquisitions in Nova Scotia.
They are alone a full counter-balance to our loss at the southward; and you
will easily be disposed to think so, when I have told you that the
Neutral-French, as they are called, are, by this means, entirely subjected to
our Command. And accordingly transport-vessels, (they having refused to swear
allegiance to his majesty George our gracious Sovereign) have been taken up,
and sailed from hence, to carry them out of that part of America, and to place
them in others where they may be less dangerous and troublesome. I suppose, by
this time, Nova Scotia is emptied of its French-inhabitants, and thereby
secured to the British crown more effectually than ever. How galling must this
be to France! What a vast disappointment! when she doubtless expected the
reverse of all this, as she had sent over so great a number of troops, and with
a design to accomplish that on her side, which we have done on our's.

We thankfully ascribe it, under the smiles of providence, to the seasonable
arrival of Admiral Boscawen, with so powerful a naval force, that the Gallic
Scheme, so far as it related to Nova Scotia, has been entirely defeated. And
such has been the vigilant and prudent conduct of this brave Commander, and
such the distresses arising herefrom to a certain place, that it might,
perhaps, should permission be granted, be soon put into English hands, to the
entire Ruin of the French interest in America.

I don't think I shall be too hasty, if I congratulate you also on the virtual
or constructive conquest even of Du Quesne itself on the Ohio, in what Major
General Shirley, our Governor, has already done to cut off the communication
between Canada, and that fort. I own, I was not without pain, when I knew his
excellency was going in person upon the Niagara-expedition, and with no more
than about 2500 men, as it might reasonably be expected the French would be
alarmed at an attempt to take from them the grand Key to all the Lakes, and
whole Country extending to the Missisippi; and my fears were heightened upon
the advantage, General Braddock's defeat would give them, the more powerfully
to oppose him. But, by the wise and timely care of his Excellency, the English
Oswego-fort, upon the Margin of the south-east part of lake Ontario, was so
enlarged and strengthened as to discourage a thousand French and Indians from
making an attack upon it, though they were collected together, near the fort, for
this purpose: -- Besides which, He has for some time had, through the laborious
diligence of a number of New England carpenters, well guarded and defended
while at their work, three well armed vessels cruizing in the lake; and by this
time 2 more are built, and joined with them; which make a very formidable
squadron for a small sea, as Ontario may be called, though detached from the
Ocean between 2 and 300 miles at the nearest distance. And, by means of this
squadron, he has it in his power to prevent an attempt against Oswego by
canonading or bombarding, without which it will be an easy thing to hold it
against any number of French and Indians that can be bro't to take it. And by
this squadron also he has rendered it impracticable (as may be seen by only
looking on a map of this part of America) for the Canadians to convey
artillery, ammunition, or any other stores, for the defense of their
encroachments on the back of our southern Colonies. Fort Du Quesne must, for
this reason, soon fall into our hands, and without much trouble, besides what
may be called for in watching the lake.

Had General Braddock made it his first business to secure the command of lake
Ontario, which he might easily have done soon enough to have stopped the force
that was sent from Canada to Du Quesne, that fort must have been surrendered to
him upon demand; and had he gone this way to it, greater part of that vast sum
might have been saved to the nation, which was expended in making a wagon
road, through the woods and mountains, the way he went. Why he went this way I
presume not to enquire; much less would I say, that he was above thinking, any
plan of operation could be better than his own.

It is impossible to determine at this distance, whether his Excellency General
Shirley will directly endeavor the reduction of Niagara-Fort. He is wise, and
cautious; and will, I believe, do nothing upon this head, under present
circumstances, unless there is the utmost probability of success. It would not
give me any concern, if he should make no immediate attempt upon this fort. For
as he has now got the command of Lake Ontario, the grand point is gained. The
key of communication is in English hands; and if a good use is made of it, the
consequence must be the entire destruction of the French interest on the
back-parts of our southern Colonies, in a little time, and with little pains.

As to our Crown-Point expedition; its effect is still altogether in the womb
of providence; though it might have been determined long ago, and in our
favor, humanly speaking, had not a delay been rendered unavoidable, by the
obligation which was laid upon Governor Shirley to go to Maryland [a curious
specimen, among other things we have seen, of the signal advantage of the
lately proposed Union of the Provinces] to settle with General Braddock the
plan of action for the summer. This affair has now been so long in hand, and so
much opportunity hereby given the Canadians to employ even their whole power to
oppose us, that I am not, I freely own, without fear what may be the
consequence. The troops from France, not intercepted by Admiral Boscowen, may,
before this time, be posted in the most advantageous situation for the defense
of that place: And should this be the case, our New England men may be called
to difficult service. If they don't succeed, it will not be for want of courage
and resolution. Superior force may possibly oblige them to return without
accomplishing what they went for; but I rather hope soon to hear, that they are
in possession of Fort-Frederick.

I have nothing further to add at present, but that I am, without a compliment,

Your very good Friend and humble Servant, T. W.
BOSTON, August 25th. 1755. P. S. You will probably gratify some private
friends, by giving them the opportunity of perusing this letter. You may act
your pleasure upon the matter: Nay, I object not against your making the letter
public, if you should think it fitted to promote the public service.


T. W.


