Mr. Checkley's ELECTION-SERMON, MAY 28th. 1755.

A Day of Darkness.
A SERMON Preached before His EXCELLENCY WILLIAM SHIRLEY, Esquire The HONORABLE His
MAJESTY's COUNCIL, AND House of REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, IN NEW ENGLAND: May 28th. 1755.

Being the Anniversary for the Election of His MAJESTY's COUNCIL for said
Province.

By SAMUEL CHECKLEY, A.M. Pastor of the New-South Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed by John Draper, Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR
and the Honorable His Majesty's COUNCIL. MDCCLV.

In Council, May 30. 1755.
Voted, THAT Benjamin Lynde and Joseph Pynchon, Esqrs. be a Committee to wait
on the Reverend Mr. Samuel Checkley, to return him the Thanks of this Board for
his Sermon preached on the Anniversary Day of Election; and to desire a Copy
thereof for the Press.

Copy examined, per J. WILLARD, Secry.

An ELECTION-SERMON.
ZEPHANIAH 1.15, A Day of Darkness.
ZEPHANIAH was sent to GOD'S people in the days of Josiah king of Judah, whose
reign was vastly different from that of his father Amon. Of Amon we read, 2
Kings 21 20
That he did evil in the sight of the Lord, served idols, and forsook the God
of his fathers: But when Josiah his son came to the Throne, instead of treading
in his father's steps, he soon set about a work of reformation among the
people, and was greatly succeeded in his endeavors for that end. -- But yet
after a while, the time came, when this great and good work abated, and the
people shamefully returned to their old sins again -- Upon this, God sent his
servant the prophet to them, to reprove them for their sins, warn them of the
judgments that were coming on them, and to persuade them to repent of their
evil deeds, that so God might turn from the fierceness of his anger, and repent
of the evil, he had though it to do unto them.

THE particular judgment they were threatened with was the coming of their
BABYLONISH enemies, who should make great havoc, and slaughter among them;
which is here called the day of the Lord's sacrifice context. verse 8.
. because much blood would then be shed, and the slain of the Lord be
multiplied -- and left they should put this evil day far away, the prophet
assured them, that it was near, and hasted greatly. verse 14.
And that he might thro'ly awaken them, he speaks of this day of their
calamity, which was hastening on them, in all the expressions of dread and
terror that can be. He therefore calls it, the Day of the Lord, the great day
of the Lord, a day of wrath, of trouble, and distress; a day of wasteness, and
desolation; and in the words I have chosen for my text -- a day of darkness, i.
e. a day of great calamity, and distress, a day when every thing round them
should look with a dark and melancholy aspect on them.

Now, as this was the case of God's people then, so it also sometimes is, of a
people at this day; and I cannot but think, that they whose hearts are wise to
discern time and judgment, look upon this to be very much our own case, and
think the present day, a day of darkness with us. And if so, then I hope, it
will not be though it, altogether foreign to the business of this day; if, instead
of discoursing of the divine original of civil government, and how great a
blessing it is to mankind; of the qualifications of civil rulers, and their
duty to the people under their government; and also, the duty of a people to
those in civil authority over them; (which are subjects that have been so often
handled, on this anniversary solemnity) I should come to you with a few
meditations, on the words I have pitched upon for my text -- a day of darkness.

HERE in discoursing from them, I shall endeavor, by divine help, to consider,
and show these two things.

1. WHEN it may be said to be a day of darkness with a people; or when their
case may be dark and melancholy.

2. WHAT is the duty of a people at such a day.

1. WHEN it may be said to be a day of darkness with a people; or when their
case may be dark and melancholy. And here it may be said, -- it is such a day
with them,

1. WHEN it is a day of great apostasy and declension, and many
heaven-provoking sins are to be seen in the midst of them. -- So contrary both
to the law and nature of God is sin, that he cannot but be provoked with it, and
it is peculiarly offensive to him in his own covenantpeople; nor will he let it
go unpunished in them. You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore will I punish you, for all your iniquities. Amos 3.2.
Shall I not visit for these things says the Lord? shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? Jer. 5.29.


ISRAEL were a peculiar people to him, and a people for whom he had done more,
than for any other nation under heaven; but they became very sinful and
apostate: and therefore he bro't that charge against them, Isa. 1, 2, 3, 4.
I have nourished, and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me;
the ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib, but my people does not
know, Israel does not consider; and the lamentation made over them; Ah sinful
nation, a people laden with iniquity, etc. And the heaven and earth were called
to witness against them, and to stand amazed at their ingratitude and
rebellion, -- Be astonished, O ye heavens at this, and be horribly afraid; be
ye very desolate, says the Lord; for my people have committed two evils, they
have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns,
broken cisterns that can hold no water. Jer. 2.12; I3.


AND as that was the case of God's ancient people, so it may be the case of a
people at this day; and when it is so, they are in a very sad and melancholy
one; for what can have a darker, aspect on them, than the abounding of
drunkeness, profaneness, uncleanness, covetousness, injustice, extortion,
oppression, etc? verily, when this is their case, they may well tremble for
fear of God, and be afraid of his judgments -- These and such like sins, may
turn the smiles of providence into frowns, and pull down the judgments of
heaven on them, and herefor, God may be provoked to make them desolate, a land
not inhabited.

Again,

2. SUCH a day it is also with a people, when religion, pure and undefiled
religion, which was once their glory, is apace languishing and dying; among
them -- Religion is an honor both to particular persons, and also to a people;
it is so to persons of all orders and ages, high and low, rich and poor, old
and young, yea, to kings and princes, rulers, and judges of the earth. -- The
emperor Theodosius therefore once said, he accounted is a greater honor and
joy to him, that he was a member of a church, than emperor of the world. The
flourishing of religion, will exalt a people, but the decay of it, be a
reproach to them -- If it be asked -- when is religion evidently decaying among
a people? I answer, it is so, when the professors of it have lost that zeal (I
don't mean a blind enthusiastic zeal, but a true christian zeal, and a zeal
according to knowledge) which once they had; and are become indifferent in
religion -- when, like the church of Laodicea, they are lukewarm, and neither
cold, nor hot -- and when like the church of Ephesus, they have lost their
first love -- when the day of the Lord, which once was sanctified, is
shamefully broken, and due care not to put a stop thereto, by those whose
proper business it is to do it -- when the worship, and ordinances of God's
house are neglected, and the duties of religion become tiresome to them -- when
the faithful messengers of God, and his messages by them are slighted, so that
they have reason to complaim, who has believed our report, and to whom has the
arm of the Lord been revealed? Verily, I have labored in vain, etc. -- when
the support of the gospel, and the faithful ministers of Christ, is looked upon
as a burden too heavy for them to bear, and what they do toward it not
cheerfully, but grudgingly -- when family religion, government, and instruction
are greatly wanting, and they who should support them, become lovers of
pleasure, and of the world, more than of God, and religion: when this, I say,
is the case of a people, religion is plainly upon the decline, and it is a dark
day with them, for what can they expect, unless they remember from whence they
are fallen, and repent, and do their first works, but that God come unto them
quickly, and remove their candlestick out of it is place, take away his gospel
from them, turn their teachers into corners, and send that dreadful famine
among them, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but a famine of
hearing the word of the Lord -- Again,

3dly. SUCH a day is it with a people, when for their sins, God threatens, or
visits them with those sore judgments, the famine, pestilence and sword. -- It
is so, when God calls for a dearth, by reason of which, they are threatened
with scarcity of bread. Rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, are great
smiles of providence; and when God gives both the former, and the latter rain
in their season, blessing the springing of the year, and also crowning it with
his great goodness; so that there is grass for the cattle, and herb for the
service of man, a tribute of praise is due to him therefore -- Now that God who
is the father of the rain, and who begets the drops of the dew, who
sometimes visits the earth, and waters it with the river of God, which is full
of water, can, when he pleases, stop the bottles of heaven, upon which,
instead of cooling and refreshing showers, constant scorching heats, and
scarcity follow. -- This judgment God threatened his people with; I will consume
them by famine. Jer. 14.12.
This judgment he also brought upon them, telling them at the same time, why he
sent it, viz. Because they built their own houses in a costly manner, and let
his house lie waste. Ye looked for much, and to it came to little, and when ye
brought it home, I did blow upon it: why? says the Lord of hosts: Because of
mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own house. Therefore
the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed from her fruit.
And I called for a drought upon the Land, and upon the mountains, and upon the
corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, etc. Hag. 1. 9, 10.


AND when this is the case of a people, what a distressing time is it! -- when
the heaven over their head is brass, and the earth under them is iron, and the
rain of their land powder and dust -- when the vine is dried up, the apple
tree, and all the trees of the field are withered. When the land mourns,
because the harvest of the field is perished -- when the beasts groan, and the
herds of cattle are perplexed, because they have no pasture, and the flocks of
sheep are made desolate -- when the fire devoureth the pastures of the
wilderness, and the flame burns up the trees of the wood, and the beasts of
the field cry, because the rivers of waters are dried up. -- See the distress
of such a season spoken of by the prophet, -- Judah mourns, and the gates
thereof languish, they are black to the ground, and the cry of Jerusalem is
gone up: because the ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the
plow-men were ashamed, they covered their heads. Yea, the hind also calved in
the field and forsook it, because there was no grass. Jer. 14. beg.


AGAIN, such a day it is also, when God sends contagious and mortal sickness
among them. This is another of those judgments God threatened his people with,
in case of disobedience. The Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the
plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance; and sore
sickness, and of long continuance. Deuteronomy. 28.59.
And by this judgment did he again and again distress and waste them. Agreeable
hereto we read, how at one time he sent the pestilence among them, of which
there soon died fourteen thousand and seven hundred; at another time he sent it
and there died thereof twenty and four thousand, and at another time, no less
than seventy thousand. Numb. 16, and 25 ch, 2 Samuel 24.15.


WHAT a dark day, when God sends among a people the pestilence that walks in
darkness, and the destruction that wastes at noonday: when they are afraid,
for the terror by night, and the arrow that flies by day: when sickness enters
the city, and the destroying angel stands with his sword drawn over it: when
the distemper soon spreads, and death rides in triumph in the streets, sparing
neither rich nor poor, old nor young, and many, in a short time, are carried to
the grave, that house appointed for all living; and that cry is heard, death is
come up into our windows, to cut off our young men from without, and our
children from the streets. Jer. 9, 21.


AGAIN, such a day also it is when the people are called to hear the sound of
the trumpet and the alarm of war.

PEACE on honorable terms, when every one can sit quietly under his own vine
and fig tree, and there be none to make them afraid, is a great favor of
heaven; and the time will come, when the bow shall be broken, the chariot burnt
in the fire, and wars cease from one end of the earth to the other. The time,
when they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up the sword against nation, neither shall
they learn war any more; and then instead of wars and fightings which proceed
from the lusts of men, the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard lie
down with the kid, the calf, the young lion, and the fatling together, and a
little child shall lead them; the cow also and the bear shall feed, their young
ones shall lie down together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox; the
sucking child shall play on the hole of the afp, and the weaned child shall put
his hand on the cockatrice den. -- But that happy state of the church is yet to
come; and the corruptions of men, will still be so predominant, that war will
sometimes be inevitable.

THERE are those, I am sensible, who doubt the lawfulness of christians making
war on any occasion; but to me it seems plain there can be no just ground
therefore either from reason or revelation: for when the soldiers came to John
the baptist, the forerunner of Christ, with that enquiry, what shall we do?
Luke 3.14
he didn't order them to lay down their arms, telling them there would be no
need of men of a military character, and martial spirit under the gospel; but
taught them how to behave in the station they were in: do violence to no man,
neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages.

NOT that christians should delight in war, shedding blood, preying upon, and
destroying one another; no, by no means, for this don't become reasonable
creatures, much less christians -- but yet, a martial spirit is a noble spirit,
and soldiers, expert in war, of good conduct, and undaunted courage, are an
honor to their country, and the safety of a people, under God, depends not a
little on them; and to take up arms both offensively and defensively, is
sometimes absolutely necessary. The insults, inroads and encroachments of their
ambitious and perfidious enemies upon them, the preservation of their religion,
rights, and properties, yea, their lives, and the lives of theirs, call aloud
hereto; and then their state is melancholy. -- Thus it is, when great
preparations for war are making both by sea and land, fleets manned and ready
for action, landforces also raised, well-arm'd, welldisciplined, and prepared
to march.

THUS it is also, when war is publicly proclaimed, and that cry heard; prepare
war, wake up the, mighty men, let all the men of war draw near, let them come
up -- beat your plow-shares into swords, and your pruning hooks into spears,
let the weak say, I am strong; order the buckler and shield, and draw near to
battle; harness the horses, mount ye horsemen, and stand forth with your
helmets, furnish the spears, put on the brigandines. -- The sword! O how much
human blood has been spilt by it! yea, what a field of blood has it often made
of whole kingdoms and countries! every battle of the warrior, being with
confused noise, and garments rolled in blood: What a dark day then when it is
drawn! -- Such a day it is, when God suffers enemies to distress them, by
making inroads upon their exposed borders, destroying not only their substance
but the lives of some and carrying others into a doleful captivity -- when
enemies invade and make such bold attempts against them, as oblige them, in
their own defense, to march forth, and speak with them in the gate -- or when
they themselves are forming hazardous enterprises, and important expeditions
against their enemies, by which means great numbers of their brethren are
called to jeopard their lives in the high places of the field. -- But, how much
darker the day still! If the Lord of hosts and God of armies, and whose is the
victory, instead of being on their side, and fighting their battles for them,
should fight against them, making them either to flee before their enemies,
fall by their sword, or be led captive by them.

I SPEAK not thus, to damp in the least measure, the courage of those brave
soldiers, who are gone or going forth in the service of their king and country:
No, God forbid, for were they all here before God this day, I would heartily
encourage them, as Hezekiah did the People, when invaded by Sennacherib, Be
strong and courageous, be not afraid, nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor
for all the multitude that is with him, for there is more with us, than with
him; with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us
and fight our battles. 2 Chronicles. 32.27.
And as that brave general Joab did, his men, both officers and soldiers, just
before the battle began: Be of good courage, and play the man, for your people,
and for the cities of your God. 2 Samuel 10.12


I proceed to say in the next place,

4thly. IT is a day of darkness etc. when a truly generous publick-spirit is
much wanting, and a narrow, coveteous and selfish one prevails.

No man was born for himself; nor should any one seek his own, but every one
another's wealth. A publick-spirit is a noble and truly christian spirit, but a
narrow and contracted one is mean and sordid; and they who are of such a
spirit, are often very far from being the persons they feign themselves to be;
they may speak fair, pretend a generous love to mankind, and concern for the
common welfare of the places where they live; but SELF is at the bottom, and
they will not be likely to lay out themselves to serve the public, unless they
can serve themselves at the same time. -- This spirit, instead of inclining
them to feed the hungry, and cloth the naked, will rather dispose them to vex,
grieve and grind the face of the poor; and do such mean and ungenerous actions,
as they ought to abhor and be ashamed of; and what may not persons of this
spirit be often bribed to do?

BUT on the other hand, persons of a generous and public spirit, will be
useful and serviceable both in church and state, and blessings to the places
where they live. -- They will desire, and endeavor to do good to all, as they
have opportunity, and contrive how others may be the better for them -- like
the liberal man, they will devise liberal things, and by liberal things shall
they stand. --

ARE they in civil authority, they will endeavor to be just, ruling in the
fear of God; and by no means will they be persuaded to betray their trust. They
will sincerely endeavor to know the duty of the station they are in, and as
sincerely endeavor faithfully to perform it.

WE read of Mordecai, that he was next to the king, great among the Jews, and
accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people and
speaking peace to all his seed. Esther 10.3
He was good (says one) as well as great, and his greatness gave him an
opportunity of doing the more good -- He did not seek his own wealth; and how
to make an estate for himself and family, which is the chief thing many aim at,
when they get into great places at court; but consulted the welfare of his
people, and made it his business to advance the same: He improved his power,
wealth, and interest with the King and Queen, for the public good, did not
side with one party against another, but endeavored to be a common father to
all; and herefor was he universally accepted and esteemed -- And persons of a
public spirit (as Mordecai was) will endeavor to do as he did, and be accepted
of the multitude of their brethren as he was -- But when persons of his
character are few and persons of a contrary one are numerous, a people are in
dark and melancholy case.

5thly. IT is a dark day with a people, when, instead of peace, love and
harmony; strife and contention prevail.

GOD is the God of love and peace, and where these are, he will dwell; but the
want of them will provoke him to depart. -- Behold how good and pleasant it is
for Brethren to dwell together in unity. Psalm 133.1
How good and pleasant this, in particular families, societies, churches, and
in a commonwealth! When this is their case, things are like to go well with
them: This will be both for their honor, profit and strength.

BUT on the contrary, strife and contention are of pernicious consequence --
The beginning of strife (says Solomon) is as when one lets out water,
therefore leave off contention before it is meddled with. And the apostle says,
where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. If ye
bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.
Prove. 17.14. Jam. 3.16. Gal. 5.15.


WE read of God's people, that their heart was divided. Hos. 10.2
And it was spoken of, as matter of Lamentation, that there were that raised up
strife and contention; Hab. 1.3.
and when this is the case of a people, and there are many that sow discord,
foment divisions, and incense men one against another, it is matter of grief,
as a house, so a kingdom or province divided against itself cannot stand -- The
natural consequence of contention, in all societies, is common ruin: and when a
people keep clashing one against another, will they not be in danger of
breaking to pieces, and when they are divided one against another, will they
not become an easy prey to a common enemy? and if they continue to bite and
devour one another, what can be expected, but that they be consumed one of
another?

6thly. SUCH a day is it with a people, when their public affairs labor under
peculiar difficulties and perplexities, and those who have the conduct of them,
notwithstanding all their wisdom, are at a loss what to do and to find out
means to extricate and deliver them.

As a skilful pilot at helm is necessary, when a vessel is in a storm, and she
may suffer shipwreck for want thereof; so it is absolutely necessary, that men
of wisdom and sagacity, should have the conduct of the public affairs of a
people, when they labor under perplexing difficulties; and for want of such, a
commonwealth may be ruined. Now, it may be the case of a people not to have
these at the head of affairs at such a time; or if they have, yet they may be
greatly in the dark what to do; and want that spirit of council, and
understanding which once they had.

GOD said of his sinful people, The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Isai. 29.14.
And Job, speaking of God, says, he leads the councelors away spoiled, and
makes the judges fools. Chap. 12. ver. 17.
-- When this is the case of a people it is a dark one indeed.

7thly. SUCH a day is it with a people, when trade and business, which once
flourished among them, and by which they increased in wealth at home, and in
credit and reputation abroad, fail and are gone.

TRADE and merchandise, well understood, regulated and properly carried on, are
doubtless great blessings to mankind.

THE husbandman, the tradesman, the labourer, and the public too, may be served
hereby: Therefore as it is the wisdom of a people, to encourage arts and
industry, so also is it, to promote trade and business, in such places as are
most commodiously situated therefore: And the wealth and reputation of a people
have been greatly increased, by the trade they have carried on, and
correspondence they have held, with different and distant parts of the world.
-- What, but the merchandise of Tire, made her so great, so much admired, and
cried up by the many nations she had dealings with. -- When therefore trade and
business of almost every sort fail, insomuch that many, who once could
comfortably provide for themselves and families, and at the same time, render
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's,
are so reduced, that they are hard put to it to get their daily bread, and
unable to pay their dues, either to church, or state, not through idleness, or
extravagance, but purely for want of employment, it must needs be a dark day
with them.

8thly, and lastly. SUCH a day also is it with them, when they remain unhumbled
and incorrigible, notwithstanding all the humbling providence they have been
under.

THIS was the case of God's ancient people, and therefore it was said of them,
they are not humbled to this day -- thou have stricken them, but they have not
grieved, thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction,
they have made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to return.
Jer. 44.10. Chap. 3.


THUS I have endeavored briefly to show, When it may be said to be a day of
darkness with a people; and now proceed as I proposed,

II. To show, what is their duty, when it is such a day with them.

And here I shall only briefly say,

THEY should be suitably affected therewith, and lay it to heart. They should
not think all is well, and cry peace, peace to themselves, which would make
their case not better, but worse, and give just occasion for that complaint to
be made of them, they are sottish children, they have no understanding. Lord,
when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see. Jer. 4.22. Isai. 26.11.


THEY should also, justify God, and condemn themselves. How melancholy soever
their case is, they can lay no blame upon God, who can never be charged with
any injustice; is holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works; is
judge of all the earth, and cannot but do right.

That acknowledgment becomes them; O Lora, righteoushess belongs unto thee,
but unto us, confusion of faces, as at this day. Dan. 9.7.


THEY should also seriously consider and reflect upon their past ways -- Thus
faith the Lord of hosts (to them at such a time) consider your ways; and unless
they do so, he may complain of them and say; I hearkened and heard, but they
spoke not aright, no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I
done! Jer. 3.6.


THEY should also make humble and penitent confession to God, and earnestly
implore pardon, relief, and help -- that language becomes them; We have sinned,
and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by
departing from thy precepts and thy judgments. Dan. 9.5.
O remember not against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily
prevent us, for we are brought very low -- help us, O God of our salvation, for
the glory of thy name: and deliver us; and purge away our sins for thy name
sake. Psalm. 79.8.9.


Finally,

THEY should set about a speedy and thoro' reformation.

I proceed now to the application. And here, it may be said,

Is it not obvious from what we have heard, that in diverse respects it is a day
of darkness with this Province at this day -- It is so if we consider the
growth of sin -- the decay of religion amongst us -- how we have been brought
low, by one judgment after another, and that God's anger is not, to this day,
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

Furthermore, may we not from what has been said learn, what is our
indispensible duty at this day -- That we should lay to heart our melancholy
case, be humble under the hand of God -- implore his mercy -- and return to him
who has torn, and who can heal us, who has smitten, and who can bind us up.

MAY I not add? that from what we have heard we may learn, the need we have of
men of wisdom and knowledge, prudence, integrity, etc. to be at the Head, and
have the management of our public affairs at this Day. But

I SHALL close my discourse with a brief address -- to our civil Rulers -- and
to the whole body of this people.

1. To our civil Rulers; who we hope, will act the part of Fathers to us at
such a dark day as the present one is.

AND may I be allowed in the first place to address myself to You, Sir, who
have the honor to sit in the first chair of government --

May it please your EXCELLENCY,

WE cannot but esteem you a Gentleman of superior powers and talents, to be One
formed for government, and therefore the better qualified for the honor which
God and the king have put upon you, and to fill the chair you are in --

And,

SINCE the reins of government are in your hands, at such a dark day as the
present one is, and at so critical a conjuncture -- what can you desire better,
Sir, for yourself, or this people for you, than the divine presence with you,
to support, and encourage you under the weight of the public cares; and that he
who is the father of lights, who is wisdom, and in whom is no darkness at all,
would give unto you that wisdom, which shall be profitable to direct, at such a
day as this is; and would enable you, through the whole of your administration,
so to conduct yourself, as to make this people easy, and happy under it, -- so
also as to approve yourself to him, who is King of kings, and Lord of lords,
who stands in the congregation of the mighty, and who judges among the gods,
to your royal master also, one of the best of kings, to your own conscience, to
the people under your government, and to Christ the judge of all, to whom you,
Sir, as well as we, must one day give an account.

YOUR Excellency cannot but be well acquainted with the state, and circumstances
of this province; the better able therefore to judge, what will serve the best
interests of it; and our earnest desire is, that you would exert yourself to
the uttermost, to promote and advance the same.

A PROVINCE, that look upon themselves more happy, under the British
constitution -- a province, more loyal to his majesty KING GEORGE, and more
firmly attached to the illustrious house of HANOVER, I may venture to say, is
not in all the KING's dominions: we therefore hope, that while on the one hand
you maintain his Majesty's prerogative, you will on the other, be tender of the
liberties of this people; and also use your best interest, in the court of
Great Britain, that we may still enjoy the favor, both of the KING, and his
ministers.

ONE thing which will greatly add to the weight of government on you, is, that
according to the present aspect of providence, and from the great military
preparations, that have been made, and are still making in Great Britain,
France and NORTH AMERICA, we may expect soon to hear the sound of the trumpet,
and the alarm to war; and if we should, what part of his majesty's dominions,
more like to be the seat of it, than these Northern-Colonies?

IS not North America what France has long envied us, and has been and still is
making very bold attempts (which God of his infinite mercy prevent) to become
masters of? -- Since therefore the conduct of the affairs of a war, and
particularly, of one important undertaking, is devolved upon you, and you are
called (as we hear) to go forth in person and head the forces under your
command -- our hearty wish, and earnest prayer for you, is, that the Lord, who
is a man of war, would teach your hands to war, and your fingers to fight, (and
would do the same to officers and soldiers under you, that so they may play the
man for their people, and for the cities of our God) would carry you through the
many fatigues, and difficulties you may meet with, and preserve you in every
danger, succeed you in the hazardous enterprise before you, and enable you, so
to conduct the same, as to come off with honor, and applause, and approve
yourself a good soldier, as well as a wise governor: -- And,

SUFFER me, Sir, to add, without offense, We hope you will think it worthy your
care, that our brethren, who shall so freely venture their lives, in the
service of their king and country, have no just cause to complain of wrong and
injury done them; but receive a due recompense of reward -- Thus to act your
part, will endear you, Sir, to this people, gain you love and honor from them,
afford you inward peace, and calmness of mind, whenever providence shall call
you to resign the chair, and quit the present stage of action, and what is
greater than all, will give you boldness in the day of the Lord Jesus. --

I SHALL in the next place address myself to the gentlemen, who are immediately
concerned in the elections of this day: HIS MAJESTY'S HONORABLE COUNCIL, AND
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,

Gentlemen,

THE charter privileges, which, under God and the king, we yet enjoy, are great
and invaluable; privileges, handed down to us from our fathers, and which
(pray God) may be handed down from us to our children after us, even to the
latest posterity.

THE election of persons, to sit at the council board, and assist, and advise
the king's governor, is with you; and if the most suitable persons, for that
end, are not elected, where must the blame lie? -- Since therefore this is the
particular business of this day, I would in the first place remind you, that
the time is coming, when you will be called to an account for the transactions
of this day; and the views and designs, with which you shall act, be enquired
into -- And that therefore it highly concerns you, seriously to consider,
whether your proceedings are such, as you can answer to your own consciences,
and to this people now, and to Christ in the great day. -- And then suffer me,
in the name and fear of God, to beseech you, to have your eyes upon the
faithful in the land; choose men, who, you have reason to think, fear God,
honor the king, are true friends to the province, and will stand up for the
privileges of it, religious as well as civil.

DON'T let any have your votes, because they are of this or that party, or will
be most likely to serve this or that particular interest, or to carry on this
or that particular scheme -- but such as you think in conscience, are best
qualified for a seat at that HONORABLE BOARD, and most likely to serve the
public.

WHEN was there greater need of men of sense, and wisdom, judgment and
prudence, foresight and insight, than at this day? therefore elect such as are
understanding in the times, and are most likely to know what Israel ought to
do. Men, of integrity and honesty, steadiness and resolution, not given to
change, and that will not suffer themselves to be made Tools; men, not of a
narrow and selfish, but public spirit, and that will be most likely to advance,
not their own private interest, but the welfare of the province: men, not only
of wisdom, and so most capable of advising in every important affair; but of
courage and boldness, and who will not be afraid to speak their minds, and give
their advice freely, when called thereto: men of religion, and promoters of it,
lovers of learning, and friends to the College, that society, which our
forefathers so early founded, and where many of the sons of New England have
been educated, who have been eminently useful, both in church and state.

AND when the elections of this day shall be over, and ye proceed to public
business, let your first concern be, faithfully to discharge the duty of the
station ye are in.

YE will doubtless have laid before you, affairs of great importance, and that
will require the whole of your time; avoid therefore running into parties, and
entering into such debates, as will be likely to issue, only in a mispence of
time, and increase of charge to the province.

ENDEAVOR after unanimity and dispatch, but do nothing rashly.

THE power put into your hands, by the charter, and laws of the province, is
not small; use it well, and beware of abusing it and exceeding the limits of
it. In all you do, act uprightly, conscientiously, impartially; and when in
difficult and perplexing cases, you are at a loss what to do, remember those
words of the apostle; if any of you lack wisdom, let him ask it of God. James
1.5.
In all your ways acknowledge him, and may he direct your paths for you.

I SHALL now briefly address the whole body of this people and so finish.

AND is it as we have heard, let me then in the name and fear of God, exhort
you to a speedy and general reformation. Reformation is what has been often
pressed upon you, and, if I mistake not, from this desk, on this anniversary
solemnity; but how little is there to be seen of it! may not God complain of
this people, after all his dealings with us, as he did of the Jewish nation,
they have made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to return.

IS a reformation too late now, and is there no hope or possibility of it? God
forbid; for his sake then, your own sakes, and the sake of yours after you, let
every one set about it in earnest. May our civil rulers, not only of a higher
but lower order, all clothed with any authority, put their hand to it: --
Arise, for this matter belongs unto you, be of good courage then, and do it.
This is also, what the Lord's ministers are indispensibly obliged to, let not
any of us then be wanting in doing our part toward it. But it is to be feared,
this work will not be effected, unless heads of families also engage in it: A
familyreformation would soon bring on a general one.

TILL this is the case with us, we may look for light, but behold darkness; for
peace, but no good will come; and justly expect to be punished yet seven times
for our iniquities. But should we at length become a penitent and reformed
people; we might then hope, that light would arise to us under all our
darkness, and that we should see joy and gladness, according to the days
wherein we have seen evil, and the years wherein we have been afflicted; that
we should have the divine presence with, and blessing on us, in all important
affairs, both of a civil, religious and military nature, that God, even our own
God, would bless us, glory yet dwell in our land, and we be that happy people,
whose God is the Lord, and it be said of us, as it was of Israel, There is none
like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the Heaven in thine help, and
his excellency upon the sky. The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are
the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and
shall say, destroy them. -- Happy art thou, O Israel: Who is like unto thee, O
people saved by the lord, the shield of thine help, and who is the sword of
thine excellency! And thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou
shall tread upon their high places. Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27, 29.


AMEN and AMEN.

