A Total Eclipse of LIBERTY: Being a true and faithful Account of the
Arraignment, and Examination of Daniel Foul before the Honorable House of
Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, October.
24th 1754. barely on Suspicion of his being concerned in Printing and
Publishing a Pamphlet, entitled, The Monster of Monsters.

Also his Imprisonment and Sufferings in a Stinking Stone Goal, without the
Liberty of Pen, Ink or Paper, and not allowed to see his nearest Friends, nor
to write a Line to his Wife; with many other Incidents and Aggravations; which
shows it to be Monstrous Treatment.

Written by Himself.

-- O give me LIBERTY;
For were even Paradise itself my PRISON,
Still I should long to leap the Crystal Walls.
DRYD. BOSTON Printed in the Year 1755.

DEDICATION.
To the Freemen of New England.
Gentlemen,
THERE are many who imagine, that unless their Performances are dedicated to
some Great Person of the first Rank, they loose their Value, and are soon
thrown aside as useless -- yet at the same Time are so lavish of their Talents,
that they think themselves happy if they are indulged the Favor of being quite
extravagant in stuffing the same with fulsome Complements, but laughing in
their Sleves, to use an old homely Saying, while they are endeavoring to
ingraciate themselves into Favor with those they have no real Regard for.

But the Author of the following Piece thinks himself arrived almost to the
Pinnacle of Honor, that he can take the Liberty, and hopes to be indulged the
Favor, of addressing himself to a great Number of Freemen, (not forgetting the
Clergy, who I heard was roused on this Occasion, as well they might, some of
whom came to see him afterward, though he was condemned without Benefit of
Clergy) in whose Veins there is yet a free Circulation of that noble Blood,
some of which was formerly spilt, to procure the Privileges we now enjoy under
the best of Kings, and that without the least ECLIPSE, unless at some
particular Times, when Pride and Ambition fires the Breasts of those who have
had some little Share in the Honors of Government; but quite mistaking the End
and Design thereof, have run themselves into such wrong Notions by their
intemperate Zeal, which has even vented itself upon some of those very innocent
Persons who gave them their Authority; which for want of Skill to conduct
properly, or what is worse, such an high Opinion of themselves, that Reason for
a while has been dethroned, and the Imagination they have had of Power above
all Law and Reason, has taken Place. -- As I am now only speaking of what has
been in Times past, I hope no one will think I am aiming at any Person's
Conduct in the present Government of Affairs -- No, Gentlemen, this is only to
put you upon your Guard; I have not the false Complaisance to Flatter those who
I am well assured had rather have Truth delivered with Simplicity, than only
the Appearance thereof in a pompous Style; and therefore shall take the Liberty
of subscribing my self your sincere Friend and humble Servant, while you
continue steadfast, and do not give up your Birthrights. --

D. F.

PREFACE.
October 29. 1754. Candid Reader,
IT is customary for Authors to apologize by Way of Preface to the World for
their Writings; and surely those of a low Class I think, ought never to publish
without one. Indeed such great Men as Lock, Pope, Dryden, Shakespeare, Milton,
or Butler, need none to their Works, but common Scriblers should offer an
Excuse for troubling the Public; which happens to fall to my Lot at this Time.
I must acknowledge, I should have been glad had I remained in Obscurity as I
have done for many Years, and slid out of this noisy World unnoticed: But as
there is an overruling Providence, and every Thing will in the End turn to the
Advantage of Truth and Honesty; sometimes even in this Life, but most certainly
will in the future. -- So I desire to be resigned, waiting for the Event.

But not to be too tedious, or raise the Expectation of the Reader, with more
in my Title and Preface, than there is in the Book itself, shall only observe,
That I doubt not the following Piece will be thought by many, if not all, who
peruse it, to be a new, remarkable, unprecedented Procedure, especially as it
was done in the English Nation: Therefore shall submit this plain, honest
Account of the whole Matter, to your better Judgment, who shall take the Pains
to give it a reading; and doubt not all proper Allowance will be made, as it is
the first Time the Author has taken the Freedom, or rather Courage, to venture
without a Pilot, as he would not willingly have any one even suspected to be
concerned, lest it should be accounted a Libel, and upon that very SUSPICION,
be thrown into a stinking Stone Goal, though never so innocent, and suffer in
the same Manner as if he was the real Author: without Law, nay, contrary to
Law, and in direct Opposition even to the poor dim Light of Nature, if I am not
very much mistaken. And as I have experienced the same for another Person (and
it may perhaps be the Lot of many more, unless divine Providence, in the Use of
appointed Means, interpose) yet I would not wish my greatest Enemy to remain
there so long, unless I was sure it was lawful to take away his Life, as it had
like to have cost me mine -- therefore would not publish this Affair, if I
apprehended any other Person would be thought the Author besides myself, or any
ways accessory thereto; but I am well assured the plain unpolished Style it
appears in, will convince them to the contrary, and that it is only their
bumble Servant,

D. F.

INTRODUCTION.
PERHAPS there has not any Occurrence for many Years happened, especially, in
this Country, which has occasioned more Speculation than a late Proceeding of
the Lower House of Assembly against the Author of the following Piece, only
upon Suspicion of his being concerned in printing and publishing a Pamphlet
entitled, The MOMSTER of MONSTERS There has not, says the Author of this
Pamphlet, to my Knowledge, been any Monster in this Town; nor any Thing like a
Monster. There has nothing happened lately which could naturally give Occasion
to such a Fiction; nor any Thing to which it can be justly applied in the Way
of Allegorical Interpretation. And the Persons who shall attempt this, must be
very simple, or ill-natured, for it is mercly a Work of Fancy and Imagination,
of which there is neither Type nor Antitype. And having declared this, I think
I may innocently let it see the Lights, as a very harmless, toothless
Producton, wishing that all other Romancers and Storytellers had been as fair
and ingenuous, to undeceive their Readers -- Page 23.


Had Expresses been immediately dispatched the News could not have flew quicker
to the most distant Parts of the Province, and the other Governments upon the
Continent; and no Doubt will be the Wonder of our Mother Country, when they
have a true Account of this notable Affair, which if the Reader will but have
Patience a while, he will find it was an unheard of Attack upon the Liberty of
an Englishman, than which scarcely any Thing is dearer, if he has but the
Spirit of a Man: And as my Antagonists in a few Months will become weak as
other Men, and loose their Strength, as Sampson did when his Locks was shorn,
no one can object, but that I shall be upon an Equality with them, so that what
was done only by a pretended Power, (which is no very good Character, when Laws
human and divine, as well as Reason, are set aside) will have a due
Consideration.

And though it may be thought by some, a Freedom not becoming a private Person,
to complain of a real or supposed Injury received by those in Authority, and
especially of those who are looked upon the Guardians of our Liberty, and the
Fathers of the Country; yet when its done with a becoming Modesty, and proper
Deference, surely every Man who is born free, and especially the English, who
deserve the Liberties they enjoy; and are so much the more worthy of them, as
they have spared no Pains to preserve them, whose Breasts are all on Fire for
Liberty: I say, when this is the Case, every Man, who has not justly forfeited
it, will think he has a Right to vindicate himself, and have the same
Satisfaction, in Proportion, as if the Injury had been done to any Gentleman of
Fortune, or high Character in Life, as an unjust President established or
connived at, may be of fatal Consequence to a free Constitation. To use the
Words of One who speaking of the different Forms of Government in Europe, says,
None of them appears so perfect as that of England: Here it is that we find
united all the Qualifications necessary to make the People happy, and the
Prince great, as long as he is just. It was the Opinion of Solon, "That a State
could not be happy, except the Magistrates were as Subject to the Laws, as
private Persons were to the Magistrates. According to the Sentiments of this
venerable Sage, the Constitution of a Government should be so framed, as to
keep an Equilibrium between the People and the Prince." As what I am now
writing is only an Introduction to something of an extraordinary Nature, hope I
shall be excused, and not incur the Censure of being too verbose, as perhaps it
might give too great a Shock to some Persons, and would scareely be credited,
unless their Minds were prepared to receive the Truth before hand, which it my
Intention.

And as it is an acknowledged Truth, "That nothing is so dear to an honest Man,
as his good Name, nor ought he to neglect the just Vindication of his
Character, when it is injuriously attacked by any;" -- so this, I think, being
my Case, I hope to make it appear to every honest, unprejudiced Person, that I
have been most severely, cruelly, and unjustly treated; and that I have a Right
from the Laws of GOD and Man to make my Complaint, without a partial Respect to
Persons; and no one will have Reason to say, I speak Evil of Dignities, or of
the Rulers of the People; for I am determined to stick close to the Truth, and
certainly that will prevail with those who have any Regard for their own
Freedom, or their Posterity --

And though I have had many Thoughts concerning the Publication of this Affair,
I now think upon the whole, it is for the best; and therefore shall give the
Public the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth; for should this
be overlooked, our Children perhaps may pay Reverence to a grey-headed Error;
therefore this ought not to be winked at, least it should take deeper Root; --
but as a faithful Physicion would act, it ought to be cut out, and thrown away
as an eating Canker, which in a little Time would eat out the Vitals of that
noble Principle of Liberty, for the Sake of which our pious Forefathers
ventured their Lives, and all that was dear to them --

I would endeavor to use soft Words where the Subject will allow of it, so as
not to stir up, but turn away Wrath; and smoother than Oil, but at the same
Time to cut like a Razor; to make it appear I am Serious, and in Earnest -- And
therefore shall conclude this introductive Part with an Extract from the
Letters of Pliny Vcl. 2 Book 7. P. 399, 400.
viz. Pomponius Secundus, the famous tragic Poet, whenever his Friend and he
differed about the retaintaining or rejecting any Thing in his Writings, used
to say, I appeal There is a kind of Whitticism in this expression, which will
be lost to the (...) English Reader, unless he be informed, that the Romans had
a privilege confirmed to them by several Laws which passed in the earlier Ages
of the Republic, of appealing from the Decisions of the Magistrates, to the
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE PEOPLE: and they did so in the Form of Words which
Pomponius here applies to a different Purpose.
to the People; By this Expression, I appeal to the People, some perhaps may
say, the Representatives are the People; and I only appeal to them again; I
must observe, in a Sense, they are so, but then it must be understood in a
qualified Sense, i. e. when they act according to the Laws of the Land, or at
least, not inconsistant with them, and their Conduct is agreeable to the
Constitution of a free People; and their whole Proceedings Legal, and
consequantly will be approved by the Voice of the People, which I am sorry is
so little regarded as it generally is, as though they were not to be
accountable to their Constituents, not considering that the Persons sent are
not greater than these who send them, especially if they are taken
collectively, as a Body, and then the Expression is proper, THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY OF THE PEOPLE, as the Power originally was, and still is in them --
for would it not be very absurd, to suppose when a free People unite in
choosing a small Number of Men to transact the public Affairs with Dispatch,
that they give up that Power which of Right belongs to them, and not only so,
but give them a Power to oppress and distress them as they please.
and accordingly by their Silence or Applause, adopted either his own or his
Friends Sentiments: such was the Regard he paid to the Populace! However unsafe
in general, an Appeal to the Vulgar Notions may be, there are yet some Cases in
which their Sentiment, have ever been received by the judicious, as decisive.


A Total Eclipse of Liberty.
Boston, Stone-Goal, October. 25. past 2 o'Clock in the Morning.
ON the 24th of October 1754, while at Dinner, I was apprehended by an Order
from the Lower House of Assembly signed Thomas Hubbard Speaker, on Suspicion of
publishing a Pamphlet, entitled THE MONSTER OF MONSTERS; Extract from the Votes
of the House of Representatives October 24th, P. 63. A Complaint being made to
the House of a printed Pamphlet, entitled, The Monster of Monsters, as
reflecting on sundry Members of this House; the said Pamphlet was laid on the
Table, and having been read through; --

Resolved, That the Pamphlet entitled, the Monster of Monsters, is a false,
scandalous Libel reflecting upon the Proceedings of the House in general, and
on many worthy Members in particular, in Breach of the Privileges thereof.

Ordered, That the said Pamphlet be burnt by the Hands of the common Hangman
below the Courthouse in King Street Boston, and that the Messenger of the
House see the same carried into Execution.

Resolved, That the Messenger of the House do forthwith take into Custody
Daniel Foul of Boston, Printer, who they are informed was concerned in
printing and publishing the said Pamphlet, and that the Speaker issue his
Warrent for that purpose.

Daniel Foul was brought into the House, and examined, and then was
recommitted to their Messenger by Order of the House.

Joseph Russel Apprentice to Daniel Foul, was brought into the House, and
examined relating to said Pamphlet.

Ordered, That Danial Foul be committed to the Common Goal in the County of
Suffolk; and that the Speaker issue his Warrent accordingly. --

Resolved, That the Messenger of the House do forthwith take into Custody
Zechariah Foul Printer and Royal Tyler, both of Boston, who they are informed
were concerned in printing and publishing the Pamphlet, entitled, The Monster
of Monsters; and that the Speaker issue his Warrant for that Purpose --

Royal Tyler was brought before the House: Mr. Speaker examined him whether he
had been concerned in printing and publishing said Pamphlet? Thereupon said
Tyler moved for Council.

Which the House took into Consideration, and determined that it was not
convenient to allow him Council; of which Mr. Speaker informed him.

Then Mr. Speaker again examined him relating to the said Pamphlet, and the
only Answer he would make was, Nemo tenetu^ (...) Accusare; or, a Right of
Silence was the Privilege of every Englishman.

Whereupon he was ordered to remain in the Custody of the House. Then the said
Tyler moved he might be admitted to Bail; the Messenger of the House was
ordered to withdraw with said Tyler.

Then the Question was put, Whether the said Request of Mr. Tyler's is
compatable with the Means the House are taking to discover the Authors of the
said Pamphlet? It passed in the Negative.


and forthwith to make my Appearance before said House to answer to such
Questions as should be asked me relating to the above Pamphlet; -- But before I
could be admitted, was confined in the Lobby about an Hour, then was by the
Messenger called before the House; and after my proper Complements before that
Grand Assembly, was interrogated in the following Manner, by Mr. Speaker, viz.
Do you knew any Thing of the Printing this? -- Holding it out -- Upon which I
desired it in my own Hands; which was granted: -- After looking over it seem
Time, I said, it was not of my printing, neither had I any such Letters in my
Print-House: -- After some considerable Pause, and the Gentlemen looking upon
one another, I was asked, Whether I knew any thing relating to said Book? -- I
then desired the Opinion of the House, Whether I must answer to that Question?
But notwitstanding this reasonable Request, there was no Vote passed, that I
could perceive, excepting three or four Gentlemen said Yes, Yes, very
earnestly: Upon which I informed them, I could not say, I had no Concern; for
as I heard there was such a Pamphlet to sell, I had bought two Dozen, and sold
them out of my Shop, and should not though it any Harm if I had sold an hundred of
them. This brought on tne following Questions and Answers, viz. Who did you buy
them of? -- I replied, they were sent, I thought, by a young Man, but could not
tell his Name. -- Who did he live with? I then again desired the Opinion of the
House, Whether I was obliged to tell who I bought of? -- Three or four again
rose up and said I must: Upon which I said, I believed the young Man lived with
Mr. Royal Tyler. It was then demanded, Whether I had any Conversation with him
about them? I replied, I believe I might in the same Manner as I had with many
others, not that I imagined him the Author, or any other Person, for I never
agreed with any Body about the Printing of it, neither was it ever offered to
me. I was then asked, Whether any of my Hands assisted in the doing of it? I
answered, I believe my Negro might, as sometimes he worked for my Brother. I
was then queried, Whether my Brother had any Help? I said, No. Then a Gentleman
said, Somebody must help him, for one could not print alone: As this was what I
never knew before, I replied, one could print, and I could do five hundred with
my own Hands. -- I was next questioned, Whether I ever saw any of it while
printing? As I was determined to show no Contempt of Authority, I acknowtedg'd
I had seen some of it printing off, as Printers transiently go into one
another's Houses. -- Whose House was it? -- I think it was my Brother's -- What
is his Name? -- Zechariah -- Where does he live? Down by Cross-Street. -- One
Gentleman stood up and said, sometime ago I said I bought but two Dozon,
afterward I bought a hundred; to which I replied, I would have bought a
hundred if I could have sold them. Another then stood up and said, before I had
Time to answer, YOU DO NOT KNOW WHEN YOU LIE: Upon which I said, Begging your
Pardon, Sir, I know when I LIE, and what a Lie is as well as your self: to
which there was no Reply.

They then concluded I was the Author, as I could bring no Body else -- I
desired I might have a little Time to consider as the Book was published
several Months past, and perhaps I might give more Light in the Affair; but
instead of telling me to go to my Print-House to enquire who brought the Books
there, I was locked up for three Hours in the upper Chamber of the Courthouse:
Then was ordered down to make my Appearance before the Hon. House a second
Time, and was further examined relating to this MONSTROUS BUSINESS, to know if
I could say any thing more, or give any further Light; (I understood Mr. ROYAL
TYLER had been sent for, and examined in my Absence) but as I had nothing to
correct in my Answers before, told them I could not give any further Light. --
Upon which one stood up and said, when I was in the House before, I said that I
bought the Books of ROYAL TYLER; -- Here I was suspicious they intended to get
me to acknowledge I had them of him. Which was not true in Fact. I denied and
said I believe his Boy left them at the Shop. Which I find also I am mistaken
in. And after being obliged to repeat over great Part of what I had before
said, was ordered again in the above Loft, where I was confined till between
nine and ten o'Clock at Night, without Company or Prisoners Fare -- From thence
was ordered, Malefactor-like, attended with a Crowd of Spectators, who were
waiting at the Doors, to know the Event of the Monster, to his Majesty's Goal
in Boston; as soon as I was guarded to the Prison-Keeper's House, many Friends
came to see me, endeavoring to keep up my Spirits; but no one imagined what
was to follow, nor I myself; -- but every one concluded, as Security enough was
offered, that I might have the best Chamber and Bed in the Prison-Keeper's
House; a while after my nearest Friends withdrew, and wished me a good Night.
It being now between 11 and 12 at Night, we came to the Point in Hand, whether
I must actually go into the Goal; I was told I must, and that into the
Stone-one; this I said was cruel hard; but go I must and did; where I now am an
Englishman, free born; having been for many Years entitled to the Privilege of
voting for some of the Members of that very House, by whose Order I am now
committed for no other Reason, but upon SUSPICION of printing and publishing
the aforesaid Book entitled the MONSTER of MONSTERS; This Affair was thought of
so much Conseqnence to the Public, that the 25th of October being the next
Day, Resolved, That the House will now take under Consideration the Affair of
Daniel Foul, now in his Majesty Goal.

Resolved, That it appears to this House, that Daniel Foul has been concerned
in pnblishing a Scandalous Pamphlet, entitled, The Monster of Monsters; in
which the House are greatly reflected on in Breach of their Privileges. Vot. p.
67.

October 26, The Messenger of the House informed the Speaker that Royal Tyler
requested that he might appear before the House before they adjourned: He was
accordingly admittod into the House, and represented, that his Family was in
distressed Circumstances, and prayed he might be admitted to Bail. Whereupon
Mr. Speaker, by Order of the House, declared to him, he might return to his
Family, provided he gave his Word of Honor to the House, he would be forth
coming when by them required: which he accordingly did, and then withdrew. See
Printed Votes of the House, P. 69.


-- but as I have heard of many Wonders in the World, this seems to be the
WONDER of WONDERS; and I think from this Time I shall never more wonder at any
Thing; -- But perhaps some may say, this is only a Whim, a Fancy of some
Lunatic Person, who imagined this Thing while he was dreaming of MONSTERS. Can
it be true in Fact! Is it possible under the English Constitution! Is it
possible among a Free People! Especially is it any way likely among New England
Subjects! Search for a Parralel in all the English Records! See if the like can
be found, unless when Tyranny prevailed, and Liberty, the Glory of our
Constitution, was obliged to hide it is Head! Without any more Admirations, this
very Affair was transacted in BOSTON, New England, a Place where our Ancesten
fled for Refuge, and left their pleasant Habitations, that they might enjoy
LIBERTY, the natural Right of freeborn Subjects, and not be confined upon
SUSPICIONS, nor subjected to those Oppressions which are enough to make a wise
Man mad.

Thus far I wrote in Goal the first Night: About 8 o'Clock in the Morning the
Prison-Keeper came up into my dark Apartment and said he had Orders not to
allow me Pen, Ink, or Paper, which he immediately took from me; and also said
his Orders was, Not to let me see or speak with any Body; which perhaps some
may think ought not to be told in Gath, and that I might have more MODESTY And
though it is generally thought by many that a Man must be so modest, as not to
say any Thing in his own Favor, or justify his own Conduct, for fear it would
seem like praising himself; yet as this is only a Modern Notion, I shall here
insert the Opinion of the Ancients on this Head, in the Words of a celebrated
Writer, who says, It is most certain that Modesty, according the Idea the
Ancients had of it, did not (neither in the Truth of Things does it forbid a
Man to speak well of (or justify) himself -- Homer's Ulysses to borrow the
Observation of a very polite and judicious Critic) calls himself the wisest of
the Grecians, as his Achilles dees not scruple to represent himself the best
and most valiant of them; and that too in a Council of all the Princes: I might
mention Virgil in making Aeneas talk frequently of his Piety and Valor --
Socrates in Plato, Cyrus, Caesar and the great Jewish Writers of his Life, etc.
--.
than to blaze it about, or publish it in the Streets of Askelon, etc.

PART II.
Boston, Stone-Goal, Upper Loft, October 26. 1754.
I Should have enlarged in my first Account, but it was either surmised, or
somebody informed that I had a Pen and Ink, which the Prison-Keeper said he had
Orders to take from me, which he did; so was obliged to break off abruptly; and
for Fear of being searched, hid what I had wrote in a private Place, where I
thought Modesty would be a Check upon him from searching: Now thinking my self
very secure, only desired I might have the Liberty of writing a few Lines to my
Wife; this Favor was denied me. I then begged I might have the Liberty of
speaking with some Friend in the Place of my Confinement, which was also denied
me; -- I then entreated that my Wife might be sent for, that I might deliver
some Message to her to intercede for my Delieverance out of this stinking,
dark, melancholy Place; but all my Pleadings were of no avail. Mr Young then
said, he would carry any Message for me, but not in writing, About this Time I
received a Letter in a private Manner from my Wife, wherein were these
Expressions -- "I am almost raving distracted, and am quite ill: If you do not
come home I shall be quite dead; or get Leave to see you: send me a Line or
two, and I shall be glad: I have had no Sleep all Night, and know not whether
you will find me alive. Your most afflicted and distressed Wise, L. F.
though I told hin he might see what I wrote. -- This I looked upon to be
shocking Orders which Mr. Young had received, but knew at the same Time, that
no Man or Body of Men had a right to give, as this Affair was circumstanc'd
either from the Laws of God or Man, but was purely ARBITRARY in the bad Sense
of the Word -- Had I been a Murderer, I should not have been denied these
Favors, for they are generally allowed, the Comfort of their nearest Friends;
and though I could enlarge with Truth, and show wherein this Treatment was
almost too much for human Nature to bear, shall not at present proceed any
further on this Head --

All I could be allowed Was to send a Message by Mr. Young, who said he would
deliver it to the Person who was below, and had brought me some Victuals, if I
inclined to send Word by him; but as I did not care to commit any Thing of a
private Nature to him, only desired him to acquaint my Wife All the Friends and
Disciples of Socrates, that were in the City, excepting Plato, who was sick,
departed to the Prison to take their bast Farewell of their dying Master. As
they came very early in the morning that they might have an Opportunity of
conversing with him all the Day, they were detained sometime at the Prison-Door
before they were admitted; for the Eleven Magistrates were then untying
Socrates, according to the Laws of Athens, which detreed, that when a Criminal
was by the final Orders of these Eleven doomed to die, he was immediately
released form all manner of Bonds, as a Victim to Death. As soon as this
Ceremony was performed, they were introduced by the Gonler into the Apartment
in which he was to suffer, where they found him unsound, with his Wife Xan^^^^^
and his Children sitting by him; who as soon as she saw them, cried out, O
Socrates, this is the last Time you and Your Friends will converse together.
Life of Socrates, Book, 5 P. 155." The Design of this Note is to represent,
that (...) sentenced to die, unjustly, through the implacable Malice of his
Enemies, yet was not FORBID THE COMPANY OF HIS WIFE AND CHILDREN.
and Relations, That I was deprived either of the Pleasure of her Comparny, or
theirs; for I Was not allowed to have any Body with me; nor to write her a
Line. Which was delivered as far as I know. But to digress a little, This
Building, by what I can learn from the Prisoners, has seven Apartments, besides
the Dungeon; the Walls about three Feet and half thick. When I was first
conveyed to Mr. Young's House, I thought I might have lodged there, giving
Security as before hin^ed, but the Officer showed me a Paper Sgn'd by Thomas
Hubbard, COPY of the MITTAMUS. SEAL. Province of the Massachusetts Bay.
To William Baker, Messenger of the House of Representatives now sitting in
Boston, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Goal in the County of Suffolk.
Whereas by a Resolve of the said House of Representatives, I am directed to
issue my Warrent for the Committment of Daniel Foul of Boston in the County of
Suffolk Printer to the Common Goal, of the said County as a Person SUSPECTED of
being guilty of spreading and publishing a scandalous Libel upon the said House
of Representatives, entitled the Monster of Monsters.

You are hereby therefore required to commit to said Goal the said Daniel Foul
now in your Custody.

And the Keeper of the said Goal is hareby required to receive the said Daniel
Foul into said Goal, and him there to detain until the further Order of the
said House of Representatives.

Given under my Hand and Seal at the Courthouse in Boston, the 24th Day of
October Anno. Dom. 1754. T. Hubbard Speaker of the House of Representatives.




Speaker, Wherein was these Words, TO PUT ME INTO THE COMMON GOAL: I hoped the
Common Goal meant no more than the Wooden one; but I must go into the Stone
one, which it seems is the proper Meanig of the Words Common Goal, as there
were explained at that Time: I suppose it is called Common, because all Sorts
of Criminals are put here, such as Murderers, Thieves, Common-Cheats,
Pick-Pockets, etc. And what is worse than all that has been mentioned,
SUSPICIOUS PERSONS. who are coavicted of no Crime at all; but are to remain
there during the Pleasure of Lawless, arbitrary, ambitious. Men. So I am here
as one of the worst of Crininals, the Nature of my Crime, being only Suspicion.
But to proceed, After all Entreaties of my self and Friends failed, as before
mentioned, and I found I must go into this Place, I then endeavored to bring
my Mind to my Condition, and thought more than I said, as there are no humane
Laws against Thinking, though against Speaking. After Eleven at Night, when
People were generally gone to Rest, I was by the Prison-Keeper and several
others, conducted through several Apartments, each of which was secured with
Locks and Bolts; on each Door of about 70 Spickes, the Heads of which about two
Inches diametor, I walked very slow, that I might observe as I went along; and
could not help thinking of those Words, which appeared very stricking to me, of
walking through the dark Valley of the Shadow of Death. Having got to my
Apartment, without any broken Bones, it being an ugly stumbling Way to the
Place, an extraordinary Composure of Mind ensued; I would not have any imagine
by this, that I was easy, and contented. No, far from that, but if there is any
such Thing as a Hell upon Earth, I think this Place is the nearest Resemblance
of any I can conceive of; all I mean by it is, that as I was Conscious I did
not deserve this Treatment; but had the proper Exercise of my Reajon; and
Innocence and a clear Conscience, will almost quench the Flame of the most
dismal mal Place, to speak parabolically while Consciousness of Guilt, (...)
Man in the most delightful Palace.
I then fancied myself like one of the old Philosophers, the Account of whose
Lives has been some Entertainment to me, but wished for Diogene's Tub or
Hogshead, or something to keep out the Inclemency of the Weather, for it was a
dark stormy Night, and rained prodigious hard all next Day. I had no Bed to
lodge on, but a Pillow and one Blanket. I walked about, and when tired sat
down, and heard the Clock strick every Time from 12 till Eight. There is but
one Window, and that without any Thing to keep off the Weather, as there is
only several Iron Bars, no Winder-shut, which the Murderer was favored with.
The Place stunk prodigiously, which obliged me to tie my Handkerchief over my
Mouth and Nose, for fear of being suffocated; worse than the Smell of
Brimstone. I heard no Noise for some considerable Time; all Nature seemed to be
dead; the first stiring of any Thing I could hear, was the Noise of Rats, which
seemed to be of a prodigious Size, and have Reason to think if I had been
favored with a Club, I might have been the Death of some of them. As I was now
deprived of all human Company, I wished for my little Dog Corriden, and was
sorry I had not thought of him before, whose Company perhaps I might have been
indulged. About two o'Clock I heard a most terrible Groan as of some human
Person, which startled me a little, but had Resolution enough I thought, to
encounter, had it been One from the other World; the Groan appeared to be very
long and piercing: In a few Minutes after, I spoke out with as strong a Voice
as I could, Who Is there! This seemed to bring the Dead to Life; for I soon
found I had roused the Prisoners in the other Apartments, and was immediately
answered by one who said his Name was Wire, I suppose you have heard of me; he
was to have been executed the Thursday following. I told him I was sorry for
his Misfortune; and advised him to behave sutably under his Affliction; he
thanked me, and bid me a good Night; he was in the next Room; only a Plank
Partition parted us. Soon after I was hailed by one in the upper Loft, whose
Name is Webb, to know if I had just come in, and desired I would not take it
amiss, as Prisoners were as kind to one another as the Place would allow of; I
then told him between eleven and twelve. From that Time till eight the next
Morning, I had no more Conversation with any Body; soon after I heard Wire at
Prayer, who seemed to be very penitent, then there was a general Muster of the
Prisoners, and calling to one another, some for Tobacco; some for Rum, Sugar,
Water, etc. some Swearing, Crying and Praying; so that I was entertained with a
Variety, which seemed as though I had got into another World. As I found my
Companions must be Murderers, Thieves, common Cheats, etc. I imagined I might
make a good Improvement by conversing with these notorious Sinners: And though
it is said a Man may be known by his Company; yet I beg Leave to contradict
that general prevailing Notion, and differ from some; I think there is an
Advantage in being with all Sorts of Persons, if Prudence is used and the Place
does not stink too much. Had I not been here, I should not have known the
Behavior of a poor Melefactor bound in Chains; I should not have had so clear
an Idea of that Patience and Resignation, which is so much talked of, and so
little practiced in the World. I than desired the Prison Keeper to remove me
any where in the Prison, so I might get out of this Place, for I was almost
suffocated with the Smell. He told me he could not, unless I went above with
Webb; which I readily accepted of; and in about two Hours after was removed;
which Place was pleasant in Comparison of the other. I endeavored now to make
the best of my companion; and though I had heard a notorious Character of him,
must say, he behaved to me with all the Civility of a good natured Man.

** Is it not very unaccountable, as this Affair took up so much Time, and was
carried on with so much Deliberation, that it was never sent up to the
Honorable Board, to know if his Excellency and Honors, (who are two Branches
of the Legislature) approved of it? Had this been done, as I think it should,
with Submission to better Judgment; and had I been so happy as to have been
favored with their Opinion, doubt not it would have met with but a very cool
Reception, and finally thrown out, as not being for the Dignity of the General
Assembly to take Notice of such an imaginary Creature; or if in their Wisdom
should have thought otherwise, I cannot entertain the least Doubt but that the
Law would have been the Rule for my Trial, and that it could never find Place
in the Heart of a sincere and upright Christian of prosecuting it to Effect in
the Manner it was done.

Part III.
Prisonhouse, Saturday October 26. past 12 o'Clock, Forenoon.
AS I was ordered half a Hour ago by the Prison-Keeper to come out of the close
Stone-Goal, into his Dwelling House, I think it necessary immediately to give
some further Account of this extraordinary Affair, which is not mentioned fully
in my first and second Papers.

I have been 48 Hours confined in a stinking close Stone-Goal, a particular
Account of which I gave in my second Paper. It is now more than ever before a
pleasant Thing for my Eyes to behold the Sun. I am now allowed the Use of Pen,
Ink, Paper, the Pleasure of seeing my Relations, and many Friends, whom before
I knew nothing of. I seem to myself as one almost risen from the Dead, and
though weak in Body, can perceive a Revival as I have the Liberty of breathing
a freer Air. While I was in Tribulation, I am informed the People were in
Doubt, saying one to another, What means this? And though I had not the Use of
the Bible, I cannot remember, whether that in particular was forbid me.

But as I have had many Thoughts, some Parts of Scripture came fresh in my
Mind, such as, "if this Counsel or this Work be of Men, it will come to
Naught;" And that "there is no Wisdom nor Understanding, nor Counsel against
the LORD." I was informed about Midnight, that the Jailer had received a strict
Charge to (...) into Prison, and there to keep me safely, but no Orders to make
my Feet fast in the Stocks. Afterward the Keeper himself told this Saying to
me, which I suppose came from the Magistrates, TO LET ME GO; and doubt not I
might have departed in Peace: But St. Paul's Words seemed to be rivited into
me, speaking of himself and his Fellow Sufferers, "They have beaten ( or
abused) us openly uncondemn'd ( i.e. by the Law) being Romans, and have cast us
into Prison; and now do they thrust us out privily? Nay, verily, but let them
come themselves and fetch us out:" Perhaps their hard Hearts may relent, when
they see the Situation we are in, as it is natural for the Eye to affect the
Heart. So it is applicable in some Measure to my Case, as I was put into the
inner Room in the Prison, and that at Midnight, uncondemn'd, i.e. by the Law;
and I am an Englishman, freeborn, not having forfeited my Liberty any more
than the above Romans; and I now desire that the same Authority that put me in,
would by Virtue of that same Power take me out, and not thrust me out privily.
I had heard that the Chief Magistrate, and some others, gave this good Advice;
Take heed to yourselves, what ye intend to do as touching those Man. If any
should say I am mad, or beside my self; it could not be wondered at considering
the Treatment I have unjustly received; but I can affirm with all seriousness
in the Words of St. Paul, I am not mad, but speak forth the Words of Truth and
Soberness. I only speak freely, and every Man of common Sense has this Right,
and I think every Man is more or less concerned in an Affair of this Nature,
for this Thing was not done in a Corner, unless it was in a Corner of the
Courthouse. I did nothing that was worthy of Death or of Bonds, the former I
was in great Danger of, the latter I actually experienced; when at the same
Time I ought to have been set at Liberty. I have Reason to think twenty four
Hours more would have put an End to my Life, for I had caught a prodigious
Cold the first Night, as the Wind blew hard in upon me the whole Time; and had
that been the Case, what Satisfaction could have been made to injured
Innocence? Would it have been any Mitigation, because it was done by the
Representatives of the People, or at least by a Number of them? No! the Crime
would have been so much the more aggravated, as it cannot be supposed they were
ignorant of what they were doing, though I have so much Charity as to think
that forty Men of superior Sense then setting, would sooner have cut off their
Hands than been guilty of such a base Action; but suppose most Votes carried it.

After I was delivered from this doleful, melancholy Stinking Place, into Mr.
Young's Dwelling House, I had a particular Account of the Doctor's attending my
Wife, who on this Occasion, was thrown into Fainting Fits, and Hesterick
Disorders, of which perhaps she may never recover so as to be the same Woman as
before. Here is a further Aggravation of this unprecedented Conduct of those
who had no Right to put me there, as I hope I shall be able to prove -- The
whole Time she was forbid Admittance, who would willingly have kept with me:
How then must this appear to a thinking Mind, that the dearer Part of a Man's
Self must be as it were torn from him, which God had joined together, and no
Man had a Right to put asunder, excepting in some particular Cases, of which
there can no Shadow of a Reason be pretended here. I could only hear while in
Goal, the tender Cries of an aged Mother, for the Sight of her Son, the
Intercession of Friends for a Relief, and the encouraging Words of some to keep
up a good Heart; and the Pity of the poor Melefactor, who said, he thought I
was worse off than himself. Soon after I had got into the Prison-Keeper's
House, being weak in Body, and scarcely able to walk, my dear Companion, with
Assistance, came in, whose Paleness and quivering Lips, with Trembling, was
enough to move a Stoic. Here, I acknowledge, I want Words to paint this Scene
in true and lively Colors; and as I imagine Language, were I capable, would
only eclipse a true Idea of it, so I think nothing but a complete Orator, a
Master of Language, perfectly acquainted with human Nature, can draw it to its
Life; therefore shall forbear.

The Day being now far spent, and my Friends taking their Leave, I retired to a
Chamber, and went to Rest as soon as I could; having a tolerable Night's
Refreshment, I awoke with considerable Strength of Body, heard two Sermons
preached to the poor Melefactor; as there was a Number of Persons came to see
the Prisoner on this Occasion, there was Enquiry, how I came out. I also heard
the House had sent for the Mittemus on Saturday, and that the Sheriff would not
give up the Orignal, for I was not under Bonds, nor any Body for me, that I
should not depart the Prison-Yard; and the Doors and Gates being frequently
open I had opportunity enough to go out, but being determined to show no
Contempt of Authority, nor any other Orders, am now, on Monday, (October 28.)
still confined waiting for the Pleasure of the Hon. House. Having had my Trial
before the Lower House, and suspected to be guilty, on Tuesday the fifth Day
after Confinement, it was "Ordered, that Daniel Foul be brought to the Bar of
the House, and Reprimanded by the Speaker, for his publishing a Scandalous
Libel, called, the Monster of Monsters, greatly reflecting upon the Honor of
this House; and then be discharged, paying Costs. The said Daniel Foul was
accordingly brought to the Bar of the House, and Reprimanded by the Speaker.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker issue his Warrant to the Keeper of his Majesty's
Goal, in the County of Suffolk, to discharge the said Daniel Foul upon his
paying Cost. Which was issued by Mr. Speaker accordingly.




This Affair, I understand, is the chief Topic of Conversation in Town, and
well it may be, for it is a new Thing in the Land. As I live under the
Constitution of England, shall transcribe a few Thoughts out of that approved
Piece, entitled the Spirit of Laws, Vol. 1. P. 216, and so on. --

"The Liberty of the Subject is a Tranquillity of Mind, arising from the Opinion
each Person has of his Safety. In order to have this Liberty, it is requisite
the Government be so constituted as one Man need not be afraid of another."

When the Legislative and Executive Powers are united, in the same Person, or
in the same Body of Magistrates, there can be no Liberty; because Apprehensions
may arise, least the same Monarch or Senate should enact tyrannical Laws, to
execute them in a tyrannical Manner."

"Again, There is no Liberty, if the Power of judging be not separated from the
Legislative and Executive Powers. Were it joined with the Legislative, the Life
and Liberty of the (...) he exposed to arbitrary Control; for the judge (...)
the Legislature. Were it joined to the Executive Power, the Judge might behave
with all the Violence of an Opressor."

"There would be an End of every Thing, were the same Man, or the same Body,
whether of the Nobles or of the People, to exercise those three Powers, that of
enacting Laws, that of executing the Public Resolutions, and that of judging
the Crimes or Differences of Individuals."

Tuesday October 29. Afternoon.

The Doctor having acquainted me that my Wife was thrown into Fits on Account
of my Confinement, which obliged me to write the following Letter to Thomas
Hobbard, Esquire; Speaker, to be communicated to the House, viz. --

Hon. Gentlemen,
As I have been confined in Mr. Young's Custody for above five Days, two Days
and Nights of it in the Stone-Goal, and hearing my Wife has had several
fainting Fits, which the Doctor says will endanger her Life; and as it
proceeds, he thinks, upon this Account, I must beg you would dismiss me, to go
to her, and shall be ready to wait upon you when you may have Occasion for me.

I am with all due Regard Your most humble Servant Daniel Foul.


P. S. Since I wrote the above, I have received the enclosed Letter --

Mr. Foul,
I was so shocked at your Confinement in the Common Goal, that I was Seized
with a Tremblings, and I sunk down with a Fainting Fit; I have had several
since, and my Spirits are quite gone; -- I am now going to Bed weak and faint,
and God alone knows whether I shall ever come to my self again. Can the House
be stripped of all Bowels of Compassion? -- I am, etc.

L. F. --
October. 29.

It may not be amiss here to transcribe some Passages of that excellent Book,
entitled the English Liberties; or, The Freeborn Subjects Inheritance: The
Author, in his Preface says, "Let us then by perusing this Treatise deeply
imprint in (...) Minds the Laws and Rights that from Age to Age have been
delivered down to us from our Renowned Forefathers, and which they so dearly
bought and vindicated to themselves at the Expense of so much Blood and
Treasure: In a Word, Let them never perish in our Hands, but let us make our
Lives happy in the Enjoyment of them, and piously transmit them to our
Posterity; being fully convinced of this Truth, that when Liberty is once gone,
even Life itself grows insipid, and loses all its Relish."

MAGNA CHARTA, Page 22. Chap. 29. This excellent Charter was read at
West-minster Hall in Presence of the Nobility and Bishops, with lighted Candles
in their Hands, the King all the while laying his Hand on his Breast, and at
last solemnnly Swearing faithfully and inviolably to observe all the Things
therein contained, as he was a Man, a Christian, a Soldier, and a King. Then
the Bishops extinguished their Candles, throwing them on the Ground, crying, --
Thus let him be extinguished and stink in Hell, who violates this Charter. It
was thought to be so beneficial to the Subject, and a Law of so great equity,
in Comparision of those which were formerly in Use, that King Henry, for the
granting it, had the fifteenth Penny of all the moveable Goods both Temporal
and Spiritual. Cham. Dict. It is called the GREAT CHARTER OF LIBERTIES.
No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or disseised of of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or Free Customs, or be outlawed; or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed, nor will we pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful Judgment
of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. We will sell to no Man, we will not
deny or defer to any Man, either Justice or Right.

No Freeman shall be taken, etc. These Words deserve to be written in Letters
of Gold, and I have often wondered that they are not inscribed in CAPITALS, in
all our Courts of Judicature, Town-Halls and most public Edifices; they being
so essential to our English Freedom and Liberties, and because my Lord Coke in
the second Part of his Institutes, has many excellent Observations on this
Chapter; I shall recite his very Words;

That no free Man shall be taken, or imprisoned, but by the Law of the Land, i.
e. by the Common Law, or by the Statute Law, for the Liberty of a Man's Person
is more dear to him than any Thing, and therefore if he be wronged in the
Liberty, it is very reasonable be should be relieved.

No Man shall disseised, i. e. put out of Seisin or be dispossessed of his
Freehold, i. e. of his Lands or Tenements, or Livelihood, or of his Liberties,
or Free-Customs, which belong to him as his Birthright, unless it be by Lawful
Judgment, i. e. by a Verdict of his Equals, or Men of his own Condition, or by
the Law of the Land, i. e. to speak once for all, by the due Course and Process
of Law.

No Man shall be taken, etc. i. e. restrained of his Liberty, by Petition, or
Suggestion, to the King or Council, unless it be by Indictment or Presentment,
of good and lawful Men, living near the Place where such Deeds were done. The
Warrant or Mittimus, containing a Lawful Cause, ought to have a Lawful
Conclusion, etc. and him safely to keep until he be delivered by Law, etc. and
not until the Party committing shall farther Order.

If any Man, by Color of Authority where he has not any in that particular
Case, shall persume to arrest or imprison any Man, or cause him to be arrested
or imprisoned, this is against this Act, and it is most hateful, when it is
done by Countenance of Justice.

There are three Things, which the Law of England (which is a Law of Mercy)
principally regards and takes Care of, viz. Life, Liberty and Estate. Next to
a Man's Life, the nearest Thing that concerns him, is Freedom of his Person;
for indeed what is Imprisonment, but a kind of civil Death? Therefore, faith
Fortescus, the Laws of England do, in all Cases, favor Liberty."

If the Impartial should think upon perusing the foregoing, that I have wrote
with any unbecoming Passion or Prejudice, I am willing to acknowledge it. But at
the same Time must observe, to use the Words of an excellent Writer, "All Anger
or Resentment cannot be condemned, although there is little lovely in any
Degree of it. An entire Insensibility of all injuries, of which there are but
few Instances, would be a very inconvenient Disposition; exposing a Man to the
Conturnelies and Petulance of others; nor consistent with his own Character."

Is it not very surprising, such a Vote should pass that House, when I declared
the Book was not of my printing, neither had I any such Types to print with? If
it be said it was put to Vote, and there was a Majority for my Committment, and
Mr. Speaker was ordered to sign a Mittemus to put me into the Common Goal, I
think he might with as much Propriety have signed my Death Warrant if ordered.
If it then be said, Mr. Speaker was against this Proceeding, could he not in a
genteel Manner have excused himself, and desired the House to appoint another
for this Case, and considered if he did me Wrong, though by their Influence, or
Order, it would not excuse him, unless they had an absolute Power to take away
Life at Pleasure -- [I here shall insert that Passage in the English Liberties,
Page 3. "'It Is true the Law itself affirms, the King can do no Wrong; which
proceeds not only from a Presumption, that so excellent a Person will do none,
but also because he acts nothing but by Ministers, which (from the lowest to
the highest) are answerable for their Doings; so that if a King in his Passion
should command A to kill B, without Process of Law, A may yet be prosecuted by
Indictment, or upon an Appeal, (where no Royal Pardon is allowable) and must
for the same be executed, such Command notwithstanding."] Would he in Fact have
done it, had I been his Son in Law, though ordered by the whole General
Assembly? No I dare say, he would not; and he certainly must know, or at least
ought to know, in order to qualify him for that Office, I was not dealt with in
a due Course and Process of Law; and that their Power did not extend, in such
Cases to any but their own Members. All I 'desir'd was a fair Trial at Common
Law, which I doubt not is founded upon Reason; and if I had been condemned,
would have endeavored to be calm and easy, and thrown them in the Heap of
Misfortunes Mankind are subject to.

If this was a just Method of Proceeding, why was not the other Printers sent
for, and against whom Warrants were issued? It seems there was no Occasion for
this; but if they could sacrifice an innocent Person, it might be a Terror to
others. Is this just? Has it the Appearance of Justice! Nay, would any of them
have carried the Affair to such a monstrous Height with a Relation or an
Acquaintance? Would Mr. Speaker have signed that Mittimus had I been nearly
allied to his Family? It is unaccountable, that a Gentleman, who for several
Years has had almost the unanimous Vote of this Town to represent them, should
act thus, when he must know our Liberties Were touched to the Quick; (for I
would not in the least imagine he could be IGNORANT) and that the plain English
of establishing such a Precedent would be this: If I can be secure, or
protected, I will do all in my Power to put every Man into the Stone Goal that
shall pretend either directly or indirectly to find Fault with the Conduct of
the House of Representatives, while I am Speaker, even if they barely
suspected; and whatever they order, I will sign, and we will be Judges of
Parallels and Innuendoes, though we should incur the Censure of Juvenal, who
says, "There are a Set of Creature Who have no Mercy on Paper, and are ready
to answer, even when they are absolute Strangers to the Subject."

Strange! That Men who have had Liberty and Property continuallly sounding in
their Ears from the Press and Pulpit; even from their Infancy, should be guilty
of this unaccountable Conduct? Is the Nature of Right and Wrong altered? Is
this Glory departing from New England which our Renowned Predecessors purchased
with so much Blood and Treasure? We hope not. We have our Courts of Justice not
yet overthrown: For we have the Grand Privilege of Trials, by our Country, that
is by Juries; and I hope never to see the Day, when the People of this Country,
will be so stupid as tamely to give up the Privilege they of Right enjoy; but
always have a Godly Jealousy, when there is the least Encroachment either in
Civil or Religious Affairs, and more especially when the very Foundation is
struck at; and act like Men; fear not stern Countenances, the Threats of a
Prison, nor the rattling of Chains; but imitate the noble Courage of your
Fathers, who are now sleeping quietly in the Dust, and feared none of these
Things, as they knew they were acting in a just Cause; and have overcome, and
no Doubt gained the Prize: For should you act an inglorious Part, and they,
could rise out of their Graves, you would not be acknowleged as their Children,
but the degenerate Plants of a strange Vine.

Now while we have Opportunity, let us consider, that as Life once lost, can
never be recovered; so when Liberty is banished, or by bad Treatment, takes it
Flight to another Climate, where it will be kindly received, it is almost as
impossible to recover it again in its native Beauty, as it is for the Ethiopian
to change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spot.

Alhough I could enlarge, with Assistance, from the best Authors, who wrote on
the Original of Civil Government, The internal Structure of States, and the
several Parts of the supreme Power, The Downfall of Tyranny etc. and show
wherein the Author of the foregoing Piece has been treated contrary to, and in
direct Violation of all the Laws of the English Nation; but must reserve these
Thoughts, with an APPENDIX, for another Opportunity.

FINISH.

