A LETTER To a Gentleman On the SIN and DANGER Of Playing at Cards and other
Games.

BOSTON, Printed; And Sold by D. FOUL in Ann-street, and by Z. FOUL in
Middlestreet.

SIR,
THE Relation you stand in to an honorable Family lays you under
proportionable Obligations to exert yourself, in the best Methods, to train
them up, not only in the Knowledge of sound Doctrine according to the Gospel of
CHRIST, but in virtuous Practices; and carefully to detect Vice and restrain
them from all Tendencies thereto. For not only the future Credit and Prosperity
of your Children in this World and their eternal Welfare in the next may be
connected with such a good Education; but also the Welfare of many other young
Persons may greatly depend upon it. For you cannot but be sensible that young
People of lower Rank and Condition are much inclined to follow the Example of
those whom they look upon above them; especially, that they will improve the
bad Example of Superiors as an Argument to gratify their own corrupt
Inclinations when their concerned Parents lay them under any Restraints. --
Therefore, (since your Name is kept a Secret) you cannot reasonably take it
ill, but must think that I act a faithful and friendly Part, in advartizing
you, from the Press, of some unhappy Things prevailing in your Family,
especially considering I have no other Way to do it with so much Advantage, nor
with so much Honor to you and myself.

Perhaps you are not appriz'd of it, but I can assure you, upon moral Evidence,
that several of your Children have imbibed, and, as they have had Opportunity,
have vented and spread abroad diverse corrupt Opinions of dangerous Tendency,
and some of them subversive of the whole Christian Religion as it is opened in
the Gospel, and Epistles. -- But since I know you have obliged your self to
teach them a Form of sound Words, and hope you are warning and guarding them
against such Corruptions, I may be excused, at present, from descending into
Particulars upon this Head.

But there are some Practices, in which several of your House allow themselves,
that must not be passed over in Silence; particularly wastful Gaming and
Card-playing, if not other Games wherein there is Lottery.

You cannot, Sir, be insensible that you are under Covenant Engagement to use
your utmost Endeavors to Convince your Children and Family of the Evil and
Danger of such Practices, and, if possible, to restrain them, provided you view
them in the same Light that I do.

By wastful Gaming, I don't intend those Games that are in themselves sinful,
but such as are too often attended with a Waste of precious Time, which might
be employed to much better Purpose, or which are accompanied with sotish
Drinking if not some other Vices, -- Now, though GOD allows us and we should
allow our Families the sober Use of the Delights of Sense and proper
Recreations, yet if we give them such Allowances as to gratify their Solicitude
of these Things as their best Pleasure, we virtually allow them to be
Time-Wasters, if not to become Intemperate and to gratify other Lusts which are
often the Concomitants of them. -- Therefore, Sir, is it not more than Time to
have the Practice reformed? Is it not expedient for Parents to bring the
Diversions of Children more under their Eye and see what accompanies them. For,
beside the Guilt and Ruin that wastful Gaming brings upon Souls, it is the ready
Way to undo a promising Child in his temporal Interests. The wise King of
Israel assures us, he that loves Pleasure, shall be a poorMan. And we have
often seen this Proverb verefied; and who can think but that it will be
respecting our Children if they agree to the Description? For their Pleasures
must be maintained at the Expense of their Time, and often, perhaps, at the
Expense of Money too. By this Means, many young Persons that have good natural
Endowments and might have acquired a good Stock of useful Knowledge, and have
been wealthy and public Blessings in their Day, come to Poverty and Shame.

But beside such wastful Gaming, there is playing at Cards, if no other Games
wherein there is Lottery, that has been practiced by some of your Family, the
Evil and Danger of which is still greater than in the forementioned Diversions.
For the Temptation to waste precious Time, venture Wagers, spend Money or
indulge some other Lust is greater; and that because it is a Lot: for
considering the Event is Contingent, the Looser, in some proceeding Games,
hopes his good Fortune will turn the Card in his Favor if he makes another
Trial, and therefore is tempted himself and is ready to tempt his Companions to
try another Game, and so on from one to another, and visa versa. But this is
not all; for the Evil and Danger of such Gaming is greater as it is sinful in
it self, and that because there is Lottery in it. You know, Sir, that our best
Divines who have wrote upon the Subject have esteemed it a plain Breach of the
same Command with the Sin of common Swearing; and their Opinion is founded upon
solid Reason. -- If you ask how it appears? The Answer is easy in a few Words:
is swearing an Appeal to the GOD of Heaven and Earth, touching the Truth of
what we affirm, promise or deny? So casting a Lot is a solemn Appeal or
Reference to the GOD of Heaven and Earth touching the Issue of a contingent
Event. Do common Swearers profane and villify an Act of divine Worship, when,
without due Respect had to the Subject, without awful Reverence of his Majesty
as GOD the Searcher of Hearts, without any serious Regard to such an Act of
Religion, they dare, upon a slight Occasion, make use of his great and sacred
Name? So casting a Lot is an awful profaning and villifying an Act of divine
Worship, when without due Respect had to the Subject, without awful Reverence
to the glorious Majesty of GOD, without proper Regard to such a solemn Act of
Religion, Men do, upon a slight Occasion, refer the Event of a Contingency to
(...) Providence of GOD, as in playing at Cards, (...) other Games of Lottery
they do. -- It Is rea(...)y granted that taking an Oath is sometimes necessary
to put an End to Strife or decide a Controversy; but in small Matters and upon
slight Occasions for Men to call upon GOD to Witness the Truth of what they
affirm, is a profane and abusive Treatment of his venerable Name: it argues
that they have a mean and low Opinion of him, when they make him Judge in
Matters of no Importance, or when they do this in a light and trifling Manner.
So casting a Lot is sometime, necessary for the Decision of a Controversy and
other important Concerns in the Church or State; and GOD approves of it, if it
be done in a right Manner, with a sacred regard to His venerable Name and His
all-disposing Providence; but in small Matters and upon slight Occasions to
refer a Contingent Event to the Providence of GOD, is a profane Abuse of His
Majesty; it argues that Persons have a m^^^ and low Opinion of GOD and of His
governing Hand in Contingencies, when they make such References in Affairs of
little or no Importance.

And besides, please to consider the Consequences of a Family, so distinguished
as yours is, being indulged in such sort of Games. Some of the weaker People
are ready to think, when they see or hear of a Family of Character, deal so
irreverently with their Maker, that there is no GOD; at least, that he does not
concern himself with Affairs below, and that revealed Religion is a mere
Pretense. Hence, our holy Religion is evil spoken of and even hissed at by
Infidels.

Neither is this all; but the Practice opens a wide Door to many other Vices;
such as profane Swearing, intemperate Drinking, Quarrelling and at last to
decide the Controversy with Sword and Pistol. And these Things have been in
Fact the dreadful Consequences of playing at Cards. In a Word, Sir, if the
Devil were to teach our Children how to wear out or stupify natural Conscience,
and keep off all Sense of GOD, Religion and Futurity, and how they might arrive
to Impudence in Sinning, I think, he could not well take a more effectual Step
toward it, than by encouraging them in those Sports that treat the Name or
Providence of GOD irreverently, and refering themselves to GOD upon the most
trifling Occasions; for when our Children are brought on thus far, he need not
much fear their scrupling any Thing else. And if such Practices are winked at
in your Family, we may justly fear our Colleges will soon be infected, in as
much as the Youth, that are sent there for an Education, are very apt to copy
after Families of Distinction. And if this should be the awful Case, we may
expect to have the Practice common through the Country; nay, the Pulpits will
not be long clear of this Evil, as some of the Episcopalians have got into it
already. Hence, many sober, and conscientious Parents will not dare to give
their hopeful Children a College Education, till at length, those Houses will
be next to bare Walls, unless they are filled with the most profligate and
vain, who would be more properly disposed of in another Place.

Suffer me, Sir, to conclude by saying, that GOD is now testifying his
righteous Displeasure against us, in expensive Wars and tremendous Earthquakes.
Both these Dispensations call you and me to make a Pause, and consider what GOD
expects of us, in a way of Means, to effect a Reformation in our own Houses and
among others. And while we have a Respite given us, from threatened Vengeance,
may our Souls be awakned to Duty; and no more allow those Things in ourselves
or our Families that tend to bring down Sin-revenging Justice upon a guilty
Land.

I am, Sir, Your faithful Friend, etc.
Dec. 11. 1755.

