A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF SOME LENT AND OTHER Extraordinary Processions AND
ECCLESIASTICAL ENTERTAINMENTS, Seen last Year at LISBON.

In FOUR LETTERS to an English Friend.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, Late of PEMBROKE COLLEGE* And Chaplain to the Right Hon.
the Countess of Huntingdon.

LONDON, Printed.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND, Reprinted and Sold by Z. FOUL below the Mill-Bridge and
by EDES and GILL in Queen Street, next the Prison* M,D,CC,LV*

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THE following Letters were written about a Twelvemonth ago, and are now sent
into the World at the earnest Desire of many. -- If an infinitely condescending
God shall vouchsafe to bless the Perusal of them to excite in any, either at
home or abroad, a more obediental and zealous Thankfulness for the Civil and
Religious Liberties we enjoy; or make them any way instrumental in stirring up
my Fellow-Protestants and Dear Countrymen to exert themselves more vigorously,
at this critical Juncture, against those who, if Conquerors, would quickly rob
us of those invaluable Blessings, I shall not repent that the Publication of
them was consented to by, courteous Reader,

Thy willing Servant, For CHRIST'S Sake, G. W.
LONDON, May 16, 1755.
LETTER I.
Lisbon, March 1754. My dear Friend,
BY this Time, I suppose, you have heard of my having been at Lisbon, and are
wondering what led me thither, especially since my last informed you of my
Intention to go to Georgia by way of New York. This was really my Design at the
Time of my writing; but being afterward called by Providence to take with me
several Orphan-children, I thought it most advisable to go and settle them,
and my other domestic Affairs, at the Orphan-house first; that I might visit
the northern Parts of America with more Ease and Freedom in my own Mind. -- It
happened that the Success, Capt. Thomson, bound for Port Royal, South Carolina,
(which is not very far from Georgia) was then almost ready to sail. -- I sent
for the Owner, and finding that the Ship was to touch at Lisbon to unload some
Wheat, it occasioned a little Demurr; but, upon second Thoughts, believing it
might be serviceable to me, as a Preacher and Protestant, to see something of
the Superstitions of the Church of Rome, I took my Passage and embarked in the
Success the 7th of March. -- On the 14th we reached Cape Finister. -- On the
15th came in sight of the Burlings; and on the 16th anchored safe before
Bellem, about four Miles distance from Lisbon City, the Metropolis of Portugal.
-- As I knew nobody there, and had formed but an indifferent Idea of the
Inhabitants, from the Account that had been given me of them, I had purposed
within myself to keep on Board, and go ashore only now and then in the
Daytime. -- But Providence so ordered it, that a Gentleman of the Factory, who
had heard me himself, and whose Brother had been awakened under my Ministry
several Years ago, immediately, upon hearing of my Arrival, sent me an Offer of
his House during my Stay. -- I thankfully accepted it; and special Leave being
procured for my going ashore, I was carried in a Chaise and Pair from Bellem to
Lisbon. -- A new Scene, both in respect to the Situation of the Place, the
Fashion of the Buildings, and the Dress of the Inhabitants, presented itself
all the way. -- But what engaged my Attention most, was the Frequency of
Crucifixes and little Images of the Virgin Mary, and other real or reputed
Saints, which were placed almost in every Street, or fixed against the Walls of
the Houses almost at every Turning, with Lamps hanging before them. -- To these
I observed the People bow as they passed along; and near some of them stood
several little Companies, singing with great Earnestness. -- This seemed to me
very odd, and gave me an Idea of what further ecclesiastical Curiosities would
probably fall in my way, if I should be detained any time here. -- These
Expectations were quickly raised; -- For, not long after my Arrival at my new
Lodgings, (where I was received and entertained with great Gentility,
Hospitality, and Friendliness) upon looking out of the Window, I saw a Company
of Priests and Friars bearing lighted Wax-Tapers, and attended by various sorts
of People, some of which had Bags and Baskets of Victuals in their Hands, and
others carried Provisions upon their Shoulders on Sticks between two. After
these followed a mixed Multitude, singing with a very audible Voice, and
addressing the Virgin Mary in their usual Strain, " Ora pro nobis." In this
Manner they proceeded to the Prison, where all was deposited for the Use of the
poor Persons confined therein. -- But a far more pompous Procession of the like
Nature (as a Stander-by informed me) passed by a few Days after. -- In this
there were near three hundred Franciscan Friars, many of which (besides Porters
hired for the Purpose) were loaded with a Variety of Food; and those who bore
no Burden, carried either Ladles or Spoons in their Hands. -- Sights of this
Nature being quite a Novelty to me, I was fond of attending as many of them as
I could. Two things concurred to make them more frequent at this Juncture, viz.
the Season of Lent, and an excessive Drought, which threatened the total
Destruction of the Fruits of the Earth. -- For the averting so great a
Judgment, and for the imploring the much longed-for Blessing of Rain, daily
Processions had been made from one Convent or another for a considerable Time.
-- One of these I saw: It was looked upon as a pretty grand one, being made up
of the Carmelite Friars, the Parish Priests, and a great Number of what they
call the Brothers of the Order, who walked two by two in diverse Habits, holding
a long and very large lighted Wax-taper in their right Hands. -- Amidst these
was carried, upon eight or ten Men's Shoulders, a tall Image of the Virgin Mary,
in a kind of Man's Attire; for I think she had a very fine white Wig on her
Head, (a Dress she often appears in) and was much adorned with Jewels and
glittering Stones. -- At some Distance from the Lady, under a large Canopy of
State, and supported likewise by six or eight Persons, came a Priest, holding
in his Hand some noted Relick. -- After him followed several Thousands of
People, joining with the Friars in singing Eandem cantilenam, Ora pro nobis,
all the way. -- Still Rain was denied, and still Processions were continued. --
At length the Clouds began to gather, and the Mercury in the Barometer fell
very much. -- Then was brought out a wooden Image, which they say never failed.
-- It was the Figure of our Blessed Lord, clothed with purple Robes, and
crowned with Thorns. I think they call him the LORD OF THE PASSION. -- Upon his
Shoulders he bore a large Cross, under the Weight of which he was represented
as stooping, 'till his Body bent almost double. -- He was brought from the Le
Grass Convent in very great Pomp, and placed in a large Cathedral Church. --
Being on Board at that Time I lost this Sight: But the subsequent Evening I
beheld the SEIGNEUR fixed on an Eminence in a large Cathedral Church, near the
Altar, surrounded with Wax-tapers of a prodigious Size. -- He was attended by
many Noblemen, and Thousands of Spectators of all Ranks and Stations, who
crowded from every Quarter, and, in their Turns, were admitted by the Guards to
come within the Rails and perform their Devotions. -- This they expressed by
kneeling, and kissing the SEIGNEUR'S Heel, by putting their left and right Eye
to it, and then touching it with their Beads, which a Gentleman in waiting
received from them, and then returned again. -- This Scene was repeated for
three Days successively; and during all this time the Church and Space before
it was so thronged with Carriages and People, that there was scarce any
passing. -- The Music on this Occasion was extremely soft, and the Church was
illuminated in a very striking Manner. -- The third Day in the Forenoon it
rained, and soon after the SEIGNEUR was conducted home in as great Splendor,
and much greater Rejoicing, than when he was brought forth. -- As my Situation
was very commodious, I saw the whole; and afterward went and heard Part of the
Sermon, which was delivered before him in the Church to which the SEIGNEUR
belonged. -- The Preacher was full of Action; and in some Part of his
Discourse, (as one who understood Portuguese informed me) pointing to the
Image, he said, Now he is at Rest. -- He went out in Justice, but is returned
in Mercy. -- And toward the Conclusion he called upon the People to join with
him in an extempore Prayer. This they did with great Fervency, which was
expressed not only by repeating it loud, but by beating their Breasts, and
clapping their Cheeks, and weeping heartily. -- To complete the Solemnity,
immediately after the delivery of the Blessing, all on a sudden, from the Place
near which the Image stood, there was heard a most soft and soothing Symphony
of Music, which being ended, the Assembly broke up, and I returned to my
Lodgings, not a little affected to see so many Thousands led away from the
Simplicity of the Gospel, by such a Mixture of human Artifice and blind
Superstition, of which indeed I could have formed no Idea, had I not been an
Eyewitness of it myself. -- This Concern was still increased by what I heard
from some of my fellow Passengers, who informed me, that about eleven one
Night, after I came aboard, they not only heard a Friar preaching most
fervently before the SEIGNEUR, but also saw several Companies of Penitents
brought in, lashing and whipping themselves severely. -- How little unlike this
to those who cut themselves with Knives and Lancets, and cried out from Morning
till Night, " O Baal hear us." -- Methinks I hear you say, and had I been
present, I should have wished for the Spirit of an Elijah to -- Hush, my Friend
-- I am content to guess at the rest 'till we meet. -- In the mean while, let
us comfort ourselves with this Thought, that there is a Season approaching,
when the Lord God of Elijah will himself come, and destroy this and every other
Species of Antichrist by the Breath of his Mouth, and the Brightness of his
appearing, even by the all-conquering Manifestations of his Eternal Spirit. --
Whether as Men, Christians, and Protestants, we have not more and more Reason
to pray Night and Day for the hastening on of that glorious and long wished-for
Period, you will be better able to judge, when I send you (as I purpose to do,
if I have Time) a further Account of a Lent Procession or two, of which I was
also a Spectator -- At present I can only beg a continual Remembrance at a
Throne of Grace, as being, my dear Friend,

Yours most respectfully, In our Common Lord, G. W.

LETTER II.
Lisbon, March, 1754. My dear Friend,
THOUGH some other Business demands my Attention, yet I must not forget the
Promise made you of a further Account of the Processions I saw at Lisbon. --
Some of those already mentioned were extraordinary, by Reason of their great
Drought; but that which is to be the Subject of my present Letter was an annual
one; it being always customary at Lisbon to exhibit some Procession or another
every Friday in Lent. -- An intelligent Protestant who stood near me, was so
good as to be my Interpreter of the Dumb Show as it passed along -- I say Dumb
Show -- For you must know it was chiefly made up of waxen or wooden Images, and
carried on Men's Shoulders through the Streets, intending to represent the Life
and Death of St. Francis, the Founder of one of their religious Orders. -- They
were brought out from the Franciscan Convent, and were preceded by three
Persons in scarlet Habits with Baskets in their Hands, in which they received
the Alms of the Spectators, for the Benefit of the poor Prisoners. -- After
these, came two little Boys in Party-colored Clothes, with Wings fixed on
their Shoulders, in Imitation of little Angels. -- Then appeared the Figure of
St. Francis, very gay and Beaulike, as he used to be before his Conversion. --
In the next, he was introduced under Conviction, and consequently stripped of his
Finery. -- Soon after this was exhibited, an Image of our Blessed Lord himself,
in a purple Gown with long black Hair, with St. Francis lying before him, to
receive his immediate Orders. -- Then came the Virgin Mother, ( horresco
referens) with Christ her Son at her left Hand, and St. Francis making his
Obeisance to both. -- Here, if I remember aright, he made his first Appearance
in his Friar's Habit with his Hair cut short, but not as yet shaved in the
Crown of his Head: -- After a little Space followed a mitred Cardinal gaudily
attired, and before him lay St. Francis almost prostrate, in order to be
confirmed in his Office. -- Soon after this he appears quite metamorphosed into
a Monk, his Crown shorn, his Habit black, and his Loins girt with a Knotted
Cord. -- Here he prays to our Savior hanging on a Cross, that the Marks of the
Wounds in his Hands, Feet, and Side, might be impressed on the same Parts of
his Body. -- The Prayer is granted; Blood comes from the Hands, Feet, and Side;
and the Saint with great Devotion receives the Impressions. -- This was
represented by red waxen Strings, reaching from those Parts of the Image to the
corresponding Parts of St. Francis his Body. -- Upon this he begins to do
Wonders; and therefore in a little while he was carried along, holding up a
House which was just falling. -- This Miracle they say was performed (if my
Information be true) at Madrid, but the Particulars of its History I have
forgotten. -- At length the Father dies, and is brought forth lying in his
Grave. -- But lo! the Briars and Nettles under which he lay, are turned into
fine and fragrant Flowers. -- After this he is born along upon a Bier covered
with a Silver Pall, and four Friars lamenting over him. -- He then appears for
the last Time, but with an Increase of Power; for he was represented as drawing
tormented People out of Purgatory with his knotted Cord, which, as you may well
imagine, the poor Souls catched at, and took Hold of very eagerly. -- At length
came a gorgeous Friar under a splendid Canopy, bearing in his Hand a Piece of
the Holy Cross. -- After him followed two more little winged Boys, and then a
long Train of fat and well-favoured Franciscans with their Calceis Fenestratis,
as Erasmus calls them; and so the Procession ended. Methinks I hear you say, it
is full Time -- And so say I -- For as the Sight itself disgusted me, so I am
persuaded the bare Narration of it, though ever so short, cannot be very
pleasant to you, who I know abhor every Thing that savours of Superstition and
Idolatry. -- We will therefore take our Leave of St. Francis, whose Procession
was in the Day Time; but I must tell you it is only to inform you of another of
a much more awful and shocking Nature, which I saw afterward by Night. -- It
was about Ten o'Clock, when being deeply engaged in Conversation with my kind
Host, in came an Englishman, and told me in all Haste, that he had seen a Train
of near two hundred Penitents passing along, and that in all Probability I
might be gratified with the same Sight, if I hastened to a Place whither he
would conduct me. -- I very readily obeyed the Summons, and, as Curiosity
quickened my Pace, we soon came up with some of those poor Creatures, who were
then making a Halt, and kneeling in the Street, whilst a Friar from a high
Cross, with an Image of our LORD Crucified in his Hand, was preaching to them,
and the Populace, with great Vehemence. -- Sermon being ended, the Penitents,
who had already been preached to, went forwards, and several Companies followed
after with their respective preaching Friars at their Head bearing Crucifixes.
-- These they pointed to and brandished frequently, and the Hearers as
frequently beat their Breasts and clapped their Cheeks -- At proper Pauses they
stopped and prayed; and one of them, more zealous than the rest, before the
King's Palace, sounded out the Word Penitentia through a speaking Trumpet. --
The Penitents themselves were clothed and covered all over with white linen
Vestments, only Holes were made for their Eyes to peep out at. -- All were
barefooted, and all had long heavy Chains fastened to their Ancles, which, when
dragged along the Street, made a dismal rattling: But though alike in Dress,
yet in other Respects there was great Variety amongst them -- For some carried
great Stones on their Backs, and others dead Men's Bones and Skulls in their
Hands. -- Some bore large and seemingly very heavy Crosses upon their
Shoulders, whilst others had their Arms extended quite wide, or carried a Bow
full of Swords with the Points downwards -- Most of them whipped and lashed
themselves, some with Cords, and others with flat Bits of Iron -- It being a
Moonshine Night, I could see them quite well; and indeed some of them struck so
hard, that I perceived that their Backs (left bare on purpose to be slashed)
were quite red, and swollen very much by the Violence and Repetition of the Blows
-- Had my dear Friend been there, he would have joined with me in saying, that
the whole Scene was horrible -- So horrible, that, being informed it was to be
continued 'till Morning, I was glad to return from whence I came, about
Midnight -- Had you been with me, I know you would have joined in praising and
gratefully adoring the LORD of all Lords, not only for the great Wonder of the
Reformation, but also for that glorious Deliverance wrought out for us, in
stopping of our late unnatural Rebellion -- Oh with what a mighty Spirit and
Power from on high, must Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, Zui^^lius, and those
glorious Reformers, be necessarily endued with, who dared first openly to
oppose and stem such a Torrent of Superstition and spiritual Tyranny! -- And
what Gratitude owe we to Him, who, under GOD, was instrumental in saving us
from the Return of such spiritual Slavery, and such blind Obedience to a Papal
Power! To have had a Cardinal for our King -- A Cardinal, if not born, yet from
his Infancy nursed up at Rome -- A Cardinal, one of whose Sons is advanced to
the same ecclesiastical Dignity, and both under the strongest Obligations to
support the Interest of that Church, whose Superstitions, as well as political
State Principles, they have sucked in and imbibed even from their Infancy. --
But, blessed be GOD, the Snare is broken, and we are delivered. -- Oh for
Protestant Practices to bo added to PROTESTANT PRINCIPLES! -- Oh for an
obediential Acknowledgment to the ever blessed God for our repeated
Deliverances! -- But alas! Pardon me, my dear Friend, I stop to weep -- Adieu
-- I cannot enlarge, but leaving you to guess from what Source my Tears flow, I
must hasten to subscribe myself,

My dear Sir, Yours most cordially In our Blessed Lord.
LETTER III.
Lisbon, March, 1754. My dear Friend.
PRovidence still detains us at Lisbon, and therefore I know you will be
enquiring what more News from thence? -- Truly, as extraordinary as ever -- For
I have now seen the Solemnities of a Holy Thursday, which is a very high Day in
this Metropolis, and particularly remarkable for the grand Illuminations of the
Churches, and the King's washing twelve poor Men's Feet. -- Through the Interest
of a Friend I got Admittance into the Gallery where the Ceremony was performed.
-- It was large, and hung with Tapestry; one Piece of which represented the
humble Jesus washing the Feet of his Disciples. -- Before this, upon a small
Eminence, sat twelve Men in black. -- At the upper End, and several other Parts
of the Gallery, were Sideboards of Gold and Silver large Basins and Ewers most
curiously wrought; and near these a large Table covered with a Variety of
Dishes, all cold, set off and garnished after the Portuguese Fashion. --
Public high Mass being over, his Majesty came in, attended with his Nobles,
who seemed to me to look like so many Roman Senators. -- The very Act of
washing the Feet, I did not get in time enough to see; but that being ended,
several of the young Noblemen served up the Dishes to the King's Brother and
Uncles; These again handed them to his Majesty, who gave (I think) twelve of
them in all to each poor Man. -- Every thing was carried on with a great deal
of Decency and good Humor. -- The young Noblemen served very cheerfully, their
Seniors looked quite pleased, and the King and his royal Relations behaved in a
very polite, easy manner. -- Upon the whole, though, as you may easily guess,
it was not an exact Copy of the Tapestry yet, as the poor Men's Clothes and
Food, when sold, came to about ten Moidores, and as there was little Mixture of
Superstition in it, I cannot say but I was as well pleased with my Morning's
Entertainment as with any Thing I had met with since my Arrival. -- I believe
the whole took up near two Hours. -- After Dinner we went to see the Churches;
but the Magnificence and Sumptuousness of the Furniture, on this Occasion,
cannot well be expressed. -- Many of them were hung with purple Damask trimmed
with Gold. -- In one of them there was a solid silver Altar of several Yards
Circumference, and near twelve Steps high: And in another a gold one, still
more magnificent, of about the same Dimensions. -- Its Basis was studded with
many precious Stones, and near the Top were placed silver Images, in
Representation of Angels. -- Each Step was filled with large silver
Candlesticks, with Wax-tapers in them, which, going up by a regular Ascent
'till they formed themselves into a Pyramid, made a most glittering and
splendid Blaze -- The great Altars also of the other Churches were illuminated
most profusely, and silver Pots of artificial Flowers, with a large Wax-taper
between each, were fixed all round several of them -- Between these were large
Paintings in black and white, representing the different Parts of our Savior's
Passion -- And, in short, all was so magnificently, so superstitiously grand,
that I am persuaded several Thousands of Pounds would not defray the Expenses
of this one Day -- Go which Way you would, nothing was to be seen but
Illuminations within, and Hurry without -- For all Persons, the Crowned Heads
themselves not excepted, are obliged on this Day to visit seven Churches or
Altars, in Imitation, as is supposed, of our LORD's being hurried from one
Tribunal to another, before he was condemned to be hung upon the Cross -- I saw
the Queen pass by in great State to visit three of them -- Velvet Cushions were
carried before her Majesty, and Boards laid along the Streets for Herself and
Retinue to walk upon -- Guards attended before and behind, and Thousands of
Spectators stood on each Side to gaze at them as they passed along -- Being
desirous of seeing the Manner of their Entrance, we got into the last Church
before they came -- It was that of St. Domingo, where was the gold Altar before
mentioned, and at which her Majesty and Train knelt about a Quarter of an Hour
-- All the while the Dominican Friars sung most surprisingly sweet -- But as I
stood near the Altar, over against the great Door, I must confess my very
inmost Soul was struck with a secret Horror, when, upon looking up, I saw, over
the Front of the great Window of the Church, the heads of many hundred Jews,
painted on Canvas, who had been condemned (by what they call the Holy
Inquisition) and carried out from that Church to be burnt -- Strange way this,
of compelling People to come in! -- Such was not thy Method, O meek and
compassionate Lamb of God! -- Thou came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to
save them -- But Bigotry is as cruel as the Grave -- It knows no Remorse --
From all its bitter and dire Effects, Good LORD deliver us. -- But to return to
the Queen -- Having performed her Devotions, she departed, and went in a Coach
of State, I believe, directly from the Church to her Palace, and without doubt
sufficiently fatigued. For, besides walking through the Streets to the several
Churches, her Majesty also, and the Princesses, had been engaged in waiting
upon and washing the Feet of twelve poor Women, in as public a Manner as the
King -- In our Walk home we met His Majesty with his Brother and two Uncles,
attended only with a few Noblemen in black Velvet, and a few Guards without
Halberts -- I suppose he was returning from his last Church, and, as one may
well imagine, equally fatigued with his royal Consort and Daughters -- When
Church and State thus combine to be nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to
Superstition, is it any Wonder that its Credit and Influence is so diffusive
among the Populace? --.O Britain! Britain! had thou but Zeal proportionable
to thy Knowledge, and inward Purity adequate to the Simplicity of thy external
Worship, in what a happy and god-like Situation would thou be! -- Here I
could weep again -- Again I leave you to guess the Cause; and if I can send you
one more Letter of a like Nature, before we leave this Place, it is all you
must expect from,

My dear Friend, Yours most assuredly In our glorious Head.
LETTER IV.
Lisbon, April 13. 1754. My dear Friend,
AFTER the News sent you in my last, I thought our Lisbon Correspondence would
entirely have been put a Stop to. -- For upon returning to my Lodgings, (as
weary I believe as others that had been running from Church to Church all Day)
Word was sent me, that our Ship would certainly sail next Morning. -- This
News, I own, was not altogether agreeable to me, because I wanted to see the
Conclusion of the Lent Solemnities. -- However, I made ready; and having
dispatched my private Affairs the Overnight, was conducted very early in the
Morning, by my kind Host, down to Bellem, where the Ship lay. -- We parted. --
The Wind promised to be fair; but dying away, I very eagerly went ashore once
more. -- But how was the Scene changed; Before, all used to be Noise and Hurry
-- Now, all was hushed and shut up in the most awful and profound Silence. --
No Clock or Bell had been heard since Yesterday Noon, and scarce a Person was
to be seen in the Street all the way to Lisbon. -- About Two in the Afternoon
we got to the Place where (I had heard some Days ago) an extraordinary Scene
was to be exhibited -- Can you guess what it was? -- Perhaps not. -- Why then I
will tell you. -- It was the Crucifixion of the Son of God, represented partly
by dumb Images, and partly by living Persons, in a large Church belonging to
the Convent of St. De Beato. -- Several thousands crowded into it; some of
which, as I was told, had been waiting there ever since Six in the Morning --
Through the kind Interposition and Assistance of a Protestant or two, I was not
only admitted into the Church, but was very commodiously situated to view the
whole Performance. We had not waited long before the Curtain was drawn up. --
Immediately, upon a high Scaffold, hung in the Front with black Bays, and
behind with silk purple Damask laced with Gold, was exhibited to our View an
Image of the LORD JESUS at full Length, crowned with Thorns, and nailed on a
Cross, between two Figures of like Dimensions, representing the two Thieves --
At a little Distance, on the right Hand, was placed an Image of the Virgin
Mary, in plain long Ruffles, and a kind of Widow-weeds -- Her Veil was purple
Silk, and she had a wire Glory round her Head -- At the Foot of the Cross lay,
in a mournful pensive Posture, a living Man, dressed in Woman's Clothes, who
personated Mary Magdalen; and not far off stood a young Man, in Imitation of
the beloved Disciple -- He was dressed in a loose green silk Vesture, and
Bob-wig -- His Eyes were fixed on the Cross, and his two Hands a little
extended -- On each Side, near the Front of the State, stood two Sentinels in
Buff, with formidable Caps and long Beards; and directly in the Front stood
another yet more formidable, with a large Target in his Hand -- We may suppose
him to be the Roman Centurion -- To complete the Scene, from behind the purple
Hangings came out about twenty little purple-vested winged Boys, two by two,
each bearing a lighted Wax-taper in his Hand, and a Crimson and Gold Cap on his
Head -- At their Entrance upon the Stage they gently bowed their Heads to the
Spectators, then kneeled and made Obeisance, first to the Image on the Cross,
and then to that of the Virgin Mary. -- When risen, they bowed to each other,
and then took their respective Places over against one another, on Steps
assigned for them at the Front of the Stage -- Opposite to this, at a few Yards
distance, stood a black Friar, in a Pulpit hung in Mourning -- For a while he
paused, and then breaking Silence, gradually lifted up his Voice 'till it was
extended to a pretty high Pitch, though I think scarce high enough for so large
an Auditory -- After he had proceeded in his Discourse about a Quarter of an
Hour, a confused Noise was heard near the front great Door; and, upon turning
my Head, I saw four long-bearded Men; two of which carried a Ladder on their
Shoulders, and after them followed two more with large gilt Dishes in their
Hands, full of Linen, (...), etc -- These (as I imagined) w^^^ the
Representatives of Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea -- On a Signal given from
the Pulpit, they advanced toward the Steps of the Scaffold -- But upon their
very first attempting to mount it, at the watchful Centurion's Nod, the
observant Soldiers made a Pass at them, and presented the Points of their
Javelins directly to their Breasts -- They are repulsed -- Upon this a Letter
from Pilate is produced -- The Centurion reads it, shakes his Head, and, with
Looks that bespoke a forced Compliance, beckons to the Sentinels to withdraw
their Arms -- Leave being thus obtained, they ascend; and having paid their
Homage, by kneeling first to the Image on the Cross, and then to the Virgin
Mary, they retired to the Back of the Stage -- Still the Preacher continued
declaiming, or rather (as was said) explaining the mournful Scene -- Magdalen
persists in wringing her Hands, and variously expressing her personated Sorrow;
while John (seemingly regardless of all besides) stood gazing on the crucifixed
Figure -- By this time it was near Three o'Clock, and therefore proper for the
Scene to begin to close -- The Ladders are ascended, the Superscription and
Crown of Thorns taken off, long white Rollers put round the Arms of the Image,
and then the Nails knocked out which fastened the Hands and Feet -- Here Mary
Magdalen looks most languishing, and John, if possible, stands more
Thunderstruck than before -- The Orator lifts up his Voice, and almost all the
Hearers expressed Concern by weeping, beating their Breasts, and smiting their
Cheeks -- At length the Body is gently let down -- Magdalen eyes it, and,
gradually rising, receives the Feet into her wide-spread Handkerchief; whilst
John, (who hitherto stood motionless like a Statue) as the Body came nearer the
Ground, with an Eargerness that bespoke the intense Affection of a sympathizing
Friend; runs toward the Cross, seizes the upper Part of it into his clasping
Arms, and, with his disguised Fellow-mourner, helps to bear it away. -- And
here the Play should end, was I not afraid you would be angry with me if I did
not give you an Account of the last Act, by telling you what became of the
Corpse after it was taken down -- Great Preparations were made for its
Interment. -- It was wrapped in Linen and Spices, etc. and being laid upon a
Bier richly hung, was afterward carried round the Churchyard in grand
Procession. -- The Image of the Virgin Mary was chief Mourner, and John and
Magdalen, with a whole Troop of Friars with Wax Tapers in their Hands, followed
after. Determined to see the whole, I waited its Return, and in about a quarter
of an Hour the Corpse was brought in, and deposited in an open Sepulcher
prepared for the Purpose; but not before a Priest, accompanied by several of
the same Order in splendid Vestments, had perfumed it with Incense, sung to and
kneeled before it -- John and Magdalen attended the Obsequies; but the Image of
the Virgin Mary was carried away and placed upon the Front of the Stage, in
order to be kissed, adored, and worshipped by the People -- This I saw them do
with the utmost Eargerness and Reverence -- And thus ended this Good Friday's
Tragi-comical, superstitious, idolatrous Droll -- A Droll, which whilst I saw,
as well as now whilst I am describing it, excited in me a high Indignation --
Surely thought I, whilst attending on such a Scene of mock Devotion, if ever,
now is the dear Lord Jesus crucified afresh; and I could then, and even now,
think of no other Plea for the poor beguiled Devotees, than that which
suffering Innocence put up himself for his Enemies, when actually hanging upon
the Cross, viz. " Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." --
There was but one Thing wanting to raise one's Resentment to the highest Pitch,
and that was for one of the Soldiers to have pierced the Side of the Image upon
the Cross -- This in all Probability you have heard has actually been done in
other Places, and with a little more Art, might, I think, have been performed
here -- Doubtless it would have afforded the Preacher as good, if not a better
Opportunity of working upon the Passions of his Auditory, than the taking down
the Superscription and Crown of Thorns, and wiping the Head with a blooded
Cloth, and afterward exposing it to the View of the People; all which I saw
done before the Body was let down. -- But alas! my dear Friend, how mean is
that Eloquence, and how entirely destitute of the Demonstration of the Spirit,
and of a divine Power, must that Oratory necessarily be, that stands in need of
such a Train of superstitious Pageantry to render it impressive! -- Think you,
my dear Friend, that the Apostle Paul used or needed any such Artifices to
excite the Passions of the People of Galatia, amongst whom, as he himself
informs, us, Jesus Christ was crucified, and evidently set forth? But thus it
is, and thus it will be, when Simplicity and Spirituality are banished from our
religious Offices, and Artifice and Idolatry seated in their Room -- I am well
aware that the Romanists deny the Charge of Idolatry; but after having seen
what I have seen this Day, as well as at sundry other Times since my Arrival
here, I cannot help thinking but a Person must be capable of making more than
metaphysical Distinctions, and deal in very abstract Ideas indeed, fairly to
evade the Charge -- If weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, I am positive
the Scale must turn on the Protestant Side -- But such a Balance these poor
People are not permitted to make Use of! Does not your Heart bleed for them?
Mine does I am sure, and I believe would do so more and more, was I to stay
longer, and see what they call their Hallelujah and grand Devotions on Easter
Day -- But that Scene is denied me -- The Wind is fair, and I must away --
Follow me with your Prayers, and believe me to be,

My dear Friend, Yours most affectionately, In our Common Redeemer.
FINIS.

