The Nature, Certainty and Evidence of true CHRISTIANITY.

IN A LETTER FROM A GENTLEWOMAN In NEW ENGLAND. To ANOTHER her dear Friend, in
great Darkness, Doubt and Concern of a Religious Nature.

1 Cor. 1. 26 -- 31.

N. B. Though this Letter was wrote in (...) ^^^vacy from one Friend to another,
yet on representing that by allowing it to be Printed, it would probably reach
to many others in the like afflicted Case, and by the Grace of GOD be very
helpful to them, the Writer was at length prevailed on to suffer it -- provided
her Name and Place of abode remain concealed.

BOSTON: Printed for and Sold by S. Kneeland, (...) the Prison in Queen Street,
1755.

COPY of a LETTER from a Gentlewoman in NEW ENGLAND to another Gentlewoman her
Friend, great Concern of Soul.
July 2, 1753. My very dear, dear, Friend!
I Have thought much on those few Lines you began to write to me; and do not at
all wonder that you expect I should improve (...) Opportunity to relieve you,
-- For surely the ^^rong Bonds of Friendship, with which we have for some Years
been bound to each other ((...) there no Bonds of Grace at all) demand this,
and how much more when these are added? And truly, my dear Friend, it has not
been owing to want of Tenderness, and Compassion toward you, under your
Distresses, that my Tongue as well as Pen have often been silent. No! my Bowels
earned. and I longed to speak many Times; but your Difficultys were such, that
I dare not open my Lips, least at subtle Adversary should turn that against
you, which I intended for your Comfort, and sink your Spirits the low^^^ (...)
has sometimes you know been the Case.

And Oh that GOD will now bless the poor wea^^ Endeavors of a worthless Worm
to refresh you! If so, it will rejoice me much: But whether it please Him to
use a poor nothing Creature as an Instrument or no; I am persuaded he will in
his own Time revive you, and I rejoice and praise him on your Behalf, by Grace:
that he will turn your Captivity; and that He will bruise Satan under your'Feet
shortly, and make him gladly quit the Field, and leave you to enjoy your God.
For blessed be God, Christ Jesus is stronger than He and all his combined
Legions; and he cannot resist his Power, though he has audaciously struck at his
Honor, and endeavored to impede his blessed Work in your Soul. Does or has
the bold-daring Spirit presumed to insinuate that all Religion, is vain,
imaginary, and delusive? Does he pretend that none can know they are right? --
ell him from me, He is a Liar, and I am bold to say, I have proved him so. He
has told me the same Tale: But blessed be God, I do know that Religion is no
imaginary Thing, but a substanital Reality. I do know that there is GOD of
boundless Perfections, Truth any Faithfulness; that will not deceive, no nor
forsake the Soul that puts its Trust in him.

But now perhaps you will say, Aye, but bow do I know this God is mine; and that
I myself and not deceived? I answer, by the Evidences of a Work of Grace
wrought in my Soul. And now as God shall enable me, my dear Friend. I Will tell
you truly what GOD has done for my Soul, and what I call Evidences of a Work of
Grace. This Question I could never fully verbally answer, when with you, which
makes me now attempt to explain myself.

First, then, I do know that God has by his Word and Spirit, convinced me of
Sin, Original and Actual; that I was by Nature a Child of Wrath, an Heir of
Hell, an Enemy to Him, and his Ways, yea, Enmity itself; Dead in Trespasses and
Sins; and that I was both utterly, unable, and unwilling too, to help myself
out of this miserable State, being averse to the Gospel-Way of Salvation,
wrought out by Christ. I plainly see the Cause of that Complaint, Ye will not
come to me, that ye might have Life. God convinced me also that by the Deeds of
the Law, no Flesh living should be justified, and that He and his Throne would
be spotless forever though He should cast me off, and condemn me to the hottest
Hell: Since He owed me nothing nor was any Way bound to bestow his Grace upon
me; and if he did, it would be absolutely free and sovereign. -- GOD showed me
I was, utterly unworthy that he should help me.

Nevertheless, though I had thus destroyed myself, yet in Him was my Help. Yea He
discovered to me, that he had laid Help upon ONE who is mighty to save to the
uttermost all that come to God by Him; even a glorious CHRIST the Great EMANUEL
God-Man, even one Coequal with Himself, the express Image of his Person* in
whom dwells, all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily; One every Way complete and
suited to all my wants; and that He was not only thus qualified and sealed and
sent by the FATHER, but that he was absolutely willing as well as able to
accomplish the great Work; and would by no means cast out any that come to him.

Well upon this Discovery of the amiable and lovely JESUS, if I know that I
have a Being, I do know that God compelled or sweetly constrained me to throw
down the Weapons of my Rebellion and to submit to HIM as Prince and Savior,
and consent to be saved by him in his own way, and upon his own Terms; that he
should be the Alpha and the Omega, the Foundation and the Topstone in my
Salvation. Yea, God caused my Heart to go out after Him in strong and vehement
Desires, and to choose Him in all his Offices, with all his Benefits, to be my
Portion forever. Yea He appeared to me to be in Himself the most lovely and
desirable Object, the fairest of ten thousand Fairs: and God enabled me to give
myself, my whole Soul and Body with all my Concerns for Time and Eternity into
his merciful and faithful Hands: and had I a thousand precious Souls, I would
gladly venture them all with him; for I am persuaded he will keep by his mighty
Power what I have committed to his Charge; nor shall all the Hosts of Hell,
ever be able to pluck me out of his Hands.

But to proceed; upon this choice, and surrender to CHRIST as Mediator, GOD the
FATHER manifested himself to me, as my reconciled GOD and Father; the blessed
SPIRIT took up his abode with me, afforded me his Influences and Assistance
daily; and God made with me an everlasting Covenant, never to be forgotten,
Even the sure Mercies of David: and I solemnly gave myself up, all I have, am,
or can do, both in Life and Death, in Time, and for Eternity, to GOD the
FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST, to be his own, in a Covenant Way, to be disposed of
as shall most consist with his Glory; and chose the glorious TRINITY for my
Portion forever, in opposition to all Others, even a GOD of infinite
Perfections. Oh happy Choice! oh happy I, that I lived to see that Day wherein
GOD betrothed me to himself in loving Kindness and tender Mercy!

Thus I was effectually called and made willing in the Day of GOD'S Power to
receive Him: and to as many as received Him to them gave He Power to become the
Sons of God, even to those that believe on his Name.

And now the Foundation of my Hopes are laid upon the Rock of Ages. And
agreeable to those covenant Engagements, a faithful GOD, has ever since dealt
with me. And surely I can say; whereas as I was born blind, now I can see; old
Things are done away, all Things become new. Now through Grace I dare appeal to a
Heart-searching GOD and say; that none of his Commands are grievous; I esteem
them all holy, right, just, and good; and long to yield a universal Obedience
to them all: yea GOD does excite in me strong and vehement Desires after an
entire Conformity to his Law, as though my whole Salvation depended thereon while
at the same Time, he will not suffer me to depend on any thing but CHRIST
alone; notwithstanding a strong Propersity to cleave to the Covenant of Works;
but enables me to account all Things as Loss and Dung and filtby Rags, in point
of Justification; nor would I for a Million Worlds appear before GOD, in the
best Performance I ever did: No it is in that spotless Righteousness, which
CHRIST has wrought out, imputed to me, and in that only I dare appear before
GOD. But he gives me to see a Beauty in Holiness, which far exceeds the Luster
of all created Things. Nor do I know what Desire means, after any, or all the
Enjoyments of Time and Sense, compared with those ardent Longings, and
Pantings, which He at sometimes excites in my Soul, after the Enjoyment of
Himself; and for sanctifying Grace.

And though Grace is not always alike in Exercise; (no I am sometimes dull and
lifeless as to Exercise) yet blessed be GOD its has been the habitual, and
settled Bent of my Soul for many Years; to choose GOD, his CHRIST, and Grace
for my Portion in all Conditions, both adverse and prosperous. Blessed be GOD,
my Faith has not been staggered. Sometimes He has bereaved, cut off the Streams
of earthly Comforts, one after another; and then caused me to justify him, and
fly to Him as my all. Sometimes He has hid his Face, and caused me to mourn
after Him, and, refuse all Comfort till He, returned. Sometimes He has
permitted Satan to tempt and tyranize over me for a Season; and many a precious
Jewel has he stolen from me by clouding my Evidences and infinuating that all
was Delusion and Hypocrisy; and how many distressing gloomy Days I have had GOD
only knows: but Satan could not keep, them; for a faithful GOD would not suffer
me to be tempted above that I was able, but made way for my escape.

Sometimes He has permitted the Remains of indwelling Corruption to rally all
its Force and strive for Mastery; but at the same time stirred up an inveterate
Hatred and an Abhorrance of it, and myself for it, because it is the abominable
Thing which His Soul hates. And sometimes Unbelief, has so far prevailed, that
I have cried out I shall-one Day perish by the Hands of these Enemies, or I
shall at least fall foully to the Dishonor of the dear Name by which I am
called, if not finally. But for more than Sixteen Years has GOD preserved me
from open scandalous Sins. (Yea, blessed be God, through restraining Grace, all
my Life long,) and from ever making a League with Sin, since I have through Grace
proclaimed War with it: And by Grace assisting I am determined never to lay
down my Arms, but to fight till I die, under the Banner of the great Captain of
my Salvation: Yea, and Truth and Veracity itself has said, Sin shall not have
Dominion over you, and my Grace shall be suffcient for you. And here (my Dear,)
my great Strength lies: For all the Promises are Yea and Amen in CHRIST JESUS:
And since my LORD is mine, all is mine, and I shall come off more than a
Conqueror through Him that has loved me and given himself for me. Though now I
groan under a Body of Sin and Death; and may I never cease to mourn, but daily
look on Him whom I have pierced: Oh it was Sin, my Sin, that pierced his sacred
Head and Side, that put all the bitter Ingredients into the Cup, that extorted
that heart-piercing Cry from him, My God my God, why have thou forsaken me: And
never does it appear more odious, than when I am well satisfied it never will
prove my Ruin. GOD disposes me to choose any Affliction, or all the Affictions
in this World rather than Sin. I do esteem it the worst of Evils; yea I had
rather have all the Furies of Hell let loose to perplex me, than to be given
over to the Tyranny of my own inbred Lusts, and Corruptions. O thanks be to
GOD, He has said, I will subdue your Inquities! Oh how sweet here to consider
CHRIST as my King, that will e're long set his Foot on the Necks of these
Enemies! how sweet to espouse his Cause! bring forth the Traitors, and entreat
him to slay every one that says they will not have him to reign over them! Oh
that CHRIST would entirely possess his rightful Throne in my Soul, wholly sway
the Scepter there, fill every Room; that not a Lust, a Usurper, might ever dare
to lift up its venomous Head again! O transporting Thought; one Everlasting
Day, this shall be the happy Case!

Again, GOD causes me to love his Image wherever I see it; in Strangers, in
Rich, in Poor, in Bond or Free, of what Denomination soever. Surely I do esteem
the Saints, the excellent of the Earth, and they are my Delight. Again, God
enables me to love my Enemies, to forgive Injuries, and earnesty to pray that
God would forgive them also. But I must not innumerate more.

But these, my dear Friend, are what I call Evidences of a Work of Grace: and
for my part I had rather be able to read them, than to hear a Voice from Heaven
telling me, I am a Child of GOD. If you ask again, if I can always, or of
myself read them to my Satisfaction? I answer, without CHRIST I can do nothing;
I am not sufficient for one good Thought; all my sufficiency is of GOD: But GOD
has taught me to live more by Faith, and less by Sense, than I used to do; and
therefore if he hide his Face, I do not immediately raze Foundations as
formerly, and draw up hard Conclusions against myself: But having treasured up
the Experiences of many Years, I repair to them in a dark and cloudy Day, and
find, thus, and thus, GOD has done for me, and appeared for my Help in Times
past: and this as an Anchor holds me sure, and He will in his own time return,
and revive me; He has begun that good Work in me, that he will carry on till
the the Day of JESUS; HE was the Author, and he will be the Finisher of my
Faith: And so he makes me hang on the Faithfulness of a Covenant-GOD, who will
not deceive nor make any ashamed of their Hope, that put their Trust in him.

And now my dear, dear Friend, I have given you the Reason of the Hope that is
in me: And judge you, are These all the Effects of Nature, Gifts, Imagination,
or a common Work of the SPIRIT? Will any or all of these latter thus determine
the Soul for GOD? Will they enamour the Soul with his Beauty, because holy,
just, faithful, powerful, etc.; and make it even break with Longings after a
conformity to Him? Will they cause it to cry out, whom have I in Heaven but
THEE; and make it rejoice -- because even the brightest Seraph nor all the
Angelick Host shall never be able to divert it one Moment throughout Eternity
from GOD; but HE shall be in all, the Heaven of Heaven itself? Will Nature
abhor and dread Hypocrisy, and always cause the Soul when it has any Sense of
divine Things to tremble at the very Thoughts of it, and earnestly to plead
with God to search and try it, if there is any Guile, or Reservation, or any
false Way in it? Yea will Nature lay the Said open and cause it to plead with
GOD that his all-piercing Eye may penetrate into the most secret Rocesses? Yea,
and rejoice that it does so? Will Nature welcome Death the King of Terors,
purely because it will deliver the Soul from Sin and usher it into the
immediate Presence of GOD; when no outward Difficulties make it desire Death,
but GOD in his Providence makes Things comfortable and easy? -- Again, will
Nature cause all things below to appear very Vanity, and less than Nothing
compared with Communion with GOD, even here; and cause it to deprecate and
tremble at the Thought of any unsanctified Prosperity; and absolutely to
refuse, accepting of any or all Creature Comforts, as any Part of its Portion,
or in the room of one Degree of sanctifying Grace: May not the Soul in this
Case say, There is none upon Earth I desire besides THEE --; Ordinances, and
Providence are all empty without Thee; and I will not let thee go, I will not
be comforted except thou comfort me? Yea, though Thou slay me, I will trust in
Thee, byline Grace assisting: And leaving the Things that are behind, I am
determined to press after as great Discoveries of CHRIST, and Degrees of
Sanctification, as it is possible for a mortal, finite Creature to attain in
this imperfect State; since Grace is absolutely free and sovereign, and not
bestowed for any Worth or Worthiness in the Object, but for JESUS his sake
alone.

Surely This is a Work of Almighty Power and Victorious Grace! May GOD have all
the Glory! But methinks I see you wondering that I attempt to write in so
positive a Strain; and with all, your tender Heart misgives you, and you fear
least I am influenced by Self-confidence, Pride, Ostentation, or vain Glory:
and would to GOD, I dare tell you that I had no Remains of these odious Sins in
me; but doubtless cleave they will, to my best Performances as long as I live
in this World. However I trust through Grace, That is not the Motive which has
constrained me thus (...) to communicate my Experiences to You. (...) but to
vindicate the Honor and Glory of the great GOD, whom Satan has, dared to
slander, and reproach with his Lies; to bear a Testimony for GOD, that I know
Him to be Truth and Faithfulness in the Abstract, and far to exceed all that
ever I could ask or think; and again to declare, that had I a Thousand precious
Souls, I would venture them all on his Truth and Veracity, and cling to him: I
will in Defiance of Satan and all his combined Legions, so long as GOD holds me
by the Bonds of his Spirit. When GOD himself rends my Hope from me I Will let it
go; but not till then: And if it is the Hope of the Hypocrite, may it go this
Moment! And well may I say so long as GOD holds me: For I know assuredly, it is
by Grace, and Grace only I stand. For so vile am I of myself, that should he
withhold it, I should wander from Him as far as Hell itself, notwithstanding
all He has done for me. Whereof, then have I to boast? Oh blessed be GOD,
Boasting is forever excluded! Oh may the Crown be set on JESUS his Head; while
I lay my Mouth in the Dust, and acknowledge I am an unprofitable Servant, and
utterly unworthy of all the Mercy he has showed to me.

I entreat you not to conclude from what I have wrote, that I have any desire
to establish Assurance as the Essence of saving Faith; or to set up my
Experiences as a Standard. No, no, far be that from me. I know GOD by his
SPIRIT works variously with his Children. But as to the Essential and
Fundamental Parts, I trust you will find them agreeable to the Scripture. Try
them by That Is to the Law and to the Testimony; if they agree not with that,
reject them immediately, as false, delusive, imaginary, and have no light in
them. But if you find they are genuine Characters of a saving Work wrought by
almighty Power in the Soul; Discern I pray thee whose Signet, Braslets, and
Staff are these. Can you not lay Claim to them, and say, surely GOD has done,
thus and thus for me also? Or if you dare not lay Claim; dare you deny, dare
you say, GOD has not convinced you of Sin, and your absoute Need of a SAVIOR?
Has he not determined you for Himself? Do you not Choose Him for your
Everlasting Portion? Do not for a World say, you do not: I trust you dare not
say so. Well, if you ever have CHOSE GOD, for your all; renew your Choice, fly
to him again, give up yourself, and all your vast Concerns into his Hands,
through the Mediator; and I doubt not but you will derive Strength from the Head
of all gracious Influences. Oh say not, you cannot; but try to sretch forth the
withered Hand, and it will be whole! Oh touch but the Hem of his Garment, and
all shall be well! Oh lay your impotent needy Soul by the Pool, and I trust the
Angel of the Everlasting Covenant will ever long descend, and make you whole
and restore to you the Joys of his Salvation! And thus perhaps you will see, though
now they are clouded that you have the Evidences of Grace in you; that you do
hate Sin as Sin; that you do love Holiness for its own sake, and GOD because an
holy God; that you love his Law, and long perfectly to obey; (...) you do prize
CHRIST as a KING, as well as Savior that you do love his Image in his
Children; that you do love your Enemies; and are weaned from this World, and
all its trifling Enjoyments: that you are reaching after greater Degress
sanctifying Grace.

I know you will forgive me, if I intrude on your Patience in this long
Epistle, and all my Freedoms herein; since it proceeds from a Heart full of
tender Concern for You, and wanted vent. Oh may God refresh you by it, and lift
up the Light of his Countenance upon you! And I beg you, pray for me, that I
enter not into Temptation: For though I have for sometime through surprising Grace,
walked up and down in Light of GOD's Countenance; I am yet in my Enemy's
Country; a Thousand Snares await me from within and without; I have not yet put
off the Harness, and perhaps comparatively but girding it on; and though the
House built upon the (...)* CHRIST JESUS fall not; yet I have no Exp^^^^tion,
but that the Rain will descend, the Floods come the Winds blow and beat upon
it. Oh pray, that I may glorify GOD, in every Condition, and State of Life, and
all is well.

This long Letter, my dear Friend, I commit to your Care and Prudence, as the
very Secrets of my Soul, and as a Token of my sincere of Affection, and Esteem
for you, as my very dear, dear Friend: Which pray accept, with hearty Regards
to you, and all dear to you. -- Pray write to me as soon as you can -- Yours
Heartily.


