Mr. Winthrop's LECTURE ON EARTHQUAKES.

A LECTURE ON EARTHQUAKES;

Read in the Chapel of Harvard-College in Cambridge, N. E. November 26th 1755.

On Occasion of the great EARTHQUAKE which ^hook NEW ENGLAND the Week before.

By John Winthrop, Esquire Hollisian Professor of the Mathematics and Philosophy at
Cambridge.

Published by the general Desire of that Society.

Subterraneous caverns and vulcanos, if well considered, will be found to be
wise contrivances of the Creator, serving to great uses of the Globe, and end
of GOD's government. In all probability, these things may minister unto many
secret, grand functions and operations of nature in the bowels of the earth.
Dr. DERHAM'S Physico-Theol. BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by Edes and
Gill, at their Printing-Office next to the Prison in Queen Street. 1755.

A LECTURE On EARTHQUAKES.
YOU may justly expect, that the great EARTHQUAKE, which so lately This great
Earthquake happened on Tuesday the 18th of November, 17^5, about a quarter
after four in the morning. There was another much smaller shock an hour and
quarter after this, viz. at 5h 29'; and a thi^^, on the Saturday evening
following, at 27' after 8. Since the reading of this lecture, there has been
another small shock, viz. on Friday the 19th of December in the evening,
exactly at 10 o'clock; the sky being then perfectly clean, and a very gentle
gale at S. W. It was preceded by the peculiar noise of an Earthquake about 3 or
4 seconds, and the jarring lasted near as long; causing the window-shutters and
door of the chamber, in which I then was, to clatter. Those of my family, who
were in a lower room, perceiv^d nothing of the shake, though they heard the
noise. These are the only shocks that I have been s^nsible of; though it is
said, that many others have been felt in the Province of New Hampshire, Since
the first great one.
spread terror, and threatened desolation throughout New England, should take
me off from my stated course of lectures, to inquire into the probable causes
of so formidable a phenomenon. The subject is curious, and at present engages
the attention of many persons; and the discussion of it may help to extend your
views.

An Earthquake, you all know, is an agitation or shaking of some considerable
part of the earth, and that by natural causes; in contradistinction to the
shaking of a small part of it by artificial methods. The degrees of this
shaking are very various; -- from the small jarrings, which are but just
perceptible, to those violent ^uccu^^ions, which have altered the face of whole
c^untri^s. These shakings are for the most part (I believe, always) praeceded
or attended by an hollow rumbling noise, something like what is called heavy
thunder; which is usually greater or less, according to the degree of the
shake. Naturalists have distingui^hed earthquakes into two kinds; one, when the
motion is horizontal, or from side to side; the other, when it is
perpendicular, or right up and down. This distinction may, for what I know, be
just; and yet perhaps earthquakes more commonly consist in a kind of undulatory
motion, which may include both the others. For as a wave of water, when raised
to it is greatest height, subsides, and in subsiding spreads itself
horizontally; so in like manner, a wave of earth, if I may be allowed the
expression, must in it is descent partake both of an horizontal and
perpendicular motion at the same time. And for the same reason, it must have
had both these motions in it is ascent; but those particles, which had been
carried forward in one direction in the ascent, will return in a contrary
direction in the descent. This has been evidently found to be the case in the
more violent earthquakes; and probably the reason why it has not been
universally found so, was, the difficulty of distinguishing these two motions
from one another, when each of them has been but small. Though the ancient
Egyptians and Ch^ld^ans are said to have been able to foretell earthquakes,
yet it is very certain, from all the accounts we have, that these agitations of
the earth do no where observe any order or regular period in their returns; but
at sometimes, recur more frequently; at others, after longer intermissions. If
therefore they pretended to foretell them at all, they must have done it, not
from any knowledge they had of their nature and causes; but only by the vain
arts of judicial a^trology; -- a kind of learning, it seems, which, f^tile as
it is, was held in high repute among them. No countries, of which we have any
knowledge, are exempt from these agitations; but some are more subject to them
than others; and it is observable, that those which abound most with
combustible minerals, as fo^^ile coals, ^ulphur, nitre, etc. are the most
exposed to them. Many of these countries, too, have certa^n mountains called
vulcanos, which are almost perpetually burning, and throwing out fire, and
smoke, and ashes; their entrails probably consisting chiefly of such sort of
minerals. It is observed, however, that about the time of an earthquake in
those places, these vulcano^ rage more furiously, projecting stones and cinders
to a great height in the air; and pouring out whole rivers of liquid fire,
which carry such a devastation, wherever they run, as no human art can either
prevent or repair. Several such there are in the M^lucca islands in the
East Indies, almost under the ^quinoctial; and Iceland, under the polar circle,
has four or five, besides the noted Hecla. Vesuvio near Naples is very
remarkable; but there is none more famous than that in Sicily, now known there
by the name of Monte Gibello, as it was formerly by that of AEtna; whose
eruptions VIRGIL has described in so picturesque a manner, that I cannot
forbear repeating a few lines from him.

-- Horrificis juxta ^onat AEtna ruinis:
Interdumque atram p^orumpit ad aethera nubem,
Turbine fumantem piceo et candente favilla;
Attollitque globo^ flammarum, et ^idera lambit.
Interdum scopulo^ avul^aque viscera montis
Erigit eruct^ns, ^^quefactaque ^axa ^ub auras
Cum gemi^u glomerat, fundoque exae^tuat imo.
AEneid. III. 571. ^eqq.

This description For the sake of English readers, Dr. TRAPP'S translation of
this passage is here inserted.

-- ' AEtna thunders nigh
'In dreadful ruins. With a whirlwind's force
'Sometimes is throw^ to heaven a pitchy cloud,
'R^dden'd with cl^ders, and ^volv'd in smoke;
'And tosses balls of flame, and licks the stars.
'Sometimes with loud explosion high it (...)
'Vast rocks, and entrails from the mountain torn;
'Wish roaring noise slings molten stones in air,
'And boils, and bellows, from it is lowest caves.

of these phenomenon is perhaps not exceeded by any extant; except by those
passages in the holy scriptures which ascribe these effects, as true philosophy
does all those which we call natural effects, to the agency of GOD. It is (...)
who removes the mountains, and they know not; who (...) them in his anger; who
shakes the earth out of (...), and the pillars thereof tremble. HE looks on
(...), and it trembles; HE touches the hills, and they (...) The pillars of
heaven tremble, and are astonished at (...) proof. Nothing can equal the
sublimity, the grandeur o^ these images. But to proceed.

That the earth has been, in all ages, and in most parts of it, subject to
these agitations, history affords us but too many proofs. It is not, however,
my design to enter into a detail of the dismal events of this sort, left upon
record. I shall only extract from authentic accounts a few of the most striking
particulars, in order to give you some idea of the dire effects, which such
convulsions of the earth are capable of producing.

Imagine then the earth trembling with a huge thundering noise, or heaving and
swelling like a rolling sea: -- now gaping in chasms of various sizes, and then
immediately closing again; either swallowing up the unhappy persons who chanced
to be over them, or crushing them to death by the middle: -- from some,
spouting up prodigious quantities of water to a vast height, or belching out
hot, offensive and suffocating exhalations; while others are streaming with
torrents of melted minerals: -- some houses moving out of their places; others
cracking and t^mbling into heaps of rubbish; and others again, not barely by
whole streets, but by whole cities at a time, sinking downright to a great
depth in the earth, or under water: -- on the shore, the sea roaring and rising
in billows; or else retiring to a great distance from the land, and then
violently returning like a flood to overwhelm it; vessels driven from their
anchors; some overset and lost, others thrown up on the land: -- ^n one place,
vast rocks slung down from mountains, and ch^ki^g up rivers, which, being then
forced to find themselves new (...), sweep away such trees, houses, etc. as had
escaped the fury of the shock; in another, mountains themselves sinking in a
moment, and their places (...) by pools of water: -- some people running about
pale, with fear, trembling for the event, and ignorant whither to fly for
shelter; others thrown with violence down on the ground, not being able to keep
on their feet; and others shrieking or groaning in the agonies of death: --
even the brute creation manifesting all the signs of consternation and
astonishment: -- Imagine these things to yourselves, and you will then have a
view, though but an imperfect one, of some of those images of horror and
desolation, which accompany the more violent earthquakes.

But I will dwell no longer on these tragical scenes. Those of you, who are
desirous of farther information, may meet with it in the Philosophical
Transactions; L^^t^orp'^ Abridgement, Vol. 11. p. 400 -- 419.
particularly in the accounts of those horrible earthquakes, which almost
desolated the islands of Jamaica and Sicily. 63 years ago; in the latter of
which it was computed, that about 60,000 persons perished; which was very near
one quarter of the whole number of inhabitants. To relieve you and my self
under such melancholy prospects, I will turn my thoughts to the theory of these
most formidable phenomenon, as soon as I have made two or three observations on
the earthquakes we lately felt.

GOD be thanked, all earthquakes are not formidable in so high a degree. Those
of New England, in particular, which have indeed greatly and justly alarmed the
inhabitants, have never destroyed them. For though this country, we know, has
been visited with earthquakes from it is first settlement by the English; yet,
so far as my information reaches, not a single life has been lost by any of
them; and perhaps never so much damage done to our buildings as by the last
great shock: As to which I would observe.

First, That it certainly began with an undulation of the earth, as I have been
assured by some who were then awake; though I think it would not have been easily
concluded from the effects, that the earth had had any other than an horizontal
motion; those effects which were generally taken notice of, being chiefly, if
not only, such, as a perpendicular motion would not, but an horizontal one
would, have produced. Such, for instance, were the dashing of liquors over the
sides of open vessels; the oversetting setting many things in houses; and the
throwing of bricks from off the tops of chimnies to some distance. In order to
estimate the velocity with which some were thrown from my chimney, I measured
the greatest distance on the ground to which any of them had reached, and found
it to be 30 feet; and the height of the chimney from which they fell was 32
feet. Now bodies fall through 16 feet nearly in one second of time; and the
times, in which they fall through other heights, are in the subduplicate ratio of
those heights. From whence it follows, that the velocity, wherewith those
bricks were thrown off, was that of above 21 feet in 1" of time. For the
subduplicate ratio of 32 to 16 is the same as the simple ratio of 30 to a
little more than 21. It will be impossible, I believe, ever to determine with
exactness the rea^ spaces through which any of our buildings vibrated, in this
reciprocating motion of the earth. It may be observed, however, that the
shorter these vibrations are supposed to have been, the quicker or more
frequent they must have been; the number of them in a given time being
reciprocally as the length of each. Thus, for example, if each vibration had
been of one foot in length, then th^re were 21 of them in 1" of time; but if
each were of 6 (...) then there were 42 of them in a second; and so on.
Possibly, some of these reciprocations might be as quick as those of a musical
chord.

But it is not to be doubted, that the velocity, wherewith our buildings were
agitated, was different in different places. It was different also, as I
apprehend, at different heights. This I collect from the observation, that a
key, which was thrown off a shelf in my house, was not thrown so far, in
proportion to the height through which it fell, as the bri^ks were from the top
of the chimney. Hence it appears, that our buildings were r^cked with a kind of
angular motion, like that of a cradle; the upper parts of them moving swifter,
or through greater spaces in the same time, than the lower. That the vibrations
of our buildings, and especially of the higher parts of them, were in fact
extremely swift, appears from some effects, which had not come to my knowledge,
when I wrote the above paragraphs. The bur^ting of a di^tiller's ci^t^rn, by
the agitation of the liquor in it; and the breaking off the spindle of the vane
of Faneuil-hall, in Boston, are arguments of it. This spindle, if I am rightly
informed, was a pine stick, of about 5 inches in diameter, at the place where
it was snap't off; and 10 feet in height; and the weight of the vane on the top
of it was about 30 pounds. But nothing more strongly infers the excessive
swiftness of these vibrations, than the bending of the wind-vanes on some high
steeples. One at Boston was bent at it is spindle 3 or 4 points of the compass;
and another at Springfield, distant about 80 miles in a right line westerly
from Boston, was bent to a right angle; as I was assured by an eyewitness.
This effect seems to be owing to a smart shock upon these spindles, in a
direction perpendicular to that in which the vanes happened to stand; which in
an instant gave them a very great velocity. The motion from below being given
in the first place to the spindles, they were jerk'd forward so swiftly, that
there was not time to have it communicated to the extreme parts of the vanes;
which therefore were left behind, the remained in their former places. This may
be illustrated by the following instance. When a door is half open, and moving
very freely on it is hinges; if a pistol be fired against it, the ball will go
through the door, without moving it out of it is place: because the motion of
the ball is communicated but to a few parts of the door; viz. only those which
the ball drives before it. Dr. DESAGULIERS'S Experimental Philosophy, Vol. 1.
p. 419. The re^i^tence of the air might also contribute to this effect. The
re^i^tence, which a fluid makes to the motion of bodies in it, is, coeteris
paribus, as the square of their velocity. When the motion, then, is not very
swift, a fluid affords a pretty easy passage to bodies moving in it; but when
the motion is so swift, that there is not time for the particles of the fluid
to give way, and make room for the moving body, in this case a fluid will
resist as much as solid. An Instance of this we have in the book now cited, p.
420. A musket being fired against water, the bullet was beaten to pieces upon
the surface of the water. And thus in the present case, the velocity, attempted
to be given by those spindles to their vanes, may be supposed so vastly great,
that the air might resist their motion, in the manner of a firm, immovable
obstacle; which re^i^tence therefore would be equivalent to the stroke of an
hard body against them. In either way of accounting for this effect, it is
visible, that the velocity, wherewith the tops of those steeples vibrated, must
have been extremely great.
This perf^ctly agrees with the idea of an undulatory motion of the earth; as
you may clearly conceive by turning your thoughts to the case of a vessel
floating at rest upon stagnant water, and then suddenly agitated by a great
wave rolling under it. In the motion of ascent, the mast of the vessel would be
thrown forward, in the same direction as the wave was moving; and in the motion
of descent, backward, or in the contrary direction; and in both these cases,
the top of the must would move through greater spaces than the bottom.

As it is certain, that in the great shock, the earth had an horizontal motion;
so it appears with the most sensible evidence to me, that in the shock we felt
the Saturday evening following, at 27' after 8, there was a perpendicular
motion of the earth. I was then sitting on a brick hearth, and felt the motion
of the bricks distinctly under my feet. It was not a motion of the whole hearth
together, either from side to side, or up and down; but of each brick
separately by itself. Now as the bricks were contiguous, the only motion, which
could be communicated to them separately, was in a perpendicular direction; and
the sensation excited in me was exactly the same, as if some small solid body,
by moving along under the hearth, had raised up the bricks successively, which
immediately settled down again. The motion of the earth in this instance
plainly appeared undulatory to me; and this shock, I apprehend, was occasioned
by one small wave of earth rolling along, but not with a very swift motion. For
the velocity of it is progress was considerably less than that of sound, which
moves about 13 miles in a minute; as appeared from hence, that the roar of this
earthquake might be heard at least half a minute before the shake was felt.
Which also argues, that the shock began at some considerable distance from this
place. The same remarks may be applied to the great shock; only this began with
two at least, if not three waves, of much greater breadth and height. The
latter part of this shock was tremulous, consisting chiefly in vibrations which
succeeded one another with extreme quickness; and, as I take it, was owing to
the efforts of the earth to recover the position, out of which it had been
violently thrust, during the undulatory motion: Much in the same manner, as the
re^iprocations of a musical chord are occasioned by it is endeavour^ to restore
it self to that situation, which it had before it was struck. As soon as the
stroke, which bent it, ceases, the chord does not barely regain it is
rectilinear figure, but bends itself almost as far the contrary way; and thus
continues bending and unbending itself with great quickness, till it is motion
is gradually destroyed, and at length it settles into a state of rest. Both
these (...)* then, seem evidently to have been of the undulatory kind; and to
have differed in degree only. I take the last shock, on the 19th of December,
to have been also undulatory. For it is being more sensible above stairs than
below, as was observed in Note ^, is an indication, that the motion of the
house was of the rocking kind, and this implies undulation in the earth.

It may not be amiss to observe here, that these undulations of the earth are
not to be supposed to follow one another in so orderly a manner, as the waves
of the ocean often do: nor that they all move forward exactly in one direction.
They rather resemble the agitations of a tumbling sea, whose surges rise and
fall irregularly, and follow different courses in different places; and in the
same place too, at different instants of time. This appears from that
remarkable effect, of some chimnies being partly turned round. One of mine
looked as if it had been twisted, quite down to the roof.


I would observe

Secondly, that the duration of the great shock was longer than has been
usually observed. If my memory fails me not, even those earthquakes, which have
brought on the most amazing catastrophes, have commonly done their execution in
one or two minutes; whereas this shock with us lasted at least four; taking in
the whole of the time, from the first agitation of the earth, till it was
become perfectly quiet; though the violence of the shock did not last above
half so long. This I am assured of, partly from the observations of some
Gentlemen, who were up, and looked on their watches, when it began and ended;
and partly from my own, which were as follows. The preceding noon, I had
adjusted both my clock and watch, by a meridian line; and the following noon I
found that the watch had kept time exactly. Being awaked by the earthquake, I
lay till the violence of it seemed to be over, for the second time; for it had
a little abated before, as if it were going off, and then instantly began again
with redoubled fury. Till then I forb^re to rise, because the agitation was so
vehement, that I concluded it would be very difficult, if not impracticable, to
go from the bed to the chimney, without being thrown down; and therefore
thought it best not to attempt it. The space of time, in which I say awake, I
cannot think to be much, if any thing, less than 2'. This was the conjecture I
formed at that time; though it being but conjecture, I would not lay very great
stress upon it, were it not supported by concurring observations. On the second
abatement I rose, and lighting a candle, looked on my watch, and found it to be
15' after 4. The shock then was not quite over, but the windows continued
rattling for about a minute longer, as near as I can remember; for the shock
went off very gradually. As soon as I had looked on the watch, I went directly
to the clock, which was in another chamber, that I might see whether that
agreed with the watch; and found that it was stopped at 4 hours 11' 35". It Is
stopping, however, was not, immediately, owing to the violence of the shock,
though several clocks, and watches too, at Boston are said to have been stopped
by it; but to the following accident. Having some time before used a pretty
long glass tube, in a particular experiment, I had shut it up in the clock-case
for security; and this tube, being overthrown by the earthquake, lodged against
the pendulum, and stopped it is motion. By this accident, the beginning of the
earthquake, I conceive, is determined with all the exactness that can be
desired; for, so far as I can learn, the first shake was violent enough to
overset so tall, slender a body, and standing in a position so near a
perpendicular, as that tube; and it was impossible for the pendulum to make one
oscillation, after the tube had struck against it. Now from the time when the
clock stopped, to my looking on the watch, it was about 3'^; and the jarring was
not quite over, till about a minute after this: So that I think I speak within
bounds, when I say, that this shock with us lasted at least 4'. In other
places, it is duration might possibly be different. I observe

Thirdly, as to the course of this earthquake, that it seems to have been
nearly from N. W. to S. E. I was informed a few minutes after the shock, by a
person who was upon the common in this town at the time, that the noise began
about the N. W, and came on from thence, and passed away toward the S.E; and
other accounts, which I have since met with, agree with this. Those who were in
such clear, open places could make the best judgment in this matter; for such
as were within doors, or surrounded with buildings, might easily be misled by
the various reflections of the sound. I am induced to give the greater credit
to this information, by what I observed my self. For the key before spoken of;
as thrown from off a shelf in my house, was found at a place on the floor,
which bore very near N. W. of the place from which it fell; though the
situation of it before it is fall was such, that it might have been thrown in
several other directions as well as that, had the course of the earthquake been
different. An account which we have lately received from the West Indies (...)
very well with the supposition, that our earthquake proceeded from hence
sout^^^^^ward. The account is, that one the 18th of November, about two o'clock
in the afternoon, the sea withdrew from the harb^^r of St. Martin's, ^^^ving
the vessels dry, and fish on the banks, where there used to be 3 or 4 fathom
water; and continued out a considerable time, so that the people retired to the
high land, fearing the consequence of it is return; and when it came is, it
arose 6 feet higher than usual, so as to overflow the low lands. There was no
shock felt at the above time. As this (...) motion of the ^ea happ^^ed about 9
hours after we had the great shock, it seems very likely to have been
occasioned by the same convulsion of the earth. Now if this earthquake went off
southeastward into the Atlantic, it would pass considerably to the eastward of
St. Martin's; and it is plain that, in fact, it did not reach that island,
there being no shock felt done. The motion of the sea, then, was owing to a
great agitation (...) at a considerable distance, in some part or other of the
ocean, where the earthquake passed; and from thence propagated to that island.
Nor is the length of time greater than what seems to be necessary for this
purpose. The earthquake itself, as the rate it moved with us, would be some
hours in going from (...) to the latitude of St. Martin's. For it has been
already observed, that it is p^^gress was slower than that of sound; and sound
would be about two hours and a quarter in moving to such a distance. The rest
of the 9 hours might well be spent in conveying this motion excited in the
water, from the place where it was excited, to St. Martin's; for the waves
raised hereby cannot be supposed to have moved with near the velocity of sound.

It is to be regretted, that we have had no good accounts of the time, when the
earthquake happened at different places on the continent, whose longitudes and
latitudes are known; which might have enabled us to form a more (...) judgment
of this matter.

A very ingenious Gentleman having given it has his opinion, that the
earthquake seems to have come from the S. W, I think my self obliged to
consider what he has offered upon this point. His words are, Most ^^counts we
have from the S. W. make the shock considerably sooner there, than we (...) is
here, and then it was felt to the N. E. of us; so much sooner, that the
differen^^ of longitude will scarce help us at all in accounting for it* In
which, as I humbly conceive, there is a mistake. For allowing the difference of
longitude, the expressions used in the accounts from the S. W. are precisely
such as might be expected, in case the earthquake was felt there as the same
instant that it was here. I suppose it is ^uffici^^tly evident from what has
been said above, that the earthquake began with us at 11'^; after 4, within a
very few seconds of time. Now our meridian is to the E. of New Haven about 8'^;
-- of New York, about 12' and of Philadelphia, about 17'^;. Consequently, when
it was 11' after 4 with us, it was 3' after 4 at New Haven; and it wanted a
minute of 4 at New York. Now the accounts from both those places are, that they
had the earthquake about four O'clock. Again; at this same moment of time, it
wanted 6' of 4 at Philadelphia; and their account is, that the earthquake
happened between three and four o'clock.

I do not remember any account of the time, from the N. E; unless that from the
vessel on the Atlantic, 70 leagues E. of Cape-Anne, may be reckoned for one.
The people on board this vessel are said to have felt the shock at half past
four. Now 70 leagues on the parallel of Cape-Anne make the difference of
meridians to be 19'. So that when it was 11' after 4 with us, it was exactly
half past four at that vessel.

Thus, all these accounts agree perfectly with the supposition, that the
earthquake was felt at the same time in these several places. But I am far from
affirming, that it really was so. I am indeed inclined to think, that there was
no great difference in the time of it is being felt here, and in the places to
the S. W. For it seems most likely, that it reached at the same time to all
places which lay in a line perpendicular to it is course. So that if it came
from about the N. W. as I believe it did, I should think, that all the places
before mentioned, Boston, New Haven, New York, and Philadelphia, which bear
almost S. W. and N. E. from each other, must have felt it nearly at the same
time. I was careful to note the time, when we had it, as exactly as I could; in
hopes that, by comparing it with the like accounts from distant places, we
might be able to judge, both of the course of the earthquake, and the velocity
of it is progress. But all the accounts of the time, which I have yet seen, are
so very lax, that no just conclusions can be drawn from them, with respect to
either of these points. To establish any thing of this sort, the minutes at
least, if not the seconds, should be made certain.

It is worthy of remark, that two, of the five great earthquakes which we have
had, have gone nearly in the same track, as this last did. The first of all,
which was on June 2. 1638. is said by the Historian, to 'come from the
northward, and pass southward.' By the description given of it, it was very
much like our late earthquake, only not quite so violent. The noise and shakes
of the earthquake, October 29. 1727. seemed, it is said, to come from the
northwestward, and to go off southeasterly; and so the houses seemed to rec^.
As to the great earthquakes of 16^^ and 1663, we have no account of the course
which they went in. But from the other three, it may be reasonably conjectured,
that the center, or place in which our earthquakes originate, lies in some part
of Canada; or perhaps beyond it.




Having mad^ the observations proposed, let us now attempt to trace out the
causes of these great (...). Several accounts of the late earthquake having
been already published by different hands, particularly very full and distinct
ones by the Rev. Doctors CHAUNC^Y and MAYHEW; I think it needless for me to add
my thing farther upon this head, except the following short (...).

1. Dr. MAYHEW speaks of such a great white (...) being upon the ground in the
morning, as he had not observed for many years past* I took notice of it
likewise; and, when it was melted, measured (...); and found that it covered
the ground to the depth of 11/1000 parts of an inch; which is almost double of
any white frost we have had for seven years past, and about 5 to 6 times as
great as we commonly have.

2. The barometer and thermometer (...) no (...) at the (...) of the
earthquake: Only, my barometer, which has an open oft^^n of quicksilver, was
so agitated, that part of the quicksilver was (...) over the (...) of the
cistern, and scattered upon the floor. This cistern was a cylindri^-cap, whose
sides were an inch higher than the surface of the quicksilver.

3. I have received undoubted intelligence from a Gentleman is that
neighborhood, that the report we had of a prodigious-chasm made in the ground
at Newington in New Hampshire, of 60 (...) length, and a (...), is a pure
fiction; and that is had no other f^^^dation than (...) (If (...) indeed can be
called a foundation for such a (...)) that a (...) in that town, standing upon
a sandy ground, was shaken down by the earthquakes; and the force of the
falling stones, having beat up the sand on each side, made some appearance of
an hollow in the middle.




That the agents, which are able to produce affects so extraordinary as those
before recited; which can ha^ve up such ^normous masses of matter, and put into
the most vehement commotion vast tracts of land and sea, of many hundred miles
in extent; -- that the agents, I say, which can do all this, and more, must be
very powerful, will not admit of a doubt. Now we know of nothing in nature more
powerful: than the particles of certain bodies converted into vapor by the
action of fire. Fire then, and proper materials for it to act upon, it is
probable, are the principal agents in this affair. And what greatly strengthens
the probability is, an observation beforementioned that those countries, which
have burning mountains, are most subject to earthquakes; and that these
mountains rage with uncommon fu^y, about the time when the circumjacent
countries are torn with convul^ions; -- an argument this, that the eruptions of
such mo^ntains, and earthquakes, are owing to one and the same cause. But we
must be more particular.

1. The earth is not solid throughout, but contains within it many large holes,
pits and caverns; as is agreed by all Natural Historians. There are very
probably also long, crooked, unequal passages, which run winding through a
great extent of earth, and form a communication between very distant regions.
The observation here made concerning the great length of subterranean canals
has received a new and strong confirmation by the account, inserted in note ^,
of the agitation of the sea at St. Martin's; and a stronger still, by another
account we have more lately received of a surprising flux and reflux of it at
Barbados, on the first of November last, at two o'clock in the afternoon;
which was about 6 hours after that terrible earthquake, which made such hav^ck
at Lisbon, and the neighboring parts of Portugal and Spain. This account, as
it was published in our Newspapers, is as follows. Extract of a Letter from
Barbados, Nov. 13, 1755. The first of this instant, about 2 o'Clock, P. M. the
Tide having then ebbed one Hour, in a ^tar^ Calm, there was, of a sudden, to
the great Surprise of all the Inhabitants, a Flux of Water, that rose to the
Height of 5 Feet and upward, and as suddenly it returned to the Sea; this Flux
and Reflux was performed every 6 or 7 Minutes, and so conti^u'd till 10
o'Clock, though the Violence abated gradually from 5 o'Clock: So that in that
small Space of Time, the Sea ^lux'd and re^l^x'd, upwards of 60 Times.
Extraordinary commoti^ns in the sea were likewise observed, the same day, on
the western coasts of Europe and Africa, and at a considerable distance from
the shore. One vessel in Lat. 25. 30 N. and Long. 16. 15 W. from London, about
half an hour after 9 A. M. was violently agitated for the space of 3 minutes by
an earthquake, though not damaged, as we were told in our Newspapers. This
vessel was then under a meridian half an hour to the W. of Lisbon, and at the
distance of about 1000 miles from it; and the time, when it felt the shock, was
an hour earlier than they had it at Lisbon and Cadi^; and therefore, if this
was the same shock as that, it was an hour in moving from the place of this
vessel to those cities. 'At Lisbon,' we are told, half an hour after the shock,
which came between 10 and 11 o'clock in the forenoon, and continued about 2
minutes, the tide came in and arose about 20 feet higher than common, by which
a few people were drowned. And at Cadiz, that soon after the shock, which was
at 11 in the forenoon, and lasted about 3 minutes, they saw from the shore a
heavy sea (about half a mile distance) coming on, which did considerable damage
to the shipping, and when it broke, made great destruction in the city: -- The
about a quarter of an hour after, there came a second sea as awful; and about
the same space after, came a third more awful, which did prodigious damage; and
great numbers of people were l^st. These extraordinary agitations in the ocean,
which all happened on the first of November; and another of the same kind on
the 18th, which was observed at St. Martin's, as is related in note ^; we shall
endeavor to account for in note ^. p. 24.

Here now we have an earthquake extending it is effects across the Atlantic. An
amazing distance truly for an earthquake! And such as I do not remember to have
met with any account of, in history. Our earthquake ^ea^^ed 1900 miles; whereas
this reached almost twice us far.

But though this latter earthquake was of greater extent than the former,
perhaps it did not much, if at all, exceed it in the degree of violence.
Indeed, the damage done by it at Lisbon appears to have been vastly greater
than any sustained by us; though we have not yet had an exact account of the
particulars. But this was probably owing, not altogether to the greater
violence of the shock, but partly, if not chiefly, to their manner of building.
I am informed by a Gentleman, who is well acquainted with that city, that the
buildings are very high, many of them being of 7 stories; and chiefly of stone,
laid in clay. A poor (...); ind^^d! which can never bind stones together with
any tolerable ^i^^ness. And on supposition that their earthquake was of the
same species with ours, that is, undulatory, the great height of those
buildings exposed them to much greater agitations, than if they had been lower.
(^ee p. 10.) It is no wonder then, if their houses were shaken to pieces,
enough the shock were not more violent (...) what has been felt in other
places, where much less damage has been done. An earthquake that could give so
smart a blow, as ours did to some wind^anes (See note d) must be sufficient,
one would think, to demolish such a city in a few minutes; so as scar^^ly to
leave one stone upon another. Had Boston been built in that manner, probably at
this day (...) would have been little better than an heap of ruins.


Some of these cavities are dry, and contain nothing but air, or the fumes of
fermenting minerals; in others, there are currents of water.

2. This globe is a very heterogeneous body. Besides the two grand divisions of
it into solid and fluid parts, each of these is again divisible into an
indefinite number of others. Although our knowledge of the earth reaches but a
little way below it is surface, yet so far as we have penetrated, it appears to
be a compages of a vast variety of solid substances, ranged in a manner which
to us seems to have not much of regularity in it. Here we find earths, stones,
salts, sulphurs, minerals, metals, etc. and a great number of inferior species
under each of these general heads, blended and intermingled with each other.
Many of these are combustible, or of a texture proper to be turned by fire into
flame and vapor. And besides the pure elementary water, if there be any such,
the aqueous parts of the globe receive peculiar tinctures from the beds and
veins through which they run; so that perhaps there may be almost as many sorts
of waters, as there are of solid substances. Thus, some waters are charged with
sulphur^ous particles; some, with particles of iron; and others, with those of
other minerals. And the ^ubterraneous rivers and streams, thus impregnated with
different particles, may, by their confluence, produce an almost infinite
variety of mixtures in the earth. Probably, this promi^cuous disposition of
materials, in the bowels of the earth, may be necessary to the growth of bodies
in it; for in the judgment of some of the most eminent philosophers,
particularly the excellent Mr. BOIL, even the harde^t, inorganized bodies, as
stones, metals, etc. do, in their proper way, grow within the earth, as truly
as vegetables grow on it is surface, or animals in their parent animals. And to
the same and seems to conduce.

3. The heat within the bowels of the earth. Heat, it is well known, is a grand
agent in most natural productions; and the inner parts of the earth are
sufficiently furnished with it. Some parts indeed, as the vulcanos, are
actually on fire and burn; but there is, moreover, an heat without flame,
diffused through the interior regions of the earth. This is evident from the
instance of hot springs, and from the warmth which is always found at great
depths, as in the bottoms of mines.

4. There seems to be an inexhaustible source of this heat in the attractive
powers, which Sir ISAAC NEWTON has shown to belong to the particles of matter.
For, heat consisting in a p^culiar kind of intestine motion of the parts of
bodies; whatever tends to produce this motion in bo^^es, will cause them to
grow hot. Now such a motion may be produced, by the particles of different
bodies rushing together, in virtue of their attractive powers; of which that
great man has given a very copious collection of instances in the 31st Question
at the end of his Optics, whither I must refer you. In some of them, not only
a very sudden and violent heat, but an actual flame, is produced, by the bare
mixing of two cold bodies together; and that, even without the presence of the
air, which we find absolutely necessary to our culinary fires. So in a
remarkable experiment, (first made, I think, by Dr. SLARE) when a certain
compound spirit of nitr^ is poured on half it is weight of any ponderous oil of
vegetable or animal substances, the liquors grow so very hot in mixing, as
presently to send up a burning flame. Newton's Opt. p. 353. This compound
spirit of nitr^ was made by d^^tilling equal parts of nitr^ and oil of vitriol.
The oil used in Dr. Slare's first experiment was that of carraway seeds. A full
account of these experiments, by Dr. Slare himself, may be seen in Lowthorp's
Abridgm. Vol. III. p. 352 -- 366.
At the first trial, so small a quantity, as a dram of this spirit, being
poured upon half a dram of such oil, in vacu^, to see what effect would
ensue; the mixture in the twinkling of an eye made a flash like gunpowder, and
blew up the exhausted receiver, whose diameter was six inches, and depth above
eight; all who were present being astonished at the unexpected event. There is
also so strong an attraction between iron and sulphur, that 'even the gross
body of sulphur powdered,' continues Sir ISAAC, and with an equal weight of
iron filings and a little water made into paste, in a few hours grows too hot
to be touched, and emits a flame. And by these experiments compared with the
great quantity of sulphur with which the earth abounds, and the warmth of the
interior parts of the earth, and hot springs, and burning mountains, and with
damps, mineral coruscations, etc. we may learn that sulphurous steams abound
in the bowels of the earth, and ferment with minerals, and sometimes take fire
with a sudden coruscation and explosion. But to set this curious doctrine in
it is full light, it would be necessary to repeat that whole Question; which
indeed highly deserves it, would the time permit. For it would then appear,
that there is a very great variety of bodies, which being mixed together,
produce so strong an effervescence, as to emit inflammable fumes. Thus, to
mention one instance more, when iron is dissolving in a mixture of oil of
vitriol and common water, there instantly arises a great heat and violent
ebullition, with fumes copiously exhaling; which are so very inflammable, that,
being set on fire, they go off at once like a gun, with a great explosion.
Having thus seen what a perpetual source of heat there is in these powerful,
active principles, continu^lly operating within the bowels of the earth; let us
next inquire, what effects may be expected from it. Therefore

5. It is a known property of heat to expand bodies, to rarefy them, and
enlarge their dimensions; and, when raised to an higher degree, to separate
their parts, and make them fly from each other; as in some measure appears
already from the instances mentioned under the foregoing article. This effect
heat has upon solid as well as fluid bodies; -- upon the hardest, as well as
the softest. It is observable here, that such particles as cohere by the
strongest attraction, do most forcibly repel one another, when they are once
separated by heat. And when the heat is intense, and the particles of the
heated body are prevented from flying away, till they become thoroughly hot; it
will require very strong vessels to (...) their b^r^^ing forth with a violent
explosion. Thus, a single drop of common water, enclosed in a glass bubble, and
laid upon the fire: as soon as it become hot, will burst the bubble, with a
report sca^^^ inferior to that of a pistol. And water in larger quantities has
been heated to that degree, as to rend in sander very strong vessels of (...),
in which it has been endeavour^d to be confined. What the (...) then would be,
of a great body of water's suddenly making it is way into a flaming cavern,
whose sulphur^ou^ or (...) fires are not extinguished but in^ag^d by water; and
of it is being there, almost instantaneously, converted into vapor; your own
imaginations may easily represent to you. This, it is very likely, has
sometimes been the case with respect to those famous vulcanos, AEtna and
Vesuvio; both which border on the sea. You see here what water may do; but
there are many other bodies, which cohere more strongly, as sulphur and nitre,
for example, whose vapor is still more powerful than that of water. This is
evident from the composition of gunpowder; a very small quantity of which,
when turned into vapor, every one knows, is able to remove any obstacle that
opposes it is expansion, and to burst the firmest rocks. The paste
abovementioned, made of powdered sulphur and iron filings, if put a few feet
under ground, will by degrees cause the earth over it to heave and crack, to
let out the flame; thus making an artificial earthquake. And therefore, if a
water, saturated with sulphurous particles, should in it is passage under
ground soak into a large bed of iron ore, or a strong c^alybeate water into a
bed of sulphur; the mixture would doubtless perfor^ in great, what this
experiment does in miniature. A vitrioli^ water mixing with iron, if in
sufficient quantities, would be followed with the like effect. But no mixture
of this nature appears so surprising as Dr. SLARE'S, which did not require so
much as the presence of the air to inkindle it, From this small mixture, which
was but one dram and an half, a force was generated in an instant, by the
mutual collision of those active liquors, far exceeding the weight of the
atmosphere that pressed down the receiver; which in that experiment amounted to
about 420 pounds. I say, far exceeding; for the receiver was not barely raised,
but 'with a much greater force blown up,' as Dr. SLARE expresses it. We have no
right indeed, that I know of, to suppose all the same sorts of bodies, both
solid and fluid, in the bowels of the earth, as chemistry has furnished us
with; but several things induce us to believe, that in those dark recesses,
impenetrable as they are to mortal eyes, bodies are prepared, by a kind of
natural chemistry, which very much resemble many of our chemical preparations,
and are possessed of the same essential properties. To be sure, there are not
wanting, in those lower regions, all the degrees of heat, which a Chemist could
desire for any of his processes. If then two bodies, of the like nature as the
spirit and oil used in this experiment, should be mingled together in due
quantity, though in the closest subterraneous vault, which neither contained
any genuine air, nor could admit any; I need not say, that an earthquake must
be the consequence.

You have now, I suppose, before you the general causes of earthquakes. You
have seen that there are in the bowels of the earth inflammable materials, of
various kinds, and in large quantities; some in the form of solid or liquid
bodies, and others in that of exhalations and vapors; that there are also
powerful principles constantly at work, which are capable of inkindling these
materials into an actual flame; and that the vapor generated from such flame
will endeavor to expand it self on all sides with immense force. If now these
inflammable vapors be p^nt up in close caverns, so as to find no vent till they
are collected in a large quantity; so soon as they take fire in any part, the
flame will spread itself, wherever it meets with materials to convey it, with
as great rapidity, perhaps, as it does in a train of gunpowder; and the vapors
produced from hence will rush along through the subterraneous grottos, as they
are able to find or force for themselves a passage; and by heaving up the earth
that lies over them, will make that kind of progressive swell or undulation, in
which we have supposed earthquakes commonly to consist; and will at length
burst the caverns with a great shaking of the earth, as in springing a mine;
and so discharge themselves into the open air. The extraordinary commotion^ of
the sea, related in the foregoing notes, having happened within a few hours of
the great earthquakes; one of which shook Spain and Portugal, and the other,
New England with some of the neighboring parts of America; will naturally be
ascribed by every body to those earthquakes, or at least to the same causes as
those earthquakes are. Now for my part, I can hardly persuade my self, that the
bare agitations of the earth, at those times, could be great enough, to put the
sea into such vehement commotions, as it appears to have been in, by those
relations. To account for these things satisfactorily, it seems to me that we
must have recourse to such an eruption of the vapors which caused those
earthquakes, as is spoken of in the passage above. At those times, these
furious vapors, impatient of restraint, must have continued to drive along
through their subterraneous passages, till they found some place, where the top
of the caverns, which contained them, was not of sufficient strength to confine
them; and there they would burst out of their dungeons, and spring up into day.
The eruptions, which caused those uncommon motions of the sea that surprised
the inhabitants of Barbados and St. Martin's, were very probably made in the
Atlantic ocean, to the eastward of the West India islands, and near the same
latitudes; and, until we hear whether the like commotions were observed
elsewhere, about the same time, we may well enough suppose, that the places of
these eruptions were nearer to those islands, than to any other land. Now to
assist the Reader in forming a conception of what probably passed in the ocean
on those great occasions, I shall lay before him two or three facts, relating
to the force of fired gunpowder, and the re^i^tence of water; taken from the
before cited work of Dr. DESAGULIERS, pp. 420, 421. The Dr. tells us, that
being with several other persons in a great barge upon the Tham^, playing off
some fireworks on a rejoicing day, it happened that a water-rocket (whose
property is to go under water several times and rise again, and at last burst
on the top of the water) came up, when it was ready to burst, under the stern
of the barge, being thereby prevented from coming up to the surface of the
water; and bursting where it was, gave the barge a great shock, and sensible
lift, though there was much less than an O^^ce of powder to make it. Another of
these rockets in it is last rise, stopping under the middle of smaller barge,
broke there, and made so great an hole in the barge's bottom, that in a very
short time the barge was half full of water. After this, to try the effect of
the explosion of gunpowder under water; the Dr. loaded a water rocket, so that
it should break under the water, and having set fire to it, threw it into a
pond, that covered an acre of ground: And so great was the shock, that several
persons, who stood round the pond, felt it like a momentan^ous earthquake. Now
if so inconsiderable a quantity of powder, fired just under the surface of
water, could have such effects as these; what must have been the com^^tion,
when the vapors, which were able to shake such great extents of land and sea,
as we are sure were shaken in these earthquakes, made their way, with united
force, through the vast body of water that lay over them? No doubt, the water
^oam'd, and boiled, and raged with inconceivable fury, and was agitated into
overgrown, mountainous wa^es. The first effect of the eruption probably was,
that all the water, which lay directly over the spot where the bottom of the
ocean gaped to let out the vapors, was blown right up, almost like a compact
body, to a great height in the air. The bottom doubtless closed again us soon
as the vapors were discharged; but there must have been a pit or cavity left in
the ocean, in the place deserted by the water; -- of what dimensions it is
impossible for us to say; though, from what followed it seems, they must have
been very considerable. The next step would be, that the neighbou^ing water
would rush in from all sides to fill up the vacuity; first, from the nearer
parts; and then by degrees from the remotes; and by that means form a spacious
concave all around, on the surface of the ocean; the centure of which would be
this pit. The motion of the water descending to fill such a pit, was what, I
suppose, might draw off the water from the shore of St. Martin's; which was the
first circumstance observed there. The water, by thus descending to fill the
pit, having fallen below it is proper level, would next be raised above it,
erecting itself into a mountain over the place where the pit was made; and then
by falling and rising alternately in this place, would communicate an
undulatory motion all around it: And the waves thus excited would be more
numerous, and of greater breadth, as the dimensions of the pit first made were
larger. Mean time, the water, thrown up at the beginning in a body into the
air, would by it is weight fall down in cataracts, and add greatly to the
confusion. A motion like this, once begun, must needs be propagated to very
considerable distances, before it could be entirely lost; and that to a degree
sufficient, I should think, to cause such great waves, and to such a number, as
were observed at the places beforementioned. Wheth^r this, or something like
this, might not probably have been the process of these extraordinary scenes in
the ocean, I submit to the judgment of the Reader. And if he shall be of this
opinion, he will doubtless make a pause, and reflect on the great goodness of
HEAVEN, in causing the vapors to break forth is the ocean; -- a place, where
they could do the least hurt. The effects which must have followed, had these
impetuous blasts been directed against the foundations of a great and populous
city, his own imagination will paint to him in livelier colors than I can
pretend to do.

It is necessary to suppose, at least two such eruptions in the Atlantic on the
first of November. For it is utterly Incredible, that the waves excited by one
only, however great in degree, or in whatever part of the ocean, it be
supposed, could reach to places at such distances from each other, as Cadiz and
Lisbon are from Barbados. The inun^ations at Cadiz and Lisbon were probably
occasioned by one and the same eruption, which, by the violence of them, seems
to have been at no great distance from those cities. But that at Barbados must
have been occasioned by another eruption, happen^ng a few hours later; and
seems, by the expressions used in the relations, to have fallen far short of
those in Europe, in point of violence. From whence we should argue, that this
eruption happened at a considerable distance from that island: Because, from
the great number of waves, or fluxes and refluxes, we must argue, that the
commotion in the center or place of eruption, which excited those waves, was
vastly great.


These vapors may possibly sometimes infect the air, and bring on pestilential
distempers, which have been said to be consequent upon great earthquakes. Not
that I can give credit to all the reports of this sort, which have been handed
about; many of them having been propagated by writers of an astrological turn,
who have been as ready to attribute distempers to the configurations of the
planets, and to the appearance of comets, as to earthquakes.

By this time, enough has been said, I should think, to convince you, that the
earth contains within itself the seeds of earthquakes in great abundance. And
all these things being considered, it may seem rather a wonder that we have no
more earthquakes, than that we have so many. The causes of earthquakes are
incessantly at work; and although it may require a course of years Besides
several lesser earthquakes, there have been five great ones in New England,
since the arrival of the English in 162^; which, at a medium, is one in about
27 years. But they have not happened at equal distances of time. About the year
1660, they were pretty frequent: but I find no mention of any from 1670 till
that memorable one in 1727; between which there was an interval of 57 years.
to ripen the proper materials to that pitch, as that they can force for
themselves a passage through the earth; yet it is reasonable to expect, that they
will from time to time be collected in such quantities, and ferment to such
degrees, as to make these explosions unavoidable. As therefore our globe has
been subject to such concussions from the earliest accounts of antiquity, we
have no room to doubt but that it will continue to be so, as long as the
present frame of nature subsists. For this we may be assured of, that though
that imprisoned vapor be discharged into the open air, which, by its struggles
to escape, has caused an earthquake; yet the fermenting minerals, from which it
was generated, will be continually supplying new quantities of the same; and
even those very minerals may from time to time be re-produced, as they are
consumed; as was before observed. Thus we see, that in the very structure and
constitution of this globe, provision has been made to continue these
agitations of it, at proper intervals of time, during the whole period of it is
existence in it is present form; and that in every climate, from the equator to
the pole. This suggests a reflection, with which I shall close the present
discourse. It is this: That

Though these explosions, and consequent concussions of the earth, have indeed
occasioned most terrible desolations, and in this light may justly be regarded
as the tokens of an incensed DEITY; yet it can by no means be concluded from
hence, that they are not of real and standing advantage to the globe in
general. Multitudes, it is true, have at different times suffered by them;
multitudes have been destroyed by them; but much greater multitudes may have
been every day benefited by them. The all-wise CREATOR could not but foresee
all the effects of all the powers he implanted in matter; and, as we find in
innumerable in^^ances (and the more we know of his works, the more such
in^^ances we discover) that he has established such laws for the government of
the world, as tend to promote the good of the whole, we may reasonably presume,
that he has done it in this case as well as others. To me, at least, the
argument on this side the question, drawn from the general analogy of nature,
appear^ to have more force, than any that I have seen offered on the other. For
there is nothing, however useful, however necessary, but what is capable of
producing, and in fact has produc^d, damage, in single in^^ances. It were
endless to particularize here; I shall therefore only mention one or two things
by way of specimen. The power of gravity, -- a power of such indispensable
importance, that without it the system of nature could not subsist a moment,
has yet proved the destruction of multitudes. The wind, so necessary for the
purposes of navigation, as well as to purge the air, which would otherwise
^^agnate and pu^refy, -- how often has it risen to ^uch a pitch, as to
overthrow houses, and wre^k vessels? by which means thousands have perished.
Even thunder and lightning, which, next to earthquakes, are the most terrible
phenomenon of nature, are yet universally allowed to be necessary to free the
atmosphere from a certain unwholesome ^ultriness, which often infects it. Other
instances of the like sort I leave to your own reflections: and would rather
observe, that the world is governed by general laws; and general laws must,
from the nature of them, be liable sometimes to do hurt. However, laws of this
sort are sufficiently vindicated, not only as wise, but as good, if upon the
whole they produce a maximum of good; (to borrow an expression from the
Mathematicians;) and this, it is in the highest degree probable, all the laws
of nature do. It may be added, that as in the animal body, the evacuations,
which are of ab^olute necessity to maintain life and health, do yet sometimes
run to such extremes as to prove mortal; so in like manner, these explosions of
subterraneous vapor, whose effects have sometimes been so fatal, may,
notwithstanding this, be highly conducive, and even indispensably necessary, to
the good of this globe in general. The explosions themselves, as well as the
laws, in consequence of which they are produced, may be necessary on various
accounts; and particularly to the carrying on the more secret and noble works
of nature within the entrails of the earth. It is not impossible that some may
think it strange to have any thing said, that seems at all to abate the horror
which many people have of earthquakes, as if all of them were nothing but
scourges in the hand of the ALMIGHTY; and may be fearful, left the cause of
religion should be disserved hereby. But of this there is not, in my
apprehension, the remotest danger -- The idea here exhibited, while it exalts
the wisdom and goodness, does not in the (...) detract from the majesty, or
from the justice, of GOD. And the terror, which an earthquake never fails to
carry with it, will be sufficient to secure the interests of religion, so far
as they are to be secured by the influence of fear; even though such a
phaenom^non be represented in the most favorable light that truth will admit
of.
Let me dilate a little on this matter.

By the incessant action of gravity and other attractive powers, and by the
perpetual consumption of fluids, the earth becomes, continually more and more
hard, compact and dense. Now an openness or looseness of contexture, to a
certain degree, in the earth, is necessary to carry on the operations of nature
within it. So that on the supposition that mineral, metalline, and other
subterraneous bodies grow within the earth, it should seem that the earth must
become gradually less and less fit for the production of them. Since then the
direct, immediate, and most general effect of earthquakes is, by shaking to
loosen and disunite the parts of the earth, and to open it is pores, it seems
agreeable to reason to infer, that this is the end primarily aimed at in these
concussions. But you will take notice, that I speak here only, of physical or
natural ends. For though I make no doubt, that the laws of nature were
established, and that the operations of nature are conducted, with a view,
ultimately, to moral purposes; and that there is the most perfect coincidence,
at all times, between GOD's government of the natural and of the moral world;
yet it would be improper for me to enter into these di^quisitions at this time,
since my province limits me to consider th^^ subject, only in the relation
which it bears to natural philosophy. It is in the physical sense alone that I
say, the disjoining the parts of the earth, and opening it is pores, may be the
end primarily aimed at in earthquakes, as such mutations in the earth may from
time to time become necessary to the production of subterraneous bodies; and
perhaps this end could not be effectually answered by less forcible methods.
This point may receive some light, if not proof, from the operations of
agriculture. We find it necessary, by ploughing, digging, etc. to break the
clods of the ground, to comminute and even pulverize it, in order to fit it for
the purposes of vegetation; and we find it necessary to renew these labors
every year. Now the use and tendency of these artificial operations may bear
some analogy to those of the greater operations of nature, which we are
speaking of. And indeed, it is not in the least degree improbable, that such a
loosening of the parts of the earth may promote even the growth of vegetables
on it is surface, as well as of minerals in it is bowels; it being now well
known, that all vegetables, the smaller as well as the larger, shoot some
fibers of their roots to vastly greater depths, than those to which any of our
instruments of tillage ever penetrate. This, it is, likely, may be one reason
of the wonderful fertility, for which AEtna and Vesuvio have been so generally
and so highly celebrated. Again; it may be necessary now and then, to have such
subterraneous vapors, as are generated by fermentation, discharged up into the
air; as their continuance below, in the caverns of the earth, might be an
impediment to those important processes which are there carrying on. But those
very vapors, which might obstruct some sorts of natural processes, while below
the surface of the earth, may as much advance others, when above it. We know
that in many cases of the fermentation of bodies, especially of such dense ones
as salts and minerals, air is plentifully absorbed; and that in many others, it
is as plentifully generated: So that great part of the exhalations thrown out
by earthquakes may be true, permanent air, and designed to recruit what has
been absorbed by bodies here on the surface. And perhaps the grounds, on which
the great NEWTON founded his suspicion, Newton's Prin^ip. p. 515.
that the finest, the most subtle, and most spirituous parts of our air, and
those which are most necessary to maintain the life of all things, come chiefly
from the comets; may equally support another suspicion, that some such
particles of air may be derived also from subterraneous eruptions. For among
the almost infinite variety of particles which are thrown out of the earth in
these eruptions, it is most likely, that if some are noxious, others will be
salutary. It may also be necessary from time to time to have the subterraneous
streams diverted from their former courses into new ones: partly, that
different places in the lower regions may be watered by them; and partly, that
the waters themselves, by passing through different beds or channels, may alter
their properties, Some wells near me have had the quality of their waters much
(...) the earthquake.
and convey new tinctures to different places.

But however these things may be; whether all the foregoing conjectures be well
founded, or not: If these explosions and concussions be, as it is next to
certain that they are, the necessary and inevitable consequences of such laws
of nature, and such powers in matter, as our globe could not well subsist
without; this ought to silence all the complaints of those who suffer either
loss or terror by them; as well as all the objections, which men of ^c^ptical
minds have been disposed to make, upon this head, to the order of Providence.
It ought, in reason, to do this, though we should never be able to point out
all the particular advantages resulting from them. For, it is plain, they may
be beneficial in a thousand other ways, than we, short-sighted mortals, may
pretend to guess at.

To sum up all in a word. This is a MIXED state; in which there is such a
variety of purposes, natural as well as moral, in prosecution at the same time,
that there may be nothing, perhaps, in the material world, that is simply and
absolutely evil; -- nothing, but what, under the direction of infinite wisdom,
power and beneficence, is, in some or other of it is consequences, productive of
an over-balance of good:

Upon the whole. How 'wonderful in counsel,' how excellent in working is that
BEING, who can bring good out of the greatest evils; and can answer intentions,
the most widely differing, by one and the same dispensation of His providence!

The END.
APPENDIX,
Concerning the Operation of Electrical Substance in EARTHQUAKES; and the
Effects of Iron Points.
A little tract having lately appeared among us, under a respectable nam^,
hinting at a different cause of earthquakes, from that which is delivered in
these papers; it is desired and expected, I (...), by several worthy Persons,
that I should here take some notice of it. This I shall end^avou^ to do, with
all the respect that belongs to v^nerable characters, consist^nt with that
superior regard which i^ due only to truth. When I composed the foregoing
discourse, I thought it of more importanc^ to explain to my pupils what I took
to be the real causes of earthquak^s, then to enter into an examin^tion of the
many ^ine but uncertain (...) of the projecting sort of Philosophe^^ both
ancient and modern; to do which, with any degree of exactnes^, would have
required a dis^ourse by its^lf. ^hilosophy, like every thing else, has had it is
fashion^, and the reigning m^de of last has been, to explain every thing by
ELECTRICITY. It is not long* sin^^ we were amused with pompous accounts of the
wonderful effects of electricity in the practice of phy^ic. It was extolled as
^ perfect ^a^^^li^^n; (...) represented as aff^rding the most easy, and, at the
same time, the most e^^e^t^al means of conveying into the body, the active
particles of all medicines, ^m^tic, c^thartic, alterative,etc. and as curing,
or at le^^t relieving, almost i^stantan^o^sly, the most obstinate and
intrac^able disorders, which the ^uman body is li^ble to; gout, blindness,
deafness, dumbness, and what not! ^ut this affair is pr^tty well over for the
present. Now, it seems, it is to be the cause of earthquakes. Electricity
indeed is at this day certainly known to be a much more extensi^e principle in
nature, than was suspected a few years ago; and to have a hand in the
production of effects, where it was thought to have no concern. It must not,
however, be concluded from hence, that it is the sole principle of natural
effects, and that it does every thing. It is true, the very ing^nious Mr.
FRANKLIN of Philadelphia has, with singular s^gacity, and, in my opinion, with
happy success, accounted this way for the phaenome^a of thunder and lightning;
and has made discoveries upon this subject, which are not only extrem^^y
curio^^ in speculation, but of high importance in practice. ^ut this is no
argument, that electricity is also the cause of earthquakes. In the tract
before me, P. 2^. we are indeed told, that the El^ctrical Substance subsists
and moves to and fro in different Parties or Collecti^ns in the Bowels of the
Earth, as well as in the Clouds of the Air. And so waving about in different
Parties in the Earth below, though by Divine Direction, and surrounding
rounding other substances, as in the air above; when a greater party comes
within the striking distance of another, a shock is immediately effected: and
in proportion to the quantities of those several parties, and the other
sub^^^nces surrounded by them, is the shock in the earth, either less or
greater. And " all this" with more is said to be "argued from Analogy." But
that analogy does not take place here; that the two cases of lightning and
earthquakes are no way parallel; and that the electric substance, when in the
bowels of the earth, is in circumstances essentially different from what it is,
when in the clouds of the air; will, I think, plainly appear, by taking a brief
view of the known laws of electricity, so far as they can be thought to relate
to this subject. Not that I here take upon me to maintain a negative, or to
assert absolutely, that electricity cannot possibly be, directly nor
indirectly, concerned in the production of earthquakes. Neither would I assert
this of magnetism, any more than of electricity. I cannot say how for the
unknown causes of these powers may be connected together, and with the causes
of other attractive and repulsive powers; and therefore do not pretend to know
all the possible effects of either of them; or what remote influence they may
have, in virtue of some yet undiscovered properties, upon any of the phaenom^na
of this lower world. What I would be understood to mean, then, is this, that
according to the laws of magnetism and electricity, so far as they have been
hitherto discovered, it is inconceivable to me, how earthquakes can be
accounted for by them. At present, we are concerned only with electricity.

The laws of electricity are; -- that every body is either an electric per se,
or a non-electric; -- that electrics per se are incapable of receiving
electricity by communication from others, and therefore cannot have the
quantity of electrical substance, which they naturally contain, augmented; nor
yet, on the other hand, can they have it diminished; -- that non-electri^s may
receive electricity by communication; but in order to this, it is fundamentally
necessary, that they be entirely supported by, and surrounded with, electrics
per se. For if a non-electric, which is to receive electricity by
communication, or, as it is commonly called, to be electri^ed, touches another
non-electric, or even if it is very near it; the electricity, received by the
first, will be communicated to the second; and if there be more than two, to
the third; and so on. And if this line of non-electrics reaches to the ground,
all the electricity received will go away into the earth; and none of the
non-electrics will be electri^ed at all. But if any number of non-electrics
touching, or very near, one another, be terminated on all sides by electri^s,
they may then receive and retain electricity for some time. For the electric
supporters, being incapable of receiving this communicated electricity, stop
the progress of it, and confine it to the non-electrics. All this will appear
plainer, especially to those who have seen electric experiments, by singling
out a particular instance. Thus, a met^ll^^e tube, such as is commonly used is
electric experiments, and is called a conductor, is a non-electric, and is
incapable of being rendered electrical, by any action immediately upon it. A
glass globe is an electric per se, and may have it is electricity excited by
rubbing it; and if it be very near the non-electric conductor, it will
communicate it is electric virtue to that, provided the conductor be properly
supported. It must be supported by nothing but electri^s per se, such as glass,
wax, rosin, etc* or by lines of silk or hair. Such supporters, as they cannot
receive the virtue from the glass globe, will stop it from running off the
conductor, which by that means bec^mes electri^ed. But if the conductor be not
entirely supported in this manner; if there be the smallest line of
communication, by the intervention of non-electrics, between the conductor and
the earth, although it were but the finest wire, of a (...) thr^^d of hemp or
flax, or any thing that is wet; all the electricity, given by the globe to the
conductor, will run off that way, and be lost in the earth; and the conductor
will show no signs of electricity at all. It is known also, that the air, which
surrounds this earth, is an electric per se; as appears from (...), among other
considerations, that if it were non-electric, it would be impossible for us
ever to electri^e a conductor, or any thing else; unless it were placed in
(...). For in that case, all the virtue, given to the conductor, would run off
by the air; as, in damp weather, it does by the watery vapors floating in the
air, which are non-electric bodies. It was before observed, that electrics
cannot have their share of the electric substance increased or diminished; but
non-electrics may, when duly supported: And the whole effect of abundance of
the electric experiments, that are made in c^urses, is nothing more than this;
that when one non electric is brought within a certain distance, called the
striking distance, of another non-electric, which contains a different
proportion of the electric substance from the former; that which contains the
most will impart so much to that which contains the least, as to make it equal
in both. And the transition of the electric substance, from one of these bodies
to the other, will be attended with a flash and a report; which will be
greater, in proportion as the absolute quantity of the electric matter
accumulated in one of the bodies (...) greater, and as the difference between
the quantities in the bodies imparting and receiving is greater. And much in
the same proportion will the striking distance be greater too.

It is easy now to see, that, though lightning may be accounted for upon these
principles, earthquakes cannot. For clouds, which are collections of watery,
that is, of non-electric vapors, being entirely supported and surrounded by
air, which is an electric per se, are capable of having more or less than their
natural quantity of the electric substance. And therefore, when a cloud,
containing more or less than it is natural quantity of the electric substance,
approaches the earth; or when two clouds, containing unequal quantities of this
substance, approach one another; the consequence will be^ a discharge of
electric substance from that body which contained the most of it, into that
which contained the least, till it becomes equally divided between them; which
discharge will be ^^^ompanied with a flash of lightning and (...) of thunder.
But where is the analogy between this case in the (...), and what may be
supposed to pass in the bowels of the earth, to cause earthquakes? to make out
any thing like an analogy, we must suppose, first, two huge non-electric bodies
under ground, which, for some earthquakes, must be hundreds, if not thousands,
of miles in extent; and secondly, that each of these non-electrics is entirely
supported and surrounded by electri^s per se. The first of these suppositions
has no difficulty in it; because this terraqu^ous globe consists almost wholly
of non-electrics; but where to find such electric supporters for these vast
conductors, as are required in the second, in a point, I humbly conceive,
attended with very great difficulty. And yet, without this, it is impossible
that either of these non-ele^^rics can have more or less than it is own natural
quantity of electric substance. For though we were told of its waving about in
different parties in the earth below, yet there can be no such thing; unless
the 'Divine Direction,' here introduced, should in this case suspend or set
aside the established laws of nature: that is, should act miracul^^sly. But
this will hardly be supposed: (...), to have recourse to miraculous
interpositions of the 'Divine Direction,' is to put an (...) end at once to all
reasoning^ about electricity, or earthquakes, or any other natural phenomenon.
There can therefore, I say, be no such thing as this waving about of the
electric substance in different Parties in the earth below, so long as the
'Divine Direction' continues to operate according to the established laws of
electricity: It being a certain truth, that whatever quantity of this electric
substance is communicated to any non-electric body, it is equally diffused in
an instant throughout the whole of that body. Thus, the virtue of the glass
globe, though applied only to one end of the conductor, is in a moment spread
all over it, and throughout it; and the conductor becomes equally electri^ed in
every part. There can, therefore, be no inequality of electric substance in the
non-electric bodies of which this globe is composed, excepting only in those
which are entirely surrounded by electri^^ per se. Through all the rest of the
globe, the electric substance will be equally and uniformly diffused. Now if we
could even find electric supporters for these vast conductors of a thousand or
two miles in extent, a very great difficulty would still remain, which is, that
this very circumstance of having electric supporters on all sides, without
which no non-electric can have more than it is own natural quantity of electric
substance thrown into it, nor any withdrawn from it, will, in the bowels of the
earth, effectually prevent either of these alterations. The reason of this will
appear plainer, I believe, by a particular instance, than by a long
explanation. Suppose a glass bottle of water to be shut up perfectly tight with
a glass stopple. Here will be a non-electric entirely surrounded with an
electric. If this water had more than it is natural quantity of electric
substance thrown into it, before it was stopped up, the glass covering would
keep it in; or if it had less, the same covering would prevent more from
entering into it out of the neighboring bodies. After the bottle is stopped, the
glass, which now surrounds the water on all sides, by cutting off all
communication between the water within the bottle and other non-^lectrics
without, is an effectual bar in the way of any alteration. No more of the
electric substance can, after this, enter into the bottle, or come out of it.
And thus if, in the bowel^ of the earth, there be a non-electric entirely
surrounded with electri^s, it can have no additional quantity of electric
substance thrown into it, nor any drawn out of it; the electrics, which
surround it, preventing the passage of this electric substance, either from
without, inwards; or from within, outward. And the case will be the same, if
the non-electric be not intir^ly surrounded with electrics. For then, if any
quantity of the electric substance were attempted to be thrown into the
non-electric, it would not remain there, but would instantly spread itself into
the neighboring non-electric bodies; and if any were attempted to be drawn
out, it is place would be immediately supplied out of the neighboring bodies.
Thus it appears, that there can be no unequal distribution of this substance in
the earth; and consequently, by this Gentleman's own confession in p. 20,
'nothing to produce any concu^^ions there.'

For brevity's sake, I have insisted only on this single circumstance of the
nece^^^ty of electric supporters. When this difficulty is cleared up, there ar^
others to be offered.

But the most exceptionable part is yet to come. It is the Postscript in p. 23.
which runs thus.

P. S. The more P^ints of Iron are er^^ted round the Earth, to draw the
Electrical Substance out of the Air; the more the Earth must needs be charged
with-it. And therefore it seems worthy of Consideration* Whether any Part of
the Earth being fuller of this terri^* Substance, may not be more exposed to
more sh^c^ing Earthquakes. In Boston are more e^^cted than any where else in
New England: and Boston seems to be more dreadfully shaken. O! there is no
getting out of the mighty Hand of GOD! If we think to avoid it in the Air, we
cannot in the Earth: Yea it may grow more fatal. When I first read this
Postscript, I was both s^rprised and concerned: -- surprised, to find so many
mistakes in so few lines; and concerned, for the ill effects it would probably
have. For I could see no other effects of it, but that it would fill with
unnecessary terrors (...) minds of many persons, who were not well enough
acquainted with the laws (...) electricity, to discover the mistakes: And that
it would discourage the use of (...) iron-p^ints, which were erecting in Boston
and elsewhere; and which, by the blessing of GOD, might be a means of
p^eventing many of those mischievous and sorrowful accidents, which we have so
often seen to follow upon thunder storms. In order therefore to guard, as much
as I can, against the ill effects just mention^d, I shall now lay open, though
as briefly as possible, the principal of these mistakes.

1. Strictly speaking, it is a mistake to say, that points of iron erected
round the earth draw the electrical substance out of the air. For the air,
being an electric per se, obstinately retains it is own quantity of this
substance* and will not part with it to any other body. They do indeed draw it
out of the clouds in the air; which, being non-electrics, can part with some of
it. But even this they must be said to d^, only in a qualified sense; and not
so universally, as the first words of this P. ^. ^eem to intimate. For

2dly, I appeal to every Reader, whether the idea, most obviously conveyed by
those words, be not this, that these iron points do, by a constant and
perpetual action, keep drawing the electric substance out of the air, and
overcharging the earth with it. Now this is far from being the case. They never
draw it out of the air, or, more properly, out of the clouds in the air, but
when those clouds have more than their due quantity of it, and the earth, less;
and consequently, it is impossible, that they should ever overcharge the earth
with it at all. The only thing they can do is, to restore to the earth it is
just quantity, when it is undercharged. But supposing they did constantly draw
this electric substance out of the air into the earth, yet.

3dly, They could never fill any part of the earth fuller of this terrible
substance; nor consequently expose any one part more than another to more
shocking earthquakes. For how much soever of this terrible substance be
supposed drawn out of the air into any particular part of the earth, it cannot
remain collected there, but will instantly spread itself all around into the
neighboring parts which have less of it, and thus will be restored to an
equality every where.

4thly. I know no reason to think, that ' Boston was more dreadfully shaken'
than other towns. Some of the effects of the earthquakes may have been more
considerable, for their number, there than elsewhere; but the reason of this
is, not that in Boston are more points of iron erected than any where else in
New England,, but that there are more brick houses erected there. For the
effect of a shock is more considerable upon brick-work than upon wood-work. The
reasons of this are obvious; and that it is so in fact, plainly appeared by our
chimnies being every where more shattered than any thing else: Though this was
in part owing to their being the highest parts of buildings.

5thly. I should think, though with the utmost deference to superior
judgments, that the pathetic exclamation, which comes next, might well enough
have been spared. 'O! there is no getting out of the mighty hand of GOD!' For I
cannot believe, that in the whole town of Boston, where so many iron points are
erected, there is so much as one person, who is so weak, so ignorant, so
foolish, or, to say all in one word, so athei^tical, as ever to have
entertained a single thought, that it is possible, by the help of a few yards
of wire, to 'get out of the mighty hand of GOD.'

6thly. The postscript proceeds. 'If we think to avoid it' [the mighty hand of
God] in the Air, we cannot in the Earth: Yea it may grown more fatal. Upon
which I observe, that if the hypothesis in question were right; if earthquakes
were indeed caused by any parts of the earth being fuller of this terrible
substance than they ought to be; it would follow, not that iron points make
'the mighty hand of God grow more fatal', or 'expose those parts to more
shocking earthquakes;' as is here most groundlessly insinuated: But it would
follow, that iron points would be of great and most admirable use, in
preventing earthquakes as well as thunder and lightning. For it must be
observed, that these iron points have, not only a power of drawing electric
substance out of the clouds into the earth, but an equal power of throwing off
this same substance out of the earth into the clouds; which latter power they
exert, as often as the former: according to Mr. FRANKLIN'S observations, to
whom we are indebted for the discovery of both these powers of points. This
latter power the Postscript has entirely overlooked. The truth is: If a cloud
have more than it is due quantity of electric substance, these points will draw
the redundant part of it down into the earth; but if it have less, the points
will throw off enough out of the earth into the cloud to supply the deficiency.
If then it were possible for earthquakes to be caused by the earth's being more
charged with electric substance than it should be, and the air's being charged
less; the iron points would stand ready to throw off the superfluous part from
the earth into the upper regions of the air; and thus, by removing the cause of
earthquakes, would take away the effect.

I have now considered what this remarkable Postscript tells us 'seems worthy
of consideration.' I have taken no notice of several other things in this piece
which seem liable to just exception; but hope I have fully vindicated the
character of these innocent and injured iron-p^ints; and have showed, that all
apprehen^^ons of danger arising from them are perfectly groundless and
chimerical.

J.W.
Cambridge, December. 20. 1755.
An Additional Article to Note in Page 17.
4. As to the limits of our great shock; I have very lately been informed, that
it was felt at Annapolis-Royal in Nova Scotia; though in a much less degree
than with us. It shook off a few bricks from the tops of some chimni^s; but was
not perceived by vessels upon the water. And a Letter from Halifax, which I
have seen, says, The earthquake, which happened in the west, extended itself to
this place, though scarcely perceivable here. Thus, Halifax seems to have been
very near the N. E. limit.

For the other limit, toward the S. W. my information is, that it was felt on
the eastern side of Ches^peak Bay in Maryland; and not on the western side.

The Reader is desired to read center for centure in p. 25. line 10 from the
bottom; and to excuse any smaller mistakes.


