A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR OF MARYLAND, AND Both
Houses of ASSEMBLY, AT ANNAPOLIS, December 13, 1754.

By JAMES STERLING, A. M. Rector of St. Paul's Parish, in Kent County.

ANNAPOLIS: Printed by Jonas Green, Printer to the Province. MDCCLV.

By the Lower House of Assembly, December 13, 1754. P. M.
Ordered,

THAT Col. William Fitzhugh, Mr. Lloyd Bucbanan, Col. John Henry, Mr. William
Hicks, Mr. Henry Casson, and Capt. Alexander Williamson, do wait upon the
Reverend Mr. James Sterling, and return him the Thanks of the House, for his
Sermon preached this Day before his Excellency the Governor, and both Houses of
Assembly, and request a Copy thereof that it may be Printed.

M. Macnemara, Cl. Lo. Ho.

THE PRAYER.
OMNIPOTENT and Universal Father! Source of Light and Truth! Purify our Minds
from erroneous Prejudices: Eradicate thence every meanly-selfish, and
contracted Notion; and let all thy true Votaries, in this Province especially,
with a well-regulated Zeal, inspired by the Love of our Religion and Country,
combine to stop the Torrents of Profaneness and Infidelity; or, their as
dangerous Opposites, servile Superstition, and all-devouring Bigotry! -- Let
Honesty and Industry, Loyalty and Public Spirit, with a Charity extensive to
our Species, flourish through all Ranks of our Fellow Subjects; while Respect
to our Rulers supreme and subordinate, and Reverence to the Laws, maternal and
provincial, are every where propagated, as the Basis of Peace and Happiness,
private and popular; to the Suppression of predominant Immorality and Vice; and
to the Maintenance of christian and social Virtues!

We farther supplicate Thee, in Behalf of the whole Rice of Mankind; for Those,
who are yet in the Darkness of Nature degenerated, and wander in the Vale and
Shadow of Death; that the Rays of thy glorious Gospel may speedily illuminate
this great Continent, diffuse their Influence to the remotest Regions of the
Globe, and complete our Messiah's Dominion!

Bless and preserve our only rightful, and gracious Monarch, King George; the
Heir Apparent of his Crowns; and the whole Royal Family; and may the British
Scepter be ever swayed in continued Succession, by Patriot Princes of that
illustrious Line! -- Bestow thy Favor and Support to the Lord Proprietary of
this Province; to the King's and his Chief Delegate here; to the whole Council;
and to all the People, collective, or, as now represented, in General Assembly;
and may Protection and Obedience be reciprocal between the Governing and
Governed!

Shed thy Graces and Benediction on the Universities and Seminaries of Learning
and Piety; and may all Persons educated therein, in particular our Missionary
Pastors, by conscientious Assiduity in the Discharge of their holy Function; by
their Life and Doctrine; advance to the utmost the sacred Cause of Truth and
Liberty! -- Under the Umbrage of thy Wings may the purest Part of the Catholic
Church, of which we are Members, be evermore defended! -- And, O preserve, with
our Ecclesiastical, our Civil Constitution, from foreign and intestine Enemies!
-- Assuage their Malice; confound their Devices; hasten their Reformation; we
earnestly beseech thee, without Hatred of their Persons, and with Abborrence
only of their Principles! -- Prosper the Arms of these confederated Colonies
for their mutual and common Safety: Humble in Europe and America the bostile
Aggressors and Disturbers of England's Peace; and animate all her Sons, in the
just, necessary, and self-defensive Expedition, we are now undertaking, to
assert and vindicate her violated Rights. -- Finally, let indissolable Union
heal the Wounds of former Divisions, and render us invincible! -- May there be
no future Contention among us; but as universal Emulation to promote thy Glory,
O GOD, and the Welfare of the Community; and from thy Vengeance on particular,
or national Guilt, Good Lord, deliver us, for the Sake, and through the
Intercession of our Divine Mediator, in whose own sententious Form of Prayer,
we sum up our Petitions and supply their Defects,

Our Father, who art in Heaven, and c.

Epistle to the GALATIANS, Chap. iv. Ver. 18. It is good to be zealously
affected always in a good Thing. --
THERE is no Duty more needful to be strenuously and universally inculcated,
than what any Text concisely, but emphatically, recommends; nor any
Opportunity, wherein I may hope to do it with more Advantage, than what now
solemnly offers itself. --

In discoursing on these memorable Words, I shall, First, explain the true
Purport of them; showing under what Limitations the glorious Virtue, here
enjoined, is to be understood; and at the same Time proving that the Practice
of it, as it springs from laudable Principles, and is managed by a right
Conduct, is truly a religious, as well as civil Duty.

Secondly, I shall demonstrate from some Instances, of Jewish History chiefly,
that in Proportion as this Queen of Virtues was more or less asserted,
cherished, and epidemically diffused, the Rise and Progress, or the Fall and
Declension, of the Hebrew State, and indeed of the most potent Empires and
Commonwealths, and consequently of Arts and Sciences, may be traced and
ascertained.

Thirdly, I shall, as cogently as I can, enfore the Doctrine of this divine
Precept, with a particular Application to my respectable Auditors, not only to
each Individual, interested as a Member of the Society in the Welfare and
Preservation of his Country; but, with all Humility and Deference, to the Three
Branches of it is Legislature; most of whom, I was, at a short Warning,
informed, would previously convene at this sacred Place, to implore the
Blessing of Almighty GOD on their Consultations, for taking the most speedy,
effectual, and salutary Measures to secure the public Peace, Honor, and
Emolument, in this critical Juncture: And this I shall dutifully and
conscientiously endeavor to perform, by urging to you some of the principal
Motives, that ought to influence a Christian, instigate a Commonwealthsman, and
animate a true Briton.

First, I am to set forth the true Purport of the Words of my Text; showing
what the glorious Virtue is, and under what Circumscriptions it is here
enjoined; and proving, as it springs from laudable Principles, and is managed
by a well-tempered Conduct, that the Practice of it is truly a religious, as
well as civil Duty.

It is good to be zealously affected always in a good Thing. -- Which is as
much as to say in Paraphrase, -- It is an indispensable Duty, universally, and,
in course, obligatory on Christian Converts under the Light of the Gospel, as
it was before on all Nations under the mere moral Guidance of Nature, (since it
is absurd and impious to maintain, that the Laws of the Former could ever
supersede or contradict the genuine Dictates of the Latter, which they were
intended to strengthen, and give a higher Sanction to) on all, without
Exception, obligatory; and that too, at all Times, -- To be cordially affected
with a good Thing, in Proportion to the Object exciting this Affection, or the
Exigence requiring it. -- Or, in other Words, -- To apply the Faculties of our
Minds, and the Powers of our Bodies, with the prudential Influence of our
respective Stations and Fortunes, for the Advancement of a good Cause, for
obtaining, by honest Means, honest Ends, whether they regard a local and less
general Welfare in an inferior Degree, or the Utility of the whole Community in
the highest.

So, you see, Zeal, in general, is the grand Virtue here recommended by the
eminent Apostle, not only to the Churches of Galatia, to whom he particularly
addresses this Epistle, but to all Disciples of CHRIST, wheresoever dispersed,
to whom he designed his sacred Writings should be duly and impartially
communicated, in order to be transcribed, and publicly read in their Assemblies
of Worship, for the Benefit of all Ranks of People. Nor did the mighty Saint
Paul think it sufficient barely to act as the Scribe of the Holy Ghost, but he
most remarkably distinguished himself in being on all proper Occasions the
practical and foremost Example of the noble Precept he delivers. No
Difficulties discouraged; no Dangers deterred; no private Avocations diverted
him (as with a generous Conscionsness, but modest Declaration, he informs us),
from the arduous Work of his Ministry; from serving the Cause of his GOD, his
Countrymen, and Mankind. Hence it is, that he so strenuously insists on the
full Exertion of all the adequate Ardour, which a good Cause calls for in
Execution: All the Heroism, which Virtue glowingly suggests, or Christianity
inspires. As the Practice of his Master's Dispensation was very properly styled
a Warfare; what forceful Images, what bold Figures, does he borrow from the
military Art and Roman Discipline, to train up his Pupils by the holy Exercise
for glorious Exploits in the Combats they were destined to; for the various
Lists they were to wrestle in; for fighting against Principalities and Powers;
and the Rulers of the Darkness of this World; against spiritual Wickedness in
high Places? They are commanded to put on the whole Armor of GOD: To gird
their Loins with Truth: To assume the Breast Plate of Righteousness: To stand
firm in the Post of Honor: To invest their Heads with the Helmet of Salvation:
To wield the Sword of the Spirit: And, above all, to defend themselves with the
Shield of Faith, whereby they might quench, or repel, all the fiery Darts of
the Wicked. --

Again, in being obliged to propose himself, as a Pattern to them of Patience
and Fortitude, while he industriously guards against Imputations of Vanity,
with what persuasive, what resistless Eloquence, does this consummate Orator
(scarce less humanly learned, than divinely inspired) insinuate himself into
the Hearts of his Readers, and captivate their Passions, while he convinces
their Understandings? Such was this Instrument of Providence for accomplishing
the most important Enterprises; this Elect of GOD: -- Not arbitrarily so, but
becoming his chosen Vessel from the previous Disposition of a good Heart to
engage in a good Cause at all Adventures: And that he vitally and intimately
felt, what he would proselyte others to, we cannot doubt, when he thus
expresses himself to his Countrymen, proverbially proud of the Origin of their
Nation! "Are you Hebrews? So am I! -- (And, by anticipating the Application of
the subsequent Part of this Sermon, let me too somewhat abruptly say, -- Are
you Englishmen? Are you, my Hearers, Britons? -- You are: All are: So am I! --
And therefore, independent of my sacred Function, I have a natural Claim to
your Attention.) But, to proceed, Are you Israelites, or of the Seed of
Abrabam? So am I! In Labors more abundant: In Stripes above Measure: In
Prisons frequent: In Deaths often: Of the Jews five Times received I forty
Stripes, save one: Thrice was I beaten with Rods: Once was I stoned: Thrice I
suffered Shipwreck: A Night and a Day have I been in the Deep: In Journeying
often: In Perils of Water: In Perils of Robbers: In Perils of mine own
Countrymen: In Perils by the Heathen: In Perils in the City: In Perils in the
Wilderness: In Perils in the Sea: In Perils among false Brethren: In Weariness
and Painfulness: In Watchings often: In Hunger and Thirst: In Fastings often:
In Cold and Nakedness: And (besides those numberless Things, that are without)
that, which comes upon me daily, the Care of all the Churches.

Thus equally from the Doctrine and Example of Saint Paul (without insisting on
many other Scriptural Instances, no less pertinent) we may be sufficiently
assured, that Zeal, rightly understood and well-regulated, is truly a Christian
and Social Virtue; not only speculatively to be assented to by Reason, but
incumbent on the Votaries of CHRIST, to be carried into Act with Alacrity and
Assiduity, as best may serve the meritorious Purposes, which are only
attainable by its Assistance. -- The Phrase indeed, to be zealously affected,
however obvious to all candid and ordinary Understandings, is often liable to
be abused, and grossly misapplied by rash and precipitate Men. It means no more
than an intense Bent of Mind and vigorous Attachment to whatever we are engaged
in, or concerned about; and, like all other Passions, such as Love, Anger, and
the like, may be laudable or culpable; equally productive of the noblest Ends,
or most ruinous Consequences, according as it is kept within due Bounds, or
permitted to swell to Excess; and its intrinsic Goodness or Badness must be
determined by its Motive, Object, and Degree. Thus the Violence of this very
Saint Paul for persecuting the Church of CHRIST, before his Conversion, is
called Zeal: The same Word which he uses, for the Virtue he so highly commends
in my Text; where he takes Care (as the Mark and Criterion of Distinction) to
direct the Regulation of our Zeal, by confining it to be employed always in a
good Thing; for then only itself can be always good. It nearly behooves us then,
that our Zeal be occupy'd rightly; otherwise it degenerates into wild Folly,
Madness and Sin; and the more we are transported by it, the more Guilt we shall
contract. To be zealous for the Honor of GOD, for the Interest and Propagation
of our holy Religion; for the Benefit of our Species, or the Prosperity of our
Country, is no Doubt, of all other Things, most praiseworthy; though even in
these Cases our Zeal may be misguided and sadly perverted, and so lose all its
Value and Reward. -- But, on the other Hand, Luke-warmness and Indifference
therein, is certainly most base and unmanly in the Sense of Nature, and, from
various Authorities in the Word of GOD, most degrading and sinful. Thou shall
love the Lord, thy GOD, with thine Heart, with all thy Mind, with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Strength: And thy Neighbor (in which general Word our Country
is mainly included) as thy self, is declared by our Savior to be the Essence
and Sum of Religion, and to comprehend the whole of the Law and the Prophets.
-- That is, -- All divine, social, and moral Duties, perfective of our Natures,
and preparative to our Happiness. And here it is remarkable, how emphatically,
and with what repetitious Enforcements our Lord urges a well-grounded Zeal;
excluding from it, lest his Meaning should be conveyed in too feeble a manner,
all Coldness, Listlessness and vile Mediocrity. Indeed in all his Actions, in
all his private Documents, and public Sermons, in his Life, and in his Death,
he displays, with an Energy becoming the Captain of our Salvation, his
Approbation, beyond all others, of this Virtue, soaring to all the warrantable
and rational Degrees, to which it may be exalted. Nay, he exhibits it as the
Test and Characteristic of his faithful Militants, his noble Army of veteran
Martyrs and Confessors; and, we know, a Diffusion of this generous Principle
among them, rendered them more than Conquerers in the midst of Flames; till,
triumphant over ten bloody Persecutions of merciless Tyrants, they subdued all
the Rage and Fury of Fiends and Men; of spiritual and incarnate Demons,
associated against them.

Again, says our Redeemer, deterring us from an Abatement of true Zeal: He,
that loves Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, Wife or Children, more than me,
is not worthy to be my Disciple: And we may easily conceive, by attending to
the true Import of these Words, that he means not hereby to destroy the Ties of
these sacred Relationships, or in the least to relax, or weaken them, when he
elsewhere takes all Occasions tenderly to strengthen them, both as natural and
positive Duties; but that, when any Concernments of an inferior Kind happen to
come in Competition with those of a superior Importance, so as that an absolute
Adherence to the former cannot be maintained, without Renouncing the latter,
then the higher Obligation must take Place, and indispensably claims our
Preserence. Thus a well-regulated Zeal, without more ado, will dictate to us,
that the Glory of our universal Father, who is in Heaven, must be nearer our
Hearts, than our Affections to our earthly Parents, who are but his
Instruments, and secondary Agents for our Being. Thus all, who enjoy the
various Benefits and Protection of the Laws of a Society are strictly and
fundamentally bound to a primary Regard for its Health and Safety beyond lesser
Considerations, personal Views, smaller Alliances, and the like: And if we
would deserve for our Zeal to be styled, like David, Men after GOD's own Heart,
our Love to the Community must surmount these, even as much as the Whole is
greater than a small Quantity of its Parts, or a Species of People more
numerous than a few of its Individuals.

Thus then the Flame of our Incense is never pure and acceptable, or sends
forth a sweet Savor, but when it burns brightly, and unadulterated with
smouldering Smoke; which a faint Heat, or Lukewarmness, chiefly Occasions. Its
Fuel too must be lasting and permanent; not apt to blaze out too fiercely, and
after a transient Violence expire, like Thorns under a Pot, as the Psalmist
expresses it. In short, we must use the most prudential Caution to steer in the
golden Medium between the Extremes of intemperate Fury, in a good Cause, and an
almost creeping, grovelling, and sordid Insensibility, on the other. While a
Bigot in every light is odious; a mere moderate Lover of his Country
(especially when Danger threatens it ever so remotely, and much more when it
nearly approaches), is a most detestable and ridiculous Monster. If we would
escape the Imputation of the former, we should meditate on the Words of St.
Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans: I hear them Record, that they have a Zeal
for GOD, but not according to Knowledge. Or if we would not be stigmatized for
being as despicable as the latter, let us animadvert on what the Angel in the
Revelations commands St. John to write to the Churches of Laodicea. -- I know
thy Works, that thou art neither cold, nor hot: I would that thou were either
cold, or hot: So then because thou art lakewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I
will spue thee out of my Mouth.

We live, alas! in an Age, when true public Spirit (by which I understand the
most elevated Species of the Zeal here proved a Christian Duty), is very
languid and defective; where too often, a Spirit of Faction, the very Reverse
of it, usurps its Place, and arrogates with loud and awkward Insolence its
sacred Form; but the specious Mask may be easily stripped off, and its native
Deformity detected by a little more than ordinary Inspection into its
blustering Pretenses and Ends of Action; which will be all found in a little
Time to spring from, or center in, some low, mercenary, and contracted View. We
too frequently observe it invidiously obstructing the Wheels of Government, and
embroiling a State, where it is not admitted to an immediate Participation of
Power: Industriously watchful to detect and aggravate little Errors in an
Administration, for the Gratification of private Spleen and Revenge; employing
its clamourous Rhetoric to render itself of Consequence; and pertinaciously
maintaining its Importance, by instilling Jealousies, somenting Discontents,
and attracting popular Applause from the giddy Vulgar, great and small, with
strong Passions and weak Brains. But all this argues a Disingenuity, and
Infirmity of Mind, and is no more to be compared to public Spirit, than the
unnatural Tumors in a dropsical Person, to the just Proportions of a sound and
healthful Body.

In fine, while I really think there is more Danger to be apprehended from a
shameful Deficiency in this all-animating Principle, than from its Excels and
Redundancy, I won'd have every true Patriot fix its proper Boundaries in Reason
and Conscience, and distinguish the sierce, unbridled, bloody, and
enthusiastical Zeal of a thorough-pac'd Republican and desperate Regicide; of
an Ireton and a Bradshaw, from the inflexibly honest, wise, and disciplined
Ardour of a Hamden; equally employing his Tongue in the Senate, and his Sword
in the Field, in Defense of his Country's unalienable Rights: Of Liberty
invaded: -- Social Liberty! Mankind's original and universal Charter from
Heaven! -- Hamden, -- I say; almost singly at first stemming the Torrent of
Royal Encroachments and Ministerial Oppression; who, living, stood the Bulwark
of the State; and, dying, fell the Emulation of Heroes! An Example, alone
sufficient to rouse undegenerated Britons in any Time of public Distress
(whether foreign or civil) into somewhat more than ancient Romans; as much
more, as our Constitution in State is preferable in all Respects to their
boasted Republic; and our Protestant Christianity to the (almost-similar)
Idolatry of old, or modern Rome!

Though much remains to be still spoken to on this Head, yet left an
intelligent Audience might think a farther Enlargement too great an Invasion of
their Time, I shall proceed to the next:

And show, in the second Place, from some glaring Instances of ancient Jewish
History chiefly, that in Proportion, as this Sovereign of social Virtues,
public Spirit, or in other Words, the Love of our Country, was more or less
asserted, cherished, and epidemically diffused, the Rise and Progress, or the
Fall and Declension of the Hebrew State, and indeed of the most potent
Commonwealths and Empires, Greek and Roman, and consequently of Arts and
Sciences, may be traced and ascertained.

After the Expulsion of the impious and idolatrous Nations, and the Settlement
of the Jews in the promised Land, purchased by a memorable Series of glorious
Victories under their mighty Leader Joshua; how soon did they sink into torpid
Indolence, and were lulled into a base Security and false Confidence, by the
bewitching Charms of the Sirens, Peace and Plenty; supporting themselves rather
by the Terror of their Name, than by any intrinsic Principle of national
Stength, or external Preparation? How soon did they forget the last, the dying,
Instructions of their great Lawgiver under GOD, Moses, manfully to defend the
Country, which they owed to the Indulgence of Providence; that goodly Country,
flowing with Milk and Honey; yet, take Notice, inferior in Situation and
Fertility, (and, all Things considered, in Climate too), to that, which we, of
this delightful Province, from the same all bountiful Hand, now possess? How
were they prepared to be sent back to their Egyptian Taskmasters; to servile
Drudgery; to be Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, to groan out their
beastial Lives under the Tyranny of a Pharaoh, (the true Antitype of the most
Christian King, the most despotical, persecuting French Grand Monarch) to be
driven, by their Overseers, like our restive Negro-Slaves, to make Brick
without Straw, to erect a Pyramid, or a Versailles, an eternal Monument of
their own Subjection, and their Tyrant's Vainglory? -- How quickly did their
brutal Appetites yearn after their precarious Meals of sodden Fleshpots; for
the edible Gods of their Masters; and the Gods of their own Bellies; even
Lentils, Leeks and Onions; which despicably and ingratefully they murmured for,
in Preference to Manna or Quails; to Liberty and the Bread of Heaven! How soon
by deviating from the Maxims, on which only their conditional Establishment was
to be confirmed, did they fall under the galling and alternate Yoke of every
neighboring Heathen Nation, adopting the Manners, and in Part the Religion of
their corrupted and corrupting Conquerors; as we read in the Book of Judges;
all the Chapters of which are only brief Annals of their Infatuation and
Subjection; or of their Repentance and miraculous Deliverance under
Heaven-rais'd Generals, or occasionally-selected Chieftains, according to their
several Emergencies and Distresses. -- Every now and then, such a Leader was
indeed requisite! Such, as the Inhabitants of this Province have Reason to
felicitate themselves upon, in his gracious Majesty's paternal Choice, or
Approbation of our Governor, to conduct, either singly, or in Conjunction with
other Commanders, our own, and the Forces of the contiguous Colonies, in
Association, on a concerted Expedition in our present Exigency, against the
enterprising Foes of Europe's, America's, and the World's Repose; if he be
enabled by the present (I hope and believe Patriot) Assembly to prosecute the
Royal Orders, and his own generous Purpose. -- A Gentleman, who (without a vain
Compliment in the awful House of GOD) has a real Right to a high Esteem from
you, both on Account of his Station and personal Merit; and whom it is the Duty
of us all to regard, as not deriving his Preferments from Court-Interest, but
as thus distinguished for known Loyalty, and military Experience, which we
cannot doubt, but he will now exert to the utmost, if an ill-timed Parsimony
does not starve his Cause, and petty Dissentions and Avocations from the grand
Concernment, do not interpose to check his Designs, and prevent what his cool
Deliberation, and natural Ardour, give us most rational Hopes he will have a
main Hand in accomplishing: The principal Merit and Glory of which, will
redound to this Province, and more and more recommend its important Interests
to the Mother-Nation, so intimately blended with her own; if our Contributions
for the common Service be more cheerfully given, or more speedily raised, than
those of our Neighboring Governments. --

But, again, if we consider the Israelitish Nation under their Kings, (whose
Government they perversely preser'd to an Hierarchy under the King of Kings) to
what can we impute the Train and Vicissitude of Calamities, they by Intervals
groaned under, but to a stupid Dormancy, or Decay of this virtuous Zeal in
themselves, or their Monarchs? To this dire Source their Prophets unanimously
ascribe the Decadence of their State, and the various Judgments of GOD.
Whenever any Degree of public Spirit revived, as in the Reigns of David and
Solomon most remarkably, and afterward in those of Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, and
a few Others; how did they attract the divine Favor, to the Confusion of their
haughty Enemies? How did the Almighty Arm interpose to save them in the Crisis
of complicated Perils? The Almighty Arm, indeed; though not without their own
Efforts! (For, they have a wrong Notion of the usual Conduct of Providence in
sublunary Affairs, who absurdly suppose, that it never uses, or concurs with
human Abilities, Dispositions, and Improvements, as Instruments to work it is
Purposes!) How prodigiously did useful Arts then flourish: Witness that
stupendous Structure, their glorious Temple, so magnificent, so richly
ornamented, as would tire Description? How must smiling Commerce have been
extended, not only by the numerous Caravans that passed by them to Egypt,
Mesopotamia, Assyria, Persia, and the farthest Arabia, but by Means of the much
envied Ports of Eloth and Eziongeber on the Red Sea, the great Marts for the
Treasures of Ophir, and all the rich Commodities of the East Indies; which drew
such a Mass of Wealth on this People, while industrious and ancorrupted, (that
is, while influenced by public Spirit) that Silver once abounded so as to be
accounted but as the Stones of the Street for it is Plenty; and Gold, Jewels,
Spices, Balsams, Perfumes, and invaluable medical Druggs, were transmitted
either by themselves from their principal Sea-Town Joppa, or more probably in
the Bottomry of Phenician Merchants, through all the Coast of the
Mediterranean, to the Straits of Gades, and the Western Ocean; and we have good
Grounds to conjecture that this originally opened, or vastly assisted that
immense Trade, by which the Sidonians and Tyrians were so early enriched and
renowned; and by which their ever-famous Colony of Carthage rose from the
meanest Beginnings to the sublimest Pitch of earthly Grandeur, so as to contend
for a long Time, and in the most bloody and consumptive Wars, with the Romans
themselves, their only Rivals for the Empire of the then known World. By
listening to the noble Dictates of this vitally active Principle, how did all
temporal Blessings, as it were in course, accrue to Judea; and how did that
minute Spot of the Globe, not half so large as Maryland, nor attended, as I
hinted, with so many natural Advantages, raise and support such countless
Myriads of People, as scarce any History, without the Sanction of Inspiration,
could persuade our Belief of? Wonderful as this seems, it is to be accounted
for from what I have laid down, as it is Foundation; even, from selfish
Attachments to public Interests; (for self and social, if justly stated, will
be found to be but the same Thing in the End, or concentering in one Point) by
strictly adhering to their Laws; by loving their civil and ecclesiastical
Polity; by a firm Union among themselves; by a due Submission to executive
Authority; by an honest and vigilant Jealousy of the ambitious Designs of
turbulent Neighbors to disturb their Property, or distress their Trade; by a
firm Resolution to repel violent Invasions, and retaliate national Injuries; by
manuring and cultivating every Inch of their narrow Territory, even the most
barren Parts, Hills, stoney Valleys and sandy Plains, to the last Possibility
of Perfectica; (the apparent Vestigies of which Industry cannot escape a
curious Traveller, as Doctor Maundrel assures us at this Day, in it is desolate
and miserable Condition) by judicionsly considering the Genius of each
particular Soil; and by planting, or sowing therein, whatever was most adapted
to it is natural, or reclaimed State; by encouraging Artificers of all Sorts,
and employing their laborious Poor in various Manufactures; and by opening
their Hearts and Purses liberally, and by lending their Hands readily and
without murmuring, to aid the Community on all Occasions, to chastise the
incursive Heathen, and fight the Battles of the Lard.

If you should want further Conviction of this; modern Holland will show you,
how by pursuing such Measures, (confider'd only in a political Light) their
seven diminutive Provinces, not much bigger than seven of our Counties,
withstood the whole Monarchy of Spain, (then in her Altitude of Power, and
assisted with the Wealth of both Indies by the Conquest of Portugal)
dissipating her Landforces, and Sea-Armadas, and rendering itself independent
of Inquisitions and Tyrants, by incredible Efforts in Trade and Arms at the
same Time; till from being the most Distressed States (as they called
themselves in our renowned Queen Elisabeth's Days) they rose almost
instantaneously, like Meteors in Clouds and Storms, to the pompous Denomination
of High and Mighty; the Monopolizers of Commerce; the Controullers of Kings;
and the Arbiters of Europe.

A free and mercantile People, who hear all this, must be covered with Blushes,
or glow with Emulation at the first Recital!

On the other Hand, what caused the general Contempt, frequent Captivities, and
almost utter Excision of this devoted People, the Jews, but being deaf to the
reiterated Advice, Threats, and Warnings of their several Prophets: In stupidly
dividing the incommunicable Honors and Worship of Jebovah with the Calves of
Jeroboam (who seduced ten whole Tribes to a final Revolt at once;) in bowing
the Knee alternately to Baal, or Rimnon, or Dagon, or Ashtoroth, or Isis; and
the Rabble of Gods and Goddesses of their Ethnic Neighbors; perhaps as
numerous, and as much adored, as those we find Sainted, and more than
Half-Deisy'd, in the long Muster-Roll of a Popish Calendar; in letting Zeal
stagnate by Inaction; or sink into enervate Languer by relaxing the only Sinews
of Power and Greatness; by a total Depravation of Manners: And in adopting
Schemes diametrically opposite to general Felicity; while they ridiculously
imagined, that the particular Prosperity of Families, or a narrowly-divided and
partial Happiness might continue in a weak and tottering Kingdom.

It Is true that after the Return of a Remnant of them from their Seventy-Year's
Thraldom in Babylon, they cannot be justly chargeable with a similar ill
Conduct; and by smarting so long and so severely for their Apostasy, they can
be no more accused of the least Proneness to Idolatry; and the brave and
memorable Struggles they made under the heroic Race of the Maccabees against
the Syro-Macedonian Tyrants, in Vindication of their Religion and Liberty, are
highly commendable; and they were accordingly rewarded for it; for, by this
Means only their Temple and civil Polity were fully restored: They emerg'd for
a while, and had some Appearance again of being GOD's select People. -- But how
soon did they grow wanton, like the stall-fed Ox fit for Slaughter, by
battening in Peace, Opulence and Luxury? How soon did they relapse, though not
into the same, yet into the other equally destructive extreme of popular Folly?
Read but their own Historian well-conversant with those Times, and you will be
abundantly confirmed by what swift Gradations, they paved the Way for
Extirpation, or total Dispersion when they began to change a true Zeal into a
false; when, by admitting Cabals and Faction, into their Sanhedrin and
Councils, they split into various Sects, and exasperated the divided Rabble
into fanatical Phrensy by the magical Nicknames (Sounds, without Ideas) of
Pharisee, Sadducee, Herodian, and the like: For, as to the Meaning and
Distinction of the Terms, the Majority knew no more of them, than many of our
Fellow Subjects lately did what Whig and Jory, High-Church and Low-Church
signisy'd. Their crafty Demogogues and Ringleaders blew the Coals: The inflamed
Populace were set together by the Ears with a Jargon of hard words: The Church
forsooth was in Jeopardy: The Court and Country were alternately in Fault, as
the Tide ebbed or flowed: All Men were alarmed, (Few knew why,) at intestine
Danger, and laughed at foreign; being too eagerly occupy'd in domestic Discords
to be sufficiently watchful against formidable and surrounding Enemies, who
were too wise to neglect the Opportunity these Dissentions gave them of
properly availing themselves thereby.

Thus either by Defect and Omission, or by Abuse and Transgression in Degree of
their Zeal or public Spirit, this Heaven-abandon'd People filled up the Measare
of their Iniquity; and were permitted in their last atrocious Act to crucify
their Messiah. And thus, in the Nature of Things, and without any absolute
Decree of GOD, they were self-doom'd to all the Horrors of civil Butchery, and
Roman Vengeance, with such terrible, and accumulated Circumstances of Fire,
Sword, Pestilence and Famine, as never before afflicted any other Nation, and
does too much Violence on Humanity to hear, or relate. -- This Good however may
be educ'd from their Ill, that a vagabond Residue of them are still preserved
in all Parts of the World to warn those, they live among, if they would escape
their Fate, to avoid those Stages of different Guilt, into which they
desperately plunged themselves at particular Seasons.

It would require a Volume rather than a Sermon, should I make Extracts for
further enforcing the momentous Truth of this Head from profane Records, since
such can be but little necessary, after what I have advanced from the sacred
Oracles.

Let me therefore only cursorily glance at what the greatest Sages of the two
wisest and most renowned Nations, that ever awed and enlightened Mankind, have
delivered as to these Points, Demosthenes and Cicero; Thucidides and Tacitus,
Aristotle and Pliny: In short, the most famous Orators, Historians,
Philosophers and Patriots have evinced that the Greeks and Romans owed all
their Glory in Arts and Arms, not so much to other salutary Institutions of
their original Lawgivers, Lycurgus, Solos, or Numa, as to this one simple
Principle of Public Spirit, or a virtuous and well-tempered Zeal for the Honor
and Welfare of their Country, being infused into and propagated among, all
Ranks of their Subjects, with the utmost Care even from their earliest Insancy.
-- This (notwithstanding some temporary Commotions, which necessarily and
frequent, will arise in free States, as the Excrescencies of Liberty, or from
the Want of absolute Perfection in human Societies) I say, -- Notwithstanding
these, -- This sole Principle rendered them invincible, conser'd on them the
two last of the four great Monarchies foretold by Daniel, and immortalized
their Name. -- Hence the liberal Sciences triumphed, and the Muses exultingly
sung: Hence Apelies touched the Canvas into mimic Life, and Marble seemed to
breathe from the forming Hand of Praxiteles. Hence the Works of Homer, by
exquisitely celebrating the Heroes of Antiquity, in Effect daily created new
Ones, while a Transfusion of their Virtues was felt in the Breast of every
Reader, capable of being warmed by his Sentiments and Numbers. Hence a Curtius
leaped into the opening Gulf; and the Decii devoted themselves. -- Hence a
First Brutus, with an Heart as bright and impervious too, as a Rock of polished
Adamant, asserted the impartial Tribunal of Liberty restored; passed Sentence
of Death on his own Rebel-Sons, and sat with an awful Serenity, till he saw it
executed on the two degenerate Youths. -- A Godlike Act! Nor is an English
Christian Clergyman ashamed to give it from the Pulpit that high Epithet,
though performed by a Heathen. -- A Godlike Act; to show amazed Posterity, how
much the Consul should transcend the Parent; and the Father of his Country rise
above the Father of the Children of his Bowels! -- Thus too the second Brutus,
with a Zeal worthy of the First, bathed his Dagger in the Heart's Blood of a
proud Usurper: A perfidious and overgrown Robber -- A Robber, in spite of the
false Glare and tinsel Splendour that Adulation decked him in; in spite of all
those fine Qualities and happy Endowments of Art and Nature, by which he
excelled the Sons of Men; and which but rendered him more eminently culpable,
when they were perverted into Instruments of overthrowing the Liberties of his
Country, and not made subservient only for it is Preservation and Glory! -- Yes,
-- On this Principle he was justly stabbed in the midst of his servile, and
venal Senate; when no other Resource was left to reinstate the Commonwealth in
it is former Luster of Independency and Freedom. Hence too, -- Lastly, -- the
venerable Elders of a former Senate, but of another Stamp, displayed an Example
of truly Roman Fortitude, that should engage the Attention of the
Representatives of a brave British People, I mean, that of those Conscript
Fathers; who, when their Counsels could no longer assist their bleeding
Country, and their Hands were too feeble through the Infirmities of Age to draw
a Sword in its Defense, resolved to bury themselves in its Ruins rather than
survive it, and with a patient Dignity suffered their Throats to be cut by the
inhuman Gauls (the Predecessors of the present invading, burning, scalping,
persecuting, allmassacreing French) who, like a rushing Torrent under Brennus,
broke into Italy; still, as they advanced, swelling their Numbers with fresh
Accessions of rapacious Barbarians, in every savage Country, through which they
marched. --

But how did these sovereign Republics suffer the Ensigns of Dominion to be
snatched from their Hands, and all their Laurels to be withered? Whence is it,
that they declined so fast from their Meridian Glory; from their Zenith of
boasted Liberty, and set so soon in Obscurity? Why, their own best Authors will
unanimously acknowledge, it was by starting from the Principle, on which they
were founded, and grew into Greatness. 'Twas this paved the Way for Philip's
dangerous Intrigues, and Caesar's Ambition. Athenians, Spartans, Thebans and
Romans were gradually prepared for Slavery, and by abandoning public Spirit,
they became an easy Prey to the nearest Invader at Hand, who had Power and
Address enough to snatch at, and seramble for it. By warping their Passions
from generous Pursuits to ignoble Objects, they became ripe for Shackles; such
as the rampantly mad Macedonian Boy, or a more crasty Roman Triumvir thought
fit to impose upon them: To whose infamous Manes (pardon me, ye Abettors of
passive Obedience; ye Advocates of hereditary, indefeasible, Right in Kings) I
cannot pay any, the least, Incense; and would as soon complement the Eruptions
of a Volcano, the Havoc of a Huricane, the Devourings of a Conflagration, that
laid the Creation waste, as those Scurges of Heaven; those Alexanders the
Great, or those Lewises the Great; whom I regard not as GOD's Vicegerents on
Earth, but as the Toals of penal Vengeance on self-debas'd, and selfinslav'd
Nations, for betraying their Birthrights; for selling them, like Esau for a
Mess of Pottage; for their high Treason against Nature; for their abdicating
the Prerogative, and forfeiting the Dignity and Characteristic of Man! --

But, it is Time; more than Time, to close this Head; and come, as my main
Scope, to the Application of the Whole:

Is it not now and always, good to be zealonsly affected in a good Thing, or
Cause? -- And what Cause can so sensibly affect us, as that of our Country? And
to whom shall we have Recourse for Relief, when it is menaced by hostile
Attempts, as at present, but to the Delegates of the Community and the
Executive Power, with whom the Means of raising the Support, and the Methods of
carrying it into Action are entrusted?

I now address myself with a faithful Boldness, but with duteous Humility and
Respect, to each Brauch of our Provincial Legislature; whom in a private
Capacity, as Gentlemen, Friends, Englishmen, and Fellow Subjects under the best
of Kings (and Best is Greatest in my Opinion) I sincerely love; and whom I
cordially honor, as invested with the supreme Power here over a fine and
flourishing Country, endeared to me by the strongest Gratitude, and every warm,
and tender Motive, that can flow from the conscious Heart of Man.

An important Cause indeed renders the convening of the new Assembly, even at
this rigorous Season of the Year necessary; and its first Session is opened by
a Speech, worthy of his Excellency (whom we are here to consider as the
immediate Substitute of the Throne) for a legal and competent Supply from them
adequate to the urgent Occasion, and the Abilities of their Constituents; in
Order that he may immediately fulfill the expected Purposes (as I said) of the
late Honorable Commission from his Majesty; and uniting our proportioned Quota
of brave Volunteers with those of other Colonies, propitiously begin his March
to repel Force by Force; to punish a flagrant Infringement of the Law of
Nations; to secure the exterior Settlements, as a firm Barrier behind us; and
to vindicate the just and ample Claims of the British Empire; now, on all
Parts, Northward and Westward in our Continent, as well as in our Southern
Islands, nay, in Africa, and in the East Indies too, manifestly insulted, or
audaciously invaded.

It were a Presumption deserving your Indignation and Censure, to dare to point
out to your Wisdoms the Ways and Means, or any expedient needful to be used for
raising the Supply in this pressing Extremity. But surely I keep within my
proper Sphere, while in general Terms I only urge what my sacred Function
exacts from me, as a bounden Duty. I would not found forth an Alarm for
romantic Expeditions in chimerical Perils; but, I confess, I would blew the
Trumpet in Zion rather with some Degree of honest Enthusiasm, than with a
feeble Blast, for kindling public Spirit in real Danger, and prevent, as a
Priest of the sacred Altar, that pure, Guardian, Vestal, Fire from ever being
extinguished among us.

Let me then conjure von to weigh the high Consequence of these noble Colonies,
for your own Sakes, as well as on Account of your Mother Country; who, having
been the powerful Protectress, and careful Nurse of your Insancy, has not
remitted her parental Care, even when you are grown to a State of juvenile
Vigor; and it would be equally ungrateful and shameful not to act in
Conjunction with her other Offspring in your common Defense, but still with
childish Cries call upon her for further Aid, when you are at an Age, more than
qualified to defend yourselves; especially as she is loaded with an Eighty
Million Debt, (besides the vast annual Expenses she is at in maintaining, for
Sovereignty at Sea, a naval Force; and in supporting her other military and
civil Lists) a Debt, contracted for the Protection of her Laws, Liberties, and
Religion, against a Succession of Popish Pretenders to our Crown; and against
their chief Patrons; those very Foes, implacable and inveterate, who now menace
yourselves; and who are pursuing her with their Malice in the remotest Parts of
her Dominions; never letting the Sun set on their Depredations; and wounding
her most sensibly through your Sides.

The first Principle of Nature calls on you, on the one Part, and Gratitude and
Justice on the other, to distinguish yourselves on this Occasion, and rather to
set an Example than to wait for one from your Neighbors, by paying back
cheerfully, in a Mutuality of good Offices, and a generous Retribution, a small
Portion, a Pittance, of what you owe her for your present Subsistence, as well
as your original Existence. Let me tell you, my worthy Countrymen, the Eyes of
your Constituents are now upon you, who as far as my Sphere of Observation
extends, will searce applaud you at your Return to your several Counties for
being unseasonably frugal, or too indulgent to their Pockets against their
Inclinations. They are Britons, and, when not misled by the Tales of designing
Men, such, as will not grudge a Day or two of extraordinary Labor in the Field
to support this Overture for national Benefit. The Eyes of your Sister-Colonies
are upon you, who will be agitated by Shame or Rivalship to take their Measures
from your Pattern. Assume then, the Glory of making your Pattern the
Master-Spring of their Motion! -- The Eyes of your venerable Mother-Nation will
be upon you, who requires and expects, that in Proportion, as her own
inviolable Products, and your Staples of Trade and Intercourse are reciprocally
lucrative, you would imitate her Parliaments in a suitable Conduct, when French
Invasions are threatened; and no longer be amused, like our Commissaries in
Paris, by the futile, and time-spinning Wrangles, or by all the stale Chicanery
of a Treaty-making and Treaty-breaking Race; but crush at a Blow the Crocadile
in the Egg-Shell. -- Nay, Gentlemen, the Argus' Eyes of the very French are
upon you, who, by their various and concealed Emissaries, undisguis'd Jesuits,
pardoned Rebels, and traitorous Malcontents, will have dispatched to them at
Quebec, or even Paris, the Accounts of your Proceedings, with more Speed, than
they can be transmitted home. You should consider, How well acquainted they are
with the defenseless Condition of our various Colonies, and that they are hence
emboldened to undertake these destructive Projects; that, while they are
carrying on a Chain of Forts of incredible Length behind us, almost from the
Tropic to the Polar Circle, from new Orleans and the Bay of Mexico to beyond
that of St. Laurence Northward, and within a trifling Distance of our chief
Places for the Fur-Trade at the Bottom of James's Bay; that while they are ever
and anon edging on us from the West, and striving to confine us to a
comparativelynarrow Slip of Land by hemming us in between the Apalachean Hills
and the Ocean; that while they are laying the Foundations of a Monarchy,
greater than the four ancient Ones together, and extend their enormous
Louisiana in their impudent Maps and hot Imaginations to the very South-Seas,
and perhaps to Japan; that while they are doing, or contriving to do all this,
we lie exposed to their Insults and Depredations, without Fortifications,
Magazines, and warlike Stores, or even a disciplined Militia to defend us
against any sudden Hostility; so that if they were to take it into their Heads
(which they are very capable of doing, even without waiting for a Proclamation
of Was) to make a quick March upon this, or either of the two bordering
Colonies, with but Two Thousand Men of the regular Troops of France, attended
with as many of their Woodrangers and Indian Allies, they would find nothing to
obstruct their Course till the Atlantic Ocean stopped them; but won'd over run
us at once, and with the same Rapidity and Violence that the back Forests
sometimes suffer, when at a general Hunting the Woods are set on Fire by the
Natives. You should consider, that though the Zeal of their House may often eat
them up; -- That though their Zeal, I say, may be too volatile frequently, yet
our's for that very Reason ought never to be too Phlegmatic; that though they
now and then overshoot the Mark by too sanguine Hopes and hasty Aims, yet
generally their Projects are the Result of long and deep Thinking, and laid far
in Futurity, whereas many of us scarce consider even the present Time; in
short, that they first deliberate cooly, and then execute speedily. -- You
should consider how much it is your Duty to have a watchful Eye on all known,
and suspected Enemies of the Government; to prevent the Poison of their salfe
Rumors and secret Caballing from spreading among his Majesty's good Subjects;
and to obstruct as much as possible, by empowering the Magistrates to act with
Vigilance and Vigor, that Intelligence, which the Enemy hourly have of our
Designs, and We rarely of theirs: -- For it is melancholy to think of what I am
well-affur'd, as I am of all other Facts here set down, that they have a high
Way of Information, often traveled through from Albany, and other Places of
ours, to Montreal and the Parts adjacent. Every one of our Governments should
therefore offer Rewards for intercepting and detecting through all their Shapes
and Disguises, those Pretenses that annually stroll down among us from Georges
to Neca-Scotia; for, (to use Joseph's Words to his Brethren in Egypt) These Men
are surely Spies; and by the Life of Pharaoh, to pry into the Nakedness of the
Land de they come. -- You should maturely consider, what Advantages, by your
omitting this Opportunity they will have over you next Summer, when they unite
their Forces to oppose you and maintain their Usurpations; that it is high Time
to raise a sufficient Force to give an immediate and decisive Blow; and that to
receive another Defeat, or feebly to attempt and fail again, would be more
fatal, than to sit still and make no Effort at all. You should consider indeed
what their grand Schemes really are; no less, than to unite, by seizing on the
vast interjacent Regions, their Northern with their Southern Colonies, their
Canada with their Missisippi; to six Garrisons on all the navigable Straits of
the mighty Expanse of Mediterranean fresh water Seas, Ontario, Erie, Huron,
Illinois, and the Superieur Lake; behind which there are others, that probably
communicate both with Hudson's Bay and the Pacific Ocean; as these do with one
another. You should consider that the great Object of their immediate Ambition
is, to obtain a commodious Port on the Atlantic Main; (which their Engineers
would soon take Care to render stronger, as more important, than Louisburg is
now by additional Works, and new Batteries) that, could this be done, it would
be the first step to complete their unbounded Hopes, and that the Places, which
present themselves principally to their Ambition are the River of Hudson, and
the Bay of Chesapeak; that their Designs were only providentially frustrated on
the former by the Dissipation of their formidable Fleet under Duke D'Anville;
by which they intended to have taken and fortified for themselves, our
defenseless Town of New York, at the Mouth of it; while at the same Time a
Land-Army, rendevouzing then near Montreal, was ready to move down by the Lake
of Champlain to surprise our naked Albany toward the Forks of it; and thus all
Communication had been cut off between our Southern and Nothern Colonies for
mutual Defense, and an Asylum opened for Swarms of Papists, Jacobites,
Desperadoes, Convicts, and fugitive Negroes, to have joined them, at the very
Time, when an unnatural Rebellion at home, promoted chiefly by the French, was
gnawing our Vitals, and an expensive War abroad was externally wasting us. --
Had this Hell-concerted and Heavendisappointed Armament succeeded, and a Popish
Pretender been proclaimed as our King, you may better conceive, than I
describe, what direful Scenes of Blood and Horror, Protestants and loyal
Britons had been involved in; nor would any of our Settlements have escaped
some Part of the Storm, though they are extended in Length for full Fifteen
Hundred Miles on the Coast, and contain, by the best Information I can receive,
at least One Million of Inhabitants: I Which, by the Bye, however, doubles the
Number of the French on this Continent, even from their own exaggerating
Accounts, though we reckon in all the Indians nationally blended with them, and
their promiscuous Posterity; now as good Frenchmen and Papists, as themselves,
by their wise Methods of Adoption and Incorporation, which from the Beginning
they never neglected, and we always shamefully despised!] -- You will hence
likewise please to consider, that the Superiority of the French does not
consist in a Continuity of Settlements, like ours: (Being more dispersed in the
vast Wilderness, and corresponding chiefly by Means of Blockhouses, Forts, and
Trading-Places, at stated Distances on the Missisippi, Ohio, and Straits of the
Lakes.) Nor does it consist in Numbers of Men, or Courage; in neither of which,
we know, they are yet comparable to us: But in dextrons Cunning, Ambuscading,
political Intriguing, ready Obedience to civil or military Command, and in a
natural Vivacity and Alertness in Action, they certainly excel us; as they
fatally do in a Knewlege of the Use of Arms; being all from their Boyhood
trained up to it, mustered and disciplined by Veteran and European Officers;
and, above all, in a Consolidation of Interests and Councils, being firmly
united, though so widely scattered, under one Chief in supreme Command, the
Governor-General in Canada: Whereas our Provinces, though so happily located,
are disseminated in Mind; and seldom can be brought to act with Unanimity. --
You are therefore to supply this Defect, by which only despotic Governments
have the Advantage of free States, with all possible Prudence, in your
Negociations and Conjunctions with contiguous Colonies, that we may firmly
associate, without tedious Adjustments of trifling Punctilios, for common
Preservation: But most especially it is now necessary, that a mutual Confidence
be settled with the Cement of fraternal Affection between the Legislative
Powers of this Province; for where this Cornerstone is wanting, we build in
vain; and a manifest Tendency to Anarchy and Confusion ensues. -- If this is
preserved in your Debates, and those of your neighboring Assemblies, no
reasonable Man (humanly speaking) can any more doubt of a happy Issue to our
glorious Undertaking, than of its Expediency and Necessity: -- We are not only
invited, but compelled into it: The Enemy are at our Doors: They are
intrenching, and fortressing in our Borders: They have slaughtered our
Virginian Forces; and driven from their Habitations great Numbers of distressed,
outlying Families, and industrious Adventurers, who might otherwise, by rapid
Progress, advance the British Frontiers and the Christian Religion. They have
intercepted our beneficial Southern Fur-Trade, and by the vilest Artifices
rendered us cheap and suspectable in the Eyes of our allied Indians;
particularly the Five Nations, some Tribes of whom have seceded from their
League, and migrated to themselves; as, if not more powerful Protectors; yet to
be relied on, as more steadfast Friends. They have perverted Multitudes of
honest heathen Clans into christened Demons. Their Rome-imp'd Priests have
refined simple Savages into human Tigers, and to enlarge their Creed have
totally corrupted whatever they knew of Morals before. -- They would now by
Preoccupation, in Order to ground a Right to future, and still-growing Claims,
engross that charming Country, from the Sources of the Ohio to its Conflux with
the Ouabach, which is truly worth fighting for in a righteous Cause, and is
compared for delicious Prospect and Fertility, to the Plains of Milan, the
Garden of Italy, surrounded, and interspersed with celebrated Lakes and Rivers;
if indeed great Things, without being too much degraded, may admit a Comparison
with small; a widely-expanded Landscape with a Pocket-Picture in Miniature;
such a Brook as the Po with the Missisippi; or such little Fishponds as Garda,
and Maggiore with such E^xines and Caspians, as the Waters of the Erie and
Huron.

Gentlemen of both Houses, As you are Guardians of the present Race, and
Trustees of Posterity, stop in Time their Progress, since none know where it
will otherwise End. O stop it in Time! Secure those blissful Regions, as a
Jewel of the greatest Magnitude and Splendour in the British Crown, to be worn
for ever by illustrious Descendants from King George; and to be exhaustless
Reservations for your own Children, when these multiplying Provinces are
overstock'd with People, as they will soon be from their natural Increase only.
Remember the brave Achievements of your Brethren of New England in the late
War: Think, how an Handful of undisciplined Farmers, fresh from the Plow, took
the Bull by the Horns, possessed themselves of their impregnable Cape-Breton,
and, in its Rendition, as an Equivalent for all Flanders, purchased a Peace for
Europe. Think on the native Bravery of your own Inmates; who, among the other
Americans eminently and lately distinguished themselves at Carthagesa; and
convinced the World, that Maryland produced a Race of Heroes from her Forests,
whose Lion-like Fierceness, in the Front of Fire and Death, was only censurable
for its generous Excess. -- Think, that your Troops (if a General of Seniority
is not sent hither from Europe) will have a Chief of their own to lead them to
Conquest; a Father, by his Employment and Inclination; who, by the previous
Measures he has taken, the unwonted Intelligence he has obtained of the Country
and Enemy, and his unwearied Application to the Grand-Concernment in every
Particular, has given us encouraging Omens of Success, and that in his intended
March and Attacks, he will obviate all former Difficulties, prevent future
Miscarriages, and revenge the Blood of our Countrymen, unprofitably shed! -- O
think of all this, and think (I repeat it again) that much Frugality may be
sometimes a Crime, as, in a good Cause, Lukewarmness is always one. Think, that
a moderate Taxation now will be most certainly the greatest Economy, and the
Means of saving very heavy future Expenses, if the Foe by our Neglect should
grow too potent in our Frontiers to be soon or easily ejected! -- I remember
the Time (not many Years ago) when, in this Town, those few Persons, (among
whom, it is known, I was one) who expressed their Apprehensions of French
Attempts to make Settlements, where they since have done it to our Cost, found
their Predictions received with but slender Impressions by many Men in popular
Esteem for Sagacity. An Increase of Arms and Ammunition were then thought
burdensome and useless and Invasions from Utopia, or the Moon, would have been
as soon dreaded; as from the Quarters, whence we are now molested! But let us
avoid all Retrospections in a Matter, that requires universal Amity and
Concord. Let us acquaint ourselves better with French Politics and French
Ambition. The History of every Nation in Europe will show ye, that their
Monarchy has been grasping at supreme Dominion there for near two Centuries;
even at all, their Charlemagne once possessed. Papery, too gross, too
affrontive to common Sense, to be believed by their wise Men, is submitted to
as their main Engine of State; and so would Mabometism, if equally and
essentially subservient to their grand Scheme; as we may well conjecture from
their close Connexions with their best Allies, the Turks; having entered into
an Agreement, as it shon'd seem, to keep the Grand Saignor on the Throne of
Constantine, in Order to share with him, some Time or other, the best Part of
Christendom. Their Perfidy in solemn Treaties is a trite Proverb; and among
themselves they laugh at all those, as incorrigible Dupes, who still continue
to trust or believe them. Their Arrogance carries them so far as to boast that
they can easily make up any Misfortune in War by their skill in the Cabinet, or
at a Congress. The Reason of their Kings is published from the Mouths of their
Cannons; and where their Clergy sail, Dragoons more powerfully convert. What
they are capable of doing this Way, let the terrible Massacre of Paris; and, if
possible, the more horrid Revocation of the Edict of Nantz, inform ye: Not to
dwell on what you know from every Gazette, their present Barbarities to their
own Countrymen and Fellow Subjects in Languedoc; nor on their hellish Crusadoes
of Yore against the miserable Albigenses, chiefly for not believing, that a Bit
of Bread, to be chewed, devoured, and digested by a Rat or a Mouse, as well as
themselves could not be transubstantiated by the mumbled Words of a priestly
Conjuror into the Flesh of GOD! -- Yes, these are they, who, being setter'd
themselves, would bring you under the same Yoke, and like the Rival of their
Pride and Ambition, the Devil, envy you that Happiness, (a standing Reproach to
Fiends and Slaves!) from which they are for ever excluded! These, Gentlemen,
are the Foes you are to engage with; the emigrant Successors of those, whom
your heroic Predecessors so often vanquished, plucking the Plume of Triumph
from their Crests; and whose Capital Kingdom they more than once over run from
Dan to Beersheba! Turn over the Pages of your shining Annals, and while you
read of what has been done in the Fields of Cressy, Poictiers, Agencourt and
Blenheim, tell your bounding Hearts the same Blood enriches your own Veins, and
ensures approaching Victory! Ye Sons of the Reformation, confirmed by the Death
of so many bright Martyrs, guard your holy Religion from Papal Persecution,
Idolatry, Irish Massacres, Gun-Powder-Treasons, and worse than Smithfield
Fires! -- Protect your Estates, your Laws, your Liberties, Ye Assertors of the
glorious Revolution, from foreign Tyranny, though menaced only at the greatest
Distance. -- Yet, -- GOD forbid, that you should use any Unchristian Methods
even for compassing these good Ends; or should conceive those nefarious Means
warrantable in the Service of the best Cause, which our subtle Adversaries make
no Scruple (...) Maintenance of the worst! Whatever (...) their Conduct,
especially in their (...) us not disdain to imitate. Let (...) Serpents, but
innocent as real Doves. Let the very Sounds of France and Rome, swell your
Indignation, but not diminish your Charity! -- Internal Sisters! That stalk
Hand in Hand together, blasting alike the moral and natural Creation; spreading
a twofold Pestilence around! Detestable Religion; which only the most
outrageous Tyranny can sustain! -- Abominable Tyranny; which can only be
mutually supported by Doctrines, shocking even to unprejudiced Canibals!

Under the public Provocations, which some virulent Papists, perhaps encouraged
by the Proximity of the French, have lately given, though condemned by their
less sanguine, and more discreet Partisans, I do not wonder that we are
generally, because justly alarmed: But I could wish, that the sole Object of
the present short Session should be the necessary Supply for hastening the
Expedition, which ought not to be retarded by any other Avocation; for what is
truly expedient may be sometimes unseasonable, if it may be safely postpon'd to
a succeeding Opportunity of more deliberate Enquiry. Then without Cruelty to
their Persons, or overstraining the Laws, let us muzzle the Bear, or out off
the Tyger's Fangs, and take all speedy, Parliamentary, and Christian Methods
for Self-Security. I am satisfied there are some Roman Catholic Gentlemen of
Fortune and Family, both here and in England, who do not swallow implicitly all
the Impositions of that Church, though they hold external Communion with it;
and the Jesuits, with whom the Mission of these Parts is solely entrusted, are
too wisely indulgent not to come to a Sort of Composition with Men of Sense in
those Points, which they know how to slur over; and are ashamed to defend, what
they cannot believe themselves, except to the Vulgar. Such Persons, though they
might in general relish an established French Religion, are not so far gone in
Madness as to wish to live under a French Government. -- However this be, it is
an Article of my Creed as firmly believed as any other, that all Men have a
natural Right to remain unmolested for Opinions, merely conscientious, however
absurd in themselves, or discordant with mine; but when these apparently tend
to the Destruction of the State, and their Toleration becomes incompatible with
it is Safety; then it is incumbent on the civil Establishment, by the same
Sanction of Nature, either totally to suppress them, or keep them under such
Restrictions of penal or preventive Statutes, as may be judged sufficient for
our present and suture Security.

But lest I exhaust that Patience, I have, I sear, too long tried, I shall
conclude all, with once more imploring you most pathetically to reflect, that
you are Britons! A Term, that should comprehend, in it is true Desinition, every
Social, every Christian Virtue; and exclude from it is Idea all narrow Notions,
merely local Views, and mean-spirited Images. -- All, who live under the
Umbrage of old England's Laws: All, who are ready to the last Gasp, and to the
last Farthing to defend the Acquisitions of their Ancestors Industry and Virtue
in the European and American Empires of our common King; with their Lives and
Fortunes, I say: These, all these, give the only intallible Proof of their
Right of Denizenship, and are true Brethren, and the legal Sons and Coheirs of
their General Mother; while all they, who would unhinge her excellent
Appointments in Church or State, betray her Rights, or even supinely behold her
Dangers, are not only Parricides, but Aliens too, though born in the Midst of
her great Metropolis.

O then, as you would deserve that glorious Appellation; as you are intimately
concerned in the Consequences of the momentous Event, that has summoned you now
extraordinarily; as you are under the more peculiar Obligations of Honor,
Trust, and Conscience, to promote the Happiness of the Community; of which you
are not bare Members, but Rulers and Patrons: As you will answer it to your
GOD; your King; your Young and Noble Proprietary; and your own Constituents: O
permit not the Zeal of a true Public Spirit to cool in your Breasts; but on
this, and all other, worthy Occasions, improve it in yourselves; kindle,
increase it in others; and transmit the hallowed Principle to your Children's
Children; to latest Posterity; till only the Day of Judgment and the Kingdom of
CHRIST put a Period to the British Dominion in our New World; or till Time
shall be lost in Eternity! And, For this you will be attended with public
Prayers and Blessings upon Earth, as Universal Benefactors; and shine in
distinguishable Glory hereafter, even as the Stars of Light in the Firmament of
Heaven, for ever and ever! -- Amen! --

FINIS.

