A SERMON ON THE ACCURSED THING That hinders Success and Victory in WAR,
Occasioned by the Defeat of the Hon. EDWARD BRADDOCK, Esquire General of all the
English Forces in North America, who was mortally wounded in an Engagement with
the French and Indians, near Fort Du Quesne, and died of his Wounds the third
Day after the Battle; which was fought July 9. 1755.

Published at the Request of the HEARERS.

By WILLIAM VINAL, A. M. Pastor of the First CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH in
RHODE ISLAND.

ROM viii.31. If GOD be for us, who can be against us?

PSA. lx. ult. Give us Help from Trouble; for vain is the Help of Man. Through
GOD shall we do valiantly: For he it is that shall tread down our Enemies.

NEWPORT: Printed by JAMES FRANKLIN, at the Printing-Office at the
Town-School-House, 1755.

JOSHUA vii.13. Up, sanctify the People, and (...) sanctify yourselves against
Tomorrow: For thus says the LORD GOD of Israel. There is an accursed Thing in
the Midst of thee, O Israel: Thou can not stand before thine Enemies, until
ye take away the accursed Thing from among you.


IN this Chapter, we have an Account of Joshua's sending Spies to the Country
of A^, with the Report they made at their Return: -- The Number of Men he sent
to destroy that petty Kingdom: -- That they fled before their Enemies, and some
of them were slain.

We are in the next Place informed of the Behavior of Joshua, and the Elders
of Israel, upon this Occasion: They humbled themselves before God, 6 ver. For
the Heart of all the People (...) and became as Water, upon their hearing the
News; and Joshua himself was greatly alarmed. -- But the same Day at Evening
they had an Answer from God, in which Joshua was directed what Method to take,
in order to find out the guilty Person, who had, by his Theft, procured the
Defeat, -- The Kind and Degree of his Punishment was likewise specified by the
Divine Oracle at the same Time; which was executed the next Day, in the Manner
prescribed, after he had been detected and convicted, 24, 25 ver. And they
raised a great Heap of Stones over him, as a Monument of God's righteous
Displeasure and Severity against Sins of such a public Scandal and general
Mischief to the Community, and as a Warning to all others.

And this was wisely ordered by God in the Beginning of their new Empire and
Settlement in the promised Land, to prevent the Death of great Numbers, that
took Warning by this awful Example; who, if not restrained by the Fear and Love
of God, from such detestable and destructive Practices, yet, would be, by the
Fear of Punishment, and the Love of their own, and their dear Childrens Lives.

I shall wave a particular and critical Survey of the Context, which would take
up much Time to little Purpose, and proceed to the Text; in which it may be
noted, That God speaks to Joshua with great Solemnity, and Indications of high
Displeasure: Up, sanctify the People, and say, Sanctify yourselves -- "Rise
from your Prostration -- Attend the Duty incumbent on you -- Put the People
upon making suitable Preparation to appear before God -- Summon them to be
ready against Tomorrow, and bid them see that they have no ceremonial
Pollution upon them, but purify yourselves from whatever is contrary to the Law
in this Case, that I may point out, before the whole Congregation, the Person
that has committed the accursed Fact; and that you may all see his most awful
and exemplary Punishment. -- Purify yourselves, for the whole Congregation is,
in some Respect, polluted by this detestable Thing."

The latter Part of the Text contains a Declaration of the Reason, why the Army
that was sent out could not stand, and the Necessity of their removing the
Cause, in order to their being able, for the future, to stand before, and
subdue their Enemies: Thus says the Lord of Hosts, There is an accursed Thing
in the Midst of thee, O Israel: Thou can not stand before thine Enemies,
until ye take away the accursed Thing from among you. The Sin of Achan,
considered in all its Circumstances, had put the whole People of Israel out of
the Divine Protection, and was the Cause of God's withdrawing from them that
Spirit of Courage and Resolution, which are necessary in War. When that is
withheld, no Warriors, though their natural Courage and acquired Skill be ever so
great, can stand before the most contemptible Foe; especially when it is on the
Account of the Violation of their Covenant-Engagements; which was then the Case
of the Israelites.

I shall now attempt, by Divine Assistance, to offer something agreeable to the
Subject, under the following general Heads.

I. When God's professing People go forth to war against their Enemies, they
should be very careful to put away from among them, all their Sins; especially
that, which is emphatically, The accursed Thing in the Midst of them. II. In
order to this, a diligent Inquiry ought to be made, to find out what it is.
III. The Reason assigned for this Duty is, That unless it be taken away, they
cannot stand before their Enemies in the Day of Battle. IV. A particular
Application shall conclude the Subject.
I. When God's professing People go forth to war against their Enemies, they
should be very careful to put away from among them all their Sins; especially
that, which is emphatically, The Accursed Thing in the Midst of them.

That this Duty is more especially incumbent on those who are favored with the
Light of the Gospel, I need not attempt to prove to a Christian Auditory. And
that God's peculiar People are often obliged, by the ill Treatment of some of
their fellow Men, to go to war with them in a Way of Self-defence (which is a
Duty they owe to Him, as the Author of their Being) is evident from undeniable
Facts: Otherwise they would be driven out of the World by Violence; not called
out by the ordinary Way of Providence; or be forced to drag out the most
miserable Lives, in the most abject Slavery, without tasting the Sweetness of
Liberty, which is common to the Human Species. And that defensive War is
frequently necessary as well as lawful, and offensive War sometimes so, is
conspicuous, not only from the Oracles of Truth, but even from the Principles
of Nature in its degenerate State. In the Old Testament, we have diverse
Accounts of its being undertaken and engaged in, by the special Appointment and
Command of the Lord of Hosts. Nor is it any where forbidden in the New
Testament, either by Christ, the Prince of Peace, who constituted and presided
over the legal, as well as the evangelical Dispensation, or by his Apostles;
but is implicitly approved of by them: Which it would not have been, if it had
been contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel, but would have been forbidden by
them.

This being so evident, I shall not attempt a Vindication of it against
Sophisters and Bigots; especially as this interesting, though in itself,
unpleasant Subject, has, of late Years, been set in the most convincing Light
by the clearest Pens See Mr. Tennent's and Mr. Smith's Sermons (of
Philadelphia) on the Subject. And Mr. William Currie's Vindication of the
Lawfulness of defensive War; printed in Philadelphia.
.

Having premised these Things, we come to the Point, which is, That when the
Lord's People go to war, they ought to put away all their Sins, especially that
which is the Accursed Thing. The Obligation is general and binding upon all
Persons, at all Times, in all Circumstances, more especially when under the
Rebukes and Frowns of Providence for their Sins, as they are in a Time of War.
This Dispensation is a solemn Call to the Practice of the Duty, which ought to
be religiously observed, especially when there is any Thing particularly
specified, as there was in the Case of the Jews at their Entrance into the Land
of Canaan. The revealed Will of God is the only Rule of our Conduct, and his
Authority the Reason of our Compliance.

Now, by the Accursed Thing, we are to understand the Person of A^^an, together
with his stolen Goods, as in 12 ver. And his taking these was Sacrilege,
because consecrated to the Lord* Josh. 6 19.

But if it be demanded, What we, at this Day, are to understand by the Accursed
Thing? How it may be taken away? And who shall undertake the difficult Task?

The Answer to the first of these Inquiries is, That we are to understand Sin
in general, especially that which is open and public; or those Sins which are
openly committed by Persons of Note, and by Men in Authority and Office, both
Civil and Ecclesiastical: And those which are committed by the Encouragement,
Approbation, and Connivance of dignified Persons. There is an intrinsic moral
Evil in all Sin, especially the last Sort, as contrary to the most holy Nature
and Law of God: For this Reason, every Sin is an Accursed Thing. For, as the
Apostle argues, Sin is the Transgression of the Law; of that Law, which is a
Transcript of the moral Perfections of God; therefore necessarily holy, just,
and good. And every Sin is more or less heinous, as Cases and Circumstances
vary, or may be altered for special, prudential, or public Reasons. That Sin,
therefore, which is the most detrimental to the public Good, and the most
dishonorary to God, is now, and ever, to be deemed the Accursed Thing.

The next Inquiry is, How this is to be taken away?

The Answer is easy, but the Performance difficult: But it may be done by a
vigorous and faithful Execution of the Laws of the Country; which is the
Magistrate's Province. And it supposes him to be concerned only in such Things
as properly come under his Cognizance. For where the legislative Body provide a
Sect of good Laws, enforcing the Observation of the Divine; there the wanton
Boughs and rampant Branches may be cut off, though the Trunk of the Tree remain,
and the Root live. For, public Sins are but overgrown Branches of the accursed
Root of corrupt Nature, which shoot out to more open View. And it is evident
from known Facts, that these in general may be lop'd off by a vigorous and
faithful Exertion of civil Power and Authority. For the Magistracy was erected
among Mankind in their degenerate State, and these Powers were ordained by God,
for this very End. Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers.
For there is no Power but of God: The Powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. For
Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to evil.

It follows then, in Answer to the last Inquiry, that this Work belongs to the
Magistrate; who, as by his Office, he undertakes it, so he is obliged, in Point
of Duty to God and the Public, to engage in it, otherwise be bears the Sword in
vain. He ought to do all that in him lies to suppress whatever Vice and
Immortality is cognizable by the Law: This is greatly conducive to the Benefit
of Society. For, continues the Apostle, 4 ver* he is the Minister of God for
Good to thee (if thou do that which is good) But if thou do that which is evil,
be afraid; for he bears not the Sword in vain: For he is the Minister of God,
a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil. The civil Magistrate may
do much toward a Reformation, by suppressing Vice, if he would dare to magnify
his Office, by a vigilant and faithful Discharge of it. When this is not
wanting on his Part, all needed Assistance, and a Blessing, never sail on God's
Part. This might be exemplified by Instances both from sacred and profane
History; but I shall only recur to our Text and Context for Illustration. Here
we find Joshua, as a Judge and Magistrate, and as Generalissimo of all the
Jewish Forces, expressly commanded by God to search out and punish the Accursed
Thing: Which done, God went forth with their Armies and enabled them to stand
before their Enemies. This Event seems in general to be adapted to all Persons
in high Stations, and to have been designed for an Example to them. And that
Nation that is favored with good Laws (such as secure the Persons, Privileges,
and Properties of the Subject) and with faithful Magistrates, of a generous
public Spirit, may be styled Righteous, in a forensic Sense, agreeable to the
Divine Aphorism, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness, encouraged, promoted, and
protected, exalts a Nation: But Sin, countenanced, and unpunished by civil
Authority, is a Reproach to any People.

When therefore the Rulers of a professing People send forth their Armies to
war, they should not only be satisfied that the Cause be just, but take a
religious Care to remove every Thing, especially the Accursed, from among them,
that there may be no Obstacle in the Way of their Success.

Nor are Generals or Admirals, or any subordinate Officers, exempted from the
Duty; but should do their Endeavor, as far as their Observation, Authority,
and Influence, can extend, to put away Iniquity from among themselves and their
Men. And all that are in Authority, both civil and ecclesiastical, especially
the Preachers of Righteousness, ought daily, and forever to recommend and
enforce the Observation of our salutary Laws, by their own Example, and by a
steady, uniform Practice of those Things, which they require by Law, and
recommend by Precept and Doctrine: Otherwise the Law loses its Force,
Government misses its End, and Preaching is unprofitable. For the Glory of God,
and the Good of the Public, require them to shine as Lights in the Midst of a
perverse and crooked Generation.

In a Word; when the common Soldiers and Marines are engaged in War, they
should carefully put away the unclean Thing; and so should they that abide by
the Stuff, and they that remain in their Possessions. Hear with practical
Reverence, what God says in this very Case: Deuteronomy. 23.9. When the Host goes
forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from every wicked Thing. For the
Lord thy God walks in the Midst of thy Camp, to deliver thee, and to give up
thine Enemies before thee. Therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no
unclean Thing in thee, and turn away from thee.

Having dispatched the first, we proceed to the next general Head.

II. In order to the Removal of the accursed Thing, a diligent Inquiry ought to
be made, to find out what it is.

Take away the Cause and the Effects will cease. In order to this, we must use
such Means as are adapted to the End. -- We must exercise our Faculties as
reasonable Creatures. -- Must consider our Ways, and observe the Ways of
others, estimating the latter by Facts and clear Evidences, not by mere
Suspicions. -- We must search and try our Ways; reflect upon ourselves and
Conduct; inspect our Hearts very minutely; and examine our Actions very
accurately, by the Divine Rule. -- We must learn the Art of Self-Knowledge See
an excellent small Treatise on this Subject by John Mason, A. M. which ought to
be read by every one who is capable of Self-Application.
; which Kind of Knowledge is, in general, the least regarded and inquired after
of many, though of all other the most necessary and useful to Mankind, with
Respect both to their present and future Happiness. Every one ought to learn
what are his own reigning Vices; and they that are in public Offices, ought to
acquaint themselves with the prevailing Vices of the Times, in order to expose
and restrain them as much as possible.

We need not enter into a Detail of Particulars, to inform those that are in
Office, what Method they ought to take, and what Means to use, in order to
detect and restrain Vice and Immorality: If they know what belongs to their
Office, they know the Means; and if so, they are inexcusable, if they use them
not, in the Sight of the Great LAWGIVER and JUDGE of all, to whom they will
one Day find themselves accountable for all their Conduct and Procedure, both
in the Legislative and Executive Trust. To whom does it belong, but to the
Magistrate, to search out, and take away open and public Sins? Is he not styled
in Scripture, The Minister of God, for this End? Thus he is to sanctify the
People; -- and they also must sanctify themselves, by considering their Ways,
and framing their Doings, to turn unto their God. In doing which, both
Magistrates and People must use the Means conducive to the End, or they will
fail of the desired Success. But, let it be noted, that the Sanctification here
mentioned, is only legal and external, and will not avail to the Salvation of
the Soul, without the internal Sanctification of the Holy Spirit.

We proceed to the next Proposition.

III. To assign the Reason of the Duty; which is, That unless God's People take
away the accursed Thing from among them, they cannot stand before their Enemies
in Battle.

For the Evincing of this Point, let us consider the Nature of Sin in general;
the defiling Influence of it upon Mankind; and the destructive Tendency and
Consequence of it.

As to the Nature of Sin, it is described by an Apostle to be, The
Transgression of the Law of God: Which Law is a Transcript of his moral
Perfections; therefore necessarily holy, just, and good. The intrinsic
Turpitude of Sin, as contrary to the Purity of the Divine Nature and Law, is
the principal Reason why it should be put away.

And it has a defiling Influence upon Men, and renders those who are guilty of
it, vile and filthy in the Sight of that God, who is of purer Eyes than to
behold Iniquity, without infinite Detestation, at any Time, or in any Place,
especially in a Time of War, and a critical Conjuncture of Affairs. Therefore
it should be put away from the Courts and Palaces of Kings and Princes; from
national Councils, and the higher Courts; and from all the Courts of Judicature
in the Nation and Kingdom, of every Denomination; from the Markets, and all
Places of public Commerce and Resort; and from our Camps, and Fleets, and
Fortresses: For it is most heinous, when practiced openly by Persons in high
Stations, public Offices, and important Trusts, who should be the most virtuous
and exemplary Persons in the World, on Account of the Influence which their
Example has upon others.

As to the Tendency and Consequence of public Sins, it is to bring Desolation
and Ruin upon the People, as is evident from the History of the Kings of
Israel. -- For when the Holy ONE of Israel looks down upon a People, and sees
the abominable Thing among them, he turns away with Indignation, and withdraws
his favorable Presence and kind Influence. -- Then follows Confusion, and
endless perplexing Debates in their Councils, Frustration of their Schemes,
Disappointment of their Enterprises, and Defeat of their Armies, with a Series
of other Judgments and Calamities.

And now they cannot Stand before their Enemies; but are surprised,
intimidated, run, stumble, and fall down dead and wounded in Heaps -- Just like
a Flock of the feathered Kind, that were stretching their Course, secure, over
Hills and Mountains, Valleys and Rivers, till they advanced near the Place,
where the Fowler lay in Ambush, amongst the Reeds; -- then, upon his sudden and
unexpected Discharge, fall to the Ground, flutter and expire, -- while some
escape affrighted, and others wounded. -- And no Wonder they cannot stand --
for God has departed from them, and left them an easy Prey to their Enemies.
And as He is not for them, He is against them, and on the Side of their
Adversaries. And though their Number be ever so great, and their Military
Preparations, Courage, and Skill for War, ever so respectable; yet if God be
not for them, and with them, as their wise LEADER and almighty PROTECTOR, they
cannot stand -- Read with Reverence the awful apposite Threatening, Lev. 26.15.
If ye will not do all my Commandments, but break my Covenant -- I will set my
Face against you, and ye shall be stain before your Enemies. They that hate you
shall reign over you; and ye shall flee when none pursues you. The Lord of
Hosts cannot go forth with our Armies to fight our Battles for us, cannot walk
in our Camp to deliver us, when his infinitely holy and penetrating Eyes behold
the Accursed Thing in the Midst of us. How can two walk together, except they
be agreed? -- What Concord has CHRIST with Belial? -- For this very important
Reason, we should carefully take away Every Accursed Thing, when our Armies go
out to war.

We are now come to the last Part designed in the Method; which is,

IV. A particular Application of the Subject in several Uses. And,

1. Let us humble ourselves under the mighty Hand of God, that has been
stretched out against us, in the late Defeat of our principal Army.

This is a heavy Blow, justly inflicted upon us by the Hand of an angry God --
a terrible Evil in itself; but may however, by his wise and good Providence,
prove beneficial in the End. And we ought to know that it is for our Sins,
highly aggravated, long and obstinately persisted in, after solemn Warnings,
and sharp Rebukes, of various Kinds. Let us then justify God and take Shame to
ourselves, like the penitent Jews in Ezra's Time. Thou art righteous, O Lord
God; for we remain yet escaped, as at this Day. Behold we are before Thee in
our Trespasses: For we cannot stand before Thee because of this. If we cannot
stand before our Enemies in this World, because of our Sins; how much less
shall we be able to stand before the just JUDGE in the great Day, if they are
not pardoned through the Blood of Christ!

2. The next Use shall be of Information and Examination concerning the
Accursed Thing, that has procured this Defeat.

That the World of Mankind is totally corrupt, I need not inform you: -- But
that Vice and Immorality, Error and Heresy, prevail more than ever, I must tell
you: Let the Reader's own Observation and Conscience be my Witnesses --
Conscience, that Candle of the Lord, that Lamp of Heaven, which lightens every
Man that comes into the World; and which cannot be extiguished, till Man almost
wholly degenerates from the State of his Creation.

If any should be inquisitive to know, What is the particular Accursed Thing,
in the Case of New England, which, above all other, may be justly supposed to
be the Cause provoking God to fight against us, and permit the Enemy to defeat
our Army? -- I must say, in Answer to this pertinent Query, That there are so
many Accursed Things among us, that I have been almost at a Loss which to
single out: -- However, I will mention some of them, and leave the Reader to
choose and judge for himself, reserving to myself the Liberty of showing my own
Opinion.

The abominable accursed Things that prevail in our Nation and Land, among all
Orders, Ranks, and Sexes of Persons, especially in the Seaport Towns, are such
as these, viz. Customary profane Swearing and Cursing (taking Gods Name in
vain, and imprecating Divine Vengeance upon Persons and Things) as if simple
Affirmations and Negations had no Weight, without this harsh accursed Adjunct;
or as if the native Flowers of Rhetoric, and a graceful modest Address, were
unornamental, unless intermixed and garnished with shocking Expressions of
Impiety; -- as though (...) Politeness could not consist with a proper Regard to
the DEITY; and this polite and wise Age could relish no Conversation, but that
which is offensive to Him! -- But polite, only in the Esteem of Persons of a
depraved Taste, degenerate Minds, and dissolute Morals; and wise, only among
Fools! -- Another Evil is, the open Profanation of the Sabbath, by unnecessary
Pursuit of Business, and by drolling it away in Pastime and Merriment, either
in public Houses, or open Streets; -- Contempt and Neglect of the Gospel, its
Ordinances and Institutions; -- professed Infidelity, and prevailing Heresy: --
Pride and Arrogance: -- Gluttony and Drunkenness (the Abuse of Meats and Drinks
in a greater or less Degree) whereby the Faculties of the Soul, and Organs of
the Body, are not only clogged and impeded in their several Acts and Functions,
but even imbruted, and unfitted for any Service, either human or divine: --
Extravagant and immodest Apparel among that Sex, that pretends to the greatest
Modesty: -- Fraud, Injustice, and Oppression in Bargains, Dealings and
Commerce, and the pernicious Practice of Clandestine Trading in a Time of War:
-- Extortion of Usurers, more especially the detestable Crime of Bribery, and
Partiality in Courts of Judicature, and general Assembles; whereby it comes to
pass, that the Righteous are rewarded according to the Work of the Wicked, and
the Wicked according to the Work of the Righteous, as the Prophet complains: --
Defamation, Slander and Mischief-making among Neighbors and Friends;
especially Falsifying in Witness-bearing: -- Coveteousness, Theft, and
Sacrilege, which was the Sin of Achan -- And lastly, Self-Confidence in War, at
this critical Conjuncture, when our ALL lies at Stake. -- These Things, and
many more, which might have been bro't into the Account, have been very
observable among us for many Years, especially of late: -- Let Conscience
speak, and the Guilty shall be convinced.

And now, if there be one Sin rather than another, that may be pitched upon, as
being the most considerable procuring Cause of the late sad Disaster, I take it
to be Self-Confidence in War: This, added to all our other flagrant Crimes, and
public Sins, seems to have filled up our Measure, and ripened us for the
Melancholy Event. -- Did not a Self-confident Spirit begin to act, while we
were preparing to send out our Armies? Did it not run through the Country, like
Wildfire, all the Time the General was on his March to Ohio? Did it not
inflame every Fancy, and catch from Heart to Heart, and kindle up some
unhallowed Sparks even in pious Breasts? Alas, that there was so much of this
accursed Thing to be seen, where better Things might have been expected! -- Did
we rightly consider JEHOVAH, as the LORD of Sabbath, or the Armies of his
People? -- That the Battle is his, and that he has an indubitable Right to give
it to whomsoever he pleases? And to complete the presumptuous Scene, did not
our Troops go out to war, boasting in themselves, as if they were not just
putting on the Harness, but were putting it off? And had we not several
Accounts of the Prevalence of the same Spirit among them, while on their March?
Does it not then appear, that Self-Confidence in War is the Accursed Thing,
that prevented their standing before their Enemies?

3. We hence learn, that Self-Confidence in War is, in its Nature, most
offensive to the Lord of Hosts.

This is a complicate Vice of the Mind, and of an Atheistical Complexion: It
militates audaciously and presumptuously against the Being and Attributes of
God; particularly his Wisdom, in setting up finite Wisdom against that which is
infinite, which alone knows how to govern the World, and dispose of all Events,
infinitely better than the best Politicians. -- Against His Power, by boasting
in their own Strength, forgetful of the ALMIGHTY; trusting in their Numbers, in
their Military Skill and Furniture; in the Bravery of their Generals and
Admirals, and of their Officers and Men (all which are at best but an Arm of
Flesh) whereby they do practically, and in a Sense, explicitly, deny the
ALMIGHTY, and their absolute Dependence upon Him; as if they, thus equipped by
Human Art, had no Need of Him to teach their Hands to war, and their Fingers to
fight; and to cover their Heads in the Day of Battle: Or to be their Sun, to
enlighten them in their Way, and their Shield to defend them in their Battles:
And as though they had it in their Power, to command Success and Victory by their
own conquering Blows. -- It is also an Impeachment of the Justice of God, if he
should not give them the Victory; allowing they are dependent on Him therefore.
-- And, in a Word, it is a setting up their Wills against the Divine
Sovereignty, and denying Him the sole Prerogative of ordering all Events, as he
pleases; particularly those relating to guilty Mortals, unworthy of any
gracious Notice. It is a determining in themselves, and proudly declaring, That
they will have the Victory, whether He will give it, or not: And so by
Consequence, setting up themselves, not only against God, but above God.

This, as it is the most shocking Thought, so it is the most ready Way to
procure such a remarkable Defeat, as our Army has lately had. -- Thus I have
given you a general View of the Nature of Self-Confidence in War, the Accursed
Thing, which, above all other, or in Addition to many other, public Sins, has
provoked God to inflict this humbling Stroke. -- Let as many of us then, as are
conscious of this Sin (and who among us is not guilty?) smite upon our Breasts,
saying, -- "Alas, my Soul, how great a Share have thou had in procuring this
Calamity!"

4. We infer likewise, that it becomes us to be modest and cautious in our
Remarks upon this Occasion.

People are very apt to make unsuitable Remarks upon such Occasions. -- While
some find Fault with the Great FIRST CAUSE, and blame the Conduct of his
Providence; -- others lay the Blame of adverse Events upon Second Causes, in
such a Manner, as if there was no First Mover, and Sovereign Disposer of
Events; but as though all depended upon human Foresight, Prudence, and Bravery.

As to the Conduct of Divine Providence toward us, and the Equity of it, in
the late Defeat, it has been sufficiently vindicated in the preceding
Discourse, by the Consideration of our Sinfulness and Unworthiness.

As to the General, he was a brave experienced Warrior, in the Regular Way, who
had, by his good Behavior in Military Affairs, deserved well of his King and
Country; -- and was in high Favor with those who knew his Abilities: -- His
Merit recommended him to his Majesty's Service in America. -- But he had not
Opportunity to acquaint himself with the Irregular Manner of Fighting in this
Country -- And so he happened to be unfortunate. --

When he fell into Difficulty and Danger, he exerted himself to the utmost; --
and when the Case required it, exposed himself as much as if he had been a
common Soldier, rather than desert our Cause, or save himself by an inglorious
Flight. -- And his Example was followed by the Officers, who, it is said,
behaved in the most gallant Manner; though they also were unacquainted with the
American Way of Fighting.

The Means of this Defeat were ordained and ordered by God: The procuring Cause
was our Sins, especially the Accursed Thing. We, by our Sins, by our
Self-Confidence, together with that which prevailed in the Army, rendered him
unable to stand before our Enemies.

Wherefore,

5. Let us take up a Lamentation over our fallen General; and over our
degenerate Land.

"How are the mighty fallen, and the Weapons of War perished! Tell it not at
Quebec, publish it not in the Streets of Paris, lest the Daughters of France
rejoice, and the Sons of Antichrist triumph. Ye Mountains of Apalachea, and ye
Plains of Ohio, let there be no Dew, neither let there be Rain upon you -- And
thou Monongahela Monongahela -- a River, about a Quarter of a Mile wide, near
Fort Du Quesne, fordable in Summer; near to which the Battle was fought.
, let not thy Waters, stained with the Blood of British Warriors, henceforth
flow, to regale and fertilise thy fatal Banks -- For There the Shield of the
Mighty is vively castaway, the Shield of BRADDOCK, as though he had not been a
mighty Man. From the Slaughter of the Mighty, the Sword of Braddock turned not
back, nor returned empty. Ye Daughters of the English Israel, weep over
Braddock; who, had not your Sins prevented him from being victorious, would
have clothed you in Scarlet, with other Delights, and would have put on
Ornaments of Gold upon your Apparel. How are the Mighty fallen in the Midst of
the Battle! O Braddock, thou wast slain in our low Places by the cowardly Foe,
lurking among the Reeds, afraid to meet Thee on equal Ground. We are distressed
for thee, dear Braddock -- Very pleasant have thou been unto us: Alas, that it
was for so short a Time! How are the Mighty fallen! How are the Weapons of War
perished!"

And Thou, New England By New England, some understand all the British Colonies
in North America; others only a Part.
, How art thou fallen from thy first Love -- and from thy first Works! -- Thou
wast planted a noble Vine, and wholly a right Seed: How then art thou turned
into the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine! How is thy Excellence departed
from thee, and thy Glory sullied! -- Thou wast once an Asylum of persecuted
Saints; but thou art now almost converted into a Den of Thieves and Robbers.
Thou have forsaken thy God, and he has departed from Thee in many Respects: --
Woe to thee, if he should wholly depart from thee! -- Thy Name is changed to
Ichabod, i. e. the Glory departed. Where is the Glory and Beauty that once
distinguished thee from others? -- Though thou wast once possessed of
Virgin-Charms and Innocence, thou have since followed many Lovers, and have
degenerated into a shameless Prostitute to numberless debasing Lusts, whereby
thou art exposed to the severe Resentments of thy Maker once thy Husband; but
now no more, till thou returnest to the Exercise of thy first Love. -- How have
thy Sins divorced thee from Him! And how often has he threatened to cast Thee
out of his House, and out of the good Land, which he gave your Forefathers for
a Possession! -- How is thy Excellence, O New England, departed from thee! How
is the Gold become dim, and the most fine Gold changed!

6. We advance now to an Argument of Excitation and Encouragement.

The Justice of our Cause -- The Success already granted -- The Prospect of
Advantage to ourselves, and Posterity -- And the Impossibility of living by
such perfidicus. Blood thirsty Neighbors, as the French and their Allies in
America -- are powerful Motives to excite us, both to Caution, and to Action.

That our Cause is just and good, has of late been proved by ancient authentic
Records, and Histories of Facts, both English and French; and by the most
solemn Treaties of Utrecht and Aix la Chapelle; the Conditions of which, have
never yet been fulfilled by the French; -- and are never like to be, unless we
compel them by Sword in Hand. It Is further evident, from their vast
Encroachments upon our Lands, and the numerous Forts they have built thereon,
to defend them, computed to be near fifty, great and small; -- and from the
execrable Barbarities committed by them and their Indians upon the Inhabitants,
even in Times of Peace See a Pamphlet, entitled, The present State of NORTH
AMERICA* Land. printed. Bost. reprinted.
: These Things, and many other, which might be mentioned, make it evident, that
our Cause is just and good.

And, we may encourage ourselves to hope, notwithstanding the Ohio-Defeat, that
the God of Armies is yet for us, and will still maintain our Cause, from the
remarkable Smiles of his Providence upon us, with regard to the Successes
granted our Forces at Nova Scotia, and the Defeat of the French Army near Lake
George This Sermon was printed after the Battle between General Johnson and
Baron De Dieskou, which was fought Sept. 8. 1755; and some Things were added
for Illustration.
, which was a signal Victory; a never-to-be-forgotten-Mercy to the Englosh
Colonies -- and should excite us still to encourage ourselves in the Lord, and
to hope for his Protection and Blessing, in the right Use of proper Means, what
are in our Power: For we have the Advantage of our Enemies in Point of
Situation, Numbers, and Supplies of Necessaries for Life and War; which we
ought thankfully and vigorously to improve.

In so doing, we have a Prospect of rich Advantages to follow us, and our
Children after us: -- Such as the Recovery of our Rights and Properties, and
the Lands of our American Allies, that have been ravished from them The present
State of North America.
; reducing the numerous Tribes of Indians to our Interest; securing the
valuable Furr-Trade to ourselves; with a vast Extent of Country, well watered,
and perhaps equal in Fertility to the Land of Canaan, and naturally productive
of every Thing useful in Life; and civilizing the Indians, in order to
propagate the Gospel among them successfully, when these Followers of the
Beast, these Sons of Violence and Falsehood, are driven out of the Land; for
they are the greatest Obstacle to the Success of the Gospel among them, except
their own inherent Corruptions; -- and what is more (and what every one that
has a true Sense of Things, will fight, bleed, and die for, rather than resign
or neglect) we have a Prospect of securing our invaluable spiritual Privileges,
and of transmitting them inviolate to our latest Posterity.

As to the Impossibility of living by such bad Neighbors as the French, -- we
may observe, That their repeated Practices give us sufficient Reason to
conclude, they are of as bad a Disposition, as it is possible for human
Creatures to be of, in this Life; and that they want nothing but Ability and
Opportunity (which, blessed be God, has hitherto been withheld from them) to
show the World how bad they are -- They are not only a numerous, warlike
Nation, whereby they are become respectable and formidable in Europe; but they
are ambitious, enterprizing, subtle, deceitful, perfidious, and extremely
cruel: And all this, under the amiable and attractive Appearance or Show of
Honesty, Pleasantry, Humanity, and Politeness; whereby they impose upon the
English, who are more honest, by Education, and of a better natural
Disposition. -- Their late Practice of burning, killing, torturing, and
destroying, all they conquer in America, without Regard to Age or Sex, is most
shocking -- Come, say they, let us cut them off from being a People; that the
Name of New England may be remembered no more. What a cruel Design is this
against vanquished Lives; -- How alarming to those who have any Sparks of
Humanity in their Disposition! -- Or a Drop of English Blood in their Veins! --
How abhorrent to every pious Soul! -- How detestable to the kind and benevolent
Author of our Beings! --

May it not then be expected, that the Consideration of these Things, which are
known Facts, should awaken every Soul to strict Caution, and resolute Action,
against such an Enemy? -- If we fight, we can but die; if not, we are sure to
die. -- A sad Dilemma this, Fight, or Die! For the French seem determined, if
possible, to root us quite out of America; and not only so, but to dispatch us
out of the World; as if we were the most noxious Animals, and had not as good a
Right to live upon God's Earth, and to breathe in his Air, as they have. -- It
is the Opinion of some, that they have private verbal Orders and Instructions,
To give no Quarter to the English in America: -- But whether they have, or not,
their Practice is equally hurtful to us. -- And shall we tamely suffer such
intolerable Abuses? -- Shall we lie down, like Lambs, to be slain, because they
would have us? -- Shall we not rather rouse, like Lions, and exert ourselves,
like Men? --

To ARMS then -- To ARMS, ye Descendants of ancient HEROES, -- Ye Sons of Honor
and Renown. -- Rise, ye Fathers of your Country -- Let every noble Principle,
that resides in your Patriot-Breasts, awaken into new Life and Action, excited
by the best Motives, and inspirited by the most glorious Cause, -- Religion,
Liberty, Self-defence. Let all your Faculties and Powers be employed, and every
Drop of Blood in your Veins grow warm, and glow to a noble Ardor -- Resent,
Revenge, your Country's Wrongs. -- Make it appear, that by the Help of God, and
of Great Britain, you will bear their Insults and Cruelties no longer: That you
cannot endure to see your Wives (the dear Partners of your Joys and Sorrows)
ravished before your Eyes, ripped up with Child, and inhumanly murdered; -- nor
your tender Babes (the lively Pledges of your mutual Loves) dashed in Pieces
against the Stones! -- Horror to your Eyes! -- Worse than Death to your Hearts!
-- More painful than the Sword, which (soon after the killing Sight) pierces
your own Bowels! -- And let them know, that you are not used to be driven into
your Churches, and there burnt alive with your Wives and Children; -- though such
a Thing has lately been devised!

And as the French have for a long Time, been the Plagues of Europe,
continually embroiling the Nations, so now they are become the the Disturbers
and Incendiaries of America: and (it seems) have, without asking Leave of
Heaven, doomed us all to utter, swift Destruction, without the tedious Ceremony
of an Inquisition -- Now then, let us lay these Things together, and say,
Whether it does not behave us, as Men, as Eritons by Descent, and as Christians
by Profession, to awake from our Slumbers, to start from our Beds of Ease and
Indolence; to Rush to Arms, and to Play the Man for our People, and for the
Cities of our God: And let the Lord do that which seems good unto Him.

7. I shall now close the dark and tragic Scene, with a serious Exhortation to
the Use of Means, conducive both to our temporal and spiritual Interests.

Particularly,

(1) Let us devise, and use such Means, as will probably disconcert the Schemes
of the French, disappoint their Devices, and break their Measures. -- As we
have a subtle and deceitful Enemy to deal with, so we ought to be more
strictly upon our Guard, and to use those Faculties with which we are endued
(for all necessary and good Purposes) in prying into* and discovering their
Schemes, and Artifices; that we may be able to counter-plot and counter-act
them. They often get as great Advantages by Artifice, as by Action: And why
cannot we attempt something of this Kind? -- Why can we not believe they always
intend to deceive us, when they dare; and order our Matters accordingly? -- Are
we obliged to believe them, because they speak fair? --

Perhaps it would be thought impertinent at this Time, if I should insist upon
the Expediency and Necessity of building and repairing Castles, Forts, and
other Places of Defense; and keeping them in good Order, and well furnished
with all Kinds of warlike Stores: -- But as this has been much neglected by
the English, in many Places, I thought it might bear mentioning at least --
among their Polities! For when they should have them ready, they too often have
them to build or repair; -- notwithstanding they see a designing, encroaching
Enemy, fortifying all around them, even in Times of Peace. -- But as we have
begun to revise our Politics, it is to be hoped we shall descry their Defects,
and mend them in Time.

As to our Militia -- a proper Care thereof has been as much neglected, in some
Governments, as our Fortifications, though it is a necessary Mean of
Self-Preservation and Defense. -- King David, that great Warrior and wise
Politician, never lost a Battle; and it was owing in Part to the good Care he
took of the Militia, as the Means. And it would be no Disparagement to our
greatest Generals, to imitate him herein; and to inspire their Men with
Ambition to excel in Military Feats and Exercises. -- After the Defeat of Saul
and Jonathan, David had them (the Officers) teach even the Children of Judah
the Use of the Bow, which had been neglected by Saul; or it might have been a
late Invention of the Philistines, that had not been discovered by him: But it
proved his Overthrow; for the Archers shot at him, and wounded him sore. It is
good Policy to acquaint ourselves with all the Arts of War in Use among our
Enemies, that we may know how to defend ourselves, and annoy them, when we come
to an Engagement: And to take Care that none but able-bodied, effective Men,
well disciplined, be sent out to fight those Battles for us, upon which the
Fate of our Country depends. -- And the more firmly they are attached to the
Government, in Defense of which they fight, the better -- But what can be
expected from a Number of raw, undisciplined, debauched, enfeebled,
dissaffected, Mortals? -- And those that are sent to war, ought to be equipped
with every Thing necessary therefore; and to be sent in due Season; for great
Advantages may be lost by soort Delays; and a long Train of bad Consequences
follow. A vast Expense of human Blood, and Treasure, may be saved by Dispatch.

And all the Governments ought to DO their Proportion in supplying Men and
Money; -- for it is mean and fordid for any to attempt to cast the Burden upon
others. -- All the British Colonies considered collectively and politically,
are one Body, though consisting of many Members. Ought not every Member then to
do its Part, to preserve the whole Body? For if the Head be cut off, all the
rest of the Members will soon wither and die. This then is a Touchstone, that
will soon discover who are public-spirited, and who are not. If every one, by
Parsimony, should try to save all, every one would certainly lose all in a
short Time. But to give liberally upon such great Occasions, is a Duty, that
all, who have Ability, owe to their GREAT BENEFACTOR, to their King, their
Country, Themselves, and their Posterity. -- But here it ought to be noted,
That Four of the most Northern Governments have exerted themselves in so free
and generous a Manner, that they have almost outdone themselves; and can do
but little more in any future Expeditions, unless they have such Assistance
from their Mother Country, as the Exigence and Extremity of their Case require.

It is also necessary, that all the Governments cut off, as much as possible,
all Supplies of Provision (which is one of the main Sinews of War) from the
Enemy, both directly and indirectly, by breaking up that illegal, clandestine
Trade, which some intestine Enemies to the Government, carry on in a Time of
War. This will certainly do much toward the suppressing our public Enemies, and
some think more, than all our Forces. For, if they are not supplied by and from
Us, they must starve in a short Time, or surrender without fighting. And this
will prevent the spilling vast Quantities of human Blood, which is too precious
to be bartered away for French Commodities by our clandestine Traders; -- a Set
of short-sighted Men, whose Eyes are so full of the Dust of present personal
Gain, that they cannot foresee one of those dreadful Consequences of this their
Practice, that will inevitably fall upon their Posterity; and perhaps upon
themselves: -- If so, their Blood will be upon their own Heads; and the Blood
of their Country will, in a great Measure, be required at their Hands, in the
Day of Judgment.

Unanimity and a good Understanding among the English Governments in America,
is another excellent and necessary Mean of saving the whole Country from the
Ravages of the Enemy; and indeed from utter Ruin. -- For while our Heads and
Leaders are resenting Affronts, and contending among themselves about Points of
Honor, as well as Duty, the important, and pressing Affairs of Government, and
of War, must be neglected. -- In the mean Time, our Enemies are unanimous,
vigilant, active, and swift as Eagles; never failing to seize those Advantages,
which our unhappy Divisions, Contentions, and Delays, always give them. -- Do
not then the Exigence and Importance of our public Affairs require, that our
civil Rulers, our Generals, and Officers, in ALL the Governments, pay so sacred
a Regard to the Great Trust reposed in them, as strictly to guard against every
Thing that tends to a Misunderstanding, and opens a Door to Contention and
Division? -- And to cultivate, as much as possible, a good Understanding among
themselves? This is excellent Policy, especially in a Time of War; agreeable to
our Savior's Words, Mark 3.24, 25. If a Kingdom be divided against itself,
that Kingdom cannot stand. And if a House be divided against itself, that House
cannot stand. If the British Colonies in America be divided against themselves,
how can they stand, at such a Time as this, when they have Need to UNITE their
Councils, and collect their scattered Forces, and to pour them with Fury upon
our invidious and perfidous Enemies? If this should be our Case (as there is
some Reason to fear it may be) Great Britain itself cannot save us from the
French and Indians. For God's Sake therefore, let both Rulers, and Generals,
and People, hearken to the excellent Advice of Solomon, the wisest of Kings,
and of mere Men. Prove. 17.14. The Beginning of Strife, is as when one lets
out Water; therefore leave off Contention before it be meddled with.

We proceed to another Branch of Exhortation.

(2) If we hope for Success in War, let us put away all our Accursed Things.

There are many such among us; and they must be put away; or they will bring
down the Judgments of God upon our Fleets, Armies, and Provinces; and upon the
whole Kingdom: They must be taken away, both Root and Branch, by Faith,
Repentance, and Reformation. And when this People is a more holy and humble
People; then, but not till then, they will be a happy and blessed People: And
God himself will delight to dwell with them. Let us all then, both Magistrates
and Ministers, Generals and Admirals, and the other Officers, with the common
Soldiers and Marines, be sensible of the Corruption of our Hearts, and the
Wickedness of our Lives; and apply to the Blood of Christ for Pardon and
Cleansing. And having so done, let us repent in Dust and Ashes, and forsake all
our evil Ways; and make our Ways and Doings good. And when our Ways please God,
then he will make even our Enemies to be at Peace with us.

Particularly, let us put away Drunkenness and Debauchery from our Cities and
Camps. -- Query, Are not lewd Women Accursed Things in our Camps? Do any but
such follow Armies? Ought they not then to be taken away? Do Soldiers in the
Field need any Thing to be done for them, which they cannot do well enough
themselves?

And having made all the necessary Dispositions for War with our Fellow Men,
let us not bid Defiance to Heaven by our Sins; but put them away -- And set up
our Banners in the Name of the Lord; and no more venture out into the Field of
Battle, under the Standard of Self-Sufficiency, -- nor dare again to display
the Colors of Self-Confidence, since we have had such sad Experience of the
Folly of trusting to an Arm of Flesh, which is weak in itself, and easily
broken -- Nor let our Officers and Men dare to discharge Vollies of profane
Oaths and Curses against the Battlements of Heaven, as many of them daily do;
whereby they seem professedly to set out on an Expedition against Heaven; and
do practically besiege the Throne itself of God.

Generals and Admirals, and their Officers, have it in their Power to do public
Honor to the Great Name of God, by making and giving out Laws in their Camps,
and Fleets, with a severe Penalty annexed, forbidding profane Swearing and
Cursing; not neglecting duly to inflict the same, when incurred. -- And they
should make it appear, by their own Conversation, that they reverence and fear
that most holy and dreadful Name. -- And the only Strife among Civil and
Military Officers, should be, Who among them shall be the most virtuous and
exemplary; and who shall do the best Service for their King and Country.

To proceed,

(3) Let us adjoin Prayer to Almighty God, as a special appointed Means of
Success, in all our Enterprises.

God is to be acknowledged in all our Ways, by Prayer, especially in our Wars.
And for an Encouragement to this Duty, He styles himself, A God bearing Prayer.
-- When he had made large Promises, to the Jews in Captivity, of temporal and
spiritual Blessings, He subjoins, Yet for all this, will I be enquired of by
the House of Israel, to do it for them.

As therefore we have taken the Sword in one Hand, we ought to take Prayer in
the other. You may pray and fight, at the same Time: And the more ardently you
pray for God's Blessing and Protection, the more likely you will be to do good
Execution among your Enemies; and to escape with your own Lives too. All they
that go forth to war, ought to exercise and express a humble Dependence upon
the Lord of Hosts, and to trust in Him for Safety. For the Battle is His, and
he gives it to whomsoever be pleases.

Let us then pray, that God Almighty would be pleased to bless and preserve
King GEORGE, and the whole Royal-Family -- and the British Ministry: That he
would bless our Governors and Counselors; our Generals and Admirals, -- and
make them the Guardians of our spiritual Privileges, and civil Liberties; and
the Assertors and Defenders of our Rights and Properties -- That he would make
our Armies courageous, valiant, and victorious -- That he would cover their
Heads in the Day of Battle -- And that they may go on from conquering to
conquer, till ALL our Enemies shall be subdued under us -- That he would
prepare us for so great a Mercy, by pouring out his Spirit upon us, and his
Blessing upon our Offspring; and thereby dispose us to a thorough Reformation l
-- But let thine Enemies perish, O God, scatter thou the People, that delight
in War. -- Let God arise, let his Enemies be scattered, let them that hate him,
she before him: As Wax melts before the Fire, so let them be consumed at thy
Presence: For thou, Lord, art great in Zion: Thou art high above all People.

My Fathers and Brethren, if we do these Things aright, no doubt God will be
for us, and enable us to stand before our Enemies. -- Then shall our Armies
return from Battle crowned with Victory, and clothed with Triumph -- rejoicing
in the Salvation of the Lord, and triumphing in his Promise.

To conclude,

(4) Let us all list under the Lord Jesus Christ, by Faith, who is the Captain
of Salvation; and then we shall be able to stand before ALL our Enemies.

Being sensible, dear Friends, of your Captivity and Bondage to Sin and Satan,
you should learn your Need of the Ransom which Christ has paid to Divine
Justice for guilty Men, which was his own Blood -- a Price of infinite Value!
-- He became obedient to Death, even the Death of the Cross, that Sinners might
have Life. -- This is the Righteousness that he wrought out, the Ransom that he
paid, for such as were condemned to die by the Law, and to be tormented
forever, for their many Rebellions and Hostilities against the King of Heaven.
But, though ye are Rebels by Nature, and condemned to die by Law; yet, if you
will come and list under the Captain of Salvation, and submit to Him, on his
Terms, you shall be pardoned, accepted, and saved: For he is the Great Captain
of all the Forces, that are raised, and to be raised, in the Church-militant!
-- And as soon as you inlist, you shall be entitled to the Large Bounty which
he has promised in the Proclamation of Grace: -- And for the Service you
perform in his spiritual Kingdom, you shall be rewarded with a Crown of Glory
in Heaven. -- But such is the Enmity of your carnal Minds against him, that you
will never become Volunteers, till you are made willing in the Day of his Power.

And, you ought to consider, that when you are inlisted among his Followers,
you will soon receive Orders to march out into the Field of Battle, and to
engage with Principalities and Powers, with the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, and with wicked Spirits in heavenly Places. In this Case, you must by no
Means desert your Colors, but put on the whole Armor of God, and fight the
good Fight of Faith, as you hope to lay hold on eternal Life. And in order to
this, you must obey the Instructions which he has given by the Apostle Paul,
which are recorded in his Epistle to the Ephesians, 6.10. -- Finally, my
Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might. Put on the
whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the Wiles of the
Devil. -- Take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil Day; and having done all, to stand. STAND therefore,
having your Loins girt about with Truth, and having on the Breast plate of
Righteousness; and your Feet shed with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace:
Above all, taking the Shield of Faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all
the fiery Darts of the Wicked* And take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. You must learn the Art of using
skilfully the Shield of Faith, or you will be often wounded by the Infernal
Archers, who shoot no other than fiery Darts; -- and of handling dexterously
the Sword of the Spirit, or you will never overcome them. And you must be
continually upon your Guard, watching against their Devices, that you may never
be surprised; but always ready to withstand their Wiles, by the Force of
constant Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit.

And now you must stand strong, fight courageously in the spiritual Warfare,
and show yourselves valiant Soldiers of the Captain of Salvation. And you may
be assured, that as it is the Son of God, who is styled the Captain of the
Lord's Hosts, that leads you out into the Field of Battle; so, he will be your
CHAMPION, to bring you off more than Conquerors, at last.

Having therefore inlisted under Him, you should encourage yourselves in Him,
upon every Appearance of Danger; -- and be strong upon all Occasions. -- Let
not your Graces be like the Soldiers of Saul, who stood with him trembling, but
like the Worthies of David, able to break through an Host of Enemies, and draw
Water at the Wells of Salvation. -- And if at any Time you should be wounded
and soiled, look to your Leader, and he will heal you, and raise you up; for he
is all-sufficient.

And be then faithful to the Death (for thou must once pass through that gloomy
Vale, either in a natural or violent Way, to the bright triumphant World above)
and then, though thou wast ranked among the meanest of his Followers here, thou
shall be arrayed and adorned with a Palm of final Victory, a Diadem of
immaculate Beauty, and a Crown of immortal Glory; and shall live and reign with
Him in His Kingdom; where there is no Noise nor Rumor of War, but all the
Region is everlasting Peace. -- Where sits the PRINCE of Peace, in State of
Glory, on his Throne, in the Midst of Myriads of blessed Spirits; the Delight
of every Eye, the Joy of every Heart, the supreme Rest and Satisfaction of
every happy Soul. To whom be GLORY, DOMINION, and POWER forever. AMEN.


