THE Character and Duty of SOLDIERS ILLUSTRATED, IN A SERMON Preached May 25,
1755, IN The REV. MR. NOYES's Meeting House, In NEW HAVEN AT The Desire of Col.
NATHAN WHITING, TO The Military Company under his Command in the present
Expedition, for the Defense of the BRITISH Dominions in AMERICA.

By ISAAC STYLES, A.M.

Published at the Request of said Colonel, and the other Officers of said
Company.

Who will lead me into Edom? Wilt not thou, O GOD! go forth with our Hosts?
DAVID.

So Joshua Ascended from Gilgal, he and all the People of War with him, and all
the mighty Men of Valor: And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear not; for I have
delivered them into thine Hand! -- There shall not a Man of them stand before
thee!

JOSHUA. NEW HAVEN: Printed and (...) by James Parker, at the Post Office,
MDCCLV.

TO NATHAN WHITING, Esquire LIEUT. COLONEL OF The SECOND REGIMENT OF FOOT, RAISED
In the COLONY of CONNECTICUT; For the Defense and Protection Of His Majesty's
Territories In AMERICA, AND For Removing the Encroachments Of the French, At
CROWN-POINT, and upon the Lake Iroquois or Champlain; THIS SERMON IS HUMBLY
INSCRIBED, BY His Devoted Servant, ISAAC STYLES.

The Character and Duty of Soldiers: A SERMON:
II. SAMUEL, X. 12. Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men for our People,
and for the Cities of our GOD; and the LORD do that which seems him good.


WAR is one of the bitter Fruits and deplorable Effects of the Apostasy and
Degeneracy of the human Species: It originates or takes its Rise from the Lusts
of Men, from Pride, Selfishness, Malevolence, Envy, Avarice, and c. as appears
from those Words of Inspiration, James iv. 5. From whence come Wars and
Fightings? etc. and it is one of the sore Judgments and Rebukes wherewith the
Holy GOD corrects Man for his Iniquity. Although the Kingdom of Christ is a
Kingdom of Peace, and his Gospel breathes Nothing but universal Love and
Benevolence; insomuch that had all Men Faith, and were actuated and governed by
the noble Principles and Maxims of moral Truth and Duty, revealed and
established in the Gospel, every Man might fit under his own Vine and Fig Tree,
and there would be none to terrify or molest him: Ephraim would not envy Judah,
nor Judah vex Ephraim: Men might then beat up their Swords into Plowshares, and
learn War no more; for in Consequence of this, Wars would cease to the Ends of
the Earth. Yet ever since the ancient Enmity was put between the Seed of the
Serpent and the Woman, Peace has been taken from the Earth, and Nation has been
rising up against Nation: The Serpent has been casting out of his Mouth Water
as a Flood after the Woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the
Flood: The Dragon has all along been wroth with the Woman, viz. the Church of
God in the World, and been making War with the Remnant of her Seed, which keep
the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of JESUS CHRIST. Rev. xii. 15,
17.
Cain, who mortally hated, and embrued his Hands in the Blood of righteous
Abel, his Brother, has left behind him Numbers in his cursed Image, possessed
of those diabolical Distempers of Pride, Malice, Envy, and such like, who have
hated God's Zion, and been attempting to raze it to the Foundation thereof. We
have a very remarkable Specimen of this Cainine Temper and hostile Spirit, in
the unreasonable, insulting and tyrannical Demands and Expectations of those
recorded 1 Kings xx. Men there have been, from Age to Age, and now are, who are
Lovers of their own selves, covetous, proud, Truce Breakers, false Accusers,
and these make the Times perilous: For to the Wills and Lusts of such Haters
of Zion, the People of God must yield up their Lives, Properties, Liberties,
Consciences, and all that is near and dear to 'em here in this World; or else
in an hostile Way be compelled to it, if this be in the Enemy's Power:
Monopoly, perfect Slavery and Vassalage is what they ultimately have in View;
our Persons, and all our dearest Enjoyments, must be submitted to their entire
Ordering and Disposal: They will not be satisfied with the Enslaving of our
Bodies, but our Souls too must be brought into Bondage, and kept under their
heavy and galling Yoke. -- As we must enjoy none of the Comforts of Life, but
by their Sufferance and Permission; so we must needs be of their Religion,
except we be given up to believe a Lie, that we all may be damned; except we
become their Proselytes, espouse their destructive Heresies, and bow down and
pay divine Honors to graven Images and dumb Idols, which they have set up, and
sing Te Deum, we must expect to sacrifice our Lives, and burn at the Stake. And
since it is so, and the Adversary will hearken to no Rule or Reason, and are
entirely addicted to Violence and Oppression; the Law and Light of Nature and
of GOD, will allow, yea, it requires repelling of Force by Force. In this Case,
it is evidently the Mind and Will of God, that his People make military
Preparations; labor to furnish themselves with Skill in the Art military; whet
and surbish their Swords; file off the Rust of their Firelocks, that
exquisitely-contriv'd Engine of Terror, and tremendous Instrument of Death; and
as Volunteers go forth to the Help of the LORD, against the Mighty; jeopard
their Lives in the high Places of the Field; endure Hardness as good Soldiers;
be bold in their GOD, and play the Men for their People, and for the Cities of
their GOD. When Men rise up against us; are hemming of us in; stretching beyond
their Line; making the most glaringly unjust Encroachments on our Territories;
invading our just Rights, and threatening to swallow us up; for us now to to
depend upon God to save us from Ruin, by the miraculous Interposition of his
Providence, in a Neglect of the proper and appointed Means of our own Security
and Preservation, would be inexcusable Presumption; -- this would be not to
trust, but to tempt the Lord; the very Thing which the Devil would have
persuaded our Savior to; Mat. iv. 6. Cast thy self down; for it is written, He
shall give his Angels charge, etc. It Is true, we should likewise beware of the
other Extreme, and not symbolize with them, who in a Way of Distrust of GOD,
went down to Egypt for Help, and stayed on Horses, and trusted in Chariots,
because they were many, and in Horsemen, because they were strong; but looked
not to the Holy One of Israel, neither sought the LORD: Isaiah xxxi. 1.
But with a due Dependence on the Power that made us, and is the great
Preserver of Men; when Things are come to this Crisis, we ought to put
ourselves into a Posture of Defense, prepare for War, be clad in our
Regimentals, every Man of the Valiant of Israel having his Sword upon his
Thigh, brandishing the glittering Spear, the Dart, and the Habergeon, and
laying at the Enemy, attempting hereby to humble their Pride, tame their
Madness, and oblige them to yield or die! Now it behooves the Officers and
Infantry, like General Joab, and his Battallions, to be of good Courage, and
play the Men for this People, and for the Cities of their GOD.

That there may be just Occasion for a People professing Godliness to arm
themselves, and engage in a defensive War against their Enemies, cannot be
denied, without offering Violence to Reason, and wresting the Scriptures. The
Affronts and Abuses offered to King David and his Men, by the Children of
(...), related in our Context, were intolerable; and hence we find Joab the
General, charging his armed Bands to be of good Courage, and play the Men, etc.
And if any will not own that Joab was a good Man; yet they must grant, that he
here speaks as became one of a noble and martial Spirit, and an experienced
valiant Leader of the Armies of Israel; yea, and as became a pious General too;
for he adds, and the LORD do that which seems him good: q. d. Let us do our
Parts, and quietly refer ourselves and the Event to God's good Pleasure, which
we have no Reason to distrust; the War on our Part being just, and not vainly
undertaken to enlarge our Empire, or aggrandize ourselves, but for our own just
and necessary Defense: It Is for our People, and for the Cities of our GOD, that
we are now called to sight; for the Preservation of them from that Ruin which
our Enemies design for us; the Cities which are devoted to his Worship and
Service; and therefore we may hope for GOD's Presence, Blessing and Assistance
in it; that he will plead their Cause, and be on our Side. 'Twas undoubtedly
their Duty to do as they did; and why not equally ours, when in similar
Circumstances? -- it being plainly and infinitely impossible for that ever to
cease being a Duty, which is founded in and results from the eternal
unalterable Nature, Reason and moral Fitness of Things. The Example of Laish is
written for our Admonition; Judges xviii. 27, 28. And they took the Things
which Micah had made, and the Priest which be had, and came unto Laish, unto a
People that were at quiet, and secure; and they smote them with the Edge of the
Sword, and burnt the City with Fire: And there was no Deliverer, because it was
far from Zidon, and they had no Business with any Man. St. Paul assures us,
that all Scripture given by Divine Inspiration is profitable for Instruction;
and that what soever was written afore-time, was written for our Learning.

I shall therefore take Occasion from the Words of my Text, first, to
characterize or describe, and secondly, to excite the good Soldier.

I am then, in the first Place, to describe, or give a brief Sketch of the
Character of the good Soldier. And in general, he is One that is of good
Courage, and when called hereto, plays the Man for his People, and for the
Cities of his GOD. And if we come to Particulars, these following Things, I
conceive, go to make up, and complete the Character of a good Soldier.

1. He must be of a martial Genius, of a bold and heroic Spirit, and well
furnished with military Knowledge or Skill in the Art of War. If Courage or
Conduct be wanting, whether it be in the Officers or Soldiers, what Prospect
can there be of their copying the Example of Joab, or his Warriors? of their
being a Safeguard and Defense to their Country, and thence answering the
principal End and Design of their Institution and Calling? It Is required in
Soldiers, especially in their Leaders and chief Officers, that they be well
acquainted with what belongs to the Art-Military; that so they may be able, in
the best Manner, to attack and oppose, battle, and rout, and vanquish the
Enemy. One that is a Soldier ought to understand the Words of Command; the
several Beats of that great warlike Instrument the Drum, together with the
Language of the shrill high-sounding Trumpet, that noble, reviving and
animating Sound: Soldiers ought to understand how to march regularly; keep
their Ranks and Files; what are the proper Facings; how to make good the
Ground; when to advance or stand, or turn the Sway of Battle; when to open or
close the grim Ridges of War, and how to make a regular, advantageous and safe
Retreat, as there may be occasion: They ought to be acquainted with the wisest
and best Methods of Encamping, of Entrenchment or Circumvallation, of
Fortification, of erecting Batteries, Forts, Garrisens or Castles, of battering
down or scaling Walls and Ramparts, and thence forcing the Enemy to surrender,
and submit themselves. Joel ii. 7, 8, 9. They shall run like mighty Men; they
shall climb the Wall like Men of War, and they shall march every one on his
Ways, and they shall not break their Ranks, neither shall one thrust another;
they shall run to and fro in the City; they shall run upon the Wall; they shall
climb up upon the Houses; they shall enter in at the Windows. Knowledge and
Understanding in these Things, will inspire Courage; whereas the Want of it
tends to intimidate, disanimate, and render Men pusillanimous and cowardly; and
Cowardice evermore cuts the Nerves and Sinews of adventurous Attempts.

2. Furthermore, it is required in Soldiers, that they be not only Men of
Courage and Conduct, of martial Accomplishments, of Activity, and an
enterprizing Genius; but that they be loyal to their King, and Lovers of their
Country: Of this we have Joab, and his valiant Soldiers, for an Example.

3. A Soldier should be a Man of Religion, a Christian Temper of Mind and
Conduct, a pure Conscience, an upright self-approving Mind, Faith, and a good
Life: This also contributes toward making them of good Courage, and prompting
them to play the Men for their People, and for the Cities of their GOD. A
strict Regard to Discipline and good Order, Temperance, Sobriety, Mortification
and Self-Denial, and good Decorum, is no small Embellishment to the Character
of them that are in the Militia, and wear the honorary Title of Soldiers, and
tends to make them, under GOD, our Decus ac Tutamen, our Glory and our Defense.
Faith and Religion in an Army, must needs have a great Tendency to engage the
Divine Presence with them, without which they can expect little Success. This
makes them strong and very courageous, bolder than Lions, swifter than Eagles;
now they wax valiant in Fight, and put to Flight the Armies of the Aliens: Like
David, run through a Troop, and leap over a Wall; pursue their Enemies, and
overtake them; beat them small as the Dust, and tread them down as Mire in the
Streets: Now One chases a Thousand, and Ten put ten Thousand to Flight. A
strict and sacred Regard to Truth and Honesty, Justice and Equity, in a
Soldier, has a mighty Tendency to fill his Heart with Courage and Valor. A
Soldier that is a Man of Religion, a devout Man, a Man of Prayer, a just Man,
one that can rule his own Spirit, bridle and govern his Tongue, keep under his
Body, and bring it into Subjection, and is sober, chaste and temperate in all
Things, will not be ashamed or afraid; but will speak with the Enemies in the
Gate; will not fear to look his Enemy in the Face, to stand Foot to Foot, and
measure Arms with him; for he does not fear Death with any Amazement.

That the true Knowledge of God, and Trust in him, is one needful Qualification
of a Soldier, is plain from Dan. xi. 32. The People that do know their GOD,
shall be strong, and do Exploits: The Opposite to these are such as do wickedly
against the Covenant, and may be corrupted by Flattery or Bribery, to serve the
Worst of Interests, to engage with the Vilest of Men, to promote their wicked
Designs, to join with Antichrist in perpetrating the greatest Barbarities and
Cruelties, under Pretenses of Religion, thinking they are doing God Service,
while they are killing his Children.

Since it is evident, that the Calling and Business of Soldiers is what
Christianity allows, and gives Countenance to; since to be a Soldier, and fight
the LORD's Battles, is not inconsistent with the Character and Life of a
Christian, every Soldier ought to be a Christian, and in Behavior as becomes
Holiness. He that, under the Light of Revelation, lacks these Things, has
denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. The Holy Ghost directs all, and
consequently Soldiers, to take to 'em the whole Armor of God, to stand having
their Loins girt about with Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, and their Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel, taking
the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit,
which is the World of God; praying always with all Prayer and Supplication, in
the Spirit; and in the Exercise of these military Virtues, faithfully to employ
themselves fighting against not only Flesh and Blood, but Principalities and
Powers, and the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, and spiritual
Wickednesses in high Places, till they have overcome through the Blood of the
Lamb; are Conquerors, and more than Conquerors, through him that has loved us.
And to instruct us, that Soldiers ought to be Men of Piety and Virtue, must
needs be the Design of the Spirit of Truth, in transmitting down to us, in the
sacred Records, the Examples of so many famous and renowned Warriors, who
feared God and kept his Precepts, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, quenched
the Violence of Fire, escaped the Edge of the Sword, out of Weakness were made
strong, waxed valiant in Fight, etc. The Example of Abraham, for Instance, the
Friend of God, whose Victory, and triumphant Return from the Slaughter of the
four Kings, accompanied with his small but brave and gallant Train-band, is
recorded to his immortal Honor; -- the Example of David, the Man after God's
own Heart, who made God his Trust from his Youth, and was also a Man of War
from his Youth, who through God did valiantly, and trod down his Enemies; --
the Example of that pious young Hero King Josiah, who for the Sake of his
People, and the Cities of his God, jeopardiz'd his Life, and even sacrificed it
in a Battle of the Warriors, attended with confused Noise, and Garments rolled
in Blood. -- And what shall I more say? for the Time would sail me, to tell of
Joshua, of Gideon, of Barak, of Sampson, and of Jephthe, and many others, whose
signal Courage and wife Conduct, and remarkable Successes, were undoubtedly in
no smail Measure, owing to their Faith and Hope in GOD, and to their being
under the governing Influence of Religion, fearing God, and keeping his Ways.
And whoever considers the Directions given to the Soldiers by John the Baptist,
must be sensible, that this is one Thing requisite to finish the Character of
one that will be likely to play the Man, and act the Part of a good Soldier.

4. As Soldiers would be what they ought to be, and act in Character, they must
be disposed to obey their Leaders and commanding Officers. Murmurings and
Mutinies among Soldiers, and Rebellion, which is as the Sin of Witchcraft, must
needs be an ill Omen, and have a dark, threatening and disasterous Aspect upon
the Success of the Campaign. If Soldiers desert their Post, or fly from their
Colors, or despise to obey their Commanders; Defeat and Loss of Victory, must
needs ensue: Nor is the Rebel safe; but is awfully exposed to an untimely
Death; to be like Absalom suddenly chased out of the World, and driven into
Darkness: He has just Ground to fear, that Vengeance will not suffer him to
live; -- that he shall be devoured with the Sword, or by some other Means be
forced to descend to Hell, with all his Weapons of War; Ezekiel.
and that his Sins will lie down with him in the Dust; Job
that how fearful a Thing soever it be to fall into the Hands of the Living
GOD, who will cast upon him, and not spare; this must be his Lot, that
everlasting Terrors will take hold on him; that he must be destroyed, and that
without Remedy, and suffer the Vengeance of eternal Fire. Is not that written
for our Admonition, Judges v. 15, 16, 17. For the Divisions of Reuben there
were great Thought; of Heart: Why abodest thou among the Sheep-folds, to bear
the Bleatings of the Flocks? Why did Dan abide in the Ships? Asher continued on
the Seashore, etc. -- This their not joining their Brethren in the Expedition,
had a Tendency to discourage their Hearts, and weaken their Hands, and prevent
the Success of their Enterprise; and therefore was a Thing highly criminal: And
again, v. 23, Curse ye Meroz, (said the Angel of the Lord,) curse ye bitterly,
the Inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the Help of the Lord, to the
Help of the Lord against the Mighty. A Rebel in an Army is no better. 2 Timothy
ii. 4. No Man that warreth entangleth himself with the Affairs of this Life;
that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier.

Thus I have given a brief Sketch of the Character of a good Soldier, and shown
what Qualifications they must have, in order to their playing the Men for their
People, and for the Cities of their GOD.

The next Thing proposed, was to excite the Soldier thus furnished to his Work,
to a due Discharge of his Duty; -- which I now heartily do; though it was with
much Reluctance I undertook this Work, conscious to my self how unequal I was
to the Task, and that I am, of all my Brethren of the ministerial Order,
perhaps the most unskillful in military Matters.

And it may now be expected, that I do this in a particular Address to the
military Company, at the Request of whose honorable COLONEL Col NATHAN
WHITING, of New Haven.
I stand in this Place.

GENTLEMEN, We rejoice to see such a Number who make so good a Figure, and such
a handsome Appearance, who have willingly offered yourselves, and are inlisted
into the Service of your KING and COUNTRY, and expect ever long to go upon the
intended Expedition, for the Defense of his Majesty's Rights and Dominions in
this our NORTH AMERICA: My Heart is toward you, my Brethren and Friends, and I
wish you a Blessing out of the House of the LORD: GOD Almighty bless you,
protect and prosper you; teach your Hands to war, and your Fingers to fight;
give you Courage and Conduct, and make you the Terror of your Enemies, the
Beauty of our Israel, our Safety and Defense: God by your Refuge and Strength,
a very present Help in Trouble; the Lord of Hosts be with you; the God of Jacob
be your Refuge: Selah.

And now, what an Honor will it be to you, and to us, if it shall appear that
you have proved your Armor, and that each of you is like the Son of a King,
like the Princes of Issachar, for martial Skill, Valor and Prowess? If you
prove expert in War, wax valiant in Fight, and put to Flight the Armies of them
who are the Aggressors, and are seeking a Quarrel against us; how will this
heighten the Glory of your Company, and tend to endear and eternize your
Memories? And what I say unto you, I say unto all of your Order and Profession.
Our Lives and Properties, our Religion and Liberty of Conscience, lie at Stake,
and we may expect ever long to be deprived of 'em, by those unreasonable and
wicked Men, that froward and perverse Generation of Children, in whom there is
no Faith, except Men of your Character and Improvement, except our Militia, our
Men in Armor, are instrumental in the Hand of Providence, to prevent the
impending and important Evil, and deliver us out of the Hands of them that
would fain spoil us.

With such Views, we would hope you have put on your Harness, and we trust you
will be ambitious to merit the Encomium given of those heroic and celebrated
Warriors, 2 Samuel i. 22. From the Blood of the Slain, from the Fat of the
Mighty, the Bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the Sword of Saul returned not
empty. The MOST HIGH has styled himself a MAN OF WAR, to denote the Divine
Agency in the Victories and Triumphs of his People over their Enemies: And it is
noted, that when the Children of Reuben made War with the Hagarites, they were
helped against them, because the War was of GOD: The Cause you are called to
engage in, is no doubt the Cause of GOD; and methinks you may hear the GOD of
the Armies of Israel, the Lord of Hosts, saying to you, This Matter belongs to
you, arise and do it, and I will be with you. Since the Race is not always to
the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong; we hope you will all be greatly
concerned to secure an Interest in the Favor of God, and engage the Divine
Presence with you: All of you have Reason to say as Moses, LORD if thy Presence
go not with us, carry us not up hence; and to repeat the Prayer of the
Psalmist, Wilt not thou, O GOD, go forth with our Armies! Give us Help from
Trouble; for vain is the Help of Man.

If GOD be with you, and on your Side, you may comfort yourselves and one
another, with these Words: Numb. xxiii. 8. How can they curse, whom God has
not cursed? Isa xli. 10. Fear thou not; for I am with thee; I will strengthen
thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee, etc. In this Case, you
may say, as that renowned Warrior, and Glory of his Time and Day; Though an Host
should encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear; though War should arise
against me, in this will I be confident; the Lord is my Helper, and I will not
fear what Man shall do unto me; yea, though I walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil; for thou art with me, etc. Now you may
humbly expect, that the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle, will
break the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield and the Sword of your Enemies, and
crown you with Victory. Now you may hope for Protection, that God will deliver
you from the hurtful Sword, and rid you from the Hand of strange Children,
whose Mouth speaks Vanity, and their Right Hand is a Right Hand of Falsehood:
That if Need be, he will make the Stars in their Courses to fight for you; that
he will ride upon the Heavens in your Help; fly upon the Wings of the Wind;
scatter Hailstones, and kindle Coals of Fire; send forth Lightnings and
Thunder, with a great Thunder, and discomfit the Enemy; deliver you from your
strong Enemy, and from the violent Man; gird you with Strength unto Battle;
make your Feet like Hind's Feet; teach your Hands to war, so that a Bow of
Steel shall be broken by your Arms; give you the Necks of your Enemies, that
you might destroy them that hate you, avenge you, and subdue the People under
you, and set you upon your high Places.

You will permit me, my Fellow Soldiers, to be your Monitor. Unto you is that
spoken; Deuteronomy. xxiii. 9. When the Host goes forth against their Enemies, then
keep thee from every wicked Thing; and v. 13. For the LORD thy God walks in
the Midst of thy Camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine Enemies before
thee; therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that be see no unclean Thing in thee,
and turn away from thee. The Armies of Israel you know, though led by Joshua, a
General of undaunted Courage, and full of the Spirit of Wisdom, could not stand
before their Enemies, but turned their Backs, because they sinned, and
transgressed God's Covenant: The Children of Ephraim, being armed, and carrying
Bows, turned back in the Day of Battle, for the same Cause. Infidelity,
Profaness, Iniquity, Sensuality, Intemperance, Luxury and Debauchery, Lying,
Stealing, profane Swearing, horrid Imprecations, hellish Execrations, and
Cursings, (but too common in Camps) these tend to make the Camp a Curse, and to
trouble it: Joshua vii. 11, 22. This must needs provoke the holy sin-hating GOD
to stand afar, and remove from the Camp. If those that stand in the Front, face
the Artillery of Heaven, defy and dare Almighty Vengeance, and challenge divine
Thunderbolts, by suffering their Tongue to be set on Fire of Hell, by setting
their Mouths against the Heavens, belching out great swelling Words of
Blasphemy, and discharging frightful Vollies of Curses, one after another,
enough to astonish and make the Pillars of Heaven and Earth to tremble; and
those in the Rear are in this Way pouring forth the Poison of Dragons, and the
cruel venom of Asps; what can be expected, but that when they come to face
Danger, and look Death in the Face in an Encounter, -- their Hearts will
meditate Terror, melt like Wax in the Midst of their Bowels! having just Ground
to expect, that God will now pour out upon 'em the Fury of his Anger, and the
Strength of Battle; that the Sword will cut 'em off, and cat 'em up like the
Canker-Worm; that God will visit for these Things, and that his Soul will be
avenged on such an Army as this! It cannot be expected but that Fear and a Share
will come upon 'em; that their Hearts will faint, and their Hands hang down,
and not be able to perform their Enterprise.

By considering the doleful Consequences of a Defeat, how you will injure the
Public as well as yourselves, in case you should fail of Success through your
own Default, and chosen Wickedness; you will be excited to put away all these,
and let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouths, nor delight in any
of these Abominations: You will, we hope, beware of Sin, and arm yourselves
against all Temptations to it: Do Violence to no Man, neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your Wages; swear not at all; abstain from fleshly
Lusts, and be temperate in all Things: My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent
thou not: Learn not their Way, avoid it, turn from it, and pass away.

From the Example of Ac^^n, it appears, that one Man may sin in such a Manner,
as to bring Wrath upon the whole Camp; and woe to that Man whoever he be!

You will permit me further to excite you, to behave as becomes Christian
Soldiers, by reminding you of the good Tendency and Consequence of a right
Conduct, in Men that go forth to War. One Thing required of a Soldier, is, that
he be a Man of Prayer; and you are not ignorant of the Efficacy and Advantage
of this. We read the (...) were helped against the Hagarites; for they cried to
God in the Battle, and be was entreated of them: We read also, that in Answer
to Prayer, the LORD in a very wonderful Manner, helped the Israelitish Army,
discomfiting the Philistines; and that the Prayer of Asa prevailed against the
huge Host of the Ethiopians and the Lubims. 2 Chronicles. xiv. David's Successes and
Victories were in Answer to his Prayers; Psalm. xviii. 6; and to show the
Success and great Benefit of Prayer in this Case, I desire you to peruse 2 Chronicles. chap. xx. Surely then you will not hazard the Success of the Enterprise,
by casting off Fear, and restraining Prayer before GOD. You will do well to
read and ponder Psalm. xviii. throughout.

But its Time to hasten to a Close: And left I should trespass upon your
Patience, let me only add, that in Case you approve yourselves good Soldiers,
be of good Courage, and play the Men for your People, and for the Cities of
your GOD; it is hopeful, that you will be accessory to the humbling the Pride of
France, the punishing the stout Heart of their antichristian, perfidious and
Truce-breaking Monarch, and the Glory of his high Locks; scourging Canada; yea,
avenging of our Israel, and preventing the Romish Faith its taking Footing and
gaining Ground in this Protestant Country. You are, I trust, in high Spirits;
full of the Fury of the Lord, Jeremiah vi. 11.
and resolved to do all that in you lies, in the Defense of your dear Country;
sensible what Numbers of blood-thirsty Enemies are round about us on our
Borders, who hunt for the precious Life, and whose tender Mercies are Cruelty;
and whose savage Minds are continually whetted and exasperated against us by
popish Incendiaries, upon that Maxim of their Religion, that "he who kills us
does GOD good Service;" sensible that the French, our inveterate and dangerous
Enemies, nearly border upon, yea, in some Sense, compass us round about, whose
Interest, and the Prejudices of their Religion, prompt them mortally to hate
us, and seek our Overthrow. Seeing in Reference to them, we may go into the
Language of John, with a little Variation, What Peace! so long as that (...)
Jezebel, the Whore of Babylon, and her Witchcrafts are so many? Its doubtless
high Time, if not more than Time, to gird on our Armor, whet our Swords, and
prepare the Instruments of Death, and go out against them; that in the Name of
the Lord we may cut 'em off, or bring 'em to a better Mind, and to honorable
and lasting Terms of Peace. Wherefore, my Friends, strengthen yourselves in the
Almighty; and in this thy Might go forth. O thou worthy Man! thou mighty Man of
Valor! and do worthily in CROWN-POINT, and be famous in CANADA: Go forth in
the Faith and Spirit of David, when he said, they compassed me about like Bees;
but in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them. Be of good Courage, my
Countrymen, and play the Men for your People, and for the Cities of your GOD,
and the LORD do that which seems him good. Quit yourselves like Men; be
strong, stand fast, set yourselves in Battle-Array, that as soon as your Enemies
hear of you, they may obey you; may fade away, and be afraid, out of their
close Places; or otherwise pursue them, and turn not again, till they are
consumed; wound them, that they may not be able to rise; make them to fall
under your Feet; lay at them, and spare not, Deuteronomy xxxii. 36.
till their Power is gone, and there is none shut up or left.

If you, my Friends, on whom we depend, under GOD, to be our Lifeguard, and as
Guardian-Angels to us, are not stout-hearted, strong and very courageous, if
Faintness seize upon your Spirits; your Hearts melt, and there remain not any
more Courage in any Man if our Men of Might find not their Hands, forbear to
fight, be affrightned and become as Woman; or if Wisdom and Counsel be not with
you (for without these, Weapons of War avail little,) without Counsel, Purposes
are disappointed: Prove. xv. 22. most probably, ever long, we shall roar all
like Bears, and mourn sore like Doves; like God's People of old, when by the
Rivers of Babylon they sat down and wept, remembering Zion, hanging their Harps
upon the Willows.

May we not depend upon it, that you will vigorously exert yourselves, and act
the Part of valiant, noble and generous Warriors in the Cause of Heaven, and
for the Lengthning out of our Tranquillity? -- that you will entertain no
Thought of Flight, none of Retreat; but with Boldness and Intrepidity of Mind,
rush into the Battle, press on for Victory, play off your Artillery, storm the
Castle, break in Pieces the Gates of Brass, and cut in sunder the Bars of Iron,
and being violent, take it by Force? How can you endure to see the Evil that
seems to be coming on your People, or how can you endure to see the Destruction
of your Kindred? (...)
Surely then, you will put your Life in your Hand, if happily you may prevent it.

My Brethren and Kinsmen, according to the Flesh, let me persuade myself, that
you will be of good Courage, and play the Men for your People, and the Cities
of our GOD; -- lest our Cities be wasted without an Inhabitant, our Inheritance
turned to Strangers, and our Houses to Aliens, we become Orphans and
Fatherless, and our Mothers Widows, and our Necks brought under Persecution; --
lest the Cities sit solitary that are now full of People, and the Provinces,
and whole Land become tributary, or go into Captivity and great Servitude, and
dwell among the Heathen; -- lest our Adversaries are the Chief, and our Enemies
prosper, and from this Daughter of Zion all her Beauty depart, and the
Adversary spread out his Hands upon all her pleasant Things; -- lest we see the
Heathen enter into our Sanctuaries, and our holy and beautiful Houses, wherein
our Fathers and we have praised God, burnt up with Fire; -- lest the solemn
Feasts and Sabbaths be forgotten in our Zion; -- lest the Women in our Zion be
ravished, and the Maids in the Cities of our Judah; our Princes be hanged up by
their Hands, and the Faces of the Elders not honored, and we trodden as in a
Wine Press. Our Enemies how numerous and potent are they? how deep their
Policy? how indefatigable their Pains, that they may enslave or destroy us? and
you have certainly more of the Spirit of Englishmen, than to be willing that
the Enemy should vaunt himself, and say, Aha, so we would have it.

Finally, Brethren, Farewell; be and behave as becomes Christian Soldiers, and
fear not; you will be strong and do Exploits: Such Combatants are fierce as
young Lions; with undaunted Courage they wave their flaming Faulchions, which
make frightful Circles in the Air; and the shattered Arms, bleeding Sculls, and
cloven Trunks of the Slain, together with the dolorous Groans and Bellowing of
the Wounded, witness that they were not Wooden Swords, but made of triple
Steel. No pale Horror or Dismay seizes them, when fronting the Enemy, appearing
in terrible Array, in thick embattled Squadrons, and blazing Armor; in whom
Revenge and Fury, mixed with proud, obdurate Scorn and Hatred, lives for a
While on every Brow, denouncing Wrath and sudden Fate to all less than
immortal: The Angels of Gabriel, (the good Soldiers of Jesus Christ I mean)
while standing before the cloudy Van, on the rough Edge of War, ever it join;
and when they hear the Shout of Battle begun, and the rushing Sound of Onset,
and see Arms reflecting Blaze on Blaze; remain undismayed: -- A strong Desire,
and a Christian-like Hope and Expectation of coming off victorious, breeds
Wings, and on they fly, as a swift Eagle hastes to her Prey; their angry Eye
turns fiery red, denouncing and portending sudden Destruction to the rebel
Host, beginning now to despair of Success; observing their Competitor and
Antagonists, how their Right Hand grasps hard a glittering Sword, as it were,
tempered by divine Wrath, whose Edge is armed with hideous Terror, Slaughter,
Dread and Pain, and Desolation hanging near their Points, dealing round wild
Havoc, Amazement and Ruin, wherever they alight: These accompanied with
animating Music, the Beat of Drums and Sound of the Trumpets, as they move on,
to inspire or wake heroic Ardor in each Breast; Voices that inspire to lofty
and noblest Deeds, persuade to highest Acts, to Fame and Triumphs, worthy to be
owned in Heaven, when they return victorious, the Foe, not without Glory to the
Victor's Arms, being destroyed. The Captain of the Host, with Words enflaming
all who hear the Sound with Thirst of Battle, thus excites to Arms his God-like
Legions; See them draw nigh (says he) who will give our Swords new Triumphs! no
Fear of meeting Shame from you proud Infidels, whose Courage and Prowess will
hardly hold out so long, as to give these Power, these our military Forces
their Right and Fill of Glory. These Words enflaming each Breast with Valor,
panting now to grasp their Weapons of War, and asking instant Battle; some
instantly draw and brandish their furbish'd Swords, marking the Clouds with
Light, as they wave round in Golden Circles; robbing the Day of half its Glory;
prompted to adventurous Deeds and sacred Fame; inspired with a Love of Praise,
wrought in the Cause of Heaven: A sudden Blaze, illuminating wide the ample
Sky, shoots from their Crests and Shields and brightned Arms, flashing with
fearful Light, seen by their Foes with dire Amazement, Dread and Pain; ill
prepared to lift their Swords in Battle; having a Foe within, a guilty
Conscience, that takes from every Arm its Courage; weakened with their own
Despair, that shakes at every Danger: Conscience now whetting keen her Shafts,
and arming herself with Stings and Poisons, and twice ten Thousand Terrors
working Regret in each Soul, making his Strength Weakness: The good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ all the While shine with all the Beauty and Luster, that inward
Sanctity and outward Charms lend to the Hero's Lock; and fierce as a Whirlwind,
down they drive the faithful Edge of their Swords, tearing asunder the Crest
and Helmet, and the yielding Arms of the Foe, unable to endure its Force;
confounded with the stunning Blow, back he reels, distressed between the sad
Extremes of Fear and Shame; one prompting him to Flight, the other to second
Combat; but inward Pain, Shame, and the dread of Hell, drains his Arm of all
Courage and Strength; and total Rout and Ruin on the Part of the faithless and
godless Host ensues; Joshua x. 7, 8. So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he and all
the People of War with him, and all the mighty Men of Valor. And the Lord said
unto Joshua, Fear them not; for I have delivered them into thine Hand; there
shall not a Man of them stand before thee. When the HOLY ONE appeared to
Joshua, with his Sword drawn in his Hand, declaring, that he was come as
Captain of the Host of the Lord, what new Life did this put into him? And now,
behold the Wall of Jericho could not stand before him, but fell down flat, so
that they took the City, and gained a complete Victory.

And suppose any of you should fall amongst the Slain, and your Shields be
vilely cast away, (even as it happened to that pious and heroic Youth, Prince
Josiah,) you will die in a good Cause, die in the Bed of Honor; you will not
die unlamented; but your Exit will be deplored in such like honorary Accents as
these, (descriptive of the Excellency and Glory of valiant Soldiers) The Beauty
of Israel is slain; how are the Mighty fallen! they were stronger than Lions;
they were swifter than Eagles: The Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the
Lord was taken in their Pits. Your Memory will be blessed; your Names will not
rot; but be had in everlasting Remembrance; be enrolled in the Book of Fame, as
some of the Guardians of our Land, and Defenders of our Faith; and, which is
more, your Death will be a happy Transit (happy for you, and perhaps a quick
and easy one too) from a World that hate Peace, and are for War, to a peaceful
Region, a quiet Resting Place, a World where War and Strife are eternal
Strangers; where neither Injury nor Resentment are ever known or practiced,
(those bitter and Fatal Springs of Revenge and Bloodshed!) but universal
Benevolence runs through the whole Kingdom, and all are made perfect in Love. See
Romans viii. 35, 39. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? Shall Peril
or Sword? As it is written, for thy Sake are we killed, etc, Nay, in all these
Things we are more than Conquerors through him that loved us; for I am
persuaded, that neither Death, nor any other Creature, shall be able to
separate us from the Love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. For you to
die will be Gain; your End will be Peace, and the best Part of your
Composition, your precious and immortal Souls, will be gathered to the Spirits
of just Men made perfect; to the Multitude of the heavenly Host, that are
before the Throne of GOD, and of the Lamb; and GOD shall wipe away all Tears
from your Eyes; adorn your Brows with heavenly Garlands, with the ever-green
Laurels that grow in the Paradise of GOD, fast by the Tree of Life, and crown
you with Glory and Honor.

Your Warfare being accomplished, and your faithful Service accepted; the
righteous Judge, in the Distribution of the Rewards of the next Life, will not
forget your Work and Labor of Love, in generously playing the Men for your
People, and the Cities of your GOD; will see that distinguishing Honors be
done you; will set a Crown of pure celestial Gold upon your Head, and to you
will be grant, to sit down with him in his Throne. Rev. iii. 21. And in a short
Time, your dead Bodies will be raised, and when this Corruptible shall have put
on Incorruption, and this Mortal shall have put on Immortality; then shall be
brought to pass the Saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory:
Amen. -- O our GOD! will thou not judge them? -- Our Eyes are upon thee. Then
upon Jahaziel came the Spirit of the Lord; and he said, Hearken ye, all Judah,
and ye Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou King Jehosaphat; thus says the Lord
unto you, Be not afraid, nor dismayed, by reason of this great Multitude; for
the Battle is not yours, but GOD's: -- The Lord will be with you; 2 Chronicles. xx.
12, 14, 15, 17.

I conclude with that apposite Benediction of Moses, with which he took his
final Leave and Farewell of the Host of Israel, encamped in the Wilderness:
Deuteronomy. xxxii. 26, -- 29. There is none like the GOD of Jeshurun, who rides upon
the Heavens in thy Help, and in his Excellency, on the Sky. The eternal GOD is
thy Refuge; and underneath are the everlasting Arms; and he shall thrust out
the Enemy from before thee; and shall say, destroy them. Israel then shall
dwell in Safety (...), the Fountain of Jacob shall be upon Land of Corn and
Wine; also his Heavers shall drop down Dew. Happy art thou, O Israel! who is
like unto thee! O People, saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy Help, who is the
Sword of thy Excellency! and thine Enemies shall be found Liars unto thee; and
thou shall tread upon their high Places. Amen and Amen.


