Mr. Prince's SERMON On the Death of Mrs. Fayerweather.

Be Followers of Them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises.

A SERMON Occasioned by the Decease of Mrs. Hannah Fayerweather, Of BOSTON, On
January 27 th, 1755. AEtatis 53.

And delivered at the South Church, the LORD'S DAY after.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And a Pastor of said Church.

Luke i. 45. And blessed is she that believed!

BOSTON: Printed by Edes and Gill, in Kingstreet, for D. HENCHMAN, in Cornhill.
1755.

A Funeral SERMON.
HEB. vi. 12. That ye be Followers of Them, who through Faith and Patience
inherit the Promises.


THE Apostle, in the midst of the foregoing Chapter, entering into a noble
Discourse about the eternal (...) Pries^^ood of CHRIST, after the Order of
M^lchis^deck; he suddenly digresses, at the 11th Verse, to prepare the Minds of
the Christian Hebrews, for the Entertainment of so sublime a Subject. And this
he does,

1. By reproving them for their faulty Dullness and Unpresiciency in their*
Christian Course; in the four last Verses.

2. By exciting them to aspire to Perfection and persevere in their
Proficiency; in this Chapter following. (1.) To an aspiring Progress in the
Christian Life, to the End of the 10th Verse; (2.) To a careful Perseverence
therein, to the Close of the Chapter.

And these Excitations he presses with a most grateful and excellent Variety of
Argument. As,

1. From their own good and promising Beginnings, v. 11. And we desire that
every one of you do show the same Diligence, to the full Assurance of Hope to
the End.

Do show; i. e. continue to show; Fell.
the same Diligence; i. e. the same which ye began to show at your first
Believing; to the full Assurance of Hope; i. e. till your Hope grows and
arrives to a full Assurance; or to the Completion, Fullness, and Consummation of
Hope; Pol. Synops.
to the End; i. e. not only to the End of your Lives, Dutch Annot.
but therewith also to the End of your Hope; when both your Diligence, your
Hope, and your full Assurance will happily issue in the eternal Enjoyment of
the Things hoped for, assured of, and labored after.

2. He presses to this Christian Progress and Perseverance, from the lively
Examples of those eminent Saints who had gone before them, v. 12. That ye be
not ^^thful, but Followers of them who through Faith and (...) inherit the
Promises.

And here are these two Things,

1. On the one Hand, a previous and important Caution against being negligent,
in our Christian Course. That ye ^e not slothful. The Term is rendered -- Dull
-- in the 11th Verse of the foregoing Chapter; and also signifies both
^istless, sluggish, remiss and ^^ack. Gouge, Leigh, Pol. Synops. and Fell.
In Respect to our perceptive Powers, it signifies Dullness; in Respect to our
active, it signifies Slothfulness and Negligence. Gouge*


The Word is here plainly opposed to the Diligence urged in the Verse
foregoing; which is a Term importing both a diligent Endeavor, with a
Forwardness and Earnestness therein: as being needful for the overcoming every
Difficulty, and obtaining the desirable Good endeavored after. Gouge*


The Meaning therefore is -- That ye neither cease to go on in your
Christian-Course; Me^^chius, in Pol. Synops.
nor allow yourselves to be dull, sluggish, slack, remiss or negligent therein.
Erasmus, Grotius and Fell.
Or as if the Apostle had said -- As we desire you to go on and show the same
Diligence you began to show, but to which you have still a natural Aversion; so
we desire you likewise would be very careful to guard and strive against that
remiss and sluggish Temper, to which you have also a natural and strong
Propension; and which, indulged, will sadly hinder your advancing to a full
Assurance of Hope, and your further Progress in Christian Knowledge, Grace,
Obedience and Comfort.

2. We have then on the other Hand, in the Rest of the Verse, a moving
Excitation, to follow them who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises.

As a farther Motive to this diligent and steady Progress, the Apostle here
sets before them, the fair Examples of such as have run well, and happily
attained the End, viz. the Possession of the promised Inheritance. Gouge.


And here are (1) The lively Examples represented -- Them who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises. By them, the Apostle may mean, not only the
ancient Patriarchs Erasmus, Beza, Grotius.
and Prophets, yea the Saints of all preceding Ages they had read and heard
of; D^^date.
but even of that Age also, and more especially those whom these Christian
Hebrews had been ^rally acquainted with, and whose lively Examples they had
before their Eyes. (2) The special Duty excited to, viz. to be Followers
[Mimet^^] or Imitators of the^.

And in introducing his Excitation, we may observe the Contrast between the
forementioned Vice of Negligence he had been just de^orting from, and the
following Duty he is going to excite them to; implied in the transitive
Particle -- But -- as if the Apostle had said -- In Opposition to such a remiss
and negligent Temper and Carriage in the Christian Life, we beg you to keep in
View and imitate those exemplary Saints who have gone to Heaven before you.
They who have obtained the Prize did set you no such negligent Example; they
led no such careless Lives, but quite the contrary: they in their Places and
Times were diligent in the Christian Course; and so must you, if you ever mean
to come and join them in the same Inheritance.

But the farther Explication of the Text, I leave to be attempted under this
general Doctrine. That in order to make a Progress and to persevere in the
Christian Life, we should be careful Followers of those, who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises.

And to illustrate this, there are these four Heads to be considered.

I. To take a general View of the Promises they had in their Eye, and whereby
they were animated.

II. Those eminent Graces of Faith and Patience, in the Exercise whereof they
brightly shone, they set a lovely Example, and through which they persevered to
the promised Inheritance.

III. The blessed Issue of their Faith and Patience in their inheriting the
Promises.

IV. And lastly, The great Duty we are here excited to, viz. to be Followers of
them, if we would ever arrive at the same Inheritance.

I. To take a general View of the Promises they had in their Eye, and whereby
they were animated.

These indeed are the last Things mentioned here; but they were first in View,
and are here intended as the principal Objects of their active Faith, and the
principal Motives of their persevering Patience. They had Promises of glorious
and eternal Things in View, which they believed and realiz'd; which they kept
their Eyes upon continually, and which inspired them with a persevering
Patience under all their Trials.

By these Promises are meant in general, the Promises of GOD revealed and given
in the inspired Scriptures, to true Believers. They are no where else to be
found, and they are comprehensive of these two Things in general; (1) All the
Good comprised in them; (2) The divine Word of Security, which God has given
Believers of its being bestowed on them.

And these Promises contain both earthly, spiritual and eternal Blessings. For
our Apostle assures us, 1 Timothy iv. 8. Godliness is profitable unto all Things;
having the Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. i. e.
Real Godliness in Union with the Subject of it: or whoever is truly godly, as
every true Believer in CHRIST JESUS is, has the Promise both of the
Continuance of the present Life, with all the imperfect Good therein, as far as
the Love and Wisdom of God see fittest for them; as also of the Life to come,
including all the perfect and et^^nal Blessedness thereof. And all the Promises
are made over to them in the everlasting Covenant of Grace, well ordered in all
Things and sure, comprehending all their Salvation, and all their Desire. 2 Samuel xxiii. 5.

Of these Promises we read in 2 Pet. I. beginning; That, To them who have
obtained precious Faith, through the Righteousness of GOD and our Savior JESUS
CHRIST, are given exceeding great and precious Promises; that by these they
might be Partakers of the divine Nature, having escaped the Corruption that is
in the World through Lust.

By this we see that these great and precious Promises are given to those who
have obtained precious Faith, through the Righteousness of GOD and our Savior
JESUS CHRIST: And that their principal End is, that by their Influence, those
who have precious Faith might be Partakers of the divine Nature; i. e. may grow
more and more like the Nature even of GOD himself, in his moral Excellencies,
Views, Designs, Actions and Blessedness; even in some Degree in the present
Life, and in as perfect a Degree as possible, in the future: Having escaped the
Corruption in this earthly World through Lust; i. e. having by the Influence of
these Promises escaped this Corruption more and more, as they went on in their
Christian Course; and in the Hour of Death escaped it entirely and for ever.

And those Promises may well be called exceeding great and precious, for these
five Reasons; (1) Because of the exceeding great and precious Things contained
in them; (2) Because they were purchased by the exceeding great Price, and
precious Blo^d of the SON of GOD; (3) Because of the great, precious, absolute
Security of their being accomplished; (4) Because they are justly exceeding
great and precious, in the Esteem and Eye of every true Believer; (5) and
lastly, Because of the exceeding great and precious Influence they have on
those who are entitled to them, or by Faith embrace, improve, and ^ive upon
them.

But What exceeding great and precious Promises are these?

To this I answer -- They are almost innumerable in the Holy Scriptures: But
they may all be ranked under such general Heads as the Apostle Paul has given,
in 2 Cor. vi. and the three last Verses -- As GOD has said; I will dwell in
them and walk in them, and I will be their GOD, and they shall be my People --
And I will receive you, and be a Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the LORD Almighty. These the Apostle styles by the Name of
Promises, and shows the excellent Use and Influence of them in the following
Verse: Having therefore these Promises, dearly Beloved, let us cleanse
ourselves from all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in
the Fear of GOD.

I might mention a great Variety of other Promises: But they are all comprised
in These: For to have the infinite and all-sufficient GOD for our GOD and
Father, and for him to receive us, and dwell in us for ever, is plainly
comprehensive of all the Good that our largest Hearts can wish, or our most
capacious Natures can receive: and they comprehend both all the imperfect Good
of the present World, and all the perfect Good of the other. But as the other
is immensely more great and excellent than the present; so is the View and
Purport of these comprehensive Promises: they most eminently look to the other:
they reach unto, and through the ^alley o^ the Shadow of Death, yea beyond it
infinitely; (...) their Prospect to eternal Ages. And that they chiefly look to
the World to come, most clearly appears from the Parallel Description of their
glorious Fu^fi^ment in Rev. xxi, and xxii.

There, in that other World, the Perfection of their Natures and Capacities;
their perfect Likeness to the blessed GOD; their clearest Knowledge of their
perfect and eternal Justification, Adoption, Conformity to Him and Interest in
Him; with the most intimate, endless, satisfying Manifestations, Visions and
Enjoyments of Him, as He appears in CHRIST, are by many Promises ensured to
true Believers.

Included in these Promises, is the Promise of Life which is in CHRIST JESUS, 2 Timothy i. 1. The Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him, Jam. i. 12. And this is the Promise that he has promised us, even eternal
Life, 1 John ii. 25. The Kingdom which he has promised to them that (...) him,
Jam. ii. 5. A Promise of entering into his Rest, Heb. iv. ^. The Promise of
eternal Inheritance, Heb. ix. 15: and many others.

They who rightly love the blessed GOD, and who believe aright in CHRIST, are
the very same Persons. For they who rightly love Him, love Him as He appears in
CHRIST perfectly and eternally reconcilable and amiable to them: and on the
very same Account it is, that in CHRIST they view Him with entire Approbation
and Complacency, believe in CHRIST to receive and reconcile them* and embrace
Him as their blessed Reconciler. And one great Reason why the Promises
belonging to them, sometimes describe them by their Love, and sometimes by
their Faith, is because these Graces, when they look to GOD in CHRIST, in their
very Nature, Motives, and Operations, ever mix together.

I say, that all these and every other Promise which Respects the future and
heavenly World, as well as this, are comprehended in this one; of GOD's being
our GOD and Father, and dwelling with and in us for ever; who is the only and
eternal Fountain of all that is good* and every other Promise is only of some
particular Stream of Good deriving from Him*

This most great and perfect Good is the comprehensive Good of all the
Promises. In all the Promises the glorious GOD* especially as revealed in
CHRIST, is All in All. And the Promises of this, especially as enjoyed in
Perfection in the heavenly World, are firstly in the Heart and Eye of the true
Believer. They are the strongest Motives of his Life and Actions* they enliven,
draw forth, and raise his Faith: and they produce and maintain his Patience,
till He comes to their full Accomplishment.

If you ask me, -- Whence these Promises derive is true Believers* I must lead
back your Views to the past Eternity: For so does our Apostle in Titu^ i. 2, In
Hope of eternal Life, which GOD that cannot Li^, pr^mis^d before the World
began. And to whom should HE then firstly make this most great and
comprehensive Promise, but to the MEDIATOR, as the appointed Head of a glorious
Offspring? Agreeable to this, the Apostle tells us, in Heb. viii. ^, He is the
(...) of a better Covenant which was established upon better Promises: and in 2
Cor. i. 20, For, all the Promises of GOD in HIM [i. e. in JESUS CHRIST, the SON
of GOD, as He is described in the Verse foregoing] are yea, and in HIM Amen,
unto the Glory of GOD.

Now, by our being re^^nerated by the SPIRIT of CHRIST, we become his
Mediatorial-Offspring: and by Faith in Him, we are actually united to Him as
our Mediatorial Head, and become his Children, as He calls them, Heb. ii. 13,
14. And as He says to his divine Father, Job. xvii. 10, All Mine are Thine, and
Thine are Mine; they become the Children of GOD by Adoption also. Job. i. 12,
As many as received HIM, to them gave He Power to become [i. e. the Right and
Privilege of being] the Sons of GOD, even to them th^^ believe on his Name. So
Gal. iii. 26, Ye are all the Children of GOD by Faith in CHRIST JESUS. And
hence the Apostle infers, Romans viii. 17, And if Children, then Heirs* Heirs of
GOD, and joint Heirs with CHRIST. Gal. iv. 28, We are the Children of the
Promise. Gal. iii. 29, Heirs according to Promise. Heb. vi. 17, The Heirs of
Promise. Gal. iii. 22, That the Promise by Faith in JESUS CHRIST might be given
to them that believe. Ephesians. iii. 6, That the Gentiles should be FellowHeirs and
Partakers of his Promise in CHRIST. James ii. 5^ Rich in [having] Faith and
Heirs of the Kingdom which He has promised. And Heb. 9. 15, That they which
are called might receive the Promise of eternal Inheritance.

And these are the Promises which true Believers chiefly have in their Eye; and
live, rejoice, and triumph in the hastening View of their sure Fulfillment.

But we must now go on to consider,

II. Those eminent Graces of Faith and Patience, in the Exercise whereof they
brightly shone, they set a lovely Example, and through which they obtained the
promised Inheritance.

Both their exemplary Lives and Graces seem to be summed up in these, viz.
their Faith and Patience; their Faith as the Cause, and their Patience as the
Consequence* Faith as the vital Principle, and Patience as the persevering
Fruit, in a Life of Righteousness, Beneficence and Holiness. And in those two
Graces with their genuine Influence, may be well comprised all the exemplary
Virtues of the Christian Life.

And here we may give some brief Account; (1) of their Faith; (2) their
Patience; as also the Influence of these together, to bring them on to inherit
the Promises.

1. Of their Faith.

Now this is that divine Grace, wrought in their Hearts by the SPIRIT of GOD,
in their thorough Conviction and Regeneration, whereby they clearly saw and
believed the invisible GOD and his inspired Word: they saw and believed the
wondrous Things contained in his Law and Gospel: they saw and believed his
Being and revealed Perfections: they had high and realizing Apprehensions of
Him: they saw and believed the vast Extent and Excellence of his Commands and
Prohibitions: they believed his Threatenings, and had awful Views of his
destroying Displeasure and Judgments denounced in them: they believed his
Promises, and had enlarged, lively Views of the trans^endent and eternal Good
ensured by them: they believed his universal and perfect creating, upholding,
and ruling the World; saw his wondrous Influence in the Works of Nature and
Providence: And thereby they realized his universal and perpetual Presence, his
all-seeing Eye, and his future Judgment.

By Faith, they saw the Emptiness of Creatures, the Vanity of earthly Things,
the incomparable Glories and Amiableness of GOD, especially as appearing in the
Face of CHRIST; with his only all-suitableness and all sufficiency, fully and
for ever to save and make them happy, in giving them a perfect Conformity to
Him, Communion with Him, Vision and Enjoyment of Him. By Faith they saw the
surpassing Beauty of Holiness, the exceeding Vileness of Sin, the Heinousness
and Multitude of their own Sins, and the Sins of others, the most odious
Fountain of all Iniquity and Contrariety to GOD within them* their guilty,
cursed, wretched, perishing Condition: and by Faith they clearly and gladly saw
the excellent and blessed Way of Salvation by JESUS CHRIST.

By Faith, they looked into the eternal World, they were hastening to and are
since entered in. They looked down and saw the Distresses of the (...) Spirits,
until the expected Resurrection of their vile Bodies; their rising then in Sin,
in Shame, and in unsufferable Horror; the open Discovery of all their
Wickedness in the View of the World; their extreme Confusion before their
Judge, and that vast Assembly; their dreadful Condemnation; their being driven
down to Hell, with most vile and cruel Devils, and their suffering there with
them the Vengeance of eternal Fire.

And by Faith they also looked up and viewed the Paradise above; the Spirits of
the Just made perfect, the blessed Angels, and CHRIST the glorified Mediator
there; the perfect Entertainments, Satisfactions and Delights of all the Saints
and Angels in that finstless, lightsome and joyous World, until CHRIST descends
with them, and the Bodies of Believers rise in Glory like Him, and mount to
meet Him. And then, by Faith they view their admired HEAD in his surpassing
Glories, owning every true Believer, assembling them in one vast Company,
placing them at his Right Hand in the Air above, acquiting them before the
World; and then, with most endearing Looks and ravishing Complacency, blessing
them, and carrying them to Heaven with Him; there to view the amazing Wisdom of
all his Works, the amazing Revelations of his Kindness to them, and the Fullness
of his Excellence, and the Excellence of GOD in him for ever.

In such Views as these, their Faith was conversant: They more or less beheld
them every Day. These were the great and principal Objects of their believing
Contemplations. They had a clear, strong, lively, realizing View of these
invisible Things; were persuaded of their Truth and Certainty: And by believing
them, were bro't to believe in the invisible GOD as revealed in CHRIST; to
believe in his Word and Promises; to embrace him in them; to believe in his
Allsufficiency, Faithfulness and fixed Resolution to fulfill them; to believe in
CHRIST to reconcile them to his DIVINE FATHER; to believe in the FATHER to be
reconciled to them by CHRIST; to believe in the DIVINE SPIRIT, to possess,
dwell in, and reign over them for ever, to enlighten and sanctify; to
strengthen, excite and comfort them; to guide and fit them for all this Glory,
and then to be received into it.

In short; their Faith was the Substance of Things hoped for, the Evidence of
Things not seen; Heb. xi. 1. i. e. it was that vital Grace which viewed Things
hoped for as substantial or real, and unseen Things as evident. And like
ABRAHAM, the Father of all Believers, they believed in God who quickneth the
Dead, and c^lleth those Things which be not, as though they were: Even against
all Embarrassments of Hope, they still believed in Hope; yea they were strong
in Faith, giving Glory to God; being fully persuaded, that what he had promised
he was able also to perform. Romans iv. 16-21. And like his pious Consort SARAH,
who also believed in GOD and his Promise, Because she judged him Faithful who
had promised. Heb. xi. 11.

Thus of their Faith. Now --

2. We come to their Patience.

The Word [ Makrothumias] literally rendered, is Longanimity* or Long-bearing
Mindedness. Tremellius.
Fell.
It is in true Believers, who are the truly sanctified, that peculiar Grace, or
gracious, powerful Principle wrought in their Hearts by the HOLY SPIRIT, in the
work of Regeneration also; whereby they were inclined, and by the continued
Influence of the same SPIRIT, enabled, both submissively, patiently and a long
While, even as long as they lived, to bare the Afflictions they almost always
met with in their Christian Course; and also patiently waited for the
Fulfillment of the Promises, till they happily obtained it. Dutch Annot.


It was by the Power and Action of their Faith, that their Patience was in
Exercise: It was by Faith their Patience rose, and grew, and held, and
persevered.

In Proportion to our Faith in GOD as revealed in CHRIST, and Things eternal
and invisible; so will be our Patience. When our Faith is weak, our Patience
will be feeble: when our Faith grows strong, our Patience will more powerfully
endure Affliction: If our Faith holds out, our Patience will persevere; and
this both in bearing heavy Burdens, resisting strong Temptations, overcoming
Oppositions, and doing difficult Duties. While Faith is in a vigorous Exercise,
no Afflictions are too hard to bear, no Commands of GOD are grievous to us; no
Temptations too powerful for us: And those Believers who were eminent for
Faith, were likewise eminent for Meekness, Patience and Self-Denial.

So we read of Moses, that illustrious Pattern of all these Graces; Heb. xi.
24-27, By Faith Moses, when he was come to Years, refused to be called the Son
of Pharoah's Daughter; choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of
GOD, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season; esteeming the Reproach of
CHRIST greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt: For he ha^ Respect to the
Recompense of the Reward: [i. e. not of Desert in himself, but of the bounteous
Grace of GOD] By Faith ^e forso^k Egypt, not fearing the Wrath of the King:
For, (...), as seeing HIM who is INVISIBLE.

Those who believe in CHRIST, expect to follow him through Tribulation, as he has
foretold them, Job. xvi. 33; and that through much Tribulation they must enter
into the Kingdom of GOD, as his Apostles have warned them, Acts xiv. 22. They
must suffer with him here, if they would reign with him hereafter, 2 Timothy i^.
12. In Consideration of which, our Apostle had told them, Heb. x. 34 -- 36,
Knowing in yourselves, that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring
Substance: Cast net away therefore your Confidence, which has great Recompense
of Reward [for all you loose or suffer on Earth]: For ye have Need of Patience,
that after ye have done the Will of God, ye might receive the Promise.

Yea, in Proportion to their Tribulations, so their Faith and Patience had need
to be. Where greater Tribulations are designed for true Believers, there
greater Measures of Faith and Patience are usually granted. Wherever there is a
greater Stock of Faith, there is a greater Fund for Patience; there is ^ greater
Preparation made both for Contest, Suffering and Service* And when such Times
arrive; then Faith is wont to rise and look to GOD in CHRIST, to invisible
Things, and to the exceeding great and precious Promises: And then the Grace of
Patience also grows; i. e. the Soul grows stronger to bear Affliction, resist
Temptation, overcome and get above the World, to do great Things for GOD, and
(...) therein.

(...) such Times as these, their Patience often shines to the Wonder of all
about them. Far from being stupid or unaffected, they might have most tender
Hearts, even a constant Frame of Tenderness, most easy to receive Impressions:
But yet, for all -- from the strong and steady Exercise of Faith, they had a
Power within them to bear up under the most sensible Impressions, and maintain
a constant Exercise of Submission, Meekness, Patience* and Humility, under
sorest Trials.

The most afflicting Losses of the nearest Relatives, yea in the most unhappy
Circumstances and most grievous Manner; the most perplexing Difficulties in
their temporal Affairs; with the most distressing Pains of Body, and of long
Continuance; -- might all unite and come at the same Time on them, too heavy
for the mere Power of Nature to sustain. But their Faith then looked upward to
the invisible, but absolutely sovereign, wise and holy GOD, as their covenant,
kind and faithful Father and Friend in CHRIST; then looked forward to unseen
and eternal Things; realiz'd the Promises in their most glorious and sure
Accomplishment; saw them hastening to be fulfilled to them; yea, saw the most
afflicting Providence promoting their Fulfillment; by the lively Contemplation
made these Things as evident and present to them: and when their Faith beheld
them, and compared them with their present Troubles; their Afflictions seemed
but light and momentany, in Proportion to the vastly far more exceeding and
eternal Weight of Glory, which they saw them working for them: and these
believing Views bro't in an answerable Degree of Patience, sufficient to
support them under, and sufficient for their Perseverance, through all their
Trials.

I might mention a Multitude of other Trials: but must omit them, and only
observe; that sometimes they were so great, so many, so grievous and so long
continued, notwithstanding all their Prayers, and Prayers of others; that their
Faith and Patience were ready to fail them: But then, as the Apostle directed
them in Heb. xii. 2, 3, They looked unto JESUS, the Author and Finisher [both]
of their Faith [and Patience, and whole Salvation;] who for the Joy that was
set before him, endured the Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at the
right Hand of the Throne of GOD; [and they] considered Him that endured such
Contradiction of Sinners against himself, that [they] might not be wearied and
faint in [their] Minds: And then a fresh Supply of Faith and Patience came into
them, afresh uniting them in View with HIM their HEAD, in his passed Sufferings
and present Glory.

And see how they then exulted in a rising Flight of Joy and Triumph -- as in
Romans v. 1 -- 5. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with GOD through our LORD
JESUS CHRIST: By whom also we have Access by Faith into this Grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of GOD: and not only so, but we glory
in Tribulation also; knowing that Tribulation works Patience; and Patience --
Experience; and Experience -- Hope; and Hope makes not ashamed, because [we
experience, or experimentally feel] the Love of GOD is shed abroad in our
Hearts by the HOLY GHOST which is given unto us.

In short, by Faith, they entirely believed in GOD, and in his faithful
Promises: and though the Promises were not soon performed, yet by Patience they
humbly and quietly bare their long Suspension, and held out in looking, waiting
for and expecting their sure Fulfillment. Menochius and Erasmus.
By Faith they firmly adhered to GOD in CHRIST, and kept his Truths and Ways in
the midst of all Temptations: and by Patience, they endured all their Trials,
and surmounted all Adversities. Junius in Pol. Synops.


And ^s they lived, so they died in Faith, as those in Heb. xi. 13. These all
died in Faith, not having received [the main Fulfillment of] the Promises: but
having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and
confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth: For they that
say, [suffer and do] such Things, declare plainly, that they seek a Country, --
desire a better Country, that is, an heavenly: Wherefore GOD is not ashamed to
be called their GOD; for He has prepared for them a City.

And thus, through Faith and Patience, they persevered to the End of all their
Trials in their Christian Course, till they came to inherit the Promises, at
the Close thereof.

We therefore now proceed to consider,

III. The happy Issue of their Faith and Patience in their inheriting the
Promises.

The Blessedness which these eminent Saints have through their Faith and
Patience now obtained, is expressed by this, that they inherit the Promises.
Gouge.


The Word [ Kleeronomount^^n] which we translate inherit, plainly imports a
present Happiness; and may be more expressly rendered thus -- Who through Faith
and Patience are now inheriting the Promises.

While they lived on Earth, they were certain Heirs, to whom the heavenly
Inheritance was sure to come; but they are now Possessors: they are now
enjoying the promised Inheritance in the heavenly Kingdom. Dutch Annot.
Piscator. --


It is the same Word used in Heb. I. 14; where the Apostle tells us, that All
the Angels are mini^^ring Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be
Heirs of Salvation. Gouge.
[ dia tous mellontas kleronomein S^terian] i. e. who while on Earth are
certain Heirs, and shall in due Time come to inherit the full Salvation CHRIST
has purchased, and GOD in Him has promised.

And the Word implies these three Things -- (1) The ^^rtain Right they had as
Heirs to their present Happiness; Gouge.
(2) Their present actual and full Possession; (3) The fixed and eternal
Continuance of it. Gouge.


1. While in their State of Trial, they had a certain Right as Heirs to their
present Happiness.

When they were born again of the SPIRIT of GOD, they believed in CHRIST, and
were made his Children both by Regeneration and Adoption: and being his
Children, they thereby became his Heirs, even Heirs of GOD, and joint Heirs
with CHRIST; as we observed before, from Romans viii. 17.

They were not merely such Heirs as Adam was at his original Creation; who
being then a Child of GOD, as in Luke iii. 38, was also then an Heir of GOD:
But He was not then a joint Heir with CHRIST. No; He had an hereditary Title,
but suspended on a Condition, which He might fail of performing, and might
therefore loose. And indeed He failed of the Condition, and lost his Tit^^^ And
we being by Nature the Children of Adam, and so joint Heirs with Him; we ceased
with Him from being the Heirs of GOD; we unhappily lost our Title, and have a
Title anew to gain.

But when we come to be born of the SPIRIT of GOD; then we are made the
Children of GOD again by Regeneration or ^ Sort of New Creation: And then both
the New Nature and the HOLY SPIRIT in it, both incline and enable us
immediately, to believe in CHRIST, i. e. in the Act of Faith and Lo^^ to close
in with Him: in which Act we become united to Him as Members of his mediatorial
Body, and fully interested in Him; we are his, and HE is ours completely and
for ever; He reconciles us to the righteous and holy GOD; and GOD adopts us
into the Number and Rights of his Children in Connection with CHRIST himself:
And all this by Virtue of his mediatorial Purchase, Intercession and Agency by
his HOLY SPIRIT. And thus we become the Children of GOD by Faith in CHRIST
JESUS, as in the forementioned Gal. iii. 26; and being CHRIST'S, we are Heirs
according to the Promise, v. 29: which we never were before. For thus being
joined to CHRIST, and made the Children of GOD with HIM, we also become joint
Heirs with HIM. And because we are joined to CHRIST, raised to such a glorious
Dignity and Privilege as to be made one with HIM, as to have the same united
Right with HIM (with the humblest Gratitude and Veneration be it spoke and
thought of;) He will not let us lose our joint Title; He will not let us fail
of our joint Inheritance.

If one Child of GOD might fail, another might; and so another, and others; and
so all might fail, and CHRIST enjoy the Inheritance even alone without them:
but they being joint Heirs with Him, this cannot be. They are the (...) of his
mediatorial Body, and for them He purchased this Inheritance in Connection with
Himself, as well as for his own human Nature; and He is their Head and Suerty;
and therefore He will not suffer them to fail. Because He has an eternal Title,
they have an eternal Title also: because He lives, they shall also live:
because He possesses, they shall surely come to the Possession also.

Yea; I Will tell you a wondrous Thing indeed, astonishing and ravishing to
think of -- That not only GOD himself, but even Believers too are CHRIST's own
Inheritance. He has most dearly bought them, by the lowest Abasement and most
bitter Sufferings, for his eternal Inheritance: His DIVINE FATHER has given and
made them over to Him, for his own Inheritance for ever: and this may be said
of every true Believer, as well as of their collective Body. If one Believer
fails, the purchased and desired Body will not be complete: And is it possible
that CHRIST himself should lose his Purchase, or fail of his purchased, given
and promised Inheritance? It cannot be.

It Is true indeed, their Enjoying the Promises is annexed to their Perseverance
in their Faith and Patience.

But then HE who purchased and designed them for ^is own Inheritance, has
purchased their whole Salvation; including both all Graces, and the Increase,
Continuance, Perseverance and Consummation of them. Their Perseverance in Faith
and Patience is as much the Fruit of his Purchase, as their Faith and Patience
themselves, or any Thing else. It has also pleased his DIVINE FATHER, that in
HIM, as MEDIATOR, all Fullness dwells; that out of his Fullness all his Members
might constantly receive even Grace upon Grace, i. e. every Grace both in their
primary Principles, and after Actings, Progress, Perseverance and Perfection.
And they being by Faith made one with HIM, they have this Fullness, as their own
Propriety secure in HIM, their mediatorial and vital Head; this Fullness in HIM
is Theirs for ever, for ever to supply them. Yea HE is their Representative and
Surety: In HIM they have a divine, and most compassionate High Priest and
Advocate to make a constant, and prevailing Intercession for them: He bares
them constantly on his Breast and Heart: He most tenderly sees and feels their
Troubles: Yea, when they Sin, he helps them to a new Act of Repentance, and
effectually pleads their Cause; obtains a fresh Reconcilement, and gives them
fresh Supplies of the SPIRIT of Grace and Comfort. Yea, in HIM as their
mediatorial Head, they have a Supreme and Almighty King, exalted over all
created Powers in Heaven and Earth: And having a constant Interest in them, and
Affection for them, he has a constant Bent and Resolution to employ his Power
for their Perseverance and eternal Safety; to supply them constantly with Faith
and Patience, till he puts them in Possession of their Inheritance. See the
fixed Resolution with which he speaks, in Joh. x. 27, 2^; My Sheep hear my
Voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And I give to them eternal Life,
and they shall never p^^ish, neither shall any pluck than (...) of my Ha^^s.

Yea, lastly, as their Hea^, he has even taken Possession of this very
Inheritance for them, as well as for himself: And he will therefore never fail
to give them his purchased Coheirs, Perseverance in these Graces; nor ever
fail to uphold, and guide them, till he happily brings them to their rightful
Enjoyment with HIM of their joint Inheritance. But,

2. Those who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises, even now enjoy all
those Promises which look to the present State of the invisible World in their
full Accomplishment.

There are various Sorts of Promises, which look to the present State of
Believers in the invisible World, to their following State at the Resurrection
and universal Judgment, and thence along to the ceaseless Ages of Eternity: And
we should carefully therefore distinguish between the Promises belonging to
them in these several States of theirs exceeding different; and wherein their
Bliss appears to rise and grow, above all Conception. But they are the Promises
only referring to their present State in the invisible World which they are now
inheriting, and we are now to view them in the Enjoyment of: Though at the same
Time they are absolutely sure, and exceedingly rejoice in the certain View of
their enjoying all the other in their full Perfection.

But how do they now inherit the Promises? Or what Fulfillment of them is it
they are now possessing? Why,

1.) I might say, that even their lifeless Bodies are not now without
possessing them in some Degree, though vastly short of their full Accomplishment.

For they are now entirely f^^^d for ever from the Sin, as well as P^in and
Trouble, which were their constant Burden, made them groan, and from which
they longed to be delivered: They lie down there, where the Wicked cease from
Troubling, and where the Weary are at Rest.

But their very Du^^ is always under the View of GOD, and precious to Him.
Their d^ad Bodies are even very precious, as was the Body of CHRIST while it
lay in the Grave bereaved both of Life and Beauty. Though then there appeared no
Comeliness in it to the sensitive Eye, it yet belonged to a Soul most glorious
in the Eyes of GOD. On this Account especially, the dead Body of CHRIST was
exceeding dear to HIM, as well as for the Labors, Pains, Indignities and Death
it had endured for his Glory. Yea, on these Accounts it had a certain Right to
his watchful Care, and to a glorious Resurrection to immortal Life: and under
this watchful Care it rested safe, in full Assurance of that joyous Day.

And so the Bodi^^ of Believers likewise, in their dissolved State, belong to
their perfect Spirits, which are in their Measures like the Soul of CHRIST, and
therefore exceeding dear to GOD: and on the Account of these their Spirits,
their lifeless Bodies are highly valued by Him. Nor are they related only to
their perfect Spirits in the World above, but most nearly also to the most
glorious Body and Soul of CHRIST himself, in whom the FATHER is perfectly
pleased; and therefore He looks on their Bodies, as united to the SON of his
Love, with a dear Affection.

Lastly, these dead Bodies of theirs were purchased also by CHRIST for a Crown
of Glory to himself in the heavenly Kingdom: they are his purchased Propriety,
most dearly purchased, by pouring out his most precious Blood and Life and Soul
to Death; and therefore their Bodies are most dearly valued. Yea, by the same
Price He jointly purchased eternal Life for their Bodies, as well as for his
own: He has invested them with the unfailing Title: He has promised it to them:
He is able and faithful to fulfill his Word: and therefore carefully watches
over their dusty Remains; and will certainly raise and fashion them like his
own glorious Body, at his second Appearance. But,

2.) They are especially their separate Spirits, that are now inheriting the
Promises.

A Number indeed, as E^^ch, Moses, Elijah, and many Saints at Jerusalem, whose
^odies were raised quickly after the Resurrection of CHRIST, are now completely
possessing the Promises both in Soul and Body, in the heavenly World; as so
many Specimens and Pledges, with their glorious HEAD, of what the Rest shall
be, at his Descent from Heaven. But the Rest of Believers from the Death of
Abel to the present Day, are enjoying the Promises only in their separate
Spirits; but this in a very high Degree, and a Manner exceeding happy above all
that we can now conceive: And this is the inheriting the Promises we are now
considering.

Upon their Spirits being loosed from their Bodies, they are at once released
entirely from a vile and dark Prison of sinful Flesh and Blood; and their
Spirits enter into perfect Light and Liberty, into the glorious Liberties of
the Sons of GOD. Their Spirits are entirely freed from Sin and Weakness; from
Corruption, Error and Temptation; from Trouble, Fear and Doubt; and they are
perfected in Strength and Holiness. Their Faculties and Powers are raised to a
wondrous Height: They see the holy and mighty Angels their joyful Friends and
Guardians round about them, as Elijah did, and with Transport hear their
congratulating Voices. Yea, no doubt, like Stephen, they see the Heavens opened
to them, and CHRIST himself at the Right Hand of the Glory of GOD, with all the
shining Hosts adoring him and triumphing in him. By their Guardian Angels they
are soon transported to, and welcomed with the highest Joy by that happy
Company.

There they see the amazing Glories of the Godhead shining forth in the Face of
CHRIST: They see themselves in a wondrous Manner like him: They see him
looking on them with perpetual Love and Pleasure: They receive most admirable
Revelations from him: They feel transporting Emanations flowing continually
from his perpetual Influence in them: They feel themselves to the filled with
all the Fullness of GOD himself, as far as they can possibly receive and bare.
And who among us can conceive a thousandth Part of this Felicity? But with all
the Saints they join, in singing that triumphant Song to JESUS CHRIST, the
faithful Witness, the first begotten or raised from the Dead, and the Prince of
the Kings of the Earth, in Rev. i. 5, 6; Unto HIM that loved us and washed us
from our Sins in his own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto GOD and
HIS FATHER; To HIM be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever.

But what they see, hear, feel, enjoy, speak and do, is utterly beyond the
Power of our most raised Understanding in our present State to conceive, and
must be left to know till we come to join them. See something more of this in
my Discourses on Acts vii. 59* and Psalm. xvi. 11.


3.) and lastly, Those who through Faith and Patience are inheriting the
Promises, are in such a fixed Enjoyment of their exalted Blessedness, as they
most surely know they shall never lose.

There are no doubt continual Changes and Varieties in their happy Visions and
Enjoyments: But they are rather Improvements, and not Losses; they are
Increases, and not Diminishings. Their Perfections, their perfect Visions,
Adorations, Services, Enjoyments of the infinite GOD in CHRIST, and their
perfect Satisfactions will eternally continue, if not grow for ever. And their
absolute Assurance of all This, compleats their Blessedness.

But our

IV. and last general Head, is briefly to consider the great Duty we are here
excited to; viz. to be Followers of them, if we would ever come to the same
Inheritance.

The Word [ (...)] translated Followers, is used by Plutar^h and others to
describe the industrious Stage Players who labor to be as like to those whose
Parts they act, as possible: The Word is often used in the New Testament also,
Gouge.
and by this Apostle especially: and this, to express our Duty and endeavor to
imitate the moral Excellencies of GOD himself, as well as of CHRIST, and the
Virtues also of the most eminent Saints.

Here it points to our Imitation of those who through Faith and Patience
inherit the Promises: and strongly implies our diligent Endeavor to be like
them, and in our Times and Places, to live and do as they. ( g. Gouge.
on Heb. xiii. 7.)

And this implies these three Things; (1) That we constantly keep in Mind and
in our lively Views, the eminent Displays of their Faith and Patience and other
Graces, for our constant Excitation and Encouragement; (2) That we earnestly
endeavor to be like them in these Graces; and (3) and lastly, That we follow
them continually, and grow and persevere as they, until we come to the same
Inheritance.

But our Time obliges us to come to the IMPROVEMENT.

And,

1. Hence then we see of what great Importance it is, that we as fully as
possible acquaint ourselves with the divine Promises, sec^re them to us, and
improve them.

The Promises being the principal Foundation of our Faith and Patience, and the
powerful Motives of our Perseverance, we need be well acquainted with them;
that by a believing, realizing Prospect of them we may be prevailingly excited
to a patient and persevering Suffering and Well-doing, till we come to enjoy
them in Perfection in the World above.

O! They are incomparably precious! They include all Good on Earth and
Happiness in Heaven: they ensure them to every true Believer: they are made by
HIM who is absolutely sovereign, absolute in Foresight, Wisdom, Truth and
Pow^^, absolutely unchangeable and faithful, with whom it is impossible to lie:
they are the most encouraging Things that can be: they are both absolutely sure
and everlasting: they comprehend all our Salvation and all our Desire; yea,
what is infinitely more, they comprehend all that the absolute Wisdom and Love
of GOD can desire for us: they are his Deeds of Gift to us, of the heavenly and
eternal Inheritance, and they can never fall us.

O! How studiously should we enquire into them, study their extensive Fullness,
gladly and gratefully embrace them; earnestly endeavor to secure an Interest
in them, and to make it most clear and certain; and then abound continually in
the realizing Views of the glorious Things they ensure to us; cheerfully
improve them; and aspire to live and die in the full Assurance of their
complete Accomplishment to eternal Ages.

2. Then it greatly concerns us to take the utmost Care, to be well acquainted
with these peculiar Graces; that we may not be deceived about them.

Multitudes deceive themselves in thinking, that saving Faith, or the Faith
whereby we come to inherit the Promises, is a mere Assent to the Truth of the
inspired Scriptures. But if we carefully examine them, we shall every where
find it therein described, as a vital, active, powerful and prevailing Grace
wro't in us by the supernatural Operation of the DIVINE SPIRIT; and such a
Principle, Grace or Power, whereby we are able to form a lively and efficacious
View of GOD and CHRIST, and those invisible and eternal Things revealed in
Scripture; and have such a persuasive Apprehension of their Reality, as to
awaken and rouse up all our Powers to a suitable Action -- As to embrace the
SAVIOR in all his Offices, Excellencies, Benefits; to labor for a certain
Evidence of our Interest in him; to strive against and mortify every
Inclination offensive to him; to labor after a constant and complete
Conformity to his holy Nature, Life and Will, in our Hearts and Lives; to get
and keep above the World; improve and suffer all Things for him, and to long
and strive to grow more meet for the immediate Vision and Enjoyment of him.

And the Patience whereby we come to inherit the Promises, is also a holy Grace
or Principle wrought at first and continued in the Heart by the same SPIRIT;
and from the Exercise of this lively Faith, by his Help excited into Action;
whereby we submissively and meekly bare every Trial, and go through every
Service in the Way to Heaven.

And it is in the Power of these Graces in their l^vely Exercise, that we
persevere, 'till we come to the Enjoyment of this promised Inheritance.

3. Would we be sure of inheriting the Promises; we must not only labor to get
these Graces in us, but also to gain their eminent Degrees, and to live in as
high and constant an Exercise of them as possible.

For the livelier and stronger is our Faith in GOD and CHRIST, the holy
Scriptures, the invisible World, and the divine Promises; the more earnest and
lively will be our Labors to secure an Interest in them; the higher will be
our Consolations, and Encouragements; the clearer and more satisfying will be
our Views of the various Dispensations of divine Providence; we shall view them
in Connection with the Promises and with their full Accomplishment hereafter;
and the more will our Views be raised to the promised Inheritance; the more
Deligent in our Course of Obedience; the more resolute in our Contest with
Temptations; and the more submissive, meek and patient under all our Sufferings
in our Way to Glory.

4. When our believing Friends are under heavy Trials, let us then behold them
as the blessed Heirs of this Inheritance; and when they have passed through
them, let us then behold them as in the joyous and full Possession.

But I must h^sten --

5. For the (...) raised Exercise and Strength of (...) own Faith and Patience,
we should be almost constantly ascending in our lively Views to the (...)
W^rl^, whither JESUS our divine Fore runner has already ascended, and our
believing Friends deceased, after him; and where with the Saints of all Ages,
they are all enjoying the Promises together in their glorious and happy
Accomplishment.

6. and lastly, Wh^le our (...) Friends departed are possessing the Promises
with CHRIST in Heaven; let us take Care to follow them in their Faith and
Patience* here on the Earth, and persevere therein 'till we also come to join
them in the same Inheritance.

And it may be now expected, I should give some Account of that lovely Example
of Faith and Patience whose (...) many of us followed to the Grave last Friday
Evening, but whose departed Spirit we apprehend is now enjoying the Promises in
the World above.

But I shall only observe these three Things concerning her;

(1.) For the Excitation of our younger People, especially of the Female Sex;
-- That even in early Youth, in the midst of all the gay Allurements and
Company round about her, she was so far superior to earthly Vanities, that when
she was Seventeen Years of Age, she appeared to be not ashamed of Religion, or
of the (...) of CHRIST; but openly professing her Faith in HIM and Subjection
to HIM* she joined in full Communion with one of our Churches, and sat down
with them at the Table of the LORD. And ever since, her Life has adorned her
Profession -- Especially for Piety, Modesty, Discretion, Inoffensiveness,
Goodness and Kindness; and under many Trials, held out in a Course of Christian
Faith and Patience to the last; and which happily enlightened the very Valley of
the Shadow of Death, as she passed through it.

(2.) For the Excitationof (...) of Families bereaved of their Husbands; --
That upon the losing of hers* when she was thirty Years of Age; she called her
Children before Her, kneeled down and poured out her Soul to GOD i^ Prayer with
and for them, suitable for their mournful Circumstance, from the Treasures of
her Christian Knowledge: And thence she carried on the Worship of GOD in her
Family, Morning and Evening, both in Reading the Scriptures and Prayer: besides
her careful watching: over them* instructing them in the Assembly's Catechism;
reading other Books of Piety; giving them her pious Counsels and Admonitions;
and keeping them in constant Order.

This, indeed has also been the pious Practice of great Numbers of good Women
in this Land from the Beginning, and has been a Glory to us and our pure
Religion: though, as the Power of Godliness decays, I fear this exemplary
Practice of our holy Ancestors is decaying therewith: and yet I hope there will
be some, who will keep it up from Age to Age, to the second Coming of CHRIST;
and that when ever He comes, He will find some Praying with their Children
among us, and lifting up their Voice with Joy -- LORD, Here am I, with the
Children thou has graciously given me.

(3.) And lastly, For the Excitation of her Relatives, Acquaintants, and indeed
of every one of the Audience; I shall mention some of her dying Speeches; and
so conclude.

On the Saturday before she died, she renewed her Covenant with GOD in a verbal
Manner; saying -- I dedicate myself afresh to GOD, the FATHER, SON and HOLY
GHOST; to whom I have often given up myself in Secret with all my Heart. I
praise GOD the FATHER; who has made and preserved me all my Life long: I praise
GOD the SON; who has redeemed and bought me with his precious Blood; who is
infinitely precious to my Soul: I praise also GOD the HOLY GHOST; who
sanctifies and makes me meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And
this one GOD in three Persons is my GOD, and will be my Portion for ever.

The same Day, her eldest Son coming to see Her, asked Her, Whether She thought
She should Die? She answered -- Yes. He asked, How Death appeared to Her? She
answered, -- Not as the King of Terrors. He asked, Whether She knew in whom She
believed, and whether She could commit her Soul into his gracious Hands? She
answered, -- Yes, Yes: though I die repenting, and my humble Trust is in the
Righteousness and Merits of CHRIST alone, for my Acceptance with GOD: I have no
Merit or Righteousness of my own: CHRIST is my All and in All. He has in his
Word declared -- All that the FATHER gives me, shall come to me; and whosoever
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out:And GOD has enabled me to come to Him
by his Grace and SPIRIT.

Her elder Daughter telling Her, She need not be afraid of Death; She answered,
No, I am not afraid to die: though Death be the King of Terrors, yet my JESUS has
overcome Death, and brought Life and Immortality to Light by the Gospel.

She charged her Children to seek an Interest in CHRIST; -- to seek Him early
and earnestly: -- and don't dare to have one repining Thought of GOD, though I
shall leave you: For what He does is in infinite Wisdom; best for me, and best
for you -- Be in Subjection to the FATHER of Spirits, and live. And when they
wept, She said; -- Weep not for me: your Weeping hurts me: but rather rejoice,
because I am going to the FATHER.

After this, She broke out, saying, -- I pity my poor Girls: But be not
dismayed; for my dear SAVIOR in whom I have trusted, is the Rock of Ages; and
will not fail you, if you do but seek Him and trust in Him; though Father and
Mother forsake you, He will take you up.

Then she called her Ni^^^s, and in a most affectionate Manner -- begged them to
seek the LORD betimes, even now in their Youth, while it is an accepted Time,
and a Day of Salvation: concluding with the Words of CHRIST, who is the Wisdom
of GOD -- I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find me.

On the Approach of the Lord's Day Morning, as soon as the Day dawned, she thus
expressed herself in Triumph and Praise to GOD -- Have I lived to see another
of the Days of the Son of Man! Why, This is the LORD's Day! This is the Day the
LORD has made: I will be glad and rejoice in it! O blessed Day! Ye Angels that
excel in Strength, Praise the LORD! I long to join with you to do so in a
perfect Manner! I long, I long to depart and be with CHRIST, which is
infinite^y better than to be here! The LORD is my Rock; I will exalt him; and
blessed be the GOD of my Salvation!

At another Time, she said -- I long for a fuller Assurance of GOD's Love:
LORD, lift up the Light of thy blessed Countenance upon my Soul: it will put
Joy and Gladness in my Heart, more than if Corn and Wine were increased: LORD
JESUS, receive my Spirit: LORD JESUS, come quickly! I am going to Glory: It is
better to be with CHRIST, than to be here: I am just going: And I say with
Thankfulness and Humility; that I have that Hope in me, that makes not
ashamed, the Love of GOD being shed abroad in my Soul by the HOLY GHOST: I have
trusted in the LORD GOD of Truth: I have Remission through the Blood of CHRIST,
even the Forgiveness of my Sins: The Blood of CHRIST cleanses from all Sin:
The Chastisement of my Peace was laid upon him; and through his Stripes I am
healed.

A Friend of hers coming in at the Evening and asking Her, Do you know me? She
readily answered -- Yes, and I hope and trust, I shall know you in the Kingdom
of Heaven, and that we shall rejoice together in Glory for ever.

At the hearing of this, her Children wept: On which she said -- Do you weep or
cry for me? You should rather rejoice on my Account; and I have given You all
to HIM, who has said; Cast thy Fatherless Children upon me: He will never leave
you, nor forsake you, if you put your Trust in him: Do my Children, as I would
have you; Be in Subjection to the FATHER of Spirits!

Being asked -- How CHRIST now appeared, and whether she had Faith still in
Exercise? She readily answered -- CHRIST is precious to me, CHRIST is
infinitely precious to me: Yea, he is in me the Hope of Glory: I say again, I
have that Hope that makes not ashamed, because the Love of GOD is shed abroad
in my Heart: CHRIST is the Giver of Faith: It is the Gift of GOD: My Flesh and
my Heart fails; but CHRIST is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for
ever.

Finally, She said that Evening; -- I am now entering the (...) Death: I am
encountering this last Enemy: I am actually passing through the dark Shadow: But
I fear no Evil; because I have a divine Rod with me and Staff to comfort me: --
It is hard Work to die; but CHRIST has conquered Death, and him that had the
Power of it; He endured the Cross, despising the Shame: My Work is finished:
Where is my Conqueror? Where is my Conqueror? LORD JESUS, receive my Spirit!
Come! Come quickly! even so come LORD JESUS! To die will be to me unspeakable
Gain! O most glorious and blessed GOD! O blessed, blessed, blessed and glorious
LORD, that ever -- [But stopped, and said the Rest in Eternity.]

Her Speech and Senses failing, till the next Day, when She expired.

And now -- How lovely is such a Believer as This, both in her early and later
Days, in Life and Death! How amiable and alluring does CHRIST, the Spirit of
CHRIST, the Religion of CHRIST, the Grace of CHRIST and his Consolations appear
in such Believers, both Living and Dying! Who would not desire to Die like
them? In the very Shadow of Death, they rather appear more lovely and happy
than ever. But you must believe in, embrace and follow CHRIST as they; if you
ever intend to go after them into the promised Inheritance; and rejoice with
them for ever. And the more early you begin to believe and live as they, the
more likely you are to die triumphantly as they.

Instead of your consorting with the vain and light Companions of dancing
Assemblies, who dare not solemnly appeal to CHRIST, that they are his appointed
Way to Heaven, or doing what He would have them be doing, at his second Coming;
you must choose the Pious only for your Companions: For you may depend upon it,
that the Company you most prefer and choose in Time, you will be with to
Eternity. And if you cannot take a greater Pleasure in the Chamber of such a
dying and triumphant Saint than the most brilliant Circle; you may know, you
are miserably blinded and deluded; the God of this World has blinded your Eyes,
that you do not see the Glory of the Gospel; your dancing Steps are taking hold
of Hell, and in the broad and pleasant Way, you are every Moment leaping to
Destruction.

In short, there is but one Way to Heaven, for Ministers and People, Low and
High, Old and Young: And if you are not exceeding careful, the subtle Serpent
and his read (...), with their plausible Pretenses, siding with the (...) in
you* will fatally deceive you, to your (...) Ruin. You are in infinite and
continual Hazard: And ere you are aware, are like to be in the Depths of Hell*
(as Multitudes of others, who were a little While since, as secure as you)
eternally but vainly cursing the unhappy Day, you hearkened to their
Temptations and chose their Company.

Lastly, to awaken you, let me, as your faithful Friend, entreat you to
consider; that CHRIST has warned you, He will come at MIDNIGHT, to the
JUDGMENT; and to be always Ready; for in an Hour you think not, the SON or MAN
comes in the Clouds with Power and great Glory: And now suppose, at your
Midnight Revels, -- the Skies should break with a mighty Noise, the Sea roar,
the Earth tremble, the Mountains groan, the Rocks rend, a flaming Light from
the JUDGE appearing fill the World, and all the unprepared round you wringing
their Hands, and shrieking with Distress unutterable! -- Would you (do you
think) be Where He would have you? would you be among the Number of those
blessed Servants [THEN] whom our LORD when he comes shall find Watching? Or
rather, would you not wish the rocking House you dance in, might bury you in
everlasting Ruins! But alas, it cannot be! The Devils appearing in their
horrid Shapes would tare and drag you out, and your flattering Pleasures turn
to eternal Anguish and Lamentations.

O therefore, Bare in your Minds continually, as you will answer it in that
(...) Night, those awful Admonitions of your glorious JUDGE, in Luke xxi. 36;
with which I close my Testimony -- Watch ye therefore, and Pray ALWAYS; that ye
may ^e (...) worthy to escape all these Things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the SON o^ MAN.

Some Account of the Deceased from the Public Newspapers. By another Hand.
BOSTON, on Monday January 27, Died here Mrs. Hannah Fayerweather: eldest
Daughter of the late Jonathan Waldo, Esquire and Hannah his Wife, of this Town.
B^rn, Jan. 17. 1702, 3: married Nov. 4. 1718, to Thomas Fayerweather, Esquire
Merchant, who died Nov. 20. 1733, in the 42 d Year of his Age: and She left two
Sons and two Daughters surviving. She was beloved and esteemed by all who knew
Her, as a Gentlewoman of a fine Person and most amiable Conversation; of
shining Piety, refined Friendship, and elegant O^conomy: who adorned the
several Characters of the Wife, the Widow, the Mother and the Mistress, with
the greatest De^^rum: was a Pattern of every Female Virtue: Her Deathbed b^re
Testimony to be conscious Sincerity of her Religion; in which she exalted to
the last in all the Triumphs of the dying Christian.

Corrections.
PAGE 3. l. 13, r -- [ (...)]

Page 10. l. 13. for -- Long-bearing Mindedness -- r -- Long-sufferance

Page 19. l. 3. for 3* r -- 3.


