AN ADDRESS TO THOSE QUAKERS, Who perversely refused to pay any Regard to the
late provincial FAST, May 21, 1756. To which is added, A celebrated Paper,
reprinted from The MONITOR, or British Freeholder, Numb. 28. on Occasion of the
Quakers refusing to keep the General Fast appointed in England, Feb. 6. 1756.

PERVERSENESS is a Breach in the SPIRIT.

Prove. 1^. 4. QUAKERS (that like to Lanthorns bear
Their Light within them) will not swear;
Like Mules, who if they have not their Will
To keep their own Pace, stand stock still.
Hudibras. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by James Chattin, at the
Newest-Printing-Office, on the South Side of the Jersey Market. 1756. ( Price
Sixpence.)

AN ADDRESS, etc.
WHOEVER admits the moral Perfections and universal Providence of Almighty God,
must necessarily grant that the Majesty of his Government, and the Honor of his
Laws, require that signal Trespasses should be signally corrected When these
Trespasses are of a private Nature, their full Punishment is often referred to
another World; but when the Guilt is public and national, the Punishment of it
must be national also. For it is only in this World that whole Nations can be
punished as such, since in the World to come, all lesser Societies or
Combinations of Men, that are entered into here, will be for ever dissolved.

Both Sacred and Profane History bears Testimony to the remarkable Judgments
that have been poured down upon Guilty Nations. Some have kissed the Rod of the
Almighty, and humbled themselves before the Lord their Maker; and he has
returned and repented, and left a Blessing behind him. But others have hardened
their Faces, and refused all Correction; and have therefore been given up to
entire Ruin and Desolation. For there is a Time when the Patience of the
Almighty has had its full Work, and when the Measure of a People's Iniquity is
complete, so that nothing remains but a fearful looking for Judgment, and fiery
Indignation!

It has been the Practice of the wisest Nations of all Ages, to set apart
particular Times to be kept holy for particular Purposes. And whoever allows
SOCIAL WORSHIP to be a Duty, and the devoting one Day in Seven to adore the
Lord our Maker, publicly and in the great Congregation, for the common
Benefits which we daily receive, and to pray for Forgiveness of the common
Trespasses which we daily commit; -- I say, whoever allows this to be a Duty,
must likewise allow it to be an indispensible Duty for a People to set apart
and keep holy particular Times, either of Thanksgiving or Humiliation, as often
as they receive any particular Deliverance, or are threatened with any
particular Punishment or Judgment. And as it is the Business of those who watch
over the Welfare of the State to point out and enjoin the Seasons proper for
such Purposes; so it is the Duty of every Individual of the Community, to
observe the same with all becoming Reverence and Solemnity.

Of this Nature was the general FAST appointed to be kept holy by all his
Majesty's loving Subjects in this Province and three Lower Counties, on the
21st of May last, being the same Day on which a like Fast was appointed in one
of the Neighboring Provinces. Certainly, if ever any People had a more
immediate Call to humble themselves before the LORD JEHOVAH, it was our Duty so
to do, upon that solemn Occasion; when our joint Thanksgivings were to be
offered up at the Footstool of Omnipotence, for a most remarkable Deliverance
from wide-spreading Earthquakes, which had laid several Cities level with the
Dust; and when all that is dear and valuable to us, as Britons and as
Protestants, was to be the Subject of our united Prayers and Supplications. To
be convinced of this we need only to read the GOVERNOR's excellent
Proclamation, which is delivered in a Style so truly pathetic, affecting and
solemn, that one would imagine it might have roused the most Hardened, and
overcome the most Obstinate. In the Preamble it sets forth the Reasons of the
said FAST, as follows;

THAT it is often the Method of God's Providence, for the Glory of his Name,
and the Maintenance of true Holiness, graciously to visit his People for their
Sins, and in a more solemn Manner to call them to Repentance by awakening
Judgments from Heaven, which, if neglected or contemned, render such a People
still more obnoxious to the divine Displeasure: -- That at this present Time,
the Judgments of the Lord seem visibly to be abroad upon the Earth, whose
habitable Parts have been almost universally agitated with frequent and most
dreadful Earthquakes, great Cities in diverse Places being overturned to their
Foundations, many Thousands of their Inhabitants whelmed in the Ruins, and
Wars, and Rumors of Wars, with Sin and Wickedness, nevertheless extensively
prevailing: -- That our gracious Sovereign on the British Throne, touched with
a deep Sense of these Things, and a thorough Concern for the Glory of God, and
the Prosperity of his Dominions, was pleased to appoint and command a Day of
public Fasting, Prayer and Supplication, and to hallow that Day by his royal
Example, rising from the Throne like the King of Nineveh, and humbling himself
in the Dust, together with his good Subjects, in one grand and solemn Act of
Devotion before the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, most fervently imploring
the adorable Majesty of Heaven to avert just Judgments from us, to continue his
Mercies toward us, to perpetuate the Enjoyment of the Protestant Religion, and
to protect and bless our Fleets and Armies: -- That the Imitation of such an
illustrious Pattern of Humiliation and Devotion, was not only our indispensible
Duty, on so awful and interesting an Occasion; as we are Subjects to the best
of Kings, and equally concerned with others of his faithful Subjects in the
general Safety and Prosperity of his Dominions, but especially as the Province
which we inhabit is at this Time particularly visited with the murdering Sword
of a savage Enemy, a considerable Part of it being already laid waste by their
bloody Ravages; great Numbers of our unhappy Fellow Subjects cruelly murdered,
or carried into barbarous Captivity, and the ensuing Summer opening a Prospect
that seems big with the Fate of these Colonies, and more nearly interesting
their suture Safety than any Period which they have ever yet beheld.

Nor were the Ends proposed by this FAST less affecting than the awful Occasion
of it. For the Proclamation goes on to declare that it was designed for a Day
Of general Humiliation before the Lord our God, that we might with one Heart
and Voice, in the most solemn and devout Manner, send up our united Prayers and
Supplications to the Throne of Grace and Mercy, through the unspeakable Merits
and Intercession of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for the Forgiveness both
of our private and national Sins; for averting the Punishments justly due to
them; for Reformation and Amendment of Manners; for Harmony and public Spirit
in all our Transactions; for a Blessing upon his Majesty's Arms employed in the
Defense of our just Rights both by Sea and Land; for Consolation and Redress to
our suffering Brethren and Neighbors; for a speedy deliverance from our cruel
and blood-thirsty Enemies; and for continuing among us, and spreading abroad to
the remotest Parts of this dark Continent, the inestimable Blessings of British
Liberty, and the pure Light of the Protestant Religion, as it is in Christ
Jesus, equally reformed from vain Superstition and giddy Enthusiasm.

These were the great Ends of this Fast; and certainly none were ever more
becoming a Government to enjoin, or a People to comply with. For there is
scarce a single Thing worthy of our Care in this Life, as a Society of
dependent Creatures, which is not comprised under some one of the foregoing
Heads. -- And, On! what a glorious Prospect it would have been, to have beheld
two or three Provinces, without one dissenting Voice, humbling themselves
before a Heart-searching God for such important Purposes, and throwing
themselves at the precious REDEEMER'S Feet for Mercy and Favor. One may safely
affirm, that there is not, among all the Works of the Almighty, a Prospect that
would have been more pleasing to him than such an Appearance of his repenting
and returning Creatures But alas! the Harmony of the finest Instrument may be
interrupted and marred by one peevish and jarring String! In order to have
given such an Appearance its full Beauty and Luster, it ought to have been
universal, and without Exception; for as every Member of the Community has
added to the general Guilt, so every Member ought likewise to have joined in
the general Humiliation. And for any Set of Men to oppose their stubborn Wills
to the Sense of a Community, and to do all in their Power to prevent that
general-Blessing which the Lord has promised to such a general Act of Devotion,
thereby involving others in the fatal Effects of their Obstinacy; -- I say, for
any Set of Men to act thus, is a Degree of Baseness for which I have no Name.
Good Men have Reason to think it their Misfortune to be connected in the same
Society with such perverse Persons, and heartily to mourn because they are
constrained to sojourn in Mesech, and to dwell in the Tents of Kedar!

Such was the Perverseness of the People called Quakers on the late solemn
Fast. And Notwithstanding all the aforesaid Considerations, and the express
Order of the Government, -- requiring the said Fast to be religiously kept by
all his Majesty's loving Subjects within this Province and Counties, of
whatsoever Denomination, as they tendered their own temporal and eternal
Welfare, and would not be deemed wanting in the universal Duties of GRATITUDE
to their adorable Maker, AFFECTION for their gracious Sovereign, COMPASSION for
their suffering Brethren, and Regard for their own IMMEDIATE SAFETY; yet most
of them in this City, as well as in the Country, refused to pay the least
Regard to the Day, but were rather more busy than usual in pursuing their
temporal Callings, and grasping at the vile Dross of this World!

Early on the Morning of the said Day, the MAYOR of this City being informed,
that many of the said Quakers, neither restrained by Decency to their
Neighbors, nor moved by the calamitous Situation of their Country, were
obstinately employed in servile Labor, sent the following Warrant directed to
the Constables of the City, viz.

City Philadelphia, ss.
THIS Day being by Order of His Honor the GOVERNOR appointed to be religiously
kept, and all Persons being required to abstain from servile Labor throughout
this Province; you are hereby directed to go through the several Wards of this
City, and if you find any Persons at Work, you are to acquaint him of this
Order; and if they are so indiscreet as to open their Shops and follow their
several Vocations in Opposition to the Orders of Government, you are to let
them know that they ought to conform to all Acts of Government, and more
especially at this Time. -- You are hereby further enjoined to take down the
Name or Names of every Master of a Family or of Workmen, whom you may find
either at work, their Shops open, or otherwise following their several Trades,
and to make a Return of all such to me, that such disorderly and unjustifiable
Practices may hereafter be prevented, and the Offenders brought to a true Sense
of their Indiscretion. Witness my Hand and Seal, May 21. 1756.

WILLIAM PLUMSTED, Mayor.

In Consequence of this Warrant the Constables returned the Names of 61 Heads
of Families, all Quakers in this City who were found employed in Opposition to
this Order of Government. Their Power and Numbers will no Doubt screen them
from the Punishment which might justly be inflicted upon such Obstinacy and
Contempt. But they shall not escape that Censure which the PRESS, and EVERY
GOOD MAN ought to pronounce against them. It was once intended to add the Names
of the Offenders in this Place, that the Innocent might not suffer with the
Guilty; for it is but Justice to confess, that some of the most rational and
sensible Quakers of this City were not among the Number, and who, if they did
not go to any Place of Worship, yet thought it their Duty not to give any
Offense to their Fellow-Citizens, and kept their Houses shut up accordingly.
But these were only a few in Comparison to the Number of Offenders.
Nevertheless, as they are sufficiently known, I shall spare filling up my Paper
with their Names; and shall only observe, that among the rest were three
Members of the present Assembly residing in this City, who were the Foremost to
follow their worldly Callings, and to refuse joining in public Prayers to
Almighty God for the Preservation of that HOLY PROTESTANT RELIGION AND CIVIL
LIBERTY, whereof they are the pretended CONSERVATORS.

I shall not pass that Censure on these People which they deserve. I consign
them over to the Public, and to the Censure contained in the following Monitor,
published against the Quakers in London, for not observing the late Fast
appointed by his Majesty in that Place. As it comes from a Writer of the
highest Reputation, and most approved Abilities, it will be far superior to any
Thing I could say on the Subject; and therefore I shall conclude my Part of
this Publication with a few Queries to Quakers.

1. Whether they believe in the absolute Perfections and wise Providence of the
supreme God?

2. Whether they believe He makes no Distinction between Virtue and Vice,
Obedience and Disobedience to his holy Laws?

3. Whether every Member of this Community, Quakers as well as others, have not
sinned, and in many Cases come short of the Duty which they owe to such an
adorable Being?

4. Whether when the Offense is public and national, our Repentance and
Humiliation ought not to be public and national also?

5 Whether, when a particular Season is appointed for such Purposes, and a
great Majority come cheerfully and readily to humble themselves at their
Maker's Feet, a few have any Right to oppose themselves to the Sense of said
Majority, to disturb them in such a solemn and necessary Act of Devotion, and
thereby to prevent, as far as they can, the obtaining of those public
Blessings, which the Lord has graciously promised to public Repentance and
Reformation?

6. Whether Persons who act thus are not to be considered as Enemies to their
Country, and to those invaluable Enjoyments which we are called, to pray for
the Preservation of, upon such solemn Occasions?

7. Whether the Quakers were not more immediately concerned than others to pray
for the Relief of our bleeding and suffering Country, from that Distress and
Confusion, wherein their particular Obstinacy and absurd Principles of
Government have involved us?

8. Whether Men who thus despise every Ordinance of the Powers that be, and
seem unconcerned at the Sufferings of their Fellow-Citizens, as well as the
Visitations of their ALMIGHTY CREATOR, are fit to receive any civil Trust,
either as Magistrates, or as our Representatives, and Guardians of that Liberty
and holy Religion which they refuse to join in imploring the Supreme Being for
the Continuance of?

9. Whether they have not incurred the highest Disgrace by their late
Administration of this Province?

10. Whether their Conduct has not been so obnoxious to the British Nation,
that they were lately deemed by his Majesty and his Ministers to have forfeited
all Right to civil Offices, as maintaining Principles diametrically opposite to
the Nature of an English Government, and to the Rights and Honor of his
Majesty's Crown?

11. Whether the Quakers in England, in Order to prevent the extending of a
Test for the total Exclusion of their Friends here from all Places of public
Trust, have not engaged as it were Body for Body, that their said Friends the
Quakers of this Province will for the future decline meddling in public
Matters, and behave more dutifully to their Sovereign, that his just Rights may
be recovered, and Peace and Happiness secured for his good Subjects in these
Colonies?

12. Whether the obstinate Refusal of the Quakers here to keep the late Fast,
was consistent with this Duty to their Sovereign, and the Promise so lately
made for them by their Friends in England?

13. Whether giving out in Mr. Bradford's Journal, No. 703. that only a
Majority of Quakers have engaged to resign for a little Time, and that they are
to resume their Seats when the present Troubles are over, is not a plain Proof
that they intend to evade the Promise made for them, and to continue in their
Obstinacy till they incur a severer Censure?

14. Whether it is not the highest Insolence in them to talk of suffering other
Denominations to come into the Assembly to extricate the Province from the
Distress into which Quakers have involved it, and that when the Storm is over,
the said Quakers will resume the Helm, and send those others about their
Business?

15. Whether any Persons of Spirit or Reputation would serve in Assembly upon
such dishonorable Terms? And whether those who are not fit to govern in Time of
War, can be sit in Time of Peace, seeing it is the great Business of Peace to
prevent, or provide against, War?

16. Whether all these Things put together do not prove that a Quaker will be
continually the same perverse, self-willed, deceitful Thing that is so well
described in the following MONITOR?

The MONITOR, etc. Published in London, February 14. 1756. To the MONITOR.
SIR,
THE subject of the following paper, though I cannot rank it entirely among the
political, is of so interesting a nature, in regard to the welfare of the
state, that I doubt not of your acceptance and readiness to communicate the
same to whom it may concern.

THE awful end interesting occasion of the late general fast, which our
gracious sovereign commanded to be observed RELIGIOUSLY by ALL his loving
subjects, was enforced under these most solemn and awakening conditions: As
they tendered the favor of Almighty GOD, and upon pain of suffering temporal
punishment, should they be found so irreligious and refractory as to contemn or
neglect the performance of so religious and necessary a duty. A fast, as his
majesty expressed himself, not only to adore the Almighty for being our defense
in time of danger, and for having protected and preserved us from imminent
destruction of EARTHQUAKES; but also to implore the divine blessing and
assistance in the present situation of PUBLIC AFFAIRS; whose issue is of the
highest importance to the peace and safety of these kingdoms, to our commerce
and liberties, and, above all, to the most valuable blessing of the Protestant
religion: I say this awful and interesting occasion, enforced in so pathetic
and powerful a manner from the throne, persuaded me that the fast of Nineveh
would be renewed in the British Capital.

IT was great satisfaction to every religious heart, and no less pleasing to
those, who pay a just regard to the powers in being, and sincerely desire the
blessings of peace and of the Protestant religion, to see this Fast observed
with that solemn and Christian deprotment in all our churches; as the cause
thereof required. Where majesty appeared arrayed with the brightest luster
before the King of Kings: and both houses of parliament never shone more
illustrious, than, at thus solemnity, before the altar. No age, nor condition;
no party, nor Religion pretended to be exempt from this universal obligation.
The Papists, Dissenters of all Denominations, the Methodists, and even the Jews
solemnized the day with acts of humiliation and works of mercy.

The courts of judicature were silent: no cause was that day pleaded but the
national Protection before the Lord. The public offices, the customs, the
excise, the exchange, and the very exchequer were not open: the merchants, the
manufacturers, the tradesmen and laborers; nay the very common soldiers were
impressed with such a sense of their Christian calling to obey the royal
authority, commanding them to cease from all worldly employments, and to
exercise their Christian pofession by fasting and prayer, that not only the
markets were adjourned, the shops, nay the very stews and brothels were shut
up; but in this most populous city, I am told, there was no appearance of any
worldly traffic, except amongst a set of people, distinguished by the name of
Quakers.

If this be true, Mr. Monitor! what idea must foreign nations conceive of a
state that tolerates a people, who run counter to the greatest examples; and
disobey the authority, by which they are protected? what jealousies does it
create in our minds to be connected with a people that will neither obey their
God, nor their king! had the Jews opened their shops, and frequented their
daily labor, would it not have been interpreted a contempt of a Christian
ordinance? had the Papists and Nonjurors made it a day of pleasure and
entertainment, would not they have been deservedly branded with disaffection?
had the Methodists neglected this necessary duty, under a vain pretense of a
more perfect way to appease the wrath of God, and to intercede for his
protection and aid; would they not have incurred the censure of all well
wishers to our happy establishment both in church and state?

WHAT then can be urged in defense of these Quakers, who in contempt of his
majesty's proclamation; in opposition to the universal abstinance from
lucrative and worldly employs, and unmoved at the imminent destruction from
which the Almighty has preserved us, and which our enemies are contriving to
bring upon this nation, were the only subjects that appeared insensible of the
public danger, or not desirous of the public good?

IT is unscriptural to suppose any one can serve both God and Mammon. And can
they be said to serve the Lord in fasting, and weeping and praying, who at the
time of public calamities, and general mourning, are taken up in their daily
practices of acquiring the riches of this world only? and it is very near
boarding upon rebellion, not to comply with such regulations of a government,
as are calculated for God's glory and the public safety.

There can be no great expectation of loyalty and religion from a people, who
are deaf to the voice of their sovereign; and prefer the advantages of this
world, and their peculiar humor or inventions, to the interest we ought to
seek in God by fasting and prayer; and to the example of the great, the
learned, and the devout.

What could an earthly prince say more to engage all his subjects to accompany
him to the footstool of the Almighty, than to declare that the reason of his
proclaiming a general and public fast, was, that both he and his people, might
humble themselves before Almighty God, and in a most devout and solemn manner,
send up their prayers and supplications to the divine Majesty, to avert just
judgments, to continue his mercies, to perpetuate the enjoyment of the
Protestant religion among us, and safety and prosperity to these kingdoms and
dominions; and to implore his protection and blessing upon our fleets and
armies. Was there any token of humiliation amongst the Quakers? where was their
devotion? in what manner did they keep the fast? instead of prayers and
supplications to the Divine Majesty, they were laboring for the Mammon of
unrighteousness. Neither decency toward their neighbors, nor regard for their
king; nor yet the terrors of the Lord, which are abroad upon the earth, could
work upon their stubborn, unruly, and hardened hearts. Their shop was their
Temple! and their gain was their God!

Is it not a shocking circumstance to be connected with a people that are
neither to be moved by judgments, nor engaged by mercies, to perform acts of
devotion, and to pray for the welfare of the society, whereunto they belong?
can there be any credit given to their future professions in favor of the
Protestant religion, who refused on this solemn occasion to pray for its
perpetuity among us? does not such a behavior countenance the suspicion that
Quakerism is continued by the same jesuitical policy, with which it was first
broached in this island? and that it has not cleared itself of the blasphemy
for which George Fox, their patriarch was punished?

Is not there reason to suspect the loyalty, as well as religion, of a people,
who would not in a devout and solemn manner, humble themselves and send up
their prayers and supplications by the command and example of their king, to
the Divine Majesty, for the safety and prosperity of his kingdoms and
dominions? and does not any evasion or equivocation to excuse their contempt,
or neglect of so religious and necessary a duty, as at this time, to implore
the Almighty's protection and blessing upon our fleets and armies, call aloud
upon the government to examine into those principles, upon which they pretend
to maintain such absurd and dangerous doctrines, and what, in other subjects,
would be justly suspected of disaffection, and a ripeness to join in the first
act of rebellion? not to pray for our fleets and armies is the next step to
refusing the necessary taxes to maintain them; which, according to our
information from America, is already the case, where these Quakers think they
can act with impunity: and there is no step between such a refusal, and the
betraying of their country to the first invader.

Yet these are the people who have been in many instances distinguished by the
royal favor! and in many particulars permitted by the legislature to enjoy
privileges denied to their fellow subjects: whose conscience will not permit
them to take an oath! and whose plea is for the spirit of Christianity, and for
the light within!

I shall only beg leave to ask whether you think a people who have a Right to
seek for the protection of their Property and lives, are not obliged to submit
to the ordinances of that power by whom they are protected, when those
ordinances do not clash with the commandments of God, nor with the liberties of
the subject? whether the measure of a subject's obedience is not to be confined
within the limits of the law? whether it is not more criminal in foro
conscientiae to forfeit our allegiance by an obstinate refractoriness to the
command of a supreme governor, than to take an Oath in a judicial way for the
confirmation of a truth? whether the spirit of Christianity is more visible in
wearing a broad-brim'd hat, a plain coat, or a green apron; than in the outward
forms of humiliation, and other positive institutions in the Christian church?
or whether that light within, the plus ultra of all enthusiasts, who have so
many innovations to patronize under that presumption, is not a perverse
ambitious passion, which delights in singularity, and sacrifices every
consideration both human and divine to an unmeaning obstinacy?

But what can be expected from a people, who, under the plea of being guided by
the spirit, reject the two sacraments of Christ's own institution; and who are,
as far as they do so, unworthy the Name of Christians? who screening their
unjustifiable proceedings under the sacred name of conscience and toleration,
make use of liberty as a cloak to cover their impiety and disobedience. For no
one can plead the act of toleration for doctrines, tenets and deeds which tend
to the overthrow of religion and the authority of that government, under which
he lives. And I can harbor but a very contemptible opinion of them, whose
chief pride lies in an obstinate perseverance in their own inventions, and in
opposition to all other institutions both ecclesiastic and civil.

This is very distant from the real spirit of Christ and of his disciples;
which is to give Caesar his due, to obey those that are in authority, to submit
to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, to mourn with them that mourn,
to fast and pray lest we enter into temptation, and not to confine the light as
in a dark lanthorn, but to let it so shine before men, that they may see our
good works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

It is not the place of a Monitor to punish; but to exert all his faculties
with a view to deter evildoers from proceeding in their wickedness, and to
reclaim those, whose hearts are not already given up to a reprobate sense.
Therefore, as in the midst of Judgment, it is the Christian spirit to show
mercy, where there appears any token of repentance and amendment; I do not
persuade you to sound the trumpet of persecution; a term which these Quakers
have made use of with great success to extort extraordinary privileges from the
clemency of the state: but, as a friend to society, and an enemy to no person,
I believe that it can be no breach of christian charity, nor any force upon a
Christian conscience, to call them to a remembrance of their duty to fear God,
and to honor the King; and to ask them, how they can reconcile their contempt
or neglect of the religious observance of the late fast, with that authority;
which in the most solemn manner, for their present and eternal welfare, called
upon them, and enjoined it, as they tender the favor of Almighty God; and upon
pain of suffering the punishment, as they deserve, who resist or contemn the
powers, ordained of God for the punishment of evil doers? HAD the occasion
alleged been confined only to the mournful object of earthquakes, which have
wrought so great destruction abroad, and visited several parts of the British
dominions, humanity, the bowels of Christian compassion, and a true sense of
God's mercy, which has so wonderfully protected and preserved us from imminent
destruction, should have produced some religious acts toward our Maker; but
when the precarious situation of our public national affairs; when our peace,
safety, commerce, liberties, and the very light of the gospel where also made a
necessary part of the duty, What shame must they take to themselves, who
contemned or neglected so interesting and important an act of religion! -- Is
not this a specimen of that spirit, which has so lately reduced Pennsylvania to
the brink of destruction, exposed the country to the common enemy, and deserted
their Protestant neighbors to be cruelly butchered by the knives of savage
Indians? ALL then that I would have proposed to reform this evil spirit, is,
that they shall either confess their abhorence of their late disobedience and
contempt of the royal proclamation, and promise their future strict comformity
to such ordinances of the state, from which they are not excused by the law; or
that his majesty will be pleased to maintain the honor and dignity of his
crown, the force of his laws, and the dignity of the Christian name among
protestants, by inflicting such punishment, as he may justly do, upon all such
as have contemned or neglected the performance of the late religious and
necessary duty of fasting. For it is in vain to shelter a contempt of the laws,
under the act of toleration. An act designed to prevent persecution for
religion, in such cases as the state acknowledged to be indifferent: but not to
countenance every irreligious, factious, and rebellious doctrine, which the
enthusiasts, uncristian and republican teachers, might invent and introduce
from time to time.

So far I can venture to affirm, that these worldly-minded people can find no
plea for there obstinancy, and disobedience, in scripture; and that there don't
want examples to show the confusion and damage, which have ensued to the state,
by yielding to, or conniving at those, who plead conscience for rebellion, and
reject all authority, that interferes with their unruly passions.

THE END.

