A SPEECH Said to have been Delivered SOME TIME Before the CLOSE OF THE LAST
SESSIONS, BY A MEMBER DISSENTING FROM The CHURCH.

Printed in the Year 1755.

A SPEECH, etc.
Mr. SPEAKER,
THOUGH my Sentiments in Relation to this Affair of our College, may be of very
little Weight at any Time, and much less, at a Time when, after so much
Contrast, Peoples Minds must be overheated; yet I could not think I had
discharged my Duty to my Country, and Constituents, in the Situation they have
placed me, without laying them before you; but with great Submission.

WE, Gentlemen, as a Branch of the Legislature, ought well to consider, how
prudent it may be thought in us, to enter into a Dispute of this Kind, which,
in all Probability, is like to turn out a religious One.

THAT there are often religious Fevers, and Deliria, in the Body Politic, as
well as in the Body Natural, when the Use of Reason, that grand Specific, is
lost, to all Intents and Purposes, is well known to those the least acquainted
with History. Bigotism, the Meaning of which, and its Derivation, I hope will
be thought no improper Digression.

A BIGOT* is a Person foolishly obstinate, and perversely wedded to an Opinion:
It comes from the German, Bey and Got. By God.

CAMBDEN relates, that the Normans were the first called Bey-Gotts, on Occasion
of their Duke Rollo, who receiving Gissa, the Daughter of Charles, and with her
the Investiture of the Dukedom, refused to kiss the King's Foot, in Token of
Subjection, unless he would hold it out for that Purpose; and being urged by
those Present, answered hastily, No, Bey-Gott. Whereupon the King turning
about, called him, Bey-Gott, which Name passed from him to his People.
Bigotism, I say, that constant Attendant upon all religious Persuasions, as the
Shadow to a Substance, when carried on with a proper enthusiastic Zeal, has
terrible Effects upon weak Minds In party Politics, the Affair is soon over,
and commonly ends only in a few sour Looks; whereas those in Religion, last
from Generation to Generation, and commonly end in Fire and Faggot.

WHAT Lengths did not Mahomet carry his Schemes, upon these very Principles?
And what Havoc and Devastations, did he not create over half the World? And
what Lengths might not our little Vagrant Mahomet, carry his Schemes, were he
endowed with equal Ambition? And the Inducements, or Alurement chiefly used by
both, are equally ridiculous; the one the Luxuries of a Life in Heaven, and the
other, the Torments of great Fire in Hell. And did not Cromwell, upon the very
same Principles, overturn one of the best Constitutions under the Sun. But
Examples are infinite. The Great Sir Harry W^tton, on his Deathbed, ordered
the following Epitaph to be fixed on his Tombstone. Hic (...) hujus Sententiae
primus Author,
Disputandi pruritus Ecclesiarum Scabies.
Which in English is, The (...) of Disputation, is the Bane of all Churches.
For these Reasons, and many more which I could offer, I am for getting out of
this Dispute as soon as possible.

WE, Mr. Speaker, I mean this House, have been long nibbling at the Prerogative
of the Crown, for which we have had hitherto only a few gentle Admonitions,
whether we may succeed so well in our Attempts upon the constitutional Church,
and the Prerogatives of the Bishops, those Guardians of Church Affairs, who may
be not quite so forgiving, is what I much doubt. The Protesting Gentlemen, seem
to be very sanguine in their Opinions, That the Church of England, as by Law
established, does not extend to any of his Majesty's Colonies. If so, the
Toleration Act, which is but a Subsequent of the other, can have no Meaning out
of England, and of Course, all Religions, Turks, Jews, Infidels, Papists,
Pawaouers, etc. are all upon an equal Footing. Judge now, Mr. Speaker, what a
beautiful Contrast, and Harmony, this must create.

THE Siamese indeed, hold the different Manners of honoring God, to be
pleasing to him, having all the same Object, all tending to the same End, though
by different Means. This, however idolatrous, is certainly preferable to that
Christian Principle, of compelling them to come in, alias, damning all those
that differ from them in Opinion.

IT may be thought Presumption in me, to enter the Lists, in an Argument of
this Kind, with Gentlemen so noted for their Knowledge in the Profession of the
Law, and so much Masters of Argument. I cannot, however, help observing, from
the little Progress I have made in Books, that it is a fixed Maxim, and a Rule
with all Nations, and indeed, from the Reason and Nature of Things, it cannot
be otherwise, That where ever Colonies issue, and settle, whether by Conquest
or otherwise, the Laws of that Country from whence they have their Existence,
being their Birthright, are, and must be in Force^ till other Laws are given
them. This, I say, is not only a Rule with all Nations, but is even an adjudged
Case in England, according to the 4th Mod. Rep. 224-5. See also, Salk. 411. and
3d Mod. Cases 159, which it is hardly possible to imagine, these Gentlemen
could have overlooked. The Force of the Common, and Municipal Laws of England,
for the Regulation of Property, had no other Introduction amongst us, and the
Use and Benefit of them has remained undisputed ever since. Why those, for
regulating Church Matters, were not, by the same Parity of Reason, introduced
at the same Time, is what I cannot well comprehend. There were indeed, but few
or none of the Communion of the Church here, when this Place was surrendered;
but will that exclude that few, or those that came afterward, from the Benefit
of their ecclesiastical Laws? If I should be asked, by what Act of Parliament
the Church Discipline is in Force here, I have only to answer by Way of
Question, By what Act of Parliament do we speak English? Or is the common Law
in Force? And an Answer to one, will serve both.

THIS Country was acquired by Conquest: Some indeed affirm, it was only
retaking our own; be that as it will, there were Articles of Surrender, and
amongst others, it was then stipulated, that the Inhabitants should preserve
their Liberties and Properties, and the full Enjoyment of the Exercise of their
Religion, providing they submitted to be governed by the Laws of England; and
in many of their Grants, and Confirmations, may be seen at this Day, that
Proviso, Paying to his Majesty yearly, etc. and submitting themselves to the
Laws, etc. and all this has been cheerfully complied with on both Sides, ever
since. How it comes into the Heads of any of their Descendents, at this Time of
Day, to contravert, or call in Question, the Validity of those original,
constitutional Laws, either with regard to the Church or State, can only, I
believe, be accounted for, by those protesting Gentlemen. But it seems some of
our religious Leaders, are become wiser than those of our Ancestors; whether
better Christians, or not, I am not to determine. We ought, however, well to
consider, whether it is for God's Sake, or any other Sake, that they lead us on
with so much Vehemence, and so little Charity.

IN every Community governed by Laws, the adopting some religious Worship, or
other, is unavoidable, and of Course, Laws will be absolutely necessary, for
Discipline and Order, to which all Reverence is due, from every individual, if
not from Principle, yet in Obedience to those Laws. We have indeed, had
Instances of a contrary Conduct, which has often proved fatal to the Invaders,
and sometimes to the Constitution.

SUCH, at present, is the Constitution of the Church of England and the
Territories thereunto belonging, according to the Act for uniting the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, proper Provision however, is made, for
scrupulous Consciences, by which they are to enjoy the full Exercise of their
own Discipline and Order, in all religious Matters, while they continue
peacebly in a subordinate State, according to prescribed Laws.

PERSECUTION in any Shape, merely for Conscience, is contrary to the Principles
of Christianity, and the Doctrine of the Church of England.

WE, Mr. Speaker, (as I presume you well know I am a Dessenter) are, in my
humble Opinion, sufficiently happy, at present, in the Indulgences the Law
allows us; and I believe the wiser Part of our Brethren at home, and elsewhere,
are of the same Opinion; let us therefore, for God's Sake, and for the Sake of
other Things, at this Time, of the utmost Importance to us all, be contented,
at this critical Juncture, at least. By Squabbling with the national
established Church for Superiority, or even for an Equality, may produce
Consequences not at all favorable to us. How happy would it be for some People
in the World, if they but knew when they were well!

THE Governor, and those Gentlemen of the Council, who were for the King's
Charter, and who have suffered a Species of Persecution, upon that Account,
from the Clamours of a Multitude, have gone as far, in my humble Opinion, in
our Favor, as the Nature of their Trust could well admit, and further than we
could well have expected; as by the 5th of Queen Anne, Chap. 5, Every King and
Queen of England, hereafter at their Coronation, shall take and subscribe an
Oath, to preserve the Settlement of the Church of England, and the Doctrine,
Dicipline and Government thereof, within the Kingdom of England and Ireland,
and the Territories thereunto belonging, etc.

HERE is a constitutional Trust reposed in his Majesty, which he of Course must
delegate by his Commission and Instructions, to every Governor, appointed
within the Dominions and Territories of Great Britain; and which they even by
their Oath of Office, are obliged to observe. How strictly those Gentlemen, as
well as some of our Neighbors, have adheard to the Spirit of that Oath, and
Trust, I am not Casuist enough to determine.

SUPPOSE a Society altogether Moravians, or any other Persusiaon, should settle
amongst us, (...) they possibly expect, or demand any other (...), or
Immunities, in religious (...) what they are allowed by the Act (...)? Or if
our Legislature should take (...) Heads, to give them more, would (...) with
that very Act, and (...) I shall leave to the learned in the (...) I must beg
Leave to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that it appears to me, our Predecessors in this
House, had a very different Way of thinking, from what we at present have, in
Relation to the established Church, as may be seen by the several Acts for
establishing a Maintenance for the Clergy of that Church only, in several of
the Counties, particularly in this very City, and which are at this Time in
Force.

LET us, therefore, of the Church of Scotland, consider how it would be taken,
were any of the Members of the Church of England, who are Dissenters there, to
claim a Professorship in any of their Universities, or indeed to establish any
University at all, upon that Foundation, how it would be taken.

THE same I would offer to you, Gentlemen, of the Calvinistical Persuasion, of
which, I think, the Majority of this House is composed. I would have you
recollect, that the different Persuasions in Holland, are almost infinite:
Should all of them, or indeed any of them, upon any Pretense whatever, make the
like Pretensions there, upon the established Church, what, pray Gentlemen, do
you think, would be the Consequence? The established Clergy in Holland, are
pined down very closely, to the national Orthodoxy, nor dare they depart from
the Heidleberg's Catechisms, or Synod of Dort They are paid by the Government,
and must behave accordingly.

THEIR Priests and Teachers, are maintained by their Hearers and Followers;
none have any Posts there, but such as are of the established Church. No Man
there, however, more than here, can complain of Pressure in his Conscience, of
being forced to any public Profession, of his private Faith, of being
restrained in his own Way of Worship, in his own House, and obliged to any
abroad; and adds, Sir William Temple, Whoever asks more, in Point of Religion,
without the indisputed Evidence of a particular Mission from Heaven, may justly
be suspected not to ask for God's Sake, but his own. That Difference in Opinion
there, makes none in Affection, and little in Conversation, where it serves for
Variety and Entertainment. They argue, says he, without Interest, differ
without Enmity, and agree without Confederacy. Let us, Gentlemen, endeavor to
follow so fair an Example.

AS to a Free-College, so much insisted upon, in the Light these Gentlemen put
it, I really don't know what to make of it, or what would be the Consequence.
One Thing I am sure of, that where ever a Number of different Persuasions meet
in any one Place, all upon an equal Footing, there will be no End of
Animosities, and Squabbling, 'till one or other gets the Better of all the
Rest. In that Case, poor Mother Church would stand but a bad Chance, according
to a late Commutation of twenty (I believe we may fairly say, 500) to one. It
may be remembered, what a Bustle there was in the late King James's Time, for a
general Toleration, but with no other View, than to extirpate every other
Religion, but that of the Church of Rome. But as those Gentlemen can have no
Views of this Kind, it increases my Surprise.

AS for my own Part, I am for the present College, as established by the
Charter. Nor am I, by any Act of ours, for making any further Encroachments
upon the Prerogative of the Crown, with whom alone, if I am not mistaken, is
lodged the sole Power of incorporating, and creating Bodies politic.

BESIDES, Sir, I humbly conceive, any other Method of Education, would be
injurious to me, and perhaps to many other Families, as it would disappoint me
in the Hopes I have, and the Expense I have been at, and willingly would be at,
in the Education of a Son, who every Body allows, has a very promising
Disposition, and Genius.

THE Intention and Design of Seminaries, in every Country governed by Laws, are
to form the Minds of the Youth, to Virtue, and to make them useful Members of
the Society, in whatever Station may be allotted them, in Conformity to the Law
of the Land. And the great Inducement to Study and Application, for that
Purpose, is the Hopes of a Reward adequate to the Expense, Labor and Pains,
taken. In Countries, where Liberty prevails* and where the Road is left open
for the Son of the meanest Plebeian, to arrive at the highest Pitch of Honors
and Preferments, there never will be wanting great Emulation, and of Course
great Men; such at this Day, is China; hence a Confucius, etc. Such of old,
were Greece and Rome. Hence a Demosthenes, a Pericles, a Cicero, a Brutus, etc.
And such at this Day, is Great-Britian. Hence a Bacon, a Boil, a Newton, etc.
To enumerate the great Men, from a low Entrance into the World, would be a Task
too laborious. In short, most of the Nobility of the modern Race, at least, we
all know, rose by their own Merit; and why may not we hope from a liberal
Education of our Youth, for Men of equal Merit? And why may not I hope, my Son
may be one of them? In our dissenting Way indeed, by the Laws of our Country,
we are deprived of all the Advantages of a liberal Education; there are none of
our Persuasion in the Direction of Affairs, either in Church or State; no
Nobility, that I know of, at least in England. If my Son had the Wisdom of a
Socrates, or the Genius of a Bacon, in our Way, they are but of little Use to
him; the Public is deprived of any Benefit from them, and he of being of any
great Use either to himself or his Friends; he has no Room to exert any
extraordinary Talents, which God my have been pleased to bestow upon him,
further than the Extent of the Walls of his own Closer; his Wings are clipped,
his Flight can be but short: He may study, write Books, and compose Sermons, in
which the World already sufficiently abound. The present Age, I doubt, will be
little the better either for him or them. Who can doubt, but that Mr. Foster
would have been in the first Order in the Church, and perhaps in the State too,
and of Course in a Capacity of serving the Public* himself, and his Friends;
had it been his good Fortune to have had the Rector of his College a Member of
the Church of England, his fine Accomplishments in that Situation, would have
appeared in their proper Luster.

THE Author of the Life of Mr. Thompson, tells us, he was designed for the
Ministry; but declined becoming a Presbyterian Minister, from a Consciousness
of his own Genius, which gave him a Right to entertain more ambitious Views;
for it seldom happens, says he, that a Man of great Parts can be content with
Obscurity, or the low Income of Sixty Pounds a Year, in some neglected Corner
of the World, which would have been his Lot, had he not extended his Views,
beyond that of a Presbyterian Minister; and this, I think* is the utmost
Preferment in our Way of Education, when religiously adhered to.

ON the other Side of the Question, a Youth of Genius, is under no Restraints;
he may soar to what Heights he pleases; he is sure of being employed in the
Service of his Country, and his Reward is as sure and ample.

SUCH are the Laws, and such our Whims about Matters, acknowledged on both
Sides, to be altogether indifferent. If this is truly the Case, then, whether
we ought to submit to the Laws, or the Laws submit to our Whims, let the
unprejudiced determine. There are some great Men, who have, now and then,
dropped us; the Temptation indeed is great, as all the beneficial Circumstances
of Life, and all the shining ones, lie on the other Side; but with how good a
Grace, I must leave you to judge. Lead us not therefore, O ye ruling Elders,
into such Temptations.

WHEN a Parent intends his Son a liberal Education, he means to make him a
useful Member of the Society, not only with Respect to the public, but also
for his own Interest; for, as I think it is Cicero observes, Qui ipse sibi,
sapiens prodesse nequit, nequiequam sapit; He that is not wise for himself, is
wise to very little Purpose. In our Way, therefore, an Education, as I have
before observed, cannot be called Liberal.

FOR a Parent industriously to limit the Genius of a Youth, so as to deprive
him of the proper Use of those happy Talents God has been pleased to Favor him
with, perhaps for his own Good Purposes, is not only injuring the Public, but
doing him the highest Injustice; and all for a few Conundrums; whether the
Preacher appears in a black Gown, and Jacket, or Cassock; or in a long black
Cloak; or whether he delivers what he has to say, with, or without Book, are no
Points of Religion, but mere Formalities, and can only affect wrong headed
Folks.

For Modes of Faith, let graceless Zealots fight,
He cannot err, whose Life, is in the right.
I AM, Sir, for these Reasons determined to send my Son to the Charter-College,
as you call it, and to no other; and am very far from being under any Concern,
that the principal Director is a Member of the established Church.

I HAVE indeed, two Objections to this College. The first is, that it is too
near the City; which being a Sea Port Town, great Numbers of all Sorts of
People are collected, good and bad, from all Parts; and I doubt the latter will
ever be, by far, the Majority. Besides, from its Situation, it will be
surrounded, in all Probability, with tippling Houses; and it is well known,
that Examples, especially in their College Years, is almost all in all, and
will prevail with Youth, as it does with the Rest (...) Mankind, beyond Precept.

Regis ad Exemplum, etc. THE other is, that I would not have any Clergyman, be
of what Denomination he will, concerned in the Education of Youth, because they
generally have a Cast, or Biass to one Side; whereas, a liberal Education,
ought to be free, open, and generous; the least Tincture of Prejudice, either
to one Side, or other, entirely defeats that Design.

BESIDES, Clergymen, from their studious, recluse Way of Life, cannot be
supposed to know much of the World, or Mankind, and of Course little of the
Belles Letters, Things of no small Importance in the Education of Youth.

THEY may possibly make them great Scholars; but; Merus Scholasticus, est Merus
Asinus. There is a good Story told of the great Doctor Barrow, who was much a
Favorite with King Charles the Second, who seeing him one Day, advancing, to
pay his Complements, said to the Duke of Buckingham and some others, standing
by, Here comes our great Doctor, who cannot say, Bogh, to a Goose. Upon which
the Duke begged his Majesty's Leave, to ask him the Question; which being
granted, his first Salutation was, Pray, Doctor, can you say, Bogh, to a Goose?
To which the only Return the Doctor made, was, Bogh! This turned the Jest upon
the Duke, with which his Majesty, and the Company, were not a little pleased.
It is observable, that most of our Academicks, when they first turn out into
the World, take them out of their Way, can hardly say, Bogh, to a Goose; what
this may be owing to, is easy to imagine.

SUCH as have been deliberately pitched upon, by the best Judges, as Tutors to
Noblemen, in their Travels, would be the fittest for Directors of Colleges, in
these Parts of the World. Let no one from hence however imagine, that there is
any Reflection intended by this, upon the present worthy Director, whose
Benevolence, great Learning and Piety, is so well known. I know none indeed, at
present, fitter for that important Trust.

BUT to put this Affair of the College in a clearer Light, if possible, let us
suppose a Son about to take Leave of his Father, for the College, he will
naturally have something to say to him, at parting; and suppose he should
address him in the following Manner, viz.

MY Son, I am satisfied as to the Uncommonness of your Genius, and have
therefore not grudged any Expense in your Education; you are now going to the
College, where those few Principles you have imbibed at home, and at your
Schools, are to be improved; and your Mind enlarged in the Study of Nature and
Mankind, an ample Field for the most extensive Genius; and where, if properly
cultivated, cannot fail of producing happy Effects, and answering all my
Wishes; and hopes nothing, I assure you, shall be wanting on my Part, to the
utmost of my Abilities, being sensible of the Truth of the old Roman Proverb,
Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat,
Res Angusta Domi.


AS to your religious Principles, we have hitherto, only endeavored to
inculcate those of your Duty to your God, and your Neighbor, without
attempting to enter you into any formed System. Perhaps it may be of Use to you
hereafter, to know in what Manner I came by that Persuasion, or those religious
Principles, which I at present profess. Your Predecessors lived in Communion
with the Church of England, from the Time (for any Thing I know) of the
Reformation, to some little Time after your Grandfather's Decease, when it so
happened, that the Parish Church wanted a thorough Repair; and among other
Things, the Disposition of the Pews was altered; and a Neighbor's Pew, (with
whom there had been for some Time, no very good Understanding) which had been
the second Pew behind us, was now become the second Pew before us. This, my
Mother who had always been a Well-wisher, and a great Benefactress to the
Church, took a high Dudgeon, and represented the Hardship to the
Churchwardens, but to no Purpose, the Thing was done, and could not be
altered; upon which, my Mother, next Sunday, carried us all to the Meeting.
This is truly the Reason, and a doughty one it is, for my being at this Time a
Dissenter. I have this, however, to comfort myself withal, that I believe few
of you can give a better Reason, for your Professions, Persuasions or Religion,
call it which you will.

NOR has this Incident, given me any Aversion to the Church of England; I wish
well to all Churches, and Kirks; I have Charity for all Men; and should think
it just as ridiculous to be angry with my Neighbor, for differing from me, in
my Way of Thinking, about these Matters, as it would be to be angry with him,
for not choosing a Coat of the same Color with mine. Divine Principals, are
Rays, or Emanations from Heaven, as those of Colors are from the Sun, and both
liable to Obscurity, and Obstructions from Vapors and Clouds; but often break
their Way through, manifesting the Glory of God, and the Beauty of the Creation.

MR. Pope, my dear, whom I have before quoted, in his Letter to the Bishop of
Rochester, who had made some Attempts to bring him over to the Church, tells
him, I Will tell you my politic and religious Sentiments, in a few Words In my
Politics, I think no farther, than how to preserve my Peace of Life, in any
Government, under which I live; nor in my Religion, than to preserve the Peace
of my Conscience, in any Church with which I communicate. I hope all Churches,
and all Governments, are so far of God, as they are rightly understood, and
rightly administered; and where they are, or may be wrong, I leave it to God
alone, to mend, or reform them. In a Word, says he, the Things I have always
wished to see, are, not a Roman Catholic, or a French Catholic, or a Spanish
Catholic; but a true Catholic, and not a King of Whigs, or a King of Tories,
but a King of England.

RELIGION, my dear Son, in my humble Opinion, however distinguished, or
disguised, is nothing more, nor nothing less, than a sincere Belief in One
supreme intelligent Being, the Author and Preserver of all Things. Who, that
but opens his Eyes, can help being convinced, that Intelligence, and Design,
was, and is employed in the Production, and Preservation of every Thing he
sees? No rational Being, can help believing this; the Impressions are strong,
and we stand convicted. How far the irrational, (as it is commonly called) Part
of our System, or even the Inanimate, may be affected by those Impressions, is
far beyond my Reach to determine. I may, however, have Leave, I presume, to say
with the Psalmist, Let all the Earth praise the Lord.

THE next certain Truth in Consequence of this, is, that there are certain
Acknowledgements due; such as become the Creature to the Creator. But I do not
know that any two Persons, since the Creation, have precisely agreed in the
Mode, or Manner of those Acknowledgements; and about this have we been worrying
one another ever since, more especially since it is become a Trade; each have
been for exalting the Diana of their own House, and each call Heaven and Earth,
and even Hell, to their Assistance. And how freely do they give one another
over to the Devil, for the Sake of their Souls.

ST. Paul tells the Corinthians, Let every Thing be done with Decency and
Order. But what vast, huge Volumns of Controversy, stuffed with Bitterness and
Acrimony, and void of all Charity! What Devastation in the humane Race, have
not those few well-meant Words, created! Some being for too much Decency and
Order; some for too little; and some for none at all. Hence the Source of all
our Misfortunes, whilst we are grasping at Shadows, and squabbling about Forms,
the Spirit and Truth of Religion is lost, and lies disregarded; the genuine
Principles of which are plain, simple and short, and adapted, by the express
revealed Will of God, to the meanest Understanding. Love your God, pay him
those Acknowledgements due, with a Spirit of Sincerity and Truth; and treat
your Neighbor, that is, the whole Race of Mankind, with Charity and Meekness,
as you would incline they should treat you, in every Circumstance of Life. Here
is all that is truly essential in Religion; and what most profess, but few,
very few, practice. A Person's sincere Love and Affection to God, can only be
discovered by his Benevolence and Charity to his Neighbor; and whoever is
sincere in this, let his Persuasion or Religion be what it will, I conclude him
sincere in his Love to God; and whoever is not, I conclude, his Religion is not
for God's Sake, but for his own particular Views. This you will find, in the
Course of your Pilgrimage, a certain Indication.

THAT worthy Pagan, Nicias, the Athenian General, of whom, it is said, by
Thu^ydedes, that his whole Life was one uniform Series of Piety, toward the
Deity, having been obliged to abandon the Siege of Syracuse, when all Hopes of
Safety, either for himself or his Army were almost gone, tells his Friends,
Here I am buffetted, by the Storms and Outrages of Fortune, as cruelly as ever
the vilest and most abject of any fellow Creature. It is true, I have ever
habitually worshipped the Gods, with a conscientious Deference to established
Laws; and have made Justice and Beneficence to Man, the constant Practice of my
Life. Upon the Strength of this, when I look forward to Futurity, my Mind is
enlivened with invigorating Hope. He does not here tell us, what his Religion
was; but we have all the Reason in the World, to believe, he was a Dissenter,
being a Favourer of the Doctrine of the divine Socrates, who was put to Death
upon that Account. The established Priests imagining, had he been suffered to
live, he would have over-turn'd the whole System of their Pagods. These
benevolent Acts of Toleration, were not yet in Fashion.

YOU may, my dear Son, not perhaps observ^* that I here leave out the Word,
Fear (God) (...) I doubt there may be some Inaccurity in the Translation, being
humbly of Opinion, that Fear and Love, cannot well center in the same Object;
even the Fear of Offending abares, in some Measure, that of Love; and I find
the late polite, Mr. Aaron Hill, in his Poem upon Faith, much in the same Way
of thinking; which, as he expressed it in a much genteeler Manner, take it in
his own Words.

What then must be believed? believe God kind,
To fear were to offend him: Fill thy Heart
With his felt Laws; and act the Good he loves.
Revere him but in his Mercies. Reverence too
The most mistaken Schemes that mean his Praise.
Reverence his Priests. -- For every Priest is his, --
Who finds him in his Conscience.
HHRE is a little System of Divinity, which I much doubt, whether any of those
Divinity Professors, so much insisted upon, or all of them together, with all
their learned Lumber, and profound Erudition, in Theology, will ever be able to
produce a better.

FOR my own Part, I must own, I never could well understand the Use of a
Divinity Professor, while we have Leave to read our Bibles in English. One
Thing I am pretty sure of, that they have ever been the great Nurse of those
two Pe^^s in all religious Societies, Mr. Watton's Pruritus Disputandi, and the
Cacaethes Scribendi.

THERE is no new Divinity, that I know of, besides that which our Savior has
left us, in mighty plain Terms; so that even he that runs, may read. What these
Gentlemen then profess, I presume must be a Criticism, or Comment upon that,
which puts me in Mind of the Fable of the officious old Woman.

THERE was a Boy, who had got a new Queen Anne's Shilling, which he was very
fond of: He used always to be playing with it. One Day, as Ill-Luck would have
it, he slung it so far, that he could not find it again. After searching about
the Place where it fell, for a long Time, in vain: he stood stock still for a
Minute, or two; and then began to pout, and at last burst out a crying, as loud
as he could bawl. An old Woman, his Nurse, who had observed the whole Affair,
from one of the Windows, ran immediately to his Assistance, with a Broom in her
Hand: Show me, the Place, My dear, says she; I Will warrant you, I Will find what
you want. She then began sweeping about her, with all the Assiduity that her
infirm Age would admit of: She looked and swept; and swept, and looked; but
without any Manner of Success. At last the poor Boy could hold no longer. Get
you gone, you old Creature you, cried he, if you had left Things as they were,
I might still have had some Hopes; but the Devil himself could never find it
under all (...) Heap of Dust that you have raked together. I shall make no
other Application, than, Qui capit, ill^ babet.

BUT, my dear Son, as your Mind and Understanding opens, and when you get
further into those Years of Discretion, you will be better able to judge of
these Matters. As the Almighty, under the Gospel Dispensation, has no where
made any Decision in this Point absolutely; far be it from me, after so great
an Example, to tell you, that you ought to be either of this, or that
Persuasion; or that your Religion ought to come by Descent, as Estates of
Inheritance; No. You are to search the Scriptures, and be guided by your
Reason. St. Paul tells his Friends the Corinthians, 1 Corin. Chap. i.12. Every
one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of
Christ. Chap. iii.8. But every Man shall receive his own Reward, according to
his own Labor. From hence, I think, we may learn, that those of all
Persuasions, will be equally acceptable with God, according to their Works.

MIGHT I, however, presume to advise, it should be that Situation, where you
may be under the fewest Restraints by human Laws, to which, both by the Laws of
God and Man, we are to pay all due Obedience; and where you may be in a
Capacity of exerting those Talents God has been pleased to favor you with, to
the (...) Advantage.

AFTER what I have said, I cannot, however with any Reason, advise you, to
admit any Opinions for Truth implicitly, and absolutely upon the bare Credit of
falliable Beings.

I ALLOW you Freedom of Conscience, to think, and judge for yourself; and I
likewise allow you Freedom, if not entirely from all Manner of Influence, yet
from the Dominion of human Authority, in thinking and judging for yourself. I
am so much for Liberty in these Matters that concerns us, as reasonable Beings,
that I must recommend to you, on the other Hand, a third Sort of Freedom; that
is, a Freedom from Pride, Singularity, and the Spirit of Contradiction. How
much Propriety there may be in an Address of this Kind, let the Impartial judge.

AND, now, Mr. Speaker, I shall conclude this Point, with observing, that as we
have allotted a Fund for the Advancement of Learning, let us not look back; let
us give our Children Learning, and a good Education, the Parent of Virtue, and
every other good Quality; and they will be better able to judge for themselves,
in religious Matters. As for my own Part I have no Notion, of Religion's
passing by Descent, or Inheritance, as Estates do; nor am I for craming my
Religion down my Child's Throat. This, in my humble Opinion, would be a Species
of Persecution: If he has good Sense, and capable of judging, let him choose:
This is an Instruction immediately from God himself; and don't let it be said,
that we treat all Instructions alike.

BUT to conclude, Mr. Speaker, upon the Whole, I am humbly of Opinion, that we
have spent too much of our Time upon this Subject, which, at this critical
Juncture, might have been much better employed, in preparing to obviate those
wicked Schemes, concerted for our Destruction. This Affair, which might as well
have been discussed at another Time, has not only taken up all our Attention,
but even that of the Public, and has raised such a Spirit of Contention amongst
us, and that, in a great Measure, under the Sanction of this House, that I
really don't know what to think of it; or how, or when it may have an End.

I MUST own, Mr. Speaker, when I seriously reflect upon the Consequences of an
Attack, either upon New York or Albany, in the Situation we are in at present,
it chils my Blood; I shudder, and stand amazed at our Conduct.

IF it is from a contemptible Opinion of our Enemy, take Advice from the
following Fable.

IN Days of Yore, it is said, that the two Nations of Apes and Weasels, after
having long concerted their Affairs together in Secret, had the Impudence to
break out into open War against the Lion. The fluttering Character of the one,
and the pityful Character of the other, were so deeply impressed upon all the
Beasts of the Forest, that, for a great while, there was no more Notice taken
of them, than if there had been no War at all. And indeed a great many carried
it so far, as to say that there actually was none. At the End of some Months,
when their Numbers were greatly increased, it was then thought sufficient to
send out only little Parties against them, which were always worsted, and
consequently the Enemy always increasing in Numbers and Power. On this the Lion
thought fit to summons his Council together. The Beasts all met, and some of
the most eminent among them gave their Opinion. The Leopard in particular, was
for sending twenty young Skunks against them, who should be ordered to moisten
their Tails plentifully with their Urine, and flirt it in the Eyes of the
Enemy, by which Means, as he judged, they might blind the whole Army. The Tiger
was for dispatching half a Dozen Jackalls, and a couple of Ferrets, to bring
them all up bound to Court. Several others proposed other Expedients, but all
pretty much of the same Nature. All this while the chief Deputy of the Foxes, a
very prudent, and experienced Person, had sat silent, and almost concealed, in
a retired Corner of the Assembly, when the Lion spying him out, by Chance, gave
him a kind Look, and asked him, what he would advise in the Affair before them;
on this the old Gentleman stood up, and after a short Pause, spoke as follows:
"May the King live forever; your Majesty is wise in all Things; I wish your
Assembly here, were so too. I remember as I was coming to your Majesty's Court,
it is now many Years ago; I saw a Countryman knocking one of those white Tubes,
that they carry so generally in their Mouths against an old Oak; upon which,
certain Sparks of Fire issued from it, and fell upon the Roots of the Tree. I
spoke to some of your Guards* who were standing by to tread on these little
Cinders, and extinguish them. They smiled at me, and said, they would go out of
themselves. When I returned, lo! the Oak was burned down to the Ground. Let us
never be too apt to slight weak Instruments, and poor Beginnings. If your
Majesty was to send out all the numerous Hosts you have, only by Handfulls, at
a Time, even an Army of Weasels may destroy them. My Advice therefore is, that
you should get together, a considerable, regular, and well-chosen Army, and let
them pursue the Enemy, till they are totally and entirely vanquished. Let us
subdue them first, and then despise them. But if we begin with contemning them,
and carry it on too (...), we may contrive Things so, that they may even be
able to conquer us at last.

IF our Conduct proceeds from Cowardice, and a Dread of the Expense, give me
Leave to entertain you with a short Abstract of a Speech made by a noble
Corinthian, upon an Occasion much of the same Kind, with only the Change of a
few Words.

IT is the Duty of the Prudent, so long as they are not injured, to be fond of
Peace. But it is the Duty of the Brave, when injured, to throw up Peace, and
have Recourse to Arms.

WE now having ben greatly injured, and in abundant Instances aggrieved, are
taking up Arms. Success we may promise ourselves, upon many Considerations, if
we proceed with Uniformity and Unanimity, to accomplish our Designs.

THE French Power is not supported by a natural, but a purchased Strength.
Should we gain the Victory, but in one single Engagement, in the Indian
Country, in all Probability, we have done their Business; or, in Case they
continue the Strugle, we shall then have a longer Space to improve our military
Practice; and when we have gained an Equality of Skill, our natural Courage
will soon secure us the Triumph; for that valiant Spirit which we enjoy by
Nature, it is impossible for them to acquire by Rules.

THE Sums of Money by which these Points are chiefly to be compassed, we will
respectively contribute. For, would it not in Reality be a grievous Case, when
their Dependents are never backwards, to send in those Sums, which rivet
Slavery upon themselves; if we who want to be revenged upon our Foes, and at
the same Time to secure our own Preservation; if we should refuse to submit to
Expenses, and should store up Wealth to be plundered by them, to purchase
Oppressions and Miseries for our selves.

THOSE amongst us, who are seated up in the inland Parts, at a Distance, as
they imagine, from the Danger, should now be convinced, that unless they
combine in the Defense, they will soon be obstructed in carrying on the Fruits
of their Lands; and again, in fetching in those necessary Supplies, which the
Sea bestows upon an inland Country. Let them by no Means judge erroneously of
what we urge, as not in the least affecting them: But look on it as a
Certainty, that if they abandon the Guard of the maritime Situations and
Frontiers, the Danger will soon advance quite up to them, and they of Course,
no less than we, are concerned in the Issue. For this Reason, they ought,
without the least Hesitation, to make the timely Exchange of Peace for War.

THE French are supposed to be a Match for us all united, and quite too strong
for any of us separately, to resist; so that unless we support one another with
our collective Forces, unless every Colony combine to give a Check to their
Ambition, they will oppress us apart; (...), without much strugle.

SUCH a Triumph, how grateing soever the bare Mention of it may be to any of
your Ears, yet, BE IT KNOWN, Can end in nothing else but plain and open
Slavery. To hint in mere Words so base a Doubt, that so many Colonies may be
enslaved by one, is a Disgrace to the Name of British Subjects. And yet we have
not Spirit enough to defend our own Liberty. We are suffering one State to
erect a Tyranny here, whilst we claim the Glory of being the Supporters of the
Liberties of Europe, owing altogether to our Folly, Cowardice, or Sloth; defer
therefore no longer, putting us in a Posture to defend ourselves, and succor
our Friends. The Business will admit of no longer Delay, when some already feel
the Blow; and others, if it be once known that we meet here together, and durst
not undertake our own Defense, will, in a very little Time, be sensible of the
same. Reflect within yourselves, that Affairs are come to Extremeties. Be not
terrified at the Dangers of a War; but animate yourselves, with the Hopes of a
lasting Peace, to be procured by it. For a Peace produced by a War, is ever the
most firm. But from Tranquillity and Ease, to be averse to War, can by no Means
abate, or dissipate our Danger; with this certain Conclusion, that a State in
America is starting up into a Tyranny, and aims indifferently at the Liberty of
us all. Her arbitrary Plan being partly executed, and partly i^ Agitation: Let
us rush against it, and at once pull down, even the Gates of Quebec. Thence
shall we pass the Remainder of our Lives, exempt from Danger. If there are any
French Pensioners amongst us, in God's Name, let them be Dewitted; but as we
are well assured this is not the Case, there must be some Fatality attending
us. Here are our most inveterate hereditary Enemies, actually in View upon our
Backs; how soon they may attack us in Front, or when the bloody Scene will
open, no Body knows. But have we not all the Reason in the World, even to a
Demonstration, to believe, that the Thing is concerted. The French don't form
Schemes of this Kind, by Halves; without New York and Albany, all their Inland
Acquisitions, would not be of half the Value; and with them, their Scheme is
complete; the other Colonies must fall of Course. But I shall go no further.
And here have we sat so long, without one Motion from any one Member, that I
remember, for our own Security, and our Country left to Providence,
defenseless, both in Front and Rear; and at whose Door, must this lie? I am
afraid we shall be blamed. I wish no Calamity may happen; if there does, I
doubt we shall have but little to say for ourselves.

IT is true, our House is a most unaccountable House; I mean, Gentlemen, we are
not accountable for our Proceedings; no, not even to the King. This, however,
puts me in Mind of a Story I have read some where, in the History of Greece,
where those little States were eternally at War with one another; some of them
were only small Cities, the Care of which was always left to the Ephori, or
Assembly-men, chosen by the People for that Purpose. It so happened, that one
of those little Towns was taken, purely by those Gentlemen's Neglect and
Carelessness, and a heavy Ransom laid upon it, to be paid at very distant
Periods, and Hostages required. This created some Demur among the People, few
being willing to undertake the Tour, or to be so long absent from their
Families: At last, the Ephori were fixed upon, as they, by their Neglect, had
been the Authors of the Disaster. Now, as for my own Part, Mr. Speaker, I
should not be very willing to be sent abroad, to learn a new Language, at these
Years. How far the People were in the Right, I must leave you to judge.

AND, did not the People of England demolish one King, and send another abroad,
for attemptting the Destruction of the Liberty and Properties of the People? As
for my Part, I see no Difference, if we are to lose our Liberties and
Properties, etc. whether by a Subversion of the Laws, or by a Neglect in those
with whom we have entrusted the Preservation of them; in either Case, the
Loosers will have Leave to speak; and I am sorry to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I
have heard too much of that already. And did not some of your Predecessors,
call two of the greatest Men Fatherland ever bred, to a severe Account, for a
Neglect of theirs, being at that Time, as they supposed, in the Interest of
that very faithless Nation, who at this Time insult us.

THUS, Gentlemen, you see, though we are not accountable for our Proceedings, to
any superior Powers, yet we may be called before the awful Tribunal of an
injured, incensed Multitude, who, though they sometimes take it into their Heads
to become Judges, as well as Jury, in their own Case, seldom mistake in Point
of Judgment. If we had no Connection with Virginia; were it even a neighboring
independent State, attacked by an ambitious Monarch, or a King of Slaves, would
it be prudent in us, to go to sleep? When a Neighbor's House is a Fire, every
one runs; some out of a Principle of Humanity; others, from Interest, lest it
should be his own Turn next. Have we no Humanity left? No Regard to our
Interest, or that of Posterity? Good God! Things indeed appear to me, from our
fixed Stupidity, as if some of us did not care who were our Masters. If that is
the Case, give me Leave to tell you, that our Days of Woe, or woeful Days, have
only not yet reached us.

FOR these Reasons, Mr. Speaker, I move, that all other Business, of what ever
Kind, be set aside, till such Time as we have given to his Majesty a sufficient
Fund to answer all Exigencies necessary at this critical Juncture, for the
Preservation of our Lives and Fortunes, and that without Chicane or Quibble,
and passed a Bill for putting the Militia in a proper Posture of Defense; when
we have done this, we have done our Duty; and we are no further answerable for
Consequences. To interfer in the Disposition, or Application, is out of our
Sphere, and entirely the Crown's, or those whom his Majesty has been pleased to
appoint. But they, even from the highest to the lowest, are accountable to this
House, for every Shilling expended. This is constitutional; and if we deviate
one Step from it, and enter into wrangling about Privileges, at this Time, it
may have fatal Consequences.

To the ALBANY MEMBERS. From their CONSTITUENTS.
WE acknowledge your Favor, enclosing a Speech, for which we are thankful; and
the more so, as we take it to have been delivered, in Consequence of our late
joint begging Letter, upon your first sitting down, last Sessions, when, after
almost one Hundred Days, great Hopes and Expectations, at the Rate of Fifty
Shillings a Day, a heavy Charge to the County, we were told, to our great
Mortification, that nothing was to be done: But yet we hope the Blame is not to
be laid at your Doors; but where to place it, we know not. We must now beg
Leave, Gentlemen, to be free with you; as nothing but the Necessity of the
Times, could have obliged us to tell you, That we now expect and demand of you,
that you immediately, setting all other Business aside, go about putting your
Constituents, whose Servants and Trustees you are, and for which you have each
of you, your several Allowances, into such a Situation, as they may be able to
defend themselves, as well as to attack their Enemies, if Occasion require it.

AND, in the Manner of doing it, we insist, that all Altercation, and Squabble,
about the Privileges of your own House* be postponed, till such Times as the
Privileges, Lives and Fortunes of the People, are better secured.

ONE Thing more, we beg Leave to hint to you, and that is, the jobbing out the
public Service to Friends, without accounting or suffering the other Branches
of the Legislature, the Perusal of the Vouchers; whilst those who may not be so
happy, as to have an equal Share of Favor, are obliged to produce their
Vouchers, and swear to their Accounts; and then they are often cut of, some one
Half, some two Thirds: This, in private Life, would be reckoned knavish, and
against Law; in your House, it is -- because uncomeatable, besides the Injury
to public Credit: For, who in God's Name, will trust the Government? No, not
even at this Time, a common Labourer for his Day's Work. A Government can no
more subsist without Credit, than a Merchant.

WE shall not pretend to dictate to so many worthy Gentlemen; but, as free Men,
we have Leave to advise, especially when our ALL is at Stake: And our Advice
is, that you take the proper Steps for our Security; and convince us, that you
are in earnest, for your own Sakes, as well as ours. HANS, CLA^S, DERICK, etc.

In the Name and Behalf of the Inhabitants of the City and County of Albany.

P. ^. AND give us Leave to add, that we think the following Steps most
advisable: That upon the first News of the General's Arrival, be where it
will, Application be made to him immediately, by an Express, for an Engineer,
to plan out Fortifications at Albany and New York, etc. Our Methods heretofore
of this kind, have been expensive, to little Purpose. In the mean Time, we
would advise,

THAT the Inhabitants be enabled to put themselves in the best Posture of
Defense they can, either to defend themselves, or attack the Enemy, at the
public Charge.

THAT every Gun about the Town of New York, and in the Frontier Garrisons, big
and little, not only those belonging to the Crown, but likewise every Ship's
Gun, in private Hands, be fitted upon Carriages.

THAT our Batteries be put in the best Order they possibly can, and new Ones
erected, where it may be thought necessary; and the Guns to be placed upon
them, with all their proper Accoutrements, Ladles, Spunges, Worms, etc.
together with their Proportion of Cartriges, and Ball, all ready at Hand, under
Tarpaulin Covers, according to their Situation and Consequence, under the Care
of a small Guard, and Centries Night and Day.

THUS proper Persons be allotted for the Care of each Battery, so many to a
Gun; a little Practice will soon make them perfect in the Management of them;
and by this Means, every one will know his Post when his Service is required.

THAT the Number of Sand Bags, for erecting Batteries upon the Wharffs, be
reviewed, to see that they be in good Order, and the Number sufficient.

THAT the Persons who in Case of Need, are to fill the Bags, and erect with
them the Batteries, be appointed, and actually exercised in the filling of the
Bags, and erecting the Batteries, and then emptying, drying the Bags, and
replacing them again.

THAT the Carmen who are to draw the Guns, with their Carts, to those Sand
Batteries, be actually exercised in the drawing them there, and placing them
properly for Service, as in Case of Need, and drawing them back; and that
Carmen, and other poor Laborers, employed in those Exercises, have reasonable
Payment for their Time and Labor.

AN Act for better regulating the Militia, will be absolutely necessary at this
Time; amongst other Things, impowering the Capt. General to give every Regiment
its proper Station, upon all Emergencies; and forthwith to call the Colonels,
Lieut. Colonels, and Majors, together, to concert Matters for that Purpose, and
to form Articles of War; and at the same Time to deliver in Muster-Rolls of the
Regiments, and give in an Account as far as they are able, of the Strength of
the County. And then let us be satisfied that every Man in the Province, from
Seventeen to Forty-six (that was the Method among the Romans) have their Arms
in proper Order, with Powder and Ball, etc. as the Law directs. And,

THAT no Man of whatever Quality, unless otherwise employed in the public
Service, fail to appear under Arms, under some Officer or other, as the Capt.
General thinks fit.

THAT an Account be taken, what spare Arms there are in the Cities of York and
Albany. Let us be satisfied, by proper Persons, whether it is practicable to
sink Vessels any where between the Narrows and the Hook, in order to prevent
large Ships from entering the Harbor.

AS a regular Fortification upon Nutten-Island, from whence, we are to
apprehend the greatest Mischief, is at this Time, impracticable, being without
an Engineer, and no Materials, we would advise, in the mean Time, that an
Entrenchment be thrown up all round the Island, with a Breast-Work, taking in
the full View of the Shore, from High to Low Water Mark, with here and there a
Ship's Gun. The Trenches to be made wide enough, so as the Men may pass with
ease too and fro, when ever an Attempt to land may be made; and a few Batteries
on the West Side of the Island, either to enfilade their Landing, or annoy
their Shipping.

IF there were even Breast-Works on each Side of this Trench, it would not be
amiss, because if an Enemy did land in any Part of the Island, some Part of our
Trenches would reach them. And if there was a round Entrenchment in the Middle
of the Island, with Breast-Works, under any sort of Cover, for Shelter and
Stores, and to communicate properly with the outward Trench, we conceive it
would have a good Effect.

AND all this might be done in a very short Time, and at a small, Expense, if
every Man in and about the Town, would but send their Negroes for two or three
Days, and let them charge it to the Province.

THE Learned in this Way, have allowed this Method of entrenching, to be the
best, to prevent Descents.

MEN, especially raw Men, will act with much more Spirit, when they are well
assured, that the Cannon cannot hurt them, or that they cannot be enfiladed or
flanked; which is the Case here.

WE are apprehensive, that a strong, regular Fortification, upon that Island,
will be a great Temptation to an Enemy, to take it; to imagine to make it so
strong, that it cannot be taken, is a vain Thought.

AS it is neither impossible, nor impracticable, for a small Army, with a Train
of Artillery, to fix a Battery at the Ferry, in less than 48 Hours Time (trust
not to the Militia's opposing regular Troops and a Train of Artillery, nor from
behind their Breast-Works) we would advise, that the People on the West End of
Long Island, should take the same Methods of Retrenchments, where ever they
think an Enemy can land upon any Part of their Dominions; and even if the East
Side of the North-River was lined with such an Entrenchment, we should not
think it at all amiss.

AS for Albany, their is nothing about it, that, with any Propriety, can be
called a Fortification. But till we can get better, let the Stockadoes be put
in the best Order possible, and dovetail'd at Bottom and Top, to prevent their
being pulled up, with thick Plank, or quarter Pieces on the Inside; at present,
by pulling up one or two, a few Hands would soon make a large Breach. Proper
Entrenchments to be thrown up as above, round the Town, or where most
convenient, so that they be not enfiladed, or flanked, with a sufficient Number
of Block-Houses, to contain 500 Men at least, and disposed in proper Places for
Execution.

SHOULD the Fort be taken, either by Scalade, Capitulation, or Surprise, which
is at present, what we most apprehend, the Town must immediately surrender, or
suffer a worse Fate. Too much Care therefore cannot be taken to prevent it.

TWO stout Block-Houses carried further up upon the Hill, with an Entrenchment
round the Fort, so as to communicate with it, and all the other Block-Houses
and Entrenchments, we conceive, might be of great Use in the mean Time.

THE same, with Respect to Fort-Hunter, Schenectady, and Oswego, and the
Churches every where to be loop-holed, and Grape-Shot always ready.

AND now, most noble Patriots, when we have done all this, and even fortified
our selves, Secundum Artem, by the greatest Masters, unless we can prevail with
our Indians, to act in Concert with us, and heartily too, we have just done
nothing.

AS the Indians are not so stupid, as not to know their own Interest, or may be
soon convinced, that if the French succeed in their Measures, it will subject
them and their Trade, wholly to their Mercy; and that for the future they can
have little or no Communication with the Subjects of Britain; of this, we
believe, the Indians are, or soon may be, convinced; and therefore we imagine,
it may not be so difficult a Task, to engage them again in our Interest, if
speedy and proper Measures are taken, of which, though we may not be proper
Judges, yet, as what we have to offer, may incite some abler Hands to undertake
that Task, we humbly presume to advise, That Colonel Johnson may be empowered
to raise a Regiment of Rangers, used to the Woods; of which, one Company, if he
thinks proper, or more, to be Horse.

THAT he be directed, to use his utmost Endeavors, to engage again the Six
Nations heartily in our Interest, and to incorporate as many of them, or of the
Southern, or Western Indians, into this Regiment, as he thinks proper.

THAT Colonel Peter Schuyler, being the only Person in the Province, who has
the King's Commission, and who would be most agreeable to the People of Albany,
have the Command of a Regiment of Irregulars, to support Colonel Johnson, first
in building proper Fortifications, in each of the Nations, where ever the
Indians think proper; and when they find themselves sufficiently strengthened
with Indians, that they attack Neagara, and erect a proper Fortification there,
to be garrisoned by an independent Company; and every other Fort erected there,
to be immediately garrisoned with Detachments from the regular Troops.

THAT as soon as Neagara is secured, that the Troops proceed with the Indians,
to ascertain their own Boundaries, as well as those of their Allies, and
demolish every Thing erected within them, by those common Invaders.

THAT there be never less than 400 Men from the three Regiments of Ulster,
Duchess and Albany, on Duty at Albany, in order to support those other
Gentlemen, and as a Guard to the City, who may be relieved from Time to Time.

THIS is the Method, and the only Method, to cure the Insolence of those
haughty Invaders; and we make no doubt but that Col. Schuyler, and Col.
Johnson, with the Indians, will give us, if properly supported, a good Account
of them.

WE heartily advise, that proper Care be taken, to preserve Oswego; for this is
the Rout, which, we think, must be taken at last, to extirpate those Invaders,
upon the Banks of Ohio.

THE Difficulties attending the Supply of an Army, by Way of Virginia, over
such vast Mountains, where Carts or Wagons may possibly pass over, but with
great Difficulty, are insuperable, and will create an infinite Expense, both of
Time and Treasure. In short, we despair of ever seeing an End of our Troubles,
if the above Steps, or something of the Kind, are not taken. Colonel Johnson,
and Colonel Schuyler, being in the Situation we propose, they will in all
Probability, be Commissioners of Indian Affairs, which we wish to see; and in
that Case, we would humbly offer, that in a grand Council of all the Nations of
Indians, far and near, called to the (...) Castle, the demolishing every
Fortification erected in the Indian Countries, within these Years past, either
by the English or French, may be proposed, and that none be erected for the
future, nor none of the Passes obstructed by either French or English, without
the Consent of all the Nations of Indians.

WHATEVER Consequences such a proposal may have, it will, at least, convince
the Indians; that we have no Design upon their Liberties, Trade or Hunting. One
Thing more we beg Leave to offer, and that is, That our utmost Endeavors be
used, to recover our old Friends and Allies, the Cachnawagas; they are the only
Indians the French dare not maltrait. They have been a great Obstruction to our
own Indians being hearty in our Interest, neither Side being willing to meet,
to cut the Throats of their nearest Friends and Relations, in their Excursions.
There are few Parties in which the Cachnawagas have not some Share. Putting an
End to that wicked Trade carried on between Canada and Albany, would go a great
Way, as we humbly conceive, toward bringing them back to our Interest. It is
this which has created all that Connection between them and the French; they
are the only Carriers, and grow rich upon it; whereas, when this Trade is at an
End, they will be no more than the other Indians, that is, Slaves to the
French, and soon find it their Interest to return. We say nothing of the other
ugly Consequences attending that Trade, as if we could not sell our Goods to
the Indians as well as the French; but we hope that Trade will be duly
considered at a proper Time.

THIS, it may be supposed, will be attended with a terrible Expense; but let us
seriously consider, what it is for; our ALL IS are at Stake, the Honor and
Dignity of the Crown, and the British Name, is not a little concerned in the
Matter, and the Terror will cease. It is well known to the World, that the
Enemies we have at present to deal with, are no Match, nor never were, in a
fair Field, for British Subjects, even with a Superiority of Numbers. Their
Strength lies altogether in Chicane, Deceit, and strong Walls; in these indeed
they have become great Masters, and we have been often dup'd by them, as most
honest Men are, when they have to do with Knaves. Let us make one bold Push; if
not for our own Sakes, yet in Honor and Gratitude to our Mother Country, for
the many Favors received. We are sufficiently able, if the proper Steps are
taken, to raise the Spirits of our young Men, either by pecuniary, or honorary
Rewards. -- That we must engage in the Disputes, is without doubt. But to see
the Prize and Glory carried off by a parcel of New England Men, will be a
Disgrace to them and their Children for ever.

LET us consider, all this Expense is only amongst ourselves; not one Shilling
will be carried out of the Province. Besides, as this Affair is of far more
Importance, than ever Cape-Breton was, let us not imagine, that his Majesty
will treat us worse than he did his brave New England Subjects.

WE have only to add, that as Beacons and proper Alarms, to prevent Surprises,
are absolutely necessary upon these Occasions, we would humbly advise, that
there be a great Gun, or more, at the Point of Sandy-Hook, with a Dozen or two
of long Poles, and on each a Pitch Barrel; so that in Case any Number of Men of
War appear in Sight, a Gun, or more, may be fired, and just so many Pitch
Barrels lighted, so as to be distinctly seen: These to be taken up at the
Norrows, and Mr. Kennedy's Island, by the same Number of Guns, and Pitch
Barrels, and so many other Places, as may be thought proper, to bring as many
Men together as possible, and severe Penalties attending a Neglect. Signals of
this Kind, may be carried in a short Time, to the East End of Long Island, and
even to Connecticut and Albany, at the very small Expense of a few empty Pitch
Barrels. In the City, by firing three Guns from the Fort, to be taken up by one
from each Battery, and tolling all the Bells about the City, may be a
sufficient Warning for every one to repair to their Posts.

AND whereas we have been, and may be again visited by Enemies equally
treacherous with those above mentioned, Contageons, to wit. Distempers
imported; we are humbly of Opinion, That the Commander in Chief, with the
Advice of his Majesty's Council, ought to be fully empowered, to oblige all
Vessels, in the least suspected, to lie Quarantine, and to establish proper
Pest-Houses for that Purpose; and that he may have full Power to lay Embargoes,
during those troublesome Times, as he, with Advice of Council, may think
proper. Si quid novisti rectius, candidus imperti. Which may be thus rendered
into English: He that knows more of these Matters, and does not heartily
communicate them to the Public, cannot be said to be a Friend to his Country.

FINIS.

