SERMONS Upon the following SUBJECTS, Viz.

On hearing the Word: On receiving it with Meekness: On renouncing gross
Immoralities: On the necessity of obeying the Gospel: On being sound in CHRIST:
On Justification by Faith: On the nature, principle and extent, of Evangelical
Obedience. On the deceitfulness of the Heart, and GOD's knowledge thereof. On
the shortness and vanity of Human Life: And On the true value, use and end of
Life; together with the conduciveness of Religion to prolong, and make it
happy.
By JONATHAN MAYHEW, D.D. Pastor of the West-Church in BOSTON.

HE that has my word, let him speak my word FAITHFULLY: What is the chaff to
the wheat? says the LORD. Proph. JEREMIAH. WE have renounced the hidden things
of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of GOD
DECEITFULLY. Saint PAUL. BOSTON; Printed by RICHARD DRAPER, in Newbury-street.
MDCCLV.

TO THE Small, but Honored and Beloved CHURCH and CONGREGATION, in the
Westerly Part of BOSTON.
My Brethren,
I SHOULD, perhaps, have had rather less need than I have at present, to
apologize for the inaccuracy of the following Discourses, had they been
composed with any design to make them more public than by preaching them.
However, it is, even now, almost needless to ask Your candor toward One, who
has so long experienced it; and to ask candor of some Others, would, I know, be
in vain. These Discourses, such as they are, were written and preached, with a
sincere desire to serve You in Your most important interest: I mean, to assist
You in understanding some of the doctrines, and to excite You to practice all
the duties, of the Gospel. With the same view it is, that they are now
published. I hope they will not be quite useless to You; or, indeed, to any who
shall read them with a christian spirit, instead of doing it in the
antichristian, illiberal spirit, of captiousness and party.

THE doctrinal sentiments running through them, are such as I have been led into,
and confirmed in, by a careful inquiry after truth, especially in the HOLY
SCRIPTURES, without a zealous attachment to, or prejudice against, the opinions
of Others. However, I pretend not to be exempted from mistakes. There may
possibly be errors in these Discourses: If there are, I am very sorry; and as
heartily desirous that those who read, may discover and avoid, them. And if
some person that is wiser than myself, would point them out to Me, he would
make me his debtor; especially if he should do it in the spirit of charity and
meekness.

IF there are any considerable, or dangerous errors in these Discourses, I may
venture to say, they are not disguised by any kind of artifice: They do not
just peep through the mask of studied, equivocal, and ambiguous phrases; nor
skulk in the dark, as it were from a consciousness of what they are, and a fear
of being detected: They appear in open daylight, with all the naked boldness
of truth and innocence. For I have conceived, That the the end of speaking,
especially of preaching, was to express, not to disguise, a man's real
sentiments: Though I know that I, herein, differ from many of my own Order! This
will be a great ease and advantage to any Person, who shall bring a charge of
heresy against me; and undertake to convict me of it, whether privately or
publicly. But You are sensible, My Brethren, that there is some difference
betwixt railing and reasoning; and, consequently, betwixt a man's being scolded
at, and refuted. I wish some other people knew this also! But I must now
declare, once for all, That I will not be, even religiously scolded, nor
pitied, nor wept and lamented, out of any principles which I believe upon the
authority of Scripture, in the exercise of that small share of reason which God
has given me: Nor will I postpone this authority, to that of all the good
Fathers of the Church, even with that of the good Mothers added to it!

THE only favor which I have, now, to ask of You, My Brethren, and of Others
who may happen to read these discourses, is, That you would do it with an open,
unprejudiced mind; and then either reject, or believe and practice, according
to the light and conviction of your own consciences. Religion is a matter of
too great importance to be only slightly thought of: It demands Your first and
last attention. And as I hope You are all too sensible of common human frailty,
to be uncharitable bigots and party-men in religion; so I hope You are, on the
other hand, too wise to be skeptics: The two extremes, into which men of weak
and wicked minds often run; sometimes, indeed, out of the one, directly into
the other, without stopping a moment at the golden medium.

YOU have a just title, My Brethren, to my warmest good wishes, and to my
prayers, by virtue of the relation in which I stand toward You: These wishes
and prayers are, That You may all know the truth as it is in JESUS; and finally
partake of that blessed life, and glorious immortality, brought to light by
HIM, through the Gospel. But, in the mean time, I will not forget to wish You all
temporal and worldly prosperity; being, in all respects,

Your sincere Friend And, I hope, Not Unfaithful Servant In the Work of the
Ministry, J. MAYHEW.

THE CONTENTS.
TEN SERMONS on James 1. 21, 22. LAY apart all Filthiness and Superfluity of
Naughtiness, and receive with Meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to
save your Souls. BUT be ye doers of the Word, and not Hearers only, deceiving
your own selves.
SERMON I. Upon Hearing the Word, 1. SERMON II. Upon receiving the Word with
Meekness, 19. SERMON III. Upon the necessity of renouncing Vice in its grosser
Forms, in order to a due receiving of the Gospel, 49. SERMON IV. Upon the
necessity of yielding a practical Obedience to the Gospel, in order to
obtaining the Salvation revealed in it, 73. SERMON V. Of mistakes concerning
the Terms of Salvation; and particularly concerning Salvation by Grace, 99.
SERMON VI. Of mistakes concerning being found in Christ, not having our own
righteousness, 127. SERMON VII. Of mistakes concerning Justification by Faith
170 SERMON VIII. Upon the same Subject, 204. SERMON IX. Upon the Nature and
Principle of Evangelical Obedience, 256. SERMON X. Upon the Extent of
Evangelical Obedience; together with a short Description of it, as it is found
in the Heirs of Salvation, 308.
SERMON XI. Upon the Deceitfulness of the Heart; GOD's Searching it, and the
End thereof. JEREMIAH XVII. 9, 10. The Heart is deceitful above all Things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? I the Lord search the Heart, I try the
Reins, even to give every Man according to his Ways, and according to the Fruit
of his Doings. 360 SERMON XII. Upon the Shortness and Vanity of Human Life;
Occasioned by the Death of a Young Person. PSALM XXXIX. 5, 6. Behold, thou have
made my Days as an Hand-Breadth, and mine Age is as nothing before thee: Verily
every Man at his best Estate is altogether Vanity. Selab. Surely every Man
walks in a vain Show; surely they are disquieted in vain -- 413. SERMON XIII.
Upon the true Value, Use and End of Life; and the Conduciveness of Religion to
prolong, and make it happy: Occasioned by the Death of some Aged Persons. PSALM
XXXIV. 12 -- 15. What Man is he that desires Life, and loves many Days that
he may see good? Keep thy Tongue from Evil, and thy Lips from speaking Guile.
Depart from Evil and do Good; seek Peace and pursue it. The Eyes of the Lord
are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry. 454. SERMON XIV.
Upon the same Subject, 480.
N. B. The Errata are at the End of the Book.

SERMON I. Upon Hearing the Word.
JAMES I 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
THIS apostolical exhortation consists of two principal parts. -- The former of
which respects the duty of hearing the word and gospel of the kingdom, in a way
suitable to the importance and grand design of it. Lay apart all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness; and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which
is able to save your souls. The latter, respects the necessity of yielding a
practical obedience to this heavenly message, in order to its great end being
answered upon us; together with the miserable delusion which th^se are under,
who content themselves with hearing it, without living according to it But be
ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

THIS is the first, general distribution of the subject before us. But it may
be useful to give the several things contained in this passage, a more
particular consideration in the following order. I will discourse, I. OF the
Duty of Hearing the Word. II. OF Receiving it with Meekness. III. OF the
necessity of renouncing Vice in all its gr^ss^r Forms, in order (...); Or, in
the language of the Apostle, of laying apart all filthiness, and superfluity of
naughtiness. IV. OF the necessity of (...) the Gospel, in order to obtaining
the (...) of it. V. OF some Mistakes concerning the Terms of Salvation; and
particularly concerning Salvation by Grace. VI. OF Mistakes concerning being
found in CHRIST, not having our own Righteousness. VII. OF Mistakes concerning
Justification by Faith, as Faith is distinguished from, and opposed to,
Evangelical Obedience. VIII. OF the Nature and Principle of Evangelical
Obedience. IX. AND LASTLY. OF the Extent of this Obedience, together with a
brief Description of it, as it is found in good Men, who are the Heirs of
Salvation.


FIRST, I am to represent the obligation lying upon all Christians in general
to be Hearers of the Word and Gospel of the Kingdom. I say, lying upon
Christians; because it is to such, that the apostle is here speaking; not to
unconverted Jews or Gentiles, but to those of the twelve Tribes scattered
abroad, who were already proselyted to the Christian Faith; as appears from the
Epistle itself. However it is not meant, that this is the duty of Christians,
exclusively of others. Our Savior having commanded, that the gospel should be
preached for a witness to all People; all are accordingly required to hearken
to it; and those who refuse to do this, are, in the language of scripture, said
to judge themselves unworthy of eternal life. But seeing the apostle James here
directs his Discourse to professed Christians, I shall confine myself to such.

IT is not to be supposed, that when Persons are once become Believers of the
Gospel, they need have (...) farther concern to hear, and to attend to it, from
time to time; as though this wisdom of God in a mystery, were to be learned all
at once, and disregarded afterward. The apostle expresses himself in a manner
that presupposes it to be the known, acknowledged duty of Christians in common,
to give constant and diligent Heed to the word which began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed by them that heard him: For his Exhortation chiefly
respects the manner in which this word of Truth ought to be received; the duty
of Hearing it in general, being rather taken for granted, than directly
asserted. And by his using the Expression of hearing the word, repeatedly, as
he does in the Context, it is at least probable, that he had a special
reference to hearing it preached in Christian Assemblies, at stated Times, by
those whose special Business and Office it was to teach, to reprove, to rebuke,
and exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine. The (...) did not design to
preclude, or (...) and (...), and private, (...) places, are (...) them. But
whoever will be at the pains to look into the Chapter, will, if I mistake not,
find that St. James had a particular reference to the stated, and divinely
instituted method of Christian edification in the Assemblies and Churches of
the Saints; wherein one Person, at least, exercised the office of a Teacher;
instructing the young and ignorant, stirring up the minds of the more knowing,
and inculcating upon all, the practice of Christian piety and virtue.

THIS was one very considerable end, though not the only one, proposed in the
first institution of Christian Assemblies. And it is, in a great measure, by
this means that Christianity has been handed down from age to age, from
generation to generation; though not with equal purity and advantage in all times
and places. And one may venture to assert, that, upon the whole, great good has
resulted to the world from this practice; and that Christians cannot, under any
pretense whatever, forsake the assembling of themselves together, for the
mentioned purpose, without being highly culpable. This is a Method of
instruction and edification, that is plainly of divine institution, and
therefore demands the regard and submission of all Christians, at all times,
and in all places, wherein it is practicable. Nor can conforming to this
institution, be useless and unprofitable to any, who assemble to hear the word
with that meekness which the Apostle injoins: I mean, provided the Gospel is
preached to them in any tolerable degree of purity and integrity. To be sure
the upholding of these Assemblies must be very advantageous to all that
frequent them, if the holy Scriptures are read therein from time to time, in a
language that is understood by all. Which, by the way, ought, I suppose, to be
one stated and constant part of the religious exercise in these assemblies: Nor
is the Omission hereof very consistent with that regard Christians in general
profess, for these sacred writings; and which they evidently claim, as being
given by inspiration of God; and the great rule of our Faith and Practice.
These Scriptures at least, are "profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction and for instruction in righteousness, that every man and child of
God may be perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works." To them we
ought surely to give "diligent heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place;
they being a sure word of prophecy;" and graciously given us of God, to guide
our feet into the paths of truth and peace, until the dawn of a more perfect
day, "and the day star arise in our Hearts."

NOR can it be reasonably though it, that the word preached even by fallible men,
is altogether useless and unprofitable to them that duly attend upon it. On the
contrary, this is very conducive to the good end mentioned; and, as was
intimated before, claims our regard, as an institution of our Savior, the Head
of the Church; Who when he ascended up on high, gave not only Apostles,
Prophets and Evangelists; but also " Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of His body,
'till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ; that we be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine."

HOWEVER imperfectly this business of public teaching and exhorting; of
expounding the holy Scriptures, and urging the motives to evangelical
obedience, may often be performed; yet it is unquestionably subservient to very
good ends; and should not be contemned and disregarded by any that call
themselves Christ's Disciples. It will be no great compliment upon the Clergy
(an order of men which I am not much disposed to flatter) to say, that there
are many persons in all countries, who are not such proficients in Christian
knowledge, as to be quite past receiving any instruction from them; especially
from such of them as "rightly divide the Word of truth." And some of those
persons, who presume this to be their own case, may after all be a little
mistaken in themselves; and think as much too highly of their own abilities, as
they do too lowly of those of others. To be sure, one shall hardly meet with
more vain, superficial, empty Creatures, than amongst those who take it upon
them to run down that order of men; and to set them at naught, as though all
their instructions were useless to the world, at best. And the Clergy must be
very ignorant indeed, ignorant of the rudiments and first principles of
Christianity, were they not able to instruct a multitude of these blustering
Sparks, and foolish, conceited Scoffers, who take it upon themselves to run
them down. But all comparisons are said to be odious; and, perhaps, there can
be none more so than such an one as this --

IT is not to be doubted, indeed, but that, amongst the Laiety, (I use this
term merely for distinction sake; not by way of reproach and contempt, as it
has too often been used by some arrogant Ecclesiastics.) It is not to be
doubted, I say, but that amongst the Laiety there are many persons, from whom a
great part of the Clergy might be glad to be instructed, even in matters that
are more peculiarly their own province. But on the other hand, it is to be
remembered, that there are great numbers of children and youth; and many persons
of adult age, that are either of mean education, or none at all; many poor,
laboring people, who have no time for reading and contemplation; and many
others so embarrassed with a multiplicity of business, and the cares of this
life, that they do not in fact apply themselves to the acquisition of Christian
science; and I might still add, great numbers of a low capacity, who after all
their diligence and pains, can attain to but little knowledge; I say there are
great numbers of these different sorts or classes of people, that may surely
receive some useful instruction even from the pulpit. Allowing the clergy only
a common share of natural understanding, (and it would seem hard to deny them
this) it is very strange if, with the advantage of a learned education, and
several, perhaps many, years close application to the study of sacred science,
they are not qualified to be teachers of babes; of raw, untaught, undisciplined
youth; of those whose lot it is to labor almost incessantly for the meat that
perishes; of those who have never given much of their attention to the subject
of religion; and of those who are not even capable of attaining to any
considerable degree of this knowledge, for a certain reason already hinted at.
-- So that after we have excepted all those, who have any, even the least
pretense to be excepted, on account of their superior capacity and extensive
knowledge; there are multitudes in all Christian countries, who ought to be
Hearers of the word as publicly preached, were it only for the instruction in
truth and righteousness, which they may gain by attending upon this
institution. And how few there are, comparatively speaking, who have any right
to look upon themselves as exceptions in the present case, upon the score of
their being wiser than their teachers, I shall not presume to determine.

BUT as to those who are really too great proficients in sacred knowledge, to
be capable of being instructed in this way; (let their number be greater or
less) they should remember that instruction, most properly so called, is very
far from being the whole design of preaching, and of hearing the word. There
are other good and important ends to be answered hereby, which are common to
all Christians in general; to the wise and learned, as well as to the simple
and illiterate. Are not the minds and memories of the more knowing, to be
stirred up and refreshed; and their attention to the great doctrines and duties
of the gospel, awakened from time to time, as well as the minds of the ignorant
to be informed? The preacher, though of no distinguished talents whether natural
or acquired, may possibly edify the wisest of his auditors, and such as are
much wiser than himself; by putting them in mind of what they before knew, and
were established in. The Apostles themselves did not always propose, in their
preaching and writing, to afford new light and information to their hearers,
and those to whom they wrote. I will not be negligent, says St. Peter, to put
you always in remembrance of these things, although ye know them, and be
established in the present truth. Yea I think it meet, as long as I am in this
tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance. Those who conceive
that the informing of men's understandings, either is, or ought to be, the sole
end of preaching; and who therefore excuse themselves from hearing, under a
notion that they cannot be taught or instructed, are so far from being the
wisest of men, (unless it is in their own vain imaginations) that they want one
to "teach them even the first principles of the oracles of God;" and have much
more need of that milk which they loath and despise, than of that strong meat
which their too forward and vitiated appetite so eagerly craves, and hankers
after.

MEN that are truly wise, are sensible that they need something besides
speculative knowledge, something besides the science of religion, considered as
the furniture of the head. They know they are but too apt to let slip many
useful and salutary truths, which ought to be always present with them; and
which may be again suggested to them, even by persons that are every way their
inferiors. Such Persons also know, that old truths may be set in new and
different points of light, so as to come better recommended to their
understandings, and to take faster hold of the mind and conscience, than they
have done before. They are aware how apt good impressions on the heart, are to
wear out, or at least to grow faint and dim, if not frequently renewed. They
know that the spirit of devotion, and the religion of the heart, is a fire
which will insensibly languish and go to decay, in the damps and mists and
impure vapors of this world, if it be not often supplied with new fuel from
heaven, and from that word of God which is sometimes like a fire, to melt and
inflame the heart, as well as, at others, like a sword to pierce, or a hammer
to break it in pieces. They are sensible how expedient and profitable it is, to
have the great proofs of Christianity set before them from time to time;
together with the great motives to holiness of life; the majesty and
perfections of God; the love and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; the vanity of
this world; the excellency and happiness of religion; the glories and terrors
of the last day; the joys of the righteous, and the destruction and misery of
the wicked. Wise men do not think it useless, to be frequently reminded of such
things: but know the benefit hereof, and that even a weak man may prove a
friendly monitor to them in these respects.

IT is farther to be observed, that those who are not directly able to instruct
others, may yet be a means, in the hand of providence, of suggesting and
hinting some things to them, which they never happened to think of before; and
which may naturally lead them into a long train of useful reflection. And in
this sense, God does probably sometimes ordain praise, even cut of the mouths
of babes and sucklings. In fine here, those who really deserve the character of
wise men, (a character to which so many put in their claim, without any color
of right and justice) know, that it is folly for men to pretend to be wiser
than their maker; or to throw contempt upon any of his institutions, from a
vain conceit that they do not need them. They will therefore, as Solomon
observes, hear, and increase learning. The most sure and effectually means of
growing in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is
to walk in all his ordinances blameless; of which, hearing the word, is
evidently one. Nor have any a right to be called the Friends of God and
religion, who do not love the place where he records his name, and where his
honor dwells; the place where he commands the blessing, even life
forevermore.

WERE it only for example-sake, the more knowing part of Christians ought
certainly to countenance and encourage the public religious exercises of the
Lord's Day, by attending upon them. Otherwise they will naturally come to be
disregarded by that part of mankind who most need such helps and assistances: I
mean the common people. And thus, through the knowledge of some, whether real or
imaginary, the weak Brother may perish, for whom Christ died. Whenever it shall
come to be generally supposed, that the religious exercises here intended, are
designed only for the benefit of the vulgar and illiterate; and when they shall
accordingly be neglected by persons of knowledge and capacity, it will soon be
looked upon as disreputable for any to attend upon them, as being a tacit
confession of their ignorance. And so every one, will think himself under a
sort of obligation to absent himself from the public worship of his Maker, and
from the place where his word is read and preached; in order to prove to the
world that he is a man of wisdom. And indeed there are many amongst us who give
no other evidence besides this, of their superiority to the bulk of mankind;
though I cannot at present think it a conclusive argument.

BUT to draw toward a conclusion of this discourse: It is manifestly the duty
of all Christians in common to hear the word; particularly, to hear it in the
public assembly of the Saints, upon the stated times for such religious
exercises. It is the duty of the young and old, wise and simple, male and
female, bond and free, to come and sit before God as his People sits, (to
use the language of Scripture); and constantly to attend upon the appointed
means of instruction and edification. The gospel injoins this upon all, without
making any exception. The far greater part of Christians are not past being
taught and instructed in this way: Some may have their pure, and others, their
impure minds, stirred up: Some may be enlightened in their duty: Others may have
known duties inculcated upon them to advantage; and ALL may be furthered in the
way that leads to eternal life, provided they hear the word with a suitable
temper of mind. It is no sufficient excuse for neglecting the public worship,
that the Person who officiates, is not one of a distinguished capacity and
great learning; or that he is not even as one that has a pleasant voice, and
can play well upon an instrument. It is better to hear the great doctrines,
duties and promises of the gospel, from the mouth of a plain, illiterate man,
than not to hear them at all: And the soul may be caught up to Heaven, although
not wafted thither by music and harmonious founds.

To conclude, therefore, let me beseech all those who claim the worthy and
sacred name of Christians, (for with others I am not now concerned) to be at
least hearers of the word. There are no excuses for neglecting this, cases of
necessity and mercy being excepted, which will not show either the ignorance,
or the pride and vanity, of those who make them. And it a man is not so much as
a hearer, we have surely no reason to think that he is a doer of the word, or
will be blessed in his deed. Christians ought doubtless to be left at liberty
where, and with whom they will assemble for the purpose mentioned: And should
exercise their reason, discretion and conscience in making the choice. But they
are absolutely inexcusable if they do not attend the public worship some where
or other; even though there may be no sect, church or denomination of Christians,
with which they can entirely fall in. It is one of the chief honors of the
present age, that the principles of religion, particularly of religious
liberty, are better understood, and more generally espoused, than they have,
perhaps been, since the days of the apostles. It were to be wished, that
practical Christianity had made progress in the same proportion. But it cannot
be denied, that many, together with some vulgar errors and superstitions, have
in a manner thrown off even the form of godliness; laying no stress at all upon
those outward ordinances and institutions, upon which too great a stress has
doubtless been laid heretofore. This seems to be the case not only in other
countries; but in our own. We are manifestly running into an extreme; at least
many amongst us are, under a notion of a more rational religion; an extreme
which, it is to be feared, may in time, leave scarce the outward show and
appearance of Christianity amongst us. Let not us, my Brethren, do any thing
which may have a natural tendency to bring our holy religion into disrepute.
Remembering that we are not without law to God, but under the law to Christ; let
us pay a due and sacred regard to all his commands and institutions;
particularly that, respecting the public worship, and hearing the word. In the
language of the Apostle, with whose words I shall close this discourse, Let us
hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for he is faithful
that promised) and let us consider one another, to provoke to love and to good
works; not forsaking the assembling of ourselves tegether, as the manner of
some is; but exhorting one another; and so much the more, as we see the day
approaching.

SERMON II. Upon Receiving the Word with Meekness.
JAMES I. 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
THE duty of hearing the word, having been briefly shown in the foregoing
discourse; we are now to consider with what temper it ought to be attended
upon, and received. "Receive with meekness the ingrafted word, says the
apostle, which is able to save your souls." We are more particularly (...)
admonished by these words, (...) the Gospel with a humble (...) of mind, as
opposed to that pride, captiousness, and wrangling disposition, which are but
too commonly found amongst the professors of Christianity. However, I shall
take the liberty to consider the words in a greater latitude, as designed to
injoin upon us all that care and reverence, that candor and love of truth, that
simplicity and docility of mind, which become sinful creatures, when the Gospel
is preached to them; and which are suitable to the nature and design of this
dispensation of the Grace of God to the World. And the admonition may
accordingly comprise in it the following particulars:

THAT we hear the word with care and attention, in opposition to sloth,
listlesness, and a lazy indifference:

WITH sobriety and due decorum, in opposition to indecent levity, and rudeness:

WITH humility, and a teachable temper, in opposition to a spirit of pride,
carping and contradiction:

WITH due caution, (when it is preached by fallible men) in opposition to a
false humility, which disposes many people to swallow down whatever they hear
from the Pulpit, though often very contrary to the doctrine of our Savior and
his Apostles:

WITH patience and affectionate regard to the truth, although nothing new should
be said upon the subject treated, in opposition to that vain curiosity and love
of novelty, which we see in those that have itching Ears:

WITH candor and impartiality, in opposition to all personal prejudice, and to
the spirit of party:

WITH self-application, in opposition to that common humor of applying what is
said to the case of our neighbors:

AND lastly, With a single view, and an hearty desire, to receive christian
edification; and to obtain that which is the great end of the
Gospel-revelation, and of our Faith in it, even the Salvation of our Souls.

LET me enlarge a little upon the several particulars hinted at above.

1. WE should hear the word with care and attention, in opposition to sloth,
listlesness, and a lazy indifference. Christians ought not, at any time, to be
slothful in business, but ever fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. But there
is a peculiar impropriety in withdrawing our attention, and indulging to sloth,
when we are assembled to worship God, and to hear his word. The coldness and
carelessness, with which many Christians sit under the dispensation of this
heavenly doctrine, is very surprising, and hardly to be accounted for. The
Gospel is not only the word of Him that speaks from heaven; but it is that
wherein we are all particularly interested, and far more so than we are in any
thing besides. This is that Gospel which contains the overtures of peace and
reconciliation, which God is making to his sinful Creatures; wherein "Life and
immortality are brought to light"; which contains all the solid grounds of our
hope and expectations of future bliss; and which we ought in reason to look
upon as good news from a far country; "a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance". With what raised attention? with what holy reverence? with what
humble gratitude, does it then become us to hear and receive this ingrafted
word, which is able to save our souls; and which is spoken to us solely for
that end? But alas! were a trifling, unconcerning story told us, from a remote
part of the world, by some romantic traveller, many persons would be at least
as attentive to it, and some much more so, than they are in our religious
assemblies, to those glad tidings which Christ, the true and faithful witness,
has brought from Heaven to Earth. Although God, who "at sundry times, and in
diverse manners, spoke to the fathers by the prophets, has in these last days
spoken to the world by his Son"; yet many to whom this gospel of the Kingdom is
preached, and who profess to believe it, pay far less regard to it, than they
would to an account of the Mogul-Empire; of the wars of Kouli Kan; and of many
other things, if possible, both less interesting to them, and less considerable
in their own nature. They could not doze and slumber more, while the most idle,
the most uninteresting tales were telling, than they do, when the Gospel of
their Salvation is read or preached to them. Good God! what impiety? what
infatuation is this? Is this to pay a due regard to thy overtures of peace and
happiness to rebellious mortals! Is this to give proper heed to the Revelation
which thou have made of thy self by thy Son! Is this to hear, and to receive
with meekness, the ingrafted word! Is it not rather to stop the ear against the
voice of divine love and compassion! Is it not rather to throw manifest open
contempt upon thy word, than to pay any honor to it!

SOME of those persons whom I here intend, are so far from hearing the word
with a becoming attention, that they do not hear it all; but designedly compose
themselves to rest in the place of public worship, as though they had not houses
to sleep in; or rather, as though they were determined to show how much they
despise the Church of God, and at once to cast contempt both upon God and Man.
For this is done by those who sit in the seat of the sleepers, as well as those
who sit in that of the scorners. And it is probable that few would be thus past
hearing, were they not first past feeling, having their consciences seared as
with an hot iron. In short, the indecent custom of which I am now speaking, is
equally an affront to God and man; an equal contradiction to all piety, and
good manners: Nor will any allow themselves in it, who have not both a stony
heart, and a brazen front.

2. CHRISTIANS ought to hear the word with sobriety and due decorum, in
opposition not only to a dull indifference and oscitancy; but also in
opposition to that indecent levity and rudeness, which we sometimes see in our
religious assemblies. The tidings which the Gospel brings are too interesting
to be heard with coldness and carelessness; too serious, solemn and sacred, to
be heard with unholy mirth, and wanton gaiety. The important nature and subject
of this message from God to man, evidently demand a devout and reverential, as
well as a diligent and fixed attention in the hearer. However some seem to
indulge themselves as much in unseasonable, unseemly levity of mind, as others
do in an irreligious lumpishness, and a certain lifeless, spiritless gravity.
Nor is the former of these, any more than the latter, a suitable frame and
temper with which to receive the ingrafted word. To hear it with merriment and
laughter, is not surely consistent with that meek receiving it, which is
injoined upon us. "To every thing there is a season and a time to every purpose
under heaven -- a time to weep as well as a time to laugh." Let those who are
disposed to be gay and jovial, be so in due time and place, and none but some
gloomy, morose devotionists, or the hypocritical pretenders to extraordinary
sanctity, will blame them for it. But this, however innocent upon some
occasions, is very unbecoming, and even criminal, when we are assembled for the
exercises of religion, and to hear what God the Lord will say unto us,
respecting things of the greatest importance. When we receive His message in
the Gospel, the end of which is the salvation of our souls, we should not only
abstain from all external lightness of behavior, from all those mirthful airs,
which might be harmless at other times; but also banish every idle thought,
every vain imagination, that would intrude itself upon us so unseasonably. We
should abstract ourselves, as much as possible, from all terrestial things in
general; and compose ourselves to sobriety, and holy reverence. It is only such
a grave, serious temper and deportment, that is suitable to the majesty of that
Presence in which we are; and to the nature of that message which is delivered
to us.

ONE would be almost ready to suspect, from the countenance and air of many
persons in our religious assemblies, that they were ashamed to have the least
appearance of a serious, devout mind, lest they should be looked upon either as
superstitious, or hypocritical. But surely, if there is any such thing as
religion, there is a medium betwixt a superstitious, sullen, or affected
gravity at the public worship, and that tho'tless levity of ^ehaviour, which is
here intended. There is a certain seriousness of mind, and composedness of
soul, which corresponds to the nature and design of religion; and which almost
unavoidably discovers itself wherever it is, even in the features of the face,
and in a person's whole air and deportment. And although an affected hypocritical
gravity is justly odious to God and man; yet to be really grave, and in earnest
in religion, is highly commendable; nor is it proper, or reasonable, to avoid
the appearance of this; or to strive against that which is the natural
indication of such a temper and frame of heart.

3. WE ought to hear the word with a humble, teachable temper, in opposition to
a spirit of pride, carping, and contradiction. And this, as has been already
observed, is that which the apostle more directly intends by receiving the word
with meekness. Whenever we go to the place of worship, to hear the Gospel read
or preached, it should be with a mind disposed to receive instruction, and an
ear open to discipline. The oracles of God in general, as well as the writings
of Solomon in particular, were designed to make us know wisdom, to perceive the
words of understanding, to receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, judgment
and equity; to give subtlety to the simple, to the young man knowledge and
discretion. And with this view, with a humble, meek and teachable temper, we
ought always to hear the word of God: not that we may observe something to
criticize upon, and cavil at; not that we may indulge our vanity, with the
secret thought how much wiser we are than the poor Parson, as he goes along.
However many that are far less wise than David do not scruple to adopt his
Words -- I have more understanding than all my teachers: I understand more than
the Ancients.

THIS is a temper of mind, which utterly unfits persons for receiving any
benefit from the preached and ingrafted word: And were it heard forever, with
no better, and more tractable a disposition, it would not be the means of
saving a single soul. How contrary is such a vain, proud and captious humor,
to that meekness with which we are injoined to receive the ingrafted word? How
inconsistent is such a spirit, with that simplicity, and humble desire of
improvement, which St. Peter recommends in his first Epistle? The word of the
Lord, says he, endures forever; and this is the word, which by the Gospel is
preached to you. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile and
hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings, as newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, that ye may (...) thereby. How contrary is this
temper, to that which our Savior represents as necessary to a due hearing of
the Gospel, so as to receive benefit therefrom? Verily, verily, I say unto you,
that whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, shall by
no means enter into it.

LET none of us give way to a proud, cavilling, and wrangling spirit, when we
assemble to hear the word; but keep our heart as well as our foot, with all
diligence, when we go to the house of God. The meanest person may say something
which may be to our edification: Nor should we be above receiving that from any
one, even from the meanest. No one surely will think himself above this, who
sincerely desires the salvation of his Soul. Nor are those who hear the word
with the opposite temper of vanity and haughtiness, really the better, but
rather the worse for it; and so much the farther from the kingdom of heaven.
And it is observable, that this scornful, disdainful, self-flattering humor,
is generally found in those, who have very little right to claim any such
superiority over others -- Receive with meekness, therefore, the ingrafted
word, wherever, and from whomsoever, you hear it: Be willing to be instructed,
and admonished of your duty, by any one; and more particularly by those whose
special office it is to preach the word; lest (to use the words of the wisest
of Men; lest) thou mourn at the last; and say, How have I hated instruction,
and my heart despised reproof! And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers;
nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me! I was almost in all evil in
the midst of the congregation and assembly!

HOWEVER, do not imagine, my Brethren, that we are for lording it over God's
heritage; and would put out your eyes, that you may see with ours; or rather
follow us blindfold. No: it were extravagant pride and insolence in us, to
desire this, and false humility in you to comply with such a desire. But this
brings me to the next particular mentioned.

4. WHEN we hear the Gospel preached by fallible men, we should do it with due
caution, in opposition to that excessive meekness, or rather stuped tameness,
and unmanly servility, which disposes people to swallow down every thing which
they hear from the Pulpit, right or wrong. There is a wide difference betwixt
that vain, carping and contradictious humor, which I have been speaking of
above, and the too easy credulity here intended; betwixt the spirit of
cavilling, and pertly finding fault with almost every thing, and the dullness of
implicit believing. It is the rational and christian part, to steer betwixt
these extremes. Nor is it impracticable to keep the middle way in this case; to
be neither too vain and opposite on one hand, nor too credulous and submissive
on the other.

As we are Christians, the inspired scriptures are our rule of faith and
conduct. Them we should ever read and hear with an implicit faith; submitting
ourselves wholly to their guidance and direction, after having exercised our
best reason in finding out their true sense and meaning. There is not, upon our
own principles, any room left for objecting, or doubting, when we are
convinced, that these sacred oracles deliver such or such a doctrine; or
require us to do such or such a thing. Because it is impossible for God to lie;
to teach us falsehood for truth; or to injoin upon us the performance of any
thing which ought not to be done. But too many teachers, exclusively of those
in the well-known church, which gives herself the courteous title of
infallible, have approached very near to the same insolence and arrogance;
putting themselves almost, if not altogether, upon the same footing with Moses
and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles. Yea, I wish they had not in effect
assumed to themselves an higher seat, and greater authority, than they allow to
Moses and to Christ, as though the servant were above his Lord, and the servant
greater than his Master. For why else, in the name of God! do they disparage
the holy scriptures, by representing them as an insufficient rule of faith, and
test of orthodoxy? Why do they practically deny them to be the only standard
and touchstone of Christian verity, by cramming us with their Creeds, and such
like trumpery? Why is all this lumber of Confessions and Formularies, laid upon
us? a load which we are not able to bear; and, which some others would not
perhaps have been, had they not been originally designed for creatures of
burden? Why else are we told by many, that besides believing the oracles of
God, we must, before we can be orthodox, believe their oracles? oracles as
uncertain as the old Delphian; or any others which the Pagan Fathers consulted
with gaping stupidity, and sottish amazement? Why else, do many of our
Pulpit-Performers demand at least as great a defference to be paid to their
harrangues and dogma's, as to the sacred writings, given confessedly by
inspiration of God? In fine, why else do they not preach Christ Jesus the Lord,
and themselves only servants for Jesus' sake? -- But however assuming any of
the clergy may be; yet surely those who hear them should not be so excessively
tame and servile, as to receive what they advance, without letting it pass
through their understandings; without seeing it to be conformable either to
reason or scripture, or to both. Possibly the word ingrafted by them, may not
be word of God, which is able to save the soul; but merely the word of man, and
contrary to sound doctrine; and so have a greater tendency to poison and
debauch, to mislead and destroy, the soul, than to heal and save it.

NOR is this an incredible supposition, when we reflect what absurd, what
inhuman, what blasphemous notions, have, from age to age, been ventilated for
the great truths, and most important doctrines of the Gospel, by the ministers
of it: Notions, to which we may apply what our Savior says of false teachers,
that they are "wolves in sheep's clothing;" Notions which worry and perplex
the flock of Christ; notions which lead men to destroy the bodies and lives of
their neighbors; but have no tendency to benefit their souls; notions which
under the fair pretense of exalting the grace, and promoting the honor of God,
are really subversive of both. In short, since there is too much reason to
think, that some lie in wait to deceive, and wilfully mislead others, for the
sake of carrying on their own worldly and ambitious designs; and since the
wisest and most upright men, are yet fallible, Christians ought to be cautious
and circumspect in their hearing, and not blindly to follow their spiritual
guides in any thing

AND the caution which I am now recommending, is so far from being inconsistent
with that meekness, with which we ought to receive the ingrafted word, that it
is necessarily included in it. From a regard and reverence to the word of God,
we are obliged to take heed what we hear and receive from men; lest we should
be led astray, either by those who may have an interest in deceiving us; or by
those who, through common human frailty, may run into error themselves, and
endeavor to lead others after them. The very same humility and meekness with
which, we ought to receive the truths of God's word, require us to be upon our
guard against the errors and delusions of designing or mistaken men; lest, with
them, we should corrupt the word, by mixing with it what is foreign and
heterogeneous and contrary thereto: By which means we may come at length to
have another Gospel, so very different from the old, that we cannot apply to it
the words of the apostle, that it is not another; because it is a system of
religion, in the general frame, contexture, and tendency of it, essentially and
fundamentally different from that promulgated to the world by Christ and his
apostles. And is there not now evidently in the world, another Gospel, in this
sense? a Religion, which, though it bears the name of Christian, does not in
reality resemble true primitive Christianity, so much as it does ancient
Paganism! From whence sprang these amazing corruptions, but from incautious
credulity, and blind submission to the clergy?

BUT to conclude this head: If we would receive the word with due meekness; and
with that reverence to the author and finisher of our faith, which becomes
Christians; we are always to make a wide difference betwixt the scriptures of
truth, and the doctrines and explanations of fallible men. That which God has
really revealed, cannot mislead us; the words of men may. In reverence to the
former, we ought to exercise caution with regard to the latter; and with the
noble Bereans, to search the scriptures daily, whether those things which are
preached to us are conformable to them, or not. And though any man should
preach to us another doctrine, we ought to reject it with disdain; and this,
for the same reason that we ought to receive the word and message of God with
meekness and reverence. Yea, if an Angel from Heaven should preach unto us
another Gospel, not I, but the Apostle says, "let him be accursed." Turn not
aside upon one hand, to vain jangling, and opposition of science falsely so
called; turn not aside, upon the other hand, to slavish submission, and papal
stupidity. Be men; be Christians; be protestants. Use the understandings which
God has given you, in seeking his will. Reverence the Revelation which he has
favored you with: Exercise your reason, and the liberty you enjoy, in learning
the truth, and your Duty from it. Make use of all proper helps in order to gain
a right understanding of this revelation; but submit yourselves blindly to
none; lest they should "teach for doctrines the commandments of Men." And if
you think I do not now speak to you the words of truth and soberness, pay no
regard to it. The following passages, from a Sermon of the excellent Archbishop
Sharp, against Creeds of human composition; and the vanity and arrogance of
those who impose them, is though it not improper to have a place here.

ALL Christians, (says he,) agree that we must be Believers: But some, taking
Advantage of this, will not allow us to have a right Faith, or to be Orthodox
Christians, unless we come up to all those Notions and Propositions which they
esteem Articles of Faith. One would think therefore that some Rule ought to be
given us, by which we might measure the Sufficiency of our Faith, or by which
we might know when we have believed all that is necessary; that so we might not
be under the Tyranny of such Usurpers upon our Consciences, as would be always
imposing on our Faith, till at last they came to make us swallow
Impossibilities for Divine Revelation. And such a Rule, methinks, our Savior
has here given us. His Commission to the Apostles is, Go into all the World,
and preach the Gospel unto every Creature; and he adds, Whosoever believes
shall be saved. Believes? believes what? Why certainly the Gospel that he
spoke of before: Whosoever believes the Gospel, and is baptized, shall be
saved; that must be his Meaning. It is the Gospel therefore that we must
believe; and to the believing of that alone, without any more the Promises of
Salvation are made. But what is this Gospel? Why, it is plainly that Doctrine
which Jesus Christ himself taught, and which the Apostles from him preached to
the World, and which was all in their Times p^^ into Writing, and which is all
fully contained in those Books that we have at this Day in our Hands, which we
call the New Testament. This Gospel then is the Rule of our Faith. Every
Doctrine that is there delivered we must believe^: But as for any Doctrine that
is not there delivered, nor can be deduced from thence, we are not bound to
believe that as an Article of Faith let it come never so well recommended by
the Authority of Popes or their Councils, nay, or backed with the Credit of
Miracles wrought for the Attestation of it. This, I say, i^ our Rule of Faith:
That Rule, which OUR CHURCH prescribes to us as well as the Holy Scriptures,
AND BLESSED BE GOD WE DO SO STRICTLY KEEP TO IT. So long as we do so, it is
impossible but we must be not only a true Church, but also a right and a sound
Church. We cannot indeed, upon those Principles, admit of abundance of Points,
which our Neighbors lay so much Weight upon, as to make all those that deny
them to be Infidels and Heretics. We do not believe the Infallibility of the
Church, nor the Supremacy of the Church of Rome, nor Transubstantiation, nor
Purgatory, nor Invocation of Saints, nor twenty other such Articles, which they
make necessary to Salvation. And the Reason is, because we find none of those
Things in the Gospel, as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures, which we are
sure would have been there, if God had made it our Duty to have believed them.
But we believe all ha^ the Gospel teaches, and make use likewise of all the
Means that are possible to understand (...) true Sense^. And this we are sure
is all that Christ (...), as to the Business of Believing.




5. To hear the Word with meekness, may moreover comprehend the hearing it with
patience, and an affectionate regard, although nothing new should be offered upon
the subject treated of; in contradistinction to that vain curiosity, and idle
love of novelty, which is to be found in persons who have itching ears. The
design of Christianity is not so much to please our fancies, and to gratify our
curiosity, as better our minds and save our souls: Though there is a great deal
therein, which may contribute to the former, as well as every thing needful to
the latter. The things of which the Gospel treats, are things which Angels
desire to look into: Nor is one desire gratified, till new ones arise, there
being place and scope given, in this dispensation of the grace of God, for
alternate inquiry, and pleasing admiration, 'till time shall be no more. And if
we are desirous to hear something new, for our improvement as reasonable
creatures; if we are desirous hereof, for our edification as Christians, if we
want that this glorious light should beam upon us with a fuller ray; if we are
desirous to know more of the perfections of the great Father of our spirits; if
to understand more of the mystery of our redemption; if we want to be taught
more perfectly the way that leads to eternal life, that we may walk therein
without deviating, in ^ine, if we would fain "comprehend with all ^a^^ts, what
is the height and depth, the length and breadth, and would know the love of
Christ which passes knowledge, that we may be filled with all the fullness of
God;" if this is our desire, if this our ambition, our ambition is then t^^^y
noble and divine. Such a love of novelty, such a kind of curiosity, ought
certainly to be promoted and countenanced, rather than discouraged; For a man
that is truly wise, never thinks he is wise enough; and one truly good, is
always sensible that he ought to be better.

BUT if, on the other hand, you want to hear things that are new, merely for
the sake of novelty; if your desire to know more of God, does not arise from a
desire to love him better, and serve him more acceptably; if your desire to
know more of your Redeemer, is not accompanied with a desire to live more to
Him, who has died for you; if you want to be more acquainted with Christianity,
considered only as a science, or the subject of speculation, not as it is a
doctrine according to Godliness; in fine, if you want only to have your fancies
pleased, and not the salvation of your souls promoted; this surely is a
curiosity that is unworthy a Christian. And the hearing of Novels and Romances,
would turn as much to the account of persons of this vain, trifling humor, as
all the Sermons that have been, and shall be preached, from the fall of Adam to
the fall of Antichrist: I mean, unless such people should happen to be
convinced by them, of the folly and absurdity of hearing merely with this view;
and be brought to reflect more seriously upon the things which belong to their
peace.

THERE are some persons mightily disgusted, if they hear a discourse preached a
second time; though perhaps years after the first; and which was so wholly out of
their minds, that they would not have known it to be the same, but for one or
two sentences, or some one particular word or phrase. Now from what does this
disgust arise? From a sincere desire to be edified, as Christians? or only from
an affection for new things? from trifling curiosity? Is this an indication,
that persons hear the word with a proper temper? Or does it betray an
unbecoming levity and capriciousness of humor? Or does it proceed from a
jealousy that the Preacher does not labor and toil enough for his reward? from
a fear that he will not spend and be spent soon enough? I am pretty sure it
does not usually proceed from any thing that is good and laudable, and which
such persons would not be ashamed honestly to confess.

OUR Savior's discourses often bore a very ^ear resemblance one to the other.
The Apostles did not always preach new doctrines; nor yet express the old in
different language. Yea, they professedly deliver the same things over again;
although the persons to whom they wrote and preached, already knew them, and were
established in these truths. And in fine, when our Lord was instructing his
Apostles in their ministerial office, he tells them, that every scribe which is
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man which is an
householder, which brings out of his treasure things new and old.

CAN it then be looked upon as blameworthy, in those who labor in the word
and doctrine, that they do not always bring forth things that are new? The
doctrines of the gospel are, in a sense, always new to those who have a proper
relish for the heavenly Manna. Does the same food which we have often satisfied
ourselves upon heretofore, disgust us when we are hungry? Do we loath the wine
when we are thirsty, because we have often seen it giving its color in the
glass, and moving itself aright? You may perhaps think these similitudes too
gross. However there is a real and true analogy, betwixt the cravings of the
soul, and those of the body: The sincere Christian, far from nauseating the
most familiar doctrines of the Gospel, how often soever he has heard them,
esteems them as his necessary and daily food, without which, his soul would
languish, pine away, and be in a manner famished. It is his meat and his drink
to hear, as well as to do the will of his Father which is in heaven: Nor is the
repetition thereof in his ear, more irksome to him, than the continued practice
of it in his life.

IF so be then, we know the grace of God in truth; if we have tasted and seen
that the Lord is gracious; if we truly hunger and thirst after righteousness;
these old doctrines and commandments, will be ever new and grateful to us. The
fruit of that tree of sacred, unforbidden knowledge, which God has planted upon
earth, will be always sweet to our taste; yea, sweeter than honey and the
honeycomb. The Gospel in its greatest simplicity, unadorned with the blossoms
and flowers of rhetoric, is like the tree of life, mentioned in the
ap^^^lypse, -- a tree which bare twelve manner of fruit, and the leaves whereof
were for the healing of the nations. Of this we may freely eat, and live
forever.

I am not endeavoring to excuse the lazy and slothful shepherd, who takes not
due care to feed the flock of Christ with knowledge and understanding; to cause
it to lie down in green pastures, and lead it beside the still waters. But yet
it is an ill sympton, when people are out of humor, because they are sometimes
entertained with an old discourse. Nor ought they to expect more of their
Ministers than their health and strength will allow them to perform. And You
know who observed long since, that much study is a weariness to the flesh.

6. THE admonition we are considering, requires us to hear the word with candor
and impartiality, in opposition to personal prejudices, and the spirit of
party. The prejudices, and the bigotry here intended, have a prodigious and
unaccountable influence upon the bulk of mankind; and greatly impede the
progress, the salutary tendency, and glorious design of Christianity. Nor can
we say with our Savior upon another occasion, that "from the beginning it was
not so." These things of old gave rise to the violent opposition of the Jews to
our Lord, and his Gospel. His parentage was a great stumbling block to many."
Is not this the Carpenter's son? The place of his usual abode, was another.
"Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" His not being countenanced by the
Pharisees, the orthodox folks of that day, was a third objection. Have any of
the Pharisees believed on him? Thus did personal prejudice, faction and party
spirit, reign in the days of our Savior; and obstruct the progress of his
religion; all which things are directly contrary to that meekness and candor,
with which we ought to hear the word. The same spirit, the same bigotry
discovered itself, more or less, even amongst Christians, during the apostolic
age: Of which frequent notice is taken in the new Testament. St. Paul in
particular speaks of this factious spirit, as a proof of their being carnal;
and as what prevented their profiting by the word preached. I have fed you with
milk, and not with meat; says he, for hitherto ye were not able to bear it;
neither yet now are ye able -- For whereas there is among you envying and
strife and divisions, are ye not carnal? -- For while one faith, I am of Paul,
and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? The inlisting under particular
men, as heads and leaders; and strenously opposing other teachers at all
adventures, was, you see, an error into which Christians fell in very early
times: and one quite repugnant to that candor and catholicism, which the
Apostles endeavored to propagate amongst their converts. And this illiberal,
pernicious and antichristian spirit of party has descended from age to age,
maugre all the pains which wise and good men have used to suppress it. Nor
would you believe me, if I said there was not a great deal of it to be seen
amongst us at this Day. A person under the influence and dominion of this
spirit, cannot possibly hear the truth as he ought to do. He will often reject
the truth, because it is spoken by a person of another sect or denomination. He
will cavil at those things which he would admire and applaud, and get good by,
were they delivered by one of his own side, his own party; by one, against whom
he had not conceived a strong prejudice. Such a Man is also prepared to receive
almost any thing for good doctrine, however absurd and pernicious, from the
mouth of one whom he thinks well of, as being of his own sect; especially if he
has a great personal regard and friendship for him.

Now if we would hear the word with due simplicity and meekness, it behooves us,
as far as possible to dev^st ourselves of every prejudice. We should lay our
minds open to the impressions of truth and reason; not respecting persons, nor
suffering ourselves to be carried away with blind zeal for a party. Whenever we
go to hear, we should do it with a mind prepared to receive whatever may be
conformable to reason, and the holy scriptures, without regard to names,
persons, and party-differences. And it is to be hoped, that one who hears with
this candid, and ingenuous temper, being truly desirous of improvement, will
scarce ever be sent empty away; or return without benefit. That must be a worse
Sermon than ever I have heard, (though I will not add, than ever I have preached)
from which some good might not accrue to the meek and impartial hearer. The
temper which I am now recommending, like the fabled hand of Midas, turns every
thing into gold; even lead and brass. It has the happy power of making a good
use and improvement of almost any thing; not excepting the wood, hay and
stubble, which are the superstructure raised by some unskilful builders, upon
the foundation of the gospel; instead of building gold, silver and precious
stones.

7. CHRISTIANS should hear the word, with self application; as opposed to the
common humor of applying things to their neighbors. The primary and great end
of hearing the G^sgel, is the improving of our own minds in knowledge and
virtue; that our own souls may be saved thereby. There are, however, some who
overlook this end; almost forgetting that they have any souls to be saved; and
very carefully observing whatever is applicable to the (...) others. When any
particular vice is (...) instead of asking their own hearts, how far they are
chargeable therewith, they immediately fix upon one and other as the persons to
whom this belongs; though perhaps they are far more guilty themselves. Strange
absurdity! that people will so readily see a mote in their brother's eye, and
yet cannot, or rather will not, perceive the beam that is in their own. Thou
hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shall thou
see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother's eye. Before we apply things
to our neighbors, we should think of our own Sins, which are perhaps, greater;
and take the portion that falls to us. How absurd is it for him that commits
sacrilege, to fix his eye on him that steals? for him that commits adultery,
to keep in view him that offends, comparatively in a less atrocious way? for
him that fears not God, to cast a censorious look on him that regards not
man? When we hear the word preached, our business is at home, with our own
hearts and consciences; and we shall probably find employment enough there,
without wandering thus unseasonably abroad. We should behold our own face and
moral features, in the intellectual mirror which is held up before us; in
order to see our own spots and blemishes, and to wipe away the stains which
deform us. We do not hear the word as we ought to do, unless we thus bring it
home to our selves; and aim at correcting what we find amiss in our tempers and
manners, upon a careful inspection into our own hearts. The contrary humor of
applying what is said, to our neighbors, is owing to pride and
self-confidence: It proceeds from a spirit of censoriousness, uncharity and
arrogance; and so is the very reverse of that meekness and humility, with which
we ought to receive the ingrafted word. And indeed what good can we expect from
hearing, unless we make the proper application to our-selves, instead of
hearing only for others?

LASTLY; and to sum up all in one word: We should hear with a single view to
our being edified as Christians; and that we may, at length receive that which
is the great end of the gospel, and of our faith in it, the Salvation of our
Souls. Whenever we go to hear, we should seriously reflect with ourselves what
is the grand scope and design of Christianity, that so we may hear with a
temper and disposition corresponding thereto. This is the sum of all that has
been said above upon the subject; the result and conclusion of this whole
matter. Now we cannot but know, that this gospel of the kingdom, which is, from
time to time, preached to us, is a dispensation of the grace of God to a guilty
lost world; a revelation of his mercy to us by his Son, considered as sinful
perishing creatures, justly liable to wrath and destruction; a discovery of
God's kind intentions toward us in general; and more particularly, of the
method which his infinite wisdom has pitched upon, and ordained, for our
restoration to his favor, to true wisdom, holiness and happiness; the end of
all being the salvation of our souls.

THIS is the manifest scope and aim of the Christian revelation: And while we
keep this in view, we can hardly fail of perceiving how, and with what temper
this divine message ought to be received. The nature of the thing will scarce
permit one that attends to it, to be at any loss in the present case. While we
consider the Majesty of that God who is speaking to us in his word, and our own
sinfulness and unworthiness; while we consider the subject matter of this
revelation, and the glorious Dignity of that Person who, for us men and for our
salvation, came down from heaven; while we consider the glory and happiness to
which we are called and invited by the gospel, and the destruction threatened to
those who obstinately reject the counsel of God against themselves; in fine,
while we consider that our immortal souls are at stake, and are either to be
saved or lost, according to the reception which we give to this heavenly
message; while we consider these things, we cannot but know, that it becomes us
to hear it with diligence, and the greatest care; with seriousness and gravity;
with all meekness and humility; with caution and circumspection, with affection
and love; with candor, fairness and impartiality; with a desire to inform and
better our minds; and, in fine, with an earnest desire, that the end of it may
be answered in the salvation of our souls. This is plainly the manner, this the
way, this the temper and disposition, with which we ought to hear and receive
the ingrafted word. And if we receive it thus, it will by God's blessing, be
effectual to the end and purpose for which it is preached. If not, we shall in
the language of scripture, "receive the grace of God in vain."

BUT there is something previously requisite in order to our receiving the word
in the manner described, which is, that we renounce all our gross and sensual
lusts; those vicious habits which the light of nature condemns; which darken
and pervert our understanding; and make us disrelish the pure truths and
doctrines, as well as the duties of the gospel. We are to "lay apart all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness," before we can receive the ingrafted
word in such a manner as is necessary to the salvation of our souls. But of
this in the next discourse; concluding the present with the words of the
apostle -- They received not the love of the truth that they might be saved.
And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie; that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness.

SERMON III. The Necessity of renouncing Vice in its grosser Forms, in order to
a due receiving of the Gospel.
JAMES I. 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
IT pleases God, by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.
This is the principal method which He has ordained for promulgating the Gospel
amongst all nations; and handing it down from age to age 'till the end of the
world: The way which he has appointed for bringing back those who, like sheep,
have gone astray from him; that there may be one fold and one shepherd. It is
an undoubted truth, that every one that calls aright on the name of the Lord,
shall be saved, in whatever age, in whatever region of the world, his lot is
cast: But (in the language of the Apostle) how shall they call on Him, on whom
they have not believed? And how shall they believe in Him, of whom they have
not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? -- So then, faith comes
by hearing; and hearing by the word of God. This is that word, that ingrafted
word, which is able to save our souls; and which, laying apart all filthiness
and superfluity of naughtiness, we should receive with meekness.

I HAVE already taken occasion from this passage of scripture, to show the
indispensable duty lying upon all Christians in general to be hearers of the
word.

I HAVE moreover shown, with what meekness the gospel ought to be heard and
received by all, from a consideration of the nature and design of it; it being
the doctrine of our salvation by Jesus Christ; the word brought from heaven to
earth, to be ingrafted into our hearts, that we might have our fruit unto
holiness; and the end, everlasting life.

I NOW proceed as was proposed in the third place,

THIRDLY, To show the necessity of abandoning our gross and sensual lusts,
those vices and evil habits which even the light of nature condemns, in order
to our receiving the Gospel with due meekness; and in such a manner as is
requisite in order to our salvation. This is the natural import and connection
of the apostles words -- Lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of
naughtiness; AND receive with meekness, etc. ["All filthiness."] The word
denotes the more sordid and brutal vices; particularly those sins which in the
language of scripture, go under the name of uncleanness; and fleshly lusts,
which are said to war against the soul. [ Superfluity of naughtiness] The
redundance and abounding of iniquity; the gross, palpable violations of the law
of nature; those flagrant and enormous sins, for which we could have no cloak,
no excuse, although Christ had never come, and spoken to the world. The
renouncing of these heinous immoralities, is, I suppose, what the Apostle
intends by laying apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness. And
this we are admonished to do, in order to our receiving the word with meekness;
it being impossible for men wholly under the dominion of sensual lusts, to give
that cordial reception to the Gospel, which is here intended; and which is
necessary in order to its answering the design of it, in the salvation of their
souls.

BUT according to this interpretation, some will perhaps ask, "whether we do
not make the Apostle guilty of this absurdity and inconsistency; namely, of
supposing, that vicious men must be become virtuous and holy, in order to their
receiving the gospel; whereas this is the very end which the Gospel aims at?
How can we attain to holiness but by the gospel? by receiving the word? And
yet, according to the above interpretation, we cannot receive the word, till we
are actually become holy? or 'til we have laid apart all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness; which amounts to the same thing? Here is a manifest
circle".

I ANSWER, That the Apostle, by laying apart all filthiness, etc. cannot be
here supposed to mean any thing more than a partial reformation of mind and
manners; such a one as does not come up to our idea of evangelical holiness;
but which is, at the same time, a step toward it; as it prepares and qualifies
a person for receiving the word as he ought to do; as it renders him a proper
subject for the gospel to work upon. And if we understand him thus, it will
wholly remove all appearance of inconsistency. For certainly we may suppose a
vicious man reformed in some considerable measure: and yet destitute of that
true principle of piety and holiness, which it is the design of the Gospel to
beget in us. But in order to set this matter in as clear a light as I can, I
would premise two or three things more particularly, as follows.

1. THERE is a real and manifest difference betwixt a person, who is only free
from those gross pollutions of the world; from that great depravity of mind and
manners, intended by a superfluity of naughtiness, and a thorough Christian;
one who is already made meet for, and entitled to eternal life. If it may be
said of the former, that he is "not far from the kingdom of God;" the latter is
actually in it, and a loyal subject of it. If one of them is not entirely under
the dominion of sin; the other is a servant of righteousness. If one is in some
measure delivered from the habits and practice of vice; the other has the
positive principles and habits of virtue. If one has in part, "put off the old
man with his deeds, which is corrupt according to deceitful lusts"; the other
has "put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. If one is not wholly subjected to the devil, "the spirit that works
in the children of disobedience"; the other has a divine nature implanted in
him, being "renewed in the spirit of his mind". In fine, there is plainly a
distinction to be made, betwixt one who has only so much sense of religion and
virtue, as to make him abstain from those heinous immoralities which the light
of nature condemns; and one who is, in the sense of scripture, a righteous good
man, "bringing forth good things out of the good treasure of his heart."

2. THE Gospel is the great means which God has appointed for the raising of
men to that new, spiritual and divine life, which constitutes the Christian
character. It is especially in this dispensation of grace, that we have the
things that "pertain to godliness". Hereby, and herein, are given to us "great
and precious promises, that by them we may be made partakers of a divine
nature, having [before] escaped the corruptions that are in the world through
lust."

3. THAT the Gospel may have this happy effect upon us, it is necessary that it
should be heartily embraced; that it should be received in meekness. If it is
not received at all, it can have no such influence upon us; nor indeed can it,
unless it is received with that temper of mind, which our Savior and the
Apostles always recommend to us.

THESE things being premised, whoever attends to the thing, will easily see
that a person who runs to every excess of riot and debauchery; one who commits
iniquity with greediness; and says no restraints upon himself; that has no fear
of God before his eyes; nor any awakened sense of religion; that such a person,
I say, is not in a present capacity for receiving the Gospel, in the manner it
is necessary it should be received, in order to its being to him "the power of
God unto salvation". There is a certain preparation, or previous qualification
for entertaining this heavenly doctrine, of which he is destitute. Persons who
are all immersed in sensuality and vice; those in whose mortal bodies sin
reigns triumphant; and whose very "mind and conscience is defiled," must be
reformed in some degree, and brought to more sober reflection, before they
either will, or can in the nature of the thing, give such a meek and cordial
reception to the ingrafted word, as is requisite in order to their being saved
by it.

THERE is a strong antipathy in a man who is under the government of pride and
sensual lusts, to the doctrines and precepts of the Gospel: So that he cannot
in a moment, bring himself to a proper temper of mind to receive it, though he
were desirous of it. He has that carnal mind which is enmity against God; which
is not subject to his laws, neither indeed can be: So that they who are thus in
the flesh, are not in an immediate capacity to please God, by receiving his
word with meekness; much less, by the exercise of those virtues and graces
which good men are the subjects of. They whose great concern it is, "to make
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof"; they that do not "hunger
and thirst after righteousness"; they that have no concern for the salvation of
their souls; but give full scope to their vicious inclinations; these persons,
continuing such, cannot, by any means, be supposed to be in a condition for
receiving the word; they cannot receive it with that seriousness, with that
humility and meekness, with that love to the truth, with that hearty desire of
improvement, with which it is to be received by all, in order to it is grand
design being answered upon them. No; 'til their consciences are alarmed; 'til
they see in some measure the folly and danger of sin, 'til they find some
inclination to turn from it to God, that they may obtain his favor, and life
eternal, they will not truly receive the Gospel into their hearts; though they
may hear it with their ears from day to day.

VICE, when indulged to a great degree, puts a strong, though sometimes an
unperceived, unsuspected, bias upon the human mind; so that some persons who
imagine they hear with all due candor, impartiality and meekness, are very far
from it in reality; hearing with great prejudice, and a secret disgust, which
prevents it is taking root in their hearts, and producing the good fruits of
righteousness. Any one that pleases, may see that this is a sentiment which
runs through the scriptures, and which often occurs in the new testament more
particularly. Thus our Savior says, that "he that does evil, hates the
light, and will not come to the light, lest his deeds which are evil should be
reproved". Accordingly he applies to the vicious and hardened Jews of his time,
the emphatical words of the prophet -- "In them, says he, is fulfilled the
prophecy of Isaiah, which ^aith, By hearing ye shall hear and shall not
understand; and seeing, ye shall see, and shall not perceive. For this people's
heart is waxed gross; and their ears are dull of hearing; and their eyes they
have closed, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears; and should understand with their heart; and should be converted,
and I should heal them." Conformably hereto the Apostle speaks of some, to whom
the gospel is hid; and tells us who they are. "If our gospel be hid, it is hid
to them that are lost; in whom the god of this world has blinded the eyes of
them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel -- should shine
unto them." So in the well-known parable of the sower, the good seed is
represented as taking effect, and producing fruit to purpose, only when it fell
upon good ground, adapted and prepared to receive it; i. e. according to our
Lord's own explanation, the word sown takes effect only in those who receive it
into an honest and good heart. There is a degree of integrity, honesty and
uprightness, previously necessary, in order to a cordial and effectual
receiving of the gospel, according to our Savior's doctrine. Those who are
destitute of this, being wholly sunk into vice and voluptuousness, will not
hear to purpose. Those who have that temper which our Savior expresses by an
honest and good heart, he elsewhere styles his sheep; antecedently to their
actually believing in him; and assures us that they will hear his voice and
follow him. And in conformity to this principle, we are to understand those
words of our Lord, which so often occur in his discourses. -- "He that has
ears to hear, let him hear." Let those hear, who have in them the principles of
recovery; those who are not so lost to all sense of religion and virtue, as to
be past it.

IT is not much to be wondered at, if resolved hardened transgressors; if those
who commit inquity with greediness, rolling it as a sweet morsel under their
tongue; if those who are given up to all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness; it is not to be wondered at, if such abandoned sinners often hear
the gospel of the kingdom, without receiving any considerable benefit from it.
They are not at present, proper matter for it to work upon. Though they hear the
truth, and the doctrines of salvation, they cannot receive it in the love of
it, having pleasure only in unrighteousness. They are stupefied with the
poisonous draught, which they have taken. And the word is no sooner heard
perhaps, than it is forgotten, and snatched away from them, as it were by some
evil, malicious spirit; snatched away, like the seed which fell by the way side.

The mind that is carnalized, and depraved to the degree that is here intended,
is moreover a very unfit habitation for the Holy Spirit of God; without whose
blessed influences, the seed sown in our hearts, does never take root and bring
forth fruit. In the language of the book of Wisdom, Froward thoughts separate
from God -- [And] Into a malicious soul wisdom shall not enter; nor dwell in
the body that is subject unto sin: For the Holy Spirit of discipline will flee
deceit; and remove from thoughts that are without understanding; and will not
abide when unrighteousness comes in. That pure divine truth, which we do not
love; that Spirit of grace and discipline, which we quench and grieve, by the
habitual indulgence of our sensual appetites, cannot but be unwelcome guests to
our souls, thus debased and imbruted. This superfluity of naughtiness, and the
spirit that works in the children of disobedience; throw a thick veil over
the human mind; and unite in darkening and blinding it. They extinguish every
divine ray, 'ere it can pierce the gloom; and put out that candle of the Lord,
which was originally lighted up in our hearts to guide us to Him. They destroy
our natural sense and feeling of moral and religious truths; and especially all
the mental faculties, however bright before. They hebetate and blunt all the
noble powers of the soul; and render it unsusceptiable of good impressions.
They destroy all relish of intellectual and spiritual enjoyments; and take away
the heart from God; from his word and institutions; and even from those things
which the light of nature strongly recommends to the love and practice of all
men, who have not thus abused and perverted their minds. And when the light
that is in us, is thus turned into darkness, through long, invetrate habits of
sinning against the light, "how great is that darkness!"

Is it very strange, if such abandoned sinners do not receive with meekness the
ingrafted word? Is it to be wondered at, if persons so entirely under the
dominion of fleshly lusts, and the God of this world; persons thus lost to all
sense of virtue and religion; should have their minds blinded to such a degree,
that the Gospel is hid from them; not being able to shine through such a thick,
gross and impure medium, into their hearts, "to give them the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ?" No surely; if they
do not admit, but exclude this heavenly light, it is what might be expected.
For it seems necessary in the nature of the thing, that men should be awakened
to some sense of religion; that they should be brought to sober reflection; and
divest themselves, in some measure, of the grosser habits of sin and vice,
previously to the word's being ingrafted into their hearts so effectually as to
transform them into the divine likeness; and cause them to bring forth fruit
unto God. The light of reason must be permitted to shine into our hearts,
before the light of revelation can be cordially received; the voice of natural
conscience must be heard, and listened to, before the voice of God in his word
will be duly regarded: We cannot be christians in temper and conduct, without
being first sober and moral in our lives, without first laying apart all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and abstaining from gross vice and
dissoluteness. This is a necessary preparation for, and the first step toward,
our becoming Christians in reality; and being "holy in all manner of
conversation and godliness."

IT is not only those which are peculiarly termed sensual lusts, that stupify
the consciences of men, and indispose them for receiving the truth in the love
of it. All other kinds of gross immoral indulgence, have a similar tendency to
render the heart callous; and insensible to the impressions of evangelical
truth and righteousness. All kinds of vice in general, are contrary to that
religion, which is pure and undefiled before God. So that those who give the
reins to any known and heinous sin; those who sell themselves to do any kind of
iniquity, cannot relish the truth as it is in Jesus. Both the doctrines and
duties of Christianity, must needs be disgustful to their depraved and vitiated
taste: And it is at least morally, if not naturally impossible, that they
should receive the Gospel into their hearts, 'till such time as they renounce
all gross immoralities; 'till they come to be tho'tful and serious; and are
heartily desirous to know "the things that belong to their peace."

No man can sincerely and cordially embrace the gospel, while he remains
hardened in sin; and is unconcerned about his salvation. The receiving of it
with meekness, presupposes that a person's conscience is awakened; that he is
sensible of his sins; that he is sorry for them, willing to forsake them, and
to become the servant of God and righteousness. It Is preposterously absurd to
think that any one can properly receive the ingrafted word; or "believe to the
saving of his soul," before he is brought to such a temper of mind; or while he
perseveres in his transgressions, with a seared conscience, having no fear of
God before their Eyes.

IT will be objected, perhaps, that the professed design of Christianity, is to
reform a vicious, degenerate world: And if so, the most corrupt and abandoned
men, cannot be supposed to be got beyond the reach of it; since God undoubtedly
accommodates all means to the ends proposed in them. Whereas in what has been
said above, the Gospel is supposed to be ^^ted and accommodated only to the
state of those who are the least corrupted and depraved; while those who are
the most abandoned, and who consequently most need to be reclaimed from the
error of their ways, are not in a capacity of receiving it in such a manner as
is necessary to that end. If only those who have already put away all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, can receive the word with meekness,
so as to be saved by it; the Gospel must be quite useless to a great, if not
the greatest part of mankind; and it is to no purpose to preach it to them.

I ANSWER, that to say a man is not in a present temper and disposition to give
that humble and meek reception to the gospel, which is necessary in order to
his being saved by it at last; is quite a different thing from saying, that he
can receive no good at all from it; and that it must prove a useless, dead
letter to him. These things are very distinct; nor does the latter follow from
the former, by natural deduction and inference. For although some persons, by
reason of their great wickedness, and hardness of heart, are not in an
immediate and present capacity to embrace the Gospel of Christ, with that
sincerity and humility, which is necessary before the design of it can be fully
answered upon them; yet by hearing it from time to time, they may, with the
ordinary blessing of God, and that grace of His, which always accompanies the
word preached, be awakened out of their fatal slumber; and in the language of
scripture, pricked in their hearts, so as to be seriously inquisitive, what
they shall do to be saved? In other words, the gospel may take hold of their
hearts to such a degree, as to convince them of the folly and danger of going
on in their transgressions; and make them heartily sollicitous to fly from the
wrath to come; and to obtain eternal life. And when persons are thus stopped in
their mad career; brought to think upon their ways; and made seriously
inquisitive about their salvation; then it is, that they have the temper of
mind with which the Gospel ought to be received, though they had it not before.

WHAT I intend, is this, That although no man who is grossly vicious and immoral;
that is secure and unconcerned; that sins with an high hand; boldly
transgressing the laws of God, and violating the law of his mind; that though no
such person, I say, is now in a temper of mind for receiving the gospel as it
must needs be received, before the full design of it can be answered upon him;
yet he may possibly hear it so as to bring him to that temper. In which
respect, the Word preached may be beneficial to the worst of men, as well as to
the less abandoned: For surely it is so to all whom it rouzes from their
lethargy in sin, to sober thoughtfulness and reflection; producing some
reformation in them, though at present very imperfect. Our Savior pronounces
blessed, not only those who are already filled with righteousness; but also
those who hunger and thirst after it; because they are in a hopeful and
probable way to be filled. By such, the gospel will be received in a manner
suitable to the design of it: They are prepared to have it actually ingrafted
into their hearts; and it is to be hoped, that He who has thus, by his word and
spirit, begun a good work in them, will perfect it unto the day of Christ.

THUS is the gospel calculated for the good of all. Those who are not depraved
to a great degree, will of course receive it, and be truly good and virtuous by
it. And even the more vicious and abandoned part of mankind, may be awakened
and influenced by it to such a degree as shall make them desirous of
relinquishing their former sins, and turning their feet into God's testimonies;
that so they may obtain the pardon and salvation offered to sinners in it. And
those who are brought to this temper of mind, will then of course receive the
spiritual and incorruptable seed into their hearts, as into good ground, into a
soil prepared for, and adapted to it. In consequence of which they will "bring
forth fruit, some thirty, some sixty, and some an hundred fold."

BUT alas! it was never supposed that the gospel, however sufficient, would
prove effectual in the event, for the reformation and salvation of all those to
whom it is preached. Many of those to whom it was preached of old, as it is to
us now, it did not profit, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.
There are some in every age, so resolutely set and determined in the ways of
folly and vice, given over to such filthiness, to such a superfluity of
naughtiness, that they will not give any heed or credit to this divine message.
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world; and many love
darkness better than light, because their deeds are so evil. Our Savior had
occasion to tell many, to whom he himself preached, that they would not come
unto him that they might have life. And when he commanded his Apostles to go
into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature; he intimated to
them, that they should bear these glad tidings in vain, and to no purpose, as
to many. For he then told them what should be the portion of those who believed
not, as well as of those who believed, and gave heed to their doctrine. The
gospel is published amongst all nations, not upon a presumption that all who
hear it, will meekly receive it, and be saved: But it is preached for a
witness, for a testimony to all; and they are all left to regard, or disregard
it, as they think proper; a day being appointed of God, in which he will judge
the world in righteousness. Some have those ingenuous principles remaining in
them, which render them fit subjects for the gospel to operate upon; and these
being Christ's sheep, and given to him of the Father, will, accordingly hear
his voice, and receive his gospel with meekness; and he will give unto them
eternal life. Others being incurable, and past recovery; (I mean in that way
and method which the wisdom of God has fixed upon for the reclaiming and saving
of sinners) they will accordingly stop their ears against this joyful sound;
and close their eyes against the heavenly light; they will not heartily embrace
the Gospel; and so will at length receive the end of their wickedness, and
incredulity, as others will the end of their faith.

THUS were the Apostles, though they preached the gospel of peace to all
indifferently, "the savor of life unto life" only to some; being to others,
"the savor of death unto death"; And thus it will probably be, from generation
to generation, to the end of the world: Only we have great reason to conclude,
from the oracles of God, that a glorious state of things will hereafter take
place upon earth, and be of long continuance; a state, wherein the unrighteous,
and unbelieving shall bear but a very small and inconsiderable proportion to
the true servants of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. -- Life and death,
blessing, and cursing, are, from one age to another, set before All in general;
"and whether they like is given to them". Nor will the perfections of God, be
less conspicuous in the perdition of ungodly men, who obey not the truth, but
obey unrighteousness; than in the salvation of those, who having laid apart all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, receive with meekness the ingrafted
word; and bring forth the fruits thereof with patience.

LET me conclude this discourse, with a few short reflections.

1. THIS subject suggests to us the wisdom of applying ourselves to the
concerns of religion, and another world, in youth, before the habits of sin and
vice, are become strong and inveterate. Persons usually wax worse and worse,
'til such time as they begin to reform and grow better: The farther we proceed
in the paths of iniquity, by so much more difficult will it be for us to
retreat; to receive the gospel of the kingdom into our hearts; and to become
Christ's true disciples; his loyal subjects. Such is the deceitfulness of sin,
that it steals upon us unawares, and hardens us by insensible degrees; 'til in
process of time, it takes a deep and full possession of us, so that it is as
easy for "the Ethiopian to change his skin, or the Leopard his spots," as for
us, thus accustomed to do evil, to learn to do well. So that those who do not
in early life, remember their Creator, and receive the Gospel of their Redeemer
with meekness; may come at length to receive it with mockery and derision;
"crucifying to themselves the Son of God afresh, and putting him to an open
shame:" To whom there remains no more sacrifice for sin." And thus the gospel
which was ordained unto life, proves only the savor of death unto death.

But,

2. LET us not conclude that we are true Christians, and entitled to the
salvation of the gospel, merely because we are not flagrantly immoral and
vicious in our lives. For although we may, in the sense of the Apostle, have laid
apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness; we may yet fall short of
that holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. The gospel has not
answered it is design upon us, 'til we have so received the truth into our
hearts, as to be sanctified by it; 'til we are "transformed by the renewing of
our minds, and the washing of the Holy Ghost," into the image of God and of our
Savior. This is the great end proposed in the gospel; in order whereunto, it
is to be meekly hearkened to from time to time; it must be ingrafted into our
hearts; and incorporated, if I may so express it, with our very souls and
natures -- But I shall have occasion to speak more upon this point hereafter,
in another discourse.

3. SUFFER me to warn all who allow themselves in any vicious practices,
especially in such sins as the light of their own consciences condemns,
immediately to renounce them; that so they may be in a capacity for duly
receiving the doctrines of the gospel; and may bring forth the fruits of
righteousness unto life eternal. Give heed to the divine admonition in my text;
and lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness: for then, and not
'til then, will you receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to
save your souls. Do not endeavor, I beseech you, to stifle the convictions of
your own minds and consciences, which may perhaps tell some of you, that you
are particularly concerned in this counsel. If your own hearts condemn you, as
habitual transgressors of God's commandments, remember that "He is greater than
our hearts, and knows all things;" and that He "now commands all men every
where to repent, for that he has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the
world in righteousness." We are apt to be partial to ourselves; to make too
favorable allowances; to make the best of every thing, on our own side. But
if, notwithstanding this natural propensity to think and judge favorably of
ourselves, our own hearts still misgive and condemn us; how much more surely
will that God condemn us, who is greater than our hearts? Who is no respector
of persons? and whose judgment is always according to truth?

BE assured, that while you are knowingly and habitually guilty of any immoral
practices, you are not only out of the kingdom of God, but far from it; so far
that you are not even in a capacity, at present, to receive that gospel, which
is designed to bring you into it; and to make you the heirs of salvation. Let
us therefore lay our hands upon our hearts, and ask ourselves as in the
presence of God, who will judge us another day, whether we have laid apart all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness? Or whether we live in known, wilful
Sin? Is there no kind of profaneness or dissoluteness; no kind of falsehood or
unrighteousness; no sin against God, our neighbor or ourselves, evidently
contrary to the light and law of nature, which we indulge ourselves in? What
answer do your consciences make? Guilty, or not guilty? If you are not guilty,
it may be rationably concluded, either that you have already received the
ingrafted word into your hearts, or that you will soon do so; and gradually
"cleanse yourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; perfecting
holiness in the fear of God." There is a good foundation laid, when persons are
become sober and moral in their lives; though they may full f^ll short of that
religion which is pure and undefiled before God and the Father. But if you
still live in filthiness, and the superfluity of naughtiness; you come short,
not only of the Christian character, but even that of a sober, virtuous Pagan.
Nor is it to be wondered at, if persons of this flagitious character, who daily
sin against the light of natural conscience, should continue inimical in their
hearts, to the doctrines of the gospel; 'til, having filled up the measure of
their iniquities, they receive the due reward of their deeds. However, the case
even of such profligate sinners, (if there are any such amongst us) is not
quite desperate; though the longer they persevere in their evil courses, abusing
the goodness and patience of God, which is designed to lead them to repentance;
the less ground there will be to hope for their reformation. Wherefore as the
Holy Ghost says, to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; as
in the day of provocation -- when your fathers tempted me -- Wherefore I was
grieved with that generation; and said, they do always err in their heart; and
they have not known my ways. So I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into
my rest. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily while
it is called, To Day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin.

Heb. 3.7.
SERMON IV. Upon the Necessity of yielding a practical Obedience to the Gospel,
in order to obtaining the Salvation proposed in it.
JAMES I. 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
IT is unquestionably the duty of all Christians to be hearers of the word read
and preached in the assemblies of the saints; this being a divine institution:
As was shown in the first discourse upon this subject.

IN the next, the duty of receiving the word with meekness was more
particularly considered, and enforced.

IT was shown in the last discourse, That in order to our receiving the word in
a suitable manner, so that the design of it may be answered upon us, it is
necessary that we lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness; or
in other words, that we renounce vice and immorality in all its grosser forms.
It is not possible for those who are regardless even of natural religion; and
who are given over to work all uncleanness with greediness; it is not possible
for such abandoned sinners, continuing such, to receive the revealed word of
God with a proper temper of mind. They are not in a present capacity for giving
a due reception to the Gospel of Christ. There is somewhat previously
requisite, or preparatory, thereto; which is, that they relinquish their brutal
lusts, and all gross immoralities; and are heartily desirous of being taught
the way that leads to eternal life: Then, and not before, are persons capable
of giving that cordial and meek reception to the ingrafted word, which is
required in order to the salvation of their souls.

THIS is a short view of the subject, so far as it has been treated already:
And the next thing in course, according to the method proposed, is to show,

FOURTHLY, The necessity of obeying the Gospel, in order to our receiving the
salvation of it. The apostle tells us, that the ingrafted word is able to save
our souls: But immediately subjoins, But be ye doers of the word, and not
hearers only, deceiving your own selves. q.d. "God having revealed to you the
way of life and salvation, it behooves you carefully to hearken to this
revelation, and meekly to receive it. But I warn you against so fatal an error
as this, that barely hearing the Gospel of the kingdom, without obeying it,
will entitle you to that salvation which is revealed to sinners therein. You
will grossly and fatally delude your selves, if you expect salvation upon any
other terms, than those of conforming your tempers and manners to the rules of
life contained in this revelation, which you hear, and profess to receive."

IT will be apparent to every one who carefully looks into this Epistle, that
St. James, the author of it, designedly combats some libertine notions of
Christianity, which began in those early times, to creep into the church; which
notions whenever, and wherever they prevail, must in a great measure, frustrate
the design of the Gospel; which is to make men truly good and virtuous here, in
order to their being happy hereafter.

IT is indeed strange that all men, even upon the most slight and cursory view
of Christianity, as it is delivered to us in the new testament, should not
immediately see that it is a doctrine according to Godliness, not a doctrine of
licentiousness; that the great aim of it, is to make us fear and love God, and
work righteousness; that it promises eternal life only to the pure in heart,
and holy in all manner of conversation; and that it is so far from giving
wicked men, continuing such, any hopes of pardon and salvation, that it assures
them of the contrary, in the most plain, strong and emphatical terms. It is
very strange that every one should not at once see that this is the real truth
of the case; without attempting to evade the matter by any kind of distinctions
or refinements. But alas! so devoted are some men to their lusts, and at the
fame so loath to renounce all the hopes of a blessed immortality, that they will
endeavor to make a life of sin and disobedience, no insuperable obstruction or
bar, in the way of their salvation; speaking peace to themselves while they are
walking in the paths of destruction, and the most certain, inevitable ruin.
Thus it is that some persons in every age and country, since the Gospel has
been promulgated to the world, have been deceiving their own selves; by
imagining, that the being doers of the word, was not really necessary in order
to the obtaining of God's favor, and future blessedness.

Now I am to show in general in this discourse, the indispensable necessity of
obeying the Gospel in order to our being entitled to the salvation of it:
leaving some of the most common mistakes and errors concerning this important
point, to be more particularly considered and refuted hereafter. And that all
such notions in general, are vain and delusory; that the Gospel must be obeyed,
as well as heard and received; and that no incorrigible sinner shall inherit
the kingdom of God; appears, in the first place,

FROM a general view of Christianity, as containing precepts and commandments,
given for the regulating of our conduct, as well as principles and doctrines,
for the regulating of our faith. Whoever looks into the new testament, will
find there a system of religion, which consists partly of doctrinal truths to
be assented to, and partly of commands, prescribing to us what is to be done;
the former being usually called the Credenda, the latter, the Agenda of
religion. It is not more plain and evident, that Christianity contains certain
principles that are to be believed; principles respecting the nature and moral
government of God; the person and offices of our Savior Jesus Christ; a future
existence; the resurrection of the body; a judgment to come; and a state of
rewards and punishments to succeed; (this is not more evident, I say) than that
the same religion contains a great variety of precepts, injunctions and
prohibitions, delivered to us as to creatures that have a part to act; precepts
respecting our behavior toward God, toward our Redeemer, toward our
neighbor; and some that more immediately respect the government of ourselves.
In other words, it is not less certain and obvious, that the gospel considers
us as active moral Creatures, whose hearts and manners are to be formed and
regulated by the laws therein contained; than that it considers us as
intellectual Creatures, who ought to receive and embrace the truths that are
therein revealed to our understandings. It being evident then, from the most
cursory view of Christianity, that it is not only a rule of faith, but of
practice also; it is as certain, that we are obliged to obey it, considered in
the latter of these respects, as that we are bound to believe it, considered in
the former. No one can show, that we are more strongly obligated to believe
what God has revealed, than we are to do what he has required. He is doubtless
as just in his commands, as he is true and faithful in his words and promises:
Nor can his Authority be more properly called in question in one case, than his
veracity in the other. From hence it appears, that we are no less bound to be
doers of the word, than we are to be hearers and believers of it. All the laws
which God has given us, were given that they might be observed; not that they
might be broken. And indeed if they may be disregarded with impunity; I see not
why it is necessary, that we should even be believers. For it is to be
remembered, that though this is one of God's commandments, that we believe in him
whom he has sent; yet it is not more truly one of them, than this, that we
love Him, and love our neighbor. And why that command, by which ^aith is
injoined upon us, may not be dispensed with, and set aside as being of no
consequence; as well as some other commandments of the Gospel, no one can
assign a reason. So that if we may be saved without doing the word, I am bold
to assert we may be saved without believing or receiving it. God requires the
latter no more plainly and peremptorily than he does the other. And as soon as
any one will show how we may be entitled to salvation, without obedience; I
will show, at least by similar, if not by the same Arguments, how we may be
entitled thereto, without believing one syllable of the Christian revelation,
with whatever evidence of its truth it may come to us.

WE may consider, the matter in a different point of light, which will bring us
to the same conclusion at last. -- We are the professed disciples of Christ,
acknowleding him for our teacher, master and lord. We are therefore to consider
what sort of teacher he was; what he undertook to instruct men in in; order to
know whether we really come up to the character of his disciples, or fall short
of it. There have been different kinds of teachers in the world; and still are.
Some instruct in one art or science, some in another. Now our Savior, Jesus
Christ, came into the world, as a teacher of true religion. He came to make
known to us many divine truths; those things that belong to our peace; and to
instruct us how to serve God in this World, in order to our being happy in his
favor in the world to come. Here his teachings and instructions all terminate,
as to the end of them. Now a disciple of any one, is he that learns of him that
science, art or business, of which he is the professed teacher. He that does
so, is truly and properly a disciple; otherwise he is only a nominal one. A
person, in ancient times, would not have been deemed a disciple of Socrates,
while he lived after the principles and maxims of Epicurus, although he
frequented the school of the former, and not of the latter. Let him have called
himself by what name he would, others would reckon him a disciple either of one
or of the other, according to the principles which he embibed, and the maxims
of living, which he embraced and followed. How then, does he come up to the
character of Christ's disciple, who does not learn of him, that temper and
behavior, that art of holy and virtuous living, which Christ came to teach;
and which is indeed the same thing with that practical obedience to the word,
the necessity of which I am now endeavoring to show? Those who live and act
according to other rules and maxims, than those of our divine master, Jesus
Christ, cannot, with truth and propriety, be styled his disciples and
followers, any more than an Epicurean Voluptuary could be called a disciple of
Socrates or Plato.

INDEED if the whole, or principal design of our Savior, in taking upon
himself the character and office of a teacher, had been to give us a Creed; or
to instruct us in certain religious notions and principles, without referring
them to practice; we might, in that case, be called his disciples, if we
embraced those principles, however flagitious we might be in our lives and
manners. But when we reflect, that the lesson which Christ came to teach us,
respects the regulation of our hearts, tempers and behavior; that the great
aim of all his instructions, is to reclaim men from their evil and vicious
courses; and to bring them to a resemblance of the divine purity, goodness and
holiness, in order to their being happy hereafter; when we reflect, I say, that
Christ's doctrines and instructions all terminate in this point, it is manifest
that those who call themselves his disciples, without departing from iniquity,
and living as he has taught them to live, compliment themselves with a name,
which does not belong to them; and have no neason to expect any good will
finally accrue to them from his mediation. They are destitute of the main, the
most essential characteristic, of Christians; which is a temper and behavior
corresponding to the maxims and precepts of Christ's religion; and to that
example which he has left us, that we might follow his steps.

AGREABLY to what is here said, we often find our Savior reproving the
inconsistency and absurdity of those, who, while they acknowledge him for their
Lord, do not walk according to his injunctions. "Why call ye me, Lord, Lord,
says he, and do not the things which I say." q. d. "With what propriety, with
what modesty, can you own such a relation to me, as that of disciples to a
master and Lord, while you do not demean yourselves answerably thereto? While
you give no heed to my words and counsels; but set them at naught? Either live
according to these rules which I teach and prescribe; or cease to mock me, and
to delude yourselves, by calling me your Lord"

AT another time, when our Savior was speaking of himself as one divinely
authorized to draw disciples and followers after him; and accordingly invited
people to come unto him, and to learn of him; this was not so much, that they
might be instructed in certain speculative truths, as that they might learn the
art of governing their tempers, and living well. "Come unto me, says he, --
take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and
ye shall find rest unto your souls." We here see, that though by coming to
Christ, is intended receiving him in the character of a divine teacher; yet
this is in order to a farther end; which is, submitting to be directed by him
in the way to happiness. There is no coming, or going to Christ, to any good
purpose without taking his yoke upon us, and learning of him to be meek and
lowly in heart.

UPON the whole then, Christianity appears to be a practical science; the art
of living piously and virtuously. The drift and scope of our great master's
doctrine and preaching, was to make us abandon our sins and lusts of every
kind; and to form us to a resemblance of himself, who is the image of the
invisible God. Those who do not learn of him to be sincerely good, learn
nothing to purpose; and know nothing as they ought to know it. We cannot be
called his true disciples and followers, without putting on that temper and
behavior, which his laws and example recommend to us, or rather injoin upon
us. And if we are not really his disciples, but are so in name only, certainly
we cannot hope for salvation by him. So that considering the matter in this
light, it is evidently necessary that we obey the word, as well as hear and
believe. And we do but deceive our own selves, if we expect to be saved upon
any easier terms.

BUT for the farther confirmation of the point before us, let me produce two or
three passages of scripture, wherein the end of Christ's coming into the world,
and of the gospel dispensation, is more explicitly declared. Our Savior tells
us, that he came "to call sinners to repentance." St. Paul says, that he "gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works." The same apostle tells us,
that the grace of God has appeared unto us, "teaching us that, denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in
the world." St. John tells us, that whose commits sin, is of the Devil; and
that "for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil." And we know, that our Lord was called Jesus, because he
was to "save his people from their sins." From these and suchlike passages of
scripture, the necessity of departing from iniquity, and of obeying the gospel,
is manifest. Surely that cannot be looked upon as unnecessary, which is thus
declared to be one great end of our Lord's manifestation in the flesh. But how
is this declared end of the gospel, and the grace of God appearing therein,
answered upon us, if we persevere in our evil ways, instead of being led to
repentance? If we indulge to ungodliness and worldly lusts, instead of denying
them? If we are zealous of bad works, instead of good? If the works of the
Devil are practiced by us, instead of being destroyed in us? If we remain under
the dominion and power of sin, instead of being made free from it, and becoming
the servants of righteousness? Can any one imagine that the true intent and
design of Christ's gospel is answered upon them, before they "cease to do evil,
and learn to do well?" Certainly no vicious, unrighteous man, is what the
Gospel is intended to make him: No person of this character, has complied with
the true and declared design of this dispensation of the grace of God. And if
not, is it not manifestly absurd to suppose that such a one, can be entitled to
the salvation revealed therein? Why may not a vicious Heathen, who never heard
of the gospel, be entitled to the blessings of it, as well as a vicious
Christian, on whom it has had no effect? and who is as wicked, perhaps, if not
more wicked, than he would have been, if this grace had never appeared to him?
Will not a professed Christian, who has not really complied with the great
design of the gospel, any more than a Pagan, be as certainly condemned
hereafter, as if he had been a Pagan himself? It does not appear from (...),
that any good shall finally result to those who hear the gospel, but in
proportion as they are made really better by it; having fallen in, and
concurred with the design of God's grace revealed to us therein.

WE may consider this matter still in another light; which will farther evince
the necessity of obeying the word. The Gospel informs us, that in order to our
salvation, it is necessary that we should be born again; born of God; born of
the spirit; that we put off the old man with his deeds; that we put on the new
man; that we walk in the spirit, and bring forth the fruits of the spirit; and
the like. Now I would ask, what is the meaning of all these phrases? What is
the true import, and real amount of them? Is it not manifestly, this, that
sinners must, by the gospel, and the cooperation of the spirit and grace of
God therewith, be turned from sin to righteousness? that their hearts which
were before corrupt, and estranged from God, must be purified, and turned to
him? And that, in consequence hereof they "walk in all his commandments and
ordinances blameless?" This is manifestly that new birth, or regeneration; that
putting off the old man with his deeds, and putting on the new man, of which
the scriptures speak: And the thing is in itself very plain and intelligible,
how great a mystery soever, either the ancient or modern Nichodemus's and
masters in Israel, have made of it. If therefore, it is necessary that a man be
born again, in order to his salvation; and if this is the proper notion of
regeneration; then certainly it is necessary to obey the gospel, in order to
that end. For such a change of heart and manners, as is denoted by the terms
born again, and born of the spirit, implies and involves in it, the obedience
here intended.

I AM sensible, that some persons have invented another sort of regeneration,
which leaves the subject of it much as it found him, -- "to every good work
r^br^bate;" and which a man may experience, without being really any better
than he was before; any more like to God; any more observant of his laws. Yea,
I wish there was not reason to say, that that which many have taken to be their
regeneration, and a being filled with the spirit, might be more properly called
a Possession; leaving them much worse than it found them; less careful to
"order their conversation aright;" less just, sober, humble and charitable,
than they were in what they called their carnal, unregenerate, unconverted
state. According to this Notion of regeneration, I acknowledge that a person
may be born again, and yet not become a doer of the word. But the scriptures
know of no regeneration, besides that which consists in a real change of heart
and manners, from sin and unrighteousness to holiness; a regeneration, from
which obedience to the laws of Christianity is inseparable; and with which,
habitual sinning is absolutely inconsistent. "Whosoever is born of God, does
not commit sin, for his seed remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he is
born of God." So that while we keep to this idea of regeneration, to say that
it is necessary we should be born again, is, in effect to say neither more nor
less than this, that it is necessary we should become holy in heart and
conversation, by God's assistance and grace; which is the same thing, in other
words, with being doers of the word, or yielding a practical obedience to the
gospel of Christ. It is, therefore, to be hoped that none who assert the
necessity of the former, will call in question the necessity of the latter.

IT may be added here, that the repentance of sinners is always supposed in the
new testament, to be an indispensible condition of, and a meet qualification
for, their receiving pardon and eternal life. But what is the proper notion or
idea of evangelical repentance? of that repentance, without which sinners
cannot be saved? Is it only a flashly, superficial sorrow for sin? such a
sorrow and contrition, as is consistent with persevering therein? Surely no. It
involves in it a turning from sin, to God and righteousness. It is the active
principle of a new life; a life of holiness, and obedience to the divine
commandments. The repentance which falls short of this; which leaves the heart
unsubdued to God; the repentance which leaves a sinner as it found him; and is
not accompanied with a reformation of mind and manners; is not that repentance
unto life, which is intended in the gospel: It is a vain, ineffectual sorrow;
and scarce better than that "sorrow of the world which works death." Now if
this is the proper notion of repentance; or if repentance implies in it, a
forsaking of our past sins, and entering upon a new course of life; and if such
repentance is necessary in order to salvation; then certainly the hearing of
the word, without doing it, cannot entitle us to eternal life. Evangelical
repentance is, in short, gospel-obedience in its root and principle; and
wherever it is, it will bring forth the fruits that are meet for it. So that to
assert the necessity of repentance, and yet to suppose we may be saved without
obedience and righteousness, is a manifest absurdity and contradiction.

BUT let us consider a little more particularly, to whom it is that the gospel
itself promises eternal life; and whether these promises are not evidently
restrained and confined to obedient Christians; to the doers of the word. Now
the Apostle tells us, that Christ, "being made perfect became the author of
eternal salvation to all them that obey him." Is there not here a plain
limitation of that salvation of which Christ is the author, to those who do his
commandments? Does not the form of expression used, manifestly imply, that such
as do not practically conform to the laws of Christ, as well as believe and
trust in him, shall not finally share in that redemption which he has wrought
out? Again, our Savior says, that the righteous "shall go away into life
eternal;" and that the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their Father." Is the same ever said in scripture, of the wicked and
disobedient? Or of all men in common without any discriminating mark? Again,
our Lord likens those who hear his sayings, and do them, to "a wise man that
built his house upon a rock," which would not fall. But does he make use of the
same similitude, when he speaks of those who hear his sayings, and do them not?
Thus He tells us, that they which "do the will of his Father which is in
heaven," shall enter into the kingdom of heaven hereafter. Is the same ever
said of those who persevere in their disobedience to God's will? So we are
told, that "to them who by patient continuing in well-doing, seek for glory,
honor, and immortality, God will render eternal life." Is the same promise
made, in any part of the Gospel, to those that persevere in doing evil? In
short, nothing can be more apparent, than that the scripture-promises of
salvation, are uniformly restrained and limited to such as obey the gospel; to
such as having received the word with meekness "into good and honest hearts,"
bring forth the fruits of righteousness with patience.

BUT, that no doubt may be left upon the minds of any, with reference to so
important a point, I shall now show that all incorrigible sinners in general,
are so far from having any title to the salvation of the gospel, that they are
excluded herefrom, and sentenced to future woe and misery, by the most express
and positive declarations of the Gospel itself. Thus the apostle tells us, that
"to them that are contentious and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, God will render indignation and wrath; tribulation and anguish
upon every soul of man that does evil:" That "the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth
in unrighteousness:" And that "the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall
be punished with an everlasting destruction." -- Hear the expostulation and
admonition of the same Apostle in another of his epistles. "Know ye not, says
he, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived;
neither fornicators, nor whoremongers, nor adulterers, nor thieves, nor
covetous, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God." Has not our Savior plainly
told us to the same purpose, that the wicked "shall go away into everlasting
punishment?" Has he not told us, that in the judgment of the great day, he will
say even to many who have eaten and drank in his presence, "Depart from me, I
know you not, all ye that work iniquity?" And not to multiply passages of
scripture in so plain a case, only call to mind the solemn words of our
Savior, in his last message to the Churches, in the Revelation of St. John,
toward the end -- "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end -- He that
overcomes shall inherit all things. -- But the fearful, and unbelieving, and
abominable, and murderers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall
have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death -- Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life; and may enter in through the gates into the city: For
without are dogs, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever
loves and makes a lie. I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify these things
in the Churches."

YOU now see what the plain, express, repeated declarations of the Gospel are;
how they limit the salvation revealed in it, to them that obey the truth; how
they cut off from all hope of eternal life, and consign over to future
punishment, all the irreclaimable workers of iniquity. God, who has the sole
right of ordaining and fixing the terms upon which his sinful creatures shall
be received into favor again; and enjoy the blessings of his presence in the
kingdom of Heaven: God himself, I say, has declared, that the hardened,
irreclaimable transgressor shall never enter into his rest; and that only the
pure in heart shall see him, and be happy in the enjoyment of him. Nor are we
to conceive of these terms as arbitrarily fixed, by him whose will none can
resist, whose hand none can stay, and who is not accountable to any one for his
proceedings. No: We are to conceive of them (...) terms that are fit and
reasonable to be (...) by the all-wise, and all-good, as well as all (...)
Sovereign of the world. It would have been inconsistent with his infinite
wisdom, and perfect goodness and holiness, to have accepted sinners to his
favor, and promised eternal life to them, but upon condition of their
returning to Him, and keeping his commandments.

AND if we duly attend to the thing, we shall see that such a temper and
practice as the Gospel requires of us, is necessary not only as a condition,
but as a qualification for future happiness. Although this world is much better
adapted to the depraved taste and temper of wicked men, than the kingdom of
heaven; yet they cannot be happy even here. God has constituted us in such a
manner; He has given us such a nature, that vice is an irreconcilable enemy to
our happiness; and virtue alone, friendly to it. "The way of transgressors is
hard:" and "the wicked are like the troubled sea which cannot rest." Thus it is
in this present state; and thus it must needs be, in any other. A foundation
must be laid for happiness, in the purity and moral rectitude of our minds.
Were a wicked man to be this day translated to heaven, with all his lusts and
unholy passions about him, there is nothing there which would correspond to his
taste and relish, so as to make him truly blessed in the enjoyment. Could the
society of just men made perfect? could the fellowship of holy angels, be
delightful to an impure, brutish creature? What fellowship has light with
darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial, or the sons of Belial? What
happiness can one who is every way unlike to God, and whose carnal mind is
enmity against him, have in being in his glorious presence? or how is such a
one capable of enjoying him? Wicked men, instead of expecting any felicity from
the presence and vision of God, might adopt the language of the apostate
angels, "Farthest from him is best." Paradise Lost.


IF then we are not even in a capacity for enjoying the happiness which the
Gospel reveals, in the kingdom and presence of God, while we retain our lusts
and vices, how vain and absurd is it to imagine we can be entitled to it? We
must obey the gospel, and have our tempers conformed to the holy maxims and
precepts of Christianity, before we are capable subjects of that felicity which
is brought to light thereby. And certainly it is unreasonable to suppose that
God would promise this future, heavenly bliss to any, except those who have the
qualifications necessary to a participation in it. That heaven which God has
already prepared for good men, and which is revealed to us in his word, is
every way unsuitable for all besides the good. So that wicked men must either
not go to heaven at all, or they must have another prepared on purpose for
them; and one more accommodated to their genius and inclinations: Though when
they came together there, they would soon turn their new heaven into a real
hell; and the place of their expected bliss, would prove only the place of
their torment. For wherever the wicked are; in whatever region, in whatever
world, they cannot but be miserable in a greater or less degree. So the God of
nature, so the all-wise governor of the world, has ordained; and His counsel
shall stand --

UPON laying together the several things that have been said above, I think it
plainly appears, that obedience to the gospel is not only a thing that is
fitting, reasonable, and very proper, for those that believe; (as some would
represent it) but that it is absolutely and indispensably necessary, in order
to our obtaining eternal life; necessary, both as the condition upon which God
offers salvation to us, and as the qualification for future glory and
happiness. This is so clearly, so often, so emphatically declared in the holy
scriptures, that one need not scruple to say, that whosoever is not a doer of
the word, as well as a hearer, has no more ground to expect salvation by
Christ, than the fallen angels; although he took not upon him their nature, but
the seed of Abraham. It is to impress this important truth upon our minds the
more effectually, that our blessed Savior has, in some of his discourses,
introduced wicked believers, as making their several excuses, and pleas for
mercy in the day of judgment; all which he rejects as insufficient and vain. In
these representations of the last day, we see the formalists in religion, I
mean these who hold the truth in unrighteousness, standing before their
righteous Judge; we hear them saying, "We have eaten and drank in thy presence;
and in thy name cast out devils; and thou have taught in our streets;" and
pleading, upon this foundation, for admittance into the kingdom of heaven. And
at the same time we hear this just, and merciful Savior of men, answering,
"Depart from me, ye that work iniquity!" So that this matter is represented to
us in the strongest light possible. And can any, after this, hope for mercy in
the day of Judgment, though they indulge themselves at present in impiety and
vice? They cannot, without making Christ a liar, and his Gospel a fable: --

WHEREFORE to conclude: As we desire to have a part in the resurrection of the
just; as we have any dread of falling under the condemnation of the wicked; as
we have any regard to the words of our Redeemer, to the will of our maker, to
the honor of our religion, to the salvation of our souls; let us hearken to the
Admonition in the text, "Be ye doers of the word; and not hearers only,
deceiving your ownselves." Let us apply ourselves in earnest to the regulating
of our tempers and manners; in which attempt we cannot but prove successful,
since it is God that works in us and with us. It is not more sure that there
is an heaven, than it is, that they who obey not the gospel, shall never enter
into it. It is not more certain that there is an hell, than that all the
impenitent workers of iniquity shall suffer the pains of it. And amongst all
the Wicked, none will be subjected to sorer punishment, than the hypocritical
professors of religion, who pretend to know God, but in works deny him; who
call Christ their Lord and master, but disobey his commandments. To such, the
ingrafted word is so far from being, in the event, the power of God unto
salvation; that it is in some sort, the ministration of death, as the apostle
terms the Law; binding them over to a heavier, and more inevitable punishment.

DO you really desire the salvation of your souls? Would you be indeed heirs of
that glorious inheritance which Christ has purchased for sinners? Surely you
do. Why then, my brethren, be at the pains to comply with those terms on which
it is offered to you. Give up your pride and coveteousness; give up your malice
and envy, give up all your worldly lusts. "If your right hand offend you, cut
it off; if your right eye offend you, pluck it out. For it is better to enter
into life thus, than having two hands and two eyes to be cast into hell fire,
where the worm dies not. The Gospel itself cannot give life to you, unless it
is ingrafted into your hearts; so that your tempers and manners are formed to a
resemblance of the divine author of it. Let your faith purify your hearts, and
work by love. Do your duty to God, love and obey your Redeemer; do unto all men
as you would that they should do unto you; be sober and temperate in all
things, as those that strive for the mastery: And "hope unto the end for the
grace that shall be brought unto you, at the revelation of Jesus Christ, as
obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to your former lusts."
-- I cannot close this discourse better than with the words immediately
following my text -- "If any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is
like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: For he beholds
himself, and goes his way, and straitway forgets what manner of man he was.
But who so looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he
being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed
in his deed."

SERMON V. Of some Mistakes concerning the Terms of Salvation; and particularly
concerning Salvation by Grace.
JAMES I. 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
IN the foregoing discourse it was shown in general, that obedience to the
Gospel is indispensably necessary in order to our obtaining the salvation
revealed to us therein; conformable to the scope of the apostle in the latter
branch of the text: "But be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only,
deceiving your own selves." But because St. James here speaks of those who only
hear the word, and do it not, as deceiving themselves to their own destruction;
I propose to consider some of the common mistakes and delusions which
Christians fall into, respecting this important point; and to show the vanity
and absurdity of them, lest any of us (...) carried away with the error of the
wicked, and a deceived heart should turn us aside.

MANKIND are liable to many errors and delusions, even though they take pains to
be rightly informed. They are still more liable to err, in those cases where
they are not cautious and wary, but almost indifferent whether they are
deceived or not. But most of all are they in danger of falling into mistakes,
when they have a secret prejudice against the truth; and are more disposed to
embrace the wrong side of a question than the right, by reason of some wrong
bias upon their minds. For men are not only liable to be imposed upon and
deceived by others; but in some cases, they impose upon, and deceive their
ownselves. And hence it is that we are as frequently cautioned against
self-deception in scripture, as we are admonished to take heed that we are not
deceived by others. This caution is never more necessary, than when we are
inquiring into the terms of acceptance and salvation, proposed to us in the
Gospel; whether we consider the importance of forming a right judgment in this
matter, or the natural propensity and inclination which there is in us, to make
those terms as easy and agreeable to ourselves as possible.

ALL men would be happy hereafter; but with as little difficulty to themselves
as may be; as little self-denial; as little labor; as little care to work out
their salvation. This I doubt not, is the true source of many licentious,
libertine doctrines, tending to reconcile a vicious immoral life, with the
hopes of God's favor, and future blessedness; although nothing can be more
repugnant to sober reason, and the whole current of the Christian revelation
Vicious men are loath to give up their beloved lusts, and to live that pious and
holy life which the gospel injoins upon us. And therefore they persuade
themselves to believe that there is no such absolute necessity of it as some
pretend; and endeavor to evade the force of all those arguments which are
brought to evince it. However wicked they are, they are not willing to think
themselves such persons as the Gospel excludes from that life and immortality,
which are brought to light thereby. Hence it comes to pass, that the
scriptures, however plainly and peremptorily they speak as to this point, are
often tortured and wrested; and made, whether they will or no, to favor men's
lusts, and ill-grounded hopes. The mere sound of a word or phrase, shall often
carry more conviction in it, in the apprehension of men who would fain be happy
without being good, than in the whole current of revelation: And drowning men,
we know, will catch at straws. For example; how greedily do many persons of
licentious practices lay hold on such expressions as these, that we are "saved
by grace;" that we are "justified by faith without the deeds of the law;" that
we must be "found in Christ not having our own righteousness;" and the like?
Many vicious persons think they find great ground of peace, consolation and
hope, in suchlike expressions; and conclude from them, that the
gospel covenant of grace in Christ Jesus, is of such a nature, as not to
require repentance and new obedience as the indispensable condition of
salvation; but such as will admit of the salvation of habitual sinners,
provided they believe in Christ, and rely wholly upon his righteousness. This,
in general, I suppose, is the error which St. James aims at refuting more
particularly in the second chapter of his epistle: An error which very early
appeared in the church; and in the support of which, St. Paul's doctrine had
been alleged. And if there is any such thing as a fundamental error of the
judgment, this is doubtless one. It is a mistake concerning the general nature
of that covenant of grace and mercy, which is established in Christ, for the
restoration and salvation of sinners. It is moreover an error of such a sort,
as naturally tends to confirm men in their wicked courses; since, according to
this notion, it is needless for them to forsake those courses; and to obey the
commandments of Christ, in order to their future happiness. So that persons who
are fallen into this delusion may sin, as it were, upon principle; at least
they may sin, without hazarding their salvation, according to their own notion
of the terms on which it is offered.

BUT before I proceed particularly to lay open the vanity and absurdity of this
notion, I would premise one thing in order to prevent mis-construction;
especially to guard against the charge of censoriousness and uncharity. And
that is, that how much soever any man may be mistaken in opinion concerning the
terms of salvation; yet if he is practically in the right, there is no doubt
but he will be accepted of God, who considers our frame, and knows our
weakness. Possibly many persons, according to whose principles obedience to the
Gospel is not necessary, may yet be as truly doers of the word, as those whose
sentiments concerning this matter, are more conformable to reason and
scripture. And it is certain that such persons shall not be excluded from
salvation, merely on account of their erroneous opinion It is infinitely
dishonorable to the all good and perfect Governor of the world, to imagine
that he has suspended the eternal salvation of men upon any niceties of
speculation: Or that any one who honestly aims at finding the truth, and at
doing the will of his Maker, shall be finally discarded because he fell into
some erroneous opinions. He whose heart is right with God; he who seeks his
will in his word, with an unbiassed mind; and he who conscientiously obeys the
gospel, can be guilty of no error for which an infinitely good and merciful
Being will condemn him.

I ADD, that although such a sincere inquirer after the truth, should embrace
opinions which give countenance to vice and libertinism, in a natural and fair
construction; yea, although the same principles, should, by being acted upon,
prove the destruction of other persons; yet surely he, whose practice is not
influenced by them; but is conformable to the stricter maxims of piety and
virtue laid down in the Gospel, will reap the fruits of righteousness in the
end. And although most men are not so good as their principles oblige them to be;
yet it is certain that some men are better: Which I take to be the case of
many, who place the whole of religion in faith, and dependence upon the
righteousness of Christ: For many such, doubtless live soberly and righteously
and godly in the world.

INDEED if persons fall into such errors as are, in their own nature,
inconsistent with Christian piety and virtue; (...) errors (...) must needs be
fatal; because we are assured that no righteous person shall (...) the kingdom
of God. Or if persons fall into other errors, of (...) malignant Nature; but
which do in (...) them easy in their ^ins, and regardless of their behavior;
even such errors must be fatal in their consequence; though not necessarily so,
considered in themselves. How inconsiderable any error may be in itself; if the
effect of it is either the making a man vicious, or keeping him so, to him it
is and must be fatal in the event: Though to others it may not prove so; because
it may not have the same effect upon them. Nor, indeed, is there any
speculative error, however great, which can exclude a good and upright man, who
obeys the laws of Christianity, from the kingdom of heaven: Though it may
probably prove, in some degree, prejudicial to his virtue; retard him in his
progress toward Christian perfection; and so prevent his obtaining so bright a
crown of glory, at the end of his race, as he might otherwise have done.
Accordingly we read of some that build wood, hay, stubble, i. e. false, absurd,
and hurtful doctrines, upon the basis of Christianity, who yet shall be saved
at last, though "so as by fire."

THESE considerations should, on the one hand, keep us from being censorious
toward our fellow Christians; and from dealing out our anathema's against
those that are in error. On the other hand, they should make us sincerely
inquisitive after the truth ourselves, and zealous in the defense of it. It is,
by no means, an indifferent thing, whether people have just conceptions of
Christianity or not; though all parties have perhaps laid too much stress upon
their own peculiar sentiments; and been wanting in candor and forbearance
toward others. The more justly people conceive of the doctrines of the Gospel,
the more likely they are, humanly speaking, to live as becomes their
profession. Mistaken notions of religion, espicially such as evidently disannul
the obligations to obedience, rendering the commandments of God of none effect,
should certainly be opposed and refuted; although they should not be absolutely
inconsistent with a good life, and evangelical righteousness. If we ought to
"contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints;" we ought
certainly to contend with as much earnestness at least for that practical piety
and virtue, without which no one can be a saint; and which is, in fact, the end
of all faith.

IT is not very strange if those, whose principles allow them to live wickedly,
should allow themselves in it: Especially when we consider how many there are,
who allow themselves to do so, contrary to their principles. -- There are great
numbers of persons in the Christian world who, although they acknowledge the
necessity of obedience to the gospel, yet practically deny it, led away by
their own lusts and enticed. What then can be naturally expected of those, who
imagine they have a dispensation for sinning? and that good works are of little
or no account in the christian religion! It is rather to be wondered at, that
any of these deluded persons should be good, (as it is to be hoped they are)
than that so many of them should be wicked, as there is reason to fear. For it
is very unusual for men to be better than their own principles oblige them to
be: though it is very common for them to be much worse than they can be, in
consistancy with them.

THE delusions to which I had a particular reference above, may all be reduced
to one grand, capital error; which is this, That the merits of Christ's
obedience and sufferings, may be so applied or imputed to sinners, as to be
available to their justification and salvation, although they are destitute of
all personal inherent goodness. This grand mistake is variously modified; it
puts on different forms and appearances; and scripture-terms and phrases are
brought to support it. When it is clothed in scripture language, it is
expressed thus; that we are saved by grace; that we must be found in Christ not
having on our own righteousness, which is of the law; that we are justified by
faith without the deeds of the law, etc. These are the phrases which, I
suppose, have been the most commonly abused and perverted to serve so bad a
purpose, as that of making men believe they may be in a state of favor with
God, while they live in disobedience to his commandments. They all amount to
much the same thing, both in their natural and true sense as they are used by
the sacred writers, and in the opinion of those who wrest and pervert them.
However I shall consider them distinctly; and endeavor to rescue them from the
false, absurd glosses which have been put upon them, greatly to the prejudice
of pure and undefiled religion. And I hope it will sufficiently appear, that
those who use these phrases in order to disparage good works, and evangelical
obedience; or in order to show that we may be justified and saved without being
doers of the word, deceive their ownselves, and delude those who believe them.
For they cannot possibly be though it to favor so licentious an opinion, 'til they
are misunderstood.

IT is only the first of them, viz. That we are saved by grace, that will be
considered in this discourse. Now that we are really saved by grace, no one who
believes the scriptures will deny; this being not only a doctrine of scripture,
but expressed in the the very words of scripture. But those who imagine that,
because we are saved by grace, obedience to the gospel is not necessary, as the
condition on our part, in order to salvation, draw a conclusion which is very
unnatural. If these things are reconcilable one with the other; if it may be
true that we are saved by grace, and yet true that we cannot be saved without
obedience: then certainly the supposed necessity of obedience, does not at all
militate against the doctrine of our salvation by grace. For if there be no
real repugnancy betwixt these principles, they may be both equally true; nor
can the falsehood of one be inferred from the truth of the other.

MY business here therefore, is, to show that there is no inconsistency betwixt
these doctrines; that though we are saved by grace, yet we are saved in the way
of obedience, and consequently, that it is a perversion and abuse of the
scripture doctrine of grace, to infer from it, that obedience to Christ's
Commandments, is not the gospel condition of our acceptance with God, and
obtaining eternal life by him.

NOW, that to be saved by grace, in the sense of scripture, does not imply that
we are saved without, or independently of, obedience and personal
righteousness, is very evident in general from hence, That that grace of God
which has appeared unto us, teaches us, not that we may hope for salvation
while we continue in sin; but that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously and godly in the world; looking, in
consequence of our living thus, for the blessed hope. If even the grace of God
which is revealed to us, teaches us that we are to turn from our sins to God;
it must be an absurd inference, that we need not turn from sin to God, because
this grace is revealed to us, and we are saved thereby. This is, in effect to
say, that because God in the gospel of his grace, has taught us that we must
deny our worldly lusts, and serve him, therefore we need not do so; but may
obtain his favor without! St. Paul has expressly cautioned us against such an
abuse of the doctrine of God's grace. "Sin shall not have dominion over you,
says he, for ye are not under the law, but under grace. What then! shall we
sin, because we are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid." Romans
(...). 14, 15.
The apostle, in this passage, not only represents our being under a
dispensation of grace, as consistent with the necessity of our forsaking every
sinful practice; but he represents this as an additional obligation laid upon
us to do so. He draws his argument for obedience and righteousness of life,
from this very consideration, that we are under a gracious dispensation. "Sin
shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the law, but under
grace." Those must therefore reason very preposterously, in a manner quite
contrary to the apostle, who would go about to prove from the gracious nature
of that covenant which we are under, that obedience is needless; or that we may
continue in sin, because we are saved by grace. They draw an inference the very
reverse of his, from the same principles. His inference is, that because we are
under grace, therefore we may not continue in sin: Their's, that we may
continue in sin, because we are under such a dispensation. And now whether St.
Paul is in the right, or those who contradict him, judge ye.

THIS is, I think, sufficient to show in general, that all those misunderstand
the scripture doctrine of our salvation by grace, who infer from it, that our
salvation is not suspended upon our obedience to God's commandments. But let us
be a little more particular in considering the several significations of the
term grace, in the new testament; that so we may see whether either of them
militates against the supposed necessity of obedience and good works.

AND let us begin with the primary and most general notion hereof; which is
favor; or some act of goodness, generosity or bounty, as distinguished from
those acts which come within the known laws of common equity and justice. In
conformity to this first and most general sense of the term, when it is said
that we are saved by grace, the meaning is, that we do not merit salvation;
that we cannot demand it upon the footing of natural justice; but it flows from
another fountain, even from the abounding goodness and mercy of God. It
proceeds wholly from his undeserved favor; and is to be acknowledged as his
gift, not claimed as our due. And that our salvation is of grace in this sense,
I as firmly believe, and am as ready to assert, if not so able to prove, as any
other person whatever. Our salvation took its rise in the mere bounty and
goodness of God. And the same overflowing goodness, in which it had it is
origin, is conspicious in every part of it, 'til it is, or rather shall be,
completed and perfected in the regions of immortal bliss. But does it follow
from hence, that this salvation does not accrue to us in the way of obedience
to Christ's commandments? May it not be true, that God requires this obedience
of us, as what is indispensably necessary in order to our salvation; and yet be
true, at the same time, that He manifests his favor, and great goodness to us
herein? Certainly our obedience, however necessary it may be, is not so
valuable and meritorious, as to be an adequate consideration for the salvation
and eternal happiness of our souls: So far from this, that we ought to look
upon ourselves as unprofitable servants, even though we had done all those things
that are required of us. How then could it ever enter into the heart of man to
imagine, that if obedience to the gospel is necessary in order to our
salvation, then it could not be true that we are saved by grace; as if such
obedience excluded grace; and left no room for the exercise of it? Those
persons must set a very undue and disproportionate value upon our imperfect
obedience, who imagine it leaves no place for the manifestation of divine grace
or favor in our salvation; and that whatever God is pleased to confer upon us
in consequence hereof, is only the paying of a debt, or rendering the labourer
the reward, to which he has entitled himself, on the footing of common equity.

THE reasoning of some persons upon this point are very strange and
unaccountable; and, I think quite inconsistent. For one while they tell us,
that our obedience, and best good works, are only as filthy rags; so very mean
and contemptible, that they cannot be truly acceptable to God, or fit to be
rewarded by him: Yea, that they are attended with so much sin and imperfection,
that they must be odious to him; and rather need a pardon, than entitle us to a
reward. But, in the next, if not the same breath, we are told, that th^se
filthy and abominable good works, if supposed necessary and conducive to our
salvation, would subvert the doctrine of our being saved by grace: Which is to
say in other words, that imperfect and sinful as they are, they are yet so
valuable, so excellent, so meritorious, that they leave no room for God to
exercise grace in our salvation! But if our works of righteousness are all so
imperfect, not to say so filthy, as they are sometimes represented to be, one
would think there was no danger of excluding divine grace, by saying that
obedience to the Gospel is made the condition of our salvation. Though obedience
is required in order to our salvation, it cannot be though it meritorious of it.
The truth lies betwixt the two extremes mentioned above. Our obedience and good
works are really acceptable to God in some degree; otherwise he would not have
required us to perform them, and promised to reward them; as he has most
certainly done. But yet they are not so valuable in their own nature, as to
merit eternal life for those who perform them. God is infinitely gracious, in
accepting this imperfect obedience through Christ, and in bestowing eternal life
upon the subjects of it. This is therefore a reward, not of merit on our side,
but of grace on God's part. How unjustly then, are those who hold the necessity
of personal righteousness; and believe that God will graciously reward our
obedience, through Christ, charged with maintaining the doctrine of merit, in
opposition to grace? This is but too common a slander, made use of by captious
uncharitable men, to bring a reproach upon those whom they dislike. --

IT is readily acknowledged, that the most perfect man does not work out a
righteousness, strictly legal. Salvation therefore cannot be obtained, but upon
the footing of grace or favor. Yea, I may add, that although our obedience were
perfect, it would still be favor and bounty in God, to bestow eternal life
upon us in consequence of it. We might indeed, upon this supposition, claim an
exemption from punishment and misery, according to the immutable laws of right
and equity. But to assert that the most perfect righteousness and obedience of
a creature, would, in it is own nature, on account of it is inherent worth, and
independently of any promise of God, entitle that creature to endless
happiness, is to assert more than any man can prove. It would evidently be
grace in God to confer endless immeasurable bliss, upon a creature, who had in
no instance violated his laws. The reward would be more, infinitely more, than
adequate to the service performed. Who can presume to say, that the holiest
angel in heaven, has by his obedience, strictly speaking, merited everlasting
happiness? or, that it is not grace in God, to confer this upon any creature
whatever? If God makes a creature happy during his obedience, it is the utmost
that justice requires. Such a creature might, without receiving any wrong or
injury, be deprived of his existence and happiness together, after persevering
in his obedience for any given time. The Author of his being, is not that I
know of, absolutely obliged to preserve him forever, because the creature has
not swerved from his duty. And if God is not bound in justice to make such a
creature eternally happy, it must be grace in him to do it; for betwixt justice
and grace, there is in this case no medium. Certainly then, it is grace in God
to bestow endless happiness upon those who have violated his laws, however
penitent and reformed they are. And this, I hope, is sufficient to show, that
although we cannot be saved, without obedience to the Gospel; and although this is,
properly speaking, the condition upon which pardon and eternal life are offered
to us; yet it may be still equally true, that we are saved by grace, as that
signifies favor and unmerited goodness in the Creator and Lord of all.

It will come to the same thing at last, if by grace we understand more
particularly the gospel dispensation. The term is often used thus in scripture;
and indeed this is the most common sense of it. And the Gospel is called grace,
by a usual figure, in respect of the subject of it; because it is a declaration
and manifestation of God's grace or favor toward sinners. Hence we read of
the Gospel of the grace of God. And this dispensation of mercy, is sometimes
styled grace more especially in contradistinction from the Mosaic, or Legal
dispensation. So it is said, that "the Law was given by Moses; but Grace, --
came by Jesus Christ. And in general, wherever law and grace are opposed to
each other in the new testament, grace means the Gospel, the good news of
pardon and eternal life, brought from heaven to earth by the Son of God, and
preached to the world by his apostles.

NOW if we understand the term in this appropriate sense, when we are said to
be saved by grace, the meaning will be, that we are saved by the Gospel, or in
the way which the Gospel reveals to us; which is a declaration of God's favor
and mercy to sinful creatures; a declaration of his gracious purpose to forgive
and save transgressors, upon certain terms therein marked out; and which does
not insist upon perfect Obedience, as the Law of MOSES seems, according to the
letter of it, to have done. For, says St. Paul, Moses describes the
righteousness which is of the Law, that the Man which does those things, shall
live by them. (...)
And the same Apostle tells us, that the language of that severer dispensation
is this, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the law to do them. Gal. 3, 10.


IT may be here asked again, how our being saved by grace, in this sense,
militates against the supposed necessity of repentance from dead works, and
sincerely obeying that Gospel, by which we are to be saved? What though we are
not, neither can be, saved upon the footing of mere law, whether the law of
Moses, or the law of nature? What though we are saved by, or in the way of, a new
and merciful covenant established in Christ Jesus? a covenant of Grace, wherein
provision is made for the restoration of sinners to the divine favor? Will it
follow from hence, that we are saved without any kind or degree of obedience?
It is not inconsistent even with a covenant of grace, that it should propose to
us certain terms and conditions for our acceptance, in order to our obtaining
the blessings thereof. And though we should suppose, that the terms on which the
gospel offers salvation to us, are those of faith and new obedience, would this
make it cease to be a covenant of grace? Surely, the covenant may be very
gracious, though it promises pardon and eternal life, only to penitent, obedient
believers.

IN short, to be saved by grace, meaning hereby the gospel of God's grace, is
to be saved in that way, in that method, which the gospel opens, provides for
us, and prescribes to us. To know particularly what that way is, we must look
into the gospel itself: And if we do so, we shall find that it is so far from
being inconsistent with the supposition, that obedience to the precepts of it
is necessary; that this is the very thing which it makes necessary; the great,
or rather the only, condition upon which it offers salvation to us. For in this
dispensation of the grace of God, it is, that we are assured, that Christ is
become the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him; and that
those who obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, shall fall under
condemnation hereafter. Since, therefore, to be saved by grace, is to be saved
in the way which the gospel reveals to us; and since the gospel itself
expressly requires repentance and sincere obedience in order to our salvation;
it is a very absurd inference, that because we are saved in this method of
grace, therefore we are not saved in the way of obedience; which is indeed the
only way that the gospel knows of: Unless by being saved in the way of
obedience, you mean obedience that is perfect and strictly legal; for if that
is what is intended hereby, it is certain that no one is saved in that way, no
one having performed such obedience. But it will not follow, that because
perfect obedience is not necessary in order to our salvation, therefore no
obedience at all is necessary to that end: Nor are we chargeable with turning
the gospel of God's grace into a covenant of works, in representing all the
blessings of it as confined to those who, "having believed in God, are careful
to maintain good works."

TO proceed, the term grace is sometimes used to express a heavenly, divine
principle in the hearts of those who are born again. I am not certain, indeed,
that the scripture ever uses the term in this sense; though this being now common
with theological and practical writers, we will take the propriety of it for
granted. And if we are saved by grace in this sense, it is the very thing which
I would prove, viz. that we are saved by holiness, righteousness, and
evangelical obedience; not without it. For what do we mean by this divine
principle, this grace in the hearts of the regenerate, but a principle of
goodness, or holiness? a principle, which makes us resemble God, and prompts us
to live in obedience to his commandments? To be saved by grace, understanding
thereby a principle of real sanctity in the heart, and such a one as is always
productive of good fruits in the life, is so far from being repugnant to the
supposed necessity of evangelical obedience, that it is the very same doctrine,
only expressed in different words. For when it is said, that obeying the gospel
is necessary in order to our salvation, or that we are saved by such obedience;
nothing more is intended, than that it is necessary we should be possessed of
such a gracious principle as was spoken of above; a principle of righteousness,
which manifests itself in a good conversation; and that whosoever is endowed
therewith, has the promise of eternal life. So that they who assert we are
saved by grace, in this sense of the term, are so far from contradicting those
who maintain the necessity of obedience, and the efficacy of it, that they
assert the same thing themselves.

IT will make no material difference, as to the point now before us, if by
grace we understand, not a principle of goodness and holiness in the heart, but
those influences and operations of the spirit of God upon the heart, by which
that good principle is produced therein. This, if I mistake not, is what people
often mean by the term grace. Let us therefore understand it thus, for the
present; and consider whether our being saved by grace, militates against the
other supposition, viz. that we are saved in the way of obedience to Christ's
commandments. And now, understanding the term thus, when it is said we are
saved by grace, the meaning must be, That God saves us by begetting or
producing in us, a principle of holiness and righteousness; and that we could
not be saved, did He not thus give his holy spirit to renew and sanctify us: Or
this may be expressed more in the phrase of scripture, thus, That God saves us
by "working in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure": Or thus, that
He "saves us by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy
Ghost:" Or, "through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience." Very well: it
is readily acknowledged, that it is by the operations of the spirit of God upon
our hearts, that we attain to true holiness; and that we cannot be saved
without his blessed influences, in turning us from sin to righteousness. But
what does this make against the supposed necessity of obedience? The being
saved by grace in this sense, pre-supposes the necessity of holiness, of
personal purity, and sanctity of heart and manners. For the grace of God, or
the gracious influences of his Spirit, in turning us from unrighteousness to
obedience, would not be necessary in order to our salvation, where not
obedience itself necessary to that end. The necessity of the former, arises
only from the necessity of the latter. For if you suppose that righteousness
and obedience, are not necessary to the end mentioned, and that we may be saved
without them; certainly that grace of God, by which we are made righteous, is
unnecessary also. The grace of God, meaning thereby the gracious influences of
his spirit, contributes to our salvation, only as it produces in us that
holiness which is the condition of our being saved, and by which we are made
meet for the kingdom of Heaven. So that to say, we are saved by grace, in this
sense of the term, is in effect to say, that we are saved by that divine and
heavenly principle which is wrought in us by the good Spirit of God,
cooperating with the gospel of his Son; and that we could not be saved, unless
we were thus created anew in Christ Jesus unto good works. And this, surely, is
very consistent with the supposition that we are saved in the way of obedience
to the Gospel, or by our being doers of the word.

THOSE mentioned are the most usual senses of the term grace: Nor can I readily
think of any other or different meaning, that can be affixed thereto, when we
are said to be saved thereby. The sense of the proposition, must be either (1)
in general, that we are saved by the favor and bounty of God to us, in
opposition to the doctrine of merit; or (2) that we are saved by the Gospel of
Christ, as contradistinguished from the law of Moses; or (3) that we are saved
by being truly holy; by what some call a principle of Grace in the heart; or (
lastly) by God's producing such a principle in us, by the gracious influences
of his Spirit; which comes to the same thing, with respect to the point now in
hand. And the doctrine of our being saved by grace, in any, or in all of these
senses, does not militate in the least degree against the doctrine of our being
saved by obedience to the Gospel; and of our obtaining, in this way an interest
in God's peculiar love here, together with an inheritance hereafter in the
kingdom of heaven. The necessity of obedience is rather established, than
overthrown and refuted, by the scripture doctrine of our salvation by Grace.

TO conclude this discourse, therefore, let us take heed, while we acknowledge
our salvation to be of grace, that we do not pervert this doctrine to the
encouraging of licentiousness, either in ourselves or others. To the honor of
God, and the gospel of his Son, we are bound to confess, that we are saved by
Grace. But surely it is not to his glory, nor to the honor of the Christian
revelation, to imagine that we are saved by grace in any such sense, as would
render obedience to our Savior's commandments unnecessary. On the contrary, it
would be highly dishonorable to both, to conceive thus. Such an imagination
does, in effect, divest God of his holiness, and all his moral perfections. It
is to represent him as giving men a dispensation for indulging their lusts, by
an express revelation from heaven. For, in truth, what else is it, to assert
that the gospel is a dispensation of grace, in such a sense, that even those
who live and dye in their sins, are not excluded by the terms of it, from the
hope of immortal happiness? And that the gates of heaven are set open to all
those who believe, whether they work righteousness or work iniquity? If this is
not to represent God as being indifferent to virtue and vice; if it is not to
abuse his grace, and turn it into lasciviousness; if it is not to make Christ
the minister of sin, rather than the Savior of men from it; it will be
impossible to say what is really so; yea, that any thing can be so. Nor can
there be a greater dishonor done to Christianity, than is done to it by those
who represent it in this light.

SUPPOSE one of the wiser sort of Pagans, who had as yet never heard any thing
concerning the gospel of Christ, should have an account given thereof to this
purpose; That it was a very gracious dispensation, inasmuch as it did not
require in its professors, sincere piety, and the practice of virtue, as
absolutely necessary to their being happy after death; but only recommended
these things as being decent, and a proper way of expressing our gratitude to
God; and that the most vicious men, provided they hear and believe this
revelation, trusting entirely to the righteousness and obedience of Him whose
name it bears, should certainly obtain eternal life: What would such an
intelligent Pagan naturally conclude? Certainly that this preacher of free
Grace was beside himself; or, which is still worse, that he was a very
abandoned man, and not only vicious himself, but desirous to corrupt others by
his licentious doctrine. He would not believe that the religion, of which such
an account was given him, was really a revelation from heaven; but would very
naturally and justly conclude it was the invention of some wicked man, or, at
best the dream of a weak one. But yet I am bold to say, that this is, and must
be, the account given of Christianity, by all those who deny the necessity of
obedience thereto, and of personal righteousness; and who infer from the
doctrine of our being saved by grace, that we may be saved without goodness.
Take heed therefore, my Brethren, lest any man deceive you, and lest you
deceive your ownselves, with vain empty words, and false hopes. "Be ye doers of
the word, and not hearers only." And rest assured, that That doctrine which
teaches that men may obtain salvation, without ceasing to do evil, and learning
to do well; without yielding a sincere obedience to the laws of Christianity;
(that That doctrine, I say) is not so properly called a DOCTRINE OF GRACE, as
it is, a DOCTRINE OF DEVILS.

SERMON VI. Of Mistakes concerning being sound in Christ, not having our own
Righteousness, etc.
JAMES I. 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
AMONGST other Things, the necessity of our being doers of the word, and not
hearers only, in order to our obtaining the salvation revealed in the gospel,
has been distinctly shown from this passage of scripture. But because St. James
here speaks as if there was at least some danger of our deluding ourselves with
an imagination, that obeying the gospel is not really necessary to the
mentioned end, in the preceding discourse I entered upon a consideration of
those mistakes respecting this important point, into which many Christians have
fallen, even from the early days of Christianity; and to which the Apostle
refers in some parts of this epistle. The errors and delusions which I here
intend, respect the general scheme of our salvation by Christ, and the nature
of that covenant of grace, which is established in and by Him. Which errors and
delusions, have, I suppose, chiefly proceeded from a misconstruction of certain
expressions in the writings of St. Paul. And indeed St. Peter observed long
since, that in the epistles of this his beloved Brother, there were "some
things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest
-- unto their own destruction."

THE expressions which seem at least as likely to be thus wrested by the
unlearned and unstable, as any other in those epistles, are such as these; That
we are saved by grace; That we must be found in Christ, not having our own
righteousness; and that we are justified by faith, without the deeds of the
law. For from these, and suchlike expressions, some have in fact imagined,
that personal righteousness, inherent holiness, or obedience to the Gospel,
(call it which you please) is not really necessary in order to our acceptance
with God, and to our obtaining the salvation revealed to us, and purchased for
us, by Christ: And it is to be feared, that many, from age to age, have thus
deceived themselves to their own destruction. These scripture expressions which
have been perverted, so as to render the commandments of God of none effect,
and to annul the obligations to evangelical obedience, terminate nearly in the
same point at last. However it was proposed to consider them distinctly; and to
show how far they are from countenancing any such licentious doctrines as have
been grounded upon them. The former of them, viz. that we are "saved by grace,"
was considered in the last discourse.

LET us now proceed to a consideration of the second, respecting our being
found in Christ, etc. The passage at large stands thus in the epistle. Philip.
(...). 7, -- 10.
But what things were gain to me, these I counted loss for Christ; yea
doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and
do count them but dung, that I may win Christ: And be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith
of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith: That I may know him, and
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his death.

THIS passage having been made great use of, in order to show, that our own
personal righteousness is of little or no account in the sight of God; and that
the righteousness of Christ, imputed to us, and received by faith, is the sole
ground of our acceptance with Him, I shall consider it the more carefully and
distinctly. I will give some short and general account of St. Paul's design
here: And then point out more particularly, both what that righteousness is
which he here disclaims and renounces, and what that is which he builds his
hopes upon, and glories in. From whence, I doubt not, it will appear, that he
is so far from contradicting any thing which has been said upon this subject,
concerning the necessity of obedience to the Gospel, that he, in effect,
asserts the same thing himself.

NOW it is to be remembered, and particularly observed, for the right
understanding of this passage, that St. Paul was, both by birth and religion, a
Jew: He had been educated in the principles and practices of the Pharisees, as
he himself informs us. He had been so zealous in this way, as to become, very
early, a bitter enemy to the name and religion of Christ; and thus he continued
to be, 'til he was miraculously converted to the Christian faith, in his
journey to Damascus. And the passage quoted above, represents to us in general,
how entirely his sentiments concerning religion, and the way of acceptance with
God, were changed from what they had formerly been: -- how contemptibly he now
though it of many things, in which, while he was a Pharisee, he gloried in, and
depended upon, as a sufficient and acceptable righteousness: -- how highly he
now accounted of Christ, whose name he was wont to blaspheme; and whose
disciples he had persecuted: -- how sollicitous he was to attain to that
righteousness which the gospel prescribes, and to that Salvation which is
therein revealed to sinful Men. This is the general design and scope of the
passage we are considering. And surely a person newly converted from Judaism to
Christianity, from a persecuting Pharisee to a disciple of Jesus, may well be
supposed to undervalue all his former seize in religion, and to renounce
all dependence upon them for salvation, without being supposed to undervalue
that obedience which the gospel requires, or to renounce all dependence
thereupon in the grand affair of his acceptance with God, and obtaining eternal
Life. My meaning is, that it does not follow from the Apostle's disclaiming,
and depreciating the former righteousness, that he must disclaim and depreciate
the latter also. For though one may be really worthless and insignificant, the
other may be truly valuable, and acceptable in the sight of God. The
righteousness of a Pharisee, may be contemptible, and yet the obedience of a
Christian be of great price, and great efficacy with God. Unless it can be
shown that the Apostle here renounces some other righteousness than a
Pharisaical one, as that is opposed to the obedience and good works of a
sincere Christian, this passage is not to the purpose of those who allege it
in order to prove, that a Christian's obedience is not that which entitles him
to the salvation which Christ has wrought out, and which is revealed to us in
his gospel.

LET us, therefore, as was proposed inquire a little more particularly, what
righteousness that is, which St. Paul renounces? whether it is only the
righteousness of a Pharisee, or the obedience and good works of a Christian?
And for the resolving of this point, let us go to the preceding context, where
he gives us an account of what, as a Jew and a Pharisee, he had formerly valued
himself upon.

IN opposition to the unconverted Jews, who relied upon their external
privileges, upon their circumcision, and other ritual observances, he says --
We are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, ver. 3. As if he had said, "The
Jews vaunt of their being circumcised: But we Christians, although we may not
have externally received that rite, are yet the true spiritual seed of Abraham,
being circumcised in heart, which is the thing signified by that outward sign.
We are more truly the circumcision, according to the spiritual meaning of the
law, than they who glory only in the visible symbol of internal purity: For we
serve God in spirit and in truth; and glory in our relation to Jesus Christ,
who is the end of the law; having no dependence on those carnal ordinances, and
weak and beggarly elements, which they who are still zealous of the law, value
themselves upon." Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any man
thinks he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more. ver. 4. q. d.
"Think not that I speak with contempt of these fleshly ordinances, from a
principle of envy; or because I could not glory in the observation of them as
well as others, if I judged this was any just ground of confidence. No: If such
things might justly be trusted in; if any man whatever can, with reason, place
his dependence upon things of this nature, I am bold to say that I myself can
do it with as much justice and propriety, as any other person; yea with more
than the greater part of those that do so." The Apostle proceeds to explain
himself in the next words -- Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of
Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the
law, a Pharisee." ver 5. q. d. "You may judge by what follows, with how much
more justice I could glory in Jewish privileges, and legal, ceremonious
observances, than most other persons, did I value myself upon them. For I was
circumcised exactly on the eighth day, according to the very letter of the law;
which is more than every Jew can boast. I descended directly from the loins of
Israel; and am one of the tribe of Benjamin, who was so peculiarly beloved of
our common Father: I am not a proselyte, nor the son of a proselyte, but a
natural born Jew, a branch sprung up from the original stock of the Hebrews:
And I was moreover one of that sect, which is of the greatest note and
reputation amongst the Jews, the sect of the Pharisees." The Apostle proceeds
with the catalogue of his privileges, etc. Concerning zeal, persecuting the
church; touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless. ver. 6. q.
d. "Nor was I one of the cold, lifeless professors of the Jewish religion: So
far from it, that I distinguished myself by my zeal for it; yea, so warm and
sanguine was I in the cause, that I exerted myself to the utmost, to beat down
all that did, or seemed to oppose it; and accordingly became a violent
persecutor of the church of Christ. And, to sum up all in one word, I was so
strict an observer of the law of Moses, according to the common way of
interpreting it, that no person, however critical and zealous, could blame me,
or tax me with deviating from the righteousness of it."

NOW these are the things which St. Paul asserts, gave him greater ground of
confidence, and glorying in the flesh, than most of his countrymen, who still
adhered to the law in opposition to the gospel, could pretend to: Upon which,
however, he renounces all dependence for righteousness, and acceptance with
God. But it will be proper to inquire more particularly into the Apostle's
meaning, in the last words quoted above, where he says that he had been
blameless, touching the righteousness that is in the law; this being, as I
apprehend, a point of considerable importance. By this, then, I think he must
intend one or the other of the three things following: Either,

1. THAT he had been, in the most strict and proper sense, perfect and sinless:
Or,

2. THAT he had been blameless and perfect in a lower and less proper sense; as
other good men under the law were said to be, notwithstanding some deviations
from their duty: Or,

3. THAT he had been blameless with relation to the ceremonial part of the law;
which it seems, the Jews of that corrupt, degenerate age, generally esteemed
the most excellent, and chiefly gloried in.

THE righteousness which the apostle here intends, whatever it be, he certainly
disclaims as an insufficient ground of trust and dependence, in the next words.
-- But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. The
connection plainly shows, that he contemned and despised all his former
righteousness, in comparison of that which is of God by faith.

NOW we may be very certain that the Apostle is not to be understood in the
first sense mentioned: He does not mean, that he had perfectly kept the whole
law of MOSES, in its greatest extent and latitude. For (1) it is generally
acknowledged by Christians, that that law comprehends the law of nature, as
well as the law of ceremonies, and carnal ordinances: In which latitude, our
Savior himself expounds it. (2) St. Paul himself says expressly, in his
epistle to the Romans, that all, Jews as well as Gentiles, have sinned; that
all the world is become guilty before God; and that every mouth must be
stopped. In which places he cannot be supposed to speak exclusively of himself.
(3) We diverse times find him lamenting the sins which he had committed, while
he was in his Jewish state; particularly that of persecuting the church of
Christ. (4) If he had been perfect in this sense, he could not have undervalued
such a righteousness, or needed any other. For a perfect righteousness is
undoubtedly sufficient for any man: And the language of the law itself is,
"That the man that does these things, shall live in them." From these
considerations, not to mention any more, it is evident that St. Paul, by his
having been blameless touching the righteousness which is in the law, could not
intend that he had perfectly obeyed the law in its utmost latitude and rigor.

IT remains, therefore, that he is to be understood either in the second or
third sense mentioned: i. e. That he had been blameless and perfect, as other
good men under the law, were said to be, notwithstanding some deviations from
it: Or that he had, with the greatest punctuality, observed the ritual part of
it, as contradistinguished from the moral. Let us consider, which of these
things he intends. And that he is to be understood in the last mentioned sense,
will, I think, appear very probable at least, from the following considerations.

1. IT does not appear from St. Paul's story, as we have it in the new
testament, that he was really a good man, antecedently to his conversion to the
faith of Christ; or that he had any righteousness besides that which was proper
to his sect, as a Pharisee. And how much this righteousness consisted in
outward formalities, and ceremonious usages: how little of good morality went
into the composition of a Pharisee's righteousness; how far it ^ell short of
that sincere piety and undissembled virtue, which was essential to a righteous
character, even under the law of Moses, no one can be ignorant, who has read
the gospel, with due attention. That which our Savior terms, The righteousness
of the scribes and Pharisees, did not include in it real sanctity of heart and
manners; such as good men under the law were the subjects of. If it had, he
would not surely have told us, that except our righteousness exceeds it, we
cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven: For it will not, I presume, be doubted
but that all truly pious and holy men, whether under the legal or evangelical
dispensation, shall not actually be admitted into that kingdom hereafter. How
does it appear, that the Apostle was a better man than those of his sect
generally were; who, as is plain from our Savior's account of them, were not
only imperfect, as the best men are in this world; but destitute of that
righteousness which is attainable; and of which many good men under the law
were actually the subjects? It is not very easy to reconcile the supposition of
Readiness being a good man, with the known fact of his being so bitter a
persecutor of the church; and his continuing to breath out threatenings and
slaughter against it, for so long a time together. To desire to do the will of
God, is essential to the character of a good man: And our Savior had said,
That if any man would do his will, he should know of his doctrine whether it
were of God, or whether he spoke of himself. Can it easily be supposed, then,
that Soul, had he been really a good and upright man, could have been, for so
long a time, under a mistake in this matter; and been so outrageously zealous
as he was, to extirpate the religion of Christ? I will not absolutely deny the
possibility of this; but yet think it is very improbable. Besides, St. Paul
seems, in some of his epistles, to attribute his becoming a good man, to his
becoming a disciple of Christ; particularly where he says, that it was "the law
of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, that had made him free from the law of
sin and death." Now if his conversion from sin to God, was cotemporary with his
conversion from Judaism to Christianity; (which is probable from the account he
gives of himself) it follows, that by the righteousness which is in the law, he
must mean only that external, pharisaical righteousness beforementioned; not
that internal and sanctity, of which good men were the subjects under the
mosaic dispensation.

IT will perhaps be objected, that St. Paul declares he verily though it with
himself that he ought to do those things which he did, contrary to the name of
Jesus of Nazareth; that he had lived, before his becoming a Christian, in all
good conscience toward God: And that this supposes him to have been a
righteous man, in the qualified sense of scripture, antecedently to his
conversion to the faith of Christ. However this seems not to be conclusive and
satisfactory: For there are doubtless many wicked men who act conscientiously,
especially in the business of persecution, when their heads are heated with
religious, party-disputes, and their hearts burn with a false zeal. Men may act
conscientiously, for the time, in things of this nature, and indeed in almost
all others; and yet not be truly good and virtuous. When our Savior tells his
disciples that the time would come, when whosoever killed them, would think
that he did God service; I suppose none imagine that he means good and virtuous
men would do thus, merely because they are supposed to act conscientiously
toward God, thinking they do service to him. No; The obvious sense is, that
men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, would be so infatuated, so
blinded with bigotry, and enmity against the gospel, that they would persecute
even to death, the preachers and professors of it, not only without pity and
remorse, but even with a firm persuasion that they were discharging their duty
to God; i. e. with a good conscience toward Him. It is not therefore implied
in what the Apostle says of himself, that he had been a truly righteous, good
man. It does not necessarily, or naturally, amount to any thing more than this,
all circumstances being considered; viz. That he had been zealous in the
religion he professed; a conscientious observer of the law, as interpreted by
the Pharisees; and that when he was embruing his hands in the blood of the
innocent, he was so far from doing what he knew to be sinful, that he followed
the dictates of a mistaken conscience. All which is rather an evidence, that
the light within him was then darkness, and that he was depraved to great
degree, than that he was really the pious man, and strict moralist, which some
suppose him to have been.

2. THAT the Apostle is not to be understood as asserting that he had been a
careful observer of the moral part of the law, appears from hence. He is here
arguing against the Jews; and evidently speaks of the righteousness which is in
the law, according to the notions and interpretations thereof, which generally
prevailed amongst them: He reasons with them, or rather against them, upon
their own principles, in order to confute them the more effectually. And is it
not manifest from the new testament, that the righteousness which the Jews of
this time, especially the Pharisees, laid the greatest stress upon, and chiefly
gloried in, was a mere ceremonious, or ritual righteousness? a righteousness,
which had little or no concern with their hearts and morals? This was evidently
the case. And it is much the most natural supposition, that St. Paul here uses
these terms, [the righteousness which is in the Law] in the jewish sense of
them; intending such a righteousness thereby, as these words would have
signified in the mouth of a common Pharisee. It was not directly to his
purpose, to use them in any higher, or more exalted sense.

3. THIS is farther evident, Because he speaks of such a righteousness as was
reckoned matter of confidence in the flesh; which is his way of describing the
positive part of the Mosaic law, which was of a carnal nature, related to, and
affected the flesh; whereas the moral righteousness therein required was not
fleshly; nor is it, that I remember, ever spoken of as such. Vid. Mr. Peirce's
notes in Loc. How much, or how little, I have been beholden to this learned
Commentator, in other parts of this discourse, where I have not expressly
mentioned him, may be easily seen by those who think it worth while. --


4. THE particular things which the Apostle enumerates in this passage, as
giving him greater reason of confidence and boasting, than many others could
pretend to, are all relative to the Jews, and the mosaic economy; -- his
lineal descent from Abraham, circumcision, etc. He does not so much as hint at
any particular branch of true moral righteousness, which he could justly lay
claim to, unless his persecuting zeal can be looked upon as such. Now if the
Apostle had really intended to represent himself as a pious, virtuous man,
antecedently to his becoming a Christian, can it be supposed that he would have
instanced only in his Jewish privileges, and things of a ceremonious, external
nature? Is it not much more natural to suppose, that he would, in this case,
have instanced in the great and important precepts of the moral Law, which he
had carefully observed? He certainly knew, at the time of his writing this
epistle, whatever he did before, that the keeping of these latter commandments,
was much more commendable, and acceptable in the sight of God, than the things
of which he speaks; but yet wholly omits them. This is, I think, a plain
demonstration, that by his having been blameless touching the righteousness
which is in the law, he means no more, than that he had kept the ceremonial law
with the utmost precision and exactness; so as to stand, in that respect, at
least upon an equal footing with any of his countrymen.

5. IF by the righteousness that is in the law, the Apostle had intended the
moral purity and good works required thereby; it is not supposeable that he
would have spoken of it, in the verses immediately following, in such strong
terms of contempt as he does; saying that he counted it loss and dung. Indeed
he often speaks, in other places, of the most complete righteousness of the
best men, as imperfect; as attended with some faults and failings; and
therefore insufficient to justify them before God, according to the rigor of
law: But this is a very different thing, from styling such a righteousness loss
and dung: Nor do the scriptures any where authorize our speaking of the moral
virtues of good men in such contemptuous language. This is inconsistent with
the whole spirit, and the constant language of scripture; wherein the moral
virtues of good men are always mentioned with honor, and the highest epithets
of commendation. But if we suppose the Apostle intends only those Jewish
privileges, and that ceremonious righteousness, wherein the Pharisees chiefly
trusted, without any reference to the weightier matters of the law; it will be
easy to account for his speaking of such a righteousness in the manner he does.
This righteousness, not containing in it any thing truly good, but consisting
merely in the form of godliness without the power, might be fitly enough
compared to dung, or to filthy rags; and renounced as a worthless thing. But to
speak in such reproachful language of the moral virtues, which consist
summarily in the love of God and man, and an imitation of the divine
perfections; is, in itself so absurd, and approaches so near to profanity and
blasphemy, that I cannot think so wise and good a man as St. Paul could ever be
guilty of it. He always speaks in quite a different strain concerning obedience
to the moral part of the law; though, as was said before, he asserts that no man
has so exactly and perfectly obeyed the law, as to be justified thereby; and
therefore admonishes us to rely upon the grace of God in Christ Jesus, as
revealed in the Gospel, for acceptance with him.

FOR the several reasons mentioned, I think we may conclude, with a good degree
of certainty, that when the Apostle declares he had been "blameless touching
the righteousness that is in the law", his meaning is not, that he had been
sinless; nor even that he had been a strict observer of the moral part of the
law, so far as is consistent with common human frailty: But only, that he had
been righteous in the pharisaical sense of the word; that he was possessed of
the righteousness which that sect trusted in; which gave them confidence in the
flesh; and which consisted almost wholly in certain external privileges, and
ceremonious usages; as appears fully from the new testament, particularly from
the following passages -- "The Pharisees and all the Jews except they wash
their hands eat not -- And many other things there be, which they have received
to hold; as the washing of cups and pots, and brazen vessels and tables" --
"Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye tithe mint and anise
and cummin, and neglect the weightier matters of the law" -- "Ye make clean the
outside of the cup and the platter; but within are full of extortion and
excess -- Ye are like unto whited sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful
outward; but are within full of dead men's bones and all uncleanness: Even so ye
appear righteous unto men; but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity" --
"Ye make void the law of God through your traditions." -- These passages give you
a true Idea of the religion chiefly in vogue, in the days of our Savior and
his Apostles; I mean amongst the Jews, especially the sect of the Pharisees,
that strait sect, to which St. Paul says he belonged. And this is manifestly
the righteousness which this Apostle intends in the passage we are considering;
which he calls the righteousness that is in the law; and his own righteousness.
This is that righteousness which he once depended upon, accounting it gain to
him; and which he afterward renounced, accounting it no better than loss and
dung, in comparison of the righteousness which is of God by Faith. Nor can
there well be a greater perversion of his meaning, and true design, than to
represent him as speaking in this manner concerning that real holiness and
moral goodness, by which men are made like to the blessed God himself.

LET me make one short reflection here before I proceed any further. Since it
is plain that the Apostle, by his own righteousness, which he renounces in such
strong terms of contempt, means only his Jewish privileges, and an external
pharisaical righteousness; this shows the absurdity of applying what is here
said to the virtues and good works of Christians; of those Persons who live
under the Gospel Dispensation, and practically conform themselves to it. Such
persons, are often told, that they must have no dependence upon their own
righteousness, their virtues and good works; that this righteousness, is no
better than dung, etc. And all this loose, irrational kind of talk, is
pretended to be grounded upon, and supported by, the doctrine of St. Paul;
particularly in the passage now under consideration. Whereas it is very
manifest, that this great Apostle had not the least reference to the good works
of Christians; nor even to the moral duties required by the law of Moses; but
only to that superficial, ceremonious righteousness, in which the Pharisees
were wont to trust and to glory; a righteousness altogether different from, and
inferior to, that which is intended by those, who so zealously warn us not to
have any dependence upon our obedience to Christ's commandments; so totally
different from it, that no argument can be drawn from one to the other. And how
well soever those may mean, who apply what the Apostle says concerning his own
righteousness, while he was a persecuting Pharisee, to evangelical obedience;
it is demonstrable that they grossly wrest his meaning; and instill very false
and pernicious notions of religion into the minds of Christians.

BUT to proceed: Having seen what the apostle here intends by his own
righteousness, the righteousness which is in, or of, the law; and which he
disclaims as being of little or no value; let us now inquire what it is which
he opposes thereto; and in which he trusts and triumphs.

NOW he tells us, that he despised his own former righteousness; and accounted
it as loss and dung, for [or in comparison of] the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus his Lord: -- that he might win Christ, and be found in him --
having the righteousness which is through the faith of Christ; the righteousness
which is of God by faith; that he might know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death -- The several things here mentioned, the Apostle opposes to his
former righteousness, while he was a Pharisee. Let us consider them distinctly,
that we may see, whether they do not comprise in them obedience to the gospel?
and consequently, whether the Apostle does not rather oppose his own
righteousness, which was of the law, to evangelical purity and holiness, than
to the righteousness of Christ imputed?

THE first thing he mentions is, the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus his Lord. By which knowledge, if he directly intends nothing more than a
general speculative knowledge of Christ, and the gospel dispensation; yet this
will make nothing against the worth and importance of evangelical obedience.
But if, as it is most probable, he means what some call a practical
experimental knowledge of Christ; or such a knowledge as is productive of
obedience to his commandments; then this is not only no objection against, but
a direct confirmation of, what has been said upon this point. For the Apostle's
sense will then be, that he contemned his former, pharisaical righteousness, as
worthless, in comparison of that real purity and sanctity, of which those are
the subjects, who truly know Christ. And in this complex sense, the knowledge
of Christ is often to be understood in the new testament: i. e. it comprehends
both a speculative knowledge of him, and a frame of mind, and an external
behavior, conformable thereto. Thus it is said, Hereby do we know that we know
him, if we keep his commandments. He that says I know him, and keeps not his
commandments, is a Liar and the truth is not in him. So it is said to be life
eternal, to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent. This
must mean, to know God, and his only begotten Son, so as to love and serve
them, in the manner the gospel requires us to do. For surely it is not life
eternal to know God, if in works we deny him.

THE Apostle adds -- That I may win Christ St. Paul here carries on a very
handsome and agreeable allegory, in which all the metaphors are taken from
traders or merchants -- He seems here to consider Christ, as the most important
and valuable thing, which he was therefore sollicitous to secure to himself. --
Mr. P^^rce.
. His meaning is, that he might have Christ for his Savior; that he might be
interested in the redemption wrought out by him, in conformity to that method,
and to those terms of acceptance with God, which the gospel reveals. The
expression here used is so general and indeterminate, that no argument can be
drawn from hence, either for or against, what I am now more particularly
endeavoring to show.

THE Apostle subjoins -- and be found in him. The phrase [being in Christ] is
used in a twofold sense in the new testament. Sometimes it intends no more than
an outward profession of his name and religion; or being a member of his
visible Church, which is his body. At other times it means being in him as his
true disciples and followers: and interested, by faith and sincere obedience,
in that salvation which he has purchased for all such. Thus the Apostle John
explains it; "He that keeps his commandments, dwells in him." And St. Paul
himself; [ Romans 8. 1.] "There is therefore now no condemnation to them which
are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit."
Agreably hereto, it is said in the apocalypse, that blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord --; for they rest from their labors, and their works do follow
them." From these several passages it appears, that to be in Christ, in the
most eminent and important sense of the Phrase, is to be interested in the
redemption and salvation which he has wrought out, by keeping his commandments;
by walking after the spirit; or by doing those good works, which are said to
follow the righteous into another world, when they depart out of this.

NOW when the apostle expresses his ardent desire, that he might be found in
Christ; it seems most natural to understand him in this latter sense, i. e. as
wishing to be found and acknowledged at last, as one of Christ's faithful
servants; one of those, to whom the great and precious promises of the gospel
are made. We can scarce suppose that he would express so great a solicitude as
he here does, to be found in Christ, only by an outward and formal profession
of his religion; or by faith alone, as it is opposed to evangelical obedience.
To be found in Christ in this sense only, he certainly knew would avail him
nothing at the last day. And if we understand him in the other, as we ought
undoubtedly to do; surely there is nothing here which looks like disparaging,
or undervaluing, the virtues and good works of Christians; or which intimates
that the Apostle disclaimed all trust and dependence upon his living in
obedience to Christ's laws. His words imply the direct contrary: viz. that he
earnestly desired to be a faithful and obedient servant of Christ, as the only
way of obtaining salvation by him.

THE Apostle goes on -- Not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law;
but that which is through the faith of Christ; the righteousness of God by faith.
What he means by his own righteousness, which was of the law; has been
particularly shown above; viz. his Jewish privileges, and his strict adherence
to the ceremonial part of the law, according to the custom of the Pharisees. So
that the inquiry now is only, what St. Paul intends by the righteousness which
is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith; and
which he opposes to that righteousness of the law, on which he had formerly
relied.

NOW by this he may possibly mean, that real holiness of heart and manners,
which is the genuine effect of faith, of faith in Christ, and in God through him.
Agreeable to this interpretation, we read of faith that works by love, that
overcomes the world, and the like. And evangelical righteousness, or that
holiness, the root and principle of which is faith; as it might be properly
enough termed the righteousness which is through the faith of Christ, or the
righteousness of God by faith; so it might, with equal propriety, be opposed to
Jewish privileges, and an external, pharisaical conformity to the law of
Moses. And this righteousness might be said to be of God, in contradistinction
to the other, either because it is that righteousness, which He has prescribed
and required, and promised to accept; or because it is attained by grace and
help derived from Him. And if we understand the Apostle thus, as many do, not
without some appearance of reason; this passage will surely make directly
against those, whose practice it is to speak contemptuously of Christian
obedience; and to represent it as being of no efficacy toward procuring
Acceptance with God, and eternal life. Nor does this interpretation render the
obedience and atonement of Christ needless; for it is only through him, that our
imperfect righteousness is accepted and rewarded.

However, there is another interpretation, which seems rather more agreeable to
the doctrine and language of St. Paul in other places; and which is, I think,
to be preferred accordingly. By righteousness here, I understand not any
holiness or good works of men; any obedience which Christians perform; but
pardoning mercy, acceptance and justification, with God; as the same word is
sometimes used. In this sense, the Apostle Paul in particular, seems evidently
to use this term. Romans 3. 21, -- 26. But now the righteousness of God without
the law is manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets; even the
righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ. etc.
Of such pardoning mercy, or justification unto life, we become the objects, by
faith in Christ, or by the gospel of Christ, in opposition to the law. For it
is elsewhere said, that by the deeds of the law no flesh shall be justified;
because all have sinned. God has graciously ordained another way, in which
transgressors may be accepted and justified of him; viz. through faith in his
Son, who is the propitiation for Sin. And the mercy of God thus revealed to
sinners in the Gospel, is here called His righteousness through faith. And God's
accepting sinners in this way, is what the Apostle elsewhere expresses by his
I cannot but just observe here, that the scripture teaches no such doctrine* as
that of God's imputing the perfect righteousness of Christ to sinners for
justification. If we have recourse to Romans 4th, where the imputation of
righteousness is mentioned; and which is, I think, the principal passage, on
which the Advocates for this doctrine build, it is very evident that the
imputing of righteousness is opposed to the marking of iniquity; and signifies
the same thing precisely, with forgiving iniquity; covering sin; or not
imputing sin. For thus it is that David is there introduced as describing the
blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works,
saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered: blessed is that man unto whom the Lord will not impute sin. I would
not be understood to mean, that it is not in consideration of Christ's becoming
obedient unto death, that those who believe, are pardoned, accepted, and
treated of God as though they were righteous: For this is evidently the doctrine
of the Gospel; and is, I suppose, what is intended when it is said, That "by
the obedience of One, many shall be made righteous." ( Romans 5. 19.) Possibly
some who speak of Christ's righteousness as being imputed to us, may intend no
more hereby than what is expressed above: -- with whom I have the happiness to
agree, except as to the propriety of this way of expressing the matter. This, I
humbly conceive, is a misapplication of the scripture phrase, imputing
righteousness; and almost unavoidably leads many people into a misapprehension
of the scripture-doctrine of our pardon and acceptance with God, through what our
Redeemer has done and suffered for us.
imputing righteousness without works; and his counting faith for
righteousness. But then it is to be particularly observed, that though faith is
here, and in other places, opposed to the works and righteousness of the Mosaic
law, properly so called; yet it is not opposed to evangelical obedience, as if
it was by believing in Christ, exclusively of submitting to his will and
commandments, that we are accepted with God, and entitled to eternal life. For
throughout the new testament, when the blessings of pardon, acceptance with
God, and eternal life, are annexed to faith; faith either means the
gospel dispensation in general, as opposed to the mosaic, or else it is to be
taken in a complex sense, and intends both believing the gospel, and an hearty
submission and obedience thereto. Nor can it be otherwise understood, without
making the scripture contradict itself; as will appear more particularly in the
two following discourses, concerning justification by faith.

UPON the whole, the sense of the Apostle here, where he expresses his desire
to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness; but that which is
through the faith of Christ; the righteousness of God by faith; may be taken in
the following paraphrase: q. d. "It was, and still is, my great concern to be
found a true disciple of Jesus Christ; interested in the mercy of God through
him, and entitled to the salvation purchased by him: -- Not depending upon my
privileges as a Jew; nor desiring to appear in that legal ceremonious
righteousness, of which I once though it so highly; but relying wholly upon the
pardoning mercy and goodness of God; which He has now clearly revealed and
promised to those who believe in his Son, and obey his Gospel, whether they be
Jews or Gentiles." This I take to be the true sense and spirit of St. Paul's
words. And if it is, it is perfectly consistent with all that has been said in
the preceding discourses, concerning the necessity of evangelical holiness.

BUT the Apostle goes on -- That I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, ver. 10. the former part. It is needless to add any thing here,
concerning what the Apostle means by knowing Christ; this being no more, in
effect, than a repetition of what he had said before, concerning the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord. But what does he intend by knowing
the Power of Christ's resurrection? This may be explained by such passages as
these: That Christ was raised for our Justification; that God has begotten us
unto a lively hope by his resurrection from the dead; and, that every one that
has this hope, purifieth himself, etc. The resurrection of Christ is the great
argument, by which the truth of the gospel is established: -- that gospel,
which is the basis of all our hopes; the charter of all our privileges as
Christians; of our pardon, and title to eternal life. And the resurrection of
Christ being considered in this light; and in connection with his subsequent
exaltation to glory, to appear in the presence of God for us; has a natural
tendency to quicken us in running the race of piety and virtue set before us;
to raise us from the death of sin, to newness of life; and to exalt our tho'ts,
to those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.
Sentiments of this kind frequently occur in the new testament. And when the
apostle expresses his desire to know the power of Christ's resurrection, the
obvious sense thereof is, that he might experience the full and proper efficacy
of this great doctrine upon his own heart, in the confirmation of his faith in
the divine promises; in the elevation of his hopes above this world, and fixing
them on things unseen and eternal; and so in inspiring him with zeal and
fortitude and patience in doing the will of his risen and ascended master: --
So that this is no evidence of the Apostle's making little or no account of
personal righteousness and holiness; but an evident proof of the contrary.

ST. Paul subjoins -- And the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his death. The sense in general, may be this: The Apostle, we
know, lived in times of great trial and persecution, being in jeopardy every
hour, and dying daily. And his desire was, that, in all his sufferings and
tribulations, he might suffer after the manner that Christ did, in the same
glorious cause of truth and righteousness, and with the like patience and
resolution; that so he might have a sort of communion and fellowship and
participation with him in his sufferings, and even in death, as well as in
life, be conformed to his divine Master. A passage in his epistles to Timothy
may, perhaps, illustrate his meaning here -- "Therefore, says he, I endure all
things for the Elects sake, that they also may obtain the salvation which is in
Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. It is a faithful saying; if we be dead with
him, we shall also live with him: If we suffer, we shall also reign, with him."
Agreably hereto, he tells the Colossians, Chap. 1. ver. 24.
"That he now rejoiced in his sufferings for them, and filled up what was
behind of the afflictions of Christ, in his own flesh." --

BUT those words, being made conformable to his death, will bear another
construction. The Apostle's meaning may be, that he might die unto sin. Which
interpretation is countenanced by some other passages of scripture;
particularly Romans Chap. 6 ver. 4, and onwards. And because this passage may
possibly be the best comment, both upon these words, and those preceding,
concerning the power of Christ's resurrection, I shall beg leave to give it at
large -- "Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his death: we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection:
Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. For he that is
dead, is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him: Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dies
no more; death has no more dominion over him. For in that he died, he died
unto sin once: but in that he lives, he lives unto God. Likewise reckon ye
also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin; but alive unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof."

THUS I have endeavored to explain this passage of Scripture, wherein the
Apostle, renouncing his own righteousness which was of the law, as insufficient
to justify him, and give him a title to eternal life, betakes himself to the
pardoning mercy and grace of God, revealed in the Gospel of his Son, through
faith. And I think it appears that those who apply it to the controversy
amongst Christians at this day, concerning ^aith and works, as if it favored
the modern notion of justification through the perfect righteousness of Christ,
imputed to us, and received by faith alone, entirely mistake the scope, and
true spirit of the passage. It relates to an old dispute betwixt the
unchristianized Jews, who boasted of their privileges, and depended upon an
external, ceremonious righteousness; and the disciples of Christ, who asserted
the insufficiency of such a righteousness, and the necessity of having recourse
to the pardoning mercy of God, as revealed to Sinners through his Son. And that
which the apostle here expresses so ardent a desire after, is neither more nor
less than this, that he might be, both in faith and practice, a Christian, in
order to his being entitled to the divine acceptance, and life eternal. It is a
gross perverting of scripture, to interpret this passage, as if the Apostle had
been speaking of faith and works of righteousness, in the modern sense of those
terms, opposing one of them to the other; and representing the former,
exclusively of the latter, as what intitles us to the Salvation purchased by
Christ. Nothing could well be more remote from his true design; or more
inconsistent with the general tenor of scripture. It may be added, that giving
this turn to the passage has a natural and direct tendency to make Christians
less cautious and circumspect, less careful to live up to their profession,
than they ought to be.

ALAS! could sorrow enter the mansions of the blessed, how would it affect this
holy Apostle to see his doctrine abused to the encouraging of Vice and
licenciousness, to the destruction of those souls, for which Christ died! We
cannot be ignorant how sollicitous he was, while he was fulfilling the ministry
which he had received of the Lord, that Christians should adorn their lives
with a conversation becoming their high calling of God in Christ Jesus; and how
much he was grieved when he saw any contradict their profession by their
behavior. In this very epistle, yea in this very chapter, a part of which we
have been considering, he has left us a proof hereof. "Many walk, says he, of
whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the
enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their
belly, and whose glory is in their shame; who mind earthly things." Nor was he
less careful to live piously and virtuously himself, lest he should fall short
of salvation at last, than he was to inculcate the practice of religion upon
others. Both his manner of preaching, and his manner of living, with the great
motive of it, may be judged of by the following passage in his first epistle to
the Corinthians -- "Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all; but one
receives the prize: So run that ye may obtain. And every one that striveth for
the mastery, is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible
crown, but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so
fight I, not as one that beats the air: But I keep under my body, and bring
it into subjection, lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I
myself should be a castaway." This, surely, is not the language of One, who
thought his Salvation secured by faith in the righteousness of Another, without
holiness, and perseverance therein to the end. But it is the language of One,
who looked upon his future well-being, as suspended on the condition of his
being righteous himself, and continuing patient in well-doing.

IF it should be objected, that this doctrine leads men to trust to their own
righteousness; I answer it is very reasonable they should do so, in one sense;
and the holy scriptures sufficiently warrant it. God has assured us, on one
hand, that the unrighteous shall not inherit His kingdom; and on the other,
that the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father.
Certainly then good men may so far trust to their own righteousness, as to
believe it will be available with a gracious God, through the Mediator; so as to
procure eternal life for them. Thus far to trust thereto, is not to be
self-righteous, in the bad sense of the term; nor to put a greater value upon
our sincere obedience, that God himself is pleased to put upon it in his Word.
And thus far it is evident St. Paul himself trusted to his own righteousness,
which was of the Gospel, when he said, "I have fought the good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith; Hence forward there is laid up for
me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give me
at that day."

INDEED, since we cannot be profitable unto God, it is manifest that we cannot
merit any good from him. This is impossible, not only for such imperfect sinful
creatures as we are; but for those of the highest and most perfect order. The
very notion of merit with regard to God, is a gross absurdity and
contradiction. It proceeds from a foolish imagination, that the services of his
creatures are, some way or other, really beneficial and advantageous to him. If
we conceive thus, it is very natural then to think, that we may make Him our
debtor; and merit something of him in return. But, to use the words of St.
Paul, "Who has first given unto him; and it shall be recompensed to him again?
For of him, and through him, and to him are all things." Whenever we come to have
just conceptions of God, and of ourselves, and of the relation in which we
stand toward Him; when we consider Him as a Being absolutely independent and
self-sufficient, whose goodness alone prompted him to give us existence at
first; and who governs us, not for his own sake, but only that we may be happy
in loving him, and doing his will; these sentiments will effectually root out
all that pride and vanity of heart, from whence the notion of merit springs. We
shall then be fully sensible, that we are with relation to Him, unprofitable
servants, even though we should do all those things that are required of us; and
consequently, that we are indebted to his goodness, bounty, and free grace, for
all the happiness we receive from Him, whether in this world or another.

SERMON VII. Of Justification by Faith.
JAMES I. 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
NOTWITHSTANDING the holy scriptures assure us, that all the impenitent workers
of iniquity shall be condemned in the judgment of the great Day;
notwithstanding they so plainly teach us, that only the pure in heart shall see
God; notwithstanding we are so frequently admonished to be doers of the word;
and not to hope for the favor of God, either here or hereafter, without
forsaking our sins, and working righteousness; notwithstanding all these
Things, I say, it is very hard to convince some people, that they cannot be
accepted of God through Christ, upon other and easier terms than such expressions
seem, at first view, to imply in them.

IN the two last discourses, I considered, and endeavored to refute, two
mistaken notions respecting this important point; which notions are grounded
upon a misconstruction of those expressions of scripture, that we are saved by
grace; and, that we must be found in Christ, not having our own righteousness.
--

THERE is another scripture-expression, which has not been less abused, to
serve the cause of licentiousness, than either of the former. The expression I
intend, is that which occurs diverse times in the epistles of St. Paul; viz.
That we are justified by faith. This seems to have been the sheet-anchor, with
many: And therefore I shall examine the weight of it the more carefully, in
this and the ensuing, discourse: not doubting but it will appear too light for
their purpose. The doctrine of the gospel undoubtedly is, that we are justified
by faith; but it is a great mistake to infer from hence, that we are accepted
to the divine favor, and entitled to eternal life, without unfeigned
repentance, and new obedience. Whatever notions we may entertain of
justification; it is still evident that every unreformed Sinner, every one who
hears the word, and does it not, is the object of God's wrath; and cannot
become an heir of eternal life, but by being made free from sin, and having his
fruit unto holiness. People may amuse themselves with terms and distinctions,
as long as they please; and ascribe their justification to whatever they will:
But after all, the scripture is plain, that every wicked man is out of his
Maker's favor; and must continue so, till he ceases to do evil, and learns to
do well.

BUT in order to my speaking with as little ambiguity as may be, upon the point
before us; and to prevent misconstruction; I would premise a few things
concerning the nature of justification. A short account hereof, will open the
way for what is to follow, concerning the manner in which, and the terms upon
which, we are justified before God.

THAT which is intended by justification in the new testament, may be better
understood by a brief description, than by any formal definition of the thing.

NOW evangelical justification may be considered with relation to the Author of
it; who is almighty God. For, says the apostle, "It is God that justifies."
And if we consider it under the notion of an Though we sometimes speak of
justification as an Act of God; yet it can hardly be conceived of as any thing
really distinct from his written word, or the gracious promises and
declarations of the gospel. The terms upon which we are accepted to favor,
pardoned and justified, are already laid down in the holy Scriptures: So that
those who comply therewith, are justified of course, upon such compliance.
These terms are stable and fixed; so that every one who comes up thereto, is
entitled to the mercy revealed; those who do not, are still under condemnation.
There is nothing arbitary, or capricious, in the justification of one, and the
condemnation of another. But God justifies one, and condemns another, by, and
in his word; according as men do, or do not comply with his will there made
known. No one is under condemnation, but whom the word and law of God condemns;
no one i^ justified, but whom the Gospel justifies. We do not, surely, imagine
that there is any sentence of absolution, or justification, formally pronounced
in heaven, when a man is justified; though we sometimes express ourselves after
this manner. No: God's sentence of absolution, or justification, is in his
revealed word; not any thing distinct from, or independent of, what he has
there declared; but this is the very thing itself. There is no Act of
justification to be conceived of, either as prior, or subsequent to, or
different from, the gospel-declarations of mercy. In them it is that we have
our pardon and justification. God is to be considered as speaking to us in his
word, and as pronouncing the sentence which that pronounces, whether of pardon
and life or condemnation and death: Which sentence will be ratified, be put
into execution, and will fully take effect, in the judgment of the great day.
To say a man is justified, or that he is under condemnation, expresses the
relation in which he stands to God's word and law: The former means, that he is
One, to whom the gracious promises of the gospel belong; the latter, that he is
One, against whom a curse is denounced. It would probably have prevented a
great deal of confusion, and unintelligible (...), upon the subject of
justification, had it always been considered in this light; as being only the
sentence which God passes on a man, in, and by his word; instead of being
considered as a divine act, entirely distinct from, and independent of, it.
act of God; it is an act of his mercy, grace and favor, in contradistinction
from his justice: For, says the same Apostle Paul, we are "justified freely by
his grace." The truth, and the ground, of which assertion will appear, if we
consider justification with regard to the subject of it; or who it is that is
justified; viz. a transgressor of the law of God, or a sinner: For says St.
Paul, "God justifies the ungodly." All having sinned, justification must
necessarily be of grace, entirely unmerited. God justifies no person under the
notion of his being innocent, or perfectly righteous, whether inherently or
imputatively. Nor would the justification of such a one, be an act of grace; it
would be only an act of justice.

IF we consider evangelical justification, with relation to the great Mediator;
it is his purchase, the fruit and effect of his Death. In other words, He, by
what he has done and suffered for us, has laid the foundation for our being
justified; according to God's appointment, and the economy of the gospel.
Accordingly it said, that we are justified by the grace of God, through the
redemption that is in Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, etc.

LET us for the further illustration of the scripture notion of justification,
consider what benefits are implied therein; and what privileges accrue to the
subjects of it. Now that which is primarily intended hereby is, pardon,
impunity, or exemption from the punishment due to sin, according to the law of
God. That this is the first and most proper notion of evangelical
justification, appears from the account and description which the apostle gives
of it, Romans 4. 5, -- "To him that -- believes on Him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness: Even as David also describes
the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works;
saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered; blessed is the man unto whom the Lord will not impute sin." From this
passage it is obvious, that to justify, to impute righteousness without works,
to forgive iniquity, to cover sin, and not to impute sin, are expressions
nearly synonimous, signifying in general the very same thing, viz. the
remission of the penalty denounced against the violators of God's law: So that
justification is primarily, and most properly opposed to the marking and
punishing of iniquity.

HOWEVER this is not the whole of what is implied in evangelical justification.
It is not a mere negative; but involves in it, positive blessings, and glorious
privileges. For example; he that is justified, becomes, at the same time, an
object of God's peculiar love; and, from a state of enmity, comes into a state
of peace and reconciliation with Him. Thus the apostle tells us, that "being
justified -- we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ." And the
person thus justified is, according to the gracious promises and declarations
of the gospel, entitled both to God's peculiar care and guardianship in this
world, and to glory in the other. He is accounted innocent and righteous, when
absolved from his sins, in his Justification; and acquires thereby a right to
happiness, as though he had never transgressed. There is not only no condemnation
belonging to him Romans 8 1.
; but he has, by virtue of God's gracious promise, a right to the tree of life;
and to enter in through the gates into the city. (...) ^2. 14


THIS, in brief, is the scripture notion and idea of justification. Perhaps the
term may be sometimes used in the new testament, in a more lax, vague, and
indeterminate sense, so as to be applicable, as holiness is, to the whole
collective body of professed Christians. But whether it is ever thus used, or
not, is not material to the point in hand. For we are now speaking only of such
a justification, as implies in it the forgiveness of sins, the special favor
and friendship of Heaven, and a sure title to eternal happiness; and
consequently such a one, as is peculiar to some, not common to all, who profess
the religion of the Gospel.

AND the question now before us is, How this justification accrues to us? What
terms and conditions those are, upon which it is offered, and granted, to
sinners? Whether we are, in this sense, justified only by faith, or believing,
as faith is distinguished from repentance, and newness of life? Or by faith,
considered in a larger sense, and as virtually comprehending such repentance,
and new obedience. It is acknowledged upon all hands, that many even of those
who hear the glad tidings of the gospel, and have taken upon themselves the
Christian name and character, are not the subjects of this justification. Many
of them are, doubtless, as truly under condemnation, and as much the heirs of
wrath, as if God had never revealed pardon and mercy to a sinful world. To
what, then, is this distinction owing? In general it must be owing to this,
that some comply with the terms, on which their justification is suspended,
while others reject them: for the terms are the same to all. God does not act
the part of a Sovereign here, in justifying (...) man, and leaving another
under condemnation. Though we have no right to prescribe rules of conduct to Him;
he has prescribed them to Himself; and according to them he invariably
dispenses the blessings of the new covenant, without respect of persons -- Now
that God has suspended the justification of sinners, not upon ^aith only, in
the restrained sense, mentioned above; but upon faith, considered as
comprehensive of repentance from dead works, and of evangelical obedience When
evangelical obedience is said to be necessary in order to evangelical
justification; the meaning is not, that we must actually perform a great number
of good works, such as the gospel requires, before we can be justified. True
repentance includes in it the principle of obedience; so that every sincere
penitent, is a good man, in the qualified sense of scripture, even before he
brings forth fruits meet for repentance: And he is no sooner such, than he is
pardoned and justified. It is not imagined, that after his heart is really
turned from sin to God, his justification is (...) suspended upon his making
this manifest by his good works; or by a course of external obedience to the
laws of Christ: Which notion involves those who embrace it, in many
difficulties. Perhaps a person who believes the gospel, and is become a sincere
convert in his heart, being created anew in Christ Jesus unto good works, may
be taken out of the world before he has scope and opportunity given him, to
exercise the good principle he is possessed of, in an obedient life. Shall we
say then, that such a man i^ not justified, because he has performed no works
of gospel obedience? By no means. His repentance, and inward submission to the
terms of the gospel, virtually contain all the good works which the gospel
requires. In the sight of God, who knows the hearts of men, he had complied
with the terms of mercy and salvation, according to their true intent and
meaning, although this was not manifested by his outward conduct. His willing and
obedient heart, placed him in the class of those, to whom the gospel offers
mercy and salvation, though he died before he had time, out of this good
treasure, to bring forth good things. And although he had lived ever so long
after his being thus renewed in the spirit of his mind; yet it is evident that
he would have been justified from that very time; and antecedently to his doing
good works in the sense of the gospel. The promises being made to such a
temper, it is unreasonable to suppose that his justification would have been
suspended upon the actual performance of those works of righteousness, which
naturally flow therefrom, whenever there is opportunity for it. Besides; if the
actual performance of good works, is necessary to justification; it may
reasonably be inquired, how many good works are necessary to that end? and how
long a Man must live, after he is inwardly converted to God, in order to yield
such an outward obedience to his commandments, without which he cannot be
justified? These questions, for the substance of them, have often been asked;
but never answered to the satisfaction of impartial, unprejudiced men. They
are, indeed, unanswerable; and the bare proposing of them, is sufficient to
show, that They go upon a wrong hypothesis, who suppose that any acts of
external obedience are the ground of our justification, or necessary in order
there (...) That obedience to the gospel, to which the promises of forgiveness
and eternal life are made, is an hearty belief, and inward submission to the
terms, of it; such a submission thereto, at will, whenever there is opportunity
and scope for it, be accompanied with a corresponding obedience of life. And
this is all the obedience, for the necessity of which, in order to
justification. I argue in this, and the following discourse. Possibly some, who
ascribe our justification to faith alone, may comprehend under the term faith,
all that godly sorrow, and internal submission to the terms of the gospel,
which others intend when they assert the necessity of obedience, and deny the
sufficiency of faith to justify. In this case, there is indeed a contradiction
in words, but the real sense of the parties is the same.
; I shall endeavor to make manifest by several arguments.

BUT there is a vulgar prejudice, which I would beg leave briefly to obviate,
here. Those who assert the necessity of evangelical obedience in order to
justification, are often accused of holding, that good works are meritorious;
and accordingly they are ranked with the Roman Catholics in this respect. Than
which conduct of their adversaries, there cannot well be any thing more
invidious, disingenuous and abusive. We constantly disclaim the doctrine of
merit. We assert that Christ, by what he has done and suffered, has procured
mercy, justification, and eternal life for us: Although we think that we cannot
be justified, according to the tenor of the new covenant, but by faith in, and
submission to, our blessed Redeemer. And even after we have obeyed the gospel,
we account it great grace in God to accept us, and to bestow eternal Life upon
us. Is this to teach that obedience and good works merit justification! Let us
see how easily this charge might be retorted upon those that bring it. Faith,
or believing, is as much our act, something done by us, a^ the loving of God or
our neighbor. Yea, it is expressly called a Work, by our Savior himself. John
6^ 28, 29.
Now when they assert that faith is necessary to justification, and that this
alone justifies, they attribute as much merit to faith, as we ascribe to
obedience in general. Their faith is put into, and holds, the same place in
this affair of justification, with our obedience to the gospel. How meritorious
with them, is that single act of obedience, believing in Him whom God has
sent! No; they will doubtless tell us, that they do not consider faith as what
merits justification; but only suppose, that, according to the gospel covenant
of grace, the justification which Christ has purchased, is annexed to
believing; that they are justified upon account of what He has done and
suffered, not upon account of the inherent worth and merit of faith. Very well:
This sufficiently vindicates them from the imputation of making that one act,
believing, meritorious of justification and eternal life. And in the same way
do we clear ourselves of the charge of making obedience to the gospel,
meritorious. It is only substituting the word obedience in the room of says,
thus: We do not consider obedience as what merits justification; but only
suppose, that, according to the gospel covenant of grace, the justification
which Christ has purchased, is annexed to obeying him. We are justified upon
account of what He has done and suffered for us; not upon account of the
inherent worth and merit of our obedience.

PUTTING the matter in this light, and thus turning the tables, does, I think,
show, that we are as far from making obedience in general, meritorious, as they
who tax us therewith, are from making their faith so. For to that faith, to
that one act of obedience, they ascribe all the efficacy in the matter of
justification, which we ascribe to faith and obedience conjunctly. And although,
in some of them, the bringing of such an invidious charge against their
brethren, may be charitably imputed to ignorance; yet, in others, it is but too
evident that it proceeds from something else. --

HAVING thus premised what seemed to be needful, I proceed now more directly to
what was intended; namely, to show, That justification, in that sense of the
term, which has been explained above, accrues to sinners, not by faith
considered exclusively of, and in distinction from, repentance and evangelical
obedience; but by faith, considered in a larger sense, and as really
comprehending such repentance and obedience in it. In the prosecution of which
design, I shall do these two things:

First, Give some general account of those passages of scripture, where faith,
may seem, at first view, to be opposed to obedience: and to be made,
exclusively of it, the term or condition of justification, on our part: And I
shall show that there is no real necessity of putting such a construction upon
them, they being fairly capable of another. And

Secondly, I shall show positively, by various arguments, that they cannot
possibly be understood in such a sense, in any tolerable consistency with the
general doctrine of the new testament: And consequently, that when we are said
to be justified by faith, faith is not opposed to evangelical obedience; but is
considered as including it, and the great principle of it.

First, I am to give some general account of those passages of scripture, where
faith may seem, at first view, to be opposed to obedience; and to be made,
exclusively of it, the term or condition of justification, on our part: And to
show, that there is no real necessity of putting such a construction upon them,
they being fairly capable of another. It will not be expected that I should
consider all the passages here referred to: I shall therefore select only a few
of the principal of them; those upon which the greatest stress has been laid;
which are in the epistles of St. Paul. And if a fair and natural account can be
given of them, without recurring to the solifidian doctrine, this will be a
clue to the understanding of all others, either exactly parallel, or similar,
to them.

WE may begin with that of the Apostle in his epistle to the Romans: Therefore
we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law.
[Chap. 3. ver. 28.] Are not faith and obedience here distinguished from each
other? And is not justification expressly attributed to the former, exclusively
of the latter? I answer, that by the law is often intended the jewish
dispensation, the law of Moses; and by faith, the dispensation of Grace by
Jesus Christ. And if we understand the terms thus in this place, the supposed
difficulty entirely vanishes. For then the meaning of the apostle will be no
more than this, That a man is justified by the gospel, or in the method of the
gospel, even without observing the law of Moses, and whether he be Jew or
Gentile. The Jews cannot be justified by the law, which they have violated; but
must have recourse to Christ, who is the end thereof for justification: And the
Gentiles may, in this way, attain to justification altogether without the law.
So that both of them are upon one and the same footing, with relation to the
divine acceptance. It is the gospel of God's grace alone, which can justify
either of them; and in this method, one may be justified as well as the other.
Now as the law, and faith, meaning thereby the mosaic, and the evangelical
dispensation, are frequently opposed the one to the other in this manner, this
interpretation is not unnatural; and indeed it is favored by what immediately
follows, -- Is he the God of the Jews only? is be not also of the Gentiles?
Yes, of the Gentiles also. Seeing it is one God, which shall justify the
circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith.

THE proceeding context also favors this interpretation. The Apostle had been
showing at large, that the Gentiles had transgressed the law of nature; and the
Jews, the revealed law of God, the law given by Moses. From whence he
concludes, [ ver. 19 and 20] that all the world, Jews as well as Gentiles, were
become guilty before God; and so could not plead a legal righteousness for
justification. In the three following verses St. Paul speaks of that gracious
provision, which God had made in the gospel, for all sinners in common, whether
under the mosaic law, or the law of nature; for there is no difference. By
faith, by the gospel, or submission thereto, all sinners may attain to
justification. The three next verses contain a more particular account of the
method in which this justification accrues to sinners; viz. by the grace of
God, through the redemption that is in Christ; whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, etc. In the next verse St. Paul triumphs over the boasting,
self-righteous Jews, whose dependence, for justification, was not upon the
Mercy of God in Christ, but upon their legal works, -- Where is boasting then,
says he? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but by the law of faith.
As if he had said, what becomes then of that glorying, to which the Jews are so
much addicted? It is entirely precluded; and the very foundation of it
destroyed. How is this done? by the law of Moses? No: but all boasting is
effectually excluded by the law of faith; by the evangelical method of
justification; which supposes that the subjects of it are transgressors; and
which must therefore be of grace. The words which I proposed to explain,
immediately follow; and they are an inference drawn from what had been said
above; or rather the sum of it, expressed in a few words -- Therefore we
conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law. As if
he had said, Since therefore the Jews have sinned as well as the Gentiles;
since every mouth must be stopped; and all men be condemned, by law; and since
God has revealed a gracious method of acceptance with him by Christ, making no
difference betwixt Jews and Gentiles; since these things are so, we may be
assured, that how much soever the Jews may boast of their own righteousness,
which is of the law, and despise the Gentiles; yet they neither are, nor can be
justified, by their obedience to the law of Moses, (it being imperfect) but
must have recourse to the law of faith, to the Gospel of God's grace in Christ
Jesus: And in this way, the Gentiles may attain to justification as well as
they; even though they do not observe the law of Moses, nor have any thing to do
with it.

NOW supposing this to be the true, as it is not an unnatural, interpretation
of the passage; it makes nothing in favor of the doctrine of justification by
faith, in the modern sense of the term faith; or as faith is opposed to
evangelical obedience. The amount of it is only this, that justification cannot
come by the law of Moses; but only by a compliance with the gospel; by
believing it, and heartily submitting to it.

BUT it has been observed, that the apostle here speaks of the deeds OF LAW,
without the article: From whence some have argued, that he does not mean
particularly the mosaic dispensation; but law in general, law absolutely taken:
And if so, it is said, that faith is here opposed no less to evangelical works,
than to the deeds of the Jewish law: And consequently, that believing justifies
us, exclusively of obedience of any kind.

NOW though the Article is both used and omitted in the new testament, in such a
manner, that no stress can be laid upon a criticism of this sort; yet I will
not contend about that point here. We will, if you please, take if for granted,
that, by law, the Apostle intends not particularly the mosaic dispensation; but
law in the most absolute, unlimited sense. Let us see to what his words will
amount upon this supposition. And I think they will come nearly to the same
thing, as to the particular point now before us. For then St. Paul's sense will
be this: That all men having transgressed the law they were respectively under;
the Jews, the revealed law of God, and the Gentiles, the law of nature; it is
impossible that any should attain to justification in a way strictly legal. For
in order to justification by the deeds of law, of any law whatever, it is
necessary that those deeds should be exactly conformable to that law. And no
man's deeds having been thus conformable to law, it is impossible that either
Jew or Gentile, that any man whatever, should be justified in that way. It is
necessary that grace and mercy intervene, in order to the justification of a
transgressor. But though we are not justified by the deeds of law, in the sense
above expressed; it does not follow that we are justified by faith or believing
only, as faith is distinguished from repentance and newness of life. Nor is
there any necessity of supposing that the apostle here uses the term faith in
that restrained sense. Although we should suppose that faith is here used as
comprehensive of evangelical obedience, when we are said to be justified
thereby; this would not be inconsistent with what is immediately added, --
without the deeds of law. There is no contradiction in saying that we are
justified by faith, including subjection and obedience to Christ in our idea of
faith; and saying, at the same time, that we are not justified by the deeds of
law: For the latter is only saying, in other words, that we are not justified
by a perfect righteousness; or by works exactly conformable to law. In short,
though faith is here opposed to the deeds of law, it is not opposed to
repentance, and evangelical holiness; but only to such a righteousness as would
justify a man in the eye and sense of law; and so be inconsistent with grace in
the Lawgiver.

WHETHER, therefore, the Apostle is speaking only of the law of Moses, or of
law in the most unlimited, absolute sense; it comes exactly to the same thing,
as to the point now in question. Upon neither of the suppositions is there any
need of understanding him as opposing faith, to the obedience of faith, or to
gospel holiness; but only to the deeds of law, in that sense wherein he uses
these terms: Which sense is manifestly this, viz. works exactly corresponding
to the demands of law, whether that of Moses, or that of nature. In this sense,
it is indeed evident, that no man is justified by the deeds of law; because, as
the apostle observes, all have sinned. But it may be still true that we are
justified by our obedience to the gospel of Christ.

BUT I will go one step further here, by way of concession; and allow, for the
present, that the Apostle opposes faith, not only to a legal righteousness, but
even to all external acts of evangelical obedience. And even this supposition
will not militate in the least degree, against any thing I have said; or favor
the common solifidian doctrine. Acts of external obedience, or good works, most
properly so called, are such as proceed from an obedient and good heart; from a
righteous principle within. It is the good tree only, that brings forth good
fruit; and it is only a good man, out of the good treasure in his heart, that
brings forth good things. An holy principle within, is considered in
scripture as prior to good works; the latter being the exertions and operations
of the former. And, as was said in the former part of this discourse, a man is
justified in the sense of the gospel, and in the sight of God, as soon as he is
possessed of this good principle; and, therefore, antecedently to his doing any
of those good works, which flow from it: Yea, he is justified, though he should
not live to perform any good works at all. So that it may be allowed,
consistently enough with what has been said, that the apostle here opposes
faith, to all external acts of obedience in general; whether of obedience to
law, or to the gospel. But yet it will not follow, that he opposes it to a
principle of goodness and holiness in the heart; the necessity of which
principle, in order to our justification in the sight of God, is all that I am
arguing for. Though this principle, wherever it is, will be actually, and always,
productive of an obedient life, provided there is time and scope given for it
to exert itself. So that none can be possessed thereof, excepting those, whose
external conduct is agreeable to the precepts of Christianity. -- According to
this last explanation of the apostle's words, faith is considered as virtually
and radically, containing evangelical obedience; not as something distinct from
it: And therefore St. Paul does not here teach the doctrine of justification by
faith, in the modern sense; but the contrary.

IT appears, if I mistake not, from what has been said above, that there is no
necessity of understanding the apostle, in this place as opposing faith to
obedience, in the way that many interpret him; or as asserting that we are
justified by faith exclusively of obedience. His words will fairly admit of a
different sense; which is sufficient to my present purpose.

THE next passage I shall consider, wherein faith and obedience may seem to be
opposed to each other, is Romans 9. 31, etc. -- But Israel which followed after
the law of righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness?
Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith; but as it were by the works of
the law. This passage coincides so nearly, in sense and design, with that which
we have been considering, that the less needs to be said upon it. By Israel's
following after the law of righteousness, is intended the Jews endeavoring to
work out, or to perform, such a righteousness, as would, of itself and in its
own nature, be sufficient to justify them in the sight of God. They hoped to be
justified merely by a strict adherence to, and observation of the law of Moses.
However, in the language of the apostle, they did not attain to the law of
righteousness: i. e. they did not attain to that justification unto life, which
they were in pursuit of; but failed in the attempt. Wherefore? How does it come
to pass, that they did not attain to justification? This question the apostle
answers in the next words. It was because they sought to be justified in an
improper manner; in a way wherein it is impossible that any should be
justified; neglecting that method which God had pointed out. It was because
they sought it, not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law: or, by
works of law; (for the article is here omitted.) The plain meaning is, that the
generality of the Jews of this corrupt age, had rejected the Messiah, instead
of submitting to him, and seeking justification and eternal life, by him: They
imagined, that they were to be justified merely by obedience to law; and that
they stood in no need of the grace of the gospel. For which reason, they did
not attain to justification; it being impossible that justification should come
by law, unless where there is a perfect conformity thereto. It is manifest,
that law, not tempered and relaxed by grace, must condemn all those that fall
short of the perfection required by it. So that the Jews, whose sole dependence
was upon their own legal righteousness, could not, in the nature of the thing,
be justified in this way. Whereas the Gentiles (as the apostle observes in the
preceding verse) which followed not after righteousness, attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith: i. e. The Gentiles,
who did not pretend to work out such a righteousness as would entitle them to
justification in the eye of law; obtained justification notwithstanding; viz.
that, justification which God has revealed in the gospel, through faith.

THERE is surely no necessity of supposing that faith and evangelical obedience
are here opposed to each other; as if righteousness, or justification, came by
the former, and not by the latter. Faith is only opposed to an imaginary, legal
righteousness; such a one as the Jews trusted to, despising and rejecting the
grace of the gospel. And this passage will receive farther illustration from
another, in the 10th Chap. of the same epistle, ver. 3 and 4. The apostle says,
that the Jews, being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God For Christ, says he, is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes. The sense is: -- Although the mosaic
dispensation was never designed for a law, in the exact observation of which,
the Jews were to be accepted and justified of God; but had a typical reference
to the Messiah, through whom, in a way of grace, justification comes; yet the
Jews being ignorant of this method of justification through grace, which God has
ordained for sinners; having perverted the law, which had a shadow of good
things to come, from its original meaning and true design; and vainly
attempting to work out such a righteousness as would render the intervening of
grace needless; such a one, as might give them a title to justification upon
the footing of mere law; the Jews having thus mistaken the matter, have not
submitted to, but opposed, that method of justification which God has ordained
and revealed, through faith. For Christ is typified and prefigured in the law
itself, as the end of it, for justification, to all those who believe in, and
subject themselves to Him. -- Is there any necessity of supposing that the
apostle here opposes believing in Christ, to obeying his gospel? It is plain,
that he opposes believing, only to the conduct of the Jews, who went about to
establish their own righteousness; i. e. who expected to be justified upon the
footing of mere law; not being sensible that they fell so short of the
righteousness required therein, as to stand in need of the grace of the Gospel;
and who, therefore, rejected the promised Savior. This passage is, I think,
exactly parallel to that, considered above. And in both of them, the term faith
is used in a complex sense, for believing in Christ, and sincerely obeying his
gospel; not in the restrained sense of some modern divines; as if our
justification were suspended on the former, exclusively of the latter: For
which notion there is no foundation in the new testament.

ANOTHER passage of scripture, where faith and obedience may seem to be opposed
one to the other, is Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. For by grace are ye saved through faith; (and
that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God) not of works, lest any man
should boast. Those words [and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God]
are incidental in the apostle's discourse; and the sense of them has been much
controverted. And since it is not necessary that the meaning of them should be
ascertained, in order to a resolution of the particular point now before us, I
shall pass them over at present, and consider the passage independently of
them. By grace are ye saved through faith -- not of works, lest any man should
boast. "Does not the apostle (as some argue) here plainly oppose gospel faith,
and gospel obedience to each other? Does he not ascribe our justification
wholly to the former; and deny that the latter is any cause or ground thereof?
Is it not upon this foundation that he says, our salvation is of grace? And
does he not intimate, that if works, or obedience, came in here, there would be
some cause of boasting? Whereas, if we are justified solely by faith, or
believing, there will be no room left for men to glory: All boasting will then
be excluded." To this I answer,

1st. THAT the apostle is not here speaking particularly concerning our
justification; but concerning our salvation in general: "By grace are ye saved."

2dly. EVEN those who assert the doctrine of justification by faith only, in
opposition to evangelical obedience, generally hold the necessity of works, or
obedience, in order to salvation: (a distinction, the vanity of which will be
shown in the next discourse) So that, this passage either proves nothing to
their purpose; or it proves too much; and more than they are willing to allow,
viz. that we are not only justified, but saved, without works.

3dly. IF it had been the apostle's intention to exclude every thing done by
man, from being any occasion, ground or condition, of his Acceptance with God;
(that so all cause of boasting might be taken away) he must then have excluded
faith also: For believing is our own act; and expressly called a work, by our
Savior, as has been observed before. Whereas St. Paul says, on the contrary,
that we are saved by grace through faith. I would, if possible, express what I
here intend, so us not to be misunderstood. It is said by some, that if our
justification and acceptance with God, depended upon our obeying the Gospel;
upon any thing we do, be it what it will; then we should be justified, not by
grace, but by works; and consequently there would be room left for boasting,
which is not to be allowed. Well then, believing in Christ is our own act; it
is our work, though not done without the divine Assistance. Even this, must
therefore be excluded, according to the present argument, lest some ground of
boasting should remain. Faith is as much excluded, by the present argument,
from having any hand in our justification, as obedience in any other respect.
For whether our justification depend upon one act of obedience, viz. believing;
or whether it depends upon many, there is still cause of boasting, if this way
of reasoning be just. We may therefore conclude, that this method of arguing is
not good; because it proves too much; and even makes the apostle contradict
himself; for, though he disallows of boasting, yet he asserts that our salvation
is connected with something which we do. --

4thly. ALL occasion of boasting seems to be taken away, if we exclude works
from being any meritorious cause of our justification and salvation; even though
they are not excluded from being the condition of it. If we acknowledge our
obedience is very imperfect, so that we cannot be justified upon the footing of
mere law; if we acknowledge, that we cannot claim Salvation as our due, by
virtue of any works of righteousness which we have done; if we acknowledge
ourselves indebted for it to the grace of God in Jesus Christ; this, surely,
leaves no room for boasting; though we may still very consistently hold, that our
justification is suspended upon our hearty submission to Christ, and sincere
obedience to his commandments. The asserting of this is not contradicting what
the apostle says, that we are not saved by works; but perfectly consistent
therewith. He intends no more, than that we are not saved upon the footing of
mere law; by such works as would exclude grace; and leave room for boasting.
And his meaning, I humbly conceive, might be expressed thus, more at large.
"Take heed, that ye do not exalt yourselves, or over-rate your own works, to
the dishonoring and subverting of the grace of God: For it is by His grace and
free bounty, that you are saved; not in the way of obedience to law, considered
as a covenant of works; but in the way of faith, which is revealed through
Christ, to the transgressors of Law. You are not saved by works, or by a legal
obedience; or on account of the intrinsic value and merit of any thing you do.
You have not obeyed any law of works so perfectly, that salvation becomes your
due. And of this I admonish you, lest any man should proudly boast; or think
more highly of himself and his works than he ought to do, to the dishonor of
divine grace."

THIS appears to me to be the true sense of the Apostle. And if it is, the
passage does not favor the doctrine of justification by faith alone, in the
modern sense of the terms: But is perfectly consistent with the contrary
scheme; wherein obedience to the gospel is supposed necessary in order to our
acceptance with God. There is a wide difference betwixt saying, that we are
justified and saved by works, merely upon the footing of law; (which is what
the Apostle denies) and saying, that we are justified and saved, by believing
in, and submitting to Him that was the End of the law for righteousness; and
who has redeemed us from the curse thereof: (Which is what he denies not.) The
former is, indeed, to subvert the grace of the gospel, and to leave room for
boasting; the latter does neither; but duly exalts the grace of God; and leads
us to think soberly of ourselves, as we ought to think.

IT is hoped, that what has been said upon these several passages of scripture,
may serve in some measure for the illustration of others, which speak of our
being justified by faith, and not by works. Though I do not pretend, as yet, to
have proved any thing more, than that these passages do not establish the
doctrine which they are commonly alleged in support of. And this, certainly,
they do not; because they fairly admit of another construction, than that which
is put upon them. If I have shown, that there is no necessity of supposing,
that the sacred writers intended, in these passages, which speak of faith and
works, to oppose faith to evangelical obedience; this was all that I proposed
to do, at present. In my next discourse, I shall show, that they cannot
possibly be understood thus, in any tolerable consistency with the general
doctrine of Scripture; and consequently, that when we are said to be justified
by Faith, the term faith is used in such a latitude, as to involve in it that
obedience to the gospel, the necessity of which was to be made evident.

SERMON VIII. Of Justification by Faith.
JAMES I. 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
IT is a very obvious inference from this passage of Scripture, That in order
to the Salvation of our Souls, it is necessary we should be doers of the word,
as well as hearers and believers of it; and that they who expect to be saved
upon any other terms, delude, and impose upon, themselves. However, there is
great reason to fear, that many persons do actually thus deceive their own
selves, in a matter of the last importance; fondly imagining, from what the
scripture says concerning our being saved by grace; being found in Christ, not
having our own righteousness; and being justified by faith; that obedience to
the gospel, is not an indispensable condition of our obtaining eternal life. I
have therefore, in several discourses, been endeavoring to undeceive those,
who may have thus deceived themselves; and to guard others against the like
fatal delusion.

IN my last discourse, I entered upon a consideration of those passages of
scripture, wherein our justification with God, is said to be by faith; by faith
without works; without the deeds of law, and the like. From whence many have
concluded, that obedience to the Gospel was not necessary in order to our being
justified; but that faith alone, (in the modern restrained sense of the term,
as it is distinguished from repentance and newness of life) is available
thereto. It has been shown that there is no necessity of understanding the
passages intended, in this sense; and that a fair and intelligible account may
be given of them, without having recourse to the modern solifidian doctrine.
There is no need of supposing, that when the apostles oppose faith and works to
each other, asserting that we are justified by the former exclusively of the
latter, they intended to oppose faith, to repentance and evangelical obedience.
No more may be intended by these expressions, than that we are not justified
upon the footing of mere law; but by the grace of God revealed in the Gospel.

BUT I proceed now, as was proposed in the SECOND Place, to show, That the
passages of scripture, which speak of our being justified by faith without the
deeds of law, etc. cannot possibly mean, That we are justified by faith, as
distinguished from repentance and new obedience, in any tolerable consistency
with the general doctrine of scripture: And that it is absolutely necessary to
understand the term faith, in such passages, in a larger sense; as
comprehending repentance and evangelical obedience in it; not as
contradistinguished therefrom.

To make which point evident, I must just remind you of what was said, in the
foregoing discourse, concerning the scripture-notion of justification, and the
blessings and privileges included in it, as it respects us, sinful creatures.
Justification, as was there premised, involves in it, the remission of sins,
the acceptance of our persons to the favor and friendship of God, and a title
to eternal life in the kingdom of heaven. This is the idea which the holy
scriptures give us of justification. Vid. Sermon. 7. page 172, 173, 174.
And I desire that this may be kept in mind; otherwise the ensuing discourse
will not be fully understood.

NOW, That faith, when we are said to be justified thereby, without the deeds
of law, etc. cannot mean faith, exclusively of repentance and obedience; but
must intend faith, considered as the principle of evangelical holiness, and as
virtually comprehending it, will appear from the following considerations.

I. WHATSOEVER is necessary in order to the forgiveness of sins, is also
necessary in order to justification; because the pardon of sin is a principal
part of our justification. It is a manifest repugnancy to say, that we can be
justified without that which is necessary to our forgiveness, if forgiveness is
included in the idea of justification. This would be, in effect, to say, that
we are justified without, and independently of, that upon which our
justification is suspended. Since justification before God, involves in it the
passing by our offenses, we cannot, certainly, become the subjects of it, till
we have complied with those terms, on which God has expressly made our
forgiveness with him to depend. And if we look into the new testament, we shall
find, that God has suspended our forgiveness with him, upon our forgiving those
that have injured us. "If ye forgive men their trespasses, says our Savior,
your heavenly Father will also forgive your trespasses: But if ye forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive your
trespasses." Since then, the forgiving of our neighbor is necessary to our
forgiveness; it must be equally necessary in order to our justification; unless
any will say, that we may be justified without being forgiven: i. e. in effect,
be pardoned without being pardoned. For it really comes to this, if pardon is
included in justification, and an essential part of it. That justification
comprises in it the pardon of sin, was shown in the preceding discourse: Nor
will this be denied by those who are the most likely to deny the general
doctrine here advanced: since justification is thus defined in the Assembly's
(...). "Justification is an act of (...) God's free grace, wherein he pardons
all our sins, etc.


NOW since, at least, that one christian duty of forgiving an offending
brother, is requisite in order to our being forgiven ourselves; and,
consequently, in order to our being justified; how can the faith, by which we
are said to be justified, be opposed to christian obedience? or understood
exclusively of it? Is it not a manifest contradiction to say, that we are
justified by faith alone, in the modern sense, by faith as distinguished from
obedience; and yet to say, that our forgiveness with God (a primary and
principal branch of our justification) is suspended on the condition of
forgiving our neighbor his trespasses? There cannot well be a greater
solecism, or repugnancy. We are therefore reduced to this necessity; to this
dilemma: We must either deny, that our forgiveness is suspended upon our
forgiving others; (though our Savior has expressly asserted it) or else we must
acknowledge, that the faith, by which we are justified, involves obedience in
it, instead of being opposed thereto. The alternative is unavoidable; there is
no medium in this case, if pardon is an essential part of justification; which
is now taken for granted.

THIS is sufficient to show in general, that the vulgar notion of justification
by faith alone, cannot be true. It is at least necessary, that we add to our
faith, that one virtue of forgiving others their trespasses. And here I may
ask, Whether, since this one is required, in order to our being pardoned and
justified, it is not reasonable to suppose, that all other christian virtues
are necessary to the same end? What ground is there to imagine, that this one
duty is made necessary, and that others, of equal importance, are unnecessary?
Our Savior's particularly mentioning and requiring this, does not exclude
others; but it may be naturally inferred, that all other evangelical graces and
virtues are necessary likewise: Especially since no good reason can be
assigned, why our pardon and justification should be suspended upon this,
rather than upon many other duties of Christianity; such as the love or fear of
God, love and gratitude to our Savior, and justice toward man. Indeed if
there is such a natural and necessary connection betwixt the several graces and
virtues of Christianity, as some suppose; if he that is destitute of one, must
needs be destitute of all; and if he that is possessed of one, must also be the
subject of all; it follows, that they are all equally necessary to pardon and
justification, or equally unnecessary: So that the requiring of any one, is, in
effect, the requiring of all; and if there is any one, which is not necessary,
no other can be necessary. This is, indeed, only an argument ad hominem. And
because I am not certain, that there is really, any such necessary
concatenation or connection, betwixt the various graces and virtues of
Christianity, I shall not insist upon it. But,

2dly, THAT faith cannot be opposed to evangelical obedience, when we are said
to be justified thereby, appears from the scripture-doctrine of repentance. It
will not, I suppose, be denied, that pardon, or the forgiveness of sins, is
suspended on our repentance. But because those, with whom I am concerned, can
deny almost any thing, I shall prove this point before I deduce the consequence
intended. The few passages following may suffice -- "Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon." -- "I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies; but that the
wicked forsake his way and live" -- "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish." -- "That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name." -- "Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out." --
"Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." -- "He that covers his Sins shall
not prosper; but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy." -- "If
we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness." -- These passages abundantly show, that
our forgiveness, pardon, or acceptance to the divine favor, depends upon our
repenting of our sins; that every true penitent shall obtain mercy; and that
all impenitent transgressors shall finally be condemned.

NOW if repentance is really necessary in order to our obtaining pardon, it
must be equally necessary in order to our being justified: Since, as has more
than once been observed, our pardon is involved in our justification, and is an
essential and principal part of it. It is impossible we should be justified
without that repentance, which is necessary to the pardon of our sins: for this
were to suppose, that justification is something distinct from, and prior to,
our forgiveness. Repentance, then, being necessary in order to our being
pardoned; and therefore necessary in order to our being justified; let us
briefly consider the scripture notion of repentance; and what is implied in it.
Now it is manifest, that by repentance, the scripture intends, a turning from
sin to God, accompanied with humiliation and sorrow for having offended Him. It
is a principle of holiness and universal obedience; the beginning of a new
life, devoted to God and his Service. Evangelical repentance, therefore,
comprises in it, evangelical obedience: So that if the former be necessary in
order to pardon, and justification unto life, the latter must be so too. To
say, that repentance is necessary, and yet to say that the forsaking of our
sins, and entering upon a course of obedience to God's commandments, (in which
repentance consists) is unnecessary, is a plain contradiction.

FROM these premises, the conclusion is very obvious to those who will, without
prejudice, attend to it; viz. That we are not justified by faith alone,
exclusively of evangelical obedience; but by faith, considered as the
beginning, and the great principle of it. Is there not a very manifest
repugnancy betwixt these two propositions? -- Repentance, which involves in it
a turning from sin to God, is necessary in order to our forgiveness and
justification: -- But yet faith alone, as distinguished from repentance and new
obedience, justifies us. He must have a head peculiarly turned for making
subtle distinctions, that will undertake to reconcile them. They are
contradictory; and since the former of these propositions has been proved true,
the latter must, of course, be false.

THE reasoning under this head, may perhaps seem intricate and abstruse to
some. But the argument, if I mistake not, is strictly conclusive. The sum of it
is this -- Pardon being an essential part of our justification; and repentance
being necessary in order to pardon, repentance must also be necessary in order
to justification. And since repentance involves evangelical obedience in it,
and is, indeed, the beginning of it; such obedience must also be necessary in
order to our being justified. And therefore, when the scriptures speak of our
being justified by faith, faith cannot be opposed to obedience, in the modern
way of interpretation; but must comprehend it. So that those passages of
scripture, so much insisted upon by the Solifidians, are not only capable of a
different sense from that which they put upon them; but there is an absolute
necessity of interpreting them otherwise. Indeed if the pardon of sin is not an
essential part of our justification; or if repentance is not necessary in order
to pardon; or, lastly, if repentance does not involve in it a turning from dead
works, to serve the living God; then the argument used above, is inconclusive;
and faith alone may justify. But if those positions are true, as they evidently
are, the modern notion of justification by faith alone, must be both false and
futile: And the advocates for it, amuse themselves with the more found of words.

3dly, WHATSOEVER is necessary, in order to our being at peace with God, and
becoming the objects of his peculiar love and complacency, is necessary in
order to our justification. But in order to our being at peace with God, and
becoming the objects of his special love and complacency, it is necessary that
we forsake our Sins, and obey the Gospel: This is therefore necessary in order
to our justification. The two propositions from whence this conclusion is
drawn, I shall briefly prove.

THE former of them is, That whatsoever is necessary in order to our being at
peace with God, and becoming the objects of his peculiar love and complacency,
is necessary in order to our justification: The proof of which is short and
easy. It is in our justification, that we commence the objects of the divine
love, as expressed in the proposition; neither before we are justified, nor
afterward; but at the same instant. And indeed our being thus reconciled to,
and at peace with, our Maker, is not any thing really distinct from our being
justified; but one of the blessings or privileges implied therein. So that our
becoming the objects of God's special love, is not only cotemporary with our
justification; but the former is involved in the latter, inseparable from it,
and an essential part of that compound idea. It is a contradiction to suppose a
man justified, without supposing him beloved of God; or vice versa, beloved of
God, and yet not justified. The ideas are coincident, and mutually imply each
other: So that whosoever is justified, is at peace with God, and the object of
his complacency; and whosoever is thus at peace with God, is justified of him.
Now these ideas (or these things) being thus coincident, thus inseparable, and
thus mutually inferring and implying each other, it is a contradiction to
suppose that any thing should be requisite in order to one, which is not
equally requisite in order to the other. To suppose that our being beloved of
God, depends upon one condition, and our being justified, on another condition;
is to suppose these things distinct, and separable from each other; which they
are not, according to the scripture account of them. We are therefore, if we
adhere to this account, obliged to own, that whatsoever God has required of us
in order to conciliate his special love and friendship, is equally required in
order to our being justified of him. Certainly more cannot be necessary in
order to the former, than is necessary in order to the latter: For if more were
necessary, it would follow, that we might be justified without, and
antecedently to our being in a state of favor and friendship with God; which
were a manifest repugnancy.

THE other proposition to be proved, is, That, in order to our becoming the
objects of God's special love, it is necessary, that we forsake our sins, and
obey the gospel: The proof of which is still more plain and direct. For there
is no peace, faith God, to the wicked. He has said, that he is angry with the
wicked every day; and that if they turn not he will whet his sword -- No one,
in short, can look into his bible, without finding the wrath of God there
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men;
against all impenitent and unreformed Sinners. So far are persons of this
character from being the objects of God's special love and complacency! The
doctrine of scripture, from Genesis to the Revelation of St. John, is, that so
long as men persevere in their evil ways, they are at enmity with God, and
abhorred of him; that they cannot be reconciled to Him, or He to them, without
turning their feet into his testimonies. This is what the scripture, throughout,
represents to us as indispensably necessary, in order to our being at peace
with our offended Maker; and to our being beloved of him as his servants and
children.

THE conclusion follows of course, viz. that we cannot be justified without, or
antecedently to, our thus turning unto God, and doing the will of our Father
which is in Heaven. Because, as was said before, whatsoever is requisite in
order to the former, must, in the nature of the thing, be equally necessary in
order to the latter. Whenever the scripture speaks of our being justified by
faith, there is, therefore, a necessity of understanding the term faith, in a
complex sense; not as it is contradistinguished from repentance and obedience,
but in such a latitude as to include them. For otherwise there will be an
irreconcilable contradiction betwixt those passages of Scripture, and many
others: I now mean, more particularly, such as make the forsaking of our sins,
and the keeping of God's commandments, necessary in order to our becoming the
objects of his paternal love and favor. If this is necessary, it is absurd,
and even a plain contradiction to imagine, that we can be justified by faith
only; understanding faith in the modern restrained sense; and as it is opposed
to gospel-obedience.

4thly, WHATSOEVER is necessary, according to the terms laid down in the
gospel, in order to our having a title to eternal life in the kingdom of
heaven, is necessary in order to our being justified in this world. But in
order to our having such a title, it is necessary, that we repent of our sins,
and obey the gospel: This is, therefore, necessary in order to our
justification.

THE former proposition is, that whatever the gospel makes necessary in order
to our having a title to eternal life hereafter, is necessary in order to our
justification here. The truth of which, can, I think, admit of no dispute; it
being evident from the account already given of justification, and the
blessings and privileges implied in it. A title to eternal Life is involved in
the scripture-idea of justification; and is an essential part of it. We can
neither be justified without this title; nor have this title without being
justified; they mutually infer and imply each other, and are inseparable. So
that it is a contradiction to suppose, that we are justified antecedently to
our having a title to salvation; or upon any other, or lower terms, than those
to which the promise of future blessedness is made. As Soon as a man is
justified, or rather in his justification, this title is given to him; and not
before. While we keep to the true idea of justification, as it involves in it
the promise of future glory, and a right, through grace, to the Heavenly
inheritance; we cannot even make the supposition of our being justified on
other terms than those, on which eternal life is offered to us, without
perceiving the self-repugnancy of it. The ideas of justification, and of the
title here intended, though different in some respects, are yet so far
coincident, and have such a connection and mutual dependence, that we may easily
see, that whatever God requires of us in order to our being entitled to Heaven
and happiness, must also be required in order to our justification. For
otherwise we might be justified without having the title mentioned; i. e.
justified without something, which is implied in the very notion of
justification; which is a contradiction.

THE other proposition is, That in order to our having a title to eternal life,
it is necessary that we repent of our sins, and obey the gospel. And agreably
hereto it is said, "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may
have right to the tree of life." There are no promises of future glory and
happiness, made in the scriptures, to impenitent, persevering transgressors.
They are all made to those who confess and forsake their sins. The gospel is so
far from giving any title to future glory, to the impenitent workers of
iniquity, that it expressly condemns them, and cuts them off from it. "Know ye
not, says the apostle, that the the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom
of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators," etc. It is said, that God will
render to them that "obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation
and wrath; even upon every soul of man that does evil." It is not, surely
possible, that the same gospel, which speaks thus to, and of, the wicked and
disobedient, condemning them to future woe and punishment, should, at the same
time, entitle them, by it is promises, to life everlasting -- Now since nothing
is required of us, in order to our being entitled to eternal life, but what is
equally required in order to our being justified; (as was shown above) and
since, in order to our being entitled to eternal life, it is necessary that we
repent of our sins and obey the gospel, (as we have just now seen) it
undoubtedly follows, that repentance and evangelical obedience are necessary in
order to our being justified. And hence it is farther evident, that when we are
said to be justified by faith, faith is not, in such passages of scripture,
contradistinguished from repentance and new obedience; but must, of necessity,
be considered as comprising them in it.

5thly, THE main point to be established, will be still more evident from a
cursory view of St. James's doctrine in this epistle: One main design of which
appears plainly to be, the rescuing of St. Paul's doctrine of justification,
from the abuses and false glosses which began, even then, to be put upon it by
licentious men. Or, at least, St. James designed to guard the Church in
succeeding times, against such abuses and corruptions in this respect, as he
saw likely to creep into it, and which have, since, actually overspread and
dishonored a considerable part of it. For that this apostle professedly
opposes the doctrine of justification by faith only, in the modern sense of the
term, is as evident as words can make any thing to be. And all the attempts
that have been made to reconcile St. James's doctrine, to the fond conceits of
those who are for exalting faith, at the expense of holiness and good works,
are equally futile and unnatural.

IT is more especially in the second chapter of this epistle, that the apostle
explodes and refutes these foolish and pernicious conceits. At the tenth verse
he tells us, That "Whosoever shall keep the whole law," (meaning the law of
liberty, as it is called ver. 12, and which is no other than the gospel-rule of
life and manners) and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all." The plain
meaning of which is, that whosoever shall habitually transgress any one known
precept of the gospel, is not in a state of favor with God; but as certainly
lies under condemnation, as if he violated them all. The apostle then
admonishes us to live and act in all respects, as becomes those who are
hereafter to be judged according to this law -- "So speak ye, and so do, as
they that shall be judged by the law of liberty." Now if we are to be judged by
this law, it is certain that we shall be either justified or condemned by it,
according as we have, or have not, yielded a sincere and universal obedience to
the precepts of it. This is necessarily implied in our being judged by it. From
whence it is an obvious inference, that we cannot now be justified by this law
of liberty, [the gospel] without obeying it. This law will be the same, in
itself, in the day of judgment, that it is at present: And all who will be
condemned by it, in that day, are equally condemned by it now. It cannot now
justify the same persons, whom it will condemn, when it shall be put into
execution by the judge of quick and dead. Or will any one say, that we may now
be justified by the law of liberty, on account of our faith; and yet be
condemned by it hereafter, on account of our disobedience? This seems to be too
absurd for any one to assert or suppose. But were it supposeable, yet That
justification, which does not exempt us from future condemnation; That which we
may be the subjects of here, and yet be sentenced to woe and misery hereafter
for our sins, is a thing of but little value or importance to us; Our great
concern is, to know and to do that, which will entitle us to the approbation of
our Judge, in the great day of his appearing. Even the law of liberty will not
then justify us, unless we have sincerely obeyed it: And this being the case,
it is manifest, as was said before, that it cannot justify us now, if we
disobey it; that law being still the same. And all the Solifidians in the world
might be defied to answer this single argument, were there no others.

BUT the apostle proceeds (ver. 14.) more particularly to consider the
influence of faith and works; and from thence to the end of the chapter,
professedly combats this notion, that a man is justified by the former,
independently of the latter -- "What does it profit, my brethren, though a man
say he has faith, and have not works? can faith save "Can faith save him?"
Some who assert the sufficiency of faith to justify; still allow that it is not
sufficient to save: But the Apostle makes no such idle distinction. The scope
of his argument requires, that by saving, he should here mean justifying; and
accordingly he substitutes the latter term in the room of the former, in the
following verses.
him?" As if he had said: Of what significancy or advantage is it, for a man to
talk and boast of his faith, if his faith is not accompanied with obedience?
Can faith entitle Him to the favor of God, and eternal life, who does not obey
the commandments of Christ, as well as believe in him? Vain, absurd
imagination! He goes on: "If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of
daily food; and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed, and
filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the
body; what does it profit? Even so faith, if it has not works is dead being
alone." q. d. If you give your necessitous brethren only good words, instead of
relieving their wants; of what significancy is this? It is rather to mock and
insult them, than to do them any real kindness. And faith is just as
insignificant as those good words, if it is not attended with charity and
righteousness. Being thus alone, it is a dead useless thing; and can no more
justify or save the subjects of it, than fair soft words can feed and cloth
those, who are perishing with hunger and cold. -- "Yea a man may say, Thou have
faith, and I have works: Show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show
thee my faith by my works." As if he had said: Yea, one might reason after this
manner with you; You pretend to have faith; and perhaps you really have: But I
have works, which demonstrate that I have faith. Whereas you cannot make it
appear, even that you have any faith, unless your behavior bears witness for
you. Show me, if you can, that you have any faith, without works: This is
impossible; but I will make it evident that I am a believer, by my good life.
So that faith is not only insufficient to justify and save a man; but no man
can even prove that he is possessed of it, without works.

THE apostle proceeds: "Thou believe that there is one God; thou do well:
the devils also believe and tremble. But will thou know, O vain man, that faith
without works is dead." q. d. Thou will tell me, perhaps, that thou believe
in the One true God. Be it so: Thus far it is well: But you cannot reasonably
think that you are hereby justified; for even the apostate angels believe, and
yet justly tremble; being reserved in chains under darkness, to the judgment of
the great day: To which condemnation you also stand exposed, notwithstanding
your faith, while you persevere in your sins. O vain, foolish man! will thou
not at length be sensible, that faith without obedience, is a dead useless
thing, of no profit or advantage? St. James goes on to illustrate and confirm
his doctrine by the example of Abraham. "Was not Abraham our father justified
by Works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the Altar? See thou how
faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect." q. d. You
may be convinced by the story of Abraham, that a man must obey as well as
believe, in order to his being justified. For was not he, our common father,
and the father of the faithful, justified, in effect, by works; when he
submitted to the command and authority of God, in preparing to sacrifice his
son? See thou not how his faith was exercised, and exerted itself in works of
obedience, receiving thence all its value and efficacy? And that it would have
been imperfect, dead and useless, had it not been accompanied with an obedient
heart. "And the scripture was fulfilled which says, Abraham believed God, and
it was imputed to him for righteousness; and he was called the friend of God."
q. d. And thus was the scripture verified, which tells us, that Abraham was a
religious believer in God; and this his pious and obedient faith, procured him
the divine approbation; it being, through grace, reckoned to him and accepted of
God, as righteousness. So that he was high in the divine favor; and obtained
that glorious testimony, that he was God's Friend: Which character he could
never have obtained, had he not added works to his faith. "Ye see then, says
the Apostle, how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only." q.
d. Ye may be assured therefore, that it is by obedience to God's commands, that
a man is justified in his sight; and not, as some may vainly imagine, only by
believing.

THE apostle having observed, that (...) as well as Abraham, was justified by
works; closes this subject with the following similitude. "As the body without
the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also." As if he had said: So
far is it from being true, that faith alone is sufficient to justify us, and
that our obedience is not also necessary to that end; so far is this from being
the truth of the case, that obedience gives to faith all its worth and value
and efficacy. In short works are to faith, that which the spirit is to the
body. As the body, being deprived of the spirit which should inform and animate
it, becomes a mere carcass, a dead lump of matter, void of all vigor and
energy, and unable to perform any of the proper vital functions; so faith,
being separated from works, or not attended with them, is a dead, useless
thing; and as unable to justify the subjects of it, as a breathless corpse is to
perform the actions of a living man.

THUS I have briefly laid before you the doctrine of (...) James, concerning
justification. And it is manifest that he opposes, directly and professedly
opposes, and not only opposes, but refutes, the notion of justification by
faith alone; or faith considered independently of obedience. Tell me, then, do
not those persons sow discord betwixt brethren, who interpret St Paul as
teaching the contrary doctrine of justification by faith, abstractly
considered, and in contradistinction from works? They certainly make as wide a
breach betwixt these two apostles, as happened heretofore betwixt the latter of
them, and Barnabas. And this they do without any necessity. Because what St.
Paul says concerning justification by faith without the deeds of law, admits of
a fair and easy interpretation, in perfect consistency with St. James's
doctrine as explained above: Whereas St. James's doctrine here, cannot, by all
the subtlety of man, be naturally and fairly explained in any tolerable
consistency with St. Paul's, provided the design of St. Paul was to oppose
faith to evangelical obedience; and to teach, that justification comes by the
former, exclusively of the latter.

THERE are several ways, in which St. Paul's doctrine may be made to harmonize
with St. James's, without putting any unnatural force upon the words of either.
For example; (1.) When St. Paul says, that we are justified by faith, faith may
be understood objectively; as if he had said, we are justified by the gospel;
and not by the law of Moses: And this interpretation is much countenanced by
the scope of some passages, where he treats of justification. (2) Whenever
faith is to be understood subjectively, (as it certainly must be in many
places) it is no unnatural construction, to understand the term as
comprehensive of the whole christian temper, and that obedience which the
gospel requires of us. -- If it should be said, that this cannot be St. Paul's
meaning, because he opposes faith to works, and to the deeds of law; since
faith really includes them, according to this interpretation: Though this is the
principal difficulty, it admits of a very easy solution. For by works, and the
deeds of law, in these places, may be meant, either the ceremonial and ritual
observances of the mosaic law; as if the apostle had said, "A man is justified
by believing and obeying the gospel; not by those legal observances, to which
the Jews are so disposed to trust:" Or by works and the deeds of law, may be
understood a perfect righteousness, which would exclude grace, and which no one
ever performed; as if he had said, "We are justified by a sincere, though
imperfect obedience to the gospel, through the mercy of God in Christ Jesus; not
by our works, considered as strictly conformable to law; in which sense it is
impossible that any transgressor of the law should be justified -- Now in
either of these ways, the distinction which St. Paul makes betwixt faith and
works, when he opposes the one to the other, is sufficiently preserved: And
either of these interpretations will perfectly harmonize with St. James's
doctrine, That a man is not justified by faith, exclusively of that obedience
to the laws of Christ, which ought to accompany it; and without which it is
dead.

THE Attempts made to reconcile St. James and St. Paul, on the contrary
hypothesis, ( viz. that St. Paul teaches the doctrine of justification by faith
alone, or faith in contradistinction from evangelical obedience) have hitherto
been to little purpose: unless it is to show the perplexing streights, to which
the advocates for that hypothesis are driven; and how unable they are to
support it, without using unnatural violence with the scriptures. Let me give a
specimen of these attempts, in order to support and verify this assertion.

SOME have supposed that St. Paul and St. James speak of two kinds of faith;
the former, of a true, evangelical and operative faith, the latter of a dead,
historical, and notional faith, quite different therefrom: That the first kind
justifies without, and independently of, works; but that the latter does not.
In answer to which, I shall make one or two short remarks.

IT is evident that St. James intended no such distinction; because he speaks
of faith at large, in the most general and unlimited sense. "Can faith save
him." -- "What does it profit" -- "Faith without works is dead." -- "A man is
justified -- not by faith only. "He does not say, that this or that particular
kind of faith cannot save, cannot profit, cannot justify, without works: But
the sense is plainly this, that No kind of faith whatever, can save, profit or
justify, without works; or of itself alone. Moreover,

THE apostle is here speaking of such a faith as Abraham, and Rahab were the
subjects of. The former of whom, at least, it is to be presumed, had as good a
faith as any one can pretend to, since he is called the father of the faithful.
And yet the apostle denies that either of these persons was justified by faith
alone; He asserts that they were justified by works -- "Was not Abraham our
father justified by works" -- "Likewise also was not Rahab justified by works."
-- Now if Abraham himself, the goodness, and evangelical nature of whose faith,
is not disputed by any, was not justified by faith, considered in
contradistinction from, and in opposition to, works; certainly no other
believer can be thus justified by faith alone. But,

LET us, for the present, take it for granted, that St. James is not speaking
of a true evangelical faith, when he says, that faith cannot save, profit or
justify, without works; but speaking of such an idle, historical and
inoperative faith, as is pretended by some: And let us then see what his
doctrine will amount to. And I think it will be manifestly this, according to
the present hypothesis; viz; That though an idle, historical, inoperative faith,
cannot justify without works; yet such a faith might save, profit and justify,
with works: (for this is plainly implied.) But there is another peculiar kind
of faith, a truly evangelical, a living and working faith, which justifies
without works, and exclusively of them! And again: when the apostle says, (ver.
24.) "Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only";
according to the present hypothesis, the sense (or rather the nonsense) of the
assertion must be this; That a man is justified, not only by a dead,
inoperative, and idle faith, a faith that works not; not only by such a
faith; but by such a faith in conjunction with good works! Now let me ask any
sober man, Whether such stuff as this, is worthy the pen of an inspired
apostle? And whether this method of reconciling St. Paul and St. James, is not
to pervert and wrest the plain meaning of the latter; and make him speak
right-down Nonsense?

ANOTHER way of reconciling St. James to St. Paul, (or rather of making him
contradict himself) is this: It is said, that he is not here speaking of what
is necessary to our justification in the sight of God; but of what is necessary
to the justification of our faith; necessary to the making it evident to
others, that we have true faith. It is said, that though faith, exclusively of
obedience or works, justifies us before God; yet we cannot exhibit a proof and
evidence of our faith to others, without works: And that accordingly, by being
justified, the Apostle here means, justified to the world, and in the sight of
all men, as true sincere christians.

LET us briefly examine this pretended solution of the difficulty.

And it is to be observed,

THAT this is quite an arbitrary interpretation; altogether unwarranted, and
unnatural. The justifying of a man's faith is, in itself, an uncouth,
ridiculous expression: And those make much too bold with the apostle, who apply
that to faith, which he says of men, of persons. The principal, if not the only
thing alleged in support of this interpretation, is, that St. James speaks, in
ver. 18. of showing our faith by works. Upon this slender foundation it is,
that some men have interpreted all that he says in this passage concerning the
necessity of obedience and works to justification, of the need of works in
order to show that we have faith. Whereas it is evident, that what the apostle
says in that verse, is merely incidental; something quite distinct from his
main argument, and general design. Having before shown, that faith without
works, was unable to save; that it was a dead, useless, unprofitable thing; he
then tells those with whom he is arguing, (as it were in a parenthesis) that
faith was so far from justifying them, that they could not even make it
manifest that they had any faith at all, but by their works. He tells them,
that one might, were it needful, reason with them thus: But he lets this matter
drop, with a bare mention; and then returns to his main argument; which he
pursues to the end of the chapter.

BUT that the apostle does not intend the justifying of our faith, or making it
appear to the world, that we have faith; is demonstrable from ver. 24. --."Ye
see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only."
According to these goodly interpreters of scripture, the sense must be this --
"Ye see then how that a man's faith is justified, or made evident to the world,
by good works, and not only by faith." Or thus, "Faith is made to appear, not
only by faith itself; but partly by faith and partly by works." Which, besides
the Nonsense of it, directly militates even against that part of the passage,
(ver. 18) which they think warrants this interpretation. For there it is
supposed, that faith cannot be shown at all, by faith itself; but only by
works. And indeed, had St. James talked at the rate which they would make him,
to support their favorite system, One might be apt to question, not only his
inspiration, but even the soundness of his understanding.

IT is farther to be observed, that St. James is speaking in this passage,
concerning what is necessary to salvation: -- ("Can faith save him?") It is
therefore much more natural to understand him as treating here, of our
justification in the sight of God, on whom alone our salvation depends, than of
our justification in the sight of men. We may be saved hereafter, although men
should think and speak evil of us, and condemn us: Or we may perish, though we
should appear righteous unto men. But in order to our salvation hereafter, it
is indispensably necessary that we should be justified of God in this world:
For it is only those, "whom He first justifies, that He afterward glorifies."
We may therefore fairly conclude, that this is the justification here
discoursed of.

AGAIN: That the apostle is treating of justification in the sight of God,
appears from what he says concerning Abraham. When he "believed God," and when
"faith wrought with his works," "it was It will be observed, that the
particular question here is not, What it was that was imputed to Abraham for
righteousness? whether it were his faith only, as distinguished from his
obedience; or both of them conjunctly; or, as some suppose, the perfect
righteousness of Christ? But the point is, whether the acceptance of Abraham's
person to the divine favor, and his justification in the sight of God, is not
implied in that phrase?
imputed to him for righteousness." By whom was it imputed? Certainly by that
God, in whom he trusted and whom he obeyed; as appears from Genesis 15. 6. the
place here referred to, -- He believed in the LORD, and HE counted it to him
for righteousness. Now we know, that for God to impute righteousness to a man,
and to justify him, are phrases that are equivalent in scripture. So that there
can be no reasonable doubt, but that it is justification in God's sight, that
is meant here, and throughout this passage. Nor was Abraham only called the
friend of God by men, on account of his obedience: but it was his obedient
faith which made him so. It is therefore evident, that St. James is not
treating of justification before men.

AND indeed it is, even at first view, a very strange unnatural supposition,
that the apostle should labor so much, only to prove that a man cannot appear
just and righteous in the sight of men, merely by his faith, which is
invisible; or without living righteously. This is both self-evident, so as to
need no formal proof; and, at the same time, a matter, comparatively speaking,
of but little importance. Though this is plainly the main scope and drift of this
whole passage, unless it is our justification in the sight of God, that is
intended in it. And this consideration alone, is, I think, sufficient to that
it is of a higher, and far more important justification, than one in the eyes
of men, that St. James is discoursing. The zeal and warmth which he discovers
in the course of his argument; the solemnity and pathos of his expressions; in
short, the whole air of this passage, is a demonstration that the apostle is
treating on a subject no less interesting, than that of our justification with
God, and the salvation of our souls. And the other supposition, that he is
speaking only of what is necessary to make our faith apparent, that so we may
be justified in the opinion and sight of men, is as inconsistent with good
Criticism, as it is with sound Theology.

THUS I have given you a specimen of the methods taken to make these two
apostles harmonize; taken, I mean, by those who will have it, that St. Paul
taught the doctrine of justification by faith, as contradistinguished from
evangelical obedience. The two methods which I have mentioned, are all that I
have met with, which seem to claim any notice. And how insufficient, how
unnatural, even these solutions are, it is presumed need not be made more
apparent than it is already. Both the solutions are founded upon arbitrary
suppositions; and such as are demonstrably false. And they are also mutually
repugnant to each other; so that if either of them were true, the other must
necessarily be false: Though, if I mistake not, some persons, that they might the
more effectually put heresy out of countenance, have gravely adopted them both,
and maintained them together.

BUT, as has been observed before, it is easy to reconcile all that St. Paul
has said concerning justification by faith, with the doctrine, that evangelical
obedience is required in order to our being justified: (Which last is certainly
the doctrine of St. James.) How this may be done, has been shown before. -- But
if it is supposed, that St. Paul ever taught the doctrine of justification by
faith alone, in contradistinction from obedience, the only question is not, How
he can be reconciled with St. James? Another question which naturally arises,
is, How he can be reconciled with himself? In all his epistles, he asserts that
impenitent, unreformed sinners, lie under wrath and condemnation. He therefore
testified to them repentance toward God, as well as faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, in order to their getting out of this state of condemnation; to
their being reconciled to God, and entitled to eternal life. Despisest thou the
riches of his goodness, forbearance and longsuffering, says he; not knowing
that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance; but after thy hard and
impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath?
Romans 2. 4, 5.
Is it not here supposed, that such obdurate transgressors are under
condemnation? that they are continually aggravating their guilt and ruin? and
that their repentance and reformation are indispensably necessary in order to
their obtaining the favor and mercy of God? Certainly it is. How then can it
be supposed that this same apostle in the same epistle, should teach, that
faith alone, as distinguished from repentance and new obedience, is sufficient
to justify us; and that it actually does so? or if he had taught this latter
doctrine, who could reconcile it with the other? and vindicate him against the
imputation of self-contradiction? The doctrines are diametrically repugnant to
each other: And whoever shall undertake to show on one hand, that repentance
and new obedience, are necessary to our obtaining the favor and mercy of God;
and yet, on the other hand, that we are justified by faith exclusively of
repentance and new obedience, will, I am persuaded, only darken counsel by
words without knowledge.

I INTENDED to have brought diverse other arguments to show the falsehood of this
too common doctrine, that we are justified by faith alone, as faith is opposed
to gospel-obedience. But the time will not allow of it. This is, in short, a
doctrine quite repugnant to that preached by our blessed Savior and his
apostles; a doctrine, full of absurdity, and fruitful of mischief; a doctrine,
contrary to the general scheme and genius of the gospel; a doctrine, altogether
irrational; and not less pernicious in its practical tendency, than it is
absurd in speculation.

BUT as I am now concerned with those who make great use of distinctions; I
must beg leave to take notice of one or two of these, before I conclude.

IT is said, that though one essential property of a justifying faith, is, that
it is operative; and that no faith can justify, besides that which is
productive of good works, and is manifested by them; yet faith does not justify
because it is operative, and productive of good works; but upon another
account; viz. because believing is a going out of ourselves; and is the hand by
which we lay hold upon the perfect righteousness of Christ. This, if I mistake
not, is generally said by those who assert the doctrine of justification by
faith, in opposition to obedience. And I shall make a few remarks upon this
curious distinction; because it tends rather to puzzle the ignorant, than to
edify any; and may probably be a means of beguiling unstable souls to their
destruction.

1. IF that which is intended by this distinction, were only this, that we are
not justified on account of the inherent merit of our obedience, so as to
exclude the mercy and grace of God, by which we are justified through a Mediator;
this is unquestionably true; and a thing of great importance to be considered
by all Christians. But then it is to be observed, that this is at least as
applicable to our faith, as it is to our works. For faith is no more
meritorious of our justification and salvation, than our works are: To be sure
it is not, if that be the true notion of faith, which some have advanced, viz.
that it is a renouncing all desert and merit in ourselves, and relying wholly
and absolutely upon the righteousness and merit of Another -- But this is not
the true design of the distinction: for were this all that they intend, there
would be no controversy. They intend, that faith justifies us in some sense in
which obedience does not justify us; otherwise even they themselves, would see
what others do; I mean, that this distinction has really nothing in it. For

2. IF that faith which justifies us, includes in it a principle of obedience,
as one essential property of it, (as they generally assert) then it is most
futile and absurd to oppose faith and obedience, in the manner they do, one to
the other; as though the former justified us independently of the latter. For
what is this, in effect, but to oppose a thing to itself; to that which is
essential to the very being of it? It is as if we should oppose the sun to the
light and warmth of it; or the great Father of lights, to his essential
attributes: It is as if it were said, that though God made the worlds; yet they
were not produced by his power, wisdom and goodness; but exclusively of them!

3. BUT the futility of this distinction, and the falsehood of what is intended
by it; is still further evident from the passage in St. James, which was
considered above. For it appears from thence, not only, that we cannot be
justified by a faith that is without obedience; but also that it is obedience
which gives to faith all it is life, efficacy and perfection. Without this, any
faith, all faith is vain, dead, and unprofitable; utterly insufficient to
justify and save the subjects of it. It is this principle of obedience that is,
as it were the soul and spirit of faith; the very, the only thing, by which we
can be justified. So widely do those mistake the matter, and differ from St.
James, who assert, that though a justifying faith is always productive of
obedience; yet it is not this operative quality, which gives virtue and
efficacy to it; but that a true faith justifies, exclusively of the obedience
implied in it. The Apostle more than intimates, that if faith considered
independently of obedience, could justify us, the Devils themselves might be
justified as well as we! -- But these men, it seems, will not allow that that,
upon which the apostle lays, in a manner, the whole stress of our
justification, should have any stress at all laid upon it in this affair. Even
while they allow, that the quality which essentially distinguishes a justifying
faith from any other, is its being operative; yet it must not be allowed, that
faith justifies upon account of this distinguishing quality, lest it should
follow that we are justified by works! This (though we should not be
uncharitable) looks too much as if these men were determined to say any thing;
and even plainly to contradict themselves, rather than not contradict the
apostle when he says, that "a man is justified by works, and not by faith only."

4. IF no faith can justify, (as is confessed) besides that which involves in
it a principle of obedience, then faith must justify us, considered as
including this principle in it; and not independently of it. This consequence
is incontestibly true; though it seems not to be generally attended to: and if it
were, there would be no room left for controversy about faith and works. -- Let
me illustrate what I here intend -- If this quality is essential to a true,
justifying faith; viz. that it is operative, and productive of good works; and
if the faith which has this property, certainly justifies the subject of it; it
follows that faith justifies, only considered as having that property; i. e. on
account of the obedience involved in the idea of it. For otherwise, why may not
some other kind of faith justify, though destitute of this property, as well as
that to which obedience is essential? If this quality of faith is of no
consideration in the affair of our justification; or if faith does not justify
us, because it includes obedience; it will be impossible to assign a reason,
why another faith which has all the qualities of a true one, excepting this of
being operative, should not justify as well as that which has this also. In
short, to say, that that, and that only, is a justifying faith, which has this
property, is, in effect, to say, that this property is what renders it
available to our justification; and that we are justified by faith, only
considered as a principle of obedience. So that those who say obedience is
essential to a justifying faith; and yet that faith justifies us, considered in
contradistinction from obedience, do not only make a needless, trifling
distinction; but plainly contradict themselves in it. What would you think of a
person who should tell you that wings were essential to a bird; that all the
crea^ures which had them, could fly; but that none could fly without them; and
yet tell you, in the same breath, that these inhabitants of the air did not fly
by virtue of their wings, but quite independently of them? Or what would you
think of one, who should tell you, that obedience to our earthly sovereign, was
essential to loyalty; that all his loyal subjects were entitled to his
protection; but that none could be entitled thereto, without loyalty; and yet
tell you that loyalty did not entitle you to your sovereign's protection,
considered as comprising obedience in it; but considered abstractly, and even
in contradistinction from obedience? It will not be proper, perhaps to speak
out what you would think of such subtle Distinguishers as these -- But
whatever you would think of them; the same you must think of those, who tell us
that a principle of obedience is essential to a true faith; that all who have
true faith are justified; but that those who have it not, are not justified;
and yet tell us, that a true faith does not justify, considered as
comprehensive of obedience; but as distinguished from, and opposed to it. And
this is really the amount of all the gibberish which you read or hear,
concerning being justified " Fide sola", but not " Fide solitaria!" -- " By
faith alone" but not " by faith that is alone!" --

5. AND lastly here, If we consider faith abstractly, or independently of
holiness and obedience, what can we see in it, which should give it this
pre-eminence above every thing besides? above sincere repentance for our sins?
above righteousness and charity to our neighbor? above gratitude to our
Redeemer? above the love and reverence of our Maker? Does faith, abstractly
considered, seem to have any such prerogative, that it should justify us rather
than any, or all, of these graces and virtues? Indeed if we consider faith as a
principle of universal obedience; as containing in it all the divine and social
virtues; and as being the source and sum of them; if we consider it in this
light, there will be no difficulty in accounting for the highest things that
are said of it in the new testament. But if we consider faith in
contradistinction from these virtues; and from all obedience to God's
commandments, no intelligible and rational account can be given of it; why it
should have that pre-eminence? why it should justify? why it should be imputed
for righteousness? But all this will be darkness and mystery; which, though
accounted by some, the chief glory of the gospel, seems to me to be no real
part of it is glory. The christian revelation is glorious in respect of the
great light which it affords us; but not, surely, on account of what is still
left obscure in it! Otherwise the apostle might m^^e properly have
congratulated those who still sat in darkness, than those who were, by this
dispensation, called out of it into mavelous light. -- But not to digress:
When faith is spoken of in scripture in the primary and restrained sense, or as
it is contradistinguished from true piety and virtue, other things are plainly
preferred to it. Even the apostle Paul himself, who is though it by some to exalt
faith so much, as to render every thing else inconsiderable in comparison of
it; even this same apostle undervalues faith when put in competition with the
moral virtues. "Though I have ALL FAITH, says he, and have not charity, I am
NOTHING." And again, "Now abidest faith, hope, charity, these three; but the
GREATEST of these is CHARITY." And this is that more excellent way, which he
shows unto us, after exhorting us to "covet earnestly the best gifts." Thus St.
Paul, the great champion for justification by faith, undervalues says when
considered in distinction from, and in comparison of, virtue and obedience:
Which plainly shows, that when he speaks of our being justified by faith, he
cannot mean faith, as distinguished from charity, and other christian virtues;
but as including them. -- As to the pre-eminence which some give to faith, in
the affair of justification, on account of its being the hand that lays hold on
the righteousness of Christ, and a going out of ourselves; these things, I
confess, are beyond my comprehension: Only it were to be wished, that some
people would not go out of their senses, as well as out of themselves; and both
amuse themselves, and pester others, with unmeaning phrases, and mere Jargon.

HAVING thus considered this notable distinction, (that though true faith
includes a principle of obedience; yet it does not justify us considered as
containing that principle, but exclusively of it, and as opposed to it;) I
shall just mention another, which is equally edifying; and which has, indeed,
been already hinted at in this discourse. The distinction I mean, is this, That
though faith alone justifies us in this world, and intitles us to salvation in
the world to come; yet obedience to the gospel is necessary in order to our
being justified at Christ's tribunal hereafter, and so, in order to our being
actually saved at last.

NOW if what is here said were indeed true, it would scarce be worth while to
give ourselves much concern about the terms of justification here; whether we
are now justified by faith alone, or not? This cannot be a very interesting and
important question, provided it is certain that we must both believe in Christ
and obey Him, in order to our being finally justified and saved by Him, when he
shall come to judge the world in righteousness. The grand interesting point,
is, What the gospel requires of us in order to our being acquitted in that
great day of retribution; and to our "going away into life eternal"? Which
point being once resolved, the other is but of very little importance. It is
rather a matter of curious speculation for men of leisure, than of serious
concernment to the souls of Christians. So that there is either no foundation
for this distinction; or, if there is, those who make it might be much better
employed in inculcating that piety and virtue, which is acknowledged necessary
to salvation; than in eternally insisting upon the doctrine of justification
here by faith only; as if there could be no christianity, no religion, without
it!

BUT when this distinction comes to be examined, there is really nothing in it:
it is wholly without foundation; and the thing intended by it, is demonstrably
false. We are not justified here, and entitled to salvation, on one condition;
and justified and actually saved hereafter, on another; but on the same. That
which the gospel has made necessary in order to our being acquitted and saved
in the day of judgment, it has made equally necessary in order to our being
justified now, and entitled to salvation. For (as has been observed already in
this discourse) the gospel is the rule, by which those who are under the
dispensation of it, are to be judged hereafter. So that we shall then be either
acquitted or condemned, according as we have, or have not, complied with the
terms of it according to their true intent and meaning, whatever those terms
are. And these terms being the same now that they will be hereafter, without
the least variation, it undeniably follows, that such persons as will be
condemned by the gospel then, must be equally condemned by it now; and that
such as will then be justified by it, and no others, can be justified by it at
present, or entitled to the salvation of it. Betwixt the justification and
condemnation of the gospel, there is no medium. Whom it does not justify, it
condemns; whom it condemns not, it justifies. Nor does length, or distance of
time, make any alteration in this case. We cannot be justified only by
believing, at present, unless we may be justified only by believing, hereafter;
provided the terms of the gospel, like the author of it, are "the same
yesterday, to day and forever:" So that what these men take for an important
theological distinction, turns out (like some of St. Athanasius's) to be no
better than a palpable contradiction. For there cannot well be a more glaring
repugnancy than to say, that the same gospel which will condemn men for their
disobedience in the day of judgment, does not also condemn men equally for
their disobedience now; but justifies them solely on account of their faith.

So much for the pretended It is humbly hoped that those worthy Clergymen, who
have acquired so great reputation for learning, as well as orthodoxy, by often
quoting, in their Sermons, Luther's -- " Articulus stantis vel cadentii
Ecclesiae," will not envy Au^ther the inconsiderable honor of translating it.
" Article of a standing, or a falling Church"! It is really surprising that
such a doctrine should ever be believed by any: It is still more wonderful,
that it should ever be embraced by any worthy, good men: But what is most
astonishing of all, is, that such an irrational, unscriptural doctrine; a
doctrine of so pernicious a tendency with regard to the lives and manners of
men, should be insisted upon with peculiar warmth and zeal, as a most important
and fundamental article of the Christian Faith!

SERMON IX. Of the Nature and Principle of Evangelical Obedience.
JAMES I. 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
HAVING, in several preceding discourses, shown the indispensable necessity of
our being doers of the word as well as hearers, in order to the salvation of
our souls, which is the great end of the Christian revelation; having also
pointed out to you some of those many ways, in which persons may be in danger
of deceiving their own selves in a matter of so great importance; and given you
an antidote against the poison of those errors, which are but too rife in the
Christian world; I proceed now to the next thing proposed when I entered upon
this subject: Which was,

EIGHTHLY, To explain more distinctly the nature and principle of Evangelical
obedience. And here, first, I shall consider the nature of this obedience, so
as to distinguish it from the obedience of a mere Moralist, and of a Theist;
and also from that of good men, who lived under the Jewish dispensation. And,
secondly, I shall consider the principle from which this obedience flows.

IT is to be observed in general, that all obedience, properly speaking,
consists in the observation of some law or rule. The apostle tells us, that
"where there is no law, there is no transgression:" It is equally true, that
where there is no law, there can be no obedience; all obedience consisting in
conformity to some law, or rule of conduct, as all transgression consists in a
deviation therefrom. And Christian, or Evangelical obedience, is nothing either
more or less, than the conforming of our practice to the laws and commandments
of CHRIST, who is constituted the Lord and King and Judge of the world; to whom
all power in heaven and in earth is given, that all men should honor Him in
like manner as they honor the Father.

IF you ask where you are to look for the laws of this "King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords?" I answer, Neither into the volumes of nature, nor into your own
hearts; though there are laws written there, corresponding to them; and written
as with a pen of iron and the point of a diamond. You are not to look for them
in the Statute-books, and other law books in the country, where you happen to
live; or in any of the civil establishments of religion. Nor are you to look
for them in the tomes of theological writers, or the decrees of Popes and
Councils; where they are too often made void by vain traditions. No! you are to
look for them only in the gospel of Christ; they being no other than the
precepts and rules of conduct, which are found there; and which were
promulgated, either immediately by Christ himself; or mediately, by his
inspired apostles, the chief ministers of his kingdom, whom He authoritatively
sent forth to declare his will, even as the Father had sent Him. John 20. 21.
These laws of Christ, our anointed Sovereign, and whose right it is to reign
over us, are contained in their native integrity and perfection, only in the
holy scriptures; more particularly of the new testament. This alone is the
law-book of Christians, as such; though as men, and members of civil society, we
have other laws to observe. It is only in conformity to the commandments of
Christ, as they are contained in these sacred records, that christian obedience
consists. And it is a manifest solecism to call any other obedience christian,
or evangelical, besides that, of which the laws of Christ, or the gospel, is
the measure and standard.

THOUGH these laws are many, as they respect our hearts, and external conduct; as
they prescribe to us our duty toward God, and our Savior; toward our
neighbor and ourselves; yet they are sometimes considered as one: Not only as
one system or body of laws; but as one law; the law of liberty, by which we are
to be judged; and against which, whosoever presumptuously and habitually
offends, though but in one point, is guilty of all: i. e. He so far violates the
whole, and that authority by which the whole is injoined, that he is condemned
as a transgressor, even by this law of liberty; and therefore cannot be
justified and saved by it -- But this is not the place for considering the
extent of christian obedience -- I shall therefore only just observe here, that
as on one hand, it is certain the continued and wilful violation of the
christian law, in any respect, is inconsistant with that obedience which is
necessary to salvation; so on the other hand, it is equally certain, that a
perfect conformity thereto, is not so indispensably required, that whosoever
falls short of it, must finally be condemned. For to suppose this, were plainly
to turn the law of liberty into a legal dispensation, from which it essentially
differs. And were this the case, it would be as impossible, that justification
and life should come by the gospel of Christ, as that it should come by the law
of Moses -- But

HAVING observed in general, that christian obedience consists in conforming
our tempers and behavior to the laws of Christ; it may be proper, for the
better understanding of what is here intended, to show more particularly, how
this obedience is distinguished from any other.

AND it certainly differs very widely from obedience to the law of nature, or
the moral law; especially in that narrow, partial sense and acceptance of this
law, which confines morality to men's behavior toward each other in civil and
social life: and to the private virtues of temperance, and the like, without
any regard to Deity, and a moral Governor. The ancient pagan Moralists
generally considered morality only in this light. When they teach that the law
of reason, or the law of nature, is to be followed and observed, (on many
branches of which, they treat with great propriety) they usually mean no more,
than that men are bound to practice justice, benevolence, sobriety, and the
other virtues of private and social life, as being, in their own nature,
convenient, fitting and decent. This is a notion of virtue and obedience, which
falls vastly short of the Christian idea; not only because Christians are under
obligation to practice other duties besides those which nature dictates; but
also because christianity ultimately resolves all duties into the will of God,
considered as the all-wise, good, and righteous Lawgiver, and the moral Ruler
of the world. "There is one Lawgiver, says St. James, who is able to save and
to destroy." And "He that said, do not commit adultery, said also, do not
kill." Our obedience is, "doing the will of our Father which is in heaven."
Whatever duty we are bound to practice, it is considered as injoined upon us by
the authority of almighty God. All our good and virtuous actions, are
considered as a tribute which we owe to Him; as a sacrifice offered to Him; and
with which He is H^^. 13. 16.
well pleased. And, on the other hand, whenever we transgress our duty, this is
considered as transgressing the law of God: against Him, Him only do we sin.
For the divine will and authority, does, as it were, involve and swallow up all
other obligations; even the laws of nature and reason, as they are sometimes
called, being the laws of Him who is Lord of nature, and the Fountain of all
reason.

BUT what has now been said, only distinguishes the obedience of Christians
from such virtue as a mere Atheist may, in some degree, be the subject of. For
a man may be, in some measure, just, beneficent, temperate, etc. from an
internal sense of the reasonableness and fitness and advantage of being so;
although he is so far from obeying and honoring God therein, that he does not
even believe his existence. Our modern Theists profess to go much farther than
this; though their obedience, if they really practiced agreably to their
principles, (which they seldom do) would fall much below that of Christians,
who act up to their profession. The Theists profess to reverence God as the
moral governor of the universe, whose will and laws are to be read in men's
hearts, and in the volumes of visible nature. And the dictates of nature and
reason, it is said, ought to be obeyed, not merely considered as in themselves
fit to be observed; but also because they must be supposed conformable to the
will of the Deity; and to have all the force of laws enacted by Him: So that it
may be concluded, men will be rewarded or punished by Him, as they obey or
disobey these laws. I speak now only of the more sober and rational part of
modern Theists. There are others of them, who while they profess to believe in
God, deride all this as mere superstition and enthusiasm; Characteristicks,
passim.
and with whom it is nothing but the inherent amiableness of virtue, that
claims regard; virtue not being rewarded, nor vice punished, as such, by a
moral Governor and Lord; though it is owned they have a tendency, in the very
nature of things, to render the subjects of them happy and miserable,
respectively. Whether these nominal Theists, are not really Atheists at the
bottom, or, at best Epicureans, which comes much to the same thing at last, I
will not pretend to determine. Only it is evident, there is but very little
difference betwixt saying, that there is no God at all; and saying, that there
is none who is to be regarded and reverenced, as the righteous governor of the
world; none, who rewards and punishes men for their actions. Such Persons are
justly said by the wise Roman, "Ver^^ posuisse Deum, re sustulisse:" Or to that
effect.


BUT as to the more sober and religious Theists, who consider the natural laws
of virtue, as the laws of God; and who not having, or not acknowledging any
revealed law, yet "do (...). 2. 14.
by nature the things contained in it," in some measure; even Their obedience
falls far short of the Christian standard. Christian obedience differs from
Their's, not only as Christians make a revealed law the rule of their
obedience; and They, only the light of nature: (which would not, of itself, be
sufficient to constitute a very essential difference, provided the matter of
these laws were exactly the same.) But it differs in diverse other respects. The
catalogue of Christian duties and virtues is considerably longer than the
Theist's. Every duty of natural religion, is indeed a duty of christianity; of
revealed religion. But the gospel moreover injoins upon us diverse things, which
are not contained in the law of nature; and are no part of it. And the
obedience paid to these different laws, viz. of mere nature, and of
Christianity, must differ as much, at least, as the laws themselves differ.

BESIDES: Whoever duly attends to the Christian doctrine of a Mediator, will
find, not only that various duties result from, and are injoined upon us in
consequence of, that supernatural interposition of providence; but also that
our obedience in general is put upon a different footing thereby, having, in
the whole of it, a reference to this great dispensation of divine grace to a
sinful world. All the precepts of the gospel, though they are truly the laws of
God; yet they are not to be considered only in that light; but as his laws
promulgated by His only begotten Son, who has redeemed us, and whose servants
and subjects we more immediately are. Agreably whereto it is said, that we are
"not without law to God; but under the law to Christ." 1 Cor. 9. 21.
God has subjected us to the rule and authority of His Son, in consequence of
his undertaking and executing the mediatorial office. In our Savior's own
words, "The Father loves the Son, and has given him authority to execute
judgment, because he is the Son of Man:" i. e. because he became incarnate. And
in the language of the Apostle Paul, He "took upon him the form of a servant,
and was made in the likeness of men; -- and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the cross: Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given
him a name, which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow." Philip^. 7, --
etc. Now it is as invested with this royal power and dignity; as being the
King whom God has set upon his holy hill of Zion, that Christ gives laws to
men; not merely as a prophet, o^ divine messenger. He is "made Head over all
things to the church": and we are put under his authority, in a sense wherein
we cannot be said to be under that of any other messenger or minister of
Heaven, whether human or angelical. From which considerations it is manifest,
that our obedience is more immediately due to the Son, than to the Father; it
being more immediately by His authority, that the various duties of the gospel
are enjoined upon us; and to him, that we are more immediately accountable for
our conduct.

ALLOWING for the present, (what is far from being true, viz.) that the laws of
christianity are, in all respects the same with the laws and religion of
nature, and only a republication of it; yet, surely, we could not be said to
pay a proper obedience to them, without considering them as being the laws of
Christ, our Redeemer and Sovereign. And this is what constitutes one essential
difference betwixt christian obedience, and any other. In order to a person's
obeying as a Christian ought to do, it is not only necessary that he performs
the duties peculiar to Christanity; but also that he performs all others, which
may be common to this and other religions, in obedience to Christ, as his Lord
and Master and final Judge: doing all things whatsoever he does in word or
deed, in the name of the Lord Jesus. Col. 3. 17.


HOWEVER, Christians do not (at least they ought not to) set aside the supreme
authority and dominion of God, the FATHER Almighty: or, by attempting to
divide, really destroy, the Monarchy of the universe; which is still in HIM
alone; the mediatorial authority of Christ, being derived from HIM, and
subordinate to HIS. Though our obedience as Christians, is due more immediately
to our Lord Jesus Christ; (as was said before) yet it is ultimately referred to
His Father, and our Father, to His God and our God; Joh. 20, 17.
who "is greater than ALL;" Joh. 10. 29, and Chapter 14. 28.
and who has conferred this dignity and authority on the Son. And of this
important truth, viz. that all the homage and obedience which we pay to the
Son, should thus be referred to, and terminate in, the Father; of this
important truth, I say, the apostle admonishes us, when he tells us, that God
highly exalted his Son, that every tongue might confess him to be Lord, "to the
glory of God, the FATHER." Philip. 2. 11.


So that Christians ought not, surely, to pay any such obedience or homage to
the Son, as has a tendency to eclipse the glory of God the Father; who is
without Rival or Competitor. The Dominion and Sovereignty of the universe is
necessarily one, and in ONE; -- the only living and true GOD, who delegates
such measures of power and authority to other Beings, as seems good in his
sight; but "will not give his [peculiar] glory to another." Isa. 42. 8.
Our blessed Savior does indeed assert the rights and prerogatives of his own
crown; but never usurped those of His Father's: On the contrary, He constantly
and uniformly tells us, that his authority was given to him of the Father; and
is exercised in subordination to His will; not independently of it. He claims
no authority, besides what he claims by virtue of the Father's grant, and the
commission which he received from Him.

WHAT is said above, seemed needful to prevent mis-construction; to suggest the
true ground of that obedience which we owe to our blessed Lord; and to show the
perfect consistency of paying it, with the Unity, and the supreme glory and
dominion of God, the FATHER: The not sufficiently preserving of which Unity and
Supremacy amongst Christians, has long been just matter of reproach to them;
and a great stumbling block both to Jews and Mahometans. With the metaphysical
abstract nature, or essence of the Deity, I am not bold enough to meddle.
Disquisitions of this kind, and denunciations of God's vengeance against those
who do not affect to be wise, or are not willing to believe, above what is
written, are left to the unaccountable Temerity of the Athanasians. I can, for
my own part, freely acquiesce in St. Paul's doctrine, in the most obvious sense
of his words, viz. That though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven
or in earth; (as there be gods many, and lords many) but [yet] to us there is
but ONE GOD, the FATHER -- and One Lord, Jesus Christ. -- 1 Cor. 8, 4. -- There
is ONE GOD, and One Mediator betwixt GOD and men, the Man Christ Jesus -- 1 Timothy 2, 5. Who the only true GOD is, we may farther learn from our Savior's
prayer, John 17. begin. These things spoke Jesus; and lift up his eyes to
heaven, and said, FATHER, glorify thy Son -- This is life eternal that they
might know THEE, the ONLY TRUE GOD, and Jesus Christ, whom THOU have sent.
-- But to return,

AS christian obedience is distinguished from that of mere Theists, by our
making a written revelation the rule of it; by the peculiar duties of the
gospel; and by our paying all our obedience more immediately to Jesus Christ,
as our Redeemer, Lord and Judge; so it is still farther distinguished
therefrom, by the motives from which it is performed.

THE obedience of a mere Theist may be excited by a contemplation of the divine
goodness, and other attributes, as manifested in the creation of the world; and
in that providence which sustains and governs all things. But a Christian's
obedience is moreover, excited, I might perhaps say, more especially excited,
by a contemplation of God's perfections, as manifested in our redemption: And
we are constrained by the love of Christ, who "died for all." when all were
dead. The Theist may do acts of charity to his neighbors considered as his
fellow creatures, the creatures of God. But a Christian moreover considers the
relation in which all men stand to Christ, who so loved them, as to give his
life "a ransom for all:" And if he gives ought to a disciple, it is in the name
of a disciple that he does it, and because he belongs to Christ. The Theist may
be sober and temperate because this is reasonable, and conducive to health. But
the Christian moreover, considers himself as "the habitation of God through the
spirit;" and will not defile the temple of God, lest God should destroy him.
The Theist's virtue and obedience may be excited by some general confused
notions of a future state of retribution. But a Christian lives under the
habitual expectation of a resurrection, and a future judgment; when all they
that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and come
forth, they that have done good, to the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil, to the resurrection of damnation. The Theist may obey, because
he imagines his virtue (notwithstanding all it is defects) so valuable in
itself, that it will fully and sufficiently recommend him to the approbation of
his Creator. But the Christian obeys, because this will be acceptable to God
through his Redeemer, and be rewarded for his sake. In fine, the obedience of a
Christian, in all its parts and branches, receives a peculiar tincture and
complexion from his profession; and is animated by the faith of the Son of God,
who has redeemed us by his blood; and made us kings and priests unto God, to
offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to Him by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
-- These things are sufficient to show the wide difference which there is
betwixt the obedience of a Christian, and that of a mere Theist, even supposing
the latter of them to live up to his principles.

BUT it may be inquired, How christian obedience differs from that of good men
under the law of Moses, before the coming of Christ in the flesh? The
resolution of which inquiry, depends very much upon on another question, viz.
How far the mediatorial scheme of our redemption and salvation, was opened to
Their understandings, during that preparatory dispensation? If we suppose this
scheme to have been as clearly revealed to them in general, as it seems to have
been to some of the Patriarchs before the law, and to some good men after, and
under, it, the difference will not be so great as some may perhaps imagine. For
it will then consist chiefly in these two things:

1st. IN the externals, the modes and rituals of religion; which, to be sure,
were very different under the Mosaic, and the evangelical dispensation; the
morality of the law and of the gospel being still the same. And

2dly. WHEREAS WE believe and trust in a Redeemer already come; and are hereby
excited to obey: They believed in the same Savior, as promised, and looked
for; and were, by this expectation of a Deliverer, stimulated to the service of
God.

WE are told expressly, that the gospel was preached to Abraham, who rejoiced
to see the day of Christ approaching. And he, together with others both before,
and after the Mosaic economy took place, were justified in the same way, and
upon on the same footing of grace, that we are now; Abraham being the father of
the faithful in all succeeding generations. And the Author to the Hebrews,
having enumerated diverse of these ancient worthies, tell us, that these all
died in faith, not having received the promises; ( i. e. the fulfillment of
them) but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced
them; and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims in the earth. Heb.
11, 13.
And of Moses, it is said afterward, that he esteemed the reproach of Christ,
greater riches than the treasures in Egypt; having respect unto the recompense
of the reward. Ver. 26,
Now according to these, and suchlike representations in the new testament,
one would think that, excepting the two particulars mentioned, there could be
no considerable difference betwixt the obedience of good men before, and after,
the coming of Christ.

BUT whether this knowledge of a Savior to come, were common to all good men,
under the law, or not, there is some ground of doubt. For though one great end of
the law was, that it might shadow forth good things to come; that it might at
once admonish those who were under it, of their need of a spiritual deliverer
and Redeemer, and lead them to expect such a One; yet it is manifest that the
generality of the Jews, for sometime before our Lord's nativity, had no notion
of this spiritual meaning, and typical reference of the law; and therefore
interpreted all the prophecies concerning the Messiah, of a temporal Prince and
Savior. And whether some truly pious and virtuous men, were not carried away
with this prevailing error, I will not pretend to determine -- Nor can we fully
and thoroughly discriminate betwixt the obedience of good Jews, and good
Christians, unless we knew more exactly than we do, what the ideas and
sentiments of the former generally were, respecting the promised Savior.

TO conclude this head, concerning the nature of christian obedience -- This
obedience is not only that which, for the matter of it, is agreeable to the
precepts of the gospel; but that which is performed with a due regard to
Christ, as our great Prophet, Priest and King; the Captain of our Salvation;
the author and finisher of our faith: That obedience, which has the gospel
revelation for its basis and rule; and which is performed from views and
motives proper and peculiar to this dispensation of divine grace. However right
and reasonable men's actions are, considered in themselves; however
corresponding to the law of liberty; yet there is not, in strict propriety, any
thing of christian obedience therein, any farther than they are done with
reference to the gospel of Christ. This is the characteristick of the obedience
we are considering: hereby it is distinguished from any other. And this will be
farther evident from a consideration of the grand principle of this obedience,
which was the second thing proposed in the beginning of this discourse, and to
which I now proceed.

THE great principle of christian obedience, is christian faith; faith in
Christ, and in God through him. I add -- in God through him; because the faith of
Christians does not terminate in Christ as the ultimate, (though he is the
immediate) object of it: but it is extended, through him, to the one God and
Father of all. And to beget in men that belief and trust in God, which is here
intended, was one grand design of the mediatorial undertaking. Christ came into
the world in his Father's name, as sent and commissioned by Him, to declare and
reveal Him. And in His name he spoke to the world concerning God, and His
kingdom. All he taught, did and suffered, refered ultimately to the Father; the
end thereof being to bring us to God. A passage in the apostle Peter will both
illustrate and confirm the thing here intended; where, speaking of our Savior,
he says, that he was foreordained before the foundation of the world; but was
manifest in these last times for us, who by him do believe in God that raised
him from the dead, and gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God.
1 Pet. 1, 20, 21.
From hence, and from many other passages of scripture, it is evident that
christian faith is not merely a belief in Christ, or relying upon him for
salvation; but rather a belief and hope in God through him; a belief that He is
what Christ has declared him to be; that He is that righteous, that good and
gracious Being, which the gospel represents him to be; that He is reconciling
the world unto himself, by such means, and upon such terms, as are therein
mentioned: A belief, that Christ is "the way, the truth and the life; that no
man can come unto the Father, but by him;" or that sinners can obtain eternal
life in that method, and that alone, which he has opened and revealed. Act 4.
12.


THIS is the proper notion of christian faith: And, indeed, to suppose that
faith terminates in Christ, as the ultimate object of it, is inconsistent with
his being a Mediator at all. We lose the very idea of a Mediator upon this
supposition. If Christ is really "the Mediator betwixt God and Man;" he is to
be believed on as such; and our faith must terminate, as was observed before,
in that God, betwixt Whom and us, he mediates. -- And having premised thus much
concerning the nature of christian faith in general; (which is much mistaken by
many) I am now to show, that this is the great principle of christian
obedience. I do not mean, that all who thus believe in Christ, and in God through
him, do actually obey the gospel; (which is contrary to fact and experience)
but, that all who obey it, obey it from this principle. It is this faith that
purifies their hearts; and animates them in the discharge of all the duties of
the christian life -- Let me explain myself a little more particularly upon
this point.

IT is very evident that no man can obey as a Christian, who has not the faith
of a Christian. It is supposeable that a Mohammedan, or even an Atheist, might
externally perform any duty which the gospel injoins upon us. But if a
Mohammedan or Atheist, known to be such, should perform many of these duties, no
one, surely, would call this christian obedience. Evangelical faith being
wanting, there cannot, properly speaking, be any thing of evangelical obedience
in any actions whatever.

SUCH faith in Christ, and in God through him, as is mentioned above, has a very
natural and apparent tendency to make the subjects of it truly pious and
virtuous; and to yield that obedience to the gospel, which is required of them.
As far as the belief of any thing; as far as any faith, in the primary and most
proper sense of the term, can influence the tempers and practices of men; such
a faith as I am speaking of, bids the fairest of any, to have a good influence
upon men's hearts and manners; to turn them from sin to God; and to induce them
to obey his commandments. What can be supposed sufficient and effectual to this
good end, if a belief of such truths as are revealed in the gospel; if
believing Christ to be really that divine messenger which he is said to be; if
believing, that he came into the world to redeem us, according to the
evangelical account of this matter; if believing in God, through him, believing
in his righteousness and holiness; his goodness and mercy; his promises and
threatenings; what, I say, can be supposed sufficient and effectual to turn men
from sin to righteousness, if such a faith as this, has not that influence and
efficacy? if it leaves the subjects of it, as it found them, dead in trespasses
and sins? There is certainly no faith, considered in the first and most proper
sense of the word, which can disengage men from their evil courses, and induce
them to love and serve God, if this faith fails to do it. And as this is the
obvious tendency of it; so

IT is manifest through out the new testament, that the apostles of our Lord, and
other holy men, lived under the influence of such a faith. This was the spring,
and source, and animating principle of their obedience. It was this, that made
them abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. It is by this
faith, that they are said to have walked: And the life which they lived in the
flesh, they lived by this faith of the Son of God. This is the faith, which is
said to work by love: And this is the victory that overcomes the world, says
St. John, even your faith. It was by faith, that these holy men run with
patience the race set before them: It was by this shield of faith, that they
were armed against all temptations; and wherewith they were enabled to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked. In fine it was faith, that gave them spirit
and courage to encounter, and strength to overcome, all difficulties and
dangers, in the discharge of their duty -- The account which the apostle gives
us of some renowned men before the coming of Christ, (whose faith was not
essentially different from our's) is agreeable to what is said above. By faith,
Moses, says he, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of
Pharoah's daughter -- By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the
King; for he endured as seeing him who is invisible -- "And what" (as the
apostle goes on) shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of
Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jeptha, of David also and Samuel,
and of the prophets; who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
etc. Thus was faith the great operative principle in good men, even before the
coming of Christ: It was the same principle in general, which wrought in the
apostles and primitive christians: And it is this principle that operates in
good men, in all succeding ages. This is the heavenly seed, which taking root
in the heart, springs up, and ripens into good fruit: This is the source and
fountain from whence obedience flows: And without such a principle of faith,
there can, as has been observed before, be no obedience properly evangelical.
But

NOTWITHSTANDING the visible, apparent tendency of faith, to produce obedience;
to make men truly pious and virtuous; and although no person does, or can, obey
the gospel, but from this principle; yet it is manifest both from scripture,
and daily observation, that people may be the subjects of faith, while they
live in disobedience to Christ's commandments: They may have faith, without
having their tempers and manners conformed to the dictates of it: Their lives
and practice may be contrary to what they profess to believe; yea, to what they
actually do believe. So that though faith is the true principle of obedience, in
all those who obey; yet it is not, in fact and event, a principle of obedience
in all that believe; for there are vicious believers; as well as vicious
infidels. We learn from the new testament, that many who believed in Christ and
the gospel, of old, wholly apostatized from the faith afterward; some in a
shorter, and some in a longer time. Many others, who did not make shipwreck
concerning faith, but continued to hold it; yet held it in unrighteousness;
making shipwreck of a good conscience; and being to every good work reprobate.
Our own observation may, perhaps, illustrate and verify these representations
of scripture. Have we not known some who professed to believe in Christ; to
trust in the mercy of God through him; and even to be very confident of their
title to eternal life; (of whom we cannot pretend to say, that they did not
thus believe, and trust, and confidently expect salvation) Have we not, I say,
known some such persons, who were far from being good men, if the tree is to be
known and judged of by its fruit? Yea, have we not known some, who were not
only believers; but very warm and zealous ones, who have wholly departed from
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, as was foretold? 1 Timothy 4. 1.
Have we not seen examples of such as our Savior speaks of, who "hear the
word, and anon with joy receive it; yet not having root in themselves, endure
only for a while?" Man. 13 20, 21.


IT is very evident then, that faith is not really a practical principle in the
hearts of all believers: Some of them are very little, if any thing, the better
for their faith -- And there is one thing that deserves a particular notice
here: Which is, That the Apostles, in their epistles to particular persons, or
to christian churches, never speak of the vicious, impenitent professors of
christianity, as being destitute of true faith; or as being really unbelievers,
while they professed to have faith. On the contrary, they always take it for
granted, that these persons, however wicked, were really believers
notwithstanding their wickedness; exhorting them to repent and amend; and to
live suitably to their holy vocation. In this respect, at least, there is a
very remarkable difference betwixt the Apostles, and some modern preachers of
the gospel. The latter speak to, and of, all the wicked professors of
christianity, as unbelievers, as destitute of true faith; upon a presumption
that where faith is, there will always be obedience; or, that no true believer,
can remain vicious. Now I am bold to say, that this manner of preaching is
altogether unscriptural; and that there cannot be a single instance produced,
from the writings of the apostles, which justifies it. For, as was said before,
They always take it for granted, that men may be really believers, and address
them as such, how much soever their lives and morals might resemble those of
pagans and infidels. So that we cannot reasonably doubt, but that faith, true
faith, which is a principle of obedience in some persons, is not so in others;
not working by love, nor producing the fruits of righteousness.

SOME will probably inquire, How it comes to pass, that faith, which is the
principle and source of obedience in some persons, should not be so in others,
universally? Why the hearts and manners of many should be influenced by their
faith; while the hearts and manners of as many, perhaps a much greater number,
should be so much at variance with their faith? so opposite to what they
profess to believe; and which they really do believe, according to the present
hypothesis? And, indeed, though the possibility of this, and the truth of the
supposition, is evident from the whole current of scripture, and verified by
daily experience; yet it may well be accounted one of the greatest speculative
difficulties that occurs, upon the subject of religion: And it is one, of which
it is, perhaps, beyond the sphere of human understanding to give a clear and
full solution; since it seems plainly to run up into the old question
concerning liberty; so that They who can fully clear up all the difficulties
attending the doctrine of human freedom, as opposed to necessity, can be at no
loss for an answer to this -- But who They are, I have not yet found --

SOME think this fact is sufficiently accounted for, only by supposing that
good and wicked men under the gospel, (though both of them are truly believers)
believe in different degrees of intenseness. There are doubtless degrees in
faith; there is a strong and lively faith, as well as a weak and languid. Those
who are the subjects of the former, it is said, are obedient to the dictates of
it; faith, in them, becoming an operative, practical principle: Whilst those,
whose faith is feeble and weak, do not give themselves up to the guidance of
it; this weak faith not being a practical principle, as the other is: But if it
were strengthened to a certain degree, i^ is supposed, it would become so; and
certainly be productive of good fruit. -- Thus, as some suppose, it comes to
pass, that faith is actually a principle of obedience in some persons, and not
in others. But this is far from being a full solution of the difficulty: For
the question still occurs, how it comes to pass that some men are thus strong
in faith; while others give but a feeble and cold assent to the great truths of
christianity? Besides, if there is any such thing as human liberty, it is
certain that, of different men, whose faith is the same, both for kind and
degree, some may act agreably, others contrary thereto: And to say, that all
men whose faith is alike strong, must act alike, is, in effect, to deny that
men are free creatures; unless we suppose their freedom lies rather in
believing, than acting. For if there is a necessary connection betwixt men's
faith and practice, it is plain that they cannot be free in the latter of these
respects; so that they must either be free in the former, or not at all. And,
to human appearance, some great and strong believers are much worse men, than
some who have but little faith.

OTHERS suppose that here is a specific, essential difference in the faith
itself, of those who obey the gospel, and of those who do not: From which
difference in the kind and nature of their faith, it is said, we are to account
for the difference which there is in their lives and manners; one of them being
always, and universally, a principle of christian obedience; the other, never.
But it seems impossible to give any intelligible account of this supposed
specific difference in men's faith. For to say, that one man's faith is wrought
by the special operation of the spirit of God upon his heart; and another's,
not; is not to point out to us the difference which there is supposed to be in
these men's faith; but only to tell us, how these different persons come by
their faith: Which is quite another thing. If two persons assent to the same
divine truths; if they believe in the same God; if they depend upon the same
Savior; their faith is, for kind, the same, in how different a manner soever
we may suppose they became the subjects of it. This faith, as was said above,
may, indeed, be strong in some persons, and weak in others: But this makes only
a gradual, not a specific difference in their faith itself.

SOME, who suppose there is a specific difference betwixt the faith of
obedient, and that of disobedient christians; in order to make out this
difference, and to show how faith becomes a principle of obedience in some
persons and not in others; tell us, that one is a penitent faith, an humble
faith, an holy faith; and so on: Whereas the other is an impenitent faith; not
humble, unholy, etc. But upon examination, it will appear, that this is rather
to tell us how men differ from each other, than how their faith differs. For
since a penitent faith, includes penitence, ^n humble faith, humility, and an
holy faith, holiness; to say that one person has a penitent, humble, holy
faith; but that the faith of others is not a penitent, not an humble, not an
holy one; really amounts to no more than saying, that some believers are
penitent, humble and holy; but that other believers are not so. Which is only
telling us, how widely professed christians differ from each other in their
moral and religious character; not showing us how the faith of a good man
differs specifically from that of a wicked one.

THE same faith, both for kind and degree, may be attended, or accompanied,
with different qualities in different men. One believer may be wise and
learned; another simple and unlearned. Does this difference betwixt the men,
infer any specific difference in their faith? No surely! Thus also one believer
may take a particular pleasure and delight in the exercise of one worldly
calling or occupation; another, in another. Do these different turns of men's
minds, infer a specific difference in their faith? You will justly answer, None
at all. Well: In like manner (for aught that has hitherto appeared) the same
faith may be accompanied with repentance, humility, holiness, in one man; and
with hardness of heart, pride, unholiness, in another. These contrary qualities
may be found in believers; the former of them in some, the latter in others:
But neither of them are faith, strictly and properly speaking; but somewhat
quite distinct from it. Though some believers are penitent, humble and internally
holy; yet these moral and religious qualities, or these christian graces,
strictly speaking, are not faith; but they are as distinct from it, as wisdom
and learning; or any other natural and civil accomplishments; or any particular
turn of mind, with relation to secular employments. We might as well say, that
there is a specific difference betwixt the faith of a wise man, and that of an
ignorant one; betwixt the faith of a christian magistrate, and that of a
christian merchant; as that there is such a difference betwixt the faith of a
saint, and that of a sinner: Yea we might as well say, that there is a specific
difference betwixt the faith of a man of a fair, and one of a dark complexion;
-- the faith of an European, and that of the Ethiopian baptized by Philip.
For, in truth, learning and ignorance, civil magistracy and merchandise,
darkness and fairness of complexion, are not more distinct from faith, properly
so called, than moral and religious qualities are; such as repentance, humility
and holiness. These good qualities are not only distinct from faith, and faith
from them; but there is no necessary connection betwixt them. Some believers
are possessed of them; others are not. Nor can this fact be accounted for, by
supposing, that there is a specific difference betwixt the faith of the former,
and that of the latter. For if there were really any such difference, yet the
question would still recur, How comes one man to have the good faith? another,
only that of an inferior kind? And besides; those who have endeavored to make
out such a specific difference, have not, by any means, done it. For they
either only tell us how we come by true faith, saying it is wrought in us by
the spirit of God, etc. (which, however true it may be, is not to show us
wherein that faith, considered in itself, differs from any other) Or else they
tell us, it is a penitent, humble, holy faith: Which is, in effect, to say,
that the faith of some men differs specifically from that of others, by having
somewhat which is really distinct from faith, joined with it; viz. repentance,
humility and holiness. So that to have recourse to this supposed specific
difference in men's faith, in order to account for some men's obeying, and
others not obeying, the gospel; is really no more than saying, in other words,
that some men obey the gospel, because they do not only believe, but are also
penitent, humble and internally holy; i. e. they obey it, because -- they obey
it! While others disobey it, because, though they believe, yet they remain
impenitent, proud, unholy; i. e. they disobey it, because -- they disobey it!
And is not this a very notable solution? When the very thing which is inquired,
is, How it comes to pass, that some believers are penitent, humble and holy;
others the reverse?

BY this time, I suppose, it is very evident, as was hinted above, that this
inquiry runs directly into another; and terminates therein: I mean, the
perplexing question concerning human liberty; and it can only be resolved fully
by those, who can fully reconcile our freedom (which ought not to be doubted
of) with the scripture-doctrine of God's foreknowledge, and eternal counsels;
of his governing providence, and the operations of his spirit and grace. To
pretend to answer the difficulty, by denying human freedom, and resolving all
into the absolute sovereignty, and power of God, is only to cut the knot -- And
on the other supposition, that we are free, there is somewhat in this subject,
which is, even at first view, above humanity -- somewhat, to which we cannot
attain -- somewhat, which is evidently too high for creatures of such limited
faculties; and probably for all CREATURES. And if we exercise ourselves in
these things, I know of no valuable end it can answer -- except that of
convincing us of our ignorance, 'till we come, at last, to sit down contented
and resigned, where the holy apostle did, saying with him -- O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11 33.
God's counsel and providence govern the world; but yet men are free! --

AND if we are really free creatures, we cannot go any farther toward a
solution of the question we have been considering, than this -- Some men will
and choose to conform their tempers and practice to their faith; and do so, by
the concurring influences of God's Spirit. Others will and choose to continue in
their sins; not as being tempted (much less compelled) thereto of God; but
being drawn away of their own lusts and enticed. James 1. 14.
Higher than this, I think, we cannot go, without losing ourselves. We must
either take up with this simple, scriptural account of the matter; or else
bewilder ourselves with that, both needless, and fruitless inquiry, What
determines our will and choice to one side, rather than to the other? With
relation to which question, I shall only observe, That in all those respects,
wherein we are actually Free, (whatever respects they are) certainly nothing
determines us necessarily, or unavoidably, so that we could not but make the
choice we do: We are Arbiters here, choosing for, and determining, Ourselves;
this being the proper notion and nature of liberty, as opposed to necessity.

THOSE persons who deny the foreknowledge, and the eternal purposes of God,
because they cannot clearly reconcile this doctrine with that of human liberty,
seem very worthy of blame: Since, if the scriptures are true, these doctrines
must both be true. But those who, because of the difficulty which they find
here, deny that man is free, are still much more blameable: Because the denial
of liberty, is the charging of all our sins on God; making him the author, as
well as the punisher, of them: and so, absolutely destroys his moral character:
Whilst, at the same time, this is of the most fatal tendency with reference to
practical religion --

IN that revelation, with which God has favored us, it is forever taken for
granted, that we have a self-determining power; (whatever difficulties may
attend the supposition) I mean, the power either of accepting the mercy offered
us, by complying with the gracious terms of it; or rejecting the counsel of God
against ourselves. So that none ever had, or shall have, just cause to
complain, that the God of all grace and mercy, so cruelly mocked and insulted
them, as to offer them deliverance from the wrath to come, and eternal life in
his most glorious presence, upon impracticable conditions: Which would, in
effect, be to give us a sight of heaven, only to render us more wretched in the
loss of it; and to make damnation itself the more intolerable! Such doctrine as
this we, indeed, sometimes hear; such hard speeches! -- But if you can believe
Him, for whom it is impossible to lie, "Life and death are set before you,
blessing and cursing:" And of this, both heaven and earth are called to bear
record; therefore CHOOSE Life! Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
THERE are many things attended with insuperable difficulties in speculation;
things, of which no clear account, or Rationale can be given; yea, which seem
to run us into some absurdity, if supposed true: Which things are,
nevertheless, certain, indubitable facts; such as cannot be denied, without
denying our own daily experience. Liberty, as opposed to necessity, I take to
be somewhat of this kind. Great perplexities and difficulties arise upon the
supposition of it; but much greater, upon the denial. All human language is
exactly accommodated to the doctrine of freedom: so that we could neither
understand each other, nor ourselves, without the idea of liberty; or a power
both of choosing and acting variously, or differently, within a certain sphere,
under the same given circumstances. For this is the true, proper notion of
liberty: At least, this is the sense in which the terms liberty, freedom,
active power, are used in this note. And without the idea of such a power, what
do we mean by such forms of expression as these, which are common? viz. That we
can do so or so; but cannot do another thing: That we would do this or that, if
we could; but cannot: And, vice versa, That we could do this or that, if we
would; but will not: That we will try, or use our endeavors to do so or so;
and do it, if we can. This is the language of nature; and every man understands
these forms of expression: Which, yet, would be quite senseless and
unintelligible to us, without the idea and supposition of liberty. There would
be no foundation for such a distinction betwixt what we can, and what we cannot
do, etc. All men have therefore the idea of liberty: which is, indeed, one of
the most plain and simple of all our ideas: Even children have it. And

IT may be fairly argued that we are free, and conscious to ourselves of our
being so, from our having this idea. For how did we, at first, come by it? It
could not, I think, come into our minds, originally, from any thing external
and material; or by means of any of our corporeal senses and organs. There
seems to be nothing in all visible nature, which could suggest it to us at
first; though spontaneous animal motion bids the fairest for it. If we had not
actually experienced the thing ourselves, we could have no more idea of it,
than a blind man, of colors, or a deaf one, of sounds. This idea could be
gotten only by reflecting upon what has passed in our own minds; upon what we
have experienced in ourselves, by a kind of internal sensation. We are,
therefore, conscious of our freedom: So that those who deny there is any
liberty in man, do not only contradict the experience of others; but their own.
For they have this idea, no less than others; which yet, they could not have,
but from experience.

HOWEVER: If it should be said, that we do not get the idea of active power, by
reflecting on our own experience; but that it might be naturally suggested to
the mind ab extra, by animal motion, of which we are daily witnesses; or by any
other phoenomena in nature: It will, even from hence follow, that there are
really some phoenomena in nature, which correspond to this idea; for otherwise
the idea could not have been naturally suggested to our minds by these
appearances. So that, even upon this supposition, it follows that the notion of
liberty, or active power, is a natural one; bro't into our minds by daily
observation. And if this is the case, it is surely natural to believe there is
freedom: Consequently to deny this, is unnatural; and to contradict a man's own
daily observation. For we do not live a day without seeing what has, at least,
the appearance of liberty; and what, according to the present supposition,
originally suggested to us the notion, or idea of it.

THERE is, demonstrably, liberty somewhere; in some One Being, at least. All
things could not have proceeded in an eternal series of necessary causes and
effects, each of which is both an effect with relation to somewhat preceding,
and a cause with relation to something following. We must ascend, and follow
the chain, 'till we come to a first Mover, how distant and remote soever: Which
first Mover, must be a free Being, or have a principle of active power, which
is the same thing. He cannot be necessarily actuated by any thing: Which would
be, in effect, to suppose there is a Cause of the first Cause; or that the
first Cause is a necessary effect of another necessary Cause, etc. etc.

To deny to this great first Cause, the power of imparting to his creatures a
measure of freedom; or of making a free creature, who can either choose and act,
or not, within a certain sphere, (how narrow and limited soever that sphere may
be) is making much too free with Him. There is not the least contradiction or
absurdity, in the supposition of a creature's having active power, or being a
free agent. And

IF active power be not an incommunicable attribute of the Creator; (which we
have no reason to think it is) or if a creature may possibly be endowed with
liberty; we have no reason to doubt but that we have it ourselves: Since, upon
supposition that we were actually free, we could not be more experimentally
certain that we were so, than we are at present. That we are possessed of
active power, is so immediately, so experimentally known by us; and we have
such an inward consciousness and feeling of it; that no difficulties, merely
speculative, can overthrow, or in any measure invalidate, this evidence of it.
We are not more certain of any one thing, except, perhaps, of our own
existence, than that we are free creatures.

BUT it will perhaps be said, that though we do, indeed, seem to ourselves to be
free; yet we may not really be so: This may be all a delusion. -- To which it
is answered, that if this should in fact be the case, it is impossible for us
to know it to be so; or to have any reason to think it so; since we are as
immediately and experimentally certain of our freedom, as we are of any one
thing whatever, with the single exception mentioned before. Those notions and
principles, which lead People to doubt of their freedom, must in their own
nature, be far more precarious than that is. We might as well call in question
the testimony of any, or all of our senses, as doubt the truth and certainty of
our experience in this case; this consciousness of our freedom, I mean,
whatever speculative difficulties may lie in the way. We might as plausibly, at
least, question the existence of an external, material world; question whether
we really see, hear, smell, taste or feel, any thing; because of the
difficulties which occur respecting the modus of that communication and
intercourse, which there is betwixt body and mind: We might as plausibly, at
least, say, that though things seem to be so and so; yet they may not be ready
so; but we be deluded by false appearances: We might, I say, as plausibly talk
thus, as call in question the reality of our freedom, because we cannot clearly
see how we can be free, consistently with some speculative opinions; nor fully
solve all the difficulties arising upon the supposition of our being so. The
former is not more certainly a matter of daily experience to us, than the
latter: We are conscious of, and feel, our freedom within us, as truly and
certainly as we see or feel corporeal objects without us.

IF men will not rest satisfied with such experience; but will still doubt the
truth of their own outward senses, and internal consciousness; saying, that
though things seem to be thus, yet they may not be so in reality; there is no
remedy -- These are the faculties which the Author of our beings has given us:
Nor have we any other way of coming to the truth, which is better than this, or
even so sure and infallible. If the truth of these faculties, or the certainty
of the testimony which they bear, is called in question, we are, of course,
reduced to a total absolute skepticism; having no Data, no first principles, on
which to proceed in any case whatever; whether with reference to religion, or
common life: We may doubt of every thing, or believe any thing; even
transubstantiation will be no longer an absurdity, or incredible for the good
old protestant reason, that it is a contradiction to experience and common
sense. For although all our senses seem to contradict it; yet it may be really
true --

CERTAINLY those things, of which we have such an immediate consciousness, such
an experimental knowledge, as is here intended, and as we actually have
respecting our own freedom; ought not to be called in question, upon any
pretense of speculative difficulties: Which must necessarily, and in their own
nature, be more doubtful and precarious. We are to look upon the former as
first principles, (as they really are) from which if we once depart, we have
absolutely no footing; no ground at all left to stand upon; but are plunged
into an abyss, or endless labyrinth of doubts, from whence no clue can
extricate us -- And, indeed, what a paradox is this? that men should deny what
they acknowledge seems, even to themselves, to be true from experience, on
account of difficulties merely speculative! This is the case with relation to
liberty: For these men universally confess, that they seem to themselves to be
free. -- This is such a degree of skepticism; it is such infidelity to
common-sense; such a want of faith and trust therein, and to those faculties
which God has given us for the more immediate, and the most infallible, guide
of life; that one would think it impossible, were there not examples of it!
Moreover,

THE doctrine of liberty only accords naturally to that common moral sense of
things, of actions and characters, which all mankind in all ages, in all
countries, have had, and have: I mean, their sense of ill desert, and its
contrary, both in themselves and others. It is indeed the notion or supposition
of liberty, (ever intimately present to the human mind, though some perversely
disown it: It is, I say, this idea of liberty) which partly constitutes that
moral sentiment, and internal feeling, which is here intended. All men know
what peculiar sentiment that is, which possesses the human mind, upon seeing,
or only hearing of, some remarkable instance of cruelty, injustice or perfidy.
This sentiment (or, call it what you please) is closely connected with the
notion of liberty: Or rather, the former cannot be, without the latter; which
is really a constituent part of it. There is sometimes indeed a momentary
resentment and anger, resembling it, raised in our breasts, even against
inanimate, inactive beings. But we soon check such resentment by reflecting,
that that at which we are angry, was inti^ely passive, that it had no self
moving, active principle; but was actuated in some manner, as to itself, quite
unavoidable. This single reflection, that the being, or thing, could not help,
could not avoid what has happened, immediately (...) all resentment; though we
may have received harm and damage therefrom. Which shows, that there is a
close, an intimate connection, betwixt the ideas of blame-worthiness and
liberty; so that the former cannot be without the latter, as was hinted before.
Nor can a man calmly and cooly think any action really culpable, or him that
did it, of ill-desert, without presupposing, that he was a free being: At least
no man can think so, 'till he has made himself another kind of creature than
God made him.

AND now, since the great Author of our being has framed our minds in such a
manner, that we thus naturally connect the idea of liberty, with that of
demerit, or ill-desert; so that it is almost, if not altogether impossible, to
have the latter of them without the former; we may fairly conclude, that He
Himself cannot resent, or be angry with his creatures for, any thing besides
the abuse, or the neglect, of their own freedom and active powers.
Consequently, He neither does, nor will punish them, properly speaking, for the
omission of that which they had no power to perform, or the doing of that which
they could not forbear. We cannot be more certain that there is really a
righteous moral government established in the universe, than we are of this: We
cannot even have the idea of such a constitution, without taking this
supposition along with us, our minds being molded and fashioned as they are.
And whether it becomes Us to attribute such a kind of proceeding to the Author
and Lord of all, as we all necessarily condemn in each other, under the names
of cruelty, injustice, tyranny, etc. etc. all are left to judge! --

BUT it is particularly to be observed, that both the Jewish and the Christian
revelations, proceed wholly upon the supposition that men are free creatures.
This point is never once brought into question; but is always taken for
granted: And upon this foundation the whole superstructure of precepts,
exhortations, promises and threatenings, is apparently built: Revelation, in
this respect, exactly co-inciding with, and corresponding to, the natural
sentiments, the common feelings of men's own breasts and consciences. So that
human liberty is, in fact, the true basis of the moral constitution of things;
or God's moral government as distinguished from his natural: It is the basis of
all religion, whether natural or revealed. And from hence it follows, that any
system of principles which militates against this doctrine; or which cannot be
supported, but by the denial of it, must necessarily be false; and (though
christened by the venerable name of religion) must be a real contradiction to
all religion.

BUT if it could be truly said, (as it cannot) that Christianity either
asserts, or supposes, men not to be free creatures; it is plain, Christianity
ought not to be credited. For we are more certain of this fact, that we are
free, from daily experience; than we can be of the truth of Christianity, in
the way of inference, deduction, or reasoning: Which reasoning all manifestly
depends on the truth of some historical facts, of which we must, in the nature
of the thing, be less certain than we are of the other. No revelation,
therefore, can possibly overthrow the doctrine of human liberty: So far from
this, that any pretended one which contradicts it, ought to be accounted an
imposture, for that very reason. We could not rationally have been believers in
Christ, without being first believers in our own senses, had we been spectators
of his miracles; or, even the subjects of them, feeling in our bodies, that we
were healed by him: ( Mark 5. 29.) Nor can any man set Christianity at variance
with the experience and feeling, with the common sense and reason of mankind;
or exalt faith to triumph in their ruins; without being first more truly an
Enemy to them, than he is a Friend to religion afterward --

WHAT good ends Christians can propose to themselves, even in making it a
question, whether men have liberty or not? (which, surely, is never made one in
the holy scriptures) I am unable to conceive. But their attempting to establish
the negative, is still more surprising; unless they were sure that they were
right, beyond the possibility of a mistake: For should they happen to be wrong,
they cannot well be insensible of the fatal mischiefs which may naturally
follow, if they could persuade people to believe, that they can choose and act
no otherwise than they do; thus furnishing them with a full and ample excuse
for all the impieties, and villainies, which they are either guilty of at
present, or may have an inclination to commit! And how gravely soever men may
talk, or write, while they are endeavoring to reconcile the doctrine of
necessity with our daily experience; with our natural notions of virtue and
vice, merit and demerit; with a righteous moral government, and with the
religion of the Bible; I must confess it appears to me, to be no better than
formal, solemn trifling upon a subject, which ought not to be trifled with! In
short, if any speculative principle can be justly said to be contrary to the
common sense, or sentiments, of mankind; to be immoral; to be impious; it is
this, of an universal necessity: For it really terminates in Atheism, if
pursued in its just and natural consequences.

IT is, probably, a great while before men can bring themselves heartily to
acquiesce in this opinion: Common reason and sense greatly reluct at it. And if
it ever sits quite easy upon peoples minds at last, it is because their minds
are, by some means or other, corrupted and debauched. Some persons, doubtless,
have recourse to this doctrine, as a salvo for their vices; and that they may
find rest from a guilty conscience. For this is a short, though not a wise and
safe method, for men to rid themselves of the remonstrances and upbraidings of
that officious, troublesome companion: Though I would not, by any means, suggest,
that this is always the case. --

OTHERS seem to have embraced this doctrine, merely because they though it it
followed from some philosophical and anatomical principles, which they had laid
down, and were not willing to part with. Thus, particularly, a learned
Physician and Anatomist, who, not long since, wrote in defense of it, tells the
world, That he had great reluctance at embracing it; because it seemed to him,
at first, to be inconsistent with the natural idea of vice and virtue, and the
principles of religion; (in which he seems to have been a serious believer)
However, he says, he found himself obliged to admit it, in consequence of his
hypothesis concerning the vibratory motion of the nerves; the medullary
substance; the spinal marrow, etc.!

IF some other Gentlemen had, with equal plainness and honesty, declared to the
world their reasons for embracing this doctrine of necessity, it is probable
they would have said, "It was because they were resolved, at all adventures, to
defend their (religion, shall I call it? or irreligious?) hypothesis; which
they knew not how to defend well without it." However, That system of ^heology
is, perhaps, as indefensible with, as without this doctrine: Since it is,
hereby, weakened and pulled down in some respects, in the same proportion that
it is strengthened and built up in others. The doctrine of necessity, if true,
would, indeed afford a solution of some of the difficulties respecting
foreknowledge, predestination, and Their mechanical conversion: But if these
Gentlemen design, in Their system to vindicate the moral Character of God, and
the equity of his dealings; particularly in consigning the wicked to endless
torments, rather than the holiest man on earth, or angel in heaven; if this, I
say, is ready any part of their design, they are so far from receiving any help
at all, in this respect, (wherein they needed so much) from the doctrine I am
speaking of; that that which was before their grand difficulty, is heightened,
hereby, into an absolute impossibility -- For

IT is to no purpose for these Gentlemen to tell us, That vicious men are
justly punished, because they are not actuated by a foreign, external
constraint; but will, and choose to sin, and do it voluntarily: Which is the
method in which some of them have endeavored to vindicate the divine justice
in the perdition of the wicked. This is equally evasive and futile. For what
they call willing and choosing to sin, and doing so voluntarily, is either that
which the sinner might have avoided, or that which he could not avoid: Let them
choose their alternative If they say, this was avoidable; then the doctrine of
necessity is given up: If, unavoidable; then the objection against punishing
the sinner for it, remains in its full strength: For if the sinner (it seems we
must still call him so!) could not possibly have avoided thus willing, choosing,
and acting; but was, in every successive moment of his existence, even from the
first, laid under a necessity of doing just as he did; whether this were owing
to any external constraint, or to some internal, original bias, or impulse of
nature; makes not the least alteration in the case, so far as divine justice is
concerned in it. He is as blameless on the latter supposition, as he would be
on the former: And if it would be unrighteous to punish him on one; it would be
equally so, to do it on the other --

BUT what was intended at first, only for a short marginal note, is already
become a very long one. I shall however, just add, that it is astonishing to
see some apparently sober, religious men, so sollicitous to establish Their
doctrine of the divine decrees, of the uncontrollable sovereignty, and
all-determining providence of God, as to do it at the expense (...) his moral
perfections! -- to see them so much (...) sollicitous to prove, That the Judge
of all the earth DO^S WHAT HE WILL; than That "the Judge of all the earth WILL
DO (...)! -- If it is impiety, even to "speak wickedly (...) God"; Job 13. 7.
how much greater impiety is it, to "speak wickedly AGAINST Him!" Psalm 139. 20.





BUT it is not intended in what is said above, concerning human power and
liberty, that men either do, or can, obey the gospel in the manner required of
them, independently of the concurrence and blessing of almighty God. The
meaning is only this, that God does actually afford, or is at least ready to
afford, his aid and assistance to men, in such manner and such measure, that
they may, thereby, work out their own salvation; so that if they do not, it is
owing to a criminal neglect of the power which they have, notwithstanding the
supposed depravity, and real imbecility of human nature. However incautious or
extravagant any may have been, in their representations of our corruption; our
inability to do good; and, of the manner of God's operations upon the hearts of
men; yet it is the undeniable doctrine of the gospel, that vicious men cannot
attain to true evangelical holiness, merely by their own strength, or
exclusively of the divine assistance. But still, this assistance being afforded
to all, who set themselves to seek it, and to correct their tempers and
manners, as they may, and ought to do; it follows, that the perverseness of
men's will, not their impotence, is the reason why any fall short of that
internal purity, and external obedience, which is necessary in order to their
inheriting eternal life: Nor can any one doubt, but that this is the truth,
unless he first doubts the veracity, or misunderstands the words, of Him who
has said -- Every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks finds; and
to him that knocks it shall be opened -- If ye -- being evil, know how to
give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall your heavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Luke 11. 10.


SOME, by faith, which they call a principle of obedience, seem evidently to
intend believing, together with that repentance; that humble and pious temper
of soul, which is the fruit of God's spirit, cooperating with our sincere
desires to obey and serve him: i. e they mean internal goodness and holiness,
as well as says. And indeed the scriptures frequently use the term faith in
the same latitude; particularly, when we are said to be justified thereby. And
if we understand it thus, faith is indeed always, and in all who have it,
actually a principle of obedience; I mean, of external obedience; for this
faith is itself obedience, considered as a practical principle in the heart:
and therefore it cannot, with any propriety, be opposed to, or
contradistinguished from, internal piety and goodness; or that divine nature,
of which we are made partakers by the great and precious promises of the
gospel, accompanied with the divine blessing.

IT seems impossible, in the nature of the thing, that any person who is
possessed of this divine principle of faith, understood in the complex sense
here spoken of, should not externally walk agreably to the gospel; or that he
should continue to work iniquity. For this would be to suppose, that a man
might be wicked externally; and yet be internally pious and holy! Whereas our
Savior says, with reference to this very point, That EVERY good tree brings
forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. A good tree
CANNOT bring forth evil fruit; neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit. Mat. 7. 17, 18.
Faith, considered in this large sense, seems to have a close and inseparable
connection with christian obedience: In any other sense of the term faith, it
has no such connection therewith. And it may be added, that no man can obey the
gospel as a christian ought to do, without having this divine principle in his
heart: If this is wanting, a man is internally wicked; and so not justified;
nor entitled to the glorious promises of the gospel, whatever his external
behavior may be.

I AM not much concerned, whether that which is said above, is most agreeable to
the sentiments of this, or the other denomination of Christians; being verily
persuaded, it is the truth as it is in Jesus -- Nor do I know how I can
conclude this discourse better, than by beseeching you all, to see that your
faith is improved into such a practical principle of holiness and obedience in
your hearts, as has been now spoken of. Without faith, in this sense; or unless
people have such a pious trust and confidence in God, through Christ; such a
persuasion of his goodness and holiness; of the truth of his promises and
threatenings, that they are formed into the divine image; and internally resign
themselves to the divine will; their outward behavior, however irreproachable,
cannot be well-pleasing in God's sight; as that of Christ's faithful servants
is. There is a faith which is dead for want of works: There may also be works
which are dead, for want of faith; I mean for want of a truly pious and
christian temper at the bottom, in conjunction with what is more usually termed
faith. Without this, our external obedience is scarce better than mere
formality, and empty ceremony; since God looks at our hearts. That is not a
pure fountain, from whence such obedience flows: Nor are those who perform it,
truly made alive unto God, by Jesus Christ; They have not yet in them that well
of living water, springing up into everlasting life, which our Savior speaks
of; intending hereby the spirit which they they that believe on him should
receive. But "let him that is athirst, come; and WHOSOEVER WILL, let him take
the water of life freely." Rev. 22. 17.


SERMON X. On the Extent of Evangelical Obedience.
JAMES I. 21, 22. LAY apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. But
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
THE nature and principle of evangelical obedience having been considered in
the forgoing discourse; we are now to consider the extent of it; and to give a
short description thereof, as it is found in good men, who are the heirs of
salvation. This was the last head of discourse proposed, when we entered upon
this subject.

I HAVE, more especially, two reasons for speaking of the extent of christian
obedience; and giving a short description of it, as it is actually found in the
hearts and lives of Christ's true disciples. One is, that they who are really
christians, and not only nominally such, may have the great and blessed
satisfaction of knowing that this character belongs to them; and so may
reasonably hope for the mercy of God unto eternal life; being still excited by
this very hope, to purify themselves yet more; to make farther progress in
piety and virtue; and to perfect holiness in the fear of God. -- The other end
which I have in view, is, that those who are not truly doers of the word, may
not deceive their own selves; that they may not hope to be blessed in their
deed; but may know wherein they fall short of what is necessary to constitute
the christian character; and so be excited to amend their ways, 'till they come
up thereto.

THESE two ends may, by the blessing of God, be both attained by laying before
you the christian rule of life and conduct, (by which we are to be judged
hereafter) in order to your comparing your own tempers and manners therewith.
Those whose hearts and manners correspond to this law of liberty, (allowing for
such deviations as may properly come under the head of human infirmities) may
justly have confidence toward God; and assure their hearts before Him. On the
other hand, those whose own hearts condemn them, as being presumptuous, wilful
transgressors of this law of liberty, may be equally sure that they are not
heirs to the blessings annexed to the observance, but to the condemnation
annexed to the violation, of it. The gospel, as it is a rule of life to us, and
as we behold the glory and perfections of God therein, is a sort of spiritual
fountain, or intellectual mirror; by looking into which, we may discern the
true features and lineaments of our souls. In this it is, that the good man may
discover the beauty of holiness (the divine image) in himself, as it were by
reflection from it: It will give him back, and make him see, his own likeness;
his other self: And, at the same time that it shows him all that is truly
beautiful and amiable in his inner man, it will also show him, wherein that
still needs polishing and adorning. By means of this, the wicked may likewise
come to a sight of their moral deformity: For this glass represents ugliness
and deformity in their just and proper colors, no less than it does beauty and
comeliness, in their's: It is not a deceitful one, which will either flatter
the bad, or belly the good; but it will truly show every person to himself, who,
instead of taking a careless side-glance at it, looks full and direct upon it,
with an open and honest face. Nor should either the good or bad, having looked
into it when presented before them, and beheld themselves therein, go their way
and forget what manner of men they are. James 1. 24.
But this is often done by vicious men; who do not like to retain either God,
or themselves in their knowledge and remembrance. They are disgusted at the
ugly image represented to them, when they see themselves in contraste with the
purity and holiness of God, as exhibited to them in His word. Far different
from Narcissus in the fable, who was loath to lose sight of himself in the
crystal stream; and so would have gazed forever; They are generally for losing
sight of themselves as soon as possible. Such a disagreable and loathsome
object as a sinful, polluted, guilty soul, fills them with horror, instead of
delight; and they are uneasy 'till the very idea of it is erased from their
Minds. Good men, on the other hand, receive a sacred pleasure by observing the
image and superscription of God in their own hearts, while they are
contemplating His word; though this is a pleasure attended with humiliation, and
a degree of grief, because they approach no nearer to the great Exemplar.
However, by continuing to look into this sacred mirror, they grow daily into
an exacter conformity to the glorious, the divine Original: -- They all, with
open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. 2
Cor.(...). 18.
-- But I wander too far from the particular design of this discourse; which,
you remember, was to consider the extent of christian obedience.

AND it is evident that this obedience ought to be co-extended with the rule of
it. What is that? The law of Christ; the whole collective body of christian
statutes, injunctions, and prohibitions: So speak ye and so do, as they that
shall be judged by the law of liberty. James (...). 12.
It is manifest that our obedience is not truly christian, unless we pay a
religious regard to the whole evangelical law, however broad this commandment
may be; and how many points, or distinct precepts, soever, it may be
distributed into. People may flatter themselves as much as they please, and
imagine it as easy as they please, to be truly pious and good. But one may be
bold to say, that no man was ever altogether a christian, without giving his
heart entire, and undivided, to God through Christ; so as to be internally
disposed to yield obedience to all his known commandments. There is no true
principle of christian piety and goodness in the heart, but what is an
universal one; not confined to this, or the other precept and duty, but
extended to all of them in general. This will be evident to any one, who
attentively considers what is implied in a principle of obedience to God, and
of submission to his authority. For this is really a principle uniform, and
consistent with itself, throughout. He that truly loves virtue, as being what it
is, loves it universally; though a man may in many cases put on the appearance of
it, without really loving it at all. So he that truly loves God, and reverences
his authority, as such, reverences it universally, so as to have a temper of
mind disposed to submit, in all respects, to the divine will, without reserve
or limitation. In this respect, there is a wide difference betwixt a due
principle of obedience to God's will, as discovered to us in the gospel of his
Son, and a principle of obedience to any human authority, whether civil or
parental. No one but God, has an absolute, unlimited authority over us. We may
therefore (and indeed ought to) have reserves in our breasts, with regard to
all human authority; not being obliged, in reason, to yield up ourselves
entirely to the will and disposal of men; or to do whatsoever may, by them, be
injoined upon us. We are bound to reverence, and submit to, our natural
parents, and the civil Powers, so far as their right of commanding extends: If
we do so, it is sufficient. But if we have not a disposition thus to submit to
all their rightful commands, we can neither have the temper of dutiful
children, nor of loyal subjects: i. e. we cannot have either a true principle
of filial obedience, or of obedience to the Powers that are ordained of God.
Apply this to the case in hand; to that obedience which we owe to God; and then
the argument will stand thus: The authority of our Savior, or that authority
of God, with which he is invested, has no limitation, besides those which God's
own infinite wisdom, justice and goodness, fix and prescribe to it: which is,
in effect, to say that it has none at all -- There is nothing, which can in the
nature of things, interfere with the authority of such a Being, so as to limit
it, to supersede it, or set it aside: It is in its own nature both supreme and
universal. Is it not, then, evident that our obedience ought to be without any
reserves, exceptions or limitations? and that God's holy will and commands, as
made known to us in the gospel, are the only measure and standard of that
obedience which is truly christian? Is it not incongruous to imagine, that we
can really reverence the divine authority, with reference to any of the divine
commandments, without doing so as to all of them? The same principle of love,
reverence and submission, to God and our Savior, which is even necessary to
constitute a truly christian obedience to any one commandment; must and will
run through, and take place with reference to the whole divine law; to all points
and branches of it. It is, in the very nature of it, an uniform, universal
principle; which regards the divine authority, as such; and is therefore
co-extended with the divine commandments: They alone can limit and bound it, in
those persons, in whom it really takes place. My meaning is, that no man who
supremely loves and reverences God, and, from this principle, lives conformably
to some of his commandments; can persevere from time to time in known, wilful
disobedience to others of them; or even to one only. It is a contradiction. We
may therefore be as certain, as we can of any thing, that he who has not a
disposition to obey the gospel universally, has not a truly pious disposition
to obey it at all; i. e. that he has no principle of obedience which comes up
to the evangelical standard. Knowingly and habitually trangressing any one
commandment, is a demonstration that a man obeys no others in the manner which
he ought to do. He has not cut off that right hand; he has not plucked out that
right eye which offends. Either mammon, or some other worldly object has the
possession of, and the dominion over his heart; and still separates it from
God. There is somewhat, in this case, which has the pre-eminence, and supremacy
in a man's heart: It is plain that God has it not: If He had, a man could not
thus presumptously transgress one of his commands from time to time, for the
sake of serving another master: And his servant he is, to whom he obeys. He is
not truly the servant of God and righteousness: he does not truly, and in the
manner he ought to do, obey any of God's laws; which cannot be done, without a
supreme love to him, and a reverence of his authority as such. So that known
habitual sinning, in any case whatever, is a proof, that a man is, in some
sort, guilty with reference to all the commandments; though he may seem to keep
them all, with one single exception.

THIS is not so much my own reasoning, as it is St. James's; for I must now
confess to you, that I borrowed it all from him. You have it comprised in the
10th and 11th verses of the 2d chapter of his epistle -- Whosoever shall keep
the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. For he that
said, do not commit adultery, said also, do not kill: Now if thou commit no
adultery; yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the [whole] law.
The meaning is not, that one offense comprises all other offenses in it, or
makes a man a transgressor of the whole law, because this is offending against
that one supreme authority, which binds all the commandments upon us: This is,
I think, a forced, unnatural construction; and very remote from the true
spirit, and sense of the passage. The apostle asserts no such thing: But what
he intends is, that offending in one point, though it does not of itself make a
man guilty of all, yet it proves him to be so, and he certainly is so, in some
degree, though he may seem to keep the whole law, excepting in that one point.
And the argument to prove this [ver. 11,] is conclusive, if understood thus --
That God who has forbid one crime, has forbid all others: Therefore, if you
truly reverence his authority, you will obey all his commandments: And though you
may pretend to obey many of them, and appear both to yourselves and others to
do so; yet if you habitually and presumptuously disobey any one of them, it is
certain you do not obey any of them, as you ought to do; and, therefore, must
be more or less guilty with respect to all points of christian duty. This seems
to be plain and intelligible: But if the argument needs further illustration,
it will receive, from the last verse but one in the preceding chapter -- If
any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. The obvious meaning of
which is, that how religious soever any man may seem to be; yet if his tongue
is not under any restraint; if he offends in that one point; he is deceived in
himself; all his religion is scarce better than show, and vain formality: He
has no real principle of piety or goodness in him; and therefore must be
guilty, in a degree, with reference to all points, even those wherein he may
seem to keep the law. There is nothing forced in this construction. And may not
what the apostle says concerning that one point, of not bridling the tongue, be
applied to all other vicious, immoral practices? May it not be said, with equal
certainty, that if any man among us seem to be religious; and yet is a Thief, a
Drunkard, a Liar, an Extortioner, or Adulterer, etc. this man's religion is
also vain? that he has not the fear of God before his eyes, nor the love of
God, and of his Savior in his heart? that he is no true disciple of Jesus
Christ; but that all his religion is mere formality and show? that though he may,
to outward appearance, keep the whole law, one point of it excepted; yet he
really observes none of the commandments, from a principle of love and
reverence to God and his Redeemer? that he is, therefore, really guilty, in a
degree, with reference to all points even of the law of liberty? and that he
must therefore be condemned as a transgressor of this whole law? -- This seems
to be evidently true; and it is, I think, the plain doctrine of St. James. I
HAVE in part, though not wholly, followed the common interpretation of James 2.
10, 11. Which interpretation I find, since the writing of this Sermon, is
rejected by the learned Dr. SHERLOCK, the present Bishop of LONDON, in a
discourse lately published on Matthew 22, 4. His Lordship tells us, that that
interpretation amounts to this: All laws are founded upon one and the same
authority of God; therefore every offense against any law, is a contempt of the
authority upon which all laws depend; and therefore every act of disobedience,
is a breach of the whole law. -- To those who have plain sense, and can follow
it, ^e says, this must appear absurd: And that the true and natural
interpretation, is to be collected from the new testament Notion of love, as
being the fullness of the law, and of all the commandments being comprehended in
this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And when the Apostle
says, that whosoever offends in one point, is guilty of all; his Lordship tells
us, that in this verse, he considers the royal law, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, etc. as the whole law.

HIS Lordship judges, that the common interpretation is evidently liable to all
the difficulties of the Stoic's paradox that all offenses are equal -- So that
there will be no difference between killing your neighbor and your neighbor's
horse; for he that has forbid you killing your neighbor, has likewise forbid
you doing any act to the hurt and detriment of your neighbor.

HIS Lordship says farther, that the apostle's inference in the latter part of
the verse [i. e. ver. 11.] does not answer to the principle laid down in the
former, in the common method of interpretation. He that said do not commit
^^ultery, said also do not kill. This is his principle: And he infers, Now if
thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of
the law -- But what is this toward showing that the breach of one law, is the
breach of all?

HIS Lordship thinks, that the translators have misled people in the
understanding of this whole passage. For says he, Instead of for be that said,
it should be rendered for the law which said, etc. And the place thus rendered
contains a clear reason of what went before. If, says he, [i. e. the Apostle]
you offend in any point of charity or duty, you become a transgressor of this
whole law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. The Bishop judges, that
this interpretation is evidently favored by the whole preceding context,
wherein the apostle is treating of the royal low of charity, and of relative
duties. -- And This place in St. James, says he, being thus understood and
explained, there is no occasion for any niceties or distinctions, etc.

THIS is the sum of his Lordship's reasoning upon the point. But (...) with all
the deference that is due to an author to whom the world is so much indebted
for his excellent discourses on (...), as well as those in defense of
Christia^^^ (...) the old interpretation of St. James, seems to be as
unexception^^ (...) as the new; even after his Lordship has endeavored to
explo^e the o^e, and to establish the other.

HIS Lordship, interpretation seems as evidently liable to all the difficulties
of the (...) paradox, as the old one. For if he who, in are one instance,
injures his neighbor, is transgressor of the whole law of charity; (which
contains in (...) and forbids every kind of injury) may (...) not still he
objected, that this is to make all offenses against (...) neighbor equal? Who,
it may be asked, can do more or (...), than to break this whole law of love?
For to break the whole, is to break it in all its parts, or in all points. But
yet the it what every man does, according to his Lordship, who trespasses in
any one particular point: For thus he interprets the Apostle, If you offend in
any point of charity or duty, (...) become a transgressor of this whole law,
Thou shall love, (...) How can the whole of a general law, which contains
innumerable particulars, be broken by violating it in one point only* And if,
according to the old interpretation, ( viz. that (...) who (...) in ^ne point
is guilty of all, because he violates that one Authority, upon which all laws
depend) all crimes are equal, as his Lordship says they are; One would think,
that even according to his own, all offenses against our neighbor must also be
equal: since any one is a breach of the whole law of charity. So that it seems
to be as true according to (...), as it is according to the other
interpretation, that there is no difference between killing your neighbor and
your neighbor's horse: For that law of charity which says, Thou shall not kill
thy neighbor, says also. Thou shall not kill thy neighbor's horse: And the
whole of this law, his Lordship tells us, is actually broken (...) him, who
offends in any one point of charity or duty. -- But if any think the Stoic's
paradox may be avoided here, by saying, that though any particular offense
against our neighbor is a breach upon the whole law of charity; yet the nature
and circumstances of some offense, may render them more criminal than others.
Why may not the same paradox be also avoided, in the old way, by saying, that
though every transgression is, in a sort, the violation of all God's law in
general, as it is a violation of that one general authority, on which all laws
depend; yet the nature and circumstances of some sins against this one great
authority, may render them more heinous than others? To some men who have plain
sense, and can follow it, there will, perhaps, appear no more absurdity in this
latter method of solving the difficulty, so far as it relates to the stoical
paradox, than there will appear in the former.

AND though his Lordship is pleased to say, that the apostle's inference in the
latter part of the [11th] verse, does not answer to the principle laid down in
the former, in the old way of interpretation; I must beg leave to think it
answers as well thereto, in this, as in his Lordship's interpretation: Though One
would not dissent from such an acknowledged master of reason and critical
learning, but with caution and diffidence. This 11th verse evidently contains
the grounds of the assertion in the preceding verse, viz. That whosoever
offend, in one point is guilty of all [points.] And considered in this light,
the meaning of the inference. Thou art become a transgressor of the law, must
be this, Thou art a transgressor of the whole law, so as to make thee guilty of
all; as it is expressed ver. 10. This is the design of the argument, both in
his Lordship's method of interpretation, and in the other; it is common to
them: Only his Lordship confines the words, guilty of all, to the great law of
charity; the person spoken of, is guilty of breaking that whole law, though not
of all laws in general. And agreably hereto, his Lordship, by a transgressor of
the law, ver. 11. understands a transgressor of this whole law, Thou shall
love, etc. So that in both methods of interpretation, the inference in the
latter part of ver. 11, must answer, not only to the principle laid down in the
former part; but also correspond to the Proposition to be proved, viz, that he
who offends in one point is guilty of all (points.) And the question is, How
this inference answers better, either to the principle in the former part of
the verse, (which is the medium to prove the proposition,) or to the
proposition itself, upon his Lordship's hypothesis, than upon the old. Upon the
old one the argument stands thus, The one great Lawgiver, on whose authority
all laws depend; and who has said, Do not commit adultery, has said also do not
kill: Therefore, if thou do not commit adultery, but yet killest, thou art a
transgressor of his whole law; so that thou art guilty of all [points] thereof;
i. e. as thou violatest that one authority which extends equally to all points.
If the inference does not answer to the principle, (or medium) or to the
proposition to be proved, in this way: Let us see, whether it answers to either
of them any better, in his Lordship's. Upon his hypothesis, the thing to be
proved is, That whosoever offends against his neighbor in one point, breaks
the whole law of charity; or is guilty of all [points of that royal law.] The
principle or medium of proof (in his Lordship's translation) is this -- " For
the law which said," etc. And the argument, I humbly conceive, must stand thus
-- The same royal law which has forbid you killing your neighbor, has likewise
forbid you doing any act to the hurt and detriment of your neighbor: Therefore
if thou do not kill thy neighbor; but yet injurest him in any one respect,
thou art become a transgressor of this whole law of charity; so that thou art
guilty of all [points] thereof; i. e. as thou violatest that one royal law,
which extends equally to all points of social duty and benevolence. This is
evidently the true state of the argument, upon his Lordship's hypothesis; but I
must confess I am not able to see, that the inference answers any better,
either to the principle, (or the medium of proof) or to the proposition to be
proved, in this method of interpretation, than it does in the old. If it does
not follow, that because all laws depend upon one and the same authority of
God, therefore he who transgresses one law, is a transgressor of the whole
law, or guilty of all [points;] it seems not to follow, that because all
particular social duties are comprehended in one and the same law of charity,
therefore he who transgresses one branch of that law, is a transgressor of the
whole of it, or is guilty of all [points] thereof. There seems to be as much
"occasion for niceties and distinctions" in one case, as there is in the other.

HIS Lordship judges, that his translation " For the law which said," instead
of -- For he that said, removes the difficulty which there is, otherwise, in
this passage. However he heartily allows, that the words in the original are of
doubtful interpretation; as they certainly are. And since the term law, is not
in the original; and the Greek participle may be as well referred to that One
Lawgiver, expressly mentioned by St. James in this epistle, as to the law
itself, whether the royal law, or the law in its utmost extent and latitude;
there seems to be no real necessity for departing from the common translation.
But admitting his Lordship's translation to be preferable, it is not easy to
see, how this helps the matter in any degree. For what is the law? or what can
it say, considered independently of the will and authority of the One
Lawgiver? Thus abstractly considered, it lays us under no obligation: nor can
it be broken in a moral or religious sense. It is only ink and paper, if
written; only sound, if articulately pronounced; -- even though pronounced in
Thunder, as at Sinai. So that though the true critical rendering were, " For the
law which said," etc. as his Lordship judges it is; yet we are obliged to recur
to the will and authority of the Lawgiver; and to consider Him as speaking to
us in and by the law. The law, strictly speaking, is only the will of the
Legislator, in some way or other made known to us: And this equally, whether
the royal law of charity only, be intended by St. James, or the whole law of
God in general. So that though his Lordship's translation were received; yet this
would not, I humbly conceive, in any degree, tend to establish his sense of the
apostle's doctrine, or to overthrow the common. This seems to be no more than a
verbal criticism; which cannot, in the present case, (though it might in many
others) make the least alteration in the sense and true design of the writer:
Settle this point how you will, either one way or the other; yet the result
will be exactly the same at last.

IT must be added, (because his Lordship lays stress upon it) that though St.
James is certainly speaking, in the preceding context, more directly
concerning the great law of charity and the social duties; yet this does not
seem to be a sufficient ground for understanding him in the 10th and 11th
verses, as speaking of that royal law, and of these duties, exclusively of
others. The reasoning here, may be naturally extended to all other laws, all
other branches of duty; and still be as good and conclusive, as if it were
restrained to the law and duties of charity. And there is, perhaps, as truly a
connection betwixt all christian virtues in general, so that they may be
resolved into one, viz. that of (...) love and reverence to the One great and
good Lawgiver as there is a connection betwixt all the social virtues, so that
they may be resolved into that one, of loving our neighbor as our (...). --

UPON the whole; whatever of difficulty, or paradox, there is in this passage,
in the old method of interpretation, it seems evidently to remain in his
Lordship's. For it is particularly to be observed, (though his Lordship has not
mentioned it) That when a man who transgresses in one point, is said to be
guilty of all; the word all is plural in the original; and so cannot naturally
be refered to any one general law. It is used in opposition to the one point,
or one respect, in the preceding clause: And the obvious construction is, that
whosoever offends thus in one point, is ( in some sense or other) guilty in all
points. The grand difficulty really lies here: And this, I humbly conceive, is
not, in any measure, lessened by his Lordship's observations. For though you
admit his proposed emendation in the version; though you admit all which he says
upon the context; though you allow, that St. James is speaking only of that royal
law of charity; (which extends to all points of social duty, and prohibits all
kinds of injury to your neighbor) though you conceed all this, still the
question returns, Why, or in what sense, he who offends in one point of this
great royal law, must needs be a trangressor of the whole of that law? or
quality as to all points thereof? This remains as much a difficulty, upon the
supposition that the great law of charity only, is here treated of; as it is
upon the old supposition, that the apostle is speaking of God's law in general
All God's laws may be considered as one general law, consisting of various
points, or branches; as well as all the particular laws of justice and charity,
may be reduced to that one, royal law, Thou shall love, etc. Nor has the
apostle's reasoning, ver. 11. any more obvious a tendency to prove, (on his
Lordship's supposition) that he who offends in one point of the general law of
love, is a transgressor of the whole of that law, or guilty of all; than it has
to prove, (on the other supposition) that he who offends in one point of God's
general, universal law, is a transgressor of the whole of that law, or guilty
of all. The reasoning, I humbly conceive, receives no additional clearness,
weight or cogency, by such a change of the supposition. For there is still a
general law, consisting of innumerable parts, or branches, the whole of which,
it is said, is broken, by him that offends in one point of it. And whether it
were The law, which said, or the Lawgiver, which said, Thou shall not, etc.
this makes not, so far as I am able to see, the least alteration in the (...).
--

THAT which makes this passage appear so paradoxical as it does to many, is a
palpable mistake of St James's sense; in supposing him to assert something
which he does not; viz. that offending in one point, or as to one particular
law, is what makes, renders, or constitutes a man guilty with reference to all
others; or that an offense against one law, is a breach of all laws, however
different they are in kind or degree. This would, indeed, be rather a
contradiction than a paradox; and equally so, whether said only with reference
to the various points of the royal law of love; or to the various branches of
God's law in general. But the apostle asserts no such thing as either. He
asserts only, that the man who thus offends in one point is [really] guilty of
all; and that he is a transgressor of the [whole] law: Which is quite a
different thing from saying, that in that very act, by which a man offends
against one precept, he offends against all the rest. Let us therefore keep to
the very words of the apostle -- "He is guilty of all" But how? in what sense
guilty? Certainly he does not externally disobey all the laws of God: For the
same man is supposed, in the former part of the verse, to keep the whole law,
[outwardly] with one single exception -- Now look to the 26th ver. of the
preceding chapter; and there you will find a sure and easy clue to the
apostle's meaning: If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not
his tongue, that man's religion is vain. Offending in that one point, or giving
a wicked license to the tongue, is a proof that all a man's religion is vain;
however religious he may seem to himself or others to be: Yea though he seem to
keep the whole law in other respects, he deceives his own heart; and is guilty
with reference to all the commandments: For since such a man does not truly and
piously observe any of the commandments; but his religion is all vain;
certainly he is guilty in all points; or with relation to all the commandments.
For there is really no medium betwixt truly and (...) keeping the commandments,
and really breaking them. Such a man is, therefore, guilty of all; a
transgressor of the whole law. Though he does not transgress the whole, BY
offending in one point; (which it were absurd to suppose) yet his thus
offending in one point, is a proof and evidence of his being wicked and
hypocritical at the bottom. And an evil and wicked heart is more properly a
contradiction to, and a transgression of, all God's commandments; than any
external conformity thereto, without a pious, good heart, is obedience to them.

FOR the farther illustration of this passage, it is to be observed, That, upon
the ^^oting of mere law, any single deviation, though but for a moment, and in
the least point, would render a man a transgressor of that whole convenant of
works; or of that whole law. The whole law in this case would be, in such a
sense one; [ one covenant:] that it must be either wholly kept, or wholly
violated, by every person under it. There could be no medium here. Such a unity
is of the very nature and essence of a dispensation merely legal. But the
apostle is here speaking to Christians, upon christian principles; the
principles of evangelical grace. And though he uses the terms law, in the 10th
and 11th verses; yet he means the christian law, as contradistinguished from
the Mosaic covenant of works: This he calls the law of liberty, ver. 12. And
there is really such an unity even in this covenant of grace also, that it must
be either wholly kept, or wholly broken, by each man that is under it. This
appears from the condition of it, on our part: Which is faith, in that
comprehensive sense in which the word is often used in scripture; i. e. as
including uprightness of heart toward God; which every man is either possessed
of, or not. So that every man either wholly keeps, or wholly breaks this
covenant of grace. This uprightness, or sincerity toward God, is opposed to
perfection on one hand; and both to refined hypocrisy, and to presumptuous
sinning, on the other. It is the medium betwixt them. No sincere christian is
perfect; no one is an habitual transgressor in any one point. The former is
incompatible to the present imperfect state of mankind; the latter is
inconsistent with sincerity toward God; or with faith, in that sense of the
term before alluded to. And these things being considered, the sense of this
passage will, I conceive, be intelligibly expressed; and the reasoning of the
apostle set in a true and convincing light, in the following paraphrase of the
10th and 11th verses, q d. Whosoever shall externally observe the whole gospel
rule of life, excepting in one point, wherein he knowingly and presumptuously
offends; though he may seem to be religious, yet that man is certainly destitute
of sincere piety to God; his religion is vain; he deceives his own Heart. This
is an evidence that he obeys none of the commandments in a truly christian
manner; and therefore, that he is guilty with respect to all of them in
general. For remember, that the same great Lawgiver, who forbids murder,
forbids adultery also; and His commands, you know, are equally obligatory in
all cases: So that whosoever truly knows and loves Him, and sincerely
reverences his authority, will have no reserves, but pay a sacred regard to all
his commandments. And therefore, though you should not actually commit adultery,
in the common gross sense; yet if you commit murder, or live in the practice of
any other known sin; this proves you to be such contem^ers of God and his
authority, as cannot be supposed truly, and in a christian manner, to observe
any of his laws, however you may flatter yourselves. And if you do not properly
observe any of them, you must, of consequence, be adjudged transgressors of the
whole christian law; and guilty, in a greater or less degree, with reference to
all points of your duty in general. Sincerity and piety toward God, being
wanting, you are nothing; and are cut off from all reasonable hopes of
salvation, even though you are under the merciful covenant of the gospel.

I HAVE been the longer in endeavoring to show the true sense of this passage,
and wherein the force of St. James's reasoning lies; because I conceive this to
be a point of real importance. Though I should scarce have said any thing upon
it, in the way of criticism, but as an APOLOGY for myself; for not embracing
Bishop Sherlock's new interpretation: Whose [justly] great name and character
seemed to demand this; and whose writings are so much esteemed amongst us; --
though, by none more than by him, who has thus presumed to dissent from his
Lordship.




MANY cannot reconcile themselves to this doctrine, That a man must have
respect to all the commandments, in order to his escaping condemnation, and
inheriting eternal life. Many a person doubtless reasons thus with himself --
"What harsh, rigorous doctrine is this, under the gracious dispensation of the
gospel! Must I forsake every known sin? or else lose my soul at last! Though I
disregard one of the commandments; yet certainly my religious observation of
all the rest, will turn the balance in my favor. A merciful God will not cast
me off forever, for indulging one lust only, when I so sincerely serve him in
the general course of my life. That compassionate Redeemer who loved men so
well as to die for them, cannot, surely, be so severe to mark iniquity against
me. No: If I uprightly and conscientiously obey all his known precepts, one
only excepted; he will surely accept this obedience; and overlook this one
transgression, on the score of human weakness." -- O thou Hypocrite! Do thou
talk of thy sincere, religious, and conscientious obedience to Christ's
commandments, whilst thou acknowledgest, there is one of his commandments which
thou disregardest! I tell thee, in the name of the living God! that thou do
not truly and properly obey any one precept of the gospel, while there is any
one which thou presumptuously violatest from day to day. Thou deceivest thine
own heart: Thou art a transgressor of the whole law, and guilty of all, rather
than a true and conscientious observer of the law, in any one respect. If thou
had a real principle of love and duty to Christ in thy heart, thou would
regard all his known commandments; and not think any of them grievous: Thou
would not think of compounding with thy Creditor and gracious Benefactor
thus; but be desirous, as far as possible, to pay thy whole debt to him. --
Thou can not serve two Masters: Thou can not be half loyal to thy King and
Redeemer, and half rebel: Thou art all rebel, 'till thou entirely submittest
thy will to His, and make THAT a universal rule to thee to walk by; -- 'till
thou renouncest that beloved lust, which causes thee thus to transgress in one
respect. However thou may flatter thy self, this sin which so easily besets
thee, is the lord which has dominion over thee; and thou art the servant of sin
unto death --

BUT let us suppose, for the present, that the terms of salvation were less
rigorous: Let us suppose that the gospel had assured us, that provided we
heartily and sincerely obey all the divine commandments excepting one, we shall
be saved. Though the very supposition of our heartily and conscientiously obeying
some of the commandments, while we set any one of them at naught, is absolutely
absurd, and self-contradictory; yet I will take the possibility of it for
granted; and see what such a gracious dispensation for breaking one commandment
will come to -- what the consequence will be. -- God being thus condescending,
it must be presumed that it is left to every particular man to choose what
particular commandment he will strike out of the decalogue: Which will be that,
certainly, to the observance of which, he is the most averse; that which the
most thwarts his own particular turn and temper and inclination, For example,
one man has a strong and peculiar disposition to swearing and blasphemy; to the
taking of God's name in vain: before him, the third commandment, certainly,
falls a sacrifice. Another is peculiarly addicted to cozening and stealing: He
strikes out the command which forbids this. Another has a peculiar disposition
to belly, and slander his neighbors: He will be at no loss what commandment is
most grievous to him. Another has a particular pique against the seventh
commandment; because he cannot endure to be under such a restraint, with
respect to his neighbors wives and daughters, as that lays him under. Another
is very choleric; and could often taste the sweets of bloody revenge, were it
not said, Thou shall not kill: With Him, the sixth commandment will find no
quarter: And so on -- Every man will make a sacrifice of that commandment; of
that particular precept or prohibition, which stands most in the way of his
gratifying his favorite, master-passion; of that which would keep him from his
own iniquity; from the sin that does so easily beset him. Well; God is so
gracious as to dispense with the observation of one of his commandments, thus
far, that the habitual transgressor of it, shall not be subjected to
condemnation; but obtain eternal life, through the merits of Christ, provided
this habitual sinner piously and conscientiously observes all the other
commandments: This being the case, I say, it follows, that every man may give
full scope to himself, as to that particular lust or sin, which his heart is
most set upon. And he will doubtless esteem this a great and blessed privilege,
which he enjoys by the Gospel; and improve it accordingly.

IT is farther to be observed, that there is no one great, cardinal vice or
impiety, to which one man or another is not more inclined, than to any other:
And every person, by the present supposition, being permitted to practice that
one sin, which suits his humor and taste the best; it plainly follows, that
all sins are permitted; not, indeed, all to one and the same man, but one to
one man, and another to another. No one must be so selfish as to engross and
monopolize all kinds of sin: But yet all men may take them all, and share them
amongst themselves: And yet no man give up his hopes of salvation!

NOW let me ask any man in his senses, Whether this is not to give all manner
of wickedness and impiety a free course, that they may run and be glorified in
the world? Is not this, in effect, to open the gates of the bottomless pit, for
a monstrous, hellish swarm of vices to issue out, and overspread the face of
the earth; like the locusts which St. John saw in his vision, coming up from
thence! How wretched and miserable? how much like hell, must this world be, if
every man might habitually break one commandment with impunity? if one man
might cheat or rob; another perjure himself; another blaspheme his maker;
another commit adultery; another, murder; and so on? Does not the present
supposition tend to deluge the earth with a flood of wickedness and violence.
For since men are not generally much set upon the practice of more sins than
one; and since, upon the present supposition, every man may indulge himself to
the full, in one; there is manifestly but little difference betwixt giving men
a license to indulge themselves in that particular sin, which they are the most
inclined to; and giving them the same license with respect to all others.
However different the two suppositions may appear at first view, they come very
near to the same thing at last: So that you had almost as good take off all the
restraints and obligations of religion from men's minds, at once; and tell them
they might be saved, although they habitually violated all the commandments; as
take off that obligation in one respect, by telling them, they may be saved
although they persevere in the breaking of one commandment. Is not such an
indulgence as I am speaking of, absolutely repugnant to the wisdom and holiness
of God? -- that God, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity? It is
certainly repugnant to all sober, rational conceptions of God, and of a moral
government, to imagine that He gives men any such dispensation for sinning,
though but in one point; or that he will have mercy upon those who thus offend.
Nor is this less contrary to the express declarations of the gospel, than it is
to sober reason. -- But, as was said before, this supposition itself, that men
may possibly obey all the commandments of God, sincerely and piously, as
christians ought to do; and yet presumptuously persevere in any known sin, is a
contradiction. There is no true and hearty obedience to any of God's
commandments; there is no truly pious and holy principle in the heart of a man,
unless all the commandments are regarded. Piety and virtue, or evangelical
holiness, is a uniform character. No man can be habitually pious in some
respects, and yet habitually impious in others: No man can truly love virtue,
as such, in some instances, without loving it in all. He may, indeed, do many
pious and virtuous actions, if you consider them externally; and view only the
surfaces of things: But God looks at the heart; and while that remains
rebellious to one commandment, God accounts the transgressor, as he really is,
in some sense, guilty of all.

UPON the whole: A truly good man presumes not to say in his heart, " These
commandments will I keep, because I can do so, without much trouble or
inconvenience to myself; but that other I will disobey, because it is irksome
to flesh and blood; and requires great self-denial." This is evidently the
language of stubborness and rebellion; it is the language of an heart unsubdued
to the authority of God; an heart unanimated with love and gratitude to Christ;
an heart unsanctified by the Holy Spirit; and therefore unsealed to the day of
redemption. The language of a truly good man's heart, is this, -- "O my God! O
my Redeemer, and Savior! I am not mine own, but bought with a price: Therefore
will I be wholly thine; I will glorify God in my body and in my spirit which
are his; I will do nothing which thou have forbidden; I will renounce every
lust however dear: I will, by thy grace and assistance, walk in all thy
commandments and ordinances blameless." -- He that has not such a principle of
universal, unreserved submission to the will of God and his Redeemer, rooted in
his heart; has none that is truly christian: But he is still alienated from the
life of God through the ignorance that is in him, because of the blindness of his
heart.

HAVING thus shown, That christian piety and virtue is a uniform, universal
principle in the heart, extending itself to all the precepts of the gospel; so
that whosoever truly obeys in one instance does so in all instances; and
whosoever disobeys habitually in one respect, is, in a sense, guilty of all; I
proceed now to give a more particular description of this obedience, as it is
found in the heirs of salvation.

IT appears from what has been said above, that christian obedience is partly
internal, partly external. It begins in the heart, in ^aith, or a principle of
real piety and virtue seated there. Thence it diffuses itself into the actions
and lives of men, regulating and animating all their outward deportment. Those
who are really the subjects of christian piety, or evangelical holiness, are
the same men within, that they are without, or in appearance. If you could look
into the breast of a good man you would there see that, which corresponds and
answers to his outward behavior; the latter being only a resemblance and copy
of the former; though one attends the other as certainly and invariably as the
shadow does the substance, there being an inseparable connection betwixt them.
So that, on one hand, He is certainly no christian, all whose religion is
within, not exerting itself in a good external behavior: And, on the other
hand, He is no christian, all whose religion is external, having nothing which
corresponds thereto in his own heart and breast. The one has neither the power
nor the form of godliness: The other, though he has the form, yet he denies the
power thereof; being like those, whom our Savior compares to " whited
sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead
men's bones, and of all uncleanness."

AGAIN: As the precepts of the gospel may be distributed under the two heads of
negative and positive; i. e. commands prohibiting the doing of some things, and
injoining the doing of others; christian obedience may be distributed into
negative and positive, likewise; so as to correspond to these different kinds
of precepts. The true disciple of Christ accounts himself obliged, not only to
abstain from what his Lord has forbidden, but to do those things which he has
required. Accordingly he avoids with care, all those paths which he is
admonished not to walk in; and conscientiously performs the duties which are
injoined upon him. He knows that in the judgment of the great day, according to
our Savior's own representation of it, men will be condemned, not only for
committing those crimes which the gospel has forbidden, but also for omitting
those duties which it has required us to practice. He is therefore cautious, on
one hand, lest he should trespass against any of the negative commandments; and
careful on the other, to fulfill all the duties and obligations lying upon him.

THIS leads me to observe, that christian obedience respects both the morals of
the gospel, and the positive institutions of it. A true disciple of Christ
esteems himself bound to conform to the instituted worship, and the ritual or
ceremonial part of Christ's religion, as well as to that part of it which we
distinguish therefrom, by the name of moral. With him, every thing is an
essential branch of duty and obedience, which Christ's laws have actually and
plainly injoined, by whatever name it is called, whether morality, or positive
institution. Indeed the obligation is, in a sense moral, although the duty,
considered in itself, may not be so. For certainly we are under a moral
obligation to comply with the whole will of God and our Redeemer, in what way
soever it is made known to us; whether by the light of nature, or by revelation
and positive command. I do not, indeed, assert that a christian lays an equal
stress upon every thing which Christ has commanded. There were some weightier
matters of the law, of old: There are also some weightier matters of the gospel
now: And our Savior and his apostles, have evidently made this distinction.
However, a sincere christian does not think any of his Lord's commandments of
so little importance, that they need not be obeyed. There is, in short, no
trifle in our religion, unless you will say, that the Author of it was a
Trifler! -- All the real duties of it are solemn, weighty and important, in
their respective places; and all stamped with a divine authority. The whole
system of christian duties, or of christianity reduced to life and practice, is
like a goodly fabric, arising into uniformity, proportion and beauty, by a
correspondence and due adjustment of the various parts. A skilful Architect
will omit nothing which might contribute to the regularity, the strength and
beauty of the whole pile, merely because it is not a main pillar in the
building, nor a part of the foundation. Neither will a wise and good man
neglect any one duty, under the vain pretense, that it is not a fundamental
one; or that his spiritual edifice will stand strong enough without it. And
those who excuse themselves from known, plain duties, under this hypocritical
pretext, will find that they have not built their house upon a rock, but only
upon the sand; and great will be the fall thereof.

BUT I must be a little more particular still, in this account of the christian
temper and character, as it respects God, our Savior, our neighbor, our
selves.

THE sincere Christian has an undissembled love and veneration for God, as the
best and greatest, and most glorious of Beings. He heartily respects and honors
Him; is thankful for His mercies; trusts and hopes in Him; and prizes His
favor above all things. Hence it is to him as his meat and his drink to do the
will of his Father, who is in heaven. He is patient under adversity, as being
sent or permitted by Him for wise and good ends. In prosperity, he confides not
in the uncertain things of this world; but in the living God, who gives him
all things richly to enjoy. He is truly grateful to Him, as the original author
and bestower of every thing good and desirable, whether pertaining to life or
godliness. He is heartily sorry and penitent for his sins; confessing them,
from time to time, with humility and a contrite heart; praying for the
forgiveness of them, in the spirit of the Publican; and imploring the divine
assistance, that he may walk more as becomes a child of God for the future, and
be kept by his power through faith unto salvation. To which end, he does not only
pray, but also watch; and is diligent in the improvement of all the means which
God has appointed, in order thereto; thinking it great presumption and impiety
to trust in God for salvation, in any other way than that which He has ordained.

THE true disciple of Christ, loves Him also in sincerity; and heartily esteems
and honors him, as being the image of the invisible God, the brightness of his
glory, the express image of his person. He considers him as the great
Ambassador and Prince of peace, whom God sent into this apostate, guilty world,
to save sinners; to save that which was lost. This he accounts a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance; as good tidings of great joy to all
people. He loves and honors this great Minister of heaven, as One who has shown
the most amazing kindness and condescension to guilty men, in becoming
incarnate; in undergoing poverty and reproach, and enduring the contradiction
of sinners against himself; in pouring out his soul unto death, and bearing our
sins in his own body on the tree. The true disciple of Christ cannot think of
these things, without being filled with pleasing admiration, with holy
gratitude, love and joy. And having a fixed belief of their truth, and a
thorough sense of them upon his heart, he accordingly reposes his trust in
Christ for salvation, in subordination to the Father, who sent him on this
gracious errand. He willingly resigns himself into the hands of his great
Redeemer, in full confidence that he is able to save them unto the uttermost,
who (...) unto God by him; and that he is faithful to keep that which is
committed to him. And knowing that God has exalted him, that he might be a
Prince, as well as a Savior, he considers him as his Lord and Sovereign, whom
he is bound to obey; and accordingly submits to be governed by his laws.
Without this he knows that Christ can profit him nothing. However this is not
the only motive of his obedience; Love and gratitude to One, who has laid him
under such mighty obligations, are a strong incentive thereto; and he is
sensible he can never live enough to Him, who has died for him. From these and
suchlike considerations, the sincere Christian cheerfully conforms himself to
the commandments of his Redeemer; often calling to mind the time when the
heavens which have received him, shall again reveal him with his mighty angels,
in the glory of the Father; to be admired in all them that believe; and to
render to the irreclaimable workers of iniquity, according to their doings: The
contemplation of which final scene, and great decisive day, when the mystery of
God shall be finished, fills him with sacred awe, mixed with holy hope and joy;
all conspiring to make him diligent that he may be found of his Judge in peace,
without spot and blameless.

CHRISTIAN obedience may also be considered with particular reference to our
fellow-men. A christian looks upon all men as his brethren by nature; as the
offspring of the same God, the common Father of all. He accordingly bears a
hearty good will and benevolence to all; especially when he reflects, that
Christ so loved them, as to give his life a ransom for all. This extensive
charity makes him bear a part both in the joys and sorrows of others: He is not
an indifferent, unconcerned spectator of the woes and calamities that befall
his fellow-mortals; or like the rock on the seashore, which proudly looks down
on the shipwreck at its foot, without a groan, or sympathizing tear. No! He
feels for all; weeping with them that weep, and rejoicing with them that do
rejoice. As he has opportunity, he does good to all men; but especially to them
that are of the household of faith. He is sincerely desirous of acting such a
part upon the stage of life, as may render him serviceable to the world,
whatever station providence has assigned him; -- serviceable, more
particularly, to those, with whom he has any special connection or intercourse.
He therefore proceeds, according to his capacity, in all the transactions of
civil and social life, by the rules of justice, charity and prudence. Is he a
civil ruler? The apostle's description is exemplified in him; -- He is the
minister of God for good; a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do
well. Is he a private subject? He is a quiet and peaceable one; being subject
for conscience sake, and giving honor, to whom honor is due; fear, to whom
fear; tribute, to whom tribute. Is he a parent? He is a kind and tender one;
and endeavors to promote both the present and future welfare of his offspring.
Is he a child? He honors his parents in the Lord, knowing that this is right.
Is he a master? He is a just and reasonable one, remembering that he also has a
master in heaven. Is he a servant? He is faithful and diligent, with good will
doing service; knowing that what good thing soever a man does, the same he
shall receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. The true christian is
just to all men, rendering to all their dues: He is obliging to his friends,
grateful to his benefactors, placable to his enemies, compassionate to the poor
and afflicted, sincere in his promises, faithful in the performance; more
disposed to cover, with the mantle of charity, the faults and follies of his
neighbors, than wantonly to expose them. He does not judge, and condemn, and
set at naught his brother, merely because he is of a different persuasion in
religious matters; this common practice being as contrary to the spirit and
genius, and to the express precepts of the gospel, as either drunkenness or
stealing, adultery or profane swearing. In fine here; the real Christian loves
his neighbor as himself; and from this principle, does unto all men whatsoever
he would that they should do unto him. By this grand, comprehensive maxim, he
regulates all his social behavior; even in those cases where express, positive
precepts are wanting, as well as those where they take place.

LASTLY: Christian obedience may be considered with relation to a man's self.
And if we consider it in this light, the true disciple of Christ keeps under
his body, and brings it into subjection: Or in the language of St. Paul in
another place, He, through the spirit, mortifies the deeds of the body. The
rational and spiritual part in him (which is king by divine right, in the
economy and constitution of man) bears sway over animal nature, restraining
the subject-passions, and giving law to them. No sin reigns in his mortal body,
so that he obeys it in the lusts thereof. He is neither a gluttonous man, nor a
wine-bibber, nor an unclean person; but is sober and temperate in all things,
as one that strives for the mastery. He possesses his body in sanctification
and honor 1 These. 4. 4.
, as the temple of the Holy Ghost 1 Cor 6. 19
, and the habitation of God through the Spirit Ephesians. 2.22
.

THUS I have considered the extent of evangelical obedience; and given you a
short description of it, as it is found in the hearts and lives of good men. It
is, indeed, only the out-lines, and some of the most strong and distinguishing
features of the new man, which I have drawn: There is not time to fill up and
finish the picture. Some persons would, probably, have been better pleased, if
I had talked more of high flights, and raptures, and ecstasies, and less about
the morality of the christian character. But such things, in this kind of
painting, I must confess, appear to me to to be no better than vain ornaments,
and flourishes, and a gaudy drapery; which rather obscure, than heighten and
improve, the beauties of a piece. The christian character is so amiable in
itself, without any thing of this sort, that it stands in no need thereof to
recommend it to those, who have a true and just taste. It is not every
christian that is caught up with Saint Paul, into the third heaven, and hears
unspeakable words, and has a multitude of revelations given to him: And many
that only fancy this is the case with them, are lifted up above measure;
thinking themselves so spiritual, that they have no need to be moral. In short,
to speak of things of this nature, I mean of these flights and raptures, as
common to sincere christians, and the evidences of a good estate, (as many do)
has a direct tendency to mislead and beguile people; but none at all, to edify
them, or make them wise to salvation. For which reason I have chosen to confine
myself within the limits of strict, sober truth, in speaking upon this
important point. Nor can I think that any man has a right, according to the
doctrine of the gospel, to look upon himself as a favorite of heaven, and an
heir of the promises, the temper of whose mind, and whose outward behavior,
does not in general correspond to the account given above. Indeed that kingdom
of God which is within us, consisting in righteousness and peace and joy in the
Holy Ghost, is, in some respects, like His external and visible kingdom: It is,
as a grain of mustard seed, (which is the least of all) when it first takes
root in the heart: but it afterward becomes a tree, shooting its branches to
heaven; and, being watered with the dew thereof, and warmed by the influences
of Him, who is a Sun as well as Shield, it bears more than twelve manner of
fruit, grateful to God and man. Hence it comes to pass, that all truly good men
may not be able to see, with equal clearness, the evidence of their being such;
because this must depend, in a great measure, upon the progress they have made
in goodness and holiness. However the newborn babe, as well as the full-grown
man, in Christ Jesus, has all the features and members of a child of God: Though
I have been speaking of the christian temper and character in general, without
descending to any such niceties; which seem to be unprofitable, and therefore
needless.

I HAVE been laying before you, my Brethren, that law of liberty, which is the
rule of your obedience, and by which you are to be judged hereafter: I have
been holding up to you that sacred mirror, which I mentioned to you in the
beginning of this discourse, in order to your seeing and knowing yourselves.
Have you looked into it; and beheld the true features and complexion of your
souls? your moral and religious characters? If you have, suffer me to be so
officious as to ask you, What manner of men you are? Do you find the christian
temper within you, so that you can reasonable look upon yourselves as being in
a state of favor with God; and rejoice in hope of His glory? Do your
consciences bear you witness, that your hearts are upright toward God? and
that you come up to the character of those who are doers of the word? to the
character of Christ's faithful disciples? Has the gospel had its proper
influence upon your hearts, so that you do not only seem to be religious, but
are really and internally so? Do you perform the various duties required of
you, as well as abstain from those sins which God has forbidden? Do you pay a
due regard both to the moral and the instituted part of christianity; walking
in all the ordinances and commandments of the gospel? -- those which you
yourselves cannot but acknowledge to be such; and obligatory upon you? Do you
love God above all things, esteeming his favor as life, and his
loving kindness as better than life? Is your treasure and your heart in heaven,
whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus? Do you sincerely love
and honor your Redeemer? Do you love your neighbor as your selves? Are you
just to all men? forgiving? kind? charitable according to your own capacity,
and the necessities of others? Do you honor your superiors? Are you
condescending to your inferiors? Do you rejoice in the prosperity, and mourn
in the adversity, of others? Do you observe all the known laws of sobriety and
temperance, mortifying your members which are upon the earth? cherishing and
cultivating your rational, intellectual part, and walking in the spirit? In
fine, are your wills subdued to the divine authority; so that you make the
known laws of the gospel the rule of your conduct in every respect? -- As many
as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God! -- Ephesians. 6. 16.


IF you can answer these important questions in the affirmative, you have no
reason to doubt but that you are the children of God; and if children, then
heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, to an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, and that ^adeth not away -- If you cannot; you
have certainly no ground to think yourselves Christ's true disciples, such as
he will own hereafter, when he shall be revealed from heaven. If there is any
one known commandment which you habitually violate, you have no lot nor portion
in this matter. And if any should think such doctrine as this, ^arsh and
severe; and that, according hereto, by far the greater part of the christian
world must be condemned; I shall only answer, that you are not to blame me for
this: I had no hand in making the terms, upon which God offers eternal life to
his sinful creatures: I was not his counselor; but only declare to you, as
plainly as I can, what these terms really are --

BUT however rigorous this doctrine may seem to men that are wedded to this
world; that are immersed in sensuality and vice, instead of being purified in
the fountain opened to wash in, therefrom; I doubt not, but some of my hearers
judge otherwise; and can truly say, that both their inward temper, and external
conduct, correspond to the representation given above, of evangelical
obedience. Happy, thrice happy, are all such! They may be assured, that their
transgressions are forgiven, and their sins covered; that they are justified
from all things; that there is no condemnation belonging to them; that they are
the friends of the great, the eternal God; that they are entitled to his favor
in life, in death, through out eternity; and that when He, who once died for
them, and unto whom they now live by faith, shall appear the second time
without sin, they shall also appear with him in glory! "For he is faithful that
promised." --

THERE are, probably, other Persons, who are in doubt whether they come up to
the character of christians, or not. And it is certainly incumbent upon all
such, to be impartial in the examination of their own hearts; and to grow
better than they are at present, that so these doubts may be removed. Possibly
they may be truly good and pious, notwithstanding their suspicions concerning
themselves: It is also possible that their suspicions are but too well
grounded; and that they are, at least, as bad as they fear they are. But be
their real state and character what it will, it will certainly be no
disadvantage to them, to endeavor to know what it is; and to make their
calling and election sure. To be in doubt, in so interesting and important a
point, must needs occasion great disquietude in the breast of every good man;
but it may be of fatal consequence for the vicious to come to a wrong
determination as to themselves: And this is what they are in danger of, by
reason of that partiality, which is so natural to us all; and to which vicious
men are peculiarly subject.

BUT notwithstanding self-condemnation is so irksome and disagreable; yet it is
to be feared that some cannot avoid it; the conviction of their wickedness
being too full and strong upon their minds to be resisted, or evaded. Would to
God there were none, whose whole temper and character in general, is so
directly and flagrantly the reverse of the christian, as absolutely to take
away from them the power of doubting in the present case! Can he who neither
fears God, nor regards man? Can the profane swearer and blasphemer? Can the
thief? Can the liar? Can the reviler of his brethren? Can the drunkard? the
adulterer? the whoremonger? -- Can a person who knows that either of these
characters belongs to him, make it a question, whether he is a christian, or
not! whether he is entitled to the great and precious promises of the gospel!
whether he is a son and heir of God, and a joint heir with Christ, to the
heavenly inheritance! No: it is impossible, if he looks into the perfect law of
liberty; and into his own heart, at the same time: He will find his sin written
with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond, and graven upon the table
of his heart. Jer. 17. 1.
He must know, that he is not of God; but of his father the devil, whose lusts
he does. Job. 8. 44
I will not, indeed, presume to say, that there are any persons of such a
flagitious character in this assembly: (For I would not bring a railing
accusation even against the devil, though I were contending with him, as Michael
did, about the body of Moses; Jud^, v. 9.
much less would I bring such an accusation against my brethren:) However, One
may venture to say, without giving just cause of offense, that there is seldom
such a number of people together, in any part of Christendom, where there are
not more than one, or two, or ten persons, to whom no better a character
belongs -- What the natural presumption is therefore, in the present state of
the world. You are as able to judge as I -- The matter is refered, as in the
presence of Him, who is acquainted with all our ways, to every man's own breast
and conscience.

ALL revealed religion is an appeal to the reason and consciences of men; to
the law originally written, by the finger of God, upon the fleshly tables of
our hearts. Christianity, the word which you hear, and ought to receive with
meekness, is a slip or cyon brought from heaven to earth, to be ingrafted upon
the natural, wild olive tree; that so you might bring forth fruit unto God. But
if you will perversely tear out this cyon; if you will not suffer it to grow;
if you will not give in to the dictates of your own hearts and consciences, but
will thwart and contradict them, (as people often do) what remedy can be found!
-- Though one arose from the dead, you would not give heed to him! -- Let every
one who hears me, be admonished, therefore, not to reject Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and the apostles. I warn you, in the name of that God, who has
given you your reason and moral sense of things, to reverence your selves; and
not to put your reason and conscience to silence, as you value the salvation of
your souls. O Man! God is greater than thy heart, and knows all things.
Think thou, then, that thou shall escape his righteous judgment, when thou
condemnest thyself; and can not avoid doing so? I will not appeal even unto
Caesar, in this interesting cause; but to yourselves. Under a perfectly right
and good administration of things, all depends upon a right temper of mind;
upon honesty and uprightness of soul. Therefore if thou have not this temper,
thy soul is lost! Heaven is shut against thee, whosoever thou art, that
persistest in rebellion against thy God, thy Redeemer, thyself. Turn then, at
God's reproof; at thy Savior's reproof; at thine own reproof; at the reproof
of thine own conscience; for to this I make my appeal. Do you not know that you
are sinners? Fly, then, for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before you;
that so you may have that strong consolation, which results from the gospel, to
them that hold both faith and a good conscience, instead of holding the truth
in unrighteousness. And Behold! that God, whose righteous laws you have so
often broken, is gracious and merciful; not willing that you should perish. If
you humbly confess and forsake your sins, He will forgive your sins, and
cleanse you from all unrighteousness, even in the fountain that was opened, by
the Roman spear, in thy Redeemer's side: For the blood of Christ cleanses from
all sin. Behold! He who once bare your sins in his own body on the tree, and is
since "passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God," is a merciful and
faithful high priest, in things pertaining to God; and those that come unto
him, he will in no wise cast out. Behold! that blessed Spirit of promise, of
discipline and comfort, which you have so often grieved and quenched, and
driven away from you, is ready to return, to rest upon you, to take up his
abode in your hearts; and to seal you to the day of redemption. Behold! "there
is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents!" -- But if neither the
severity of the law, nor the grace of the gospel; if neither the fear of hell,
nor the hopes of heaven; if neither the terrors of divine and merited wrath,
nor the endearments of divine unmerited love; if neither of these things, nor
all of them in conjunction, can bring down, can soften and dissolve thy stony
heart; if thou art thus abandoned, thus irreclaimable; if thou had rather
cause exultation and triumph in hell, amongst the angels of darkness, than
rejoicing in heaven, amongst the angels of light; take then, thine own course,
and see what the end of these things will be -- "the end of them, who obey not
the gospel of God." 1 (...) 17.
In vain do you hope for mercy upon other terms than those, which the God of
mercy and of truth has marked out to you: In vain has He manifested so much
love and compassion to you: In vain has He given his own dear Son to be the
Savior of the world: In vain was a body prepared for him, in the divine
counsel, before the foundations of the world were laid: In vain was he made
manifest in the flesh, in the fullness of time: In vain was that body hung, and
broken, and pierced on the cross, the sun, in the mean time, hiding his face,
the vail of the temple being rent in twain, the earth quaking, the rocks
rending, the graves opening, the dead arising: Luke 23. 44 Math. 27. 51, 52.
In vain was "the blood of the everlasting covenant" poured out for you: In
vain has God raised his Son from the dead, and given him glory, that he might
be a Prince and a Savior: In vain is the forgiveness of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God, preached to you in his name: In vain is all this
done, if you will not accept of eternal life, upon those gracious terms on
which the gospel offers it to you: And if you believe it can be obtained upon
any other, than those of being doers of the word, you deceive your-ownselves,
and YOUR FAITH IS ALSO VAIN! Remember that divine admonition, -- Because I have
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: But
ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear
comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind; when distress
and anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: For that they
hated knowledge, and did not CHOOSE the fear of the Lord. -- Therefore shall
they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.
(...). 24 -- (...)


On the Deceitfulness of the Heart, and GOD's perfect Knowledge thereof.
JEREMIAH XVII. 9, 10. THE heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked; who can know it?
I THE LORD search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according
to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

THERE are three things to be considered in the subject before us.

FIRST, What is implied in this assertion, That the heart is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked; so that it is extremely difficult, if not
impossible, exactly to know it?

SECONDLY, What is to be understood by God's searching the heart, and trying
the reins.

THIRDLY, The end hereof, namely, That He may give every man according to his
ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

THESE things comprehend the whole subject, which is to employ our thoughts at
this time: And, being considered, they will lead us to some practical
reflections of the most important and interesting nature.

FIRST, Let us consider, what is implied in this assertion, That the heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; so that it is extremely
difficult, if not impossible, exactly to know it.

THE heart of man, in the moral, scriptural and theological sense, intends the
mind, or soul; that living, active principle within us, which thinks, chooses,
determines; and which is, properly speaking, the agent in all we do whether
good or bad, the body being only its instrument; entirely passive, and
therefore not, in strict propriety, the subject of any moral or religious
qualities whatever. So that to say the hearts of men are deceitful and wicked,
and to say that men are so themselves, amounts to the same thing at last. And
accordingly, in common discourse, when we speak of a wicked and good, a
deceitful and honest heart, ascribing one to one man, and the other to another;
we intend hereby to distinguish betwixt the real characters of men, considered
in a religious or moral view; and to give to them respectively, that which
belongs to them: This is what we design, in this manner of speaking, however
unjustifiable it may be, to make so free with our neighbors characters, as we
often do.

FROM the foregoing observation, it is evident that when it is said, that the
heart is deceitful, etc. it cannot be intended, that the hearts of all men are
so: For this would be, in effect, to say that all men are deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked. To say which, in absolute terms, and without
limitation, would in fact be, to take away that distinction which we always
make betwixt the characters of men, saying that these are upright and good but
those false and wicked: Which distinction betwixt men, is also constantly
supposed, taken for granted, and asserted, in the holy scriptures. Can he be a
good and upright man, whose heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked! If he can, he must be such a kind of good man, as neither
scripture, nor common sense, knows any thing of: So far from it, that in the
language of scripture and common sense, to say that a person's heart, is thus
deceitful, thus desperately wicked, is to characterize him as a bad man,
directly the reverse of him, whom the scripture styles good and upright. We
must therefore, either totally confound all characters, asserting that there
are no sincere good man, or else we must acknowledge that these words in the
prophet, are spoken of the hearts of the wicked, exclusively of others. For it
is absolutely impossible to show, who is the good man in distinction from the
wicked, or who the wicked man, in distinction from the good, if it is common to
all men to have hearts that are so deceitful and wicked. You can say nothing
worse of the worst men, than you actually say of the best, if you apply this to
all men in general: So that either your distinction betwixt good men and bad,
must be vain and groundless; or else you wrest and pervert the sense of
scripture, when you apply this worst of characters to all men without
exception. However, it is not designed in what is here said, to intimate that
the hearts of any men are perfectly upright and good. There is doubtless a
degree of deceitfulness and wickedness in the hearts of the best. But the
scripture does not, by any means, authorize us to speak in such strong, general
terms, as these in the text, concerning the hearts of those, whom our Savior
himself distinguishes from others, by saying, that they, have an honest and
good heart. Luke (...). 15.
Certainly no one man's heart can be both honest and good, and deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked. To say both these things of the same
persons, at the same time, would be as palpable a contradiction as can be
named. Were a man to tell me, that my heart was "deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked," however true this might be, I should think he called
me nothing better than a Knave or a Villain: And all those who acknowledge this
of their own hearts, do, in reality, acknowledge that the same character
belongs to themselves; though I am persuaded that many, who express themselves in
this manner, neither deserve such a character, nor would be willing to take it
upon them: As to some others, I will not be confident. --

WHEN it is said in the text, that the heart is deceitful, etc. it is evident
that the prophet had the Jews more especially in his eye, whose general,
national character at this time, was that of a profligate, abandoned people, in
the common gross sense; in contradistinction from a pious and virtuous people:
Such they are represented to be, in this very chapter; and particularly in the
first verse of it -- The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with
the point of a diamond; it is graven upon the table of their hearts, and upon
the horns of your altars. It might well be said of such a people, in general,
that their hearts were deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; though
there were, doubtless, some men of an honest and good heart among them, even at
this very time. It is evident, therefore, from the context, from the common use
of words, and from the real distinction which there is betwixt characters,
(which distinction is constantly supposed and asserted in scripture) that what
is here said of the heart, is not to be refered to the hearts of all men
without distinction. This can no more be supposed, than it can, that when our
Savior says, Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false-witness, blasphemies; Mat. 15, 19.
^e intends to represent all men in common, as being murderers, adulterers,
fornicators, thieves, false-swearers, and blasphemers! Which certainly he did
not intend, since none, to whom either of these characters belongs, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Indeed, as was said before, the best men are not perfectly free from all
deceit and wickedness: But still, to be deceitful and wicked is not their
general, predominant character; but the very reverse of it, viz. to be sincere,
upright and good. IT would not be much to the purpose, to object to what is
said above, the account which St. Paul gives, Romans 3d. of the universal
wickedness of mankind; as where he says, "There is none righteous, no not one,"
etc. Because it is manifest, that St Paul here means, righteous in the strict,
legal sense: It being his aim, in this passage, to prove, That all the world is
become guilty before God, in such a sense, that by the deeds of the law, no
(...) shall be justified: And so to show the necessity of evangelical grace and
mercy, in order to justification. The apostle intends, that there is no man
wholly without sin: Or as it is expressed, Eccles. 7. 20. That there is not a
just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not. Which, surely, is a very
different thing from saying, that the heart of the holiest man on earth is
"deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked."


IT is to be farther observed, That when the heart is said to be deceitful, the
primary and most direct meaning, probably, is, that it is deceitful with regard
to other persons; so that they cannot know it perfectly, nor safely repose an
entire, absolute confidence in a man, however just he may appear to be: A man
may be deceitful and hypocritical in all his pretenses to virtue and religion;
in all his promises; and sadly disappoint those who put their trust in him --
This sense seems naturally suggested by the verses immediately preceding --.
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm; and whose
heart departs from the Lord, etc. Why? Because the heart is deceitful; and
God alone, who is true and faithful, can be fully and entirely confided in.
This seems to be the primary, and most obvious meaning of the passage. However,
since every man who is deceitful with reference to his neighbor, is also, in
some sense, deceitful and false to himself; and since the scripture notion of
hypocrisy, evidently includes both these species of dishonesty; and (I may add)
since the words of the prophet are so general, that they may well enough
comprehend both; I shall take the liberty to suppose, that both may be actually
intended here. And accordingly we may consider the deceitfulness of the heart
in a twofold light; first, with reference to others; and then, with reference
to a man's self.

1st. WITH reference to others. There is scarce a man, however destitute of
virtue, religion, and honor, who does not, at times, put on some show and
profession of them: And this is often, though not always done, with a fixed,
formal intention to deceive others into a good opinion of him; that so he may
carry his worldly designs and projects into execution more effectually than he
could, without the convenience of a mask. Masks are not only used in kings
courts, where great men are gorgeously apparalled, and walk in slippery places;
they are also worn in cottages, by the ignoble vulgar. And they are put on by
both, for the same end in general; which is, that the Wearer may accomplish
some sinister, dishonest purpose, which he could not accomplish so well
without. Those who pretend to a public spirit, to a patriotic principle of
conduct, are not always the men they would be though it to be. No! They are
sometimes as void of true honor, integrity, and love to their country, as the
meanest sycophant and court-parasite. The mask will, perhaps, drop off in a
little while; and you will see these raving patriots become as arrant
parasites, as those, against whom they raved; bartering all their pretended
honor, and public spirit, for the wages of unrighteousness, or only a title.
But descend from these heights, to the inferior ranks of life. Do you not see
artizans, tradesmen, laborers of every sort, yea, even beggars, putting on a
mask of honor, virtue and integrity, in their way, in order to deceive, and
impose upon, other people? in order to accomplish their particular ends? The
deceit, the wickedness of men's hearts, is the same in every degree and station
of life: It is as true, that men of low degree are vanity, as it is, that men
of high degree are a lie. King David.


SHALL we say then, that there is no such thing as honor, virtue, and public
spirit, in the world? that all men's pretenses thereto, are vain and
hypocritical? and that they would throw off the mask, could they accomplish
their ambitious, covetous, or other worldly designs? A Sir R -- may think this
a true representation of mankind but a Sir A. O -- knows it is not; and every
honest man knows so too.
No! We can only say, that we are often deluded and mocked by false pretenders
to virtue and honor: Unless there were really such qualities in nature, there
could be no counterfeits of them, any more than there could be false,
counterfeit coin, without any true and genuine -- Not only the ignorant and
over-credulous, are often cheated and deceived by the false pretenders to
virtue; but even the wise and prudent; I might add, the very elect: For even
good men are not exempted from deceptions and impositions of this kind. Yea,
how great a paradox soever it may seem, it is certainly true, that honest,
good, undesigning men, in whom there is no guile, and who always speak and act
in the simplicity of their hearts, are oftener deluded by these false
appearances of virtue, than other persons. They are not so apt to be suspicious
and jealous, and therefore are not so much upon their guard in this respect, as
others. Knowing, even from experience, that there is in nature such a thing as
uprightness, honesty and goodness, they are prone to confide in the pretenders
(...); and to take up with any plausible appearances. And this is the only
clue, that will lead us ful^y into the sense and spirit of St. Paul's words --
Charity thinks no evil -- believes all things, hops all things. A man who
is truly good and beneficent himself, knows that goodness and beneficence are
not empty names, but real qualities and characters: And he is, therefore,
disposed to think that all who have the appearance, have the reality and truth
of them. On the other hand, he who does not find in himself these moral
qualities, though he sometimes puts on the show of them, is inclined to think all
others who pretend to them, false and hypocritical, or at best fanciful men;
that all is but a mask, in order to a person's carrying on his private selfish
designs -- And whoever thinks thus; whoever tells me that there is no real
honor, religion, virtue, or public spirit in the world, tells me, in other
words, that he himself has no honor, religion, virtue, or public spirit: And
though I could believe him, if he said this only of himself; yet I cannot, when
he says the same of all other men. No one, who himself experiences what is
termed honesty, goodness, religion, charity, can, in the nature of the thing,
doubt whether any man can be held and influenced by these principles, or not.
And therefore a man's denying that any are, or can be, thus held and
influenced, is not only a tacit confession, but a plain demonstration, that he
himself is a wicked man, and a Villain at the bottom; and equally so, whether
he be a low or an high-liv'd one -- But not to digress too far --

THERE is no one virtue or grace, but what is laid claim to by persons who are
destitute of all. The Pharisees, of whom we read so much in the gospel, were,
if we can believe our Savior, such men. They made many and long prayers; they
fasted; they gave alms; they did many good things; so that they outwardly
appeared righteous unto men. Mate. 23 28.
But, what said He, who knew what was in man? He said they made long prayers
for a "pretense"; that they gave alms to be "seen of men;" that they were
"hypocrites;" that they were like "whited sepulchers;" and that they should
"receive the greater damnation." Charity, the bond of perfectness, was Judas's
pretense, when he objected against the waste of precious ointment on his Lord;
but the truth of the case was, that he wanted to have it "sold for more than
three hundred pence," and the money put into the bag which he carried, being a
Thief. It is not he, who pretends to have the greatest abhorrence of dishonesty
and knavery, that is the freest from them in his commerce and intercourse with
mankind. Nay; the most wicked and treacherous designs are often carried on
under the appearance of friendship: Which long since gave occasion to that
observation of Solomon, that "the kisses of an enemy are deceitful": And this
was remarkably exemplified, when the Son of man himself was "betrayed with a
kiss." The most solemn promises and engagements of service, and friendship, are
often so far from being strong enough to hold him that makes them, that they
are made by him, with a formal intent to break them; and to do some greater
injury to the person who relies on them, than could have been done without
them. In short, there is no man, who has a mind to deceive, that cannot find
many ways of doing it, unless he is a fool as well as a knave. Religion itself
is, perhaps, oftener made a cloak for wickedness, than any one thing. Though all
men who appear religious, are not designing hypocrites; yet "gravity is of the
very essence of imposture." And many persons, by an affected gravity, by a
serious kind of grimace, by a pretended scrupulosity about some trivial things,
by a show of zeal, and a series of religious tricks and artifices, have cheated
the world into an high opinion of their sanctity, without having one single
virtue. And it is to be observed, that people sometimes put on this mask of
religion, with a formal design to impose upon the world; that they may indulge
their vices, and injure their neighbors without being suspected of doing it,
or in danger of detection. There have been so many known examples of this gross
hypocrisy, that we can have no certain, infallible dependence upon any man.
Those, of whom we have had experience for many years, sometimes turn out to be
the reverse of what we took them to be: And we do not know, but others may do
the like hereafter; since we cannot know the heart: So deceitful is it, so
desperately wicked!

OUR blessed Savior has given us the surest criterion, the most infallible
rule, that we can go by, in forming our judgment about men and characters: By
their fruits ye shall know them. And by attending to this, we may sometimes
discover those to be inwardly ravening wolves, who come to us, and live amongst
us, in sheeps clothing. But even this rule is, in one sense, insufficient;
because no rule can make Us infallible in the application of it. It is much
easier for us to know who are, and must be, wicked men, than to know who are
certainly good. The former is, in some cases, possible: Since he that is
visibly immoral, impious and flagitious in the course of his life, cannot
possibly be good in his heart. But on the other hand, he, whose behavior is,
to all human appearance, the most pious and unexceptionable, may yet possibly
not be good: He may sin where he ought to pray, in secret: He may be habitually
guilty of many vices, which shun the observation of the world. In which case,
his heart is certainly bad: Yea, his actions, which appear the most specious
and commendable to us, may spring from such principles as would rather
denominate them vicious, than virtuous, in the eye of One who could penetrate
to the source, and bottom of them. Were not even the prayers of the Pharisees
wicked and impious, when made for a pretense? and that they might (...) widows
houses? Such suspicions are not, indeed, to be indulged with respect to our
neighbors, while their behavior is visibly good and blameless: But as this
may possibly be the case, the mentioning hereof, tends to illustrate and
confirm what is said in my text, concerning the deceitfulness of the heart; and
the impossibility of our coming to a perfect knowledge of it. But

2dly. IT is now time to consider the deceitfulness of the heart, in the other
point of light proposed, viz. with relation to a man's self. There is such a
thing as a deceived heart, an heart which deceives, and imposes upon, itself;
as well as an heart which is deceitful and dishonest with relation to others.
There are many persons, to whom those words of the prophet are applicable, "A
deceived heart has turned him aside." Isa. 44. 20.
This is a character which we often meet with. Nor is the scripture-notion of
hypocrisy, only this, that a man sometimes puts on the show or appearance of
religion and virtue, on purpose to delude his neighbors. This hypocrisy is of
the grossest kind. Every such man must be conscious to himself, that he is only
acting a part. But there is a more subtle and refined kind of deceit, whereby
a man deludes even himself, while he is not sensible that he is deluding
others, nor has any formal intention to do so. That we are thus in danger of
delusion from within, from ourselves, is plainly implied in all those passages
of scripture, where we are admonished not to deceive our ownselves; to try, to
prove, to examine ourselves, and the like. And the self-deceit, which we are
thus warned to guard against, is, I suppose, what the scripture more generally
intends by hypocrisy, than it does the gross kind mentioned before.

THIS will, probably, sound like a paradox to many, For it may be asked, What
we are so intimately acquainted with, as with ourselves? Do we not know what
passes within us? our own thoughts, and designs? the principles and motives
upon which we act? Is it not a contradiction to suppose, that we can be
ignorant of these; or deceived about them? So that it is so far from being
difficult for any man to know his heart, that it is impossible for him not to
know it.

BUT let us proceed deliberately here. Do you know your heart, in the sense of
an Anatomist, when he talks about the heart, because you are conscious of your
own thoughts, desires, volitions, etc? You will answer, No: this is quite
another thing: You must see a human body opened, the heart dissected, and view
every part of it carefully, before you can know the heart in this sense. Very
just. Well: You do not any more truly know your heart, in the moral, scriptural
and religious sense of the term, merely by being conscious of your own
thoughts, volitions, etc. than you know it in the anatomical sense: But in
order hereto you must, if I may use the expression, see the soul dissected; and
examine the parts, or several powers, faculties and operations of it
distinctly; compare them together, and the whole, with the rule of moral right.
Without this, you may be entirely ignorant of your hearts, or be deceived as to
your own true character and temper; not knowing what manner of spirit you are
of, Luke 9. 55.
however conscious you may be of your own thoughts, desires, volitions,
actions. Is it not probable? is it not certain, that many persons have been
mistaken as to their own moral and religious character; thinking themselves
good and upright men, when they were the reverse hereof? Is is not probable
that many of the Pharisees of old, and many other persons in later times, were,
and are, thus mistaken in themselves; thinking their character good and honest,
though really bad and dishonest, at the bottom? This will not be denied.
Certainly then, there is such a thing as dishonesty of heart, which a man is
insensible of; such a thing as self-deceit; such a thing as a man's imposing
upon, and cheating himself, in some way or other; and doing it so artfully,
that he does not stand convicted and condemned of himself, afterward: He is
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, even while he cries, " The temple of
the Lord, the temple of the Lord;" and actually thinks he has a right to say to
others, as those hypocrites in Isaiah did -- Stand by thyself, come not near to
me, for I am holier than thou. Chap. 65 ver. 5.


TO lay open this whole mystery of iniquity, which has already worked, and,
probably, still works, in so many persons, would require much more time than
there is for it at present. Nothing more is, therefore, to be now expected,
than some general hints -- It is all to be deduced from, as it may all be
resolved into, two well-known principles or affections in human nature: I mean
a sense of moral obligation and religion, which all men have in some degree, so
that they cannot but wish to die the death of the righteous; and a love to this
present world, so that they are desirous to enjoy the gains, the honors, the
pleasures of it. These principles, in many cases at least, interfere with each
other; and so there arises a strife and contest betwixt them, for the dominion
and sovereignty, the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the spirit against
the f^esh; which two being contrary the one to the other, a man cannot do the
things which he would. Gal 5 17
He would be religious, and yet gratify his worldly lusts and passions: He
would serve two masters, both God and Mammon: He would unite those things,
which cannot really be united: He will not renounce all pretensions to religion
and virtue, for the sake of the world; nor yet will he renounce the world for
the sake of religion and virtue: He would make the prosecution of both consist
together; and be under the joint sway of two Lords; which, in this case, is
impossible: No such composition can be made.

BUT though this is evidently the case; yet what is this to the deceitfulness of
the heart? to hypocrisy? to self-deception? You will presently see. Every man
must be the servant either of God, or of the world: He must be either good or
bad: He must have a certain, determinate internal character. But those whose
character is really bad and vicious, are not willing to see and know it. They
could not but be more dissatisfied with themselves, if they thoroughly knew
themselves. Hence, they open their intellectual eye but halfway, squint, wink
hard, look askaunce, take only side-glances, and use a magnifying glass, if I
may so express it, when they take a view of any thing which they imagine
commendable in themselves, turning the other end of it, when they look upon
their faults. The heart plays such juggling, legerdemain tricks with itself!
Men that are void of fairness and probity of mind, evidently put deceptions
upon themselves, in various ways; insensibly flattering themselves, that they
are certainly and truly good, and upright, while they certainly are not; but
live in the practice of flagrant immoralities, which every one almost, except
themselves, sees plainly enough. So deceitful are men, even with regard to
themselves! And the clue mentioned, if pursued, would lead us through all the
doublings, and labyrinths of a dishonest heart; that den of brutal lusts and
passions; that cage of unclean birds; that dark vault, which is full of dead
men's bones and of all uncleanness, though the monument over it may appear white
and beautiful.

THE principle of conscience sometimes operates so strongly in a man, that he
cannot go directly counter to it, with his eyes wide open: And yet the worldly
and vicious principle is so much stronger, that he must obey the latter, and
still seem to himself to be religious; or, at least, not very vicious. Hence
such a man will have numerous evasions and palliations, by the help of which he
will justify himself, to himself, in his evil practices. He can make human
frailty, perhaps, a salvo for almost any thing: "His faith is quite orthodox,
so that he abhors the very name of (...): The temptation is great; and the
Devil is a powerful, subtle adversary: Or every thing must be resolved into the
overruling providence of God: Who is there that is wholly free from sin? Even
good men, formerly, were sometimes guilty of greater sins than his, he
supposes: He is, besides, punctual in the performance of some duties; none of
the external ordinances of religion are neglected by him: Or he often gives
alms to the necessitous: And charity, he reads, will cover a multitude of S^ns:
Or, if that will not, certainly the righteousness of Christ will: This or that
precept of the gospel, he thinks, needs not be so rigorously interpreted, since
we are under grace, not the law: Although such and such things would be criminal
in other circumstances; yet this case is peculiar, and the general rule does
(...) it." By such subterfuges and tergiversations; by such twistings and
serpentine windings, a man that is not truly upright, will often evade those
religious and moral obligations, which every honest, good man, sees and feels,
and is influenced by: To him, darkness will be light, and light darkness;
bitter will be sweet, and sweet bitter; evil good, and good evil. He will
pacify his conscience so far, that he will not much censure himself, if at all,
for the greatest immoralities and impieties. Yea, he will think he is doing God
service, by shedding the blood of his saints: He will, perhaps, vent his unholy
pride, his spleen and malice against man, even in his prayers to God;
condemning, and endeavoring to expose another, as an heretic, an hypocrite,
and a wicked man; thinking that this is all true Zeal for God and pure religion
-- So when the Pharisee and Publican went up into the temple to pray, the
former said, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men, -- or even as this
publican. Luke 18. 10.
Poor man! He was full of arrogance, spiritual pride, and censoriousness, while
he was accusing his brother to the Father, as a graceless hypocrite; and
blessing both God and himself, that he was not as other men. Thus will those,
who are not thoroughly honest at the bottom, deceive their ownselves: Thus will
they behold, or think they behold, a mote in their brother's eye; and yet not
see the beam that is in their own: They would not do thus, were they not
hypocrites; if they had a single eye, instead of an evil one: For honesty as
well as charity, begins at home. Under a specious show of sanctity, and zeal
for God and religion, there often lurks a corrupt, pharisaical heart; but yet
so disguised, that the unhappy owner of it does not know it. So deceitful is
the heart! so desperately wicked!

THE hypocrisy here spoken of, is essentially different from that, which
consists in putting on the garb and form of Godliness, with a premeditated
design to impose upon, and to delude, others. -- When a man does thus, he must
be conscious to himself, that he is a deceiver and impostor: But this other
kind of hypocrisy, consists in self-deception; in a man's accounting his vices,
no vices; his imaginary, counterfeit virtues, sterling and genuine; and so in
mistaking his own moral and religious character. However, the former kind of
hypocrisy, it is probable, often ends in the latter, being quite swallowed up
and absorbed therein: I mean that men who, at first, put on the mask of virtue
and religion chiefly for the sake of deceiving others, wear it 'till they come,
by degrees, to think it is not a mask at all, but true religion: So that they
are at length as much deceived in themselves, as others were mistaken in them
before. This may be illustrated by that which I take to be a just, as well as
common observation, viz. That men sometimes invent lies and slanders, and
propagate them at first, knowing them to be such; but having long repeated
them, they themselves come at last to think them real truths, and propagate
them afterward as such!

THIS kind of hypocrisy, when it has taken deep possession, and strong hold of
a man, renders him almost proof against conviction; so that his case is really
more desperate than that of people, who hardly make any pretensions to virtue
and religion. Persons, being thus entrenched and fortified, those spiritual
weapons which are mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds in other
men, are used to little purpose, in order to the battering down their
high-towering imaginations; and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. 2 C^r. 10 (...).
You can much easier come at those, who live profligate lives, without making
any show or pretense of being religious, than at these self-flatterers, and
self-deceivers: Which is the true ground of those remarkable words of our
Savior to the " Chief PRIESTS," in the temple -- I say unto you, that the
publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before You. Math. 2^ ^1.
compared with ver. 23.


HYPOCRITES, in the scripture sense of the word, not only deceive their
neighbors and themselves; but they, at least constructively, and by natural
implication, endeavor to deceive and mock God; to palm upon Him their
counterfeit religion and virtue, for true; and to conceal from Him their real
wickedness. In the language of the Prophet, they seek deep to hide their
counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark; and they say, Who sees
us? and who knows us? But woe unto them! Isai. 29, 15.
For the LORD searches the heart. Which brings us to the second general head
of discourse proposed, Viz.

SECONDLY, To consider what is implied in God's searching the heart, and trying
the reins: Upon which point I need not be long. This is spoken after the manner
of men. Searching and trying, when applied to creatures, supposes some
difficulty in the case; and being literally understood, it connotes
imperfection; which certainly must be no part of the idea when these terms are
used with relation to Him that is "perfect in knowledge;" and by whom actions
are weighed. The sense in general is, that however deceitful men's hearts are;
however difficult or impossible it is for Us exactly to know either the hearts
of others, or even our own; yet God has the most thorough, immediate, and
perfect knowledge of them. However we need not scruple to use the phraseology
of scripture, with reference to this point, or any other -- It would be
needless, and in vain, not to say presumptuous and impious, for us to
scrutinize into the manner, in which God knows our hearts, or knows any thing
else. "There is no searching of His understanding," Isa. 40. 2^.
who searches our hearts, which we cannot perfectly understand ourselves. It
suffices, (or, at least it ought to suffice Us, short-sighted mortals) that
both reason and scripture evince, that the great Author of all things can be
ignorant of nothing; not even of our hearts, our most secret tho'ts, counsels,
desires and purposes; or the internal frame, temper, and operations of our
souls. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all
things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of Him, with whom we have to do; Heb
4. 13
to whom we must give an account.

GOD judges of men's characters, not by outward appearances, but by their
hearts: His eye penetrates into the most secret recesses of our souls; and
therefore His "judgment is according to truth." He takes cognizance of our
hearts in all we do. When we come before him to serve him, and "sit before him
as his people sits," he observes whether we do it in sincerity and devotion,
or whether our hearts are still "far from him." When we pray to, or praise him,
he observes whether we worship him "in spirit and in truth," or for a pretense
only; and that we may get leave of our consciences to indulge our lusts. When
we impart of our temporal substance to the necessitous, he observes whether
this is done in christian charity, and singleness of heart, or that we "may be
seen of men." Whatever good things we do, and whatever sins we abstain from, he
observes whether we do thus from a sense of duty, and a regard to his
authority, or merely from some prudential and worldly considerations. He
discriminates exactly betwixt the inward characters of all men; knowing who are
truly good and upright, notwithstanding their numerous imperfections and
failings; and who are at the bottom still vicious, notwithstanding some things
which may appear good and commendable in them.

NOR does such a perfect knowledge of our hearts, as is here intended, only
imply in general, that God distinguishes between good men and bad; but also
that he observes in what degree either of these characters belongs to us; what
enhances the guilt of some; what lessens that of others; what exalts and
en^bles our virtues; what tarnishes and sullies them. It farther implies, that
God sees our good and bad purposes, whether we have ever an opportunity to put
them in execution or not. On one hand, he takes notice if there be a willing
mind, although a man has it not in his power to do according to his wishes. On
the other hand, he sees our evil devices, purposes and inclinations, although
they never become effect. In fine here, when God is said to search our hearts,
and try our reins, the meaning is, that none of those artifices and disguises
which men use, in order to impose upon one another; nor any of th^se deceits
and delusions, which they sometimes put even upon themselves, can in the least
degree conceal their true character from almighty God. The "Father of Spirits"
immediately inspects our souls; penetrates to the bottom of them; and traces
them through all those labyrinths, and doublings, and dark paths, which neither
our own, nor the vulture's eye has seen. fob 28 7.
-- O Lord! thou have searched me, and known me. Thou know my down-sitting,
and up-rising; thou understandest my though it afar off. Thou compassest my path,
and lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways. For there is not a word in
my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. Thou have beset me
behind and before. -- Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I
flee from thy presence? -- If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even
the night shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness hides not from thee; but
the night shines as the day. The darkness and the light are both alike to
thee: For thou have possessed my reins. Psalm. 130 1, --
-- But let us proceed,

3dly. TO consider the end for which God thus searches our hearts, and tries
our reins, Namely, To give every man according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his doings. This is still speaking after the manner of men. God is
necessarily omniscient, and therefore cannot but know our hearts. However, He
is here represented as searching them with a particular design and intention:
Which manner of speaking, when used with regard to men, implies somewhat
voluntary, as opposed to that which is necessary -- But we may keep to the
language of scripture, notwithstanding: always remembering, it is not an
imperfect, but a perfect Being, that is spoken of.

WE are to consider God, not as a curious Spectator, taking notice of our ways
and hearts for his amusement; but as the sovereign Lord and Judge of men; the
gracious Rewarder of the good and upright, and the just Punisher of the wicked
and deceitful man. This mighty "Judge of all the earth, will do right;" finally
rendering to every man that which is fitting and proper, whether it be good or
evil; and this, in due measure and proportion. He who has done every thing else
by rule; He that has adapted one thing to another in the visible world, with
the greatest wisdom and exactness; He that has not only " weighed the mountains
in scales, and the hills in a balance"; He that has not only " numbered the
stars, calling them all by their names," and " meted out the heavens with his
span;" but also "numbered the very hairs of our heads," the sands upon the
seashore, and the drops in the ocean; He that has adjusted and proportioned
all things in the natural world, I say, with the utmost care and exactness,
from whence there results such an astonishing order, beauty and harmony; This
most glorious Being cannot, surely, be less exact in whatever relates to the
intellectual and moral world, for the sake of which alone, the other was
created. Happiness and misery will eventually be dealt out by Him to those, to
whom they respectively belong; and this in exact weight, measure and
proportion, according to every man's ways, and according to the fruit of his
doings; in a manner befitting the great Author, the all-powerful, all-wise,
all-just, all-good and merciful Governor of the world.

NOR could He do what is right, fit and equal, in this sense, unless he
searched our hearts, and tried our reins. This is necessary for a moral
Governor; in order to a proper distribution of rewards and punishments,
happiness and misery. The knowledge of our words and external actions only,
would not (if I may use such an expression concerning God) qualify him to judge
the world; and to render to moral, religious creatures, that which is right and
fitting. For the goodness or badness of a moral and religious creature, such as
man, evidently depends, in a great measure, if not wholly, upon the internal
frame and temper, the turn and disposition of his heart. The love of Goodness
is plainly essential to a good character: So that if we could, any ways,
certainly know, That that man, whose moral and religious conduct, externally
considered, is blameless and good, (such as it ought to be) had yet no regard
to religion and virtue in his heart, no sincerity or uprightness, but was only
acting a part; should not we ourselves be far from looking upon his character
as good, in the sense now intended? Should we account any one a pious man,
because he often said his prayers, if we knew him to be an Atheist in his
heart? or only knew, that he had no love and reverence for that God, to whom he
prayed? Should we account any one a true christian, because he "named the name
of Christ," if we knew that he did not believe in him? that he did not respect
and honor him? Should we think any one truly charitable, because he "gave his
goods to feed the poor," if we knew that he had no fixed principle of
benevolence in him; but "did alms to be seen of men?" Should we think any one
temperate and sober, in the moral and religious sense, because he abstained
from acts of intemperance, if we knew that this proceeded solely from a regard
to his health and reputation? Certainly we should not. Well; this may all be
true with respect to some persons, although we do not know it to be so. Yea, some
parts, at least, of this good behavior externally considered, may proceed from
a bad principle; from some sinister, vicious design. For a man may bring even
his prayers to God with a wicked mind. How then must such a man's character
stand in the eye of Omniscience? Or how could God "give every man according to
his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings;" if he did not "search the
heart, and try the reins?" Under a perfect moral government, must not the heart
be the standard of the man; so that he shall be rewarded or punished according
as that is good or bad? upright or deceitful? and in proportion as it is
either? No actions can be deemed good, under such a government, any farther
than there is an honest, good temper within, which corresponds to them: Nothing
truly bad and culpable, any farther than there is somewhat wrong and vicious in
the heart. We should never have though it of settling and determining the moral and
religious characters of men, by their outward conduct, had it not been for our
own necessary imperfection; because we cannot see the heart, we must judge by
the outward appearance. This is the best rule for us to judge by; the
appearance being a probable indication, though not an infallible one in all
cases, of the internal, real character. But a perfect, all-knowing Being,
stands in no need of such a clue: He looks directly at the heart: There he
sees the character as it really is; and he will give every man according to
his own, whatever it be.

FOR the farther illustration of what is here intended, let us suppose a person
born with such natural infirmities, or placed in such disadvantageous
circumstances, that he could perform none of those actions which the world
usually calls good and virtuous. This person might, nevertheless, be blessed
with a pious and virtuous mind, a good and upright heart: Would he not, then,
be one of a pious and good character, and as rewardable under a righteous moral
government, as if he had been in a capacity to "bring forth good things, out of
the good treasure of his heart?" Or will you say, his character is vicious, and
that he is of ill desert, merely because he does not perform those good works
which others do? and which he himself would perform, were it in his power!
Suppose another person laboring under the like infirmities and disadvantages;
so that he has never had it in his power to do any harm; to do any one action
which the world calls impious or immoral. This person might, nevertheless, have
an impious, malicious turn of mind; his heart might be full of envy and malice;
he might have an ininclination to do the evil which he cannot. Is not his
character, then, bad and vicious; so that he as truly deserves punishment, from
a perfect moral Governor, as if he had been externally vicious? Certainly he
does. These suppositions are made only to show, that a man's character, is
really good or bad only in proportion as his heart is so; and that it must
finally be well or ill with him accordingly. And otherwise there would be no
need of God's searching the heart, in order to his giving every man according
to his ways. For this he might do without knowing the heart, if external
actions made the character; and men were no farther either rewardable or
punishable, than they are outwardly virtuous or vicious. Why need the heart
itself be searched, unless the heart itself is to be brought into judgment,
with every secret thing?

THIS is evidently the doctrine of the gospel, and, I think, the dictate of
reason also. Upon any other supposition, what will you make of St. Paul's
doctrine, that though a man give all his goods to feed the poor, and his body to
be burned, and have not charity, he is nothing? What will you make of St.
John's doctrine, that whosoever hates his brother is a murderer? What will you
make of our Savior's own doctrine -- He that looks -- has committed
adultery -- already in his heart? Apply what is said in these passages, to all
other instances of virtue and vice, and it will hold equally true. Whatever
good deeds a man does; yet if he has not a corresponding good temper, he is
nothing: Whatever sins and lusts a man's heart is set upon, of those he is
guilty in the sight of Him, who looks at the heart, and will give to every
man according to what he sees therein. I shall just add here, that it may be
taken for granted, every man is internally vicious, at least in the same degree
that he is externally so. But it cannot be supposed, on the other hand, that
every man is internally good and pious, in the same proportion that he seems
to be so, for this plain reason; Because, were this fact, there could be no
such thing as hypocrisy, or deceitfulness of heart; as there manifestly is, in
that twofold sense which has been considered.

UPON the whole: We are assured that God "has appointed a day, wherein he will
judge the world in righteousness, by that man, whom he has ordained." In that
day the secrets of all hearts, which are not even now secrets to our Maker,
will be disclosed to all: And it shall fare with men according to their real
goodness or badness, their internal character. It is indeed, often said in the
holy scriptures, That men shall be "judged according to their works;"
"according to their deeds;" according to "the things done in the body." But it
is so expressed, upon a presumption that men's hearts correspond to their
works; or, vice versa, their works to their hearts: Which, in general, may be
taken for granted, not withstanding any thing that has been said in this
discourse. But there are manifestly some exceptions: And it is equally
manifest, that in those cases where there is not such a correspondence betwixt
men's hearts and their deeds, a man's heart, not his deeds, is what must be
regarded by the righteous Judge of all. All men shall be dealt with, according
to what they really are in the estimation of the all-knowing, all-just and good
Governor of the world; not according to outward appearances, or the false
judgments which any form either of themselves or others.

THE reflections which, I suppose, naturally arise out of this subject, are
such as follow.

WE are hereby cautioned not to place any undue trust or confidence in men; but
to exercise a degree of wariness and circumspection in all our intercourse with
them. It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man: It is
better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes. Common prudence,
which ought to be reckoned among the virtues, requires this caution and
circumspection; since men may be very different from what they appear to be.
Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water; but a man of understanding will
draw it out. Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness; Prove. 20. 5, 6.
but a faithful man who can find! Thus said the wisest, if not the best of men.
A distrust of our fellow-men may, indeed, be carried to an extreme: (Which is
most frequently done by men that are themselves destitute of honor, honesty and
virtue:) Without a considerable degree of mutual trust, faith and confidence,
it is manifest that there can scarce be any such thing as social happiness, and
a friendly, agreeable intercourse with our neighbor. And a good man would
rather strain a point, hope all things, and expose himself to some
disadvantages and impositions, than, by an universal distrust and suspicion of
others, cut himself off from the satisfaction of thinking he is conversing with
those that are as upright as himself. It is to be added, that the daily
commerce, and various affairs of the world, could not be carried on in a manner
the most beneficial to the Whole, were jealousy, and diffidence of man to man,
universally to take place. The present state of mankind, however imperfect,
plainly requires some degree of mutual faith and dependence. However, there is,
in some sense, an extreme even in virtue. Entire, unreserved confidence is to
be placed in God alone: And those who place it indiscriminately in others, may
possibly have reason to lament their easy credulity; and experience the truth
of the prophet's words -- Cursed is the man that trusts in man.

BUT since men's hearts are, in some sense, treacherous and deceitful even with
regard to themselves; we are hereby admonished to examine our own; to
scrutinize them with the utmost care, and to keep them with all diligence: For
out of them are the issues both of life and death. Solomon tells us, that "he
that trusts his own heart is a fool." His meaning is, that since there is
great deceitfulness in the hearts of wicked men, and a degree of it in the
hearts of all men, it is folly in any One to be unsuspicious, or not jealous,
concerning the integrity of his own. A truly wise man will be, in some degree,
faithless and unbelieving toward his own heart. But you will say, perhaps, My
heart is good and honest: Why, then, should I be so injurious as to distrust
it? It is true, your heart may be good and honest; but how do you know it is
so, unless you have examined it? unless you have put it to the question? unless
you have tried how it will bear the torture of being severed from the world?
unless you have denied yourself as to those sins and lusts, which most easily
beset you? unless you have taken up your cross, and followed your Savior? This
is the test of an honest heart. And if you have never done thus; if you have
never distrusted yourselves, nor do so at present, it is almost a demonstration
that you are one of those unwise men, of whom Solomon speaks; and that, however
charitable you may be toward your own heart, it is still deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked. Some other persons, you allow, are mistaken in
thinking their hearts good and upright, while they are not: May not this
possibly be your own case? --

BUT whatever some persons may think, it would be a great abuse of this
scripture-doctrine, That the heart is deceitful, to infer from it, that a man,
by self-examination, by attending to the operations of his heart, and bringing
it to the test of scripture and reason, under that influence of the good Spirit
of God, which is common to all men, cannot come to a scriptural, rational, and
satisfactory determination concerning his own heart, whether it be good or bad.
The possibility of this, in the way of rational deduction and inference, (to
say nothing of the Witness of the Spirit) is plainly presupposed in all those
passages, where we are admonished to prove and examine ourselves to this end,
that we may know ourselves: Particularly in those words of the Apostle, Examine
yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves. Know ye not your
own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? 2 Cor.
13. 15.
What propriety? what sense would there be, in this exhortation, unless
professed christians in general might, by exercising due care, come to a
rational, satisfactory, and scriptural determination, concerning their own
proper character? It is to be farther observed, That truth, and real good
sense, and thorough integrity, carry along with them a peculiar consciousness
of their own genuineness: There is a feeling belonging to them, which does not
accompany their counterfeits, error, folly, half-honesty, partial and slight
regards to virtue and right, so far as they are consistent with that course of
gratification which men happen to be set upon. Bishop Butler's Sermon on a Sam.
12. 7.
A truly honest, good man, either must, or may if he pleases, and provided time
and opportunity are allowed him, satisfactorily know his own heart; he may know
his own religious character so far, at least, that anxiety and fear shall be
cast out. And may not a wicked man know, if he will, that he is really so, with
equal certainty? He may: He is under no necessity of dishonestly closing his
eyes, any more than a good man; though he may be more inclined to do it. There is
no disputing facts; many wicked men have actually seen themselves to be really
such -- Since then both are possible, it highly concerns us all to prove, to
examine, and know our ownselves: For whether we do so or not, there is ANOTHER
who searches our hearts, and tries our reins, even to give every man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

THERE are none, perhaps, who have more reason to be suspicious of themselves,
than your hot religious zealots; the great sticklers for what they call
orthodoxy, whether justly, or unjustly, it now matters not. You will sometimes
see men wrangling in such an unchristian manner, about the form of godliness,
as to make it but too evident that they deny the power thereof. You will find
some who pride themselves in being of what they call the true church, showing
by their whole conversation, that they are of the synagogue of Satan. Some
contend, and foam, and curse their brethren, for the sake of the Athanasian
Trinity, 'till it is evident they do not love and fear the ONE living and true
God as they ought to do. Others you will see raging about their peculiar
notions of original sin, so as to prove themselves guilty of actual
transgression: About election, 'till they prove themselves reprobates: About
particular redemption, 'till they show that they themselves are not redeemed
from a vain conversation. You will hear others quarrelling about imputed
righteousness, with such fury and bitterness, as to show that they are
destitute of personal: About special grace, so as to show that they have not
even common: About faith, while they make shipwreck of a good conscience: And
about the final perseverance of the saints, 'till they prove themselves to be
no saints; and that if they had ever any goodness or grace, they are now fallen
from it -- But, who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? let
him show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom. But if
ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the truth. This wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly,
sensual, devilish. -- The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy. James 3. 13.


THE extreme folly of hypocrisy is very evident from what has been said. God
knows our hearts already; and the false, deceitful man, who has deluded others
or himself, will be as certainly condemned hereafter, when we shall all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, as those notorious profligates, who declare
their sin as Sodom. Go on then, O man, to deceive thy fellow-mortals and
thyself! Go on to mock God, saying in thy heart, The Lord shall not see;
neither shall the God of Jacob regard it! But yet, He that planted the ear,
shall not He hear? He that formed the eye, shall not He see? He that chasteneth
the Heathen, shall not He correct Psalm 94. 9. 10.
Thee also! Thou may put out the eyes of thine own understanding, and become
blind to thy self and thy danger: But thou can not quench the eye of day;
thou can not put out the eyes of thy Judge, which are as a flame of fire in
every place, beholding the evil and the good: Pro. 15. (...)
There is no darkness, neither shadow of death, where thou can hide thyself
from Him. -- It is said, there are some animals which, being pursued, are so
simple as to shut and hide their eyes from the pursuer, and their danger;
thinking both are removed when they are no longer seen* and so being
self-blinded, they become a more easy prey. These silly animals (if there are
any such) are no ill emblem of foolish, self-deceivers; who being hunted and
haunted by their own consciences, and pursued, as it were, by the great Avenger
of blood, make lies their refuge, and hide themselves under falsehood; (...).
2^. 15.
and become blind to their danger, thinking that God sees them no longer when
they are hidden from themselves. But in vain! They will soon fall into His
hands, whose eye will not spare (...) 5. 11.
in the day of vengeance!

BUT though this subject should be considered primarily and principally, as a
warning and admonition to all false pretenders to religion and virtue; yet it
may be improved with great propriety, for the encouragement and consolation of
all those, whose hearts are right with God; especially those, whose lot it is
to have their "names cast out as evil;" to be reputed wicked and graceless men,
and "separarated from the company" of them who say, We are holier than thou.
While some of the worst men have been extolled for their piety, it has often
been (shall I say, the happiness? or) the unhappiness of the best, such "of
whom the world was not worthy," to live and die under reproach; to have all
their good evil-spoken of; all they say or do, misconstrued, and perverted to
their disadvantage, by wicked or mistaken men. Thus partial, thus blind, thus
unjust, is the world in which we now live. But let us not account those upright
men miserable, whom our Savior pronounces blessed, (...) 6. 22
however despitefully they may be used at present. God "searches the hearts,
and tries the reins," not only that he may render to the hypocrite and the
wicked man, his just deserts; but that he may also give to the upright, in whom
he delig^ts, such things as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man to conceive; He does it, even to give every man
according to the fruit of his doings, whether he be wicked, or sincerely good:
And great is Their reward in heaven. With this consideration, holy men of old
used to support their spirits under the censures and ill-usage, which they
received from the world: None of these things moved them: They were kept in
perfect peace, their minds being stayed upon God -- It is required in stewards,
that a man be found faithful. But with me it is a very small thing that I
should be judged of you, or of man's judgment: -- He that judges me is the
Lord. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts. 1 Cor. 4. 2, --
With such considerations the prophets, and apostles, and other good men of
old, used to comfort themselves under bad usage, and so, in a sort, to defeat
the malice of their enemies: And in proportion as men in later ages have the
same faith in God, and the same integrity of heart, they will also derive
consolation from them, under similar trials, or any other.

THE world is now in a great measure masked: Even professed Christians often
carry two faces, more resembling Janus, the pagan deity, than their Father
which is in heaven. But the time is coming when all the world will be unmasked;
when one man shall have but one face; when every person shall appear in his own
proper colors; when the deceitful, hypocritical man, shall be stripped of his
gay plumage, and borrowed ornaments; and the Upright shall appear to be what
they really are, adorned with those internal graces and virtues, which are "in
the sight of God of great price." (...) 4.
Men's true characters shall be thus made manifest, in the day of the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God; when the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with
the trump of God; when He shall sit upon the throne of his glory, all nations
being gathered before him, the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the
left. In this day of retribution, on the decisions of which, our whole interest
and being depends, how different may we reasonably suppose men will appear,
from what they appear to themselves and others in this world, where so many
walk about in disguise, in a vain show! Whom do I behold yonder, on the right
hand, with holy joy and triumph in their faces, in expectation of the blessed
sentence! Are not many of them those, whose unaffected piety and virtue was
unnoticed in this world? Are not many of them those, who were once reproached
and condemned by rash men, as infidels, as heretics, as hypocrites, as workers
of iniquity? -- But what do I hear Him, whose judgment is according to truth,
saying to them? -- Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world! -- Whom do I behold yonder, on the
left hand, with unutterable woe and anguish in their faces; cursing the sea,
death and hell, for giving up the dead which were in them! Rev. 20 13.
and praying to the deaf, unpitying rocks and mountains to fall on them, and
hide them from the face of Him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb! Chap 6. ver. 16.
Are they only those, whose sins were open beforehand, going before to
judgment? 1 Timothy 5 24,
Are not many of them those, who once made a profession of religion? those, who
once contended so earnestly for what they called the faith delivered to the
saints? Are not many of them those, whom this deluded world though it almost the
only saints in it? Are not many of them those, who showed such zeal even about
the circumstantials and forms of religion? Are not many of them those, who were
once the great asserters of what they termed orthodoxy? and who were for
compelling, even by carnal weapons, all they supposed out of the true church,
"to come in?" Are not many of them those, who once though it and said, that they
who did not believe exactly as they did, should perish everlastingly? Are not
many of them those, who once imagined almost all mankind excepting themselves,
would be damned? -- But what sentence do I hear from the mouth of Him, who
knows the hearts of all? -- "Depart from me, ye Cursed!" -- What is now
become of all that seeming concern for the glory of God? the purity of
religion? the salvation of souls? Alas! this was only a cloak, a mask: Worldly
policy, ambition, a party-spirit, pride, covetousness, self-conceit, uncharity,
bigotry, unholy wrath, censoriousness, or the lust of domination, was at the
bottom, concealed from these men themselves, perhaps, as well as from many
others, under those fair pretenses! While they made broad their phylacteries,
and affected so much gravity, devotion and sanctity, they still loved the chief
seats in the synagogues, and at feasts; greetings in the markets, and to be
called, Rabbi, Rabbi. Are there no men of this same character in the world at
present? Would to God there were not! There are, indeed, many professed enemies
to the gospel, treating it with the utmost contempt, scorn and derision; and
blasphemously reproaching the Author of it; which to them is an evident token
of perdition, Phil. 1. 28.
notwithstanding their pretenses to probity of mind, and a sincere love to
truth and virtue: For if the gospel is true, we know that such men hate the
light. But there are, probably, many other persons, who cannot endure what is
commonly called infidelity and irreligion, or even the least deviation from the
principles which they have received by tradition from their forefathers; who
are yet as destitute of real goodness and integrity of heart, as many open
revilers of Christ: So that had they lived when their predecessors, the
Pharisees did, it is likely they would rather have cried, "Crucify Him, Crucify
Him," than "Hail Master;" unless, perhaps, they had cried, "Hail," and kissed
Him, only to betray! -- O vain mortals! God is greater than your hearts, and
knows all things: He now searches them, "even to give very man according to
his ways." To His equal, impartial judgment, I leave you; praying, that ye may
approve things that are excellent; that ye may be SINCERE, and without offense
'till the day of Christ. Phil. 1. 10.
So shall not shame, indignation and wrath, but glory, honor and peace, rest
upon you. Alas! The hope of the ungodly is like dust that is blown away with
the wind; like a thin froth that is driven away with the storm, like as the
smoke which is dispersed here and there with a tempest, and passes away as the
remembrance of a guest that tarrieth but a day. But the righteous live for
evermore: Their reward is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the Most
High. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown
from the Lord's hand: For with his right hand shall he cover them, and with his
arm shall he protect them. Wisdom of Solomon, V. 14, 15, 16.


SERMON XII. ON the Shortness and Vanity of human Life. Occasioned by the Death
of a young Person.
PSALM XXXIX. 5, 6. BEHOLD, Thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, and mine
age is as nothing before Thee: verily every man at his best estate is
altogether vanity. Selah.
SURELY every man walks in a vain show: surely they are disquieted in vain --

THE subject of this sacred Ode, is the brevity of human life: A subject, which
cannot be attentively considered, without making us wiser and better. The Psalm
was composed by David in a time of sickness, as plainly appears from the latter
part of it: Remove thy stroke away from me -- When thou with rebukes do
correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth --
O! spare me, that I may recover strength before I go hence, and be no more.
People in the gloom of adversity, especially when they have a prospect of soon
walking through the valley of the shadow of death, often entertain very different
sentiments of the present life, and its enjoyments, from those which they
entertained in high health, in the vigor of youth, in great prosperity, when
the candle of God shined upon their heads. Job 29. 3.
Men are not generally rouzed into a thorough sense of the shortness of this
mortal race, and of the vanity of life, 'till the race is almost run through, and
sorrow comes fast upon them. In early life, and in our prosperous days, we say
with Him in the parable, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years;
take thine ease, eat drink, and be merry; not considering that "this night our
souls may be required of us." Thus do many fondly build upon length of days,
and please themselves with the gay hopes of a long succession of pleasurable
enjoyments here: When Behold! God has made our days as an hand-breadth, and our
age is as nothing before him: When every man at his best estate is altogether
vanity; walking in a vain show: So that if we eagerly pursue after, and expect,
felicity here below, we do but "disquiet ourselves in vain." Time and
experience will, sooner or later, convince every man that such hopes are
delusive; and that such pursuits terminate where they begin, in vanity and
vexation of spirit; not in the possession of that solid happiness and
satisfaction, which is the object of them. It were well for us, if we were
convinced of this most certain, this most salutary truth, more seasonably than
we usually are; that so, knowing our end, and the measure of our days, what it
is, we might early apply our hearts to wisdom: For we could scarce fail to do
thus, did we but number our days aright; did we but know how frail we are, and
make a proper estimate of this vain life -- To which end it is, that this
passage of scripture is chosen for the subject of the present discourse.

AFTER representing to you the shortness, I shall represent to you the vanity
and troubles, of this life. Then, both will be considered as the appointment of
almighty God: For, behold, it is He that has made our days as an hand-breadth,
and subjected the creature to vanity, so that the whole creation groaneth, and
travaileth in pain together until now. Romans (...). 20.
These things being distinctly though briefly, considered, the subject will be
closed with some practical inferences and reflections.

FIRST, Let us consider the brevity of life. Our days are said to be as an
handbreadth, one of the shortest measures in use: And our age is as nothing
before God; before Him, with whom one day is as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day. With relation to an eternal, omniscient,
all-comprehending Mind, the longest limited duration must be indeed as nothing.
When the Prophet speaks of the greatness, the power and majesty of God, he says
that all nations before Him are as nothing; and are counted to him less than
nothing. And when we contemplate Him, who is God from everlasting to
everlasting, the King eternal and immortal; and then consider the short span of
human life, we may adopt the same prophetic style, and say, that our age before
God is not only as nothing, but even less than nothing and vanity.

BUT the duration of this our mortal life is as nothing, even with relation to
some finite Beings: I mean those which were present, and ministering spirits to
God, when the foundations of the earth were laid; and when it was said, Let US
make man. The Angels, those Morning Stars, then sang together, and ALL the SONS
of God shouted for joy. Job 38. 7. compared with Isai. 4. 12 -- "How art thou
fallen from heaven. O Lucifer, Son of the morning!" -- The King of Babylon is
here more immediately intended, (ver. 4.) but there is a plain allusion to the
Prince of the Devils, once a Son of the morning, a morning Star, and one of the
Sons of God, who are sometimes called Elohim. It does not appear that there
were any apostate spirits, or devils, before man's creation. Lucifer, the first
PRETENDER, seems then to have fallen when the tempted man to rebel; setting
himself up as the Prince and God of this world; and telling our first Parents
that they should not die, but be as the Elohim. After the fall, we know there
were many Elohim both good and bad; but only One JEHOVAH, who was to be
worshipped by sacrifice, Exodus 22 20. Qui sacrificat Diis, [Heb. Elohim]
praeterquam s^li JEHOVAE, (...) sit: He that sacrifices to the gods, [to the
Elohim] except to the only JEHOVAH, let him be accursed. This is the language
of the old testament: What says the new? -- There be gods many, and lords many,
but to us there is but One GOD, the FATHER -- The contrast to Lucifer, see Heb.
1. 9. Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquit^; therefore GOD, even Thy
GOD, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy FELLOWS. Betwixt
whom and the Serpent was it, that enmity was to be put? Who was finally to
bruise his head, after a long contest? [See Dan. 10. 13. and ver. 21. Also
Chap. 12. ver. 1.] Who was manifested in the fullness of time, to destroy the
works of the devil? to judge, and cast out, the prince of this world, who was a
Liar and a Murderer from the beginning? Was it not the Logos? -- He who is, by
way of eminence, styled, The only begotten of the FATHER, the Firstborn of
every creature? -- He who was known [imperfectly] even under the old testament,
by th^se titles -- The Angel of the Lord's presence; The Angel of the covenant;
The Messenger of the covenant? and whom David in spirit called his Lord, though
he was to be his Son according to (...) (...)? The contest betwixt the great
Friend and Patron of mankind, together with the final decission and issue of
it, was represented to St. John in vision, Apoc. 12. 7 -- And there was war in
heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought
and his angels, and prevailed not -- And the great dragon was cast out, that
old serpent, called the devil and satan, which deceives the whole world -- The
scripture informs us that the Logos had a body prepared for him, and that he
partook of flesh and blood, that he might "through death destroy him that had the
power of death, that is the devil." But that he took into personal union with
himself, an human soul, my Bible says not; nor that there is any other true
God, besides "his Father and our Father, his God and our God." Indeed some who
call themselves Christians, have exalted even the Virgin Mary above all that is
called God in heaven, and that is worshipped there; saying that she is more
kind and merciful than God himself; and praying to her to command her Son to
befriend them; styling her the Mother of God, etc. It would be no great
surprise to me to hear that the Pope and a general Council, had declared the B.
Virgin to be the fourth, or rather the first Person, in the Godhead, under the
title of God, or Goddess THE MOTHER; adding that neither the Persons are to be
confounded, nor the substance divided; that the Mother is eternal, the Father
eternal, the Son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal; but yet that there are
not four Eternals, but one Eternal; that this is the catholic faith, which
except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved -- HE THAT HAS AN EAR TO
HEAR, LET HIM HEAR! And he that has a mouth given him to blaspheme, [ Rev. 13.
5, 6.] and a tongue to b^bble without ideas, ( understanding not what he says,
nor whereof be affirms) let him blaspheme and babble! But neither Papists nor
Protestants should imagine that they will be understood by others, if they do
not understand themselves: Nor should they think that nonsense and
contradictions can ever be too sacred to be ridiculous.
How long they had then existed, we cannot tell: But they will survive 'till
the human race is extinct. They beheld our origin from the dust of the earth;
they behold us returning to dust again in quick succession: They see our
beginning and end, as it were in the same instant; themselves (those of them I
mean, that are not fallen) enjoying perpetual beauty, youth and vigor. To
intelligences which have existed through so many successive ages, our transitory
life here on earth, must be next to nothing and vanity. And

MANY things, in their nature corruptible and perishable, persevere in their
original state of beauty and splendour, much longer than mortal man, who fades
like a flower. The heavenly bodies (those great Preachers and Apostles of
natural religion, which declare the glory of God so audibly and intelligibly,
that there is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard) hitherto
shine, and perform their revolutions and several functions, without any
apparent diminution of their luster, or visible signs of decay. The sun, their
Prince, who has seen so many successions of men upon the earth, the rise and
fall of so many nations and empires, that sun is still vigorous, and strong,
and healthy, though he is so old; as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and
rejoicing as a strong man to run his race: His circuit is unto the end of the
earth; and there is nothing hid from his light and heat. Ps. 19.
But even he is mortal; and will one day sicken and languish, all his fires
becoming extinct; and his ruddy countenance, black as sackcloth of hair. Rev.
6. 12
For the heavens themselves shall wax old and perish; they shall be folded up
and changed -- But thou Lord! have immortality, dwelling in light! Thou art the
Father of lights, with whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning!

THE days of man are now as an handbreadth, even compared with the age of man
in the first periods of the world. We read of one and another of the
Antediluvians, who lived to near a thousand years of Age: Indeed they all did
so, (excepting Enoch who was translated) descending from Adam down to Noah, in
a right line. Vid. Genesis Chap. V.
And since the sacred historian makes no remark, intimating that the longaevity
of these Fathers was unusual at that day, the natural presumption is, that it
was common for other men to live to such an age, before the flood. How short
then is human life, in this age of the world, compared to Their's!

AND in the next period after the flood, men commonly lived four or five
hundred years; as appears from Moses's account of the generations of Shem, the
son of Noah. Genesis XI.
However the life of man seems to have been gradually contracted, from the time
of Shem to that of Terah, the Father of him who is the Father of the faithful.
So that the age of man in Abraham's days, may be computed to be about an
hundred and fifty years. From which it seems to have been still shortened, down
to the time of Moses, who fixes the measure thereof at threescore years and
ten. -- We spend our years as a tale that is told. The days of our years are
threescore years and ten. Psalm XC. 9, 10.
However Moses, the author of this Psalm, does not mean that men generally
attained to these years, in that period of the world. He intends that a man who
arrived at such an age, might be looked upon as one that had lived out all his
days, so that dying then, he came to his grave in a good old age, as a shock of
corn when it is fully ripe. The far greater part of those who were born into
the world, doubtless died much earlier: but to survive longer, might be looked
upon as somewhat unusual and singular; and indeed scarce desirable. For thus
it is immediately after explained: -- And if by reason of strength they be
fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for it is soon cut
off, and we flee away. This representation seems to be agreeable to the present
state of mankind; so that from the days of Moses, there has probably been no
considerable alteration in the age of man. To be sure it is not protracted to a
greater length in common now than it was then, if it is not shortened.

IN these later ages of the world, but few of mankind, comparatively speaking,
attain to threescore and ten; by far the greatest part, not to half, nay not to
a quarter, of those years. Many die in youth; many more in childhood and
infancy. Many no sooner see the light, than they are again involved in death
and darkness: and some never see it at all, passing away by an untimely birth.
Psalm. 58. 8.
Thus, O Lord! Thou turnest man to destruction; and say, Return, ye children
of men. -- Thou carriest them away as with a flood -- In the morning they are
like grass which grows up. In the morning it flourishes, and grows up; in
the evening it is cut down, and withers. For we are consumed by thine anger.
Psalm. 90. 3. --
Before the undistinguishing scythe of death, fall promiscuously the rich and
the poor; the kings and counselors of the earth, with their subjects and
slaves; the robust and the infirm; the young and the old; the beautiful Rachel
and the tender-ey'd Leah: With baser shrubs, and grovelling weeds, fall the
plants of renown, and the cedars of Lebanon; the rose of Sharon, and the
lillies of the valleys! All, All, high and low, great and small, are swept away
together by the mighty flood which God has bro't upon the world: So that the
Nile, as it has I think been described by some, is an emblem hereof; sometimes
carrying along in it is current, the Lords of this lower world, together with
inferior animals, into the common ocean. Thus are we promiscuously carried down
with the irresistible torrent, and launched together into the wide, fathomless
ocean of Eternity, where we sail like Drake and Columbus, in search of new
Worlds! How short is the space which we have to prepare, and lay in provisions,
for such a voyage? Behold, our days are not measured by furlongs, by leagues
and degrees, but by an handbreadth; and our age is as nothing: Verily every man
at his best estate is altogether vanity! Our life is as a vapor that appears
for a little time, and then vanishes away. But

SECONDLY; The present life is not only short and precarious; but also attended
with many sorrows. Our days which are few, are also evil: So that there is no
such thing as being completely happy here. When we center our hopes and
expectations in any thing below the skies, we fondly deceive ourselves; and
gather thorns instead of roses. It is as impossible for a reasonable, moral
creature, to be truly happy in the enjoyment of sensual and worldly objects, as
it is for the eye to be pleased with the sound of a viol, or the ear charmed
with a beautiful landscape. Those objects, in the enjoyment of which alone, such
a creature as man can rest and be happy, are those of an intellectual and moral
kind. Others have no similitude, no analogy or agreement, to the superior and
most excellent part of our nature; So that the immortal spirit will still pine,
and languish, and crave more, crying, Give, Give, 'till it is filled with all
the fullness of God. Those persons who are the most successful in pursuing
worldly happiness, and whom many may be apt to envy, are not (believe it!)
really the happy men they are often taken to be. They are generally, not only
far less happy than they are supposed to be; but also, than they would really
be, were they not so eager in the pursuit of such a felicity. They walk in a
vain show, and disquiet themselves in vain. It is only the show, the appearance
of felicity, which they have; a gaudy outside show, the form of happiness
without the power. And the more anxious we are to obtain felicity in this
world, independently of God, the great source thereof, the fountain of living
waters, the more do we disquiet ourselves in vain: In the language of the
prophet, we spend our money for that which is not bread, and our labor for
that which satisfies not. We have wants which cannot be removed, desires and
affections which cannot be satisfied, by terrestrial things: So that we are
wretched even in spite of that pride, which prompts us to esteem our condition
happy. And if sensual, worldly men, would but speak out the plain truth, they
would join with Solomon -- "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, and vexation of
spirit;" and confess, that even in the midst of laughter their hearts are often
sorrowful.

BUT the vanity, vexation and disquietude, from which human life is
inseparable, arises not merely from the want of proper objects here below, to
gratify the various affections and cravings of our compound nature, and to fill
up the mighty void in our breasts: There are many positive evils and
calamities, to which we are unavoidably subjected. For man is born to trouble
as the sparks fly upwards. The greater part by far, of mankind, are, by the
very condition of their birth, to eat bread in pain and sorrow, if they eat it
all; to toil hard only for a tolerable subsistence and living here. Many are,
by the providence of God, reduced to great distress, to suffer hunger,
nakedness and cold, with all the numerous and sad attendants of extreme
poverty. The greatest part of mankind now are, and almost always have been,
oppressed by wicked tyrants, called civil rulers, kings and emperors; oppressed
by God's scourges, that call themselves his ministers for good. Many are
afflicted with long and painful diseases, which render them incapable of
relishing or enjoying any thing; and so as to make both light and life a burden
to them. Some are betrayed by pretended, false-hearted friends; others are
assaulted and ruined by professed enemies. Before we return to the dust
ourselves, we are often called to weep over our dear deceased friends and
relations, our other selves; and have sorrow upon sorrow. In short, numberless
are the disappointments and afflictions of one kind and another, whereof all
are partakers. Nor is there any station of life, from the throne to the galley,
or the mines, exempted from trouble: Purple and Ermine, as well as rags and
sackcloth, often cover an aching, distressed (...) And every heart knows its
own bitter^^^^ Prove. 14. 10.
While we tabernacle in flesh, we must, whether we will or no, be in one
respect like our blessed Savior -- "Men of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief:" And if we would not keep such company, then, as the apostle said in
another case, we must needs go out of the world. Neither riches nor power;
neither wisdom nor piety, can wholly secure us from trouble and vexation here:
For even those good men who have the first fruits of the spirit, groan within
themselves, waiting for the adoption, viz. the redemption of the body. Romans 8.
23.
The short life which we live in these mortal bodies, cannot, in the nature of
the thing, but be a life of pain and disquietude, even though we live in hope of
a better; and were placed in those very circumstances, which we ourselves
esteem the most eligible of any in this world. Nor is this the effect of blind
chance or fate: For,

THIRDLY, We are to consider both the brevity and the sorrows of this life, as
the appointment of God almighty, God all-wise, just and good -- Behold, Thou
have made my days, etc. Independently of revelation, we know but very little
how we came into this state; what we were placed here for; or what shall become
of us when a period is put to the present life. But the holy scriptures give us
light in the midst of this darkness. Revelation informs us, that to be subject
to sorrow and death, is not the original, natural state of man: But that we are
brought into this state of vanity and trouble, by the righteous Lord and
Governor of the world, in consequence of the disobedience of our common Father.
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin -- Mankind, to speak
after the manner of men, were originally designed for immortality; and to be
ever happy in innocence, and the favor of God: But the apostasy of our first
parents brought them under his righteous displeasure: and thence both they and
their offspring became subject to death; which has accordingly reigned from
Adam to Moses, and from Moses to the present time, even over them that have not
sinned accordding to the similitude of Adam's transgression. So that though this
is the appointment, yet it is not the arbitrary appointment, of our Maker. --
It is the effect, and the manifestation, of God's just displeasure against the
sin and rebellion of our progenitors: And He, in this particular instance,
visits the iniquity of the FATHER upon the CHILDREN, not only to the third
and fourth generation, but to all generations. For in consequence of this first
transgression, it is appointed unto [all] men once to die; to die the first
death, though not the second; it being certainly only men's own personal sins,
that can subject them to inevitable misery and torment in the world to come.
Only the soul that sins, shall die the second death. Ezekiel. 18. 20.
The general doctrine of scripture concerning the introduction of mortality
into the world, may be summed up in those emphatical words in the book of
Wisdom -- God made not death [originally;] neither has he pleasure in the
destruction of the living. For he created all things that they might have their
being; -- and there is no poison of destruction in them; nor the kingdom of
death upon earth. For righteousness is immortal. -- But ungodly men with their
works and words called it to them. Chap. I. ver. 13.
-- God created man to be immortal; and made him to be an image of his own
eternity. Nevertheless, through envy of the devil came death into the world: and
they that do hold of his side do find it. Chap. II. ver. 23, 24.
Such as hold of his side find, not only temporal, but everlasting death.

HERE you see the source of death. The overflowing flood of mortality, by which
we are carried away, has its origin in the righteous displeasure of almighty
God, against the workers of iniquity. It might perhaps be in vain, I am pretty
sure it is unnecessary, for Us to enquire minutely, how the measure of man's
days came to be gradually contracted from time to time, after the fall, till it
was brought down to the present standard, an handbreadth. Some have attempted
to account for this, by assigning some natural, physical causes: How
successfully, I shall not pretend to determine. But to me, this matter seems
not to fall within the sphere of human knowledge: So that the most modest and
pious, and indeed the wisest way of speaking of it, is to say -- Even so,
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. It is enough for US to know, That
He who, for the sin of man, originally sent death into the world, has also, in
his infinitely wise, righteous, and good providence, determined the measure of
human life in all the different periods of the world; by whatever natural means
or causes it may have been contracted gradually, 'till our age is become as
nothing before Him.

THE same general account is to be given of the sorrows and troubles, which has
already been given of the shortness, of human life. For as mortality does not,
so neither does affliction, come forth of the dust, nor does trouble spring out
of the ground. Job 5, 6.
God who ordained the former, ordained the latter also: His hand and counsel
are equally concerned in bringing both upon mankind. We are subjected to such
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of Him who has subjected us in hope. Romans
(...) 20.


INDEED many of the sorrows to which we are here exposed, seem evidently to
^low from, and to be naturally connected with, this decaying, mortal frame,
which we have since the fall. Hence, bodily pains and diseases, 'till we return
to the dust: Hence, our turbulent, disorderly, and uneasy passions: Hence we
are called, from time to time, to mourn our deceased friends; our parents, our
brethren, our offspring: Hence, when old age comes, with its natural
attendants, this is peculiarly an evil day; the years then coming wherein the
most say, that they have no pleasure in them. Eccl. 12.
These and many other evils, seem to be inseparable from this decaying, mortal
condition.

BUT there are some other sorrows, which spring not so directly from our
mortality; and which have no natural connection therewith, though they were
connected with it in God's sentence and curse: I mean those troubles which
arise from the sterility of the earth, in consequence of the fall; by which
means it becomes a painful, laborious thing, for the greater part of mankind to
get a subsistence. This, we know, is agreeable to the original sentence; and
therefore it is to be ascribed to the will of the same God, who has subjected
us to mortality -- Cursed is the ground for thy sake: in sorrow shall thou eat
of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth
to thee: and thou shall eat the herb of the field. In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat bread, 'till thou return unto the ground. Genesis 3. 17


THERE are many other evils and sorrows, which may perhaps be more properly
ascribed to men's own, personal, voluntarily misconduct, than to their
necessary frailty and mortality, or to the curse of God upon the ground. For
how numerous are those pains and calamities, which spring directly from the
lusts of men? from that intemperance, and those other vices, which it would be
false to say men could not avoid; and to charge which upon God, would be
blasphemy? Mankind certainly bring innumerable sorrows upon themselves, by
their own ill conduct; all which it is more just and reasonable to place to the
score of their own personal wickedness, than to speak of them as the
unavoidable consequence of their being mortal creatures, placed in such a state
as the present.

HOWEVER, even these evils seem to slow, in one sense, from the original
apostasy; or from the curse of God upon (...) consequential thereto. For ^our
(...) body the consequence of Adam's sin,) being in close union with our
spirits, is the seat of those passions, which are the immediate occasions of
our sinning personally: We know that in us, that is in our flesh, dwells no
good thing. It is the flesh that lusts against the spirit. It is the law in
our members, that warreth against the law of our mind, bringing us into
captivity to the law of sin. If sin reigns, it "reigns in our mortal body, and
we obey it in the lusts thereof." Hence we read of the body of this death; i.
e. this mortal body of sin. It was by the ordination of God, that we were put
into these bodies; which expose us so much to temptation, that it is almost, if
not altogether impossible for us, wholly to avoid sinning. And hence, I
suppose, it is, that we are said to be by nature children of wrath: for no
farther than we are naturally the children of disobedience, can we be naturally
the children, or the objects of wrath. Ephesians. 2. 3. compared with Chap. (...).
ver. 6. and ^ol. 3. 6.
However, no passion or affection, with which we are born, can be in itself
sinful; it becomes so, only by wilful or careless indulgence. A creature
cannot, strictly speaking, be a sinner, 'till he has violated some law of God,
or of nature: for "sin is the transgression of the law." But not to digress --

UPON the whole; both the shortness and the sorrows of life, are the effect of
God's righteous displeasure against the sin of our first parents. Though we
should always distinguish betwixt those calamities, which are inseparable from
this our mortal condition, inseparable from our present state of trial and
discipline, as it is the appointment of God; and those evils and miseries,
which mankind bring upon themselves by their own wilful misconduct, by their
personal vices. For want of making which distinction, many persons charge God
foolishly; and utter hard speeches against Him, when they ought only to condemn
themselves.

BUT our time is poorly employed in contemplating the brevity and sorrows of
this vain life, unless we are taught hereby to make a right estimate thereof;
and to pass through these temporary troubles, in the paths of wisdom and piety,
to those joys that will never end. Let us, therefore, now draw some practical
inferences and reflections from this subject.

AND here, in the first place: Although it may be natural for us to lament our
mortal and sorrowful condition in this world; yet since this is by the
appointment of God, we ought humbly to acquiesce in it, without murmuring. Our
duty is submission, not complaining or finding fault. God had an indisputable
right either to give us life and being, or not; to give it to us either for a
longer or shorter time; and to make our condition either more or less happy, as
seemed proper to his unerring wisdom and goodness. We have no demand upon his
justice for a longer or happier life, than that which he bestows upon us in
this world, short and unhappy as it is. Nor should it be ever forgotten, that
perfect wisdom, righteousness and goodness, are the rule of his dispensations
toward his creatures. The State we are now in, is such a one as God judged
proper to place us in, in order to manifest to Us, if not to other beings in
other worlds, his holiness and righteous severity; his just displeasure against
the workers of iniquity. It is a signal manifestation of his anger against the
first transgressors of his law in this world; and a perpetual memento to Us,
their posterity. In a manner somewhat analogous hereto, it is, that the
children of traitors and rebels to their earthly Sovereigns, are often deprived
of the inheritance which, by the constitution of the government, would
otherwise have descended to them; and are subjected to diverse inconveniences;
yea, to a degree of shame and infamy, although themselves transgress not after
the similitude of their ancestors.

HOWEVER, God, who has thus subjected us to mortality, to vanity and temporal
sorrow, on account of the original rebellion and treason of our first parents,
when they hearkened to the devil, has subjected us in hope. Our condition is
not desperate: So far from it, that God has made ample provision for our
deliverance from this state of bondage, corruption and death, into the glorious
liberty of his Sons. For as in Adam we die, so in Christ we may be made alive:
And as we have born the image of the earthy, so may we also bear the image of
the heavenly. 1 Cor. 15. 40.
How joyfully does it become such creatures, in such a state, to receive the
glad tidings of salvation through Christ, who has abolished death, and brought
life and immortality to light through the Gospel? Sad indeed would be our
condition, subjected to so many calamities and sufferings as we are, and so
soon to drop into the grave, if in this life only we had hope; if we had no
prospect of a more desirable state of existance hereafter. Nor indeed can we
have any well-grounded hope or prospect of such a state, independently of the
express promises of God, in the gospel of his Son. Mere reason, or the light of
nature, suggests no arguments for a happy immortality, which are conclusive and
satisfactory, so that we can rest upon them. But blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to his abundant mercy, has begotten
us again unto a living hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead
to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away. 1
Pet. (...) 3, 4
-- This most interesting subject of life and immortality after death, lay
wrapped in night and darkness, after all the efforts of human reason and wisdom,
being hid from ages and generations: But it is now set in the full beam and
light of day, by the gospel shining upon it; and by Him who has shined into our
hearts, to give us the light of the knowledge of His glory, in the face of
Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Though vexations, sorrows and death abide us here; yet there are mansions of
endless peace and joy prepared for us hereafter, unless we will not enter in,
through unbelief. To such mortal, miserable, sinful creatures, how good is this
news from a far country? how refreshing this cold water, to the soul which
thirsts after perfection and immortality? The contemplation hereof, to those
whose hearts are fully possessed with the belief of these things, at once makes
the heaviest afflictions seem light, draws out the venomous sting of death, and
snatches the victory from the grave; enabling them to triumph over it in hope
of the glory of God, and of that "eternal life, which He that cannot lie has
promised." Tit. 1. 2.


BUT we are admonished by the subject we have been considering, to expect
afflictions of one kind or another, while we dwell in these earthly
tabernacles; and should arm ourselves with patience, that we may bear them in a
becoming manner. It is an important branch of wisdom, to proportion our
expectations as to this world, to the nature of the things of it; and not to
hope for more felicity here, than it is probable we shall ever enjoy. Being
thus wise, we should, I believe, expect but little from this world, besides
vanity and vexation of spirit: At least, we should always be prepared to meet
with trials and sorrows, so as not to be much shocked or ruffled by them when
they come, as they certainly will, however we may fondly flatter ourselves. It
is both the folly and the unhappiness of many, that they promise themselves
more felicity here below, than is consistent with this imperfect state, and the
designs of providence. If we ever enter into rest at last, it must be "through
much tribulation." Acts 14 22.
We are apt to presume in our prosperity, that we shall never be moved; but
some sudden, unexpected calamity, soon refutes the fond presumption. And being
thus unprepared to grapple with affliction, it proves an over-match for us; and
falls much heavier than it would otherwise have done: For to the natural weight
of it, there is added the uneasiness and anxiety, which is always attendant
upon disappointment, and frustrated hopes. There are not many virtues, of which
we have more need in such a world as this, than resignation and patience. By
snatching too greadily at happiness here, we only make ourselves the more
miserable -- Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord.
Behold, the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has
long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. Be ye also
patient; stablish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. (...)
5. 7, 8.


BUT since life itself is so fleeting and precarious, we are admonished not to
put the tho'ts of death far from us; but to be in daily expectation of, or at
least, in daily preparation for, this great change. To lay our account for
living long in this, world, is one of the most unaccountable follies, and
pregnant with numerous mischiefs: And yet there is scarce a folly which is more
common. We have, almost every day, affecting examples before our eyes, of human
frailty, and the uncertainty of this vain life. We see our neighbors, our
acquaintance, our friends, our relations, dropping in death and darkness, not
to arise, 'till the heavens be no more. We see people of all ranks, of all
ages, the young and old, rich and poor, male and female, bond and free, daily
bowing before the King of Terrors; many of whom, we cannot but acknowledge,
were far less likely a few days since, to fall before him, than ourselves. And
yet, some way or other, we still flatter ourselves, that it will be long before
our own turn comes to do homage to this great Monarch. We take it for granted,
except when we are in some imminent danger, that we have several years at least
yet to live. It is not only the young and healthy, that presume thus; but even
the infirm, the aged; those, on whose heads hoary time has snowed, perhaps,
more than threescore years and ten; and who already stoop, as it were to go
down to the tomb. Many, who are scarce more than the remnant, the shadow of
their former selves; and of whom it is almost a miracle that they are still
alive, seem to think that hardly any thing short of a miracle, can put a period
to their days. Strange infatuation! Mysterious delusion! Death still draws
nearer, never seeming near!

THIS fond presumption upon life, is not less pernicious in it is consequences,
than it is in itself absurd and unaccountable. It is the source of the most
fatal errors in the conduct of life. This is the true reason, why so many
neglect those things that are of the last importance, and on which their whole
being depends, while they busy themselves in trifles; while they are careful
about many things of no real importance, and disquiet themselves in vain. Men
could not be so taken up with their amusements and pastimes, or with the cares
of this mortal life, as they generally are, if they had a just sense of the
shortness and uncertainty of it, and of what depends upon it. Much less would
they dare to go on, from time to time, in the violation of God's known
commandments, if they seriously reflected, that the same hour wherein they sin,
they might lift up their eyes in hell, being in torment!

SINCE this life is so short, and the sorrows of it so numerous, it highly
concerns us to improve the present opportunity for securing the special favor
of our Maker, by faith unfeigned, and obedience to the gospel; that so we may
be forever happy in his most glorious kingdom and presence. We are degraded, in
some measure, from the original dignity and perfection of man: But we are not
totally cast off, and disinherited, by that great Lord and Father, whose
offspring we are. He has given us the strongest possible assurance, that the
delights not in our destruction; but that the wicked forsake his way and
live. He now allows us an opportunity to work out our salvation; that so we may
pass out of this world of sorrow and death, into that, where all tears shall be
wiped away from our eyes; where there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, neither any more pain; the former things being passed away. Rev.
21. 4.
If we do not despise his rest, but are heartily desirous of entering into it,
there is a peaceful harbor provided for our reception, from the storm that has
almost shipwrecked us; and which continually beats upon us, while we sail upon
the stream of Life. There is a sacred ark prepared for us, which can neither
sink nor overset; and which shall finally rest, when the waters are assuaged,
not upon the mountains of Ararat, but upon mount Zion tha^ is above, the mount
of God; where all those who do not refuse to be saved, shall appear before Him,
and behold his face in righteousness. Let us not therefore drown, and sink into
perdition; or neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken
by the Lord, and has been confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also
working with them both with signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts
of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will. Have we any time to lose, or
throw away, when life is so precarious, and when our All is at stake! What
tongue of man, or of angel, can fully express the imprudence and madness of
those, who can trifle and procrastinate, and lull themselves to rest in their
sins, when they know not what a day, an hour, or a moment, may bring forth!
Awake! thou that sleep, and arise from the dead; and Christ shall give thee
life. Awake, and call upon thy God, or thou die forevermore! Now is the
accepted time, and the day of salvation: To morrow may not be so; but the day
of perdition to those, who having a space given them to repent, repent not!
Rev. 2. ^1.


Moreover:

THOSE who truly fear God, while they live in this world of trial and
discipline, although they are already sons, should still learn obedience by the
things which they suffer. Heb. 5. 8.
We should endeavor to make a right use of all these temporal sorrows, that so
they may turn to our spiritual and eternal advantage. It is not a mere act of
sovereignty in God, to afflict and grieve the children of Men: nor does he do
it willingly. Lam. 3. 33.
For although we may have had fathers of our flesh, who corrected us only after
their own pleasure; yet the Father of our spirits chasteneth us "for our
profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness:" And if we gave Them
reverence, shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits,
and live? Our afflictions are friendly admonitions, designed in providence to
wean us from this world, to exalt our tho'ts and desires to a better, to purge
away our dross, and to refine our virtues, that being thus tried, we may come
forth as gold, and be found unto praise, and honor, and glory. If we concur
with the gracious design of providence in afflicting us, neither despising the
chastening of the Lord, nor yet fainting when we are rebuked of him, we shall
be made the wiser and better by our troubles; even they will work together for
good to us. To which end, of whatever kind our afflictions are, we should
always consider him, who once endured the contradiction of sinners against
himself; Him, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
despising the shame; Him, who being made a little lower than the angels, for
the sufferings of death, is now crowned with glory and honor. For while we keep
in view this illustrious example of patient, obedient suffering, and of
glorious reward, it will be impossible for us to be "weary or faint in our
minds:" Heb. 12 3.
Since, if we suffer with him, and in imitation of him, we know that we shall
also be glorified, and shall reign, with Him. Romans 8. 17. and 2 Timothy 2 12.
But irreclaimable transgressors should remember, on the other hand, That he
who being often reproved by God's word, and the afflictions which his
providence sends, still hardens his neck, and his heart, "shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy." Pro. 29. 1.


Again:

SINCE this world is so full of vanity and sorrow; since there is so little of
solid happiness to be expected from it, we ought not, surely, to be very fond
of living long in it. If God had made our days less than an hand-breadth, it is
not easy to see why good men should be much dejected at this reflection, unless
the present life had been much less vain and unquiet than it really is. It is
very incongruous for those, who are daily complaining of the sorrows of life,
to be so fond of living, as men usually are. Why are we backward to leave that
world, where we can find no rest for the sole of our foot; and are as uneasy as
Noah's dove, before the waters subsided? Shall I tell you the true reason, why
professed Christians are generally so desirous of living, and so afraid of
dying? It is because they have some mis-givings; some apprehensions that they
are not prepared for another world; or at least, not for that, which they would
choose to go; and that if they should make an exchange, it must, probably, be
for the worse. And, indeed, it must be confessed, that they who have no
rational grounds to believe, but that if they die, they must die the death of
the unrighteous, and their last end be like his, have great reason to be
desirous of living longer here, as troublesome and vexations as this life is.
But what cause have good men to be fond of life, or afraid of death? they, who
have a well-grounded hope in the exceeding great and precious promises of the
gospel, whereby they are already "made partakers of a divine nature?" Is there
any thing on this side the grave, very desirable? any thing in, or beyond it,
very terrible, to them? Do we fear the grave will be always victorious? Do we
fear, that the angels, when they receive our departing spirits, will lose their
way, and not convoy us safely to Abraham's bosom? Do we dread the though it of
being again united to our dear friends, who died in the Lord; and who are gone
before us to the paradise of God? Are we loath to become communicants with the
church triumphant of the First Born, which are both written and blessed in
heaven? In fine, do we dread the though it of going to the general assembly of just
men made perfect? to the innumerable company of angels? to Jesus the Mediator
of the new covenant? to God the Judge of All? to Him, with whom is the spring
of life; in whose presence there is fullness of joy; and at whose right hand are
pleasures forever more? There seems not to be any thing very terrible in these
things; nor any thing in death, which should make a sincere Christian, through
fear of it, all his lifetime "subject unto bondage." If it is these bodies
which we now inhabit that we are so fond of, even they shall shortly be
restored to us: The sea, death and hades, will be faithful to their trust; and
deliver up the dead which are in them, when He who is Lord both of the dead and
living, shall appear the second time, without sin unto salvation. But these
bodies we shall receive, in the renovation of all things, not gross and vile,
as they are when laid in the grave; but fitted up and repaired, and made more
suitable for the habitation of purified, immortal spirits. The terrestrial
body, shall be raised a celestial; that which is sown in corruption, shall be
raised in incorruption; that which is sown in dishonor, shall be raised in
glory. 2 Cor. 15. 40.
A truly living and christian faith, anticipates these things, making them
present to the mind, as though they were already accomplished: So that the
language of the apostle will appear natural -- God, who is rich in mercy, for
the great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has
quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved) and has raised us
up together and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that
in the ages to come he might show the exceeding, riches of his grace, in his
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2. 4, -- 7.
Be once fully possessed of these evangelical sentiments; and then, if you can,
be sorry that God has made our days as an handbreadth, and our age as nothing
before Him; be anxious about what may befall you in life, and shudder at the
terrors of the tomb! -- "O death! where" --

FOR the same reason that sincere Christians cannot consistently be very fond
of life, or fearful of death, they cannot mourn disconsolately for their pious
friends, who have already "put off this tabernacle." To the truly good, the day
of death is far better than that of their birth: And if we love them, we shall
rejoice because they are gone to the Father. If you are not ignorant concerning
them that are asleep; if you do not think they are perished; if you fully
believe the great doctrines of the gospel, that Christ both died and rose
again, and that "Them also which sleep in Jesus," God will raise up at the last
day, as he raised him; then go, if you can, and sorrow for your pious departed
friends, " even as others which have no hope." 1 These. 4 13, 14
Go and mourn, because they are taken away from this evil, troublesome world!
Go and mourn, because they are gone to the paradise of God! Go and grieve,
because They, whom you loved so well, are become so happy! Be inconsolable,
because They, who once mourned here, are now comforted! Go and weep, because
all tears, except those of joy, are wiped forever from Their eyes! Make
yourselves wretched in this world, because your friends are to be eternally
happy in another! because They are now at rest; and shall hereafter come forth
out of their graves, and live and triumph forever with Him that was "slain, and
has redeemed them to God, by his blood"! Put on sackcloth and morning, because
They shall shine forth as the sun, in the kingdom of their Father, even when
that mortal sun which you now behold, shall be dead, ceasing to give his light;
and the heavens themselves shall be hung with blackness and mourning for his
exit! And while you are thus weeping over the graves of your beloved friends,
drop another tear for yourselves, because you are to be forever blessed with
them; blessed, even beyond all your present conceptions and wishes, if You also
should, "sleep in Jesus," when your days on earth are numbered and finished!

BUT to conclude: How poor? how miserable a portion, falls to the share of
those, whose only felicity is in this world? Is this a world, in which to place
our All? in which to seek our supreme good? -- this world, where "all that
comes is vanity"? the fashion of which "passes away," and from which, we
ourselves must pass away in a few days? What is a man profited if he gain this
whole world, even though he should not lose his own soul? One would think it
impossible for those, who have rational, immortal souls, to be much concerned
about any thing here below, although their worldly pursuits did not interfere
with their eternal interest; there being really nothing, or but very little,
here, worthy a wise man's tho'ts, desires, and cares. But for men to suffer
this world to engross their tho'ts; and to pursue the vain pleasures, honors,
and riches of it, even to the loss, to the destruction and perdition of their
souls: What! -- A summary account of the wisdom of this world, is, that it is
inexpressible folly and madness. O envied men! who are so wise as to forego the
most solid and durable happiness, and to incur the most certain, and exquisite,
and durable misery, for the sake of bubbles and straws and shadows! for the
sake of this world, the sorrows of which are so numerous; the very pleasures of
which are vexatious, and the more eagerly pursued, the less satisfactory! --
Let not our heart envy sinners, Pro. 23. 17.
tho, they spread themselves like a green bay tree. What though they live, become
old, yea are mighty in power? Job 21. 7 -- 13.
What though their seed is established in their sight with them, and their
offspring before their eyes? What though their houses are safe from fear, neither
is the rod of God upon them? What though their cow calveth, and casts not her
young? What though they send forth their little ones like a flock, and their
children dance? What though they take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the
sound of the organ? What though they spend their days in wealth? -- "In a moment
they go down to the grave!" The wicked, however prosperous, shall soon utterly
perish: As the fat of lambs shall they consume; into smoke shall they consume
away. Psalm. 37. 20.
Such men may, indeed, imagine themselves both wise and happy for a while,
making a mock and derision of those, who seek their happiness in God alone,
sowing in tears, that they may reap in joy. But what the final issue and result
of things shall assuredly be, both as to the righteous and the wicked, you may
take in the language of the book of Wisdom -- Then shall the righteous man
stand in great boldness before the face of such as have afflicted him -- When
they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at
the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for. And
they repenting, and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say within
themselves, This is he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a proverb of
reproach. We fools counted his life madness, and his end to be without honor.
How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot is among the saints!
-- We wearied ourselves in the way of wickedness and destruction -- but as for
the way of the Lord, we have not known it. What has pride profited us? or what
good has riches with our vaunting brought us? All those things are passed away
like a shadow, and as a post that hasted by! Wisdom of Solomon, Chap. V. begin.
-- It may, perhaps, be difficult to assign a better reason why the Song, rather
than the Wisdom, of Solomon, is admitted into the Canon, than this, viz. That
people generally love and relish Song better than they do Wisdom --


SERMON XIII. Of the true Value, Use and End of Life; and the Conduciveness of
Religion to prolong, and make it happy. Occasioned by the Death of some aged
Persons.
Beware what earth calls happiness! beware
All joys, but joys that never can expire.
Who builds on less than an immortal base,
Fond as he seems, condemns his joys to death.!
Dr. YOUNG.
PSALM XXXIV. 12, 13, 14, 15. WHAT man is he that desires Life, and loves
many days, that he may see Good?
KEEP thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
DEP ART from evil, and do good: seek peace and pursue it.
THE eyes of the LORD are upon the righteous; and his cars are open unto their
cry.

IT is, I believe, the common wish of mankind, to attain to old age; at least
to that which we term so, though there is really no such thing as long life in
this world. There are but few men, if any, who would be willing that the glass
of life, which is turned up at their birth, and then begins to run, should be
choked and stopped before it is run quite out: We choose to see the last sand
fall, and to attain to the full measure of man's days on earth. Nor does this
satisfy all: Even threescore and ten, or fourscore years, when, by reason of
unusual strength, they are attained to, seem but a short life to those few who
arrive at them, being spent as a "tale that is told." Psalm. 90, 9.
The Psalmist's question in the beginning of the passage just now read, [ What
man is he that desires life, and loves many days?] does not, therefore,
imply, that there are few, or none, who thus desire to live long. Though
interrogations often carry in them a negation; their sense is always to be
determined by circumstances, and the subject spoken of. Accordingly the true
import of this question, must here be, That mankind in general breath this
wish, desiring to see many days: which is a truth, evident from our daily
observation and experience.

THAT they may live long, is plainly the wish of people in gen^ral; so that
this may be called their Common Prayer, whether made with, or without Book and
Form: All in a manner conform to it, without any scruples of conscience: You
will scarce find a single Dissenter. It is the wish and prayer, which is common
to all nations, to all sects and parties, to people of all religions; and even
to those who have no religion at all. Here Protestants and Papists, Jews and
Mahometans, and pagan Idolaters, are agreed; all joining unanimously in the
same petition. In this point, the high and low, the rich and poor, bond and
free; in this the young and the old, male and female, people of all conditions,
occupations and characters, are well united. Good men and bad, are not at
variance here; both generally consenting in the same wish and conclusion, though,
perhaps, induced thereto by different, or even contrary, principles. They who
despise this world, and they who court and adore it; Saints and Sinners, here
shake hands; and even the Atheist is not singular: For he will pray to Nature,
and his Stars, though not to GOD, to grant him many days on earth. That life is a
desirable good, might, then, be an article in every person's creed; and
indeed, the less people believe of other things, the more firmly do they
generally believe this; so that the greatest Skeptics are, here, the greatest
bigots; being attached to this life and world, in the same proportion that they
doubt of another. We might therefore change and invert the Psalmist's question,
and ask -- What man is he that desires not life, and loves not many days?
And, indeed, the question thus put, does, I suppose, as fully and exactly
express his meaning, as it does in the other way; the negative particle making
no real alteration in the sense of such interrogatories; the true intent of
which, can be determined only by the nature of the subject, to which they
relate.

IT is farther to be observed, that the royal Psalmist does not here speak with
such an air, as would lead one to suspect, that he disapproved or condemned
this common desire of living to old age. He speaks of it, not as being in
itself criminal; but as what was natural to man, and therefore innocent; at
least under certain restrictions and limitations. Mortality and death, are
unnatural; as unnatural as disobedience to God, which was the original cause
thereof. And mere nature cannot but be fond of life, and desirous of removing
death to as great a distance as possible. When I say, that mere nature cannot
but do so, I mean that a man cannot, unless he is influenced by some higher
principle than that of natural reason and sense; or else lies under the
pressure of some heavy calamity, which makes life a burden to him. The former
is the case of those good men, whose treasure and heart and hope are in heaven,
whither the Forerunner is for them entered, even Jesus: The latter is the case
of those wretched, those desperate men, who seek an assylum from pain and
sorrow here, in a tragical, voluntary death. Had the desire of long life been
in itself criminal, we cannot suppose, that the Psalmist would have encouraged
this desire in us, by telling us, in the next words, what is the most likely
way to prolong it, and render it happy -- Keep thy tongue from evil; and thy
lips from speaking guile: depart from evil, and do good, etc. That is, Let him
that loves many days, that he may see good, keep his tongue, etc. This is the
coherence and natural connection of the Psalmist's words.

IT is also observable, That long life is often spoken of in scripture, as a
good, a real blessing, the reward of piety. You know the story of good
Hezekiah, when he was "sick unto death." And God sometimes encourages the
obedience of the young, with the hopes of living long. -- Honor thy Father and
thy Mother, that thy days may be long -- Thus also God says of the good man,
Because he has set his love upon me, I will deliver him -- with long life will
I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. Psalm. 9^
So length of days is said to be in the right hand of wisdom. And you know,
that to die in youth; to be cut off in the midst of One's days, by a premature
death, is usually considered in scripture, under the notion of a real evil: and
it is sometimes represented as the effect of God's displeasure. To which
purpose are the following passages -- Bloody and deceitful men shall not live
out half their days -- Be not wicked over much; for why should thou die
before thy time. Many other passages might be added to these: But it is
needless. As long life is the desire of all in general; so the scripture
represents it as being no unreasonable, to besure no criminal, desire: It is
spoken of as the reward of piety; good men are encouraged with the hopes of it.
Untimely, or premature death, on the contrary, is often considered as an evil;
and threatened as a curse.

NOW it may be useful, in farther discoursing upon this subject, to inquire, In
what respects long life is a blessing? or why it should be accounted so? It
will then be shown, that the practice of religion tends to prolong the life of
man, and to make it happy: So that it is incumbent upon all, who love many days
that they may ^ee good, to depart from evil and do good, to fear God and keep
his commandments: For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous; and his ears
are open unto their cry. These things being done, the subject will be closed
with some practical reflections, as the time will allow.

SINCE we all naturally desire to live long, it were to be wished, that we
desired this upon rational motives, and considerations which it becomes such
creatures as we are, to be influenced by. Let us therefore inquire, as was
proposed,

FIRST, In what respects long life is desirable? why it should be accounted a
blessing? and how far it is really so? In order to our making a proper estimate
of life, it is necessary that we consider it as it is; that we consider it with
those advantages, and those equally real disadvantages, with which the
posterity of Adam possess it; that we consider the reference which this life
has to another; to the true ends and purposes of life; and that we consider
what influence our present behavior, will have into our future happiness or
misery, according to the principles of religion. Without having all these
things before us, and keeping them constantly in view, it is impossible we
should judge justly upon this subject: We shall not reason, but only rave; and
bewilder our selves in an endless maze of uncertainty and error. If the
foundation be not properly laid, the superstructure, however regularly built
upon it, will be only as an airy castle in the land of Fairies. If we consider
the present life, either as more or less happy than it really is; or if we
detach it from futurity, as having no connection with another state; we shall
never come to a just conclusion concerning the point before us: We shall never
know in what respects life is a blessing; how far it is so; how it is to be
conducted in order to make the most and best of it: We shall always either
under or over-rate its value; and the result of all, will be no better than a
dream or reverie; at least, it will not be real wisdom, and salutary truth.

LET me therefore remind you of a few facts, and well-known principles, which
are to be taken along with us; and which are so fundamental, that without them
we cannot duly estimate the value of life; but must needs wander far from the
truth.

IT is to be premised, then, That the present life is, at best, a scene of
great trouble and disquietude. This world was originally designed for a place
of happiness, by our Creator: But man's apostasy from God, has changed it, though
not into an hell, yet into an habitation of much sorrow and vexation. For
notwithstand-standing the many delights, (far more, indeed, than we could claim
as our due) which Providence bestows upon us here; yet so numerous, various,
and incessant, are the adversities to which we are subjected, that we cannot
but groan under them, as under a load and burden, from which we would gladly be
delivered, were it possible without putting off these bodies.

IT is also to be observed, with relation to the pleasures of this life, that
they are flattened and diminished by old age. Youth is the principal season for
relishing and enjoying those, which are properly called animal, sensitive and
worldly pleasures, as contradistinguished from rational, moral, and religious.
It is said with peculiar propiety -- Rejoice, O young Man, in thy youth; and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth: For after people get past
the meridian of life, the relish for such enjoyments gradually fails; much in
the same proportion that animal nature itself decays. To which it is to be
added, that old age is usually attended with many positive pains peculiar to
itself, youth being a stranger to them, though not to all others. And
notwithstanding some exceptions, that is doubtless a just representation of
advanced age in general, which the Psalmist gives: If, by reason of strength,
they be fourscore years; yet is their strength labor and sorrow. Solomon has
dwelt longer upon this gloomy theme of old age; and painted the scene with
deeper shades. The years are then come, when the most say, that they have no
pleasure; Ecles. 12. 1. --
when the sun and the light, the moon and the stars are darkened; when the
keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men bow themselves; when the
grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows are
darkened; when they rise up at the voice of the bird! and all the daughters of
music are brought low; when they are afraid of that which is high, and fears
are in the way; when the almond-tree flourishes, and the grasshopper is a
burden; and desire itself fails. This is Solomon's description of that old
age, with its common infirmities and pains, to which we are so desirous of
living. And though we should attain to it; yet it is to be remembered, that we
are not immortal; but must unavoidably die at last, how long soever our lives
may be protracted.

WE must also remember, that whether we die young or old, we are to live
forever after this mortal course is finished; and either be inexpressibly happy
in another state, in the favor and loving kindness of God; or inconceivably
wretched, under his righteous displeasure. This is our time of trial and
probation. Though we are a sinful, apostate race, yet we are candidates for
heaven; so that if we are here reconciled to our Maker, through Him that was made
sin for us; and serve God faithfully, we become his children; being heirs of
God, and joint-heirs with Christ to an incorruptible inheritance. And the
greater degrees of true wisdom, of holiness and virtue, we attain to in this
world; by so much the brighter crown of glory, will the righteous Judge of all,
give us hereafter. On the other hand, those who live and die in their sins, are
of course and consequence, heirs of the second death; and must be miserable in
proportion as they have abused the goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering of
God; and misemployed the talents committed to their trust.

THE things which have been briefly premised, are the common, well-known
principles of religion; how little soever they are attended to in a practical
sense. And these principles, it is necessary for us to keep continually in our
eye, in order to our forming a proper judgment of human life; in order to our
knowing, whether length of days is desirable, or not; and if it is, for what
reasons, and how far it is so.

AND in conformity to these maxims, it may be laid down for a certain truth,
That long life is very little, if at all, to be desired for its own sake, or
upon account of any happiness to be attained here, which is purely of a worldly
nature, detached from religion, and the hopes of a better life to come. If this
is really an happy state, upon the whole, considered in itself, and without any
reference to another; it must, indeed, be acknowledged to be a desirable one
in the same proportion; and long life might be wished for, were it only in
respect of that felicity which is to be reaped here. I do not absolutely deny
this to be the case: But, alas! when we balance the account; when we come to
weigh the common sorrows of life, against the common joys of it, the scale of
happiness will, I believe, very little preponderate, if at all, as to the
greater part of mankind. Many of the pains of life are, probably, far more
intense and vivid, than any of its pleasures, and they are, certainly, of much
longer duration. People sometimes lie in extreme torture for whole days, weeks,
and months, if not years together, with scarce any intermission: In comparison
of which pains, all sensual, and worldly pleasures, are very short-lived; and
the most sensible, probably, the shortest. We never find ourselves, nor see
others, for any considerable time together swallowed up in joy and rapture, as
we often see them swallowed up of sorrow and anguish.

BUT leave uncommon, extraordinary examples both of prosperity and adversity,
out of the question for the present; and consider mankind in general, the main
body of the species as they rise. They always have been, now are, and always
must be, poor and low in the world; obliged to toil hard, to rise early, and
set up late, in order to get a livelihood for themselves and families, eating
the bread of carefulness. In them especially is fulfilled the prediction and
threatening, when the ground was cursed for man's sake -- "In sorrow shall thou
eat of it:" What do the lower classes of mankind enjoy? what can they hope to
enjoy, which should make such a life as this, considered in itself, very
desirable to them! If from the land, you turn your eyes to another element; to
them that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters; is
Their kind of life any freer from care, disquietude or danger? They have not
always halcyon days; but experience the stormy wind and tempest. They mount up
to the heaven, they go down again to the depths, their soul is melted because
of trouble. They reel to and fro -- and are at their wits end. Psalm 107. 26, 27.
Come ashore again; and consider those, whose circumstances place them above
the necessity of laboring for their daily bread, in the common sense of the
phrase. Has not the merchant, for example, various cares and perplexities in
his calling; so that quiet often flies him by day, and sleep by night? and so
as to make his life almost one continued hurry, and scene of disquietude? And,
perhaps, after having made himself a slave almost all his days, to heap up
uncertain riches, he either never obtains them, or having obtained them, they
suddenly take to themselves wings and flee away; leaving him only poverty,
disappointment, and blasted hopes, to reward his pains! Reflect upon the man of
literature, and studious of philosophical wisdom and knowledge: Solomon, the
greatest proficient in this kind of wisdom, long since observed, that he that
"increases knowledge," does, in some respects, "increase sorrow" also. So far
is it from making a man truly happy! The joy and transport of an EUREEKA, is of
short continuance: And there are so many things which we desire to find out,
but cannot, that there is, perhaps, as much disappointment and sorrow, ^s of
solid happiness and contentment, resulting from these researches; the wisest
men having the most thorough, feeling sense of their ignorance. Behold one Sage
leaping into the Ocean, for grief that he cannot comprehend its ebbing and
flowing! See another, precipitating himself into AEtna, for sorrow that he
could not understand its sires and eruptions! Were they not more tortured on
account of what they did not know, than satisfied with what they did? The plain
Peasant and Mechanic do not feel these pains of ignorance; nor run thus
learnedly out of their wits.

CONSIDER, next, the man of ambition, who "seeks great things for himself,"
power and dignity, and high preferments in the state; and let him be one, whose
birth, qualifications and fortune, (to speak in the language of the world) give
him some reasonable prospect of success in the pursuit. But there are many
rivals and pretenders, some of whom must fail, if not the greater part of them.
And then the disappointed candidate, is probably stung and tormented with
resentment and envy. But those who succeed in these pursuits, ascending to the
heights they aspired at, generally do so, in one respect, as the saints enter
into rest, through much tribulation; through a long series of vexatious conflicts;
for if they do not often wrestle against spiritual, yet they wrestle against
temporal wickednesses in high places. And after all, the victors do not find
that rest to their souls, which they promised themselves in their elevated
stations. New desires, new cares, and sollicitudes, spring up from the root of
bitterness, to perplex and trouble them. And what slippery places do they walk
in? being often raised by one prince, as it were only to be thrown down by his
successor, or perhaps by himself. Perplexing cares haunt the courts and palaces
of sovereigns; where gorgeous apparel is often nothing but the splendid
covering of woe. Fools may stare, and envy, thinking those who appear so gay
and smiling, must needs be very happy: But wise men know better. Even those who
wear a crown, and hold a scepter, often tremble lest one should fall from their
head, and the other be wrested from their hand: And he that is so successful in
his politics and wars, as to conquer one world, weeps because there is not
another for him to ravage, mixing his tears with his triumph.

BESIDES the troubles and vexations which are attendant upon all the different
ranks and stations of life, and peculiar to them respectively; there are
others, which are common to them all in general: Such as bodily pains and
diseases; and the griefs which spring out of the natural relations of life;
even out of its nearest alliances, and closest connexions. -- Relations dear,
and all the charities
Of Father, Son and Brother --
Milt. Lib. IV.
Though there is a degree of happiness, yet there is also a degree, sometimes,
indeed, a much greater degree, of sorrow and vexation, resulting from these
connexions. They are the source of many disquietudes, while the relations
subsist; and, often, of more and greater ones, when they come to be dissolved;
as they must be, sometime or other, in a world where death reigns, as in ours.
The dissolution of these natural relations, cannot but deeply affect and grieve
all those, who are not without natural affection. The vices of mankind;
covetousness, ambition, the spirit of contention and domination; and those
other lusts of men, from whence come wars and sightings, oppression, tyranny
and blood; these vices and lusts of men, I say, redouble all the other ills of
life; and make it far more restless and miserable, than it would otherwise be.
O shame to men! Devil with Devil damned
Firm concord holds, men only disagree
Of creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly grace: and, God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity and strife
Amongst themselves, and levy cruel wars,
Wasting the earth, each other to destroy!
Milt. Lib. (...). Vid. Matthew. 12. 24, -- 27


TAKING this world as we now find it; and ballancing the happiness and the
sorrows of it, as nearly as we can, it is evident, that such a life is not much
to be desired, for its own sake. One person's experience cannot, in (...), be
the exact measure and standard of another's: I, therefore, congratulate all
those, upon their happier lot, who have sound much more satisfaction and good,
than pain, disappointment and sorrow, here, abstracting this life from the
prospect of a better to come. Put the supports of religion, and the hopes of
futurity, out of the question; and I should, for my own part, be almost tempted
to say with Job, Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which
it was said, There is a man-child conceived. Let that day be darkness, let not
God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it! Job 3. 3, --
Were it not that people generally flatter themselves, that things will go much
more according to their wishes sometime or other, in this world, than they have
done heretofore; did they not presume, and take it for granted, that they shall
live more to their mind in the remaining part of their life, than they have
hitherto done, I believe most men of reflection, would, to say the least, be
very indifferent, whether they lived much longer or not: I mean, provided they
were certain, that the whole term of their existence was comprised within the
limits of this life. Many, doubtless, would choose rather to be annihilated now,
than to live over just such another life as their past, an hundred or a
thousand times, and then be annihilated at last. Dans des (...) presents, dans
l' espoir des plaisirs
Nous (...) jamais, nous attendons la vie.
Demain^ (...) v^ combler tous nos voeux:
Demain-vient, et nous laisse encore plus malheureux.
(...) l' erreur, ^elas! (...) join qui nous devore,
(...) recommencer son course! --

It is generally that hope, which "springs eternal in the human breast," rather
than any positive happiness and enjoyment, which makes people so fond of this
life. By this hope we are led on from goal to goal, from one stage of life to
another, still expecting to find some greater good and satisfaction than we
have found already; which hope usually proves abortive in the end. So that
those who have lived long, who have had all the means of procuring worldly
happiness which any ever had, and gone the round of every sensitive enjoyment,
have at last been compelled to own, that all is but vanity and vexation of
spirit; that what the world calls happiness, is scarce more than a shadow or a
dream: And it is wise in others to trust Their experience, lest themselves
should also be disappointed in the end.

THE result of what has been said, is, That the present life, considered in
itself, if it may be properly called an happy one upon the whole, is yet so but
in a very low degree; and therefore, that long life is but little to be
desired, for the sake of any happiness that can, probably, be attained to here:
(Though I will not contradict the common opinion of the world so much as to say,
that the sorrows of life are, generally speaking, more than a balance to the
enjoyments of it, being abstracted from hope:) From whence it follows, that
life itself, and length of days upon earth, are a blessing, chiefly, considered
with relation to futurity; as this state is introductory to another, and as
long life here gives us greater opportunity and advantage than a short one, for
acquainting ourselves with God; for serving Him, and our generation according
to his will; for working out our salvation, and securing to ourselves a happy
immortality after death. Such a life as the present, however long, unless
considered in this connection with futurity, and somewhat that is to succeed it,
would, I think, demand no great thanks to the Author of it; it being but an
inconsiderable good in itself. But taken with its proper connexions and
references, it cannot but be looked upon as a great blessing, which demands our
sincere praise and thanksgiving to the bountiful Donor thereof. It is a price
put into our hands to get that true wisdom; to do that good in the world; to
gain those religious qualities and good habits, which will make us in some
measure happy even now, and which will, through the goodness and grace of God,
insure to us, and terminate in, eternal felicity. It is chiefly in these
respects, that long life is desirable. To be candidates for immortal bliss and
glory, and put in a way of obtaining them, is certainly a great privilege. And
length of days, or a long preparatory, probationary state, where so much is
depending as there is upon the present life, is certainly preferable to a short
one. The more time is allowed us, the more effectually we may provide for our
future well-being; the more we may acquaint ourselves with God and his ways;
the greater improvement we may make in piety and virtue. And this will give us
greater peace and hope in our latter end; and both qualify us for, and entitle
us to, a brighter crown of immortality, than a lower degree of goodness would
have done.

SURELY, when we have so great an interest at stake; when the salvation of our
souls depends upon our becoming truly wise and good here, it is both natural
and reasonable to desire, that this opportunity for making provision for
another world, for an There is no ground to think, taking the holy scriptures
for our guide, that those who live and die in their sins, shall ever have a
future opportunity to redeem their present miscarriages; or any other time of
trial, after this life is terminated. So far as I am able to see, the utmost
which these foolish, miserable men can hope for, is to be annihilated after
suffering unutterable torments: Though I do not assert, that they can, according
to the scripture account, hope for so great a favor as even this would be,
viz. to be utterly blotted out of being! However, it must be confessed, that
some expressions of scripture seem, at first view, to countenance this
supposition.
eternal state, should be protracted as long as may be; as long as is
consistent with the good pleasure of God, and this our mortal condition. The
making due preparation for another world, however practicable it may be
supposed to be in a short time, is yet a business of so great importance, as no
considerate man would choose to have hurried over, or crowded into a little
narrow space, if it could be avoided. Possibly a person may be so foolish and
improvident, as to neglect in childhood and youth, which are vanity, this most
important of all concernments: And when this is the case, as God knows it too
often is, is it not a great favor to have a farther time allowed for this
purpose; that so we may redeem in maturer life, or in old age, the follies and
misconduct of our youth; and may do that work at last, which ought to have been
done at first? Ask a man who apprehends he is just going out of the world, and
is conscious that he has hitherto lived a wicked, profligate life, what he
would give for two or three years more, in which to make his peace with God? He
will tell you, That if he was owner of a million times as many worlds as ever
God created, he would freely give them all for a single year. And even good
men, when they have the prospect of a speedy dissolution, unless they have
already attained to a full assurance of faith and hope, cannot well help making
the prayer which the Psalmist did in his sickness, O! spare me, that I may
recover strength before I go hence, and be no more. Psalm 3^ 13.
From these things we learn the true worth of time, the use and end of life,
the improvement which we ought to make of it; how desirable long life is, and
for what reasons. All, in a manner, terminates in this one point, viz, the
greater advantage and opportunity which length of days gives for preparing for
another state of existence, and making our calling and election sure. A future
state being out of the question, there is so little solid happiness to be
enjoyed here, and so many afflictions to be suffered, according to the common
course of things, that it may well be questioned whether life is a blessing at
all, or not; or a long one, preferable to a short one.

UPON these principles it follows, That a good man, knowing himself to be such,
and that he is entitled to the great and precious promises of the gospel, has
no reason, upon his own account, to desire to live longer, how young soever he
may be. The great end of life is accomplished as to himself; so that for him to
die would be gain. If such a man still prefers life to death, it must be solely
upon a principle of benevolence to others, and devotedness to the will of God;
that he may be instrumental of further promoting his glory in this world, and
serviceable to his neighbors, to his offspring, to his dependents, to those,
with whom he has some special connexions, and whose good he is deeply concerned
for. And it is only upon the principles here laid down, that any tolerable
sense can be put upon the apostle's words to his beloved Philipians -- Christ
shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death. For to me to
live is Christ, and to die is gain. But if I live in the flesh, this is the
fruit of my labor: Yet what I shall choose, I know not. For I am in a strait
betwixt two; having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; for this is far
better: But to abide in the flesh, is more needful for you. Philip. 1. 20, --


To sum up all in a few words: This is such a life as, being considered in
itself, is very little, if at all to be prized: Consequently it is of little or
no concernment to a man, whether he lives few or many days here; only as this
life has respect and reference to another; and the longer we live, the more
effectually we may provide for our future well-being. As Soon as we are prepared
for another world, especially if this matter is put beyond doubt to ourselves,
we have no reason to wish to live longer for our own sakes, and can do so only
upon a principle of charity, and submission to the will and providence of God;
waiting all the days of our appointed time 'till our change come. Job 14 14.
For good men to desire long life upon this principle, (which is, I think, the
only one upon which the Good can rationally desire it,) is truly noble and
generous: And the hoary head, whether found upon such a One as Paul the aged,
or upon any other person, is truly a crown of glory, if it be [thus] found in
the way of righteousness. Proverb, 16. 31.
But the sinner, though an hundred years old, shall be accursed. (...) 6^. (...)


SERMON XIV. Of the true Value, Use and End of Life; and the Conduciveness of
Religion to prolong, and make it happy. Occasioned by the Death of some aged
Persons.
PSALM XXXIV, 12, 13, 14, 15. WHAT man is he that desires Life, and loves
many days, that he may see Good?
KEEP thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
DEPART from evil, and do good: seek peace and pursue it.
THE eyes of the LORD are upon the righteous; and his ears are open unto their
cry.

PEOPLE are so universally desirous of living long in this world; and promise
themselves so much happiness from it, that it will, doubtless, appear fanciful
and romantic to many, to say there is scarce any thing to be enjoyed here, for
which it is worth while to live. But still this is the truth of the case: This
world is a scene of folly and confusion, of disappointment and sorrow. It Is
pleasures are precarious, superficial and transient; its troubles are certain,
substantial, and almost uninterrupted. So that, were there to be an end of us
at death, few or no considerate men, could ever expect to enjoy much good; or,
consequently, much desire to live long here. Such is this life, when considered
in itself: But the prospect clears up, when we consider the reference which the
present state has to, and its connection with, another after death. Life is
valuable, and length of days to be wished for, as it gives us an opportunity to
acquaint ourselves with God, and to secure eternal felicity to ourselves, when
our days here shall be numbered and finished. In any other respect, whether we
live long, or die soon; yea, whether we live at all or not, seems to be no very
interesting point. But this matter was spoken of in the preceding discourse.
It was proposed to show, in the

SECOND Place, That if we are desirous of living long, and of making the best
of life while it lasts, it becomes us to conduct ourselves by the maxims of
religion: Or, in the language of the Psalmist, to keep our tongues from evil,
and our lips from speaking guile; to depart from evil, and do good; to seek
peace and pursue it. The practice of pure, undefiled religion, has a natural
tendency to prolong human life, and to render it, in some degree, happy. For
the righteous are not only entitled to the favor of almighty God hereafter,
but to his peculiar care and guardianship in this world. Even here, the eyes of
the Lord are upon the righteous; and his ears are open unto their cry.
Godliness has promise both of the life that now is, and also of that which is
to come; so that it is profitable unto all things: 1 Timothy 4. (...).
And all kinds of arguments are used in the holy scriptures, to induce us
thereto. The principal of them, are those which are drawn from a future state
of rewards and punishments: But those that may be drawn from present
convenience and inconvenience, though of far less weight and force with a wise
man, are not wholly passed over in the sacred oracles: And, indeed, the latter
may possibly have a greater influence upon some minds, than the former.

THE Psalmist takes it for granted, that the reason why men generally desire
life, and love many days, is, that they may see good: They do not desire life,
merely for the sake of living; but in hopes of living happily. And he assures
us, that the most likely means, both of prolonging our lives, and of making
them quiet and happy, is to pursue the paths of piety and virtue. This being
the manifest scope and drift of the passage under consideration, this second
head of discourse, I think, naturally resolves itself into two propositions;
viz,

THAT the practice of religion is the most probable means of lengthening out
our lives: And

THAT it is also the most likely way for us to see good, or to live happily.
God has connected the duty and interest of men together, not only so that they
shall, in the result of things, find themselves gainers by serving Him; but so
that religion is advantageous to them in the Interim, even in this world; only
the case of persecution for righteousness sake, is to be excepted.

1st. THE practice of religion is the most likely means of prolonging human
life. It has a direct natural tendency to lengthen out a man's days; while
irreligion and vice have plainly a contrary one. All kinds of intemperance,
debauchery and excess, tend to the death of the body, as well as to the
destruction of the soul; so that they who "live after the flesh," often die
even a temporal death, much sooner than they would otherwise have done.
Voluptuousness and sensuality disorder all the springs, and poison the fountain
of animal life, bringing diseases upon the body, and most certainly shortening
a man's days in a greater or less degree. How many persons, have, by their
criminal excesses, impaired their health; and gradually ruined their
constitution, so that they have scarce "lived out half their days?" There are,
perhaps, as many, even in Christendom, who have died martyrs to the Bacchus and
Venus of the Pagans, as have ever died martyrs to Christ.

ALL irregular affections, and inordinate passions, such as anger, malice,
pride and envy, prey also upon the spirits and life; though not so apparently,
perhaps, as bodily excesses. These mental disorders are the sickness of the
soul; and by virtue of that union and sympathy, which there is between the soul
and body, impair the health of the latter also. Even those vices of the mind,
from which we may not suspect any present harm, sap and undermine us; gradually
wearing away the strength, the vigor, and the lives of men. So that all the
lusts both of the flesh and of the spirit, may be considered as a slow
consumption, (though, indeed, not a very slow one in some persons!) which will
prove mortal at last, though not feared at present. For notwithstanding some very
dissolute men; men, none of whose passions have been under due restraint, have
lived to a great age; yet, in all probability, these very persons might have
lived a considerable time longer, had they been sober and temperate in all
things, as those that strive for the mastery. Moderation in all corporeal
gratifications and pleasures, and a mind freed from inordinate affections, from
extravagant desires, from irregular, ungovernable passions, are life both to
the body and the soul; they are health to the navel and marrow to the bones.
Pro. 3. 8.
Or, in those other emphatical words of Solomon, "A sound heart is the life
[even] of the flesh; but envy is the rottenness of the bones." Chap 14. ver. 30.
What is here said particularly of envy, is also true of all other moral
disorders of the mind; of all vicious affections of the heart. Besides; the
vices of men do not seldom bring them to an untimely end, from the hands of
civil justice; and, sometimes, even from their own hands. Who will harm us, if
we are followers of that which is good? Who would lay violent hands upon
himself, were he not either deprived of his senses, or carried away by vicious
passions, and extravagant desires, which have got the mastery over him?

UPON the whole, it is manifest that "righteousness tends unto life" in this
world, and sin unto death. Had mankind persevered, from the first, in their
obedience to God, in their original innocence, death would not have entered
into the world at all: For "righteousness is immortal." And although we are all
now under the sentence of death, it being appointed unto men once to die; yet
the execution of that sentence is naturally hastened on the faster, the more we
deviate from the paths of righteousness. And though religion cannot make us
immortal here, yet it has a very obvious tendency, in diverse respects, to
protract our days upon the earth. But

2ly. THE practice of religion is also the most probable means of rendering
life easy and happy to us, causing us to see good. It is, indeed, no great,
degree of felicity that any of the sons of Adam can reasonably hope for, in
this imperfect state. However, while we live, it is our wisdom to make the best
of life, to pass through it with as little sorrow, and as much peace and
satisfaction, as is consistent with such a state. And if we aim at doing so, it
becomes us to live under a sense of God and religion; to keep another world in
mind, and to regulate our tempers and manners with a view thereto. It is in
this way, if in any, that happiness is to be sound: And indeed, Solomon, who
had long and sufficiently tried all others, though to no purpose, came at last to
this conclusion, That to fear God and keep his commandments, is the whole of
man: That the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace;
that she is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; and that happy is
every one who retains her. Pro. 3. 17. 18.
The paths of irreligion and vice are full of briars and thorns, like the earth
after God had cursed it. Whatever dissolute men may imagine, it is only wisdom,
in the practical sense of Solomon, that will be productive of true peace and
felicity. Sincere happiness grows not upon folly and vice; this is a soil under
the divine malediction. Men may weary themselves in the way of wickedness; but
they will not find the way of peace, or any rest to their souls, 'till they
find the way of virtue, and walk therein. Vice and folly as certainly make men
miserable in a degree, even now, as they will terminate in irretrievable ruin:
Religion as certainly contributes to the happiness of human life now, as it
will issue in eternal felicity. For

IT is to be observed, That in the same proportion that religion tends to
health and length of days, it is also productive even of temporal happiness.
The felicity of animal life, such as it is, has a close connection with health
and soundness of body; and is, indeed, inseparable therefrom. The corporeal
diseases which intemperance and other vices bring upon men, and by which their
lives are curtailed, also diminish their happiness; rendering them incapable of
relishing and enjoying even those animal pleasures, which are the grand object
of their pursuit. Do you imagine that he who, by criminal indulgences and
excesses, and a libertine course of life, has enfeebled his body, and impaired
his health, can receive as much happiness from those objects which God has
accommodated to our nature, considered as sensitive creatures, as One who, by
observing the rules of sobriety and moderation, preserves himself in health and
vigor? Far from it! Such a man frustrates his own aim: and while he is
criminally grasping at more pleasure than he ought, deprives himself in a great
measure, even of that which he might innocently enjoy; yea, often brings such
pains and diseases upon himself, as make life insupportable to him. There is a
great variety of evils, too many to be now enumerated, which are naturally
consequent upon these libertine indulgences. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who
has contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? They that
tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine -- At the last it biteth
like a serpent and stingeth like an adder -- Thine eye shall behold strange
women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things. Yea thou shall be as he
that lies down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lies upon the top of a
mast. Pro 23. 29.
In short, nothing is more manifest, than that what is usually called a life of
pleasure, by a strange catachresis and abuse of language, is really a life of
pain and wretchedness; and that men cannot enjoy the happiness for which they
are designed, considered only as animals, in its greatest height and
perfection, while they violate the laws of virtue in the pursuit of it.

RELIGION and virtue are also conducive to the felicity of life, as they
generally procure the esteem and good will of men; even of those, who have
little or no religion themselves. They promote that peace and good
understanding betwixt man and man, in which happiness here very much consists.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him. This is not, indeed, universally the case. Even our blessed Savior
and his apostles, were as much or more maligned by the world, than any other
persons who were ever in it. Here were some peculiar circumstances: But in
general it is unquestionably true, that a religious and virtuous conduct
attracts the good will, and procures the good offices of mankind. A good man is
far less likely to get into troublesome contentions and broils, and to have
enemies, than a proud, ambitious, covetous or wrathful one. Daily observation
confirms this. And there are some virtues, which have a more immediate and
direct tendency to conciliate the friendship of men; to promote and to
establish that good harmony which is so conducive to happiness: I mean those
virtues, which are more especially alluded to in the text -- Let him that would
see good, keep his tongue from evil, and his lips from speaking guile let him
depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.

IT is moreover, and indeed very particularly to be observed, That inward
peace, and tranquillity of mind, is not to be obtained but by the practice of
religion. We are moral and accountable creatures; and have an immediate
consciousness and feeling of our being so. And 'till a man has taken a fatal
opiate, and laid his conscience asleep, it will frequently call him to a severe
reckoning for his evil deeds. It is an accuser, witness and judge, which he can
neither fly from, nor easily bribe. And how unhappy is that man, whose own
heart condemns him? who, instead of being able to look up to his Maker with
confidence, cannot even look himself in the face, without blushing and
trembling? This, in general, is the case of wicked men; there is no peace to
them. Even in their greatest prosperity, they are frequently disquieted by
conscious guilt; and in adversity, that God, who is the confidence of the ends
of the earth, is a terror to them. Thus are they like the troubled sea, when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. Isa. 57. 20.
How different is the situation of the good man, at peace in his own breast, at
peace with his maker? in prosperity, having all his enjoyments heightened by
conscious virtue and integrity? in adversity, having God for his refuge, a very
present help in trouble, when the help of man is vain? Verily, the work of
righteousness is peace: and the effect of righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. But

RELIGION is more especially fruitful of happiness, as it gives the glorious
prospect of endless felicity in the world to come. We are the children of God,
says the Apostle; and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ -- For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Romans 8. 16,
--
Without this hope of glory, honor and immortality, which good men, have through
Him that has abolished death, we might say of all things here below --
Miserable comforters are they all. What satisfaction can a considerate man take
in this world, who knows that he has both a mortal body and an immortal soul,
provided he has no stable, fixed hope of a better life to come? no hope, which
is as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, entering into that which
is within the vail? Wicked men cannot have this hope; or at least, if they have
it, it must be by deceiving themselves. And without it, one would think that
the various sorrows and sufferings of this present time, together with the
natural fears of death, must bear very hard upon a man's spirits, leaving but
little room for mirth and joy: But with it, all things are tolerable; it
lightens every burden; it inhances every blessing; it mitigates every sorrow;
it gilds the most gloomy scenes of life; and is a perpetual cordial to the
fainting soul. It animates a good man, in every condition; it gives him
strength to do, and resolution to bear all things. It delights at home and
abroad; in company and in solitude: It brightens our days, and sweetens our
nightly slumbers. From youth to age, it preserves the good in perfect peace,
their minds being stayed upon God. Through this, they are happy even without
those possessions and enjoyments, in which others place all their felicity; so
that having nothing, they possess all things. It at once disarms both life and
death of their sting and terrors -- O blessed hope! it is thou which turnest
mourning into gladness of heart, darkness into light, and death into life: It
is thou which turnest the sufferings of time, into the triumphs of immortality;
and causest us, even in this vale of tears, to rejoice with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory!

IT appears, then, that the practice o^ religion tends naturally both to
lengthen out our lives, and to make them happy and that vice and irreligion
have the contrary tendency, to shorten, and make them miserable. But when I
speak of religion as having such a natural tendency, this is not designed, by
any means, to exclude the providence of God, his care and guardianship of the
righteous. Things have no other tendency, than what God himself has given them:
It is He that has established all their connexions, and who constantly
maintains them by his power and providence, "working all in all." If the lives
of those who fear and serve God, are prolonged; or if such persons see more
good than others, it is because the eyes of the LORD are upon the righteous,
and his ears are open unto their cry; as it is expressed in the text. On the
other hand, if the wicked die in youth; or if they live an unquiet, joyless
life, it is because the face of the LORD is against them that do evil, to cut
off the remembrance of them from the earth; as it is expressed in the verse
immediately following. God's providence is minutely concerned in every thing
that happens to us: And both the prayers of the righteous, and the blasphemies
of the wicked, are loud and vocal in his ears. They are heard from the depths
of the earth to the height of heaven, "going up for a memorial before God"; the
one for good, the other for evil. And although this is not a state of
retribution, but of discipline; yet God even now knows them that are his, and
shows them his peculiar favor; while he, in some degree, chastizes the impious
and vicious, in the course of his providence. He has actually connected our
duty and our happiness together, even in this world; at least so far as to
manifest, that He is the righteous moral governor of the world; and that They
alone can be happy, who truly fear him, and work righteousness. Irreligious,
dissolute men, may flatter and deceive themselves, if they please: But even
they, in their lucid intervals, know that this is true -- It is the immutable
decree of heaven, that none shall find their account, even at present, in
departing from the living God; from the fountain of living waters! They may,
indeed, hew out unto themselves cisterns; but they will prove leaky, broken
cisterns, which can hold no water; which will not retain a drop of pure,
unadulterated happiness; but transmit it all through, leaving only the scum, the
dregs, and the filth behind. That foolish prodigal who leaves his Father's
house, where there is bread enough, and to spare, though he would fain fill his
belly with the husks which the swine do eat, shall still remain unsatisfied: He
shall even perish with hunger in a strange land, unless he comes to himself;
unless he arises and goes to his Father. Then, and not till then, shall he know
what happiness means, when his Father shall say -- Bring forth the best robe,
and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet; and bring
hither the fatted calf and kill it; and let us eat and be merry: For this my
son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost and is found. Luke 15.
In such language as this, He who came to seek and to save that which was lost,
represents the misery of those who are "far from God:" together with their
happiness upon their return to Him: Which description, though it is allegorical,
is neither the less intelligible, nor the less emphatical.

BUT I must now close this subject with some reflections, as was proposed.

THOSE persons who have already attained to old age, agreably to their wishes
in youth, have great cause of thankfulness to the God of their lives. It is
because they have obtained help from Him, that they yet survive. This, as has
been already shown, is a great favor and blessing; if not on account of any
happiness of a worldly nature, yet, at least, in respect of the opportunity
which length of days gives men, for acquainting themselves with God, and
providing for their eternal welfare. And certainly those who are thus favored
of heaven, ought to return their grateful acknowledgments thither.

THOSE of us also, whose friends, especially whose Parents (commonly our best
friends) are preserved to old age, ought to bless God upon this account. It
demands our gratitude, both as it is a favor to them, whom we ought to esteem
and reverence, and also to ourselves. The young need the counsels, the
admonitions, and good example of the aged: And ought to look upon it as a great
blessing of heaven, when their pious parents are thus preserved to them. But
instead hereof, some ungracious children seem to think it a burden and
misfortune to them, when those, from whom they immediately derived their own
being, live to a great age; having their tho'ts more fixed, probably, upon an
earthly, than upon an heavenly inheritance. But it is certainly very
inconsistent with the honor which we owe to our Father and Mother, that our own
days may be long in the world, to think the time long and tedious till They are
taken out of it. And all such disrespectful, undutiful children, better deserve
the title of bastards than of sons, could it be given them without an implicit
reflection upon those, for whom they ought to have a greater regard and
reverence. He whose breast is warmed with true filial piety, will be desirous
of protracting the life of his parents as long as may be; and of rendering age
and infirmities as supportable and agreeble to them as he can, even after he
can no longer expect to receive any considerable benefit from them. The death
of a parent will always rather seem too early, than too long deferred, in the
opinion of such persons. However, they will also remember, that men are born to
die; and submissively bear the separating stroke, when it comes: Knowing, that
though Father and Mother forsake them, they have a Father in heaven, eternal and
immortal, though invisible; and whose paternal care is exercised over all his
offspring; especially over those who have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father! Romans 8. 15.
-- But to proceed with our reflections --

IT deserves the serious consideration of the Aged, whether they have lived so
long to any good purpose? whether they have given their attention to the great
ends of life? and made such an improvement of their time, that they can give a
good account of it to God, when he calls them to appear before Him? Which time
is now near at hand, even at the door; since they cannot expect to survive much
longer. It becomes not One, who is himself young, to be very officious in
catechizing or counselling the Old: But, methinks, if I were myself old, I
should judge it proper to catechize myself, in some such manner as this -- How
have I employed those years which have rolled over my head: how demeaned myself
under that goodness, forbearance and long-suffering, which God has exercised
toward me? Have I considered life as the gift and blessing of God, to be
employed chiefly in learning his will, in acquainting myself with his Son Jesus
Christ, and in doing his commandments, in order to my having right to eat of
the tree of life? Have I glorified God in the world? and laid myself out, to be
serviceable to my fellow men, in the improvement of the talents committed to
me? Has it been my daily care and concern to approve myself to Him, who
searches the hearts of men; and who will finally give to every man according
to his deeds? Has the salvation of my soul been the grand object of my
attention, as almost the only thing that is worthy of it? Have all other
desires and pursuits been habitually subordinated to this? What proficiency in
true goodness and holiness have I made, during this long probationary state?
Have I gained the mastery of my lusts and passions; and, through the Spirit,
mortified the deeds of the body, so that I am now prepared to leave that world,
in which I have lived so long? How many of my contemporaries are already
numbered with the dead; while I am still among the living? Where should I now
have been, had God taken me out of the world in middle age, or in youth, with
them? in the paradise of God, or in the regions of woe! Such questions as these
seem proper for every aged person to put to himself. Nor is it to be doubted,
but that many could truly answer them in the manner, in which no one could help
wishing them resolved for himself; all being desirous, whenever they die, to
die the death of the righteous. But, alas! is there not reason to think, that
some could not answer such inquiries to their satisfaction? Is there not reason
to fear, that many have spent their days in a very different manner? in
pursuing the vanities of this world, without any serious, habitual concern
about another? And that even now, when gray hairs are here and there upon them,
they consider it not? I would observe the apostle's direction, not rebuking all
Elder, but entreating him as a Father, and the younger men as brethren. Let me
beseech the Aged, with all due respect, to look both backward and forward; to
reflect upon the life which they have already lived, and almost spent; and to
consider that other life and state, which they are so soon to enter upon,
according to the common course of nature. Possibly some of them may, upon a
little reflection, see that though they have lived so long, they have not lived to
so good purpose as they might have done: And others, that they have not yet
lived to any good purpose at all; but neglected the grand business and
concernment of life, 'till life is now almost brought to a period. If there are
any of them, who have not yet numbered their days aright, nor applied their
hearts to wisdom, it behooves them to do it now, and to redeem the time. Their
days which now remain may, probably, in one sense, be very easily numbered! --

THERE is scarce a more melancholy sight to a person of sober reflection, than
a man who is just dropping into his grave with old age, still tho'tless of God,
and another state. It is matter of great grief to the wise and good, to see the
Young thus inconsiderate; thus forgetful of the God that made them; thus
regardless of their future interest: But to see the Aged so, is much more
sorrowful. There is considerable ground to hope, that the Young may live to see
the error of their ways, and become wise unto salvation. But when life is
already, in a manner, run out; when men have, as it were, one foot in the
grave; and are still pursuing vanity, straws and bubbles, with all the
tho'tless levity and wantonness of youth; there is, alas! but little ground for
hope with respect to them. If their case is not quite desperate, it is not far
from being so. And surely those who have spent a long life in sin and folly,
must have a much more awful account to give of themselves at last, than they
who have spent only a short one in the same manner. They have heaped treasure
together for the last days; James 5.
a treasure of wrath against the day of wrath. Romans 2 (...).
Although length of days, considered with reference to the true ends of life, is
a great blessing; yet those who thus misimprove it, convert it into the
heaviest of curses: And good were it for those who thus become old in iniquity,
and die therein, if they had died in youth; yea, if they had passed away like
an untimely birth!

BUT this subject must now be applied to the Young, to whom, indeed, it most
properly belongs -- My Brethren, do you desire life, and love many days, that
you may see good? I know you desire it. Hearken then to the counsel of divine
wisdom: Keep your tongues from evil, and your lips from speaking guile; depart
from evil and do good -- Be assured from reason, from the experience of others,
and especially from the infallible word of God, that that long life and
happiness, of which you are so desirous, cannot be wisely and successfully
sought after in any other course, than that of sober religion and virtue. The
Young are generally hard to be persuaded of this truth, however certain, and
however important it is to them, both with relation to this world and another,
to time and to eternity. They please themselves with false notions of
happiness; of an happiness independent of God, the source of all being, of all
good; -- of happiness in the abundance which a man possesses; of happiness in
worldly honors and preferments; of happiness in a sensual course of life. All
these imaginations, depend upon it, if God is true, are mere delusions of the
Devil, both God's enemy and yours. To pursue happiness thus, to the neglect of
God and your souls, is a most certain, infallible way, to make yourselves
miserable; miserable in some degree now, and inconceiveably so hereafter. And
by taking such a course you will, probably, shorten those lives which you love
so well, and which were given you for far nobler purposes. O that you were
wise, that you understood this, that you would consider your latter end! Deuteronomy
32. 29.
For otherwise, you will only weary yourselves in seeking felicity, where it is
not to be found; instead of seeking it in God, and in his service, where none
ever sought it, and missed of it. Do thou think that religion is a
melancholy, joyless th^^g? Do thou think we would rob thee of thy happiness,
under the appearance of friendship? Do thou think ^here is no true happiness,
but in wealth and equipage? in earthly splendour, and sensual gratificacations?
Is thy heart thus attached to toys and vanities? -- Alas! thy guardian Matthew
18. 10.
Angel weeps over thee, ready to resign his charge, fearing lest he does not
now minister to One, who shall be an heir of salvation! Hebrews 1. 14.
Yea, He who was once made a little lower than the angels for thy redemption,
but is now crowned with glory and honor, Heb. 2. 9.
and worshipped by them; Chap. 1. ver. 6.
even He, could grief enter the heavenly mansions, would weep over thee, as he
once wept over Jerusalem! Luke 19. 41.
Yea, His Father and your Father, His God and your God, is moved with pity for
thee, saying, How shall I give thee up! -- how shall I deliver thee! -- Mine
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together! Hos. 11. 8.


THOUGH you may now, for want of consideration and experience, think you can be
happy without being truly religious and virtuous; yet all the wise and good men
who have gone before you, have born their united testimony, at the close of
life, to the emptiness and vanity, and vexatious nature of those things, which
you are so apt to set your hearts upon; and from which you promise yourselves
felicity. Have they not all declared, at a time when they could have no
temptation to deceive us, that they could never find any substantial good or
satisfaction, in the^^ things? Have they not, at the same time, born witness to
the excellency of religion? to the solid peace, comfort, and joyful hope,
resulting therefrom? Have they not declared, that their real happiness arose,
in the course of their lives, not in proportion to their wealth, honors, and
sensual indulgences, but in proportion to their care to please God, and to do
good in the world? Have not those, who have had much more experience of what it
is in the power of riches, worldly honors and pleasures, to give their
votaries, than any of Us can ever expect to have? -- have not the Lords of
millions, the great men of the earth, even mighty kings and potentates, as well
as others, in lower life, born this testimony? Have not wise and good men, near
the close of life, though it that warnings and admonitions of this sort, were the
most valuable legacy they could leave to their offspring, and surviving
friends? to them, whom they were so far from envying any thing truly good, that
they loved them as their own souls? Shall we pay no regard to the experience
and testimony of so great a cloud of witnesses, who being dead yet speak;
exhorting us to be followers of them, who already inherit the promises? Yea,
rather, shall we not regard that great, that faithful and true Witness, who
came from heaven on purpose to guide miserable men thither? even Him who has
said, Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart;
and ye shall find rest unto your souls? Matthew 11. 29.
-- Him who has said, My peace I give unto you; not as the world gives, give I
unto you: Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid? John 14. 27.
Shall we seek for happiness in this world, where none ever yet found it? Or
where none, who properly seek it, seek it in vain? Happy are they, who learn
wisdom from the mistakes and follies of others! Beware of the rocks upon which
so many thousands have been shipwrecked, and wholly destroyed. Some who have
run upon them, have, indeed, been so happy as to get off again: And they have
kindly set up their beacons and landmarks for the direction of those, who were
to ^ail after them upon the sea of life; where there is many a Scylla and
Charybdis, and as many enchanting Sirens to draw us to them. We have, besides
those landmarks, an heavenly Pilot: Who, then, will pity us, if we refuse to be
directed by him; and will run upon certain destruction? -- Even He that made
us, will not have mercy upon us; and he that formed us, will show us no favor!

IF we desire to live long; if, to pass through the present scene with comfort;
if, to die in peace in a good old age; and if, to live and triumph forever in
that glorious state, where there is neither an infant of days, nor an hoary
head; if this be our desire, let us devote ourselves, in the days of our youth,
to the service of our great and good Creator. We may then hope that those words
will be verified in us, Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a
shock of corn comes in, in his season. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is;
hear it, and know thou it FOR THY GOOD. Job 5. 26, 27.


IN fine; Let all bear in mind the great end of life; and let us all, young men
and maidens, old men and children, praise the name of the Lord; serving the God
of our Fathers, with a perfect heart, and with a ready mind. Though religion
allows us, while we live here, to be conversant about our secular affairs; and
although even some good men often give a great part of their attention to this
world, (indeed much more than they ought to do) yet it is essential to the
Christian character, that a man's heart and hope are habitually in heaven. The
Mariner's needle, when duly touched by the magnet, has a direction and tendency
to the North: And though it may be disturbed, so that it will tremble and waver
for a time betwixt the two poles, or even seem to incline most to the south;
will yet fix and come to a stand, only where it ought to do. Thus the soul of a
good man, being thoroughly touched by the spirit of the living God, will ever
tend toward Him, and point to heaven. Though it may be disturbed by attractions
from below; and waver for a moment betwixt God and the world, or even seem to
incline more to earth than heaven; yet it will come to a stand, and fix,
toward no other point in the hemisphere besides the Zenith; whither He, who
once descended, is again ascended, even far above all principality and power;
whither He is gone to prepare a place, a safe retreat from the storms and
disturbances of this impure, inclement region, for all his faithful servants;
that where He is, they may be also, and behold his glory. If the great end of
life is answered; if we truly know God and Jesus Christ; if we are accounted
worthy to obtain THAT world, and the resurrection from the dead; Luke. 20. 35.
it is not very material whether we die in youth, or in advanced age. The death
of those who live the longest, is sadly premature, if they die in sin and
folly: It is, in the worst of senses, to die before our time, to be taken out
of this world unprepared for another, unless it is by being fitted for
destruction, and becoming ripe for vengeance! On the other hand, the death of
those who live the shortest space, cannot well be said to be premature,
provided they die truly wise and virtuous. To be fit for heaven, is in effect,
to be old, and ripe for the grave. And some are so happy, as even in early
life, to attain to that substantial wisdom and goodness, to which old age is
often a stranger: So that you see Honorable age is not that which stands in
length of time, or that is measured by number of years: But wisdom is the gray
hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. Wisdom 4. 8, 9.


THE END.
The most material ERRATA of the Press; those in the pointing, and even some in
the spelling, being omitted.
Page, Line, Read,

13 13 effectual means etc.

16 12 from the bot. by others heretofore.

25 8 bot. terrestrial etc.

31 3 disciple above his Lord etc.

32 4 not be the word etc.

35 1 marginal note passage etc.

36 10 to better etc.

45 3 one and another etc.

58 7 bot. doctrine etc.

59 3 bot. eclipse all the mental etc.

60 1 insusceptible etc.

65 11 be made truly good etc.

71 14 bot. reasonably etc.

76 12 at the same time etc.

79 9 bot. men in; in order etc.

87 9 they call etc.

88 10 flashy etc.

101 3 bot. than the whole current etc.

105 3 inconsiderable soever etc.

107 6 consistency etc.

113 1 reasonings etc.

121 7 were not etc.

131 13 and 14. bot. many things which etc.

139 8 and 9 bot. shall actually etc.

141 5 internal sanctity etc.

142 2 bot. to a great etc.

167 14 bot. than God etc.

243 2 bot. often said by etc.

251 4 abides etc.

286 11 that there is etc.

318 14 receive it from the etc.

325 15 marg. note bot. guilty as to etc.

327 20 marg. note bot. the term law etc.

349 15 bot. reasonably look etc.

363 7 good men etc.

377 5 bot. Is it not etc.

389 9 bot. SECONDLY, to consider etc.

400 11 bot. distrusted yourself etc.

412 3 every man etc.

472 ult. Marg. voudroit etc.

486 7 their original etc.


