Dr. Mayhew's TWO DISCOURSES, Occasioned by the EARTHQUAKES In November, 1755.

The expected Dissolution of all Things, a Motive to universal Holiness.

TWO SERMONS Preached in BOSTON, N. E. on the LORD'S DAY, Nov. 23, 1755;
Occasioned by the EARTHQUAKES Which happened on the Tuesday Morning, and
Saturday Evening preceding.

By Jonathan Mayhew, D. D. Pastor of the West Church in Boston.

PUT them in fear, O Lord, that the nations may know themselves to be but men!
PSALM ix.20. BOSTON: N. E. Printed by Edes and Gill, and Sold at their
Printing-Office, next to the Prison in Queen Street; and by R. Draper in
Newbury-Street.

M,DCC,LV.

SERMON I. Of the Dissolution of all Things.
1 PETER III. 11, 12. SEEING then that all these things shall be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,

LOOKING for, and hasting unto, the coming of the day of GOD? --


I AM pretty certain I need not inform my hearers, what is the more particular
and special occasion of my choosing this passage of holy Scripture for the
subject of our meditations at this time. So alarming a visitation of
providence, does, I think, naturally lead to it, and now claim our particular
notice; and the rather, because it has been repeated, even so lately as the
last evening. Though there are many persons throughout the world, so thoughtless
and irreligious as to disregard the common, ordinary occurrences of divine
providence, which are familiar to them; yet there are few, if any, who are
arrived at such a pitch of impiety, whose consciences are so feared and
hardened, as not to have their attention awak^ned, and to receive some
religious impressions, by mea^s of such unusual, such striking and stupendous
events. When God "looks on the earth, and it trembles," or "touches the
hills, and they smoke," Psalm 104.32. It seems not improbable that Earthquakes,
and the Eruptions of Volcanos, were the Phenomenon which the Psalmist here had
in view.
even the most abandoned men, who are witnesses of these his mighty works, are
generally struck with a solemn awe, and have their thoughts turned toward the
great Author, Upholder, and Governor of the universe: And whenever they are
thus led to think seriously of Him, they cannot but wish themselves the objects
of his favor, and shudder under the apprehensions of his righteous
displeasure: They cannot but account his displeasure even worse than death, and
his loving kindness better than life.

SUCH seasons and opportunities as the present, when the ears and hearts of men
may be supposed more open to discipline, ought not, therefore, to be neglected,
but carefully improved by those, whose particular business it is to "call
sinners to repentance," and to preach righteousness to the world. They may
reasonably hope to have an easier access to the minds and consci^^^^^ of men,
at such times than at others; and to find them more susceptible of those good
impressions, which, though at all times fit and reasonable to be received, ^re
yet too often attempted to be made to no purpose, at other seasons. I believe
there is no wicked man amongst us, though it may be justly feared there are many
to whom this character belongs; I believe there is no wicked man amongst us, I
say, whose heart did not tremble within his breast, when the earth so lately
trembled under his feet; none, the joints of whose loins were not loosed, and
whose bones and marrow did not seem to be dissolving, when the very frame of
nature, and the foundations of the world were put out of course; and all these
things seemed to be dissolving. For the truth of this, I dare appeal to the
most profligate, hardened sinner present; even to those, who may have only made
a mock of sin before, not having considered, that with God there is terrible
majesty, till He thus caused his dread to fall upon them, and his excellency
made them afraid.

MY design, therefore, is, by the assistance and blessing of Him, who works
all things according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. i.11.
in the kingdom of his providence, and of his grace, to fix, confirm, and
cultivate into a principle of sober, practical religion and piety, those good
impressions, which, I cannot but hope and believe, have been made upon the
hearts of the young and tho'tless; and even upon those of the most profane and
dissolute, by this awakening and repeated visitation of divine providence:
Improving it, at the same time, for the quickening of good men in their
christian course, and "the perfecting of the saints"; that they may give the
more diligence to be found of their Judge in peace at last, without spot and
blameless. For we are, I think, naturally led by these visitations and
admonitions of providence, to turn our attention to that great period, when we
shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; and when all these things
which were, just now, only shaken, shall be entirely dissolved; and when, not
only the earth shall be moved out of her place, but the heavens themselves
"shall pass away with a great noise." Seeing then that all these things shall
be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation
and godliness, looking for, and hasting unto, the coming of the day of GOD? --

IN discoursing upon this subject, it will be proper to inquire, in the

FIRST place, what things those are, of which St. Peter speaks; and all which,
he assures us, shall be dissolved?

SECONDLY, what we are to understand by the dissolution of these things? And,

THIRDLY, when this great and interesting event shall come to pass? or what
will be the forerunners, concomitants, and consequents of it?

FOURTHLY, I shall, in conformity to the original design of the passage, and
the manifest scope of the apostle, urge the certainty hereof as a motive to
universal holiness, and, thereby, to prepare for, and hasten unto, the coming
of this Day of God.

THE subject will then be closed with some application of it, relative to the
present season, and to those providential dispensations, which so naturally
lead us forward in our contemplations to the great catastrophe of nature, when
all these things shall be dissolved. Nor can I doubt but that you will favor
me with a serious attention, both the subject and the occasion being such, as
may justly claim one.

HOWEVER, it is not my intention to address myself merely to the passions of my
hearers; much less, to take this opportunity, when the minds of many people may
be ruffled and discomposed, to promote the cause of superstition; a cause
which, I bless God, I have neither any interest nor inclination to serve. I
shall, therefore address myself to you, as to men, and reasonable creatures;
endeavoring to gain access to your hearts and consciences, to the most secret
apartments of your souls, if I may so express it, through the door of your
understandings. And this will so much the rather be the manner of my address,
because I am persuaded from my own observation, that no religious impressions
can be of the right kind, durable, and of lasting benefit to the subjects of
them, besides those which are made, or at least fixed, by rational, sober, and
honest methods, with the concurrence and blessing of Him, who works all in
all. It might be added, as a farther reason for this manner of address, that
the subject is, in its own nature, so universally interesting and affecting,
and the passions of people so generally raised to an high pitch already, by the
late providential occurrences, that there is, perhaps, more need to bring them
to calm reflection, by treating the subject in a sober, argumentative way, than
to ruffle them still more, by treating it in a way altogether rhetorical and
pathetic: Though I am sensible, that no one who has a just feeling of its
importance, can discourse coldly upon it; which would, indeed, be an
inexcusable impropriety. He that can speak of the dissolution of all things, of
the heavens and the earth in flames, of eternal judgment, and of that day of
God, which issues in the glorious reward and triumph of the saints, and in the
"perdition of ungodly men"; he that can speak of such things in a cold, icy,
unaffecting style, does not himself believe what he says, but only acts a part;
and that, so unnaturally and absurdly, as could not but disgust every judicious
hearer. To return, therefore; let us,

FIRST inquire, what those things are, of which St. Peter is here speaking; and
all which, he assures us, shall be dissolved? "Seeing then that all these
things," etc. i. e. the things which he had mentioned in the preceding
context. They are called the heavens and the earth, which now are, ver. 7. and
ver. 10 they are more particularly distributed into the heavens, the elements,
the earth also, and the works that are therein. It immediately following in the
text, "Seeing then that all these things," etc. it is evident the apostle must
intend, not only all those things which men themselves cannot but look upon to
be fading, transitory and perishing; but also those which appear to be the most
substantial and durable: all the cities and towers, the temples and monuments
of the world, however deep and strong their foundations may be laid, and though
built for perpetuity; all the magnificent works of men; all the products of
human art and power, through so many successive ages; all the mighty babels which
either pride and vanity, or fear, has erected, though their tops should reach to
heaven; all these things shall be dissolved. And not only all these works of
men, but the earth itself, which is the work of God, and which contains and
supports them; this habitable world itself, which seems so solid and durable.
The "everlasting hills" shall not last forever: the loftiest mountains, with
their rocks of adamant, and the very elements themselves, of which the earth is
composed; all these things expect their dissolution. Yea, the dissolution will
extend even beyond this earth, to the air and atmosphere which surround and
infold it, as in a garment; if not to the planetary regions also, and this
whole solar system. For some are of opinion, that by the heavens St. Peter
intends, not only these lower regions, and aerial heavens, but the aetherial
also, with the sun and planets. And although there are objections against this
supposition, yet it cannot be denied that the opinion is favored by some other
passages of scripture, if we take them in that sense, which first and most
readily offers itself to the mind. Thus Psalm cii.25, 26. which is quoted by
the author to the Hebrews, chap. vii. Of old have thou laid the foundation of
the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall perish, but
thou shall endure. Yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed. It is far from being certain
that the heavens and the earth, are here used metaphorically, either for men of
high degree, and of low, or for the angelical hosts and hierarchy, and for
earthly rulers. They are* perhaps, to be understood literally, for that
material earth, and those heavenly bodies, which "in the beginning God
created;" Genesis i.1.
which "declare his glory, and show his handiwork." Psalm xix.1.
A passage in the 12th of Hebrews may be thus literally understood also, where
the author alludes to the shaking and quaking of mount Sinai, at the giving of
the law, and to a prophecy of Haggai concerning what should come to pass under
the reign of the Messiah, or rather at the close thereof, when the period comes
for his delivering up the kingdom to God, even the Father. "If they escaped
not," says he, who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven; whose voice then
shook the earth: but now he has promised saying, yet once more, I shake not
the earth only, but also heaven. And this, 'yet once more', signifies the
removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that
those things which cannot be shaken may remain. I am sensible that a figurative
interpretation is usually put upon this passage: but it may admit of some
doubt, whether it ought to be thus understood. For since the shaking of the
earth, in the former part of the passage, where the apostle refers to the
giving of the law, plainly means a literal shaking of it, is it not most
natural to understand literally what follows in the latter part of it,
concerning the shaking of the heavens, "as of things that are made?" And it is
to be observed, that some mighty concussion, and certain great changes, of the
heavenly bodies, as well as of this earth, seem plainly foretold in the
revelation of St. John, when that important period shall arrive, to which St.
Peter alludes in the text. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and
lo, there was a great earthquake, and the sun became black as sackcloth of
hair, and the moon became as blood; and the stars of heaven fell unto the
earth, even as a fig tree casts her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a
mighty wind; and the heaven departed as a scrowl when it is rolled together;
and every mountain and island were moved out of their places. Rev. vi.12, 13,
14.
It seems not unlikely that the same period, and the same great events, are
referred to, in the prophecy of Isaiah: My salvation is gone forth, and mine
arms shall judge the people -- Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon
the earth beneath; for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth
shall wax old like a garment; and they that dwell therein shall die in like
manner: but my salvation shall be forever, and my righteousness shall not be
abolished. Isa. li. 5, 6.
I leave every one to judge for himself, after carefully examing and comparing
these, and such like passages, whether it is this earth only which is to be
dissolved?

BUT I must not enlarge upon this head any further. The things which St. Peter
speaks of in the text, are certainly all those things which are comprehended,
in the preceding verses, under these terms, the "heavens," the "elements," the
"earth," and the "works that are therein." And by comparing other passages of
scripture, which predict the mighty changes and revolutions which shall
hereafter take place in the natural, visible world, it appears most probable to
me, that the apostle intends this whole system, inclusive of the sun and
planetary regions, as well as this habitable world, with all its furniture.
Thus far, it is not unlikely, this great dissolution will extend. Wherefore

SECONDLY, let us inquire more particularly what is to be understood by the
dissolution of these things.

NO one, certainly, can hereby understand their annihilation; or suppose that
they are all, at length, to vanish into nothing, and, by being blotted out of,
leave a mighty void and blank in, the creation of God. The language of
scripture, indeed, evidently implies the contrary: For no man by the
"dissolving," by the "shaking," the "removing," the folding up and "changing"
of things, or even by their "perishing," understands their ceasing to be, or a
deprivation of existence. But neither, upon the other hand, can all these
expressions which the scriptures make use of with reference to this matter,
mean only some little, inconsiderable alterations in the external form,
qualities, and appearances of the things intended. They undoubtedly mean, in
general, some mighty and astonishing revolutions and changes in the material,
visible world; some great catastrophe which is to befall it, in some future
period, so that it may be said to be destroyed, and to become a wide extended
ruin: They imply, that the whole present frame and course of nature shall be
altered; all things putting on a very different aspect from that which they now
wear, so as to have the appearance rather of a world laid in ruins, than of a
regular, beautiful fabric, as it is in general at present; though it has
evidently been impaired and damaged in some degree already, and is daily going
to decay and destruction. Nothing less than this can be implied in the
dissolution of all these things; in their waxing old and perishing; in their
being folded up and changed; in the powers of heaven and earth being shaken,
etc.

AS to this earth, our present scene of action, and in the fate and fortune of
which, we seem to be more especially interested; the scriptures plainly inform
us, that it shall be thus ruined, thus destroyed: And they teach us still more
particularly, by what means this destruction and dissolution shall be affected,
or brought about; namely, by fire. And whatever St. Peter may intend in the
context, by the heavens, he extends the future conflagration to them, not
limiting it to this habitable earth. It may seem strange that the same world
should be subjected to two such different catastrophes, as first to be drowned,
and then burned. But the apostle having mentioned the former, in the preceding
context, foretells the latter, in the following language. But the heavens and
the earth which now are, -- are kept in store, reserved unto fire -- The
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
2 Pet. iii.7, and 10.
And when the apostle immediately subjoins, Seeing then that all these things
shall be dissolved, etc. it is manifest that he means, thus destroyed, thus
dissolved and ruined, by fire; by a general flame, that shall embrace and wrap
them up, and prey upon them till they are reduced, as it were, to one mighty
burning mass, or fiery chaos. The expressions, that the elements shall "melt
with fervent heat," that the earth with its works shall be "burnt up," and that
all these things shall be "dissolved," are very strong and emphatical; and can
imply nothing short of the utter ruin and destruction of the world with its
contents, by that furious element which shall be let loose upon it. Even the
great mountains, the burdens of the earth, the fabled props of the skies, and
habitations of gods, shall flow down; the hills shall melt, and the earth be
burnt up at the presence of the Lord, yea, the world, and all that dwell
therein. Nah. 1.5.
This is the predicted fate and destruction, at least of that globe which we
inhabit; and where vain, foolish, and worldly minded men imagine, that even
their houses shall continue forever, and their dwelling places to all
generations; where "they call their lands after their own names, Psalm xlix.11.
and set up pillars and monuments to eternize their memory! All these things
shall be dissolved; reduced to cinders, ashes and smoke; and pass away -- The
cloud-capt towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
And, like the basely fabric of a vision,
Leave not a wreck behind! Shakes.

Even the present ruins of the earth; the horrid remains of cities burnt, or
laid in heaps; of temples and monuments, of triumphal arches and pyramids, half
mouldered away, or overturned; the rubbish and ruins of ages, made and left by
inundations, storms and tempests, volcanos and earthquakes; these ruins shall
be themselves ruined, together with whatever is most beautiful and magnificent
in the world, and the world itself: All, all these things shall be dissolved;
and neither the form nor place of any of them be any more distinguished, or
remembered, when this last fire has done its appointed work!

WHAT changes, yea, what destruction analogous to this, when the earth and the
works that are therein shall be burnt up, may happen to other parts of this
visible creation, about the same time, I shall not now pretend to inquire, much
less to determine. But I dare almost be confident, that the holy scriptures
intimate somewhat of this sort to us; and that these numerous passages cannot
be tolerably explained to a sense merely metaphorical or figurative. And indeed
the most literal and obvious sense of scripture, should ever be adhered to,
till we see some plain and positive reason for departing from it; as, I must
confess, I am not able to do in the present case. Do we know that this is the
only sinful world, which may hereafter be ripe for destruction, and doomed
thereto? Or is it any more absurd and incongruous to suppose, that this whole
planetary or solar system, should at length "wax old," and "perish," be
"dissolved," and "pass away with a great noise;" and become a wide-extended
ruin in the creation of God, for a time, 'till the time of the renovation or
restitution of all things; Acts (...)
is there any thing more absurd or incredible in this supposition, I say, than
in supposing that this earth shall undergo such a dissolution? Perhaps there
may be; but I cannot tell in what respect: And I think the scriptures have
foretold the one, almost as plainly as they have the other. It might be added,
that the phenomenon of comets, or blazing-stars, give a degree of credibility
to this opinion, not to say of probability, notwithstanding some conjectural
accounts and solutions given of them, which do not favor it. However, this is
neither a time nor a place to philosophize upon the point, were one capable of
it.

LET it suffice for the present, that St. Peter tells us, not only that the
earth and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, but also that the
heavens being on fire shall be dissolved; the Psalmist, that they shall "wax
old and perish;" the Prophet, that the time is coming, when God will "shake not
only the earth, but also heaven;" St. John, that he saw in his vision, the sun
become black as sackcloth of hair, the "moon as blood," and the "stars falling
from heaven;" and our Savior himself, that the sun shall be darkened* and the
moon shall not give her light; and the (...) of heaven shall fall, and the
powers that are in heaven shall be shaken; Mark xiii.24, 25.
and in sine, that when the Apostle speaks of the subsequent renovation of the
things that are to be dissolved, according to the promise of God after this
mighty catastrophe, he says, "we look for new heavens" as well as a new earth.
2 Pet. iii.13.
Laying these things together, with some others which I have not time to
mention, we have at least, some reason to think that the destruction and fiery
dissolution, of which St. Peter speaks in the text and context, will not be
confined to this globe; though I do not pretend to determine how far it will
reach beyond it; or how many worlds may become fuel for this last burning, and
pass away with a great noise.

THIS earth, in which we are more immediately and particularly concerned, is
apparently hastening to that destruction, to which it is condemned, and was
foreordained, by its Creator; I mean to a dissolution by fire. Insomuch that
some of the old philosophers, not only saw and predicted that it would come to
this end; but even expressed their surprise, that it was not thus destroyed
before their own time. By the frequent hints, and allusions, and even plain
predictions, which are found in ancient, profane writers, respecting this
matter, it is not improbable that there had been some common tradition
concerning it, derived from Noah perhaps, and universally propagated amongst
the inhabitants of the earth, at its first peopling after the deluge. For some
of them speak of a future conflagration as certain, without assigning any other
reason for it, than that it was decreed by the fates, or that others had
asserted it before them; i. e. it was a tradition handed down from one
generation to another, from time immemorial. However, some philosophers were
doubtless confirmed in the belief of this traditionary doctrine, by observing
the preparations which were made in nature by the God thereof, for bringing
such a stupendous event to pass; the immense quantities of coal, sulphur, and
other combustible matter in the bowels, and upon the surface of the earth;
burning mountains, and subterraneous fires; the sudden eruption of fire and
flames in some places where they were least suspected; particularly when the
ground has been cracked and opened by earthquakes: For of this, history makes
mention. These, with various other things, made it appear propable to the
observing, that the element of fire would at length become predominant over
all. IT is not, perhaps, unworthy of remarking, that amongst the numerous
passages in the ancients, where mention is made of the future burning of the
world, the following well-known one, does not exempt even the SEA itself from
the common fate, how extravagant and incredible soever this may seem.

Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus,
Quo MARE, quo tellus, correptaque que regia coeli
Ardeat, et mundi moles operosa laboret.
BY the surprising transmutations which we daily see in nature, it seems as if
there was nothing but what might possibly be converted into that which is most
unlike itself; so that even the substance of water may perhaps acquire new
qualities, which, instead of extinguishing fire, shall render it proper fuel
for it. And it is observable, that St. John describes the "new earth" as being
without any sea at all, Rev. xxi.1. And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth;
for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and THERE WAS NO
MORE SEA. Vid. Nah. 1.4.


We daily tread, for aught we know, over huge burning lakes and caverns,
extending from country to country; some of which may not be very far from the
surface of the ground, the fire still struggling to get from its prison, and
naturally ascending. By which subterraneous fires, some have, not improbably,
accounted for the phenomenon of hot and boiling springs; which are so common in
many countries. Nor does the dry land only, seem to be thus undermined; but the
sea itself, if we may credit the accounts which some have given. IT is said
that, upon the concussion of earthquakes, flames and smoke have been seen to
find their way through the watery abyss, bursting out with great fury, and
ascending far above its surface. It is likewise said, that considerable islands
have been hove up in different parts of the sea, with cinders, and other
evident marks of fire upon them; and that some islands have been entirely sunk
by earthquakes, is not, I suppose, doubted by any. If the late surprising
accounts which some of our seafaring men have given, be in fact true,
concerning the effects of the late earthquake many leagues from land, it will
be a confirmation of what has been said above. For to what can that destruction
of the fish, both great and small, which they speak of, be so probably
attributed, as to some noxious steams and vapors, issuing at the rents and
chasms made in the bottom of the sea, by subaqueous sires? However, I would not
be too hasty in believing these accounts; much less, positive, supposing them
true, that this is the true solution of so remarkable, and I believe I may add,
unheard of, a phenomenon.


IN short, this world is already on fire, and has long been so: And although that
element has not yet got the mastery of all the rest, every where, it seems to
be gradually gaining the conquest of them. And if we regard that sure word of
prophecy, whereunto we ought to take heed, we must believe that it will at
length, at the appointed time, become victorious and triumphant: When this
earth, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, and all these things
shall be dissolved. But

THIRDLY, Let us in the next place inquire, when all these things shall be thus
dissolved? When this great event shall come to pass? or what will be the
forerunners, concomitants and consequents of it?

No one, I conclude, will imagine, that by, When this event shall come to pass,
I mean strictly and properly, how long it will be before it is accomplished?
how many days, months, years, or even ages? Which would be an inquiry, equally
fruitless and presumptuous. Neither the world's nativity, nor its dissolution
and death, can be calculated by any rules of astrology or philosophy; by human
arithmetic and art: Nor has God, whose word gave birth and being to it, and who
only knows its end, particularly and determinately revealed to us the time when
it shall fall to ruins, and be dissolved. This important period is only marked
out to us in scripture, by another, of which we are equally uncertain: Which is
rather informing us what shall be coincident with this event in point of time,
than telling us how soon it shall come to pass, or how long be deferred. The
holy scriptures have informed us in general, that it shall be accomplished at
Christ's second coming; his coming in glory and majesty to judge that world,
which he once came in "the form of a servant" to redeem. Thus in the preceding
context, St. Peter having said, that the heavens and the earth which now are,
are kept in store, reserved unto fire, immediately subjoins, against the day of
judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. Plainly intimating, as it appears to
me, not only that the future conflagration and the last judgment shall be
contemporary, or coincident in respect of time; but also, that the world is
thus reserved unto fire, partly, at least, for the place and scene of that
punishment and perdition, which awaits the wicked, then to be judged and
condemned. Agreably whereto, their sentence, as we have it in our Lord's own
words, will be, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire. Matthew. xxv.41.
What fire can so probably be intended here, as that by which this earth is
finally to be dissolved? this earth which, it is expressly said, is reserved
unto fire, against that day, and the perdition of the ungodly? But not to
digress. That the dissolution of all things, and the second coming of our Lord,
will be coincident, is still farther evident from this chapter; beyond which,
indeed, I need not go for the proof of this point. St. Peter's discourse here,
concerning the conflagration, seems plainly relative to, and occasioned by, the
prophetic view and foresight which he had of those "scoffers" who should
arise, saying with an air of insolent derision and triumph, Where is the
promise of his [i. e. Christ's] coming? For since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. Ver. 4.
That which follows in this chapter, seems chiefly designed as an answer to
such vain scoffers in every succeeding age, whose hearts are fully set in them
to do evil, because sentence against their evil works is not executed speedily.
Eccles. viii.11.
The standing, perpetual answer to such faithless mockers, and which contains,
at the same time, both an invitation to accept of mercy, and a threatening of
deserved vengeance at the appointed season; the standing answer to such
mockers, I say, is this, The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, [the
promise of his coming] as some men count slackness; but is long-suffering to
usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. But the day of the Lord will come, as a thief in the night, in the
which, (be pleased to observe the connection) in the which, the heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat,
the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Ver. 9, and 10.


YOU cannot but observe also, that the manner of expression in the text,
supposes that these things will be dissolved in the day of Christ's appearing:
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought ye to be -- looking for, and hasting unto, the coming of the day of God;
i. e. the day wherein they shall be thus dissolved: For it immediately follows,
wherein the heavens being on fire. etc. That which St. Peter before calls the
day of judgment, and "the day of the Lord;" and in the which, he assures us,
all these things shall be dissolved, he, in the text, calls "the day of GOD."
All days, times, and seasons, are indeed God's, in one sense; but that of our
Lord's coming to judge the quick and the dead, is eminently and emphatically
so. It may be called the day of God with peculiar propriety, as it is God who
has chosen, fixed and prae-determined it, for so grand and important a purpose.
For, in the language of St. Paul, God commands all men every where to repent;
because He has appointed a day, in the which He will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom He has ordained; whereof He has given
[sufficient and ample ground of] assurance unto all men, in that He has raised
him from the dead. Acts xvii.31, 32.
This is also emphatically the day of God, as He only knows when it will
arrive: For our Lord has said that there are some "times" and "seasons," which
it is not for us to know, and which the Father has put in his own power. Acts
i.7.
And concerning this important period in particular, our Savior has declared
saying, Of that day and of that hour knows no man, no not the angels which
are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. Mark xiii.32.
This is, moreover, emphatically the day of God, as His power, wisdom,
righteousness and glory; His goodness and faithfulness to the saints, and His
just severity against the workers of iniquity, will therein be made manifest,
and appear far more illustrious than they did before: as it is the time wherein
the mystery of God shall be finished, as He has declared to his servants the
prophets; all his works then appearing to be truth, and his ways judgment, though
clouds and darkness are now round about him; the day which shall reveal him to
be God indeed; the all-powerful and just Sovereign of the world; and which is,
therefore, called the day of the revelation of his righteous judgment. Romans
ii.5.


THIS is, I think, a plain, scriptural account, why that day of our Savior's
second appearing, which is sometimes styled the day of the Lord, and the day of
Christ, is here called the day of God: Nor is there any need of having recourse
to metaphysics, and scolastic divinity, for a solution. I shall just add, that
this day (...) God, of his fiery indignation, wherein all things ^^all be
dissolved, and in which all men shall receive the things done in the body, is
doubtless the time which the prophet Malachi had in view in the following
passage: Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the
wicked; between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. For behold
the day comes that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that
do wickedly, shall be as stubble; and the day that comes shall burn them up,
says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave neither root nor branch. But unto
you that fear my name, shall the sun of righteousness arise, etc. And agreably
hereto, and to St. Peter's account of the earth and heaven's being on fire, at
our Lord's second coming, St. Paul describes him as making his appearance in
flaming fire: It is a righteous thing, says he, for God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled, rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels,
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the gospel, -- when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe. 2 Thessalonians. i.6 -- 10.


IT seems, from the scripture account, that this great day of God, wherein all
men are to receive the things done in the body; and in which the earth, with
the works that are therein, shall be burnt up, shall be ushered in with some
astonishing phenomenon, or appearances, in the natural world; which shall be a
kind of monitory tokens and signals of its approach, whether regarded as such
or not, by a careless, profane and faithless world; such monitory signs and
tokens as those which, it is said, preceeded the destruction of Jerusalem; or
rather, far more amazing. It seems not improbable that the prophecy of Joel
ultimately, though perhaps not immediately, relates hereto: I will show wonders
in the heavens, and in the earth blood and fire and pillars of smoke: the sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and
terrible day of the Lord come. Chap. ii. ver. 30, 31.
In the same light we may consider the words of our blessed Savior: And there
shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the
earth distress of nations, with perplexity, the sea and the waves roaring;
men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which
are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken. And then
shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with power and great glory,
Luke xxi.25, -- 26, 27.
Agreably hereto, when the disciples asked our Lord, What should be the sign of
his coming, and of the end of the world? he first told them negatively, what
things should not, and then positively, what should be looked upon as signs
hereof. He enumerates many of the former, such as wars, and rumors of wars,
the appearing of false Christ's, sore persecutions, famines and earthquakes in
diverse places. Our Lord expressly admonished his disciples, not to be troubled
when they should see and hear of such things; for such things must needs be,
says he, but the end shall not be yet. Mark xiii.7. It appears, indeed, from
Rev. vi.12. that there shall actually be "a great earthquake" at the coming of
this day, or perhaps, a little preceding it: But earthquakes being common at
other times, and in all ages, such a phenomenon could not be properly spoken
of as a sign, that this day was very near at hand; or as a token of its speedy
approach.
However, our Savior, continuing the same discourse to his disciples, says,
But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the
moon shall not give her light, and the stars, etc. -- And then shall they see
the Son of man coming in the clouds, with great power and glory. Mark xiii.24,
25, 26.


I KNOW some interpret what is said in this chapter concerning the coming of
our Lord, of a figurative, and less proper coming, viz. as he came to destroy
Jerusalem, with the whole jewish polity. Though some things in our Savior's
discourse, seem to favor this supposition; yet, I must confess, I cannot but
look upon this as a very lean, jejune exposition of it. It has, evidently, a
farther view; looking forward to that far more august, glorious, and
universally interesting coming of our Lord, when he shall literally descend
from heaven, and all nations shall be gathered before him, to receive his
righteous sentence.

AND, indeed, there are some things in this discourse, which cannot possibly be
referred to that figurative coming of Christ before mentioned; but only to the
time of his coming to judge the quick and the dead: Particularly the verse
immediately following the passage last quoted -- And then shall he send his
angels, and shall gather his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part
of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven. Ver. 27.
When were, or when will be all the elect, the faithful and chosen of God, thus
gathered together by the ministration of angels, but when our Lord shall appear
the second time, without sin, unto salvation? This, surely, was not done when
Jerusalem was destroyed: But this, we know, will be done at the judgment of the
great day: Our Lord has particularly taught us so, in his application of that
well-known parable, concerning the tares and the wheat; wherein the householder
is introduced saying, Let both grow together until the harvest; and in the time
of harvest I will say to the reapers, gather ye together first the tares, and
bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn. Matthew.
13.30.
Part of our Savior's explanation of this parable, is as follows: "The
harvest," says he, is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels. As
therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire, so shall it be in the
end of the world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity;
and shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing
of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their Father. Ver. 39 -- 43.


YOU see then, with what pomp and glory, with what astonishing signs, this day
of God shall be introduced; what is the great business and design of it; and
what shall close it, the utter perdition of ungodly men, and the crowning of
the righteous with unfading glory; this world, which is now the scene of wicked
men's crimes, then probably becoming the place of their torment, "a lake
burning with fire and brimstone;" and that heaven, far above the stars, which
is now the object of good men's desires and hopes, becoming the place of their
residence; that heaven which cannot be shaken, and to which no flames can
ascend, besides those sacred ones, with which the bosoms of saints and angels
shall forever burn; that temple of God, not made with hands, whence the
righteous "shall go no more out"; Rev. iii. 12.
but, being made "pillars" therein, shall stand firm, when the visible heavens
and earth which now are, shall wax old and perish; and "all these things shall
be dissolved." Well might the apostle call this, "The great day" Jude, ver. 6.
, considering the great things that are to be transacted, and the interesting
events that are to be accomplished, in it: -- The Son of man to descend from
heaven in flaming fire, and to sit upon the throne of his glory, thousands
standing before him, and ten thousand ministering unto him; all they who sleep
in the dust of the earth, to be awaked by the voice of the archangel, and the
trump of God; they, together with those who shall then be alive, and "changed"
1 Cor. 15.51.
; even all the posterity of Adam, to be gathered before the august tribunal;
the righteous to be absolved, and all the redeemed and "ransomed of the Lord",
to ascend with a convoy of holy Angels to the heavenly Zion, with songs, and
everlasting joy upon their heads; Isai. 35.10.
all the wicked to be condemned, together with the rebel angels now reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, Jude, ver. 6.
for that purpose; both "to be sent to that region of woe, prepared for them by
the righteous Sovereign of all; and one world at least, to be "burnt up," and
all things that are therein to be "dissolved": I say, one world at least;
because, for any thing we know to the contrary, or have reason to think, there
may be more wicked worlds than one, which shall, at this period, undergo the
same fiery doom and dissolution, agreeable to what has been said above. But how
many, or how few soever, there may be of such worlds, we have no reason to
think that MORE THAN ONE has been redeemed by the blood of the Son of God,
after having taken on himself the nature of its guilty inhabitants: Much less
have we reason to think, that if others had been thus redeemed, they would have
neglected so great salvation; that they would have trodden under foot the son
of God, accounting his blood, wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing;
and doing despite unto the spirit of grace! Heb. 10.29.


HAVING thus considered, What things those are, all which are to be dissolved;
what is intended by their dissolution; and when this great and interesting
event will come to pass, together with some of its forerunners, concomitants
and consequents; I am, in the afternoon, to urge the certainty of these things,
as a motive to universal holiness, making some application of the subject,
relative to the present season, and to those occurrences in divine providence,
which have led me to it: For seeing we look for such things, and have so lately
been thus reminded of them, "what manner of persons ought we to be!" --

SERMON II. The expected Dissolution of all Things, urged as a Motive to
universal Holiness.
2 PETER III. 11, 12. SEEING then that all these things shall be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,

LOOKING for, and hasting unto, the coming of the day of GOD? --


WE considered, in the morning, What things those are, of which St. Peter
speaks in the text; all which are to be dissolved: Viz, whatever is
comprehended in the context under these terms, the "heavens", the "elements",
the "earth", and the "works that are therein".

WE also considered what is meant by the dissolution of these things; Viz,
their destruction by fire.

And,

LASTLY, we considered when this great and interesting event shall come to
pass; Viz. at our Savior's second appearing, to judge the world in
righteousness; at that period, which is called in the text and context, the
"day of judgment," the "day of the Lord," and the "day of GOD."

I NOW proceed, as was proposed, and in conformity to the original scope of the
passage, to improve this reflection, that all these things shall be thus
dissolved, at the mentioned period, as a motive to excite you to universal
holiness, and thereby to prepare for the time when this event shall come to
pass. For seeing it shall assuredly arrive; seeing that all these things shall
certainly be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness, looking for, and hasting unto, the coming of this
day of God! Having urged this argument in a general way, I shall then improve
it with a more particular reference to the late alarming occurrences in divine
providence, which seem so naturally to lead our thoughts to the great and
general catastrophey of the world, when all these things shall not be only
shaken, but dissolved; and when we must "all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ."

BUT though I shall urge the consideration of these things, as a fit, and,
indeed, the fittest motive, to practical piety, and holiness in all our
conversation; yet I shall neither "speak wickedly for God," nor designedly
impose upon and terrify men, by representing the time when they shall come to
pass, as being either certainly, or even probably, very near at hand. For
though some might possibly think it a pious, I could not, for my own part, but
think it an impious pretense, that such an artifice would be commendable, since
it might be a means of promoting that which is good; and of putting people,
without any delay, upon working out their salvation with fear and trembling. No
good can be eventually done, by handling the word of God deceitfully, or by
those "hidden things of dishonesty," which all ought to "renounce." The words
of St. Paul may well be considered as a caution against such kind of fetches,
and cunning artifices: If the truth of God has more abounded through my lie,
UNTO HIS GLORY, why also am I yet judged as a sinner? And not rather, (as we be
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say) Let us do evil that good
may come? whose damnation is is just. Romans iii.7, 8.
And as to the particular point now under consideration; though this same
apostle was, probably, as much set to promote the glory of God, and the
salvation of men, as any other preacher of righteousness ever was, excepting
the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, who was [so
eminently] faithful to Him that appointed him; Heb. iii.1, 2.
and though he so often reasoned of righteousness, temperance and judgment to
come, causing some of the most abandoned sinners to "tremble;" yet St. Paul, I
say, never endeavored to make sinners tremble, by such means; by representing
the day of God, as nearer at hand than it really was. So far was he from doing
thus, that when the church at Thessalonica, as it seems, had mistaken his
meaning in his first epistle, thinking he had intimated that the time of
Christ's coming was very near, he, in his second epistle to that church, took
particular care to correct their mistake, beseeching them even by the coming of
Christ, not to think that he would come so soon as they imagined. "Now we
beseech you, brethren," says he, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by
our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be
troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that
the day of Christ is at hand. Let no Man deceive you by any means. 2 Thessalonians.
ii.1, 2, 3.
You see how sollicitous the apostle was, lest people should be misled and
deceived, though with respect to a point, wherein a deception might, in the
opinion of some, be rather advantageous than prejudicial to them.

IN humble imitation of this blessed apostle, or rather of Him, in whose mouth
there was never any guile, I now say, Let none be soon shaken, or troubled, by
word, as from me, -- as that the day of Christ is [even now] at hand; though it
is so long since the apostle wrote. I will not, indeed presume to say
positively, that that day is not at hand; but would rather say to you, Watch,
-- (for ye know not when the master of the house comes; whether at even, or at
midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the morning) lest coming suddenly, he
find you sleeping: And what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. Mark xiii.35.
It is not the nearness of this day, respecting which point I do not presume to
determine any thing, but the certainty of it, and its importance to you, that I
would urge as a motive to holiness in all your conversation. And, indeed, were
I to give my real opinion, it would be, that this great day of the Lord, and
consequently the dissolution of all these things, is still very remote in
futurity. For I humbly conceive, from the series of prophecies, particularly in
the Revelation of St. John, respecting the things that were to come to pass
before the consummation of all things, that many of the events therein
predicted, are not yet accomplished; and that many ages are necessary for the
fulfillment of them.

HOWEVER, I may be mistaken; and, as was intimated before, would be cautious in
what I say upon this point. For I had much rather, from the certainty that this
day will come, sooner or later, exhort you to be circumspect, and diligent in
preparing for it, than, by confidently asserting that it is at a great
distance, even seem to give any countenance to a contrary behavior. I say,
"even seem" to do so: because our obligation to be holy in all our
conversation, would not really and properly speaking, be lessened, even though we
were assured that the day of God was very remote; provided it will certainly
come at last. For, as was intimated above, it is not so much from the supposed
nearness or distance of this period, that our obligation, in point of reason,
arises, to make preparation for it, as from the nature of the thing itself, the
certainty of it, and the concern we have in it: And consequently, its supposed,
or even known remoteness, could not much, if at all, diminish our obligation to
be universally holy, this day being certainly future, and hourly approaching.
And that which is certainly future, and still drawing nearer, will as certainly
be at length present, however remote now. Truly wise and provident men will
live as "soberly, righteously and godly in the world," though they may believe
the day of the Lord is far distant, as if they knew it was at hand. For ought
not men, in poin^ of reason, duty and interest, to abstain from those sins,
which will certainly damn them a thousand or a million years hence, as if they
would damn them within an hundred, fifty, or ten? On the other hand, will not a
man who acts upon the principles of reason, be as sollicitous to become
entitled to eternal life and glory in the kingdom of heaven, although he believes
it will be long before he can come to the full possession and enjoyment
thereof, provided it is certainly attainable, as if he might arrive at this
possession and enjoyment in a much shorter time? When the torments of hell are
hazarded, and the eternal joys of heaven are the prize, and the reality of both
is firmly believed, their nearness or remoteness in point of time, is scarce of
any weight or consideration at all, in the mind of a reasonable, thoughtful
man: Eternity swallows up all; and, in the estimation of such a person, equals
all limited, temporary durations and distances. So that I had almost applied to
a truly wise man, whose care and providence for himself rap him into scenes and
ages to come, even into all futurity, what is said in the context concerning
the all-wise God, whose care and providence extend to all things, and to whom
are known all his works from the beginning; -- That with him, one day is as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. Ver. 26.


BUT of how little consequence it is to us, in a practical sense, whether the
day of God, and of the dissolution of all things, is near at hand, or far
distant, appears still more plainly and obviously from a consideration of the
shortness and uncertainty of human life, and of our probationary state. For if
we are to put off these frail, decaying tabernacles in a few years at farthest,
and, possiibly, in a few days, hours, or even moments; if this is our only time
of trial; if death will both find and leave us, either prepared or unprepared
to appear before the great tribunal; and if as death finds and leaves us, so we
shall be found of our judge at last, holy still, or still unholy and filthy; if
these things are so, surely we ought to be as diligent in our preparations for
the coming of the Day of God, as if it were nigh, even at the door. Besides;
if, immediately at death, we are received into regions of bliss, or go to
realms of woe; there to remain in a separate, unembodied state, either in a
joyful expectation, or in anxious fears and apprehensions of the great day, and
of our final sentence; if this is the case, of what great, or rather, of how
little moment is it to us, whether that period is now very near, or very
remote? Do you imagine that Lazarus, when he died, and was "carried by angels
into Abraham's bosom", Luke xvi.19 -- 26.
then though it himself the less wise; or that the rich man, when he died, and in
hell [ hades] lift up his eyes, being in torments, Luke xvi.19 -- 26.
accounted himself the less foolish and improvident, because the day of
judgment was then at a great distance! Of how little consideration was the
nearness or remoteness of the day of God, to either of them, when they had both
finished their mortal course? when the one had made sure his title to eternal
life, so that he was past danger of missing of it; and the other had neglected
to do so, in the season for it, and till it was too late? when the one was
actually in a state of rest and joy, with hopes full of immortality, the
earnest of that far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory, which awaits
the righteous in the day of Christ's appearing; and the other was in a state of
torment, in a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation,
the earnest of that far more exceeding and eternal weight of infamy and woe,
which awaits the wicked in the same terrible day? when there was an impassable
"gulf fixed between them' Ver. 26.
, so that neither of them could remove to the other, to be a sharer in his
bliss, or a partaker of his plagues?

LET us, therefore, remember that however remote that day of God may be,
wherein all these things shall be dissolved; yet the earthly house of this our
tabernacle, this mortal body, will soon be dissolved; perhaps much sooner than
we may now imagine: For what is your Life? It is even a vapor that appears
for a little time, and then vanishes away. James iv.14.
Should you attain to the greatest measure of man's days in this age of the
world, alas! even such a life is "spent as a tale that is told". But sickness,
and a thousand casualties, as we term them, may speedily put an unexpected
period to your days. We may be blasted by a stroke from heaven above; or the
earth from beneath may open her mouth, and swallow us up, at a time when we are
most secure, and least apprehensive of danger. For we daily tread upon, and
nightly slumber over, treacherous, deceitful ground, to which we can scarce
trust our bodies and estates; and which is, surely, far less to be relied on,
when the salvation of our souls is at stake, and eternity hangs upon a moment!
And as we are every moment liable to death, by one means or other, let us
remember that this is much the same thing, as if we were every moment liable to
be called before the judgment seat of Christ; and that, with respect to us, all
these things are then dissolved, and pass away, when we ourselves are
dissolved, and pass away from them.

LEAVING, therefore, the nearness or remoteness, call it which you please, of
this day of God, wholly out of the question for the present, as what is really
of little moment to us, and what scarce at all concerns practical religion, in
the eye of reason; let us now consider the thing itself, the dissolution of all
things, and the day of our Lord's appearing, only as certain; that so we may
see what manner of persons we ought to be in all holy conversation and
godliness, looking for, and hasting unto, the coming of this important period.
Represent to yourselves, then, in thought and imagination, and with a firm,
fixed faith in the truth of the scriptures; I say, represent to yourselves this
day of God, when the elements shall melt with fervent heat; when the earth and
the works that are therein shall be burnt up; when all these terrestrial
things, and the heavens themselves being on fire, shall be dissolved; when the
Lord himself shall be revealed from the highest heaven, where he now sits
enthroned; revealed in flaming fire, taking vengeance on the ungodly, who obey
not his gospel; and admired in all them that believe; when you, and I, and all
nations, shall stand before him; and, in consequence of his righteous sentence,
some shall go away into everlasting punishment, and others into life eternal.
Matt. xxv.46.
If you believe the words of Him who cannot lie, you believe that these sayings
are true and faithful. And, what is the proper practical inference from them,
every man's own heart tells him. For if you give credit to these things, I need
not, surely, inform you, but only refer it to your own reason and conscience,
as St. Peter does in the text, What manner of persons ye ought to be, in all
holy conversation and godliness; how circumspect in all your behavior; how
careful to avoid every known sin; how diligent in the practice of every known
duty; how pious toward God, and charitable toward man; how sober and
temperate in all things; how sollicitous lest in any thing you displease Him,
who is now your righteous Lawgiver, and will hereafter be your Judge; how
greatly concerned in all things, and at all times, to approve yourselves to
Him; how you ought to live and converse from day to day, under a lively,
animated sense of these things, doing every thing, whatsoever you do in word or
deed, in the name of the Lord Jesus; how dead to all these things which are to
be dissolved; and how alive unto Him, who is the same yesterday, to day and for
ever: redeeming the time in preparing for so interesting an hour; or, as it is
expressed in the latter part of the text, looking for, and hasting unto, the
coming of the day of God. By "looking for" this day is doubtless meant,
habitually expecting it, waiting for it, assuring ourselves that it will come,
and will not tarry. The other phrase, hasting unto it, is pretty singular; and
it may be difficult to ascertain, precisely and critically, the meaning of it:
Nor shall I, at present, spend time in doing it. It will bear several senses,
somewhat different from, though allied to, each others. But in general, I
suppose, it means advancing toward this day, by running our christian race
swiftly, with the utmost diligence; and making progress in holiness. For as he
who slumbers and sleeps, living as without God in the world, and as if there
were no such day approaching, may be said to "put it far away" from him, and to
turn away from it, endeavoring to avoid and shun it; so, on the other hand, he
who always lives and acts with a view to it, keeping it uppermost in his
thoughts, diligently preparing for it, and having his loins at all times girded
about, like a good and faithful servant, who, standing at the door, waits his
Lord's return; he that does thus, I say, may be said to haste unto the coming
of this day: He, as it were, runs to meet it in its approach; and, in though it, in
faith, and holy hope, anticipates its arrival, making it present to himself,
however distant. This it is in general, to look for, and hasten unto, the
coming of the day of God. But to return.

YOU cannot but see, and even feel, the force of St. Peter's argument in the
text; the reasonableness and wisdom of being holy in all our conversation; and
the great, the unspeakable folly and danger, of being otherwise, seeing that
all these things are to be dissolved, and such a day of retribution is
approaching. To imagine, that any one did not both see and feel the force of
this reasoning, would be equally a reflection upon his head and heart. You know
that it is a thing of infinite concernment to you, and to all men in general,
to be prepared for this decisive moment, by holiness in heart and life: Because
all men have immortal souls, either to be saved or lost; and because all will,
in this day, be called to render an account of themselves, to the great Judge
of quick and dead; when God will bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing; and when we shall all receive, respectively, the things done in
the body, according to that we have done, whether it be good or bad.

WITH how great weight and force should this argument come upon the hearts and
consciences of wicked men? the hearts and consciences of those, who have never
had the fear of God before their eyes? who have been, throughout their lives,
and those perhaps long ones, provoking the Holy One of Israel, by their
unrighteousness and oppression, their lewdness, debaucheries and blasphemies?
the hearts and consciences of those who have been continually sinning, not only
against the light and the God of nature, but also against the light and grace
of the gospel; against the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Father of mercies? of those who, instead of seeking the things that are above,
and laying up for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, a
treasure in the heavens, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, have been
setting their affections only on things on the earth? the things of this
present world, already doomed to destruction, the fashion of which passes
away; and which, together with all the works and treasures, and the things of
it, shall at length be burnt up and dissolved? How unwise? how improvident? how
guilty are such men? And how much does it concern them to "break off their sins
by righteousness?" to be reconciled to God by repentance toward Him, and
"faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ"? and to walk before God in holiness and
righteousness the remaining part of their lives, redeeming the time; that so
they may finally escape that condemnation to which they are exposed, and that
terrible destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power, which they cannot, otherwise, avoid in the day of his appearing? When
that period shall arrive, alas! what will it avail any, to have lived in
pleasure on the earth, and been wanton? what, for a little while, to have
nourished their hearts, as "in a day of slaughter"? James v.5.
what, to have received that honor that comes from men? what, to have acquired
great wealth, and large possessions in the world? yea, what, to have "gained
the whole world", were that possible? Will the remembrance of former, guilty
pleasures, alleviate? or will it not rather embitter, the future torments of
the wicked? Will the remembrance of past honors, especially of unmerited ones,
sooth the vanity of ungodly men, when they shall arise to "shame, and
everlasting contempt?" Will a reflection upon "riches gotten, and not by
right," and which will then be no more, profit the miser in the day of wrath;
and make him rich toward God? Or, in fine, would the gain of the whole world
profit him, whose soul is lost by gaining it? and who now perceives that same
beloved world, even worse than lost to himself, dissolving in flames and
himself tormented therein!

LET irreligious and profane, let dissolute, proud, ambitious and covetous men,
if there are any such present, calmly and seriously think of these things, I
beseech them both by the mercies of God, and the terrors of the Lord; and by
the love which they bear to themselves. Go not on, treasuring up unto
yourselves wrath against this day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God; who will render to every man according to his deeds -- unto
them that obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish!
Despise not the riches of God's goodness, forbearance and long-suffering,
knowing that this goodness leads thee "to repentance." Contemn neither the
gracious "promises, nor the awful threatenings of his word; for these are
neither "cunningly devised fables", nor foolish, "idle tales"; but the oracles
of infallible wisdom, truth and righteousness: And the heavens shall reveal the
iniquity, and the earth rise up against Job. 20.27.
the folly of those, who practically disregard them! Neglect not, therefore,
the opportunity which you now enjoy for making your peace with God, through his
own dear Son, who was made sin for you, "tasting death for every man". For if
thou despises the revelation both of God's wrath and of his mercy; if thou
hardenest thy neck and thy heart against him, setting at naught all his counsel
and reproof; if thou do thus, think not, O man! whosoever thou art, that thou
shall finally escape his righteous judgment. Thou will call upon him, at a time
when he will not answer: thou will seek him early, but not find him.

THERE is a hand constantly writing bitter things against the irreclaimable
workers of iniquity; not, indeed, upon the decaying "walis" Dan. 5.5.
of their palaces or dwellings; but on tables more durable than brass or
adamant! the eternal leaves of those books which shall be opened, when the
dead, small and great, shall stand before God, to be judged out of the things
which are written in the books, according to their works. Rev. 20.12.
And though the unfaithful, the foolish and wicked servant, may now "say in his
heart, My Lord delayeth his coming" Mat. 24.48.
; yet there is Another who has said, Behold! He comes with clouds, and every
eye shall see him; and they also which pierced him; and all kindreds of the
earth shall wail because of him: even so, Amen! Rev. 1.7.


BUT this, surely, is a subject, in which good men are concerned, as well as
the wicked and disobedient. For since we all expect such things, the
dissolution of the world, and eternal judgment, this ought to quicken the best
of men in their preparations for the day of God; to put them upon cleansing
themselves, as far as is consistent with the nature of the present state, from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Accordingly the apostle does not say, What manner of persons ought ye to be, in
this or the other particular virtues or graces of christianity (...) but, in
ALL holy conversation and godliness? Plainly intimating how universal our
holiness ought to be, and what an high degree of sanctity it becomes us to
aspire at, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before; and thus pressing toward the mark for the prize
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus Col. 3.13, 14.
. It is, if I mistake not, more especially to good men, the sincere followers
of Christ, that St. Peter addresses himself, in the following language, just
after the text: Wherefore, beloved, says he, seeing ye look for such things, be
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, withspot and blameless. Ver. 14.
It is great labor and watchfulness, an eminent degree of sanctity, and
christian perfection, which the apostle expresses, and to which he exhorts us
in these words: -- Be diligent -- without spot, and blameless. Even good men
are often far more "slothful" in the great business of human life; and less
"fervent in spirit", while they are "serving the Lord", than they ought to be.
They have sometimes very considerable "spots" and blemishes, in their lives and
religious characters; such as are justly "blameable" in the sight of God; and
the consciousness of which, could not but give them great disquietude, and
prevent their having peace and tranquillity of mind, were they actually to see
the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, in the glory of his father, and
all the holy angels with him. St. Peter, therefore, here admonishes us to be
diligent in getting rid of all such spots, and stains, and blemishes; to
cleanse ourselves from every kind and degree of sin; from all unrighteousness;
from every thing unbecoming our holy profession: That, being thus blameless and
harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, and shining as lights in the world,
we may possess our souls in patience, in expectation of the future judgment,
and the dissolution of all things: That we may enjoy a settled calm, and
serenity of soul, in a consciousness of the rectitude of our hearts and
manners: And that, instead of being terrified and amazed, and filled with
anxious fears and apprehensions, should our Lord suddenly appear, we might then
lift up our heads with peace, and even with confidence and joy, knowing that
our redemption, which before drew nigh, is now actually come.

THIS, I suppose, is St. Peter's meaning. In order to our being found of our
Lord in peace at his coming, it is necessary that we should be "diligent" in
our preparations for it, being without spot and blameless And agreably hereto,
St. John informs us, that our love must be made perfect, that we may have
boldness in the day of judgment -- For there is no fear in love; but perfect
love casts our fear: because all fear has torment, he that fears, is not
made perfect in love. 1 John iv.17, 18.
Through this perfection in love, we shall assure our hearts before him. For if
our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.
[But] Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward
God. Chap. iii. ver. 19, 20, 21.
A man's heart must, or at least always ought, in some degree, to misgive and
condemn him, till he is made perfect in love, in the sense of St. John; always,
while he is conscious of moral and sinful imperfections in himself: And in the
same degree that his own heart condemns him, will his confidence toward God
fail him; and the less boldness will he have to appear before him in judgment.
For he cannot but be sensible that God is greater than his heart, and knows
all things.

LET us therefore, my Brethren, seeing that we look for such things, be
circumspect in all our deportment, reforming whatever may be amiss in us; and
taking for our pattern in holiness, Him who once appeared in human flesh, and
has left us an example that we should follow his steps. Let us keep our hearts
with all diligence; let us watch over all our thoughts, desires, words, and
actions, carefully avoiding every thing unbecoming our holy profession and
character; our high calling of God in Christ Jesus, and our glorious
expectations from Him. Let it be our great concern to glorify God and our
Redeemer, and to be serviceable to the world, while we live in it; letting no
opportunity escape us, either for getting real good to ourselves, or doing it
to others. Let us turn our affections from the worthless things of this life,
of this perishing and dissolving world, to the things that are above, in that
kingdom which "cannot be shaken;" in that city which has foundations, whose
builder and maker is God. -- Love not the world, neither the things that are in
the world -- For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world:
And the world passes away, and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of
God, abides for ever. 1 John ii.15, 16, 17.


SUCH manner of persons ought we to be; girding up the loins of our mind, being
sober, and hoping unto the end, for the grace that is to be bro't unto us at
the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. i, 13.
when all these terrestrial things shall be dissolved. He that has this hope
in him, purifieth himself: And if we are thus holy in all conversation and
godliness; if we thus look and hope for, and hasten unto, the coming of the day
of God; if we are thus diligent, thus without spot, thus blameless and
harmless; we shall surely be found of our Judge in peace, whenever he comes;
and give him a joyful welcome. For it can scarce be conceived possible for a
christian, who thus walks with God; who walks by faith, and not by sight; whose
conversation is thus habitually in heaven, from whence he also looks for the
Savior; for one, whose fellowship is thus with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ; and who is thus made perfect in love, and love in him; I say, it
can scarce be conceived possible for such a person to be thrown into any great
perturbation of spirit, and filled with anguish and amazement, though he should
see the heavens which have received, again opened to reveal, the Son of man;
though he should behold him descending in flaming fire; though he should find
the earth tottering and failing under him; the world dissolving around him; the
powers of heaven shaken over him, and the stars falling, as a fig tree casting
her untimely figs, when she is shaken of mighty winds! No: I should rather
think that such a man as is described above, would then lift up his head with
joy, welcoming this day of God, and his descending Savior with an -- Hosanna
in the highest! This, O my soul! is the day, the great, the blessed day, of
which thou have so often heard and thought; and looked and prepared for! This
is the glorious time, which put^ a period to all thy labors, and tears, and
sorrows! This the day, which manumits and delivers the poor prisoner of earth,
from the bondage of corruption; and in^^ates thee in the glorious liberties of
the sons of God! Faithful and true is he that said, Behold I come quickly!
Yonder is He! He, whom not having seen, thou before lovedst: But now thou
beholdest thy salvation and thy Savior! Hasten to meet Him! -- These, or
suchlike sentiments, I should think, would naturally arise in the breast of a
man, in whom love was made perfect; that love which casts out fear, -- on
beholding the Son of man coming in the clouds, with great power and glory, to
perfect that salvation on a throne, which he began on a cross. For surely, it
is not the absence, but the presence of a friend and beloved object, that is
pleasing and delightful to us. And if we loved our blessed Redeemer as
perfectly as we ought to do, and served him as faithfully, I am persuaded this
would not only inspire us with boldness in the day of his appearing; but also
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. And if we did not love this world and
the things of it, beyond due measure, the prospect thereof dissolving in
flames, could minister neither grief nor terror to us; even though the present
visible heavens perished with them: Especially since we, according to our
Lord's promise, look both for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness.

BUT let me now close this subject with some reflections relative to those late
occurrences in divine providence, which led my thoughts to it. We have had
several visitations of the same sort, in this country, before; some of which
have not been inconsiderable: And, indeed, no EARTHQUAKE can, in itself, be
accounted so. An Earthquake is, in its own nature, awful, and terrifying to the
mind of man, even though, comparatively speaking, it may be small. He that will
turn an Earthquake into a jest, and make light of it; or he who will pretend to
out-brave one, and to preserve an unruffled mind when the foundations of the
world are shaken under him; (unless it be upon the principles of religion, of
faith and hope in God) he that can do thus, I say, ought to be accounted a fool
or a madman; and, accordingly, to have an apartment assigned to him in bedlam
by authority, if his friends and relations should not take proper care of him.
But though, as was said above, we, in this country, have diverse times before
been visited and admonished in this way; yet I think it is generally
acknowledged, that the first of the late Earthquakes, was both greater, and of
longer continuance, than any other which has been known amongst us; the effects
of it, which I need not enumerate to you, being certainly much more
considerable. I shall say nothing concerning the natural cause, or causes of
Earthquakes, which may perhaps be various; that being, as I apprehend, quite
foreign from the business of preaching, and therefore, at best, impertinent in
a sermon upon such an occasion. But I must just remind you, that all things and
events, whether natural or preternatural, are under one, supreme, uniform
DIRECTION, unless there is either no God, or more than One. The consequence of
which is, that even natural effects and events, are to be traced up to this
supreme, original cause of all things, whose counsel and providence govern the
world; and His hand, to be acknowledged in them.

MY business, therefore, is to make a religious improvement of these
visitations of divine providence: And, by the assistance and blessing of Him,
who does great things past finding out, and wonders without number, Job ix.10.
to set home upon, and fix in your minds and consciences, those sentiments of
religion, which ought to be, and I doubt not are, in some measure, awakened
therein, by these occurrenrences; those sentiments concerning the power,
majesty, and universal dominion of God, and your dependence upon him; those
sentiments concerning the great business of human life; concerning death, a
future state, the dissolution of all things, and eternal judgment; which these
dispensations of providence are so naturally adapted to produce in the minds,
and to impress upon the consciences of men.

As the natural and moral world are under one and the same common direction or
government; so God's end in all things, however various and diverse, is really
one and uniform. There is a subordination of one thing to another; and a vast
apparent variety amongst them; but there is also a connection and dependence of
one with and upon, another; and all tend to the same point at last; the moral
perfection and happiness of creatures capable of it, or the glory of God;
which, in any good and intelligible sense, seems to amount to the same thing.
Accordingly, even we can see innumerable things in God's natural government
over the world, and in the common course of his providence, which are wisely
ordered with respect to his moral government; being suited and adapted,
considering what our frame is, to promote, not a superstitious fear, but a just
reverence of Him, in the minds of men; a religious sense of his wisdom, power
and goodness; and of the obligations which we are under to him; that is, in
others words, to promote religion and righteousness amongst men: So that the
ultimate end of them is moral, though the things themselves may be, and are
natural; and though other subordinate ends may generally, if not always, be
answered by them in God's natural government; the whole of which, as was
intimated before, is subordinate to his moral, and conducted with a view
thereto. Thus all those effects, however natural, common and familiar, which
display the perfections and glory of God, are plain, though silent admonitions
of his providence, to reverence and love, to adore and serve him.

BUT in this light we may more especially consider whatever effects or events
in the natural world, are stupendous and great; and which, partly from their
unusualness, though not wholly so, but from their natural majesty and grandeur
also, strike the mind with a certain awe and solemnity, better known than it
can be described or explained. All these things, especially when any
apprehension of harm or danger is connected with them, have a peculiar tendency
to lead our thoughts up to the great Creator, Upholder, and Governor of the
universe: And a succession of them, at proper intervals, contributes not a
little, as I imagine, to rouse the attention of mankind to, and fix it upon,
those things of a moral and religious concernment, which ought to be attended
to even without them; and so to preserve that sense of God and religion in the
world, which, without them, would, perhaps, be lost out of it in a few
generations. For such is the make of man, that if all things should go on in
the world in one even, uniform manner and tenor, nothing of this sort occuring
from one age to another, to alarm and arrest our attention, it is not unlikely
that mankind would grow forgetful of God; and, by degrees, fall into a total
skepticism and infidelity; the certain consequence of which, is great depravity
of manners. Nor is it unworthy of observing here, that the reason which those
scoffers, walking after their own lusts, spoken of in the context; who say,
Where is the promise of his coming? that the reason, I say, which they assign
for their infidelity and skepticism is, -- Since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were -- Ver. 4.


I WILL hazard the imputation of superstition so far as to confess, that when I
get into this train of thought and reflection, which is not seldom, I cannot
but consider what I have now been mentioning, viz. the turning of men's thoughts
and attention to God, as the moral, ultimate end of remarkable tempests; of
great storms of wind, thunder, lightning and hail, especially at unusual
seasons of the year; of luminous and strange appearances in the sky and
heavens; of the aurora borealis, comets and blazing meteors; of the mighty
swellings, roarings and inundations of the sea, which are sometimes observed;
of the eruptions of volcanos; and more especially of Earthquakes. These, and
suchlike things, I doubt not, are all designed in providence to awaken the
attention of a careless, sinful world, from time to time, to religion. And though
we have not the least reason to think them preter-natural; yet those must have
but very low and unworthy conceptions of the infinite wisdom of God, who
imagine he could not have originally planned, adjusted and adapted them, to the
moral state of the world; so that, without any miraculous interposition of his,
they should occur at such times and places, in all succeeding generations,
wherein they would best subserve the ultimate end of his government. And if
this is the case, it is plain that exactly the same religious improvement is to
be made of them, as if they were the immediate, preternatural exertions of his
power. And, indeed, so little are we able to penetrate into, or fully to
comprehend their causes, and laws, that I had almost called them a sort of
natural miracles; the general, moral and ultimate design of which, is the same
with that of preter-natural, or real ones.

SOME of the things mentioned, have a more immediate tendency than others of
them, to promote religion in the world; I mean those which, by putting us in
fear for ourselves, and by sensibly and directly convincing us of our own
weakness and dependent condition, lead us to almighty God as our only refuge,
and the great object of our trust; giving us, at the same time, a demonstration
more convincing than any merely rational one, of the danger of offending him:
Put them in fear, O Lord! says the Psalmist, that that the nations may know
themselves to be but men. And when men once thoroughly know themselves to be but
men, weak, helpless, dependent creatures, they cannot well help knowing also,
that God is GOD; the mighty Lord and Sovereign of all, who does his will in
the heavens above, in the earth below, and "in all keep places"; and
consequently, that it is equally their duty and interest, by reverencing and
obeying him, to secure his favor and protection. When we behold the majesty of
God in the stormy wind and tempest, while his voice makes the hinds to calve,
rending the lofty sons of the forest, and the very rocks and mountain, in
pieces; when we behold the mighty works of God in the sea, and upon the dry
land; how he either raises or stilleth the waves and raging of the one; and
shakes the other with his nod, or bids it be rest, and it obeys; when we
behold these, and suchlike manifestations of God's power "There is no power
but of God," in a Sense different from that which seems to be originally
intended by the apostle. Secondary causes, as we term them, do not act
independently of Him. In true philosophy, as well as in religion, all the
exertions of power which we behold, are only so many manifestations of the
power of Him, of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all things.
and majesty, I say, it is not possible for the most skeptical of us to doubt,
whether it is not a thing of the last importance to us to be the objects of his
favor and loving kindness; and consequently to reverence him, and to do his
will, as the way to become so.

IT is evident that this is actually, in some degree, the moral effect of these
stupendous manifestations of God's power, in the course of his providence;
which, by the way, is one argument that this is the moral end of them. An
Earthquake, in particular, has all the force of a thousand syllogisms,
addressed merely to the understanding. It at once speaks to, and convinces the
heart; finding, if I may so express it, a shorter and directer road to a man's
conscience, than that which lies through his head, in which there are often many
meanders and labyrinths. It makes a man at once see and feel that he is
nothing; and that God is all, and in all. Though void of reason, it reasons more
effectually than an Apostle; or, at least, shakes those out of their
irreligious, skeptical principles, for a time, who are proof against other
arguments. Or, if people have not before been positive disbelievers of the
being of a God, of a future state, and of religious obligations in general; but
only too inattentive to these things in a practical sense, through the cares and
pleasures of this life, and the deceitfulness of riches; in this case, I say,
such a visitation of providence, brings these important truths home to men's
breasts and bosoms* it immediately and unanswerably convicts them of their
improvidence and guilt, in having been thus unmindful of the God that made
them, whose they are, and whom they ought to serve; in whose hands their breath
is, and whose are all their ways. It gives them a feeling, tho'rough
apprehension of the unhappy state of those, who are the objects of God's
righteous displeasure; and, at the same time, a lively sense of the happiness
of good men, who are at peace with their Maker, and the objects of his peculiar
love; those who are the care of his providence, and by being so, secure against
all real harm, though the heavens and the earth were both dissolved.

THAT these ought in reason to be the moral effects, produced by such
occurrences in providence, is indisputably certain: And that they are in fact
so, in some degree, need I attempt any formal proof? Will it not be sufficient
only to appeal to the breasts and consciences of my hearers? Recollect, my
Brethren, those thoughts and sentiments, (if it is possible they should have so
soon gone out of your minds) Recollect, I say, those thoughts and sentiments
which you so lately had, when your houses over and under you, and the earth
under them, seemed to be falling to ruins; and not unlikely to bury you
therein, either alive or dead. Is there a sinner present, whose thoughts and
heart were not immediately lifted up to God in the heavens? unless, perhaps, he
was so great a one, that he had not confidence enough to do it; which, I hope,
was not the sad case of any of us! Is there any one, whose heart was so
stubborn as not to relent? and who did not at least wish, that he had always
lived under an habitual sense of religion, working out his salvation with fear
and trembling; that so he might have his refuge in God, at a time when other
help was vain? Is there a wicked man, whose heart did not at that time accuse
and upbraid him? and tremble within him, under the apprehensions of God's just
displeasure? Is there, whose thoughts did not trouble him, so that the joints
of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another? and whose
countenance was not "changed," Dan. v.6.
like the impious Assyrian Monarch's, when he beheld MEAN TEKEL upon the
ill-boding, prophetic wall, over his midnight bowls and revellings! Is there,
who did not resolve, that if that night of terror, were not the last of his
life, it should be the last which should find him a worker of iniquity, and an
enemy to his God!

YEA, I may ask, whether there is even a good man amongst us, whose heart
remained entirely undaunted, fully "fixed, and trusting in the Lord," in that
night of general consternation? and who had no uneasy apprehensions, respecting
another world, arising from conscious deficiences in the discharge of his duty?
However, I am far from saying or thinking that this is impossible: Nay, I am
fully persuaded that it is possible: Though I am equally persuaded, that
through a certain constitutional timidity and fearfulness, and through sinful
imperfection, there are but few christians, comparatively speaking, who
actually attain to such a stability of faith, hope, and confidence in God;
especially when thus surprised in their beds, and awaking with the prospect of
immediate destruction before them. Eve^ good men's hearts do generally misgive
and reproach them, in some measure, for their negligence, and failings in their
duty to God, and their preparations for death and another world. Therefore it
is, that they cannot stand firm, under such alarming visitations of providence.
And such men will always be made the better by them; they proving a means, as
they are designed by God, of perfecting saints, as well as convincing sinners.
The former are stirred up, and quickened to their duty, while the latter are
even ready to go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth,
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he [thus] arises
to shake terribly the earth! Isai. ii.19.


BY what I have observed, these have been the moral and religious effects of
the late solemn and repeated admonitions of providence; for I cannot but call
them such. People of all ranks, good and bad, high and low, rich and poor, have
been very generally, and very justly, awakened to think more on God, and the
"things that belong to their peace," than they seemed to do but just before.
Those who were before secure and profligate, are, for the present, apparently
rouzed into a serious sense of religion: And those who, as we have reason to
hope, were, before, truly pious, have hereby been animated to run their
christian course with more speed and diligence; that so they may be ready at
whatever hour their Lord may either come, or call them out of the world;
whether at even, or at midnight, at the cock-crowing, or in the morning. These
are the present, visible, and good effects of these providential dispensations;
and such as God intended in them. For they are undoubtedly monitory in their
nature and true design: And if they are not regarded by any, as being so, I
believe it must be those only, who do not believe there is really any universal
providence over, or moral government established in the world; which is the
same thing, in other words, with atheism.

THE great danger now is, lest these religious impressions, however deep they
may seem to be for the present, should be gradually effaced from the hearts of
people; and leave them, in a little time, as they found them: which is often,
if not generally the case. Your great care, therefore, should now be, by
recollection, and serious, sober consideration, with the blessing of God, to
keep alive in your breasts those sentiments concerning Him, yourselves, another
world, and the great business of life, which have been thus awakened in you.

LET me therefore beseech those, whose minds have been seriously impressed by
these visitations of providence, not to suffer these good impressions to wear
off almost as soon as the earth ceases to tremble under them; which it has,
indeed, as yet scarcely done! Cherish and improve them, by meditation and
prayer, into a rational, substantial principle of practical religion and
holiness; such a one as shall be permanent, and productive of good fruits, in
the remaining part of your spared lives. For I must remind you, that a sudden
fright is not the conversion of a sinner's soul to God; nor the terrors and
reproaches of a guilty conscience, the same thing with being "born of the
spirit." Let not those, therefore, who cannot but think they were "in the gall
of bitterness and bond of iniquity," before they were awakened by these
admonitions of providence, if there are any such present; let not such, I say,
too suddenly conclude, that the "bitterness of death is past" with them; nor
too slightly heal the wounds of their bleeding consciences, by speaking peace
to themselves, before God speaks it to them by his word and Spirit. There is
need of your being cautioned against this; and even of your being cautioned
against returning to your old sins, as soon as your present fears and terrors
are a little abated, as the dog returns to his vomit; your goodness proving
only like the "morning cloud, and early dew;" though you may now imagine that
you shall never forget those things which have made so deep an impression upon
you; and conclude your "path" will surely be that of the just, which, like the
shining light, shines more and more, unto the perfect day. Give all diligence
to make your "calling and election sure," by attending upon all the means of
grace; and, particularly by prayer to God for his Holy Spirit. For you cannot
create yourselves anew in Christ Jesus unto good works. It is God who must, by
his concurrence and energy, cleanse you from all unrighteousness, through
sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, as it is He alone that can forgive
your sins, "through the redemption that is in Christ." And you have reason to
hope that he will do both, if you diligently seek him, and call upon him while
he is near: And he may properly be said to be now so near you, whom he has
awakened by his providence and Spirit, into a serious sense of religion, so
that your greatest concern is, to escape his deserved wrath, and to obtain an
interest in his loving kindness, which is better than life. My hearty wish and
prayer is, that you may ask till you receive; that you may seek till you find;
and knock till it is opened unto you; and that this good work may be "perfected
unto the day of Christ." And remember that if, after being thus awakened to
think soberly of God, and your eternal interest; if after beginning well, you
should again return to sin and folly, your latter end will be far "worse than
the beginning". For if you should thus forget your present good purposes and
resolutions, not only your sins, but even your goodness will, in some sense,
rise up in judgment against you! But, beloved, we hope better things of you,
and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak. Persevere in seeking
God: For then shall ye know, if ye follow on to know the Lord: his going forth
is prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto you as the rain; as the
latter and former rain unto the earth Hos. vi.3.
; and cause you to bring forth the fruits of righteousness, "in all holy
conversation and godliness"; which, through his abundant goodness and grace in
Christ Jesus, shall be gloriously recompensed in "the day of God," when "all
these things shall be dissolved."

LET good men, moreover, be admonished by these visitations of providence, to
grow in goodnes^; to value this world less, in which there is nothing to be
depended upon; to have their hearts and conversation more in heaven, where
their only valuable treasure is; "whither the forerunner is for us entered,
even Jesus"; and whence he may again come at such an hour as we think not. At
least, we cannot tell how soon or suddenly we may be taken out of this world,
by some means or other. And this reflection should make us diligent in the
improvement of our time and talents here; that when the important period comes
for us to go to the world of spirits, we may be fit to join the blessed society
of "just men made perfect." The visible things, which are made, are all at
length to be shaken, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.
Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear: For our God
is a CONSUMING FIRE. Heb. xii.27, 28, 29.


IN fine; Let us all in common, by these solemn warnings and admonitions of
providence; (for we cannot but account them such; indications of God's
righteous displeasure, and loud calls to a universal reformation of manners)
Let us all in common, I say, and choose to repeat it, by these solemn warnings
and admonitions of providence, be excited seriously to consider of our ways; to
reform what is amiss in ourselves; and diligently to attend to the great and
ultimate business of human life; which is the fearing of God, and keeping his
commandments: For this is the "whole of man", and the conclusion of the whole
matter. Do you imagine that God has no more Earthquakes at command! and even
far more terrible and fatal ones, with which, not only to chastise, but even to
destroy, a guilty, irreclaimable people, if He pleases! -- Let these
providential and judicial visitations, inspire us therefore, not only now, but
always, with a due reverence, and with awful thoughts of the inconceivable
greatness, power and majesty of Him, who removes the mountains, and they know
not; who takes up the isles as a very little thing; who sits upon the
circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as groshoppers; who
stretches out the heavens as a curtain; who is equally able, and equally
determined, to save the righteous, and to destroy the wicked. Till we think in
some measure worthily of God, we shall not think "soberly of ourselves, as we
ought to think"; nor conduct ourselves with due lowliness, humility, and
reverence toward Him. These dispensations of his providence, are peculiarly
adapted to this most important end; to show us all, how entirely we are in
God's hands, and at his disposal; how much it concerns us to fear and serve
him; and what manner of persons we ought to be in all holy conversation and
godliness; looking for, and hasting unto, the coming of the day of God; that
great day, wherein "all these things shall be dissolved".

THOUGH an Earthquake may naturally lead our tho'ts to this important period;
yet surely it is not to be compared, in respect of the terrors of it, to the
terrors of that day, when the earth, with the works that are therein, shall be
burnt up; the elements melt with fervent heat; the heavens themselves being on
fire, dissolved; and He, who was once crucified without the gates of Jerusalem,
shall be revealed in the glory of his Father, to take just vengeance on the
world of the ungodly. This scene shall yours, and mine, and "every eye", one
day behold; when both the masked hypocrite, who now covers his
transgressions; and the unmasked profligate, whose sins are open beforehand,
going before to judgment, shall equally receive the due reward of their deeds;
the cunning craftiness of the one, and the brazen effrontery and impudence of
the other, utterly forsaking him; and leaving him to his deserved perdition!
How will those wicked, ungodly men, endure the terrors of that day, whom only
the quaking of the earth, now throws into consternation and anguish? If we
cannot now possess our souls in patience, in a calm resignation of ourselves
into the hands of God; or be awaked from sleep in our beds by an Earthquake,
without such amazement; what inexpressible astonishment will seize the wicked,
who shall be awaked from their "sleep in the dust of the earth", by the voice
of the archangel, and the trump of God? and when the first objects which their
eyes behold, will be their mighty Judge coming in the clouds, and the heavens
and earth dissolving in flames! We read how courageous the greatest and boldest
sinners; those who would think the imputation of wanting courage and fortitude,
the greatest reproach to them; I say, we read how courageous these mighty men
of valor will be in this day of trial, Rev. 6. -- And the kings of the earth,
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and every
bondman, and every freeman, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of
the mountains: And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the
lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand!
--

BEHOLD that wretched multitude yonder! standing aghast, with hands hanging
down, and drooping heads! praying so earnestly to the unpitying rocks! Are
these those, who never prayed to the "Rock of ages"! the Hearer of prayer! Who
are those Two, whom I behold together yonder, all pale and shuddering with
fear! no longer Heroes! Can those be the GREAT Macedonian, and the DEIFIED
Roman, before whom the world once stooped and trembled; now become so little,
and even less than men, in their own estimation! Is it They, whose valor
exceeded that of lions, who tremble thus before the LAMB! Is that, King
Agrippa, wringing his hands! and lamenting in such anguish as he can neither
conceal nor express, that he was not altogether "persuaded to be a christian"?
Acts 26.28.
Is that Felix, the once "most Excellent Governor Acts 23.26.
"! who now more than "trembles", yonder! and looks so earnestly on him, who
once reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come Acts 24.25.
! O Pilate! do thou at length know, "What is truth" John 18.38.
! Will thou now "chastise Him, and release him Luke 23.16.
"! Or will thou condemn Him, though thou can find no fault at all in Him, lest
thou should not be though it Cesar's friend! Behold there the brave, intrepid
soldiers! But do you see any of them bowing the knee "in derision", and saying,
"Hail, king of the Jews"! Where is the reed! where is the crown of thorns!
where, the scarlet robe! the vinegar! the gall! the scourge! Yonder are the
Jews! But I hear none among so many, now calling This man "a blasphemer", for
saying, "I AM THE SON OF GOD"! John 10.36.
Do you see any of them approach to spit upon Him! to smite Him with the palms
of their hands, and bid Him "prophecy"! any, advancing boldly, to pull Him from
a throne, whom they once lifted up, and hanged on a tree! Alas, Judas! and art
thou too, there! Art thou come, once more to "betray the Son of man with a
kiss"! Methinks thou would now give more than "thirty pieces of silver"! --
the goodly price! -- And what great multitude is that, which I hear pleading
with quivering lips, and faultering tongues, "We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence"! Luke 13.26.


LET us, my Brethren, willingly lay under the imputation of being persons of
weak minds, who give way to superstious fears and fancies, rather than defy the
God that is above, or reject the record which he has given of his Son; rather
than tread under foot, Him that loved us, and redeemed us to God by his blood;
than disregard the commandments of Him, who being made perfect, is become the
author of eternal salvation to all them that obey Him! Let us now guard against
the fears and terrors, the unutterable confusion and anguish, which will come
as a whirlwind upon the guilty nations, in the day of God! Let us, having
believed in God, maintain good works; being holy in all conversation and
godliness; without spot and blameless: For doing thus, we shall be found of Him
in peace. And if we are thus prepared for that great day, we need not, surely,
be very anxious about an Earthquake already past, or for fear that others
should arrive. They that could undauntedly behold "all these things
dissolving", and the Son of man coming with power and great glory, may
certainly possess their souls in peace and patience for the present; saying
with the Psalmist, as God grant we may all be able to say in sincerity, and
holy confidence -- God is our refuge and strength; a very present help in
trouble: Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea: though the waters thereof roar,
and be troubled; though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. There is
a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God; the holy place of
the tabernacle of the most High: GOD is in the midst of her; SHE SHALL NOT BE
MOVED! Psalm 46.1 --


APPENDIX, Containing a more particular Account of the late terrible
Earthquake, than has yet been published amongst us.
IT will not be improper here, by way of appendix, to give some account of the
late terrible Earthquake; as the preceding discourses may possibly fall into
the hands of some, who have not met with any. This brief account shall be
arranged, for the sake of perspicuity, under the following heads; viz. the
time, the duration, the process, the extent, and the effects of the Earthquake:
Though one or two remarks may, perhaps, be made, which do not directly and
properly fall under either of these particulars.

THE Earthquake, I mean the first and greatest of the three lately felt at
Boston, was on tuesday, Nov. 18. 1755, between 4 and 5 o'clock in the morning;
the evening and night preceding having been calm, serene and pleasant; and
such a great white-frost being upon the ground in the morning, as I have not
observed for many years past. By reason of the difference in peoples clocks and
watches, they differ at least a quarter of an hour as to the precise time when
the shock came on; some making it but 15 minutes, and others more than 30,
after 4 o'Clock. The former, I believe, come nearest the truth; and, probably,
do not fix the time more than 3 or 4 minutes too late, if at all.

AS to the duration, or continuance of the Earthquake, people also differ
widely; viz. from 1 minute to 6 or 7. I have very good reason to think, that
they who fix it at a minute and half, or two minutes at most, allow time enough.

THE process of the earthquake was as follows. It began with a smart pulsation
of the earth upwards: I mean this was the first motion perceived; for those who
were awake, generally agree that there was a rushing, rumbling noise, a little
before any motion was felt. This pulsation was immediately succeeded by a
universal trembling, or very quick, jarring, vibratory motion, which was
horizontal. This motion increased for about a quarter of a minute; and then
abated for two or three seconds. Then came on, all at once, a violent,
prodigious shock, as suddenly to appearance, as a thunderclap breaking upon a
house; and attended with a great noise. This sudden and great shock was
immediately followed by quick and violent concussions, jerks and wrenches,
attended, as it appeared to me, with an undulatory, waving motion of the whole
surface of the ground, not unlike the shaking and quaking of a very large bogg.
These concussions and quakings continued at, or very near, their height, for
almost the space of half a minute. And were so great as to make it difficult
for those who were standing or walking, to keep their feet; and, as I am
informed, quite impracticable for some. After this great shock had been
gradually declining and going off, near half a minute, there was a very
perceptible revival of it, though of no continuance; and so all became, by
degrees, still and quiet, in a little more, perhaps, than 1 minute and from the
first symptoms of the Earthquake. This is the most exact account I can give of
its beginning, progress and ending, from my own observation compared with the
accounts of others.

THE extent of this Earthquake along the seacoast, from S. W. to N. E. was,
probably, about 800 or 900 miles; for it cannot certainly be determined at
present. The province of the Massachusetts Bay, seems to have been the center
of it. By what we hear from Philadelphia, about 300 miles distant upon a direct
line, the shock was inconsiderable, in comparison of what it was here; and less
than it was at New York. So that it seems probable, it did not reach toward
the S. W. beyond Virginia. We hear nothing of it, I think, from Hallifax; so
that we may conclude it was very little, if at all, perceived there. The
hithermost part of Nova Scotia may therefore be reckoned its N. easterly
boundary; for we are morally certain that it extended near, if not quite so
far, by what we hear concerning it in several parts of the intermediate space.
It is more difficult to ascertain its eastern and western limits; or its extent
back into the inland country, and out at sea. It extended to all our back
settlements, from which we have heard; to Lake- George; and, probably, hundreds
of miles beyond. And the shock was so great in the Atlantic, 70 leagues E. of
this American continent, that the people on board a vessel in that longitude,
thought they had run a-ground, or struck upon a rock. From whence we may
naturally conclude, that this was not the most easterly extent of it by several
hundred miles. And upon the whole it seems probable, that a circle of 900 miles
diameter would have hardly enclosed it: Especially considering that it might
run in veins and caverns of the earth, much farther one way than another. I
shall just add here, though it may not, perhaps, be the properest place for the
remark, that the Earthquake seems to have come from the S. W. and to have
caught along, (if I may so express it) through this part of the continent, as
though a train had been laid for it from country to country. For most accounts
we have from the S. W. make the shock considerably sooner there, than we had it
here, and than it was felt to the N. E. of us; so much sooner, that the
difference of longitude will scarce help us at all in accounting for it.

BEFORE I proceed to the effects of this Earthquake, I shall just mention the
two others which were felt in Boston after it. One on the same morning, about
an hour and a quarter afterward; very generally perceived, though
comparatively small; its continuance not exceeding 15 seconds at most. The
other was on the saturday evening following, about half an hour before 9
o'Clock. This was as much more considerable than the last on tuesday morning,
as that was less considerable than the first. It came on gradually, with a
rushing noise; as it also went off. It was attended with a waving, undulatory
motion, as well as a vibratory; its duration scarce half a minute. Many other
shocks have been felt since the first and the greatest, to the eastward and
northward of Boston; at 20, 30, 40 and 50 miles distance, if not farther. From
the diversity there was both as to the time and degree of the first Earthquake,
along this continent; and from the numbers of others that have been perceived
to a considerable degree in some places, and not at all in places distant but a
few miles from them, we may naturally infer these two things: That the
immediate natural cause, whatever it be, is (or rather was) not uniform, and
aequi-distant from the surface of the ground: And, that it was not very remote
from the surface, in some places. Had either of these been the case, it is at
least probable, that there would have been a greater uniformity, consent and
agreement, in the time, sensation and effects, than there has been. But not to
digress farther.

THE principal visible effects (I mean the physical effects) of the Earthquake,
are now to be mentioned. These are not, indeed, exactly the same, and equally
great, in all places within its verge and limits; as was intimated before. In
Boston, besides the throwing down of glass, pewter, and other movables in the
houses, about an 100 chimnies, perhaps, were in a manner levelled with the
roofs of the houses: and about 1500 shattered, and thrown down in part. Some
were broken off several feet below the top, and by the suddenness and violence
of the jerks. canted horizontally an inch or two over, so as to stand very
dangerously. Some others, thus broken off, were turned round several points of
the compass, as with a circular motion. The roofs of some houses were quite
broken in by the fall of chimnies. The ends of about 12 or 15 brick buildings
were thrown down, from the top to the eaves of the houses. Many clocks were
stopped; and some wells and pumps became immediately dry. The vane upon the
public Market-house was thrown down; the wooden spindle which supported it,
though of a considerable thickness, and which had stood the most violent gusts
of wind, being broken off. A new vane upon one of the churches in the town, is
bent at the spindle which passes through it, 2 or 3 points of the compass out
of its proper direction; which must have been done by a very quick and violent
horizontal motion. And "A distiller's cistern, made of plank, almost new, and
very strongly put together, was burst to pieces by the agitation of the liquor
in it; which was thrown out with such force as to break down one whole side of
the shed that defended the cistern from the weather, as also to stave off a
board or two from a fence, at the distance of 8 or 10 feet from it."

SIMILAR effects to these, were seen out of the town of Boston; and some
others. Great damage has been sustained in the country towns, by throwing down
the stone-wall fence. But what is still more alarming than any thing already
mentioned, is the breaches and chasms made in the ground, in several places; no
less than four or five in the single town of Pembroke; out of some of which
chasms the water has issued; and many cart-loads of a fine, whiteish, and
compressible sort of sand, has been spewed; and, by what I have heard, of a
sulphurous nature. And springs, it is said, are opened in several parts of the
country, which continue flowing; and some old ones dried up. It is credibly
reported, that the ground in one or two places, either upon or near Cape-Cod,
is apparently sunk down; some, I think, say, several feet. It is also reported
that a great hill upon the same Cape, is split in halves; and stands yawning in
a hideous manner. We have also had an account of a prodigious chasm made in the
ground at Newington in New-Hamsphire, of 60 rods in length, and near 2 feet in
breadth. But of the truth of these two last mentioned facts, I am less certain.

WHEN we reflect seriously upon the danger we have been in, were it only by the
falling of chimnies, we must account it a very great favor, not to say wonder,
in providence, that neither the life nor limb of any person, has been lost by
means of the Earthquake! So violent was this concussion, that had it continued
at its greatest height a minute, it is easy to tell what must, without a
miracle to prevent it, have been the sad effect; -- the throwing down of almost
all our brick and stone buildings; and the burying of thousands in their ruins:
-- I mean, if something still more awful, which I leave to be guessed at, had
not ensued!

BUT we hear of one effect of the Earthquake at sea, which is still more
uncommon, though less alarming to us, than these upon the land. For several of
our seafaring men agree in their accounts, that almost immediately after the
earthquake, large numbers of fish of different sorts, both great and small,
came up to the surface of the water, some dead, and others dying. I am credibly
informed that one of our fishing vessels, at that time out upon the banks, took
up, and brought in, several Quintals of these fish. And some assert, that even
the whales have not wholly escaped this destruction.

THUS do they that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great
waters, see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep; while we behold
them upon the dry land. -- And it were well if both they and we, took a proper
notice of them -- O Lord! how manifold are thy works! in wisdom but thou made
them all. The earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide sea,
wherein (...) things creeping innumerable both small and great beasts. There go
the ships, there is that Leviathan whom thou have made to play therein. These
wait all upon dice; that thou may give them their meat in due season. That
thou give them, they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are filled with
good. Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou take away their breath,
they die, and return to their dust!

Typographical CORRECTIONS.
Page Line Read 1 1 Text 2 PETER 11 14 bottom fear has erected, 12 9 chap. I.
16 11 effected, 21 19 probable 36 5 bottom catastrophe 51 3 bottom without 54
15 cannot 55 7 bot. a mighty wind! 62 7 bot. deep places; 62 1 bot. mountains,
69 5 bot. now near to you.


