THE CHRISTIAN's DUTY TO ^ender to CAESAR the Things that are CAESAR's,
CONSIDERED; With Regard to the PAYMENT of the present TAX of Sixty Thousand
Pounds, granted to the KING's Use. In which all the Arguments for the
Non-payment thereof are examined and refuted. Addressed to the Scrupulous among
the People called QUAKERS.

By a Lover of his KING and COUNTRY.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed in the Year MDCCLVI.

INTRODUCTION.
IT is obvious to me, when Men propose a Scheme to effect any Matter of Moment,
they should not only consider that Thing in its first Appearance, but ought
judiciously to consider what may be the Consequence thereof, and That not only
in some Particulars, but in the largest Extention the Case will admit of; and
if, after sufficient Inspection, they have Reason to believe the present
Pursuit may be attended with a Load of Inconveniences to either private or
public Affairs, and those Inconveniences to overbalance the Justness that in
Speculation might be annexed to the present Pursuit; that then it should be
laid aside, and not carried into Execution.

MATTHEW xxii. 21. Render unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and unto
God the Things that are God's.


IN order to fix the Reader's Mind the more intent upon the present Discourse,
I shall First consider who deserves that Appellation (Caesar.)

Secondly, What are the Things that belong to Caesar. And

Thirdly, Shall make it appear an Act of indisputable Justice, to render those
Things unto Caesar.

First, Men have found it necessary, in most Ages of the World, to appoint one
Head or Ruler over them, according to the settled Bounds of Nations; this being
done by the Consent of the Whole, it lays them under an actual Acknowledgment
to his Sovereignty, under which, Methods have been formed, not only to
establish him in that Dignity, but to protect his sacred Person to all Intents
and Purposes. Under which Sanction, the Superior and Inferior are inseparably
bound to each other, the one to command, the other to obey, except in religious
Matters, we are to render unto God the Things that are God's.

Men of that Class have been established under diverse Appellations, according
to the Circumstance of Affairs, or the Judgments of People, in their different
Nations.

Caesar was a Roman Emperor, unto whom Israel at that Time was tributary. The
Word Caesar, justly applied at that Time, signified Chief Ruler, or King, and
has a just Representation to our present Sovereign GEORGE, King of
Great Britain, etc.

Secondly, I shall consider what are the Things that belong to Caesar: In the
first Place I shall show, that when a King ascends the Throne, he, by Consent,
is bound in the most solemn Manner, by Oath, to defend the Rights and
Privileges belonging to the Crown, both civil and religious; and not only at
Home, but it extends unto the furthermost Parts of his Territories. And the
whole lies under an equal Claim to his Protection.

The Parliament, who act in Conjunction with the King, represent the Nation,
and are chose by those that have a Right to choose them; they are chose by the
Majority, which may, in that Case, be deemed the Whole.

They are also bound, by solemn Oath, to be faithful Subjects, to discharge
their Trust as by Law appointed, or as Necessity may require; therefore what
they do, his Majesty agreeing therewith, may justly be termed an Act of the
whole Nation, and lays an absolute Constraint on every Subject to act
consistent with himself, agreeable to the most solemn Ties he is under; this
forms a good Government; and it is impossible for any Government, either
civil or religious, to be supported without a general Contribution of Money to
defray the Expense that will necessarily accrue in the Administration thereof.

Under which Consideration, the King and Parliament have made Laws, which are
binding to the whole Realm; Laws that are not grievous, but easy to be borne;
Laws that lay an equitable Taxation on the Whole, and obliges every One to
bear his proportionable Share.

It is an actual Agreement between a King and his Subjects; they are bound in
the most solemn Manner that Mankind are capable of, to render unto Caesar the
Things that are Caesar's, whenever they are lawfully called thereunto.

It is an undeniable Debt, contracted at our Birth, and but just and honest in
us to hold ourselves in Readiness to discharge it as the Payments become due,
which will be to render Custom to whom Custom is due, Tribute to whom Tribute
is due. I shall conclude the second Part with saying, that he who is thus found
in the Discharge of his real Duty, not only renders unto Caesar the Things that
are Caesar's, but unto God the Things that are God's, viz. a good Conscience.

Thirdly, I conclude by this time we shall agree, that our present Sovereign is
the Person to whom Tribute is due, and that we his present Subjects are the
Persons, under the most solemn Ties, obliged to pay it, and can by no Means
(under a Cloak of Justice) skreen ourselves from rendering unto Caesar the
Things that are Caesar's.

However, in order to put the Thing in an obvious Light, I shall begin, as I
think, at the Foundation, and consider the present Situation of Affairs in
Great Britain, respecting his present Majesty King GEORGE, who rules these
Nations, under the indisputable Title of Heir to the Crown of Great Britain;
and who, in the most solemn Manner, by Oath, has bound himself, both to God
and Man, to protect the Protestant Religion, and to defend the Kingdom from the
Encroachments of perfidious Enemies.

This being the real Situation of our present King, I am necessarily led to
enquire, how or in what Manner he may be rendered capable of discharging that
so weighty an Affair, without the hearty Assistance of his Subjects; and at
this critical Juncture, when a potent Enemy threatens an Invasion, and gladly
would dethrone the best of Kings, and involve the Nation in a general Massacre.
But to return, As the King is bound by Oath, he conscientiously believes, with
Thousands more, that it is his absolute Duty (both in the Sight of God and Man)
to defend himself by Force of Arms; and as the Situation of Things appear at
this Time, it seems as though it were morally impossible to succeed in other
Terms, for by Accounts from Home it appears, that our Superiors in
Great Britain have (since they discovered the ill Disposition of the French,
their restless Enemies) raised large Sums of Money for the King's Use, which
Moneys being appropriated to Military Purposes, the several Sums being raised
by Tax, Men of every Class pay it with Cheerfulness; they render unto Caesar
the Things that are Caesar's, well knowing it to be their Duty to obey God, and
honor their King; this very Money, which is raised by Tax, is now, and has
been for twelve Months past, applied in building Ships of War, in raising
Forces both for Sea and Land, in purchasing Artillery, Ammunition, etc. on
purpose for Defense, the Consequence of which will be shedding of Blood, unless
the Enemy keep their Distance.

And although this be the very Case, I find not one Scrutineer among them; the
King commands, the Subjects obey; under which Economy there is a pleasant
Harmony. In which Situation I shall leave them unto the Protection of Him who
never fails to reward those who conscientiously obey his Commands, which are,
Render unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and unto God the Things that
are God's.

I shall now take a View of my native Land, where I expect to find Things of a
different Character, that may occasion me to make particular Remarks thereon,
which, if according to the Nature of the Case, I hope to be excused; my Design
is genuine; it is with a View to prevail upon all Men to pay Custom to whom
Custom is due, Tribute to whom Tribute is due. In the first Place, I shall
undeniably make it appear, that our Governor and Assembly in this Province,
represent the King and Parliament of Great Britain, because they are fixed
Ministers here, with the same Powers of Legislature to manage the King's
Affairs in this distant Colony; their Authority is firmly established by Act of
Parliament; and if what they do appears to be subordinate to the Laws of
England, it is as firm and binding to us, and ought with as equal Justice to be
obeyed, as though the King himself commanded.

And although the Laws here are not verbatim with the Laws of England in every
Case, yet that respecting the Legislative Power, is confirmed by Act of
Parliament; under which Act, there is a Method prescribed for us to choose a
lawful Number of Men, which represent the Whole; and they being of our own
choosing, what they do respecting the Legislation, is our own Act; for, in the
first Step, we come under the Sanction of Law, because all are prohibited, and
have no Vote, who are not possessed of an Estate to the Value of Fifty Pounds,
this being a particular Paragraph of Law which every Voter appealeth to for
Safety, under which he acknowledges that he particularly and directly engages
himself, under Sanction of Oath, to be a faithful Subject to his King, because
we are a Body Corporate, and every Person, thus situated, a real Member of that
Body, and will inevitably remain as such, unless he refuse to pay Tribute unto
Caesar. I also consider, that our Governor and Assembly are bound, by solemn
Oath or Affirmation, to be faithful Subjects to their King and are placed as
Guardians to the Province; for which Reason, I hope we may allow that it is
their particular Business to make all necessary Inspection into the State of
the Province, by which Means they may probably be capable of guarding against
impending Danger.

I query, Whether this be not their real Duty? And if so, I query, How they may
be able to effect it, without our Assistance? And in what Manner do we assist,
unless it be in paying Tax? And how inconsistent do those appear with
themselves, in refusing to pay Tax; do they consider what a Train of
Contradictions they are heaping on their own Heads? In the first Place, they
have entered into a Contract with their King, and in that have laid an
Obligation upon themselves to be faithful Subjects, and at the same time refuse
to pay him his just Dues; this is no other (in the Body Corporate) but that
they are doing a Thing, and at the same time are not doing that Thing. -- They
are willing to pay the King his Dues, but at the same time are not willing to
pay the King his Dues. These are plain Contradictions, and as plain Truths.

Are any so weak as to imagine this Province can remain under a good
Constitution, and no Taxes levied? I think not, by Men of common Sense: Well,
if that be the Case, I shall ask one Question, which is, Under what Appellation
could the present Act have been set forth in, more agreeable to the several
Denominations of People in this Province, under which Appellation diverse Taxes
have been levied, and the Money paid (I believe) without one Prick of
Conscience, until this critical Juncture; in which (perhaps) there never was
more Need of Money to be raised, nor was there ever more Need of showing
Loyalty to a King, or of maintaining Amity among ourselves; when we are
threatened by a potent Enemy Abroad; while we have suffered so many irreparable
Damages from a barbarous and savage Enemy at Home?

I shall now recite an infallible Text of Scripture, in order to encourage the
well-disposed Part, the Substance of which, I think, may well serve for a
Touchstone, by Virtue of which every Scrutineer may try his uncommon
Conscience; Matt. xvii. 24. And when they were come to Capernaum, they that
received Tribute Money, came to Peter and said, Does your Master pay Tribute?
He says, Yes. And when he was come into the House, Jesus prevented him,
saying, What think thou, Simon? Of whom do the Kings of the Earth take
Custom or Tribute? of their own Children, or of Strangers? Peter says unto
him, of Strangers. Jesus says unto him, then are the Children free.
Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the Sea, and cast an
Hook, and take up the Fish that first comes up; and when thou have opened his
Mouth, thou shall find a Piece of Money* that take, and give unto them for me
and thee.

I look upon this as an infallible Precedent to every true Believer in CHRIST*
it is not only his assenting to a Thing, but it is doing that Thing; it is not
only his Advice to Peter to give, but says, Go, give this for me and thee.

This Tribute or Tax, was paid under the Roman Emperor, who was at that Time
carrying on a War, the Consequence of which is always shedding of Blood.

But might not JESUS have showed a sufficient Reason wherein he was not
taxable? Observe the Text, when he asks Simon, Of whom do the Kings of the
Earth take Custom or Tribute, of their own Children, or of Strangers? Peter
says, of Strangers; Jesus says unto him, then are the Children free. This
means, that as he himself was the Son of God, who was and is the King and
Ruler of the whole Universe, and unto whom every Part belongs, was in Reality,
and absolutely exempt from paying Tax; and although this was the very Case, there
was no Hesitation on it; no, he says to Peter, Notwithstanding, lest we should
offend them, go and give unto them for me and thee. Observe, this was all acted
under an Heathen Emperor, which is far from being the Case with us; for we have
not only a Christian King, but perhaps the best of Kings that ever swayed the
British Scepter. -- A King, whose superior Virtues, and tender Indulgence
toward his Subjects, is too little regarded by that Class of Men. -- But no
Wonder, when Men refuse to make CHRIST their Example, and will not do what he
has positively commanded them to do; I say I do not wonder that those Men
refuse to obey a Christian King. I shall inspect into the Nature of the Case,
by Query, and examine whether there be any real Cause, or good Foundation, for
this unlooked for Scruple of Conscience.

1. Whether CHRIST, meaning the Godhead, who is from all Eternity to all
Eternity, did not know as well what would be Man's Duty to the End of the
World, as at that Juncture?

2. Whether he would in Reality do any Thing which might be made a Precedent,
and whether Men receiving it as such, did not act the Christian Part?

3. Whether CHRIST rendering unto Caesar the Things that were Caesar's, will
not justify us, if we do the like?

4. Whether it has not in itself the greatest Inconsistency, for CHRIST, when
personally on Earth, to do a Thing, and in the same Dispensation (by his
Spirit) forbid his Followers to do that Thing?

5. Whether Men's Consciences ought to be a Director to us, when it is evident
that they are not dictated by the Spirit of CHRIST?

6. And whether we ought to abandon human Reason, and sacrifice our brightest
Faculties, to confide in the particular Humor of two or three Self-conceited
Men?

I shall ask this Question, Did you ever read the History of the Persecutions
under the several Emperors? If you have, I would have you to read them the
second Time, where perhaps you may find a near Emblem; you may see the very
Rise of Apostasy, and what was the first Step to the so much lamented
Declension; you may see, that Men, instead of Religion, practiced Superstition;
you may see, that Men, who should have honored God, rather honored
themselves; you may see, that Men, who ought to have allowed the sole
Infallibility to God, proclaimed themselves infallible.

I shall offer the Reasons for the last Paragraph, respecting the Declension of
the Church; the first Motion was Superstition; Men valuing themselves upon
their own Judgments, by which Means they under-valued their Neighbors, and
still believed that they themselves grew better and wiser.

Under which grand Opinion of Self, they were repeatedly laying Injunctions
upon the Church (and that at first) in trivial Matters chiefly; by which Means
they lost the Power of true Religion, and set up Forms in the Room thereof; and
those Forms so prevailed, that, I am of Opinion, there is but little else; a
Word to the Wise may be enough. Therefore, it is Wisdom for all Classes of Men
to particularly guard against this impending Danger.

In the first Place, I advise the Clergy to entertain a better Opinion of the
Laity than of themselves; and the Laity to think of the Clergy just as they are.

Self-righteousness and Bigotry has been the greatest Enemies that ever a
militant Church have had, and have ever been useless in Affairs of State.

But when they creep into the Church, they are much of the Nature of a
Pestilence, they infect almost the Whole, and the chief Reason is, because the
Clergy pretend to more than other Men; more Knowledge and more Experience; and
to confirm it, in steps the Bigot, and says, Amen. And when thus met, there is
a Conference, in which there may be a narrow Inspection, perhaps, not only in
Church but State Affairs.

In one of these Consultations (I think) it was, that the Bill, for granting
Money for the King's Use, was considered.

But observe, the Council at that Time was but very small; however, after a
Deliberation upon it, up stands a Clergyman, and gives his Opinion concerning
the Bill then lying before them, which was to this Purport, viz.

Clergyman. I have considered the Tenor of this Bill, which is for granting
Sixty Thousand Pounds for the King's Use, and do not find myself free to pay
the Tax, but shall suffer a Distraint on my Goods.


Biggot. No, nor I neither; though I have thought nothing about it, until just
now; I want to be informed why we may not pay it.


Clerg. I Will tell thee; the Act specifies it in such a promiscuous Manner, that
I cannot be free to pay. I own, they have pointed out two particular Articles,
unto which I can freely pay my Tax, viz. those that are for the Support of the
distressed Inhabitants, and for continuing our Alliance with the friendly
Indians.


Bigot. Yes, yes, so can I pay toward those two thou mentioned very freely;
but I do not think I can pay the other, though I do not know rightly what it
means.


Clerg. I Will inform thee; it is that Part which is mentioned for the King's
Use; because, thou knows, we are principled against War, both offensive and
defensive.


Bigot. No, by no Means; I would not have any Hand in carrying on a War: But
can we refuse to pay Tax? It seems to me as if the King's Dues were the most
reasonable of all Taxes.


Clerg. Hold, hold! thou does not consider the Consequence; for we suppose
there may be an Indian War, and if so, some of the Money will doubtless be
converted to that Use.


Bigot. Alack-a-day! true enough; that never once entered my Mind; poor weak
Creatures we are; was it not for your constant Care over us, I doubt we should
not be able to withstand the many Temptations we are daily beset with; but I
rejoice that there are a few faithful Ones that stand for this so just a Cause.
Pay it! no, I Will never pay it, without thee pays it first. -- Yet I find some
Uneasiness, which creates a Doubting, whether we may not affront the Assembly,
in thus refusing to pay, when they have made a Law, and by that Law commanded
us to pay; I want to be resolved in this Case.


Clerg. I believe I can readily resolve that Query: In the first Place, as I
justly observed, they are Men of our own choosing, and the Majority of the House
of the same Religion that we are; and as they thought fit to lay this Burden
upon us, I think we may with much more Freedom refuse to comply. -- Before we
break up, I would just observe, that we who are present (though but few in
Number) have heard, verbatim, the strongest Objections we are able to make,
with the Reasons why we make them; I say, I would be well pleased that we
should use some Endeavors to insinuate our Opinions into the Minds of others,
for I am persuaded it would take with the Minds of many good honest People.


Bigot. I shall use my utmost Endeavor to persuade all I can; there is such,
and such, and many more, that I know would be of our Way of thinking, if they
did but know your Minds. -- And as to the Reasons that have been offered, I am
fully persuaded they are so strong, and well-grounded, that we may always
refuse to pay Tax upon the like Footing.


It was not long after the Adjournment of this Council, that their Minutes came
under the Notice of a Freethinker, who, on a serious Perusal, thought proper to
make a Reply, which he has done unto every Paragraph separately, and are as
follows:

Paragraph 1. I have considered the Tenor of this Bill, which is for granting
Sixty Thousand Pounds for the King's Use; and do not find myself free to pay
the Tax; but shall suffer a Distraint on my Goods.

Reply. For my Part, I am not able to fix a Meaning to that Paragraph; for if
he had considered it as the King's Dues, he must also have considered, that it
was his Duty to pay it; and if he did not think it the King's Dues, he ought to
have rendered his Reasons why.

In the first Place I shall observe, that Taxes, Duties, and Assizes* are the
sole Revenues of the Kingdom, that I know of, and by which the whole Realm is
supported, respecting the Affairs of State; these are the King's Dues, fixed on
him by Law; and every Voter has a Hand in making these Laws, therefore, I say,
it is as reasonable to withhold the one, as the other, and the Whole, as any
Part.

Yet, in my Opinion, there may be a more formidable Argument found (at times)
against paying of Duty, than against paying Tax, for this Reason, because Goods
on which the Duty is laid, by reason of dull Markets, are sold for little, if
any, Advance more than the Duty, and we cannot be supported in any Business,
without a reasonable Profit; this may afford some Color of Reason; but in
refusing to pay Tax, I find none.

Taxations are an unequal Injunction, I mean respecting Times; and when they
are levied, as there is a fixed Law that Taxes may be levied, according to the
present Emergency, which Power, in this Province, is solely committed unto the
Governor and Assembly, and if they command a Tax to be either for Support or
Defense of the Province, this Money, when raised, is properly the King's Money;
and as he has appointed Ministers, under lawful Qualifications, they are the
Persons that must appropriate this Money, in the best Manner they are able, to
their Master's Service; therefore I look upon the Tax to be the fundamental
Part of the King's Revenues; because it may either be augmented or diminished,
as the present State of Affairs requires.

I shall now take some Notice of the last Sentence in that Paragraph; which is,
But shall suffer a Distraint on my Goods.

Reply. No Wonder, if a Man do a Thing, at a Time when he has no Power to
refrain from doing that Thing. But what is the Consequence of refusing? Is it
not an Attempt to defraud the King of his Dues? Because, if a Man refuse to
pay, it is evident to me, that that Man is not willing to pay; and if that
Unwillingness could find Protection, the King would never have his Dues. But if
you are in Reality willing your Goods may be distrained from you, you are
certainly willing the King shall have his Dues, because that is the only Means
by which he can obtain it. If you ingenuously believe the above Tax to be the
King's Dues, and refuse to pay it, you not only appear as disloyal Subjects to
your King, but entirely reject the positive Command of CHRIST, which is, Render
unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, and unto God the Things that are
God's.

I would have you to consider it in this Light, whether you that refuse to pay
the Tax, do not the utmost in your Power to dethrone the best of Kings; who can
be no more King, without his Subjects, than we can be Subjects, without a King.
Although it is but little that one Man can do, yet that little is all he can
do, and no Thanks to him for not doing more.

Paragraph 2. I shall now consider the Substance of the second Paragraph; where
I find, he complains of the Assembly's mixing or blending Things together, in
such a Manner, that he cannot be free to pay the Tax; and in the same Paragraph
says, that he is willing to pay the Tax in two Articles, which are, to support
the distressed Inhabitants, and maintain our Alliance with the friendly Indians.

I must confess, in my Opinion, this is a strange Way of Reasoning: What, must
the Assembly make three several and distinct Acts, for raising one and the same
Sum of Money, and the Whole of that Money to be appropriated to the same
Intents and Purposes?

In the first Place, I say, unless this Province is protected under the Title
of King GEORGE, it may be morally impossible to suppose we shall be able to
help ourselves. Under this Denomination the whole Money is distributed. -- It
is true, the Act says, to relieve the distressed Inhabitants; but that Money
is converted to the King's Use, as well as the rest; unless they believe the
Relieving the Back Inhabitants is of no Use to the King. If so, by the same
Parity of Reason, we may suppose, the whole Province lies under the same
Circumstance.

And that Money which has been given to the Indians, was with the same View
(though to little Purpose) in order to secure their Friendship, by which Means
there might be Correspondence held with them in Trade; which Trade must
certainly augment the Incomes of the Crown; and to prevent their killing the
Inhabitants, and weaken the King, in his distant Dominions.

Lastly, I shall observe the Clergyman's Willingness to pay his Part of the
present Tax: He says, he is willing to pay a Part, and at the same time he
refuses to pay the Whole; No, we will not pay one Penny. Here is something new,
as well as strange; that he should be willing to comply with a Part of the Act,
and at the same Moment cannot comply with any Part of that Act.

Paragraph 3. In this Paragraph, he shows, that he is principled against
Wars, both offensive and defensive; and for that Reason cannot pay the Tax.

Reply. This being a Matter which touches Conscience, I shall not dispute it
with him, well remembering the Apostle's Expression, Let every Man be fully
convinced in his own Mind.

Paragraph 4. I observe, in this Paragraph, he has produced a Supposition, as
the Fundamental of his Argument, when he says, we suppose there may be an
Indian War; and if so, some of the Moneys will doubtless be converted to that
Use.

Reply. If this be a sufficient Argument in this Province, to refuse paying
Tax, certainly in Great Britain it is much more so; where a War may be daily
expected. But Supposition can be no Argument to deter any Person in paying his
just Debts. Neither does it appear, with any Color of Reason, that we should
refuse paying Tax, under a Supposition that it will be appropriated to this, or
the other Use. It is certainly none of our Business which Way the King, or his
Ministers, lay out his Money.

Because the Majority of the House, as he says, were of his Religion, he can,
with more Confidence, refuse to pay the Tax.

Reply. This must certainly be a wrong Representation; for if they were of his
Religion, they would act for his Safety, as much as the Nature of the Case
would admit of; because they are subject to the same Act themselves.

Our Assembly is composed of such Members, who were deemed the suitablest Men
(in their several Counties, where they are best known) to represent the People,
doubtless for some apparent Virtues; and as this is the Case, I look upon it as
a Slight to their Characters, to thus refuse to comply with their conscientious
Performances, and in this so just a Cause, where we are commanded by CHRIST, to
obey, viz. Render unto Caesar the Things that are Caesar's.

I am of Opinion, that a Set of Men could hardly be found, who would have
acted more judiciously than they have done, in forming that Act, both for Ease
of Church and State. For as they represent the whole Province, they represent
the Members of every religious Society in it; and as no one Denomination can be
exempted from refunding this Tax, the Whole have an equal Right in the
Appropriating of it.

And as a Part of the House was of Opinion, that it was necessary to defend the
Province against the Encroachments of a barbarous and savage Heathen, who have
committed Depredations and Murders in Time of Peace, I say, as a Part of the
House thus thought it their Duty, would it not have appeared disingenuous in
the rest to have withstood it, and under this Consideration, as a Part of the
Money was their own? But, as the Clergyman owns them to be of his Religion,
they must certainly be acquainted with the Rules of that Religion as well as
he; and if so, he must think they have failed a little, or we must think he
has picked up some new Matter, that perhaps was never thought on before.

Toward the latter End of the Paragraph he says, "As they thought fit to lay
this Burden upon us, I think we may with much more Freedom refuse to pay it."

I must confess, it has not appeared to me, by the Minutes of that Council,
that there was any Burden at all; it is true, there is a Discourse, which, to
me, appears only an Amusement, and may possibly lull some ignorant People
into a Kind of Lethargy. But, I think I may safely conclude, that there is
neither Divinity, Scripture, Law, nor Reason, to support it.

But how could he with more Freedom refuse to pay it, because they were of his
Religion? For it plainly appears to me, that it is an Essay toward a
Division; for I presume, we must all allow the Legislators to be Head of the
State; and it has been the Case, for many Ages past, that the Clergy have
claimed the Title, of being Head of the Church; and whenever these two Powers
clash, it has always been attended with ill Consequence to the Commonalty: But,
in this present Affair, it may be in that Society of which he himself is a
Member, and doubtless will occasion some Debate; notwithstanding, I have Reason
to believe the Majority will pay their Tax, well knowing, by this Time, they
have for their Example the Savior of the World.

But what Business have Gospel Ministers with the Affairs of the King? Will
they not take CHRIST for an Example in the one Thing nor the other? You may
read, that when the Jews sought to make CHRIST a King over them, he withdrew
himself, and says, My Kingdom is not of this World; the Princes of the Earth
usurp Authority over one another, but it shall not be so with you. I think it
is an indisputable Maxim, that every Minister of CHRIST must make CHRIST his
Example; and if so, I also believe they are quite exempt from State Affairs;
their particular Business is, "to mind themselves, and their Gifts; to exercise
their pastoral Function, according to their several Denominations of Religion;"
and while thus situated, they may be of Service in the Church.

I shall insert one more Text of Scripture, which has a full Connection with
the above, which was wrote by no less than the great Apostle to the Gentiles,
Romans xiii. 1. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers. For there is no
Power but of God; the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves Damnation. Verse 5. Wherefore ye must needs be
subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience Sake. For, for this Cause
pay you Tribute also; for they are God's Ministers, attending continually upon
this very Thing. Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is
due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor.

I shall conclude this small Tract, with making some Remarks on our present
King's Indulgence toward his Subjects, under their several Denominations of
Religion: I believe, the good Qualities of a Monarch were never displayed under
a more agreeable Appellation than that of Charity; I think the Apostle shows
us, that it is the Height of Virtue, and that without it all our Performances
are invalid. With this Virtue our King has showed himself familiar in diverse
Respects; for he has ever appeared an affectionate King to his Subjects,
particularly in that of granting free Liberty to every religious Society to act
in the Manner they think best; this is a Privilege that for many Ages of the
World could never be enjoyed, neither can it be, at this Time, in several other
Nations: Ought we not to look on this as the greatest Favor that can be
granted by any Monarch? I think it lays the greatest Constraint upon Mankind to
use their utmost Endeavors to serve God, and honor the King.

I look upon it as our absolute Duty to join heartily together in every Affair,
respecting the Preservation of his sacred Person, or the Protection of his
Realm, in that great Duty of paying Tax; because, by a diligent Inspection, I
cannot find, that either the King or his Ministers have laid any Injunction
upon us, either directly or indirectly, that interferes with revealed Religion;
and respecting tender Consciences, I believe the King has been as careful in
hurting of them, as we have been in maintaining of them as we ought to do. For
Instance, even at the Time when the Pretender landed his infernal Crew, and
marched into England, with a View to subject the Inhabitants to the Romish
Power, and assassinate his Royal Person; yet at this critical Juncture I never
understood that he summoned one Person to his Assistance, that made a Scruple
of Conscience in bearing Arms. Are not those valuable Privileges too lightly
looked upon at this Time, by those who refuse to pay Tribute to whom Tribute is
due? And at a Time when a War between England and France is expected; at a Time
when our Fellow Subjects in Britain, of every Denomination, pays a Tax of
Four Shillings in the Pound? I wish this unprecedented and unhappy
Circumstance, when laid before his Majesty, may not occasion him to think there
is some Reason to enquire into the Circumstance of Affairs in Pennsylvania.

The END.

