AN APPENDIX To the late TOTAL ECLIPSE of LIBERTY.

Being some Thoughts on the End and Design of Civil Government; also the
inherent Power of the People asserted and maintained; that it is not given up
to their Representatives; this confirmed and acknowledged by Kings or Emperors,
and proved from Scripture and Reason.

LIBERTY it so precious in the Eye of the Law, it is of so tender a Regard,
that it has reserved the whole Dispose thereof to its own immediate Direction,
and left no Part of it to the Discretion of the Judges, and what the Law will
not suffer to be done directly, it does forbid that it be done indirectly, or
by a Side-Wind. Case of William Earl of Devonshire. Dion says, That the People
held the Helm of Government in their own Power. And another very good Authority
says, That the Saxons were a free People, governed by Laws made by the People,
and therefore called a free People, because they are a Law to themselves. As
great a Lawyer as Judge Hale was, he would never suffer the Strictness of Law
to prevail against Conscience; as great a Chancellor as he was, he would make
use of all the Niceties and Subtilties in Law when it tended to support Right
and Equity. -- He governed himself indeed by the Law of the Gospel, of "doing
to others what he would have others do to him." -- See his LIFE. BOSTON:
Printed 1756.

THE following Appendix was prepared for the Press immediately after the
Publication of my sufferings, and was designed to have been made public then,
but by the Advice of Friends, I was persuaded to defist for a while, to see how
my Affair would operate: Having now delayed it above nine Months, I venture it
abroad, considering, That the different Capacities and Relishes of Persons
makes a Variety useful, if not necessary -- And often gives a meaner
Performance the Advantage with some, as to usefulness above others that are
more sprightly and elaborate -- not that I am fond of appearing in Public,
Obscurity and Retirement being much more agreeable to me: -- And though I thought
at first this bold Attack upon Liberty concerned the People in general as well
as myself and I had no Reason to think but there was a laudable Resentment
enkindled in almost every Breast, yet no one feeling the Effects in so sensible
a Manner as Mr. Tyler and myself, it formed by Degrees to cool off a little,
and made good that old Sayings, What is every Body's Business is no Body's
Businese, and no Doubt some Politicians have taken the Advantage of this, and
put off the Evil Day, by the Stifles of Conscience, imagining a late Repentance
will made Atanement at last, without considering a great Injustice was done, as
is almost universally acknowledged, which "seems to be one of those Crimes that
are never forgives in this World, nor in the next. -- Indeed a Man may repent,
but the Conditions an so hard, so mortifying, that not one of a thousand will
sign them -- For an Injustice (especially in such a Case) is not pardoned,
without a full Reflitution, and Reparation of Damages, and these run often
high" says an excellent Author -- Notwithstanding all I have said, some who
hope I shall succeed, yet are amused with a Notion then I set myself in
Opposition to Government, when I am only endeavoring that good Government, and
the real Design of it be supported against the Invaders of our Liberties and
Privileges; and do not pretend to kick against the Pricks, as some have said --
No Man is obliged to sacrifice his own Reputation, to preserve other Peoples,
says the moderate Dr. Tillotson. --

Let it be remembered that it is not degrading any particular Person, to speak
highly of the Body of the People; neither would it be improper to say, I will
take Care, and give no just Cause of Offense, I had almost said, against the
Majesty of the People: Their Privileges and Liberties I will be as tender of as
the Apple of my Eye, and will not persist in their Destruction, to the Ruin of
myself --

If I can be favored in the same Manner, as Criminals of all Sorts are, that
is, by a Jury of twelve Men, I think I shall enjoy the Privilege of an
Englishman, and this is all I desire; and to their Judgment I shall willingly
submit --

D. F.

APPENDIX To the TOTAL ECLIPSE, etc.
AS I promised in my late Piece, entitled, A TOTAL ECLIPSE or LIBERTY, etc. to
give the Public some Thoughts on the Original of Civil Government, The Rights
of the People, etc. I shall now proceed according to my Engagement: although I
am sensible there is a large Field opens, I must be Very short upon each
Particular, divesting my self of all Partiality as I go along, continually
keeping in my Eye these Maxims -- Justice is justly represented blind; because
she sees no Difference in the Parties concerned -- She has but one Scale and
Weight, for Rich and Poor, Great and Small -- Her Sentence is not guided by the
Person, but the Cause -- Impartiality is the Life of Justice, as that is of
Government -- But to proceed --

I will suppose in the first Place, That all Men are so just, that not any one
individual would do any Thing he imagined injurious to his Neighbor, but that
they were only liable to some Mistakes about their own and others Rights, and
that this would occasion Disputes among them. -- And I will further suppose,
that these honest Men, are too suspicious to leave their Disputes to the
Arbitration of others, each fearing the Interest his Adversary has with the
Person they leave their Affairs to -- Now it seems necessary from these
Considerations, that there should be CIVIL GOVERNMENT, a State of civil
Society, of Freemen united under Government for the common Interest. If any
should say, How must this Government be formed, and by whom? I answer,
certainly by these very Men whose Interest and Liberty are to be preserved; --
"As the common Interest of the whole Body is the End of all Civil Polity, is
owned by all. This, all Subjects insist upon, and all Governors glory in, as
their Dignity, except some vain Monsters, who forgetting their mortal State,
arrogate to themselves the Rights of Almighty GOD."

As to the Internal Structure of States, and the several Parts of the supreme
Power, it is observed, "No Governors are the natural Parents or Progenitors of
their People, -- Nor has GOD by any Revelation nominated Magistrates, showed
the Nature, or Extent of their Power, or given a Plan of Civil Polity for
Mankind." -- It Is also allowed, "To constitute a State or Civil Polity in a
regular Manner, these three Deeds are necessary: First, A Contract of each one
for all, that they should unite into one Society to be governed by one Counsel.
And next a Decree or Ordinance of the People concerning the Plan of Government;
and the Nomination of the Governors. And lastly, another Covenant or Contract
between these Governors and the People, binding the Rulers to a faithful
Administration of their Trust, and the People to Obedience."

Some may talk of a peculiarly divine Right; which is only a mere Dream of
Court Flatterers; It Is true, in a Sense every Right is divine; but then it
cannot be meant in any other Sense than as it is constituted by the Law of GOD
and Nature. -- The Rights of the People are certainly divine as well as the
Rights of Magistrates; and I hope no one will dispute, but that the Rights of
the People the more divine than the Rights of their Representatives, as the
latter has no more than a delegated Power from the Fountain, chose for the
Defense and Protection of the People; and they receive and hold that Power only
from them, and by them -- So that it is natural, nay a Duty, when the common
Rights of this Community is trampled upon, or only the Liberty of one is
attempted against, and that made a Precedent of, then they are perfidious to
their Trust, and that Moment forfeit all the Power committed to them; the Alarm
then ought to be given, but with Prudence and Moderation; for if but one Member
suffers unjustly, the whole Community is wounded through his Sides, and the
Body Politic really suffers as much as the Body natural does by loosing a
Limb. --

It is observed by an excellent and approved Writer, "That in all Ages there
has been too much Patience in the Body of the People, and too stupid a
Veneration for their Rulers, which has produced many monstrous Herds of
miserable abject Slaves or Beasts of Burden, rather than civil Polities of
rational Creatures, under the most inhuman and worthless Masters, trampling
upon all Things human and divine with the utmost Effrontery. -- A People enjoy
Liberty, when each one is allowed to act as he inclines, within the Bounds of
Civil Law, and not subjected to the Caprice of any other." -- The Romans, in
speaking of a free People, generally mean a Democratical State, a Form of
Government, where the supreme or legislative Power is lodged in the Common
People, and have their Turns of Commanding as well as Obeying --

And though I might say much upon the Downfall of Tyranny and show wherein the
Liberty and Power of the People has been vindicated and acknowledged even by
their chief Rulers; but as I am in Hopes it will never be suffered to arrive at
any great Height here, without a noble Stand and Check, shall only bring a few
Instances to the present Purpose, viz.

Augustus Caesar, one that had the Empire of the World, would not suffer the
People to call him Lord.

Tiberius Caesar, who succeeded him in the Empire, in an Oration he made to his
People, uses these Words, "I have often, and do still affirm, that a good and
virtuous Prince, whom you have entrusted with so great and large Authority,
ought to serve the Senate, and all the Citizens often, and many Times
particular Persons, neither do I repent of what I have said; and I have
acknowledged you for my very good and favorable Lords, and do still
acknowledge the same." --

Trajan the Emperor confessed, that he was inferior to the People; for when the
Praetor delivered him the Sword at his Inauguration, he returned it to him
again with these Words, "Take this Sword, use it for me; and that so much the
more, because it is the more wicked for one that rules over all, to transgress
the Law himself." --

Theseus, in like Manner, a most wise and valiant King of the Albenians
acknowledged the People's Power to be above his; and affirmed, yea, gloried in
it, That in Albens the People Reigned."

Thus the greatest Emperors have taken Pleasure, and no doubt thought it a
great Honor, to acknowledge themselves the People's Servants; and the People
their Lords or Masters; and in short, when they behave well, and act agreeable
to the Laws, they are worthy of double Honor, and gain the Affections of the
People, in whom lies their Safety, and enkindles in them Love and Unity, as
much as a Clergyman does, when he preaches up, and inculcates the Truths of the
Christian Religion, and sets a bright Example of Virtue, and adorns his
Profession with Humility, a meek and quiet Spirit: but whenever he leaves the
Standard, and begins to Lord it over his People's Faith, and broach unsound
Doctrines, and endeavors to establish them as Precedents for Truth, the People
to prevent his overthrowing the Christian Constitution, exert their Right, and
take away his Power, not withstanding his Pretensions of being a Messenger of
the Lord of Hosts: -- So it is in a political Sense agre^^^^ to the English
Constitution for the People to act (...) of the best in the World to make them
happy (...) the Prince great and honorable, as it is (...) more honorable to
reign over a free People than over Slaves. -- And thus, (be it spoken with the
greatest Reverence) the DIVINE BEING himself, when he speaks of his Power,
says, My People shall be willing in the Day of my Power: Here is no Force, for
by our Make and Constitution we are free Agents; if we are miserable, it is our
own Faults; Liberty, is as it were interwoven into our very Natures, and we can
no more shake it off, without doing Violence to ourselves, than we can erase
out ot our Minds the Law of Self Preservation; neither does GOD, Nature, Law or
Reason oblige us to it -- And though he is Independent and Almighty, and
accountable to none, he ever acts agreeable to the eternal Reason and Nature of
Things, and even sometimes, as it were disrobes himself of his Majesty, and
appeals to his People to testify against him, whether he has not done them
Justice: so great is his Condescension to his rational Creatures; and then,
after having set Life and Death before them, advises them to choose Life, but
leaves them to their own Choice --

And though I could produce many more Instances and Testimonies of this Nature,
from Philosophers, Orators, and others, some may say the Judgment of Man is not
sufficient Proof, therefore I shall mention a few from Scripture and Reason, to
show that the Power is not inherent, as some imagine, in the Officers chose,
but remains in the People -- In the Old Testament indeed, we read, that GOD
called Moses to the Government, and gave him a Commission; Exodus iii.
GOD himself also by his own Voice, appointed Joshua to his Office: those
immediate Calls were easily known by some particular Signs or Tokens, whereby
the Lord made known his Mind to his People -- Gideon was called by an Angel
sent from Heaven, and perhaps many other Judges were called in the same Manner;
but whoever had this Call, there always was something or other in the Manner of
it, or the Excellency of the Spirit, which sufficiently convinced the People,
that they were appointed by GOD to govern them, and then they with Pleasure
hearkened to, and obeyed them, provided they did what was just. GOD calls a Man
to the Government, by and with the Consent of the People. But not to mention
any Thing that might be tedious; how the Kings of Israel were called by the
Consent of the People, and went to make Saul, David, Solomon and Josiah Kings,
as it will be sufficient to say, that in former Times it appears the Right of
making Kings was in the People. -- Then it is Idle and Trifling for any to
pretend that the Power is not inherent in the People, and that they are such
Fools as to give it away when they choose Representatives and other Officers to
rule them; or to speak more properly, to assist them in maintaining their just
Rights and Privileges.

It is said, Deuteronomy. xvi. 18.
Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates, which the Lord thy
God gives thee throughout thy Tribes, and they shall judge the People with
just Judgment.

"To choose Men as Representatives and Protectors of the Public Good, and then
suppose they have a Right to act contrary to the Interest of their
Constituents, is to imagine, that Physicians, chosen to superintend and cure
the Sick in Hospitals, have a Right to kill their Patients, if they please,"
says a late Author.

Inconveniences of Government often lies in the Excess of the Magistrates
Power; but certainly they are not to have any Power which is for the People's
Hurt, which would be contrary to the very End for which is was designed, The
People's Good. -- Romans xiii. 4.
The Apostle Peter bids us to submit to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake," -- but if they treat us contrary to the Law, we are to do as Daniel did,
who would not obey Darius's wicked Command, but pray or speak boldly and openly
against them --

It was said to King WILLIAM Fair LIBERTY in Sables Dressed,
Write his loved Name upon his Urn,
WILLIAM the Scourge of Tyrants past,
And Awe of Princes yet unborn.
His Epitaph by Watts.
in a famous Address, "That as you are King of your People, so you are the
People's King; this Title, as it is most glorious, so is it the most
indisputable in the World. -- Your Majesty, among all the Blessings of your
Reign, has restored this, as the best of all our Enjoyments, the full Liberty
of Original Right in its Actings and Exercise -- Your Majesty knows too well
the Nature of Government, to think it at all less honorable, or the more
precarious, for being devolved from, and centered in the Consent of your People
-- That the chiefest Felicity of a Crown consists in the Affections, as the
first Authority of it derives from the Consent of the People" --

It may seem vain in me to pretend to write upon the Nature of Civil
Government, and that I had much better leave it to those who are more capable.
-- This I am very willing to do; but as I have lately suffered so much in a
free Country, and where Liberty is actually established by the Laws, I think no
one can blame me, if I give my Opinion, though very imperfect, as the Injured
have a natural Right to complain -- In order to prove this Right of the People,
"The Nature of the Thing, says one, is the Reason of the Thing: It was vested
in them, i. e. The Representatives, by the People, because the People were the
only original of their Power, being the only Power prior to the Constitution,
-- And if they invert the Grand End of their Institution, the Public Good
cease to be in the same public Capacity,

And POWER retreats to its ORIGINAL -- " And consequently the Injured have a
Right to Satisfaction -- I would not have any imagine from what I have already
wrote, that I have a Disposition to be at Varience with Gentlemen who are
annually chose to Represent this People, or that I am not a Friend to good
Government; -- no, on the contrary, I almost adore it; but especially the
English Constitution, as established by Law, the only one in the World, to make
the People happy, and the Prince great; as I intimated before; and here, to use
the Words of one, "Currat Lex, Fiat Justitia, is the Life and End of our
Government, and when the Law has not its Course, and Justice is not done, then
there is a Dissolution of it; and he that will pursue my Lord Coke's Exposition
of Magna Charta shall find that it is a Fundamental and ancient Right of the
Subject that Justice is not to be delayed or denied. --

In the second Part of my Lord Coke's Institutes, Chap. xi. on Magna Charta, he
tells us, least any Party that has a Right, should be without Remedy, or that
there should be a Failure of Justice, therefore Statutes are always so to be
expounded, that there should be no Failure of Justice, but rather than that
should fall out, that Case, (by Construction) should be excepted out of the
Statute."

In the 29th Chap. on Magna Charta, Nulli negabimus aut defferemus Justitiam
vel rectum, and that by no means common Right, or common Law should be
disturbed, or delayed, no, though it be commanded under the Great Seal, or by
any Command whatsoever, either from the King, or any other: and this is backed
or seconded by a Statute made the second of Edward III. Chap. 8. which says
thus, That it shall not be commanded by the Great Seal, nor the Little Seal, to
disturb or delay common Right: And though such Commandments do come, the
Justices shall not therefore leave to do Right in any Point."

I must make this Remark, That if any one breaks the Laws, even a Murderer, he
has all the Compassion that is possible for any one to desire, allowed him; he
is not obliged even in this Case to accuse himself; but every Thing is fair and
open; Circumstances in the first Place, must give just Cause of Suspicion; the
Grand Jury of 24 Men must find a Bill against the Criminal; then tried in open
Court, and allowed the Privilege of Lawyers to save him if they can, Arguments
for and against him; the Opinion of impartial Judges to sum up the Evidences to
a Jury of 12 Men upon Oath, to give their Opinion, whether the Criminal is
guilty or no, and after that is done, the chief Judge in a solemn Manner, puts
it to the Criminal, Whether he has any Thing to say why Sentence should not be
passed upon him? After some Time (the Criminal having nothing to say in his own
Justification) the Judge pronounces upon him, and declares him guilty: -- Here
is Beauty and Order, Justice and Righteousness meets together, Mercy and Truth
embrace each other -- "We ought ever to regard, honor, and preserve our
original Constitution, which of all regal States is the bed framed in the
Universe. The Balance of our Government is hung indeed in the nicest manner
imaginable: a single hair will turn it; but when it is exactly even, there
cannot be a finer system wider Heaven."

But how contrary to this was the Proceeding of a late extraordinary House of
Representatives, who arraigned the Author of the foregoing Remarks before them,
examined, judged and condemned by their own sovereign, independent Power,
without any Accusers, except the very Persons who looked upon themselves as
injured --

I wish the Advice of the Town Clerk of Ephesus relating to St. Paul, had been
thought of at that Time, then perhaps I should have been dismissed; -- If
there is a Matter against any Man, the Law is open, and there are Deputies; let
them implead one another -- Then said Paul, sit thou to judge me after the
Law, and command to be smitten contrary to the Law? -- Is it lawful to
scourge a Man that is uncondemn'd?

What was the Consequence of the rash Procedure of that House? -- The Author of
this Piece was thrown, or hurried at Midnight into a Stone Goal, which stunk to
that Degree, that it almost suffocated him, where he lay ten Hours before his
Friends or Relations knew it: -- Upon their hearing of this, his Wife was
seized with the most violent Fits; but I shall not here give a particular
Account of the bad Consequences with which this was attended -- and the Death
of the poor little Infant, who even anticipated its Birthright, by beginning
its Lamentation before it was capable of seeing the Light, -- as it would be
too melancholy for me to relate, and perhaps not so proper for some to hear; --
which must be deferred to the Time of Trial here, or hereafter.

When we consider the Transactions of the present Scene of Things will be
strictly examined into in the future State, how does it become us to rectify in
this State of Trial, either the wilful or mistaken Affairs of Life, and make
all the Satisfaction and Restitution we can, which goes into the very Nature of
true Repentance? -- Whatever the Great, and Mighty may think, and however they
may boast of their pretended Power, and justify their illegal Actions, they
will all be very soon and fairly Scanned, when they are obliged to appear before
the supreme Judge of All, when the condemned would be glad to Shrink into their
primitive Nothing -- If any should say, there is no Occasion for thief
Religious Reflections -- I answer, they would have been of another Mind could
they have had but a true Idea of this unheard of Scene --

Must not these Things be inquired into? Must they, can they sleep; no, Justice
cries aloud, let no indirect Methods be taken to stop the free Course thereof,
-- I had by laying in that cold Place, so impaired my Health, that for five
Months I could not say I was a well Man as before -- Had I been one of the
Offscouring of the Earth, and gone on in a constant Course of Wickedness, this
Treatment would have been unjust; but I have lived almost 40 Years in the
World, above 20 of it in this Town, a peaceable Member of Society, my Companion
brought up in the most tender manner, unacquainted with such rough Treatment,
till this sudden, unexpected, and melancholy Affair happened --

These Considerations all put together, and the little Provocation for it, I
leave to the World, nay, to my greatest Enemies, whether, take it, in all its
Circumstances, there ever was such a Transaction justified in all Christendom?
-- But the Admiration must rise to a prodigious Height, when it is done by
Men, who would take it very ill, should any say, they were not Men of Religion,
in whom Mercy and Compassion, Justice, and Honesty reigns; who look upon
themselves as the Patrons and Friends of the Country. --

Should any now pretend I have magnified Things, and have not set them in their
true Light; I beg leave to say, I think I have even diminished, and come far
short of the Idea a present Spectator must have had; and so must leave it --

I shall here insert the Words of a Writer among ourselves, "The English
Constitution is originally and essentially free, -- The Character which J.
Caesar and Tacitus both give of the ancient Britain so long ago, is, That they
were extremely jealous of their Liberties, as well as a People of a martial
Spirit. Nor have there been wanting frequent Instances and Proofs of the same
glorious Spirit (in both Respects) remaining in their Posterity ever since, --
in the Struggles they have made for Liberty, both against foreign and domestic
Tyrants -- The Prerogative and Rights of the Crown are stated, defined and
limited by Law; and that as truly and strictly as the Rights of any inferior
Officer in the state; or indeed of any private Subjects -- It does not appear,
but that Mankind, in general, have a Disposition to be as submissive and
passive and came under Government as they ought to be -- "

Our natural Parents have not a Right over their Children, either to command
them to do any Thing that is inconsistent with Reason or Religion, or even to
treat them in such a Manner as to provoke them; much more have they any Right
to abuse them; should they do thus, they cease to be, or at least do not
deserve that endearing Character of Father and Mother, but justly forfeit it,
and may be looked upon as Monsters in human Shape. -- Now to apply this to the
Political Parents of a Country; when ever they act inconsistent with the high
Character they have conferred upon them by the People, the Glory immediately
departs from them; Obedience of the Subject to them; ceases to be a Duty. It is
quite a wrong Notion which some have of Government: Even the Deed of Gift made
to David and his Seed, was not absolute, but conditional,; and they were to
hold it in no other Sense, but upon Condition of keeping the Law of God, and
executing his Judgment. 1 King, vi. 12. and viii. 25. and ii. 3, 4.


It is plain, even to a Demonstration, that the Peoples Good and Happiness, is
the End and Design of Civil Government; and they have the Power, and if they
give it up, or which is the same Thing, allow so much Power as to hurt
themselves, they neglect their Duty, which the Law of GOD requires, and
undervalue their Birthright, and it is a Resignation of their Laws, Lives,
Liberties, and Estates, to their Wills, which King James knew to be an eminent
Expedient, when he used to say, "Let me make what Judges and Bishops I will,
and I will have nothing to be Law or Gospel but what I please" A pretty Speech
for a King.

"The Law is the surest Sanctuary that a Man can take, and the strongest
Fortress to protect the weakest of all -- And that which is called common
Right, is called common Law -- The Law is also called Rectum, because it
discovers that which is crooked or wrong -- For as Right signifies Law, so
crooked signifies Injuries -- Which are the Words of that Oracle of the Law,
the Sage and Learned Coke." And in the English Liberties, P. 198. where
speaking of the Star Chamber Court, I find these Words, "There were three
Things in the very Nature of this Court, which were destructive to the original
Constitution of our English Government and Liberties, 1. They proceeded without
Juries. 2. They pretended to a Power to examine Men upon their Oaths, touching
Crimes by them supposed to be committed, which is contrary to all Law or
Reason; for no Man is bound to accuse himself. 3. The Judges of this Court
proceeded by no known Laws or Rules, but were left at Liberty to act
Arbitrarily, and according to their own Pleasures;" and in that of Trials by
Juries, it is said, "Deservedly therefore is this Trial by Juries ranked
amongst the choicest of our fundamental Laws, which whosoever shall go about
openly to suppress or craftily to undermine, and render only a Formality, does
Ipso Facto attack the Government, and brings in an Arbitrary Power, and is an
Enemy and Traitor to his King and Country; for which Reason English Parliaments
have all along been most zealous for preserving this great Jewel of Liberty,
Trials by Juries having no less than 58 several Times since the Norman
Conquest, been established and confirmed by the Legislative Power, no one
Privilege besides having been ever so often remembered in Parliament." "If we
are placed as Criminals at the Bar of Judgment, says one, Watts.
we may reasonably expect that all the favorable Circumstances which attend
our Accusation should be well weighed, and all the kind Allowances made, which
the Nature of the Charge or Crime will admit; for our Consciences would think
it reasonable to allow so much to any Criminal." --

If he that offends in one Point of the Law of God, is guilty of all, what must
we say or what must we think of those who act directly contrary to plain
Statutes, which expressly says, "That from henceforth no Court, Council, or
Place of Judicature shall be erected, ordained, constituted, or appointed
within the Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, which shall have, use, or
exercise the same, or the like Jurisdiction, as is, or has been used,
practiced, or exercised, in the Court of Starchamber." -- What can be more
strongly expressed than this? Is there any Possibility of giving these Words a
different Meaning -- But what was it that was so dreadful in this Court of
Starchamber? Why it was an intolerable Burden to the Subject, and directly
tended to introduce an Arbitrary Power and Government, as that Statute recites
-- The Punishments inflicted by that Court were, Fines, Imprisonments, Pillory,
Cutting off Ears. etc. and there were three Things in the very Nature of this
Court, which were destructive to the original Constitution of our English
Government and Liberties," as before mentioned.

What I am pleading for is of general Concern; we have ever since the first
Settlement of New England, been taught that we have great Privileges, let us
learn to be wise, and know what they arefor Time to come, and not be frightened
out of our Right and Reason at once, by those who would make us believe they
have a Right to do as they please -- The People of Israel were wiser than to be
frighted out of their Birthrights, by Rehoboam's great Words --

It has been the Wisdom of the English Nation heretofore, not to allow too much
Power to any particular Set of Men, especially in one Branch: For this Reason
it is not supposed a Right in the Legislature to oppress the Subject: was this
once allowed, it would then be established as a Rule -- So that when they could
agree, might not only arraign, judge and condemn whom they please, but also
execute all who dared to oppose their Measures; after this, they might in their
Wisdom think it but reasonable, not only to take away Life, but Estate too, as
justly forfeited, and perhaps a numerous Family become Beggars at once. -- And
would any then dare to be so bold and presumptuous as to complain? No surely,
the very Persons who were served in this Manner might justly be retorted upon,
as they gave that Power which they might have kept in their Hands --

This is one Consequence that might follow, and no doubt would, when for
Political Reasons, a Point was strained, and strongly urged, that it would be
for the public Good; but should not this be the Case, and no Man was
immediately deprived of Life; but were so moderate as only to put him into
Goal, and to remain there during Pleasure; this might actually be worse than
Death itfelf; for it it certainly better not to have Life than to be pretty
well assured we must remain in Misery during the Pleasure of those Persons
whose tender Mercies, are evidently so very cruel -- and all upon SUSPICION --
"If unsupported Suspicions are to have Weight at the Bar of Justice, no
Innocence can be safe -- Why must we suffer the Penalty of Guilt, when even the
Charge could admit of no Proof! -- and confined in the Mansions of Infamy,
under Locks and Bolts?"

"If the Prerogative be set above the Law, it will quickly devour it. -- God
will not authorize that which he has declared to be unjust, for just and
righteous are his Ways: Oppression will make a wise Man mad, which shows that
Subjects have a Right in their Properties, as well as Kings have to their
Crowns: If there were not some such Right, there could be no Oppression or
Injustice, for Oppression or Injustice, is when that which is another's Right
is detained or taken from him against his Consent. If Naboth had not had a
Right in his Vineyard, Ahab need not to have capitulated with him to have it
for a Garden of Herbs, neither would God have visited Ahab's Family for the
Blood of Naboth," says a true Patriot. --

I endeavored with Honesty and Truth to convince them Gentlemen, that I knew
not the Authors of that Pamphlet, thinking it would be most to my Advantage to
be open and free in declaring my Mind, well knowing that Tricking never answers
with honest Men, and will hardly bear with Rogues --

"The Rights of Magna Charta depend not on the Will of the Prince or the Will
of the Legislature; but they are the inherent natural Rights of Englishmen:
secured and confirmed they may be by the Legislature, but not derived from nor
dependent on their Will. It has commonly been the Case, that Civil Liberty as
well as Christian, has been lost by little and little; and Experience has
taught, that it is not easy to recover it again.

If it be allowed, That the Representatives have an independent Power, and can
imprison the Subject when they please, I think, with Submission, there is no
middle State betwixt Slavery, and Freedom. The Point in Hand is very short,
either they were limited in their Power, or they were not -- If they were not
limited, we were as much under the Subjection of their Passions as their
Reason; but if they were limited, then certainly it was, the Law that sat their
Bounds; and the Exercise of any Power beyond what that allows, is unlawful,
according to my Understanding. "Neither can it be supposed that God would
subject the World to the Will and Passions of particular Men, because it is
inconsistent with his Mercy and Justice -- The Will of Man is a wild uncertain
Thing, and a very false Guide to follow in governing People; but to make the
Law the Measure of all his Actions, and the Welfare of the People the End of
all public Designs, is that alone which will make a Man safe, easy and
powerful." --

Should any now flatter themselves, that the Representatives have an inherent
Power, pray what should we get by establishing this Principle? Why certainly,
in the space of one Year, which Time they have to exercise this Power in, they
might build a Number of Goals, and fill them with the People, who were so
stupid as to give them this unlimited Power, and they may all be put in upon
Suspicion; and I think even the Clergy would then stand but a poor Chance; for
if in their Prayers or Preaching they said any Thing, that was suspected,
against Persons in Government, away they must go to the Place appointed, and
there remain during Pleasure -- The People must now all set down easy in their
Slavery; there is no Help for it -- Well this Principle being fully
established, I will suppose, for Instance, the Pretender should again land in
England, and he should give out that they might have all the Privileges of
Freeborn Subjects, and this mighty Piece of Slavery, should be wholly
destroyed; nothing would give so great a Shock, to the English Constitution;
and therefore for the Security of our selves and Families, let us constantly
proclaim the Liberties of Englishmen, as it were upon the House-Tops; and let
no Man, or Number of Men take this Crown from us, but stand to our just Rights.

If there is any Thing in the foregoing, that is inconsistent with Truth, or
that I have been unfair in any of my Quotations, and wronged the Authors from
whom I extracted any Thoughts, I shall take it friendly, to have them pointed
out to me; and can assure them I will thank them in a public Manner, but
should any incline to keep behind the Curtain, and act the Part of ill natured
Critics, I shall take no Notice of them, which will be Contempt sufficient,
and Punishment enough. --

I have endeavored with Truth and Sincerity to impress the Mind with a due
Sense, and the great Necessity of good Government, and the proper Respect which
is due to all in Authority; and shown wherein the absolute Power is lodged, and
from whence all delegated Power flows -- If I am Mistaken, shall always lay
open to Conviction -- I have also shown that the People, the whole Body of
them, who have the inherent Power must themselves submit to the Standard, i. e.
the Law; and I can truly say, I with they were as well observed, as the Laws
were in the Days of Alfred the Great, King of England, who reigned above 800
Years ago; and was as History informs us, "a comely Prince, of graceful
Behavior, ready Wit and Memory, a Lover of good Men, very careful in providing
good Laws, most of which are extant. In short, Justice did not only flourish,
but even triumphed in his Days; insomuch that he caused Chains of Gold to be
hung in the high Roads, daring, as it were, the boldest Thieves to take them
away. He was a great Soldier, and may be justly styled, The Founder of our Laws
and Liberties." --

I heartily rejoice, amidst my Grief, that this Affair cannot be charged upon
the Government, as his Excellency, whose Knowledge in the Law, and Acquaintance
with human Nature, as well as their Honors, the Council, and many of the
Representatives, I have Reason to think, abhorred the Thing in their Hearts; and
had not an Opportunity of showing it any other Way; and therefore shall
conclude the whole with my hearty Wishes, that every one may enjoy that Liberty
only, which is agreeable to Law, Reason, and the true Principles of
Christianity; but at the same Time have as "high an Esteem for it as the
ancient Romans had, that they made it one of their Goddesses; and indeed all
sorts of Men are so averse to Slavery, and so tenacious of their Freedom, that
they will undergo the greatest Hardships, expend all their Treasure, and expose
their Lives to the most imminent Dangers, in order to preserve it; nay, when
all these Means were like to prove ineffectual, we have Instances of People who
have voluntarily destroyed themselves, rather than submit to a Yoke, which they
had not been used to bear;" but this was carrying the Matter too far; but at
the same Time shows as the natural Aversion we have to Slavery; For let us only
compare the Courage of an Englishman, who has always been bred up in the
Principles of Freedom, with the Courage of a Frenchman, who has been used to
the contrary, and we shall find the former as superior to the latter, as Light
is to Darkness, or Freedom to Bondage.

We are not under a Necessity of giving up our Privileges, considering His
MAJESTY has ever made the Laws of the Land the Rule of his Actions, and
exercised the Prerogatives of the Crown with that Mildness, Justice, and
Propriety, as on all Occasions to make them, what they were by our excellent
Constitution of Government intended for a Blessing to the People," says a late
Writer. --

"The House of Commons are our Sanctuary against the Oppression of Princes, the
Nation's Treasurers, and the Defenders of their Liberties. --

The House of Commons also are mortal, as a House; a King may dissolve them,
they may die, and be extinct; but the Power of the People has a kind of
Eternity with respect to Politic Duration: Parliaments may cease, but the
People remain; for them they were originally made, by them they are continued
and renewed, from them they receive their Power. --

FINIS.

