Mr. Barnard's SERMON, PREACHED IN THE CHAPEL of HARVARD-COLLEGE at CAMBRIDGE
in NEW ENGLAND, June 23. 1756.

A PROOF OF JESUS CHRIST HIS BEING THE ANCIENT PROMISED MESSIAH: A SERMON
PREACHED IN THE CHAPEL of HARVARD-COLLEDGE AT CAMBRIDGE in NEW ENGLAND, June
23. 1756.

By JOHN BARNARD, A.M. Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in Marblehead.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by J. DRAPER, in Cornhill. 1756.

TO Mrs. Lucy Dudley, Relict of the Honorable PAUL DUDLEY, Esquire
MADAM,
THE distinguishing Respects which You, with your departed Consort, were
pleased to honor me with, in my younger Years, which I can never forget; the
constant high Esteem and inward Veneration I have always justly upheld for you
both, and the great Obligation Harvard-College, ( in which though unworthy, I
account my self greatly interested,) are under to the Honorable Judge DUDLEY,
for his generous Legacy, and the truly pious Design of it; all conspire to
detertermine me in the Dedication of this first published Discourse, upon the
Foundation of the Dudleian Lecture, unto your self; which I do with enlarged
Hopes of your kind Acceptance of the establishing the Foundations of that best
of Religions, which you have so much at Heart, and so beautifully adorn; with
my sincere Thankfulness for your spared Life; and earnest Prayers that the
divine Consolation may be present with you, and that you may rejoice together
in the Redeemer's Kingdom.

Your Obliged Humble Servant, John Barnard.
Marblehead, August 12. 1756.
A Proof of JESUS CHRIST's being the promised MESSIAH.
MARK XIV. 61, 62. AGAIN the High Priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou
the Christ, the Son of the Blessed? And Jesus said, I am.


THE honorable, learned, and devoutly pious Founder of this Lecture, from a
sincere concern for the Establishment, and Flourishing of Christianity, in it is
Truth, and Purity, and to obviate every thing that might have a Tendency to
overthrow, or corrupt, and debase it, has appointed, and generously endowed,
an Anniversary Concio to be held in this College, upon Four important Heads,
alternately: The First of which, for the proving, explaining, and proper
Improvement of Natural Religion, you were well entertained with the last Year;
the Second, which is, for the Confirmation, Illustration, and Improvement, of
the great Articles of the Christian Religion, properly so called, or the
Revelation, which Jesus Christ, the Son of God, has pleased to make, first by
Himself, and afterward by his holy Apostles, to his Church, and the World, for
their Salvation, now comes of of Course to be treated on.

Since the worthy Trustees of this pious Benefaction have done me, (one of the
least of the Brethren in the Ministry,) the great Honor, to invite me, by
their unanimous Choice, to entertain you at this Time, (though my great Age,
wherein I plainly find the Powers of the Mind very much failing me, might have
sufficiently pleaded my Excuse for this Undertaking, in the Presence of so
learned a Body, yet) I thought it my Duty, being so called, to give the Reason
of the Hope that is in me, and to leave behind me my Testimony to the Truth of
those Things that are firmly believed by us. To this End I have read the Demand
of the High Priest to the Lord JESUS, saying, Art thou the CHRIST, the Son of
the Blessed? and the plain, and positive Answer of JESUS to that Demand; (...)
JESUS said, I am.

The Words are sufficiently plain, and need no criticizing upon them, unless to
observe, (what you all know,) that CHRISTOS, in the Greek, is but a pure
Translation of MESSIAH, in the Hebrew; and the Words contain a plain Assertion,
that JESUS CHRIST is the MESSIAH, the son of GOD, promised of old to appear in
this World, as the Savior of sinful Man. As the Belief of a GOD is the
Foundation of natural Religion, so the Belief of JESUS CHRIST his being the
true MESSIAH is the Foundation of the Christian; by whom, and by his Apostles
commissioned from him, GOD has been pleased to reveal his Mind-and Will, and
set up the Christian Religion in the World: and therefore I shall begin the
Discourses upon Revealed Religion by endeavoring, through Divine Assistance, to
prove this first, and main, Article of our holy Religion, that JESUS CHRIST is
the true ancient promised MESSIAH, the SON of GOD.

But before I enter upon the Proof of this, there is one thing that I take for
granted, and another that I make a Demand of. That which I take for granted is,
that there is a supreme Being, existing necessarily, independently, eternally,
infinite in Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, from whom all Things derive, by whom
all Things are upheld, and to whom all rational Agents must be accountable;
which supreme Being we call GOD. For this falls under the Head of Natural
Religion, which I am not now to concern myself with. What I make a Demand of
is, That our Bible, (which we say contains a Revelation from GOD,) may, at
least, be put upon an equal Foot with all other authentic Histories of
Persons, and Facts, which made their Appearance in former Ages. This, I think,
is but a very reasonable Demand; because there is no merely human Composure of
past Persons and Things, that has so many, and strong, concurring Evidences of
the Authenticity of it, as our Bible has, from the Names of the several
Persons, generally, who wrote the various Books, the Time, and Place, they
lived in, the Characters they sustained, the Simplicity, and Plainness, of
their Narrations; the great Probability of the Justness of their Accounts, from
the Nature of the Things they relate; from the great Agreement of the Whole
with itself, tho wrote by such different Persons, in such distant Ages; and
from the concurring Evidence of Profane History to the Truth of what is
reported, where it falls in with the same Times, or had any Knowledge of the
same Things. This I remark, that I may be allowed to make the same Use of
Quotations from the Bible, as any Person might from any authentic History.
Having observed these two Things, I now go on to prove,

That JESUS CHRIST is the MESSIAH, the SON of GOD.

This Proposition contains two distinct Heads, namely:

I. JESUS CHRIST is the MESSIAH. II. JESUS CHRIST is the SON of GOD.
The first of these Heads will be as much as I shall be able to dispatch at
this Time. What therefore I have to do is, to lay before you the Evidence we
have that JESUS CHRIST is the MESSIAH; or that the Person styled in the
NewTestament, and whom we Christians call, JESUS CHRIST, is the same, who, in
the Old Testament, and by the Jews, was called the MESSIAH, promised, in
ancient Times, to make his Appearance in this World, as the Deliverer, and
Savior, of sinful Man. -- In order to give the most clear and full Evidence to
this Fundamental Article of our Christian Faith, taught us by JESUS CHRIST
himself, I shall

1. Show, that there was a certain Person, styled the MESSIAH, who was spoken
of, in the ancient Scriptures, as one to be sent from GOD, in due Season, to
make his Appearance in this our World, upon the great Intention of delivering,
or saving, sinful Man, from all the Unhappiness he has fallen into.

2. I will evidence, that, according to the Scripture Account, this promised
MESSIAH has long since made his Appearance in our World.

3. I shall then endeavor to prove, by ungainsayable Evidence, that the JESUS
CHRIST, whom we Christians acknowledge, is no other than that very MESSIAH, who
was promised of old, and long since appeared in our World, to accomplish the
great Design the MESSIAH was to fulfill. -- And if I can make this fully
evident, as I doubt not but, by Divine Assistance, I shall, it will then
clearly appear that the great Articles of the Christian Religion, or the
Revelation which JESUS CHRIST, the SON OF GOD, was pleased to make, first by
himself, and after wards by his holy Apostles, to his Church, and the World,
for their Salvation, are all built upon the most solid Foundation; and we have
no Reason to be ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST.

1. First then, I am to show, that there was a certain Person, styled the
MESSIAH, who was spoken of, in the ancient Scriptures, as one to be sent from
GOD, in due Season, to make his Appearance in this our World, upon the great
Intention of delivering, or saving, sinful Man, from all the Unhappiness he has
fallen into. It may be we shall not be able to find the Word MESSIAH, as the
Name of a particular Person, in more than two or three Instances throughout all
the old Testament; as in Psalm II. 2. it is said, the Kings of the Earth set
themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together, against the Lord, and against
his MESSIAH. And in Daniel. IX. 25. we read, unto MESSIAH, Nagid the Prince;
and ver. 26. MESSIAH shall be cut off. But then, from the Consideration of a
certain Person's being anointed, or appointed of GOD, to be the Savior, and
Deliverer of Mankind, the ancient Jews more commonly styled him the MESSIAH,
the Word signifying the anointed, which also the Greek Word CHRISTOS signifies
(as you well know,) and their ancient Targums take Notice of the MESSIAH'S
being meant in more Place of the old Testament than Time will allow me now to
make mention of R. Elias reckons up fifty Places where the MESSIAH is meant,
though not named in the Original. Dr. Owen's Exerc. on Heb. p.95.
Indeed, throughout all the Writings of the Old Testament, this certain Person,
called the MESSIAH, is spoken of, and pointed to: so is he in the Jewish
Sacrifices, in the Levitical Services, and in the Aaronical Priesthood, and in
all their Prophets; insomuch as the Jews had a Saying among them Dr. I. Mather.
That all Prophecy does some Way or other relate to the MESSIAH. Mr. Whiston,
Abridgment of Boy. Lest. Vol. II. p. 233.
in his Accomplishment of the Prophecies, at the Boyleian Lecture, observes,
The main Aim of most of the Prophecies of the old Testament was, the coming of
the MESSIAH, and the Circumstances, and Characters of Him, and of his Kingdom.
This was the First Promise made to Adam, immediately after the Fall, Genesis III.
15. that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head. It Would be
too ludicrous to understand the Serpent literally, and it may be too
unphilosophical, and void of Truth, to understand the Woman's Seed strictly in
a literal Sense; but as the Seed of the Woman means one born of a Woman, so the
Serpent means some subtle foul Spirit, who is elsewhere called the old Serpent,
and the Devil: and the Words contain in them a plain Declaration, that, in some
future Time, a certain Person should appear in the World to crush the Policy,
and overthrow the Design of that Evil Spirit, which acted in the Serpent; and
craftily drew Man into a Rebellion against his Maker, and so deprived him of
the Happiness he was made for; by delivering of the poor fallen Creature from
the Death, and Misery, he was now become subject to, and the Recovery of him to
the Image, and Favor, of his GOD. This promised Savior, Deliverer, Redeemer,
(which primarily respected all Mankind, and was not confined to any particular
Nation and People, tho afterward, under some particular Circumstances, was
confined to the Jewish Nation,) runs through all the after Promises, Predictions,
and Prophecies, under some special Character of him, or Circumstances relating
to him.

Thus when it was said to Abraham, Genesis XII. 3. In Thee shall all the Families
of the Earth be blessed, which is repeated, Genesis XVIII. 18. and all the Nations
of the Earth shall be blessed in him; This cannot be understood of Abraham
Personally, who had little to do with the Families, and Nations of the Earth,
and some of which suffered upon his Account, and by his Hands; but is to be
understood of some that should descend from him; and that, not his Posterity in
general, who proved the Extirpation, and Ruin of many Nations, but of some one
particular Person; that is, the promised Seed; and therefore it is more plainly
said, Genesis XXII. 18. In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed:
which means some One, who should descend from Abraham, which should prove a
common Blessing to Mankind. Therefore this Promise is justly applied by the
Apostle Paul to the MESSIAH, as the only wonderful Person, raised up by GOD, of
the Stock of Abraham, and sent into the World, to be an extensive Blessing to
the Human Nature; for so he learnedly argues, Gal. III. 16. Now to Abraham, and
his Seed, were the Promises made; He faith not, and to Seeds, as of many, but
as of One; And to thy Seed, which is CHRIST.

Again, he is spoken of, as one that should be sent into the World before the
Conclusion of the Jewish Policy, and then the Gentiles should be called to
partake of the Blessing from him, in that famous Prophecy, Genesis XLIX. where
Jacob tells his Sons what should besal them in the last Days. (Where I would
observe by the Way, that by the last Days, or latter Days, in the old
Testament, is generally meant, and so understood by the Jews, the Days, or Time
of the MESSIAH:) And says Jacob, in the Blessing of Judah, ver. 10. The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, until Shiloh
come; and unto him shall the gathering of the People be. That is, the Tribe of
Judah should not be lost, or extinct, whatever became of the other Tribes, nor
all Government in that Tribe cease, until the coming of Shiloh, that Messenger
of the Covenant, who is the same with the MESSIAH the anointed.

Once more, Balaam, upon a View of the Camp of Israel, has his Mind filled with
noble Images of Him who should spring from them, and be their Glory; and, in a
sort of Rapture, breaks forth in this Strain, Numb. XXIV. 17. I shall see him,
but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh; there shall come a Star out of
Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel; etc. The Him, here spoken of,
plainly refers to some future Person, who was well understood in those Days,
only by pointing at him, without naming him; and who could this be, but the
MESSIAH, the Deliverer, whom the Jews looked for. Accordingly all their Targums
agree in the MESSIAH'S being intended by this Prophecy; and when the Jews had
accepted of Bar Coziba for their Messiah, they called him Bar Chocheba, the Son
of the Star, from Chochab the Star mentioned in this Prophecy. Dr. Owen, supra,
p. 98.


To add no more, Moses spoke of the same Person, when he said to the People,
Deuteronomy. XVIII. 15. The Lord, thy God, will raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the
Midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken. This
describes the promised Seed, as a Lawgiver, a Prophet, that should make known
the Mind and Will of GOD unto the World; and (adds he) whosoever will not
hearken to my Words, which he shall speak in my Name, (said GOD,) ver. 19. I
will require it of him. Which has most sadly been fulfilled upon the Jews, in
their Extermination, because of their not hearkening to the true MESSIAH when
he appeared among them.

In all the Places I have mentioned, the former Jews understood the MESSIAH to
be spoken of, and in many other Places, too numerous to be quoted. And it would
be to trace through the greatest Part of the Old Testament, to turn to all the
Instances in the History, the Law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, where the
MESSIAH is intended, described, and characterised, in his Person, Office,
Qualifications, and Works; what I have hinted at may suffice to show, that
there was such a Person, called the MESSIAH, often spoken of in the ancient
Scriptures, who should appear in due Time, in this World, as the Deliverer, and
Savior, of Mankind.

1. therefore pass on to the second Thing proposed; viz.

2. To evidence, that, according to the Scripture Account, this promised
MESSIAH has long since made his Appearance in this our World. This will be
evident, by taking notice of several Things, spoken of in the Scripture, which
clearly manifest, that many Hundreds of Years have run out, since the MESSIAH
must needs have appeared. As now,

The latter Prophets speak of the Appearing of the MESSIAH, as of what was very
near at Hand, and suddenly to be looked for. So Zachariah says, Zac. IX. 9.
Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Zion; Shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy
King comes unto thee; He is just, and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon
an Ass, and upon a Colt, the Foal of an Ass. The Words are evidently spoken of
the MESSIAH, Him whom the Jews looked for as their King; as all the Characters
here given of Him manifestly prove; and so the ancient Jews acknowledge. And
what I particularly observe is, that the coming of their King is spoken of in
such a Strain, and Mode of speech as denotes, not only the Certainty, but, the
Speediness of his Advent. Behold thy King comes; as if He was even then, in
their Time, while that Generation was standing, to make his Appearance. Haggai
also yet more plainly says Hag. II. 6, 7. Thus faith the Lord of Hosts, yet
once, it is a little while, and I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth and the
Sea, and the dry Land; and I will shake all Nations, and the Desire of all
Nations shall come; and I will fill this House with Glory, faith the Lord of
Hosts. By the Desire of all Nations is evidently meant the MESSIAH, whom the
Jews looked for as a glorious Prince; and from the great Things spoken of Him
by them, in their Writings, and Traditions, particularly His being the Great
Deliverer, and Savior, of the World, the other Nations round about them had
their Expectations raised Percrebuerat orient toto vetus et constans Opinio,
esse in satis ut co tempore Judea profecti rerum potirentur. Suet. in Vesp.
Cap. 4.
What I remark now is, that this Desire of all Nations should come within a
little while from the uttering of this Prophecy; it shall not be long before he
shall come. And how strongly does Malachi express it, -- Mal. III. 1. The Lord
whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple. Suddenly here does not relate
to the Manner, but to the Time, of his coming; meaning that he should come very
quickly. Now none of these three mentioned Prophets were later than about the
Time of Nehemiah's Reformation, which was at least two and twenty Hundred Years
ago: and therefore we may reasonably conclude, that what was then spoken of, as
suddenly, and within a little while, to be accomplished, is long since come to
pass.

But Daniel limits the Time of the MESSIAH'S Advent to a certain Period. Dan.
IX. 24. -- Seventy Weeks are determined upon thy People, -- Know therefore, and
understand, that from the going forth of the Commandment to restore, and to
build Jerusalem, unto the MESSIAH, the Prince, shall be seven Weeks; and
Threescore and two Weeks, -- and after Threescore and two Weeks shall MESSIAH
be cut off; but not for himself -- and be shall confirm the Covenant with many
for one Week. So that here the Time of his Advent is limited to Seventy
prophetic Weeks, or Four Hundred and Ninety Years, from the going forth of the
Commandment to restore, and build, Jerusalem; that is, from the Decree in the
Seventh Year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, who, in the Scripture, is called
Ahasuerus; which was the only Decree from the Persian Court to restore, and
establish the Jews Church and State. Tho there was a Decree, in Favor of the
Jews, in the first Year of Cyrus's 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 22, 23.
Reign, to build the House of God at Jerusalem; and another eighteen Years
after, in the Reign of Darius Ezra vi. 6, -- 12.
, which was but a Recital of Cyrus's Decree. And now, let us take which we will
of these Decrees for the Beginning of the 70 Weeks, or 490 Years, they have all
run out above 1700 Years since: and therefore we may be sure, if the MESSIAH
was to have appeared, in the World, according to this Prediction, he has long
since appeared.

Besides, There are many Things spoken of, which were to remain until the
coming of the MESSIAH; which are long ago passed away: therefore he has come
many Ages since. Thus, the Tribe of Judah, and Dominion, and Government in it,
was to remain until the Days of the MESSIAH, as we see in that forementioned
Prophecy, Genesis XLIX.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver
from between his Feet, until Shiloh come. That by Shiloh is meant the MESSIAH,
is evident from the Notation of the Word, which the most learned in the Hebrew
As, Mercer, Fagius, Schinder, Buxtorf, and many others.
agree to come from a Word that signifies, to prosper, to save, and so refers
to the first Promise of the Deliverer, or Savior; and from it is being included
in the Blessing of Jacob to his Children, and confined particularly to his Son
Judah; to whom belonged the Pre-eminence; and from the gathering of the People
to him, which is the same with all Nations being blessed in him; and from the
Account which the ancient Jews, who best understood their own Books, give us
hereof: for all their Targums of Onkelos, Jonathan, and the Jerusalem, agree in
understanding Shiloh to mean the MESSIAH. Whether the Word Shebet mean a
Scepter, or a Tribe, as Master Broughton contends, it amounts to the same
Thing; namely, That the Tribe of Judah, and Government in it, should remain
until Shiloh came. The Government was first set up in the Tribe of Judah under
David, and continued in that Tribe, in a Line of Descent from him, through all the
Kings of Judah to the Time of the Babylonish Captivity; and even then there was
somewhat of it remaining, partly in Judea, under those the Court of Babylon set
up as Governors over the Land; partly in the Advancement of Jehojachin above
all the Kings in Subjection to the Persian Emperor, and after him in Salathiel,
who became Prince of the Jews, and to whom they paid Tribute; and, through the
Favor of the Persian Court, they had their great Sanbedrim, and were governed
chiefly by their own Laws, until their State and Church were fully restored,
(as I have said,) in the Seventh Year of Artaxerxes. After their Return to
their own Land, and in the full Possession of their Civil Power, the Government
remained in the Tribe of Judah; what of the other Tribes returned with them
were incorporated into them, and they were all called Jews, and no longer
Judah, and Israel. And through all the Time of the Hasmoneans, and in the Days of
Herod the great, their civil Policy and Government continued in the Tribe of
Judah; and tho Pompey conquered Jerusalem, yet he left the Jews free, under the
Government of their own Laws. So that it was no more the Dr. (...) supra P. 146.
Departure of the Scepter from Judah, and a Lawgiver from between his Feet,
that the Hasmoneans of the Tribe of Levi, or Herod, probably an Idumean, were
for a Time at the Head of the Government, than it was the Extinction of the
Roman Government, for Philip an Arabian, and Maximinus, a Thracian, and other
Foreigners to be their Emperors. But soon after the Birth of JESUS CHRIST,
Judea was made a Roman Province, and governed by a Roman Procurator, and never
more had any Government of it is own. Then the Scepter departed from Judah.
Therefore we find the Jews in our Savior's Days acknowledging the Loss of
their Government, in their want of Power to put CHRIST JESUS to Death, (tho
they had Malice, and Rage enough to have done it, had it been in their Power;)
saying unto Pilate, John XV. 19, We have no King but Caesar. Since the
Destruction of their City and Temple, by Titus, the Roman General, and the
consequent Dispersion of their Nation, they have had no Pretensions to
Government, nor know they where to find any thing of the Tribe of Judah.
Therefore, according to this Prediction, the MESSIAH has long since appeared in
the World.

Again, It was foretold, that the MESSIAH should come whilst the second Temple
was yet standing. So Malachi said, Mal. III. 1. The Lord, whom ye seek, shall
suddenly come to his Temple; the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in.
And Haggai declares what Temple he shall come into, Hag. II. 3,4,7,9. Who is
left among you who saw this House is her first Glory?(that is, the magnificent
Temple which Solomon built,) and how do you see it now? (that is, the Temple
they were then building,) Is it not in your Eyes in Comparision of it, (the
first Temple,) as nothing? Yet to encourage them in their present Work, the
Prophet assures them that this House should be more glorious than the first;
for says he, The Desire of all Nations shall come; and I will fill this House
with Glory, faith the Lord of Hosts: The Glory of this latter House shall be
greater than of the former, faith the Lord of Hosts. It is certain that the
second Temple built by the Jews, in their feeble low Estate, after their Return
from their Captivity, (tho afterward, a little before the coming of the
MESSIAH, it was greatly repaired, even from the foundations, and adorned, by
Herod, yet) came not near to the first Temple in external Sumptuousness and
Glory. David, and Solomon, expended more Gold and Silver open the first Temple,
than, probably, all the Kings of Europe put together could now command, even to
the Amount of about 1235 Million of Pounds Sterling. Beside, the second Temple
was destitute of the Ark of the Covenant, and Mercy-Seat, the Shechinah, the
Thummim and Urim, the holy Fire upon the Altar, and the Spirit of Prophecy,
which were esteemed the Glory of the first Temple. How then could it be said,
the Glory of this latter House shall be greater than of former? Truly, in
nothing but in the Presence of the MESSIAH in it; as it is said, the Desire of
all Nations shall come, and I will fill this House with Glory. The Presence of
the MESSIAH in this latter House shall be a greater Glory to it, than all the
Riches, and peculiar Advantages, which belonged to the first. But now, This
second Temple has been utterly destroyed, rased to the Ground, and the very
Ground where it stood plowed up, by Titus, near upon 1700 Years agone. So that
there is an utter Impossibility of the MESSIAH's ever now coming into the
second Temple. And if this Account be true, it is then evident that the MESSIAH
has long since made his Appearance, even while the second Temple was standing.

I will only add upon this Head, That there was to remain a Distinction of
Tribes, and Families, among the Jews, at least of the Tribe of Judah, and
Family of David, until the MESSIAH'S Advent. This was absolutely necessary;
because, as He was to be of the Seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Judah, and the
Family of David, (as we have seen,) for which Reason He is called, by the Jews,
and in the new Testament, the Son of David; and we are assured that the Family
of David should not be extinct, until a Virgin should conceive, and bear a Son;
which was the Intention of the Sign given to Ahaz: Isaiah. VII. 14. so it could
not possibly be known, whether the MESSIAH, whenever he should come, was truly
of the Tribe and Family specified, if that Tribe of Judah, and Family of David,
had not remained distinct until his Coming. But where now, and for many
Hundreds of Years past, is the Tribe of Judah, and the Family of David, to be
found upon the Face of the whole Earth? The Jews themselves confess, that they
have long ago lost all Genealogy. From whence we justly conclude, that the
MESSIAH has already appeared.

But I go on to observe, that those Things that were to be consequent upon the
MESSIAH'S Advent, have long since come to pass. Thus, after the coming of the
MESSIAH, the Aaronical Priesthood, and Levitical Services, were all of them to
cease. So we read, Dan. IX. 24, 27. Seventy Weeks are determined upon thy
People, (the Time when the MESSIAH should appear,) to finish Transgression, and
make an End of Sins; (that is, to put an End to all Oblations for Transgression
and Sins;) and he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one Week, and in the
Midst of the Week he shall cause the Sacrifice, and the Oblation to cease. The
great Antitype appearing, the Types, as Shadows, shall flee away. Now it is
very evident, that the Aaronical Priesthood and Levitical Sacrifices, have long
since vanished away; it being now impossible for the Jews to offer Sacrifice,
and Oblations, according to the Law of Moses, ever since the Destruction of
their Temple, and Loss of their Genealogy; because they have neither a Priest
to make the Offering, nor an Altar to offer on.

It was also foretold, that, after the coming of the MESSIAH, the city of
Jerusalem should be destroyed, and their civil, as well as ecclesiastical,
State be dissolved. Dan. IX. 26, 27. The People of the Prince that shall come,
(i. e. after the MESSIAH shall be cut off,) shall destroy the City, and the
Sanctuary, and the thereof shall be with a Flood, and unto the End of the War
Desolations are determined; and for the overspreading of Abominations be shall
make it desolate, even until the Consummation, and that determined, shall be
poured upon the desolate. How perfectly the City and Sanctuary, the Jewish
Church and State were destroyed, by the Wars of the Romans, until all that
Desolation which was determined was fully, and dreadfully accomplished upon
them, about 40 Years after the Death of our JESUS, Josephus, the Jewish
Historian, and an Eyewitness, gives us a large and most melancholy Account
of. So the Blood imprecated upon themselves, and their Children, ( Matthew.
XXVII. 25.) fell heavily upon them.

Besides; Upon the Appearing of the MESSIAH, the Gentilesshould be brought to
the Knowledge, and Worship, of the only true GOD, and to he Faith of his
MESSIAH; which is the Meaning of that Passage in Genesis XLIX. 10. Unto him
shall the Gathering of the People be; and of that, Isa. XLIX. 6. I will give
Thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the
Ends of the Earth. What a speedy Accomplishment was there of this Prediction,
upon the Appearing of CHRIST in the World? Within how little a while, upon the
Preaching of his Gospel, were the Heathen Oracles struck dump, and the Gentiles
round about Jerusalem, for many hundreds of Miles, proselited to the Knowledge,
and Worship, of the only true GOD, and the Faith of his MESSIAH? Within about
30 Years, as far as Rome, the Gospel of CHRIST had spread itself; so that their
Amphitheatre was filled with the Blood of Martyrs, laying down their Lives for
their Confession of the true GOD, and of His Son JESUS CHRIST. So Satan fell
like Lightning, upon the setting up of the Kingdom of CHRIST in the World, in
the Conversion of the Gentile Nation: And we ourselves are, at this Day, the
happy Witnesses of this.

From all these Things, which I have but hinted at each of which would admit of
a large Discourse, it plainly, and fully, appears, that the MESSIAH, promised
of old, has long since, according to what was foretold of Him, made his
Appearance in our World.

And so I come to the last general Head I proposed; namely,

III. To prove, that the JESUS CHRIST, whom we Christians acknowledge, is no
other than that very MESSIAH, who was promised of old, and long since appeared
in our World, to accomplish the great Design the MESSIAH was to fulfill.

I might conclusively argue this, from what I have already said. For if there
was a certain Person, called the MESSIAH, who was in some future Time, to make
his Appearance in our World, and this MESSIAH is long since come; (as we have
seen;) then I may justly make the Demand, Who is He? Where is he to be found?
that we may come and worship him. It is certain, if our Lord JESUS CHRIST be
not that MESSIAH, no History, or Age, can show us One. There is no other at
this Day, that I know of, who makes any Pretensions to be the MESSIAH. Those,
who in the early Days of Christianity, set themselves up under that Character,
as Thendas, and Judas of Galilee, soon discovered their Imposture, and came to
nothing. Even Mahomet, who forced his Way by the Sword, acknowledged CHRIST to
be the MESSIAH, but at the same Time proved himself to be an Impostor. So that
JESUS CHRIST is the MESSIAH, or there is none; nor ever will be any. This alone
is an Argument of sufficient Strength, if thoroughly pursued, to prove that JESUS
CHRIST is the MESSIAH spoken of in the ancient Scriptures. But I will endeavor
to confirm this fundamental Point of Christianity, by Two Arguments, that are
indisputable, and ly level to every one's Observation.

1. All those Characteristicks, by which the MESSIAH was to be distinguished
from every other Person, do exactly agree in our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and in no
other Person whatever.

2. The Miracles which JESUS CHRIST wrought are a full Proof of his. being the
promised MESSIAH.

I shall as briefly as I can offer something to each of these.

1. All those Characters, by which the MESSIAH was to be distinguished from
every other Person, do exactly agree in our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and in no other
Person whatever.

It was needful that there should be some such peculiar and plain characters
given of the MESSIAH, as should clearly distinguish him from every other
Person, whenever he should appear in the World; otherwise, as many might make
their bold Pretentions to be the MESSIAH, the World would be thrown into
endless Disputes, and Confusions, and never be able to determine which is the
True. Accordingly there are such plain Characters given of the MESSIAH in the
ancient Scriptures, as easily distinguish him. Some of which I shall briefly
take Notice of.

I have already mentioned several Characteristicks of the MESSIAH, in showing
that He is already come; as his coming at the End of Daniel's 70 Weeks; while
the Tribe of Judah, and their Government remained, and while the Second Temple
was standing; that upon his coming the Jews Church, and State should be
dissolved, and the Gentiles should be bro't to the Knowledge, and Worship, of
the true GOD: all of which Characters of the MESSIAH are to be found upon JESUS
CHRIST, and, unitedly, upon no other. But I will now mention more distinctly
some other Characters of the MESSIAH, many of which agree in no other Person
but JESUS CHRIST alone. As,

1. There are some Characters of the MESSIAH relating to his Descent, of what
Mother, in what Town, he should be born, and that an Herald should go before
him. Thus it was a Character of Him, that he should be of the Seed of Abraham,
of the Tribe of Judah, of the Family of David. Our Lord therefore said John.
VII. 42. Has not the Scripture said, that Christ comes of the Seed of David?
Both the Evangelists, Matthew, and Luke, show this was exactly fulfilled in
JESUS CHRIST; by giving us his Genealogy, well known, and approved, in the Time
of it; the One, by his supposed Father, in a direct Descent from Abraham,
Judah, and David, by his Son Solomon; the Other, by his real Mother; in a
Descent from David, by his Son Nathan: by which also it appears that he was the
true Heir to the Crown of David.

Another Characteristick of the MESSIAH, was that his Mother should be a pure
Virgin. This was pointed at in the first Promise; that he should be the Seed of
the Woman, Genesis III. 15. not the Seed of the Man; which had been a more proper
Expression, if he was to have had any humane Father. And it is plainly foretold
by Isaiah, Isa. VII. 14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and
shall call his Name Immanuel. The Word here used, as the Learned observe,
constantly signifies a pure Virgin, one who never knew a Man. And that this was
spoken of the MESSIAH is evident, from the Name given to Him, Immanuel, or GOD
with us; and from the Design of it, which was to encourage the House of David,
that they should not be cut off, until a future Virgin should bring forth a
Son; that is, until the promised Seed of the Woman should come. This also had
it is literal Accomplishment in JESUS CHRIST. For when Mary, his Mother, was but
espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with Child by the
holy Ghost, as Matthew informs us, Matthew. I. 18. And the Angel Gabriel was sent
from GOD, to the Virgin Mary, the Mother of our Lord, with a Message, that she
should conceive in her Womb, and bring forth a Son, and call his Name JESUS.
And when she replied, How shall this be, seeing I know not a Man? The Angel
answered, and said unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power
of the Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore also that holy Thing, which
shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of GOD. Luke I. 26, -- 35. Again;

It was one Character of the MESSIAH that he should be born in the Town of
Bethlehem, called the City of David. For so the Prophet Micah says, Mic. V. 2.
Thou Bethlehem-Ephrata, tho thou be little among the Thousands of Judah, yet
cut of thee shall be come forth unto me that is to be Ruler in Israel; whose
goings forth have been from of old, from Everlasting. Who should it his Ruler
be, but the MESSIAH, the Deliverer, the King; of whose Kingdom so many great
and glorious Things are spoken through all the Prophets? The ancient Jews, before
our Savior's Time, universally understood this of Him; and so did they who
lived at the Time of the Birth of CHRIST; therefore when Herod, (fearing the
coming of One that would supplant him,) strictly demanded of the Chief Priests,
and Scribes, where CHRIST should be born? they tell him, in Bethlehem of Judea;
and quote this very Text in Micah, as a clear Proof of it. Matthew. II. 4, 5, 6.
And how wonderfully was the whole World put into Motion, to bring on the
Accomplishment of this Prophecy in our JESUS; by the Decree of Caesar Augustus
obliging all Persons to repair to their own City, there to be enrolled; by
which Means Joseph, and Mary, were necessitated to go to Bethlehem, the City of
David, from whom they derived; and while they were there, the Virgin Mother of
our Lord was delivered of her Son; as the Second Chapter of Luke's Gospel
informs us: and There, the wise Men, whom Herod sent to enquire him out, found
the young Child with Mary his Mother, and fell down, and worshipped him. Matthew.
II. 8, -- 11.

Another Character of the MESSIAH was, that He should have one to go before
him, as his Herald, and Harbinger, to prepare the Way for his Reception. This
is spoken of, Isa. XL. 3. The Voice of him that cries in the Wilderness,
Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make straight in the Desert an high Way for our
God; -- and the Glory of the Lord shall be revealed. So Mal. III. 1. Behold I
send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the Way before me; and the LORD whom ye
seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple. And, Chap. IV. 5. Behold I will send
you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful Day of the
Lord. These Texts the Jewish Expositors understood of the Messenger that was to
go before the MESSIAH. Accordingly it was fulfilled in the Ministry of John the
Baptist, who came in the Spirit and Power of Elias, immediately before CHRIST'S
appearing; declaring the Kingdom of God was at Hand; that he who comes after
me is preferred before me, and pointing to JESUS he said, this is the Son of
God; Behold the Lamb of God. As you may see, Matthew. III. 2, 3. Joh. I. 23, 27,
34, 36. Therefore his Father Zacharias said, Luke I. 76. Thou Child shall be
called the Prophet of the Highest; for thou shall go before the Face of the
Lord to prepare his Ways.

Secondly. There are some Characters given of the MESSIAH which have a special
Relation to his Offices, which exactly agree to JESUS CHRIST, and to no other
Person. The very Name, MESSIAH, denotes some high Office to which he is
anointed, and appointed, of God. His general Office was to be that of a
Deliverer, a Savior, a Redeemer, which was included in the first Promise, that
He should bruise the Serpent's Head. And ever after, through all the Prophets, He
is spoken of, as a Savior, and that not so much a temporal as a Spiritual one.
And because not only the Gentile, but the Jewish World were fallen into the
Dregs of Corruption, through their various Lusts blinding their Minds, that they
could not discern the Way of Truth and Life, therefore in the Execution of his
high Office, He was to do the Part of a Prophet, to teach and instruct the
World, in their Duty to God, and to one another, and in the regular Government
of themselves. Therefore it was foretold, Deuteronomy. XVIII. 15. The Lord thy God
will raise up unto thee, a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren,
like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken: and V. 19. Whosoever will not hearken
unto my Words, which he shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him. How
exactly does this agree to JESUS CHRIST? who, throughout the New Testament, is
styled a Savior, who should save his People from their Sins Matthew. i. 21.
and destroy the Work of the Devil I John iii, 8.;
and particularly He is spoken of Luke VII.16, as a great Prophet risen up
among us: and Luke XXIV. 19, as a Prophet mighty in Deed, and Word. As such, He
revealed the Mind and Will of GOD to the World, even all that was necessary to
be known by them; and, like Moses, gave Law unto his Church and People. He
said, John XII. 49, 50, I have not spoken of myself; but the Father, which sent
me, he gave me a Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak: and I
know that his Commandment is Life everlasting; whatsoever I speak therefore,
even as the Father said unto me, so I speak. And GOD has most miserably
destroyed the Nation of the Jews for their refusing to hearken to him.

Thus, to accomplish the great Design of the MESSIAH'S Mission, in the
Redemption and Salvation of sinful Man, GOD and MAN were to be reconciled, and
the guilty Creature is to be restored to the divine Favor; and therefore it
was necessary that the MESSIAH should sustain the Office of a Priest, not of
the Order of Aaron, which admitted of Successor, but of the Order of
Melchisedeck, which abides forever, to make Atonement, and Intercession for
us. Therefore it was said of Him, Psalm CX. 4. Thou art a Priest forever after
the Order of Melchisedeck: and Zachariah speaks of him as a Priest upon his
Throne, Zac. VI. 13. And Isaiah plainly declares, The Lord has laid on him the
Iniquity of us all; and speaks of his making his Soul an Offering for Sin; of
his making Intercession for Transgressors,etc. Isaiah LIII Chap. All of this
most exactly agrees to our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who is the great High Priest of
our Profession, Heb. III. 1, who laid down his Life, John X. 15, and gave
himself a Ransom, Matthew. XX. 28, when he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, Phil. II. 8. In whom (says the
Apostle,) we have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins,
Ephesians. I. 7. God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing
their Trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. V. 19. And having offered a Body, prepared
for him, in Sacrifice, to God for a sweet smelling Savor, to purge our
Consciences from dead Works, that we might serve the living and true God, he
ascended into Heaven, now to appear in the Presence of God for us, and in Him
we have an Advocate with the Father, who ever lives to make Intercession for
us, Heb. IX. 24. 1 John II. 1. Heb. VII. 25.

Finally; The MESSIAH was to be a King, sitting upon the Throne of David, that
is in Zion, over the Church and People of GOD, and of his Kingdom there should
be no End. This Character of Him runs almost through the whole ancient Scripture;
particularly, in the 2d, the 45th, and the 72d Psalms. Isaiah IX. 7. Jer. XXX.
9. and in too many other Places to be now mentioned. The Glory, Extent, and
Stability, of his Kingdom is spoken of in such lofty Strains, that the Jews
mistook it for a very magnificent temporal, or earthly, Kingdom tho truly it
was intended to be a spiritual one; as many Places in the Prophets clearly
determine. And such a King is our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Tho his Kingdom is not of
this World, yet it is in it, as to the Beginnings thereof. He came to recover
Mankind from the Empire of Satan, to set up the Kingdom of God in the World, by
promulgating his Laws, in His Gospel, and by his Ministers; to bring Men into a
Subjection to God their rightful Sovereign, and to the Obedience of Faith. So
is He the King of Israel: Joh. I. 49. The Head of the Church: Col. I. 18. who
conducts his Sons to Glory: Heb. II. 10. Where his Kingdom will be completed
in its fullest Glory, in the perfect Purity, Peace, and endless Happiness of
his willing Subjects.

Thirdly. The several Characters of the MESSIAH, relating to the wonderful
Works to be performed by him, all exactly agree in our Lord JESUS CHRIST. It
was one of the Names given to the MESSIAH, His Name shall be called Wonderful:
Isa. IX.6. and among other things, upon the Account of the wonderful Works
spoken of to be done by him. Particularly, Isaiah speaks of his wonderful Works
in this Language, Isa. XXXV. 4, 5, 6. Behold your God will come, -- he will
come and save you; then the Eyes of the Blind shall be opened, and the Ears of
the Deaf shall be unstopped; then shall the lame Man leap as an Heart, and the
Tongue of the Dumb shall sing. This Character is found exactly to agree to
JESUS CHRIST, as the History of the Gospels assures us: Therefore CHRIST
himself resolves the Question which the Disciples of John put to him in their
Master's Name, Art thou He that should come? or do we look for another? by
saying to them, Matt. XI. 4. 5. Go, and show John again those Things which ye
do hear, and see; the blind receive their Sight, and the lame walk, the Lepers
are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the Poor have the
Gospel preached to them. But the Consideration of the wonderful Works of the
MESSIAH, will naturally fall under the Head of Miracles. I therefore pass to
say,

Fourthly; The Characteristicks of the MESSIAH, relating to his Sufferings, and
Glory, have their exact Accomplishment in JESUS CHRIST. That the MESSIAH was to
be a Sufferer is spoken of in so many Places, and in such strong Terms, that no
One could pretend to be the MESSIAH without this Mark upon him. CHRIST
therefore said to them that stumbled at his Sufferings: Luke XXIV. 25, 26. O
Fools, and slow of Heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Ought
not CHRIST to have suffered these Things? and to enter into his Glory? Verily
lie ought to suffer, as for other Reasons, so for this, that this is given as a
distinguishing Character of him; without which he could not be what he
pretended, for his Sufferings are every where spoken of. The first mentioning
of him pointed to his Sufferings; thou, (the Serpent.) shall bruise his, (the
MESSIAH'S) Heel. Isaiah gives such a clear, and distinct Account of his
Suffering, that the ancient Enemies of Christianity objected he wrote an
History, not a Prophecy. Said the Prophet of him, Isaiah LII. 14. Many were
astonished at thee, his Visage was so marred more than any Man, and his Form
more than the Sons of Men. His Fifty-third Chapter contains a large and minute
Account of his Sufferings, and Death. Zacharias foretells his being sold for
Thirty Pieces of Silver, Chap. XI. v. 12. Daniel informs us, the Messiah shall
be cut off, but not for himself, Chapter IX. v. 26. The Psalmist speaks of the
Manner of Death, Psa. XXII. I am poured out like Water, and all my Bones are
out of joint; they pierced my Hands and my Feet; they parted my Garments among
them, and cast Lots upon my Vesture. If Time would allow me minutely to trace
out all the particular Instances wherein the Sufferings of the MESSIAH are
foretold, and described, in the Old Testament, it would be surprising to see
now exactly all the various Circumstances meet in the Sufferings which JESUS
CHRIST underwent, as they are recorded in the History of the New. But it is eno
to say, They scourged him, crowned him with Thorns, they mocked him, spit upon
him, they crucified him between two Malefactors, they pierced his Side with a
Spear, they parted his Garments, casting Lots. As may be seen, Matthew. XXVII Chapter

But then, such glorious Things are spoken of the MESSIAH, the Magnificence,
Grandeur and Perpetuity of his Kingdom, that the latter Jews could not tell how
to entertain the Thought of his being a Sufferer, and therefore invented the
Fable of two MESSIAH'S, the one the Son of Joseph, who was to suffer, the other
the Son of David, who was to reign in Glory: Whereas, there is not the least
Foundation, in the Scripture, for such a double Messiah. But the Truth is, the
Sufferings, and the Glory, are spoken of one and the same Person. So the
Prophet Isaiah says of him, Chapter LII. v. 13. Behold my Servant shall deal
prudently, he shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very high; and in the same
Breath said, v. 14. His Visage is marred more than any Man. He shall be exalted
above Abraham, extolled above Moses, and be very high above the Angels of God,
said Abarbanel. So were the Glories of Christ exceeding great; as the Glory he
had with the Father before the World was; Joh. 17.5. And the Glory which
belonged to Him as our JESUS in Union to the Logos. For even in his humbled
State He manifested forth His Glory: and we read of Him, Phil. II. 9. God has
highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name. Tho the MESSIAH was
to die, and be buried in the Earth, yet he was to be raised triumphant from the
dead, on the third Day. This was spoken of, Psa. XVI. 10. Thou will not leave
my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy One to see Corruption.
This was typified in Isaac's Deliverance from Death on the third Day, Genesis
XXII. Chap. in Jonah's being cast up alive on the third Day from the Fish's
Belly, Jon. I. 17. II. 10. And in the Prohibition to eat the Sacrifice of
PeaceOffering on the third Day. Lev. VII. 18. And accordingly JESUS rose in
Triumph from the Dead, on the third Day, and saw no Corruption as appears in
the History of the Gospel; and the Apostle says, 1 Cor. XV. 4. He was buried,
and rose again the third Day, according to the Scripture. It was the Glory of
the MESSIAH, that he should ascend into Heaven, in Triumph over all his
Enemies. Ps. LXVIII. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity
captive. And JESUS did so, before many Witnesses, Act. I. 9, 11. While they
beheld he was taken up, -- Ye Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come,
in like Manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven. The MESSIAH was to fit on
the Right Hand of God. Ps. CX. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my
Right Hand. So JESUS CHRIST has done. Heb. X. 12. This Man, after be had
offered one Sacrifice for Sin, forever sat down on the Right Hand of God.

Finally: There are some Characters of the MESSIAH relating to his Person,
which are to be found in none but JESUS CHRIST. As that he was to partake not
only of an humane, but of a divine Nature: He was to be GOD as well as MAN.
That he was to partake of the humane Nature is evident, from his being the Seed
of the Woman, descending from the Loins of Abraham, and his being the Offspring
of David; and from his Sufferings and Death, so often, and clearly, spoken of
in the Scripture. The Psalmist plainly says of him, Ps. LXXX. 17. Let thy Hand
be upon the Man of thy RightHand, the Son of Man, whom thou have made strong
for thyself. Daniel spoke of him, when he said, Dan. VII. 13. I beheld one like
the Son of Man, who came in the Clouds of Heaven. Accordingly, when CHRIST
appeared in the World, he was born of a Woman, ( Math. I. 25.) partook of the
Children's Flesh and Blood, ( Heb. II. 14.) took upon him the Form of a
Servant, and was found in Fashion as a Man, ( Phil. II. 7, 8.) had a Body
prepared, Heb. X. 5. and an humane Soul or Spirit, ( Matthew. XXVI. 38. Luke
XXIII. 46.)

But then, the MESSIAH was to be GOD as well as MAN. Therefore he is called the
Son of God, Psa. II. 7. The Son of the Blessed, in my Text, as denoting his
being by Nature GOD. And what a strange Turn must that philosophical Head have,
which supposes a Son to be of a different Nature from his Father. The MESSIAH
is the GOD that appeared to the Fathers, who led his People Israel out of the
Land of Egypt, and through Wilderness, who gave the Law on Mount Sinai; the
JEHOVAII, the mighty, the eternal, ever-living, and true GOD, besides whom
there is no other; so often spoken of in the Old Testament as the God of
Israel, and whom all the Angles are commanded to Worship. Particularly, the
Psalmist says of him, Ps. XLV. 6. Thy Throne O GOD is forever and ever. And
throout the Old Testament the promised Deliverer is spoken of in such Terms, as
naturally, and unavoidably leads every unprejudiced Mind to conceive of him, as
the living, and true GOD. This is his Name, and this is his Memorial unto all
Generations. Now this glorious Character of the MESSIAH is to be found upon
JESUS CHRIST, and upon no other Person whatever, that has ever made any
Appearance in this World. Previous to his Birth, the Angel declared, he should
be called the Son of GOD, Luke I. 35. The Devils owned thus much, Luke IV. 41,
Thou art CHRIST the Son of GOD. Simon Peter made this glorious Confession, John
VI. 69, We believe, and are sure that thou art that CHRIST, the Son of the
living GOD. He is so the Son of GOD as to be truly, by Nature, and not by
Office only, GOD: Said the Apostle, Joh. I. 1, The Word was GOD. 1 Timothy III.
16, GOD was manifest in Flesh. He is the great GOD: Tit. II. 13. The Lord GOD
almighty: Rev. XI. 17. The omnipresent GOD: Matthew. XVIII. 20. The omniscient
GOD: Joh. XXI. 17. The eternal GOD: Joh. VIII. 58. The true GOD, 1 John V. 20.
By Him all Things were made, Joh. I. 3. Are upheld, Col. I. 17. And are
Governed: Ephesians. I. 22. And shall be judged, 2 Timothy IV. 1. And we are expressly
commanded to honor the Son, as we honor the Father, Joh. V. 23. If these are
not Characters of the one true external Deity, I despair of ever knowing what
is so: And since they belong to our Lord JESUS CHRIST, He is GOD as well as MAN.

Thus we see all the Characters, in the Old Testament, descriptive of the
MESSIAH, most exactly agreeing in JESUS CHRIST, according to the History of the
New Testament; which fully proves Him, and Him only, to be that anciently
promised Person, who was to make his Appearance in our World, for the Benefit
of Mankind.

It is readily granted, that some of these Characters, taken alone, would not
be sufficiently descriptive of the MESSIAH, nor a satisfactory Proof, that
JESUS CHRIST is that Person; because they might be found upon others; as
descending from Abraham, of the Family of David, born at Bethlehem enduring
many Sufferings, and the like. But yet, the continued Series of all the
Prophecies, and Characters, of the MESSIAH, and taken together, are clearly
determinative of Him; and give full Evidence, that the Person, in whomsoever
they all meet, is most certainly He: and therefore, inasmuch as they are all of
them, unitedly, to be found upon our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and upon no other
Person, it amounts to a demonstrative Proof, that He, and He only, is the
ancient promised MESSIAH. I now pass to the second Head of Arguing, viz.

2. The Miracles which JESUS CHRIST wrought are a full Proof of his being the
promised MESSIAH. It is readily granted, That Miracles alone are no sufficient
Proof of any Persons being the promised MESSIAH. They may be a full Evidence,
that the Person who works them is sent, or commissioned, by GOD, but no Proof
that he is that individual Person, called the MESSIAH, who was of old promised
to come into the World, unless this be a Part of the Doctrine which he
teaches, that he himself is the MESSIAH; and then the Miracles wrought by him
will prove the Truth of what he asserts, and so prove him to be the MESSIAH.

None of the Prophets, who wrought Miracles, so much as pretended to be the
MESSIAH; but our Lord JESUS CHRIST appropriated it to Himself, and clearly
taught, that he was the MESSIAH, which was to come into the World. So when John
sent his Disciples to Him, with that Question, Art thou he that should come?
that is, Art thou the promised MESSIAH? Our Lord sends them away with an
affirmative Answer, proving that he was that very Person, by appealing to the
Works which he did, as characteristick of Him: Matt. XI. 4, 5. When the Woman
of Samaria said, I know that MESSIAH comes, which is called CHRIST: JESUS
faith unto her, I, that speak unto thee, am he, Job. IV.26. When Peter made
that Confession, thou art the CHRIST; (because his Hour was not yet come to be
publicly known, and because he would have his Works to evidence who he was;)
he charged them to tell no Man that he was JESUS, the CHRIST, Matthew. XVI. 16,
20. He grants the Truth of what Peter said, but would not have it yet
divulged. When the high Priest demanded of him whether he were the CHRIST, he
answered plumply, in my Text, I am; where, by the Way, observe the Phrases, ye
say that I am, and thou have said, carry in them an affirmative Answer, and
amount to thus much, it is as thou have said, or I am as thou say. And
indeed CHRIST, which is but another Word for the MESSIAH, was the usual Name he
went by. Matthew. I. 16. Mary, of whom was born JESUS, who is called CHRIST. So
His Disciples constantly owned him, and usually styled him, and ever taught the
World. Andrew said to his Brother, we have found the MESSIAH, which is, being
interpreted, the CHRIST. John I. 41. His Enemies tax him with, and ridicule him
for, his Pretentions to the Messiahship, saying, Matthew. XXVI. 68. Prophecy to
us, thou CHRIST, who is he that smote thee? Luke XXIII. 35. Let him save
himself, if he be CHRIST, the chosen of GOD. So that it is very evident, that
our Lord taught the World, that he was the CHRIST, the MESSIAH; and since he
plainly asserted this, his Miracles were full proof of the Truth of what he
affirmed, and so a Confirmation of his being the MESSIAH.

I have not Time now to go into the Consideration of the Nature of proper
Miracles, nor yet to give a particular Detail of all the Miracles which CHRIST
wrought: It must suffice to treat this Subject at present in a summary Manner,
by observing that our Lord JESUS CHRIST had all power in Heaven and in Earth
given to him of the Father, and consequently had the Command of all Nature.

His Miracles were more in Number, than those which were wrought by Moses, the
Jewish Law giver; so that the Jews could not reasonably expect, that whenever
the MESSIAH should come, he would do more Miracles than CHRIST did: therefore
the People said, Job. VII. 31, when Messiah comes, will he do more Miracles
thou these which this Man has done?

CHRIST also wrought his Miracles openly; not secretly, and in a Corner, which
might give Suspicion of some foul play, of little Tricks, of Legerdemain, and
Imposition; but upon the Theater of the World, in the Face of the Sun, and
before great Multitudes of people; insomuch that his very Enemies were forced
to acknowledge them. Job. XI. 47, The chief Priests, and Pharisees, Said, What
do we? for this Man does many Miracles.

The Greatness of CHRIST'S Miracles far exceeded that of any other person; so
that he could justly say, Joh. XV. 24, If I had not done among them the Works
which none other Man did, they had not had Sin.

Besides; CHRIST wrought all his Miracles in his own Name, and by his own
Authority; He said to the Leper, Matt. VIII. 3. I will, be thou clean; and
immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. He rebuked the Wind, and said unto the
Sea, Peace, be still; and the Wind ceased, and there was a great Calm, Mar.
IV.39. In like Manner, he rebuked the foul Spirit, saying unto him, I charge
thee come out of him, and enter no more into him; and the Spirit came out of
him. Mar. IX. 25, 26. So, with Authority and Power, he raised the Dead, saying,
over the Grave, Lazarus come forth: and he that was dead came forth, Joh. XI.
43,44.

And further, to evidence his Authority, He empowered his Disciples to work
Miracles, in his Name, saying to them, Matt. X.8, Heal the sick, cleanse the
Lepers, raise the dead, cast out Devils: and they did so; as we see in the Case
of the Cripple, who was healed by a Word: Act. IV.10. Said Peter, Be it known
unto you all, -- that by the Name of JESUS CHRIST of Nazareth, -- does this Man
stand here before you whole.

I might add, that all his Miracles were wrought for the Benefit of Mankind.
But I will only observe further,

That it is very evident, the Miracles wrought by our Savior, were not the
Effects of any of the established Laws of Nature, (as they are called,) nor
could they be produced, especially such as raising the dead, by any mere
Creature, independently of the Supreme Being: and they were wrought, as to
confirm his own Mission, and Messiahship, so, to give Confirmation to those
Doctrines which he taught, all of which, in their Nature, and Design, were most
worthy of a God. Now from hence it plainly follows, That there was a
Concurrence of the Divine Power, as a Testimony, and Seal, to the Truth of what
he affirmed. For the Goodness, and Veracity, and Wisdom, of the Divine Being
would not have permitted him to have set his Seal to a Falsehood, in which his
own Honor, and the Welfare of Mankind are so deeply concerned. Consequently
the Miracles which CHRIST wrought, with all the Circumstances attending of
them, are a clear, full, and demonstrative Proof of his being the ancient
promised MESSIAH.

To this Head of Miracles, I might add the Predictions and Prophecies of JESUS
CHRIST, (which are accounted a Species of Miracles,) as, concerning himself,
the Manner of his Death, the person that should betray him, and his
Resurrection from the dead on the third Day; concerning what should befall the
first Preachers of his Gospel, and the surprising Success of his Gospel in the
World; concerning the Destruction of the Jews Temple, and Nation, in the Time
of the then present Generation, and their after Dispersion among all Nations;
and many other incident Prophecies, recorded in the New Testament; all of which
have had their exact Accomplishment; I say, I might use this as a further
Testimony to the Truth of the Messiaship of CHRIST. For none but an infinitely
intelligent Mind, a GOD who knows all Things from the Beginning to the End, by
one entire View, could acquaint any Person, with any Certainty, of future
contingent Events.

Thus I have endeavored, according to my Measure, and as briefly as I could,
to show that there was ancient Promise, of a certain Person, called the
MESSIAH, his appearing in our World, as the Deliverer, and Savior, of sinful
Man; That this Person has most certainly long since made his Appearance; and
that our Lord JESUS CHRIST is that very individual Person; all the Characters
of that promised MESSIAH agreeing in CHRIST, and him only; and the Miracles
which he wrought in Confirmation of his Messiaship, are an undeniable proof of
the Truth and certainty of this. And thus, I think, I have established what I
am ready to esteem the first, and fundamental Article of our holy Christian
Religion.

And if these Things be true, then we may conclude,

1. That the Christian Religion is no other than a Revelation from GOD. There
are indeed many internal Characters evidential of our holy Religion's being a
Divine Revelation; especially the exact Accomplishment of Scripture prophecies:
But this puts it beyond all Controversy, that it is of Divine Original, in that
it is the Religion which has been taught to the World by JESUS CHRIST, the
MESSIAH, who was sent from GOD, according to the ancient Prediction of him, for
this very End and Purpose, to instruct Mankind in the Mind and Will of GOD, in
all necessary Points of Faith and Manners; that they might be recovered from
the Depravity of the Fall, the Power of Sin and Satan, the Dominion of Sense,
and be restored to the Image, and Favor of their GOD. For we mean nothing else
by the Christian Religion, but that Religion which JESUS CHRIST himself
personally, and by those commissioned and authorized from him, has been
pleased, in Compliance with the Will of the Father, to instruct the World in;
and not what the wild Fancies, or the vain Philosophy, of Men would impose upon
us as such. The true Christian Religion, contained in our Bible, especially the
New Testament, which is an uncorrupted Collection of the Doctrines, and Duties,
which JESUS CHRIST taught the World for their religious, and moral Conduct, and
their final Salvation, is therefore a Revelation from GOD, because handed to us
by Him who came from the Bosom of the Father upon this special Design, and who
confirmed his Mission by his miraculous Works. So that every Article of the
Christian Religion is the Truth of GOD.

2. If JESUS CHRIST be the true MESSIAH, then, in all Articles of Faith, and
Matters of Salvation, and Regimen of his Church, we are to call no Man Master,
but CHRIST alone. Because it is his special Character, that he is King in Zion,
Ps. II. 6
and has the sole Right to give Law to the Actions and Consciences of Men, in
Matters of Salvation, and to be Head over all to the Church Ephesians. I. 22.
And therefore in these Things we are not to be influenced by great Names, and
determined by the Decrees of Councils, or the Dictates of any Set of Men
whatever; but are closely to adhere to what CHRIST has taught us in his holy
Word. Isa. VIII. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them. So our Lord
has warned us against imposing, or being imposed upon; saying, Matthew. XXIII. 8.
Be not re called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even CHRIST, and ye are
Brethren; call no Man your Father upon Earth. That is, Don't subject your
Understanding, and Conscience, to the lordly Authority of any Man. Here suffer
me to say, to those of you in particular who are designed to be Teachers of
others, that you make the Bible, especially the NewTestament, your chief Study;
and while you give yourselves to reading, and consulting humane Authors, for
the Enlargement of your Minds, and acquainting you with the Sentiments of
others, be careful never to resign up your Understandings to the Government of
any merely humane Writings, be they ever so plausible, and artfully contrived,
and appear with the face of the strictest Philosophy, in any thing wherein they
differ from Divine Revelation. Remember the Words of CHRIST in his Commission
to His Apostles, and Ministers, Matthew. XXVIII. 20. Teaching them to observe all
Things whatsoever I have commanded you. To instance in a particular Case. When
CHRIST has told us, in the plainest Words, that he is the son of God, that he
is the only begotten son of God, which naturally, and necessarily, hands to our
Minds, that he is as really and truly the only begotten of the Father, in the
Way of a supernatural, and ineffable, Generation, as any humane Person is a Son
begotten of his Father, in the Way of a natural one; suffer no vain Philosophy,
(which can never teach us what GOD is in Himself, nor the Manner of His
Operations,) tho ever so speciously contrived with an apparent Show of
Demonstration, to lead you into the erroneous Conception, that CHRIST is a Son
of a different Nature from his Father. For tho we understand not the Manner of
the Divine Generation, or Filiation, yet we may plainly see that this carries
in it a greater Contradiction, and grosser Absurdity, than any which the
Principles of Philosophy would avoid; and besides, strikes the homest Stroke at
the very Foundations of all revealed Religion, yea, I will add, and of natural
Religion also.

3. If JESUS CHRIST be the true promised MESSIAH, if all the Characters of the
MESSIAH plainly meet in Him, and Him only, and he has confirmed his Mission by
the Testimony of Miracles, (as we have seen,) then, what can be more
unreasonable, than, for those who enjoy this Evidence, to reject him and remain
in Infidelity? The Jews, in our Savior's Time plainly saw, or might have seen,
all the Characters of the MESSIAH meet in him; they beheld with their Eyes the
Miracles which he wrought, and, in succeeding Ages, the Jews have seen that the
Scepter is departed from Judah, that their Temple, and City and Country are
laid waste, and they themselves are dispersed among the Nations of the Earth,
that their Priesthood, and Sacrifices, according to the Law of Moses, have long
since come to an utter End; why then do they yet vainly look for their promised
MESSIAH? Why have they rejected JESUS CHRIST, and refused to believe the
New Testament? Is it for want of sufficient Evidence that CHRIST is the
MESSIAH? No verily; but from the obstinate and unreasonable Prejudices of their
Minds, from the Blindness that has happened to Israel, that seeing they will
not see. And should we not make it our daily Prayer for them, that the Scales
may be taken off from their Eyes, that all Ungodliness may be turned from
Jacob, and so all Israel may be saved?

And how unreasonable is the Infidelity of the Gentile World, who have the
Light of the glorious Gospel shining upon them? Is there any one Matter of
Fact, of five Hundreds Years Date, so fully attested, and strongly proved, as
this, that a certain Person called JESUS CHRIST, in the New Testament, had all
the Character, upon him of a certain Person spoken of in the Old, as the
MESSIAH, who should come into the World; and wrought the Miracles recorded of
Him? Whence is it that the Old Testament foretold, and so minutely described, a
certain Person, who should make his Appearance in this World at such a fixed
Period of Time; who should instruct the World in the great Truths of GOD, do
such mighty Works, suffer, and die, for Sinners, and set up a glorious Kingdom
among Men; all of which so many Ages after, was exactly accomplished, (as we
have seen,) in our JESUS? Could this be from any other Cause, but the Diving
infinite understanding? Why is it then that so many, who are advantaged with
the Knowledge of the Christian Religion, do not believe it? Surely, this is not
from any Defect in the Evidence of the Truth of it; for it is certain they
credit ancient Histories, and many other Things, upon much less Evidence. It is
therefore, not from the want of Light, but the want of Sincerity, from the
prevailing Lusts of Men, which prejudices them against that holy Religion that
condemns them. And after all their pressing Philosophy into their Service, if
possible to undermine Christianity, and strengthen themselves in the Disbelief
of it, they do but plainly show, that they act the most unreasonable part, in
building their Schemes upon the most beggarly, uncertain, and false Principles,
which oblige them to believe flat Contradictions, rather than embrace the Truth
in the Love thereof. And because Light is come into the World, they will be so
far from escaping the Punishment they would fain avoid, by denying
Christianity, that their Condemnation will be the greater, because they have
chosen Darkness rather than Light.

4. What now should be the Consequence of what I have laid down, and proved?
but our firm Faith in the MESSIAH, the SON of GOD and SAVIOR of the World?
That we firmly credit the Reports of the Divine Oracles, (for so I now venture
to call them,) concerning JESUS CHRIST, and the Way of Salvation by Him, and be
led thereby to accept of the Blessed JESUS for our alone SAVIOR, submitting of
ourselves to his Instruction, and Government, and relying upon his Atonement,
and Intercession, for the Pardon of our Sins, the Renovation of our Natures,
and the promised Mercy of eternal Life. In the Faith and Hope hereof, let us
conescrate our whole Man, Spirit, Soul, and Body, to GOD, in CHRIST, to be
employed in his Service, and submissive to his Will, and make it our constant
Endeavor to be the sincere Followers of JESUS; to cleanse ourselves from all
Filthiness of Flesh, and Spirit, and live soberly, righteously, and Godly, in
this present World; that we may, with Comfort, look for the blessed Hope, and
glorious Appearing of the great GOD, and our SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, when all the
Promises of GOD, which are in Him Yea, and Amen, shall be abundantly made good
to us, and, that his second Appearance without Sin, may be unto our complete
Salvation.

Now unto Him who has loved us, assumed our Nature, and given himself for us,
that he might wash away our Sins in his own Blood, be Glory, and Dominion,
forever and ever.

AMEN
APPENDIX
THE Honorable Judge DUDLEY, says in his last will, bearing Date January Is It.
1750.
I TEM, I give to Harvard College in Cambridge in New England, One Hundred and
Thirty Three pounds Six Shillings and Eight Pence, in like Money (i.e. Lawful
Money,) to be appropriated and disposed of, in such Manner as I shall direct,
under my Hand and Seal at any Time hereafter.

A Copy of the said Judge's Directions, under his Hand and Seal, relating to
the abovesaid Paragraph.

WHereas the said Paul Dudley among other Legacies by him given, in his last
Will and Testament, has bequeathed to Harvard College in Cambridge in
New England, the sum of One Hundred and Thirty Three Pounds Six Shillings and
Eight Pence lawful Money (which is to be paid and discharged in and by good
Bonds and Mortgages of this Value,) the said Legacy to be appropriated in such
Manner, as the said Paul Dudley should declare under his Hand and seal.

Now know ye, that I the said Paul Dudley have, and hereby do declare the
Design of my Legacy to be at follows, That is to say, the yearly Income,
Interest, or profit of the Sum beforementioned, to be applied toward the
erecting, maintaining, supporting, and continuing an Anniversary Sermon or
Lecture, to be held, or preached, at the said College once every Year
successively, by such persons as the Trustees of the said Legacy shall choose
and appoint.

The First Lecture, or anniversary Sermon, to be for the proving, explaining,
and proper Use and Improvement of the principles of Natural Religion, as it is
commonly called and understood by Divines and learned Men.

The Second Lecture to be, for the Confirmation, Illustration and Improvement
of the great Articles of the Christian Religion, properly so called, or the
Revelation which Jesus Christ the son of God, was pleased to make, First by
himself, and afterward by his holy Apostles, to his Church and the World for
their Salvation.

The Third Lecture to be, for the detecting, and convicting, and exposing the
Idolatry of the Romish Church, their Tyranny, Usurpations, damnable Herefies,
fatal Errors, abominable Superstitions, and other crying Wickednesses in their
high Places; and finally, that the Church of Rome is that mystical Babylon,
that Man of Sin, that apostate Church, spoken of in the New Testament.

The Fourth and last Lecture I would have, For the maintaining, explaining, and
proving the Validity of the Ordination of Ministers or pastors of the Churches,
and so their Administration of the Sacraments or Ordinances of Religion, as the
same has been practiced in New England, from the first beginning of it, and so
continued at this Day.

Not that I would any Ways invalidate Episcopal Ordination, as it is commonly
called, and practiced in the Church of England; but I do esteem the Method of
Ordination as practiced, in Scotland, at Geneva, and among the Dissenters in
England, and in the Churches in this country, to be very safe, Seriptural, and
valid; and that the great Head of the Chruch, by his blessed spirit, has
owned, sanctified, and blessed them accordingly, and will continue so to do to
the End of the World. Amen.

These Four Lectures I would have held alternately every year in succession, so
long as the profits of my Legacy will support the charge of it.

As for the Trustees of this Lecture, I appoint and name them as follows;

The President of Harvard College, for the Time being.

The Professor of Divinity at Cambridge, for the Time being.

The Pastor of the first Church in Cambridge,for the Time being.

The Senior Tutor resident at said college, for the Time being.

The Pastor of the first Church in Roxbury, for the Time being. And whenever
any Vacancy happens, the same to be filled up, by those that remain, or the
major part of them.

I do also appoint the President of Harvard college, to begin and preach the
first of these four Lectures; and that he, and all such as succeed him in the
said Lectures, be at the sole Charge of leaving a fair Copy of their
Discourses, with the Treasurer of said College, to be by him filed with the
public Records of said House.

And in Testimony of my humble Desire, That God would be graciously pleased, to
accept of this poor Thank-Offering from his unworthy Servant, for his many and
great Mercies to me in my Education at that college, and my sincere prayer and
Desire, for the Favor of God to that Society in all Ages to come, I have
hereunto set my Hand and Seal, at Roxbury, the Second Day of January, in the
twenty fourth Year of his Majesty's Resign. A. D. 1750.

Paul Dudley, (Seal.)

POSTSCRIPT. Let him that preaches the last Lecture, beforementioned, be a
found, grave, experienced Divine, and at least Forty Years of Age. And let
those that preach the several Lectures aforesaid, have their Stipend or Pay
given them as soon as may be.

Paul Dudley, (Seal.)

THE above is a true Copy of Judge DUDLEY'S Directions, under his Hand and
Seal, relating to his Legacy to Harvard-College, in his last Will, bearing
Date, January 1. 1750 as extracted from the College-Records.

EDW. HOLYOKE, Presi.


