Mr. Cooper's Election-SERMON.

May 26. 1756.

A SERMON Preached in the Audience of his HONOR SPENCER PHIPS, Esquire Lieutenant
Governor and Commander in Chief; The HONORABLE His MAJESTY's COUNCIL; And the
HONORABLE House of REPRESENTATIVES, Of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay
in New England, MAY 26th. 1756.

Being the Anniversary for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL for the said
Province.

By SAMUEL COOPER, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Brattle-Street, Boston.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed by Green and Russell, by Order of the Honorable
House of REPRESENTATIVES.

M,DCC,LVI.

In the House of REPRESENTATIVES, May 27. 1756. ORDERED,
THAT the Members for the Town of Boston, be directed to give the Thanks of
this House to the Rev'd Mr. Samuel Cooper, for his Sermon preached Yesterday
before the GENERAL Court; being the Anniversay for the Election of COUNSELORS,
and to desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

T. HUBBARD, Spkr.

AN Election SERMON.
HEB. XI. 24, 25, 26. By Faith Moses when he was come to Years, refused to be
called the Son of Pharaoh' s Daughter; choosing rather to suffer Affliction
with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season:
Esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt:
for he had Respect to the Recompense of the Reward.
THE divine author of this epistle, designing to encourage the christian
Hebrews to a steadfast profession of their faith, and a resolute discharge of
their duty, in opposition to all worldly discouragements, propounds to them
some eminent examples of piety, fortitude, and self-denial; among which, that
of Moses appears with a distinguished luster: -- And as he was the renowned
lawgiver of the Hebrew nation, the consideration of so great a character cannot
be improper to the present occasion.

The Text leads us to consider in the first place, the public spirit of Moses;
the services he performed, and the self-denials he endured for his own nation
-- and then, the principle of piety which cherished and supported his patriotic
spirit, and cooperating with it, carried him through such a shining course of
self-denial and public service. -- After which, it may be proper to say
something of the wisdom of Moses in following the dictates of his conscience,
and answering his obligations to God, and to his brethren the Hebrews, in
opposition to such great worldly motives.

SUCH was the public spirit of Moses, that he resigned the most tempting
secular prospects, and voluntarily partook of the afflictions of the Hebrews,
that he might become their deliverer. He refused, says the text, to be called
the son of Pharoah's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

At the time when the founder of their state was born, the Israelites were
cruelly oppressed by the monarch of Egypt. The important services which Joseph
had rendered that kingdom were now forgotten; and the posterity of the twelve
patriarchs who had been invited to dwell in Egypt, upon the terms of
friendship, were, without any provocation, treated with a barbarity which
humanity forbids to the worst enemies. God saw and resented the oppression of
his people, and the cruelties practiced upon them by Pharaoh and his officers.
He, who has made of one blood all nations to dwell upon the face of the earth;
who is the patron of the oppressed, and who delights to humble exalted
wickedness, espoused the cause of this poor and injured nation, and opposed
himself to the tyrant of Egypt: and as he had promised great and singular
blessings to the seed of Jacob, he remembered his promise. I have seen, said
the God of Abraham, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in
Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters, and am come
down to deliver them. -- God raised up Pharaoh, or rather suffered him to rise,
that he might be an illustrious example of his own power and justice; and in
the plagues which soon after came upon that haughty oppressor and his people,
the world was taught, what those potentates deserve, who harden their hearts
against the most high, who divest themselves of the common sentiments of
humanity, and who trample upon the rights of mankind.

Moses was the chosen instrument of that deliverance which Heaven had decreed
to the posterity of Israel; and by him God gave them the most important
blessings any people can enjoy; -- a free government, and a divine religion.
The Hebrew polity is not only one of the most ancient, but one of the best
civil constitutions that ever the world was blessed with; a constitution worthy
of it is divine Author, and nicely adapted to preserve the property, freedom,
peace and safety of the people to whom it was given The frivolous objections
and gross calumnies, thrown out by some against the law of Moses, have been
more than one answered and exposed, Mr. Lowman has treated this argument to the
bottom, in his dissertation on the civil government of the Hebrews, in which,
the justice, wisdom, and goodness of the mosaical constitutions, are fully
vindicated.
: and had it been of a contrary nature and tendency; had it been calculated for
the oppression, rather than the general happiness of the subject, no man would
have been obliged to believe that it came from Heaven.

There is a close connection between civil liberty and true religion; Tyrants
are commonly equal enemies, to the religious and civil rights of mankind; and
having enslaved the bodies of their subjects, they affect also to enslave their
consciences. The people of Israel were made free, in order to their being
prepared for the service of the God of Israel; and without freedom, they would
not have been happy, even in the land flowing with milk and honey. It was this
that completed their worldly felicity, and added a peculiar sweetness to all
the fruits of Canaan, that they entered upon it as their own possession and
inheritance, and not as the propriety of an absolute lord.

God had pronounced a blessing on the seed of Jacob, and nothing could hinder
this blessing from taking effect. In vain did Pharaoh attempt to weaken and
destroy them; the people grew and multiplied under all their oppressions; and
Pharaoh himself, educates that child in his own court, who was designed to lead
the Hebrews from their bondage, and to abase the pride of Egypt. So short is
human foresight! so week is human power! and so certainly shall the divine
decrees be accomplished!

The Jewish lawgiver was furnished with all the great qualities, proper to the
public and important services, to which he was appointed. He had a princely
education from Pharoah's daughter, who had adopted him for her son, as well as
a religious one, from his own mother, by whom he was nursed. Egypt was a
renowned school of wisdom, and the fountain of arts and sciences: here, the
most illustrious men of ancient Greece, her poets, philosophers, and
legislators, improved their minds, and perfected their studies; and from this
fountain, they drew their learning and their fame. So that when St. Stephen
tells us, that Moses was learned in all the arts of the Egyptians, he does in
effect say, that he had the best, and most liberal education, that the whole
world could afford. The same divine author assures us, that Moses was mighty in
deeds, as well as words; discovering a singular prudence and firmness in his
conduct, as well as great learning and penetration in his discourses: and
uniting the fortitude of a commander, with the wisdom of a leglislator.
Archbishop Tillotson, with many others, supposes that St. Stephen in this
passage, has a reference to the great actions, which, Josephus tells us, Moses
performed, when he commanded the forces of Pharaoh, and overthrew a vast army
of the AEthiopians, that had invaded Egypt.

But the piety, and public spirit of Moses, completed his shining character,
and peculiarly fitted him to answer the great designs of providence, in the
deliverance of Israel. These divine qualities, gave a luster to all his other
great endowments, and made him happy in a right application of them. What
advantage would the Hebrew nation have reaped, from his learning, wisdom, and
fortitude, had he not been possessed with a generous concern for its welfare?
Without this, he might have ascended the throne of Egypt, unmoved with the
cries of his oppressed Brethren, and proved, perhaps, as great a scourge to the
race from which he sprung, as any of the Pharoah's. But God, who designed him
for a deliverer, softened his breast with compassion, and gave him a
benevolence of heart equal to the extent of his capacity.

It often happens, that great and uninterrupted prosperity hardens the heart: A
constant succession of gay and pleasurable objects, diverts our attention from
the miseries of others; and we too seldom sympathize with them, in those
calamities which we never felt ourselves, and are never like to feel. But the
surprising advancement of Moses in Egypt, was far from having such an effect
upon him. He did not disdain, from the height of his prosperity, to cast a
tender look upon the low and suffering condition of his brethren; and after he
had lived many years, incircled with all the splendors and luxury of the court
of Egypt, he had not forgot to weep with them that weep.

Moses might have been very happy, according to the opinion of those, who never
knew the force and pleasure of the social affections, had he abstracted himself
from his own nation, had he been regardless of those sufferings, from which he
was personally exempt, and been wise enough, to make himself the center and
circumference of his own wishes. He was a favorite in one of the politest, and
most magnificent courts, and had the prospect of being advanced to the head of
one of the greatest kingdoms, in the world: for Josephus tells us, that as
Pharaoh had no child, he designed him for his heir. But Moses could not endure
to be happy alone; his heart was too tender, to violate his obligations to God,
and his own nation, from any worldly considerations; and he preferred the soft
anguish of compassion for his brethren, to all the pleasures of sin. Their
welfare, was a dearer object to him, than the crown of Egypt: His own
prosperity was tastless, so long as the lives of the Israelites were embittered
with hard bondage; "and their groans found a way to his ear, and to his heart,
through all the music of the court, and all the martial noise of the camp, in
which perhaps he sometimes commanded." Accordingly he seemed to value his
advancement in Egypt, only as it might render him a greater blessing to his
people; and made no other use of it, than to prepare himself, to execute the
great purposes of providence, and to become the savior of Israel.

Fired with these noble views, he left the court of Pharaoh, and ventured to
visit his despised and oppressed brethren. -- Observing, as he looked upon
their burdens, an Egyptian task-master smiting an Hebrew, and using him with
great inhumanity, he warmly resented the injury. -- Led by a divine impulse, to
give a specimen of that deliverance, which God designed to send by his hands to
the Israelites, he rescued him that suffered wrong, and slew the Egyptian. This
action, which he performed, not only at the hazard of his court-preferments,
but even of his life, was a proof of the generous ardor of his mind, and of his
brave resolution, either to redress the injuries of his brethren, or to share
their afflictions.

Having given this instance of his honest indignation at the oppressions of
Pharaoh, which was very ungratefully received, even by his own nation When one
of the two Hebrews who were striving together, and whom Moses would have
reconciled, thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?
it is plain, the speech of this single person is represented in Acts vii. 35.
as expressing the sentiments of the whole body of the people; as their slowness
afterward, to believe the mission of Moses, when attested by miracles, seems
evidently to show that it was. Vid. Dod. Fam. Exp. on Acts vii. 27.
, for whose sake he had thus exposed himself, he left the court of Egypt, and
fled to the land of Midian. But no change of place; no length of time; no
ingratitude of his brethren, could obliterate his affection to them. Indeed,
when the appointed time of Israel's deliverance was come, and God called Moses
to lead in this glorious work, he at first, appeared backward to accept the
call; which proceeded, not from an abatement of love to his nation, but a
modest self-diffidence, not rarely found in great minds, and from the hopes,
that God might select some fitter person for this great undertaking. Who am I,
said the accomplished son of Amram, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh,
and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? How far was
he from being influenced by a lust of dominion! How sensible, that the office
of a ruler is not to be sought, for the sake of the external advantages annexed
to it; and ought never to be accepted by any man, but from a sense of duty, and
an inclination to deny himself for the public happiness!

Such an inclination Moses early possessed, and carried with him, through all
the surprising revolutions of his life. With this public spirit he left Egypt,
and with the same spirit, he set himself at the head of his distressed people,
when he could no longer doubt the appointment of heaven, and resolutely
discharged the laborious, and hazardous duties, of his high station: With this
spirit, he led them out of Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king, who
followed close at their heels, with a mighty army, threatening their
destruction: With this spirit, he conducted them in the wilderness, and shared
the hardships and dangers to which, for many years, they were exposed, in that
inhospitable place: With this spirit, he greatly endured the peevishness,
murmurings, and provoking carriage of the Israelites, exhibiting an astonishing
example of condescension, patience, and tenderness toward that perverse, and
ungrateful people: With this spirit, he fervently interceeded with God for
them, and stood in the gap, to appease the anger of heaven, when divine
judgments were breaking in upon them: With this spirit, when God was pleased to
offer, to make him a greater nation in the room of Israel, he humbly refused;
and still, earnestly implored the continuance of the divine patience toward
that people, preferring their welfare to the dignity of his own family; and
even wishing, that his own name might be blotted out of the book of life,
rather than they should fall by the stroke of divine justice. -- With so
constant, and inextinguishable an ardor for the welfare of his nation, was the
breast of the Hebrew lawgiver inspirited! A love strong as death, and which
many waters could not quench.

How happy were the Israelites, in so wise and tender a Leader as Moses! and
how happy the people, who are governed by men of the same disinterested and
public spirit! who consider the community over which they preside, as their own
family; who watch over it with a paternal care; who strenuously exert
themselves for it is welfare, and take pleasure in doing so: who desire no more
power than is necessary for the good of the people; who zealously employ, all
which they possess, for this noble purpose; and can relish that happiness as
their own, which they communicate to others. This is the spirit with which
every magistrate ought to enter upon his office; which will animate him to the
duties, and sweeten the cares and fatigues of it; and this, every man professes
who accepts a place of authority. A public character implies a public spirit;
without which, it is a badge of infamy, and not of honor to him that wears it;
but when both are united, nothing human can more deserve our esteem and
reverence. -- Nor should a ruler content himself with a small degree of public
affection: there is no danger of excess in this divine passion; and the duties
and dangers of an high station require a double portion of it. For that degree
of virtue, that has adorned a private character, has often been found
insufficient to resist the charms of power, and the temptations of a more
exalted state. Tacitus observes, the great change that was made in the temper
of Caligula, by a change of his circumstances: Nec meliorem servum, nec
deteriorem dominum.
No man, says he, ever knew a better servant, nor a worse master.

I know philosophers have disputed much about the motives of human actions, and
some have endeavored to prove, that all our passions are modes of self-love.
But perhaps, the controversy is rather about words, than things. It is plain,
that some men are little affected with any thing, but what relates to their own
interest, and vainly attempt, to establish a private and solitary happiness;
others possess the social affections in a due degree, and find a wonderful
pleasure in doing good: the former are called selfish, the latter
disinterested, and benevolent. Both these sorts of persons, it is allowed,
follow their own taste; but as their tastes are very different, so are their
characters: The one is hated and despised; the other loved and admired. These
are sentiments founded in nature, in which all nations and ages have generally
agreed; and which the refinements of a few speculative men can never subvert
Besides our bodily appetites, says a late writer upon this subject, there are
certain mental passions, by which we are impelled immediately to seek
particular objects, without any regard to interest; and when these objects are
attained, a pleasing enjoyment ensues, as the consequence of our indulged
affections. If we enjoy praise, or power, etc. in all these cases there is a
passion which points immediately to the object, and constitutes it our good, or
happiness; as there are other secondary passions which afterward arise, and
pursue it as part of our happiness, when once it is constituted such by our
original affections. Were there no appetites or affections of any kind,
antecedent to self-love, that propensity would scarce ever exert it self:
because we should in that case, have felt few and slender pains or pleasures,
and have little misery or happiness to avoid or pursue. -- Why then may we not
from the frame of our temper, feel a desire of another's happiness, which by
means of that affection becomes our own good, and is afterward pursued, from
the conjoined motives of benevolence and self enjoyment.
.

But whatever may be advanced in the school of philosophy, disinterested love,
is, without all doubt, strongly asserted, and recommended in the sacred
writings. Our divine Redeemer gave us a most affecting example of it, in his
own incarnation and sufferings; and has commanded us to love one another, even
as he has loved us. Whoever is born of God, and possesses the spirit of Jesus
Christ, knows the force and sweetness of this divine principle; and is taught,
to love his neighbor as himself. -- This leads us to consider in the

SECOND place; the principle of piety, which cherished, and supported the
public spirit of Moses, and cooperating with it, carried him through such a
shining course of self-denial, and public service. By faith, he refused to be
called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; by faith, he chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater riches than the treasures in
Egypt, for he had respect to the recompense of the reward. -- The providence of
God so ordered it, that the education of Moses was, for some time, committed to
his own mother, who nursed him as the adoptive son of Pharaoh's daughter. Both
his pare^^s, are celebrated by the divine author of this epistle to the
Hebrews, for their faith. From this principle, they hid their infant son three
months, not regarding the cruel commandment of the king, which had destined all
the male children of the Hebrews to immediate destruction. The singular beauty
of Moses, who is called in the sacred writings, divinely fair; So the original
signifies; Acts vii. 20.
and the signal interposition of providence for his safety, and advancement,
might naturally lead his parents to hope, that this child was designed by
heaven, for some great and extraordinary purposes. This apprehension, as well
as their great piety, could not but engage them, to give their son a religious
education; to instruct him, with peculiar care, in the knowledge of the God of
Israel; in the promises made by Him, to the Hebrew nation, and the deliverance
which they had been taught to expect.

Such an education was not lost upon Moses, though from his early youth, he was
surrounded with all the temptations of an idolatrous court. All the learning of
Egypt, gave him no prejudices against religion: His philosophy never subverted
his faith; nor did he throw off his piety, as an encumbrance, while he rounded
the circle of the sciences. His faith in the perfections, and providence of
God, and his reliance on the divine promises, made to Abraham and his seed,
animated him to his public services, and supported him under all the
discouragements with which they were attended. This illustrious patriot,
endured as seeing him who is invisible. The consideration of an infinitely
perfect mind -- presiding over all events -- making the happiness of mankind
the object of his care -- delighting to execute loving kindness, and judgment
in the earth -- and under whose government, only upright and benevolent men,
may expect to be finally happy: Such considerations as these, confirmed the
virtue of Moses, and made it invincible. His faith, being of the operation of
God, was a living, active principle -- it assimilated him to the glorious
Being, in whom he believed; it formed him to a divine temper; it wrought by
love; and impelled him to the execution of all his great and benevolent
designs. The natural affection of Moses to his nation, was improved, and
exalted by faith, into a divine virtue. Common humanity, and the dictates of
nature, led him to sympathize with the Hebrews in their sorrows, and to exert
himself for redressing their wrongs. -- Religion, confirmed the voice of
nature; taught him to cherish these benevolent inclinations, and reinforced
them, with some peculiar motives of her own. He had an affection to the
Israelites, as they were his own brethren; but they were still more dear to
him, as the people of God; the offspring of that Being, whom he supremely
loved; peculiarly related to Jehovah; and for whose welfare He had expressed a
particular concern. Moses joyfully took part in the reproach of Israel, because
he esteemed it the reproach of Christ himself; that Angel of the covenant from
whom Jacob obtained the blessing; who had taken the seed of Jacob under his own
conduct and patronage; who was afflicted in all their afflictions; of whose
incarnation, Moses prophesied; and of whom he was a type.

Thus the public spirit of Moses, was enlarged, and invigorated by a principle
of true religion; in him, the love of God, and benevolence to men were happily
united; and by the joint force of these principles, he supported his great
character, and became superior to the mighty temptations, with which he was
encountered. His faith taught him to extend his prospect, far above all present
and sensible things, to that glorious recompense of reward, which God has laid
up in another state, for upright and good men. While this was full in his view,
the scepter and wealth of Egypt appeared but small and contemptible things; and
he could cheerfully resign, a palace for a cottage; royalty for reproach; and
pleasure for affliction. -- He could make this resignation, when he was come to
years; being past the folly of childhood, and not yet arrived to the
insensibility of old age. The far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
which was set before him, extinguished the little honors of the world, and
sweetened all the self-denials, which God called him to endure, for the good of
his nation.

Such is the influence of true piety; so certainly does it greaten the human
mind, and become the support of genuine virtue! While it leads us to discharge
our duty to God, it gives us a quick sense of our obligations to men; and
breaks the force of those worldly temptations, by which, many are unhappily
persuaded to violate these obligations. -- Piety adorns every station of life;
but appears with peculiar advantage in the character of a ruler -- It teaches
him the right use of power, and gives an happy direction to the whole of his
public conduct. A pious ruler, consecrates all his talents to the honor of God,
and the good of mankind -- He makes the perfect rectitude of the divine
administration, the rule and model of his own; and imitates the justice and
benevolence of that Being, to whom he pays his first regards. And in such a
conduct, whatever self-denial it may cost him, he will certainly at last, find
his own interest. And so we come to consider in the

THIRD, and last place, the wisdom of Moses, in following the dictates of his
conscience, and answering his obligations to God, and to his brethren the
Hebrews, in opposition to such great worldly motives. Whoever resolutely
discharges his duty under the greatest discouragements, and can generously deny
himself for the good of others, lays the surest foundation for his own
happiness; and will certainly gain in the end, much more than he parts with at
present. Piety and benevolence are, in a good measure, their own reward; and
the consciousness of having done our duty, is in itself, no small and
contemptible pleasure. A self-approving mind, and the sweet hope of the divine
favor, are a treasure, which is ill exchanged, for any thing that the world
has to bestow. Moses therefore, showed his prudence, in despising the treasures
of Egypt, the magnificence of it is court, and the luster of it is crown, when he
could not enjoy these, without forfeiting his allegiance to God, and becoming
the oppressor of his own nation The idolatrous Egyptians had conceived a great
hatred to the Hebrews, and their religion, which was heightened, by a strong
jealousy, that in case of a war, these strangers might join with their enemies,
and become masters of Egypt. So that Moses had no prospect of inheriting the
crown of Pharaoh, with safety, unless he could resolve to renounce his
religion, and remove all suspicion of an attachment to his brethren, by
continuing, or increasing their oppression.
Had he renounced his religion, for the riches of this world; had he stopped his
ears against the cries of his brethren, and laid the foundation of his own
greatness in their misery, he would after all, have procured for himself but a
wretched kind of happiness. A mind capable of so much baseness, perfidy, and
cruelty, could never have been the feat of self-enjoyment. An accusing
conscience, and a certain fearful looking for of judgment, must have damp't his
sprightliest pleasures, and destroyed the relish of all that had been so dearly
purchased.

Many, who value themselves upon their worldly wisdom, betray the most
egregious folly, and grasp a shadow, while they loose the substance. -- All the
pomp of wealth and power, ill-gotten, and ill-employed, is but the gay outside
of woe; a splendid covering to a restless mind, and to an aching heart. This
pomp is indeed too commonly esteemed a mark of happiness: and upon this
account, perhaps, it is chiefly valued: "though very imperfect must be that
happiness, which a man derives from what another imagines, and not from what he
himself feels." -- But if any are desirous of appearing, with the greatest
advantage, in the eyes of their fellow-men; if they have a thirst for true
glory; and can relish that good name which is rather to be chosen than great
riches; let them join piety, and a public spirit, to their titles and
authority, and employ their abilities in doing good. God often honors, even in
this life, those who honor him. So Moses was taken up into the mount with
Jehovah; and when he descended, to bring the divine constitutions to the people
whom he had delivered, he was encircled with a glory that struck the whole
congregation of Israel: A brighter luster, than he could have derived from the
diadem of Egypt. And so highly was his character at last revered by the
Hebrews, that God saw fit to conceal from them the place of his burial; lest
their ardent affection to their departed deliverer, should rise into idolatry;
and they should make the ashes of Moses, the object of their adoration. -- His
memory wanted no monument of brass, or marble, to perpetuate it: it has lived
through all ages, without such a feeble support; and his name has been mentioned
with respect by gentile authors, as well as gloriously distinguished in the
sacred writings.

Great minds are very sensible of true honor. They who love the public, cannot
but desire a return of it is affection, and think themselves happy in it. When
Themistocles received, at the olympic games, the acknowledgments and
acclamations of Greece, for his public services: "When all eyes were turned
upon him, and every body was eager to point him out to the strangers who did
not know him, as the savior of his country; he confessed afterward to his
friends, that he looked upon that day as the happiest of his life; that he had
never tasted any joy so sensible, and so transporting; and that this
recompense, which was the genuine fruits of his labors, had exceeded all his
desires."

But the chief reward of piety and public service, the glorious recompense
which Moses principally respected, lies beyond the little circle of the present
life, and is reserved in heaven. And did we strongly believe the account which
revelation gives us of this reward, it would immediately become the first
object of our wishes; and we could never doubt, whether it were prudent to
procure it, even at the expense of our whole worldly interest. What is a name
on earth, a name written in the dust, when compared to the new name, that is
worn in the Jerusasalem which is above! What is the commendation of mortal men,
who are often mistaken in their judgment, and inconstant in their affections,
to the applause of the general assembly on high; confirmed, by the approbation
of the great Lord of all! Will the treasures of the world bear to be set in
competition with the inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not
away? Or, can the momentary pleasures of sense, especially the unnatural and
unquiet gratifications of sin, vie with the joys that are at God's right hand
for ever?

To judge rightly of our own interest, we must consider the future part of our
existence, as well as the present; and what proportion time bears to eternity.
And, if we extend our views beyond the grave, to that unchanging state that
lies before us, we shall be irresistably convinced, that nothing is of
importance to us in this life, but what will turn out to our advantage in the
next. Such a view, will enlarge our minds, confirm our virtuous inclinations,
and give us new motives of action; motives, pure and strong, and superior to
all the solicitations of sense, all the terrors and blandishments of the
world. While we are intent upon this prospect, -- the general judgment; the
solemn process; the close examinations; the impartial decisions, of that day;
and the great, the everlasting difference it will make, between the state of
the righteous and the wicked; while we view these scenes by a strong faith, the
world is vanquished, and the temptations of it are disarmed of their power.
Now, we applaud the wisdom of the humble christian, who prefers the afflictions
and reproaches of Christ, to prosperous wickedness; and of the pious patriot,
who regards his usefulness more than his ease, and his duty rather than his
secular interest.

FROM the character of Moses, though too imperfectly delineated in the
foregoing discourse, civil rulers are reminded of what is required in their own
character: what will raise and adorn it; and give them an intrinsic worth,
answerable to the station which they fill, and the respect which they demand
from others. From this great example, one of the most illustrious that either
sacred or profane history presents us with, they are taught, for what end they
are elevated above the common level of mankind; to what purpose, they are
entrusted with their authority, and invested with their dignity; and what they
owe to God, to their country, and to themselves. They are under peculiar
obligations, as they have singular opportunities, to promote the honor of the
supreme ruler of the world; and the good of men; and they answer the end of
their institution, only so far, as they accomplish these noble purposes. They
are the ministers of God for good: this is the errand upon which they are sent,
the work that is assigned to them by heaven. And, in the execution of it, they
appear glorious in the eyes of men, and acceptable to the infinitely benevolent
Being, who employs them. As they are in a peculiar manner, the servants of God,
it is justly expected of them, that they do him peculiar honor; that they go
before others in a reverence of the divine authority; that they exhibit in
their own example, the moral character of the Deity; and make the great end of
the divine government, their own ultimate design.

And is there not a reciprocal regard due from the people to the civil
magistrate? Ought we not to reverence the appointment of heaven; "to be subject
to principalities and powers; to submit to every ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake; whether it be to the king, as supreme, or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well?" This is the precept of Christ; this, is the voice of
reason. How can government exist, and the advantages of it be felt in the
world, without a proper submission to it? I say, proper submission; for
absolute, unlimited subjection belongs to bruits, and not to men. Can we relish
order; can we enjoy the peace, the safety, and the innumerable blessings that
are found in a well-regulated society; and not pay a grateful respect to those,
by whom this order is preserved; and from whom, under God, we receive these
blessings?

But it is expected, that the discourse should be turned into a particular
application to our honored Rulers, the Legislators and political Fathers of
the province, at whose call, we are this day assembled in the place of divine
worship. Accordingly, as custom and decency require, would now address myself,
with a most dutiful respect, to your HONOR, whom Providence has placed in the
first chair of government.

You are not insensible, Sir, of your obligations to the supreme Ruler of the
world, who has entrusted you with this large portion of authority; who observes
the manner in which you employ it; and to whom you are accountable for it. Nor
have we any reason to doubt the rectitude of your intentions, and your sincere
desire to discharge the trust reposed in you, to the honor and acceptance of
your Master in heaven.

A sense of duty to God, as well as the benevolence of your heart, and your
natural affection to the people committed to your care, cannot but engage you,
steadily to pursue the general welfare of the Province; which, under your mild
administration, has already enjoyed very great quietness. In this pursuit, we
heartily pray God to direct, support, and succeed you.

We can wish your Honor, nothing greater, or more happy, than like Moses, to
unite a strong principle of piety, with a warm public affection: to possess the
sweet peace, and home-felt joys, that these qualities immediately produce; and
to reap the eternal reward which God has prepared for them.

The discourse, in the next place, may be directed with all due reverence, to
the honorable his Majesty's Council; and the honorable House of Representatives.

You not only see in the example of Moses, our civil Fathers, but know, we
trust, from the sensations of your own hearts, that patriotism is not a mere
creature of the fancy: not a shadow, projected by artful men to impose upon the
vulgar; but a real passion, which degenerate as our nature is, has not wholly
left the human breast: a pure and divine passion, that elevates the mind; that
presses to it is object the public good through toils and dangers; and renders
the suffering patriot, much more respectable and happy, than the successful
sycophant, or triumphant tyrant.

The force of religion, is also beautifully illustrated in the character of
Moses. In this you see, that true piety does not sower the temper, and contract
the heart; but is the proper root of the social affections; on which, they will
flourish with the most vigor, and bring their fruits to the greatest maturity:
that it forms the patriot, and supports and accelerates him in his bright
course. How strange is it then, that piety and benevolence, should ever be set
in opposition, as though their obligations could interfere, or their interests
clash. -- From your example, much honored Fathers, we expect to learn with
what advantage these principles may be united; and that he, who best discharges
his duty to God, will most resolutely and uniformly act up to his obligations
to men.

What a soul dishonor must it reflect on our divine religion; what a reproach
to the name of Jesus Christ; should there ever be found a christian ruler,
inferior in virtue and public spirit to any pagan magistrate! And yet Cicero,
after having invoked the gods as witnesses of the sincerity of what he was
going to expose, could make this public declaration. Cic. Ver.
In all the employployments with which the Roman people have honored me to
this day, I have ever thought my self obliged by the most sacred ties of
religion, to discharge worthily the duties of them. When I was made questor, I
looked upon that dignity not as a gratuity conferred upon me for my particular
use, but as a depositum confided to my vigilance and fidelity. When I was
afterward sent to act in that office, I thought all eyes were turned upon me,
and that my person and administration were in a manner exhibited as a spectacle
to the view of all the world; and in this thought, I not only denied myself all
pleasures of an extraordinary kind, but even those which are authorized by
nature and necessity. I am now intended for aedile. I call the gods to witness,
that how honorable soever this dignity seems to me, I have too just a sense of
it is weight, not to have more solicitude and disquiet, than joy and pleasure
from it; so much I desire to make it appear, that it was not bestowed on me by
chance, or the necessity of being filled up; but confided deservedly by the
choice and discernment of my country. Shall such examples be found, amidst all
the disadvantages which pagan nations labored under, and shall all the light
and motives of the gospel, ever prove insufficient to produce an equal virtue?
Should a christian ruler, who receives his authority not only as a trust from
the people, but as a depositum from the King of kings; to whom the moral
government of God, and the eternal rewards and punishments with which it is
supported, are so clearly revealed; should such an one ever forget the end of
his advancement, or act contrary to it from any worldly considerations; should
he grow regardless of the welfare of the community committed to his care, or
set up an interest of his own in opposition to it; what guilt must he incur;
what a sentence must he fall under!

Suffer me then, honored Fathers, with a becoming importunity as well as
respect, to remind you of the importance of your public conduct; how deeply the
glory of God, as well as the good of the community is concerned in it; and how
much your own everlasting interest depends upon it! a sense of duty to you, by
whose order I stand in this place, an affection to my dear country, and a
regard to that Being in whose name I speak, all constrain me to be in earnest
upon this head. The religion, the morals, the trade, the order and safety of
this whole community, all that ought to be dear to us, are in a good measure
confided to you: an important trust, of which you must one day give an account
to him, who shall judge both the quick and the dead at his appearing, and who
accepts not the persons of princes.

By this motive, as well as a generous affection to the public good, may you be
guided in the weighty affair that lies before you; teaching us the worth of
that privilege which you are now called to exercise, by a wise improvement of
it.

No one can be insensible of the importance of his Majesty's Council, this day
to be chosen, and of the influence which that respectable Board has upon our
public affairs. With their advice the state is to be steered; with their
approbation civil officers are appointed; and the College which ought always to
be dear to us, which needs and deserves to be tenderly cherished, falls in part
under their inspection. A person then who is known to be loose in his morals,
and not to hate covetousness; one whose capacity will not allow, or whose base
and cowardly heart forbids him, to give sound and upright advice: one who is
indifferent to the interest of learning and religion; and who wants fortitude
enough not to consent to a mistaken nomination; a person of such a character,
can never be qualified for a place of so much dignity and importance. -- The
wise and pious, the loyal and disinterested patriot, can alone fill and adorn
that honorable seat. This is the character, which all who are concerned in the
election of this day should require; and in such a choice, we pray God, you may
be happily united.

We trust, our civil Fathers, that you are now assembled for the transaction of
our political affairs, in the fear of God, and under a deep sense of your
dependence for direction and success in all, upon him, who gives wisdom to the
wise, who inspires the generous sentiments of the patriot, who prospers his
endeavors, and rewards his services. You have chosen, agreeable to the pious
custom of our ancestors, to enter upon the public business of this year,
perhaps as important an one as we ever saw, with a solemn act of religion. You
have called us into the house of God, to unite with you in imploring the divine
blessing upon your administration. Happy will it be for you, happy for this
whole community, if you always preserve a supreme respect to that glorious
Being, before whom the principalities and powers in heaven cast their crowns;
who stands in the congregation of the mighty; who knows your thoughts afar off;
to whom the happiness of communities is dear; and whose favor you can never
expect, without faithfully improving your talents and opportunities for the
public good. Like Moses may you endure, by a firm faith in the invisible God;
and lead this people with the spirit of that shepherd and savior of ancient
Israel!

Possessed of this spirit, you will assert and patronize our civil and
religious rights; and be concerned to secure us from domestic opression, and
foreign slavery: you will consult the genius and temper of the people over whom
you preside: you will choose that they should understand and relish the free
constitution with which we are blessed; and endeavor, by rendering their
country happy, to inspire them with an ardent love to it, and an invincible
spirit to defend it. Possessed of the spirit of Moses, you will bear the
misapprehensions and even ungrateful murmurs of the people, should such arise,
(which God forbid) with a paternal meekness, and not suffer them to cool your
public affection, or divert you from your benevolent intentions. Animated with
the faith and piety of the Hebrew lawgiver, you will despise secular honors and
profits, when they come in competition with the favor of God, and the good of
your country; and know, that the crown of righteousness is infinitely
preferable to all the little distinctions and possessions of the world. Such a
spirit will lead you to pity this people, under our great degeneracy, and the
decay of that piety, righteousness, and sobriety which adorned and blessed our
ancestors.

Touched with this melancholy prospect, like Moses you will intercede with God
for this sinful and afflicted people: you will exert yourselves for the support
of pure and undefiled religion; and endeavor to revive a respect to the holy
Sabbath, and all the sacred institutions and precepts of christianity: you will
honor them by your own example; and employ your authority for the suppression
of vice and immorality. In a word, you will be zealous for the glory of God,
and go before us in the most reverend regards to that Being, who has lately
given us very affecting demonstrations of his power and dominion, and of his
anger at the sins of men, in the amazing EARTHQUAKES that have shook the world;
before whom our gracious king, and the whole British nation have lately humbled
themselves; and by whose providence we are all loudly called to repentance.

Were the British affairs either in Europe or America, ever brought to a more
important crisis? Are not our religion, and liberties, every valuable right and
enjoyment which heaven has indulged to us, threatened by a powerful invader? Are
we not struggling hard to maintain ourselves in the possession of this good
land, the inheritance left us, and dearly purchased by our fathers? Are not our
towns emptied, and our fields uncultivated, while so great a number of our
brethren the freemen of this province, are employed in defense of the British
rights in America, and are now jeoparding their lives in the high places of the
field? Under all our distresses, and amidst all our dangers, what succor or
security can we expect, without the favor of almighty God? But this we cannot
hope for, without sincere repentance and a general reformation. And will not
you, our civil Fathers, encourage us to obey the call of heaven, and lead us in
this important, this most necessary work?

If you are successful in your endeavors, as well as earnest in your desires
to revive a spirit of religion and virtue among us, you will render your
country the greatest and most lasting service: for this spirit naturally tends
to the public good, and will procure the divine protection and blessing, which
alone can render our safety and happiness complete.

In this work of reformation, the ministers of religion are peculiarly obliged
heartily to engage, and strenuously to labor. To us it belongs, my reverend
Fathers and Brethren (you will permit me to remind you of it) to us it belongs,
with a ceaseless importunity to intercede with Heaven for our nation and land,
and to seek the Lord till be come and rain down righteousness upon us. To us it
belongs, to explain and enforce the vocal dispensations of divine providence
from the lively oracles. To us it belongs, faithfully to reprove the impiety
and immoralities that abound among us; and warmly to urge upon the consciences
of men, the pure precepts, and affecting motives of the gospel. In fine, to us
it belongs, as we have any regard to our distressed country, any zeal for the
honor of our divine master, any hope of being found of our judge in peace, to
endeavor, both by our example and doctrine to revive the power of godliness,
and to propagate the pure morals of the christian institution.

And how much does it concern the whole body of this people, not to be deaf to
the loud admonitions of Heaven; not to neglect the season, nor resist the
powerful means of repentance, with which we are favored? May God pour out his
spirit from on high upon us, that we all may be formed to the piety and
benevolence which the gospel so strongly recommends, and so indispensibly
requires of us! Then, all would contribute to the common stock of happiness,
and every man would find his own, in the public good. Then, the providence of
God would concern itself for our welfare, and upon all our glory create a
defense.

But alas! there is so little true virtue in the world, that the happiness to
which it tends is but imperfectly felt, and the blessings of society do not
come to any great maturity, in these lower regions. Sin has intermixed a large
portion of vanity, with all that is under the Sun. There is no country here, no
soil, no civil constitution, no rights, no enjoyments which deserve our first
care and affection." Here, we have no continuing city; no kingdom that cannot
be moved; for the fashion of the world passes away. -- The faith of Moses will
point us to a better country; it will guide us to the only society where
perfect devotion, benevolence and happiness are found; -- to the city of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; to the spirits of just men made perfect; to
an innumerable company of angels; to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant;
and to God the Judge of ALL. To whom be dominion and glory for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.

