Mr. Backus's SERMON, Wherein is shown who are the proper Subjects of the
special Ordinances of the Gospel Church.

A SHORT DESCRIPTION Of the difference between the Bondwoman and the Free; As
they are the two Covenants, with the Characters and Conditions of each of their
Children: Considered in a SERMON, Delivered at Middleborough,

By ISAAC BACKUS, Preacher of the Gospel.

Wherein is particularly shown, that none are proper Subjects of the special
Ordinances of the Gospel Church, but real Saints.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND, Printed by Green and Russell, at their PRINTING-OFFICE
near the Custom-House, and next to the Writing-School in Queen Street. 1756.

THE PREFACE.
THE chief occasion of publishing the following discourse, is because of what
is said therein about the subjects of Baptism; which is a point that has been
long controverted among the greatest and best of men. But since there has been
so many volumes written upon it, pro and con, many will be ready to object
against any more's being added now, especially from one that some are pleased
to call a young upstart, and disdain to be taught by him. But without regard to
such flings, I shall beg leave in answer to this objection to tell the reader a
little of my own experience. -- I was educated from a child in the contrary
principles to what I now embrace concerning baptism; and my education had this
to enforce it, that it came from progenitors who were sundry of them eminently
godly, whose instructions godly examples and prayers, I trust I shall bless God
for to eternity. And after I trust my soul was brought to the saving knowledge
of Christ, I made a public profession in that way: to which may be added that
I have since been called (though most unworthy) to preach the gospel, and to
take the charge of a flock, in which I practiced Infant Baptism my self: all
these, and some other things concurred to bind me in that way; but the
irresistible evidence of divine truth broke through them all. Though when this
point was first brought in dispute among us, I labored under some peculiar
disadvantages, having my mind heavily burdened with a sense of past neglect of
duty in things of another nature, which at times made me afraid of looking into
these matters, least I should be left of God to embrace an error; and this,
together with the hot disputes, and vehement urgings that we then had among us
on both sides, occasioned such tossings in my mind as seemed, as if they would
have sifted and shaken me (as it were) to pieces; after which I was much
overwhelmed with melancholy, and discouragements for a great while. Yet having
since obtained through divine mercy sweet deliverance and establishment, them
words have often born with weight upon my mind, When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren: And being sensible that many of my brethren are
laboring under some of the same difficulties that I did, and having some clear
view of several things in this affair, that I have not lit of in any human
writings, these and some other considerations have inclined me to yield to the
request of those who have desired that this sermon might be published. I don't
expect in this little piece to please the Curious; much less a vain carping
world: but if it may benefit, or be any help to serious inquiring minds, I have
my end. -- Of such I ask this one request, viz. that when you get near to God,
you would remember your unworthy brother and Servant in the gospel.

Isaac Backus.
Middleborough, Jan. 20. 1756. N. B. The reason why I have said nothing in this
tract upon the mode of baptism, is not for want of clearness therein in my own
mind; but because this subject more naturally led to show who might partake of
this ordinance, than how it should be administered. And also, I scarce ever meet
with any that deny immersion's being a gospel mode: and I believe that when men
shall have done bringing infants to baptism, they will generally have done with
sprinkling therein likewise.



GAL. IV. 31. So then, Brethren we are not the children of the Bondwoman, but
of the Free.


ALTHOUGH mankind are awfully inclined to disregard God's law when in a
careless state, yet when they are wounded by conviction, instead of coming to
Christ, they fly to the law and their own works for relief. And though (as one
observes) man's legal disposition has little need of being encouraged by legal
preaching; yet some will teach people in this way: which it seems was the case
among the Galatians, that occasioned the writing of this epistle. Some teachers
(it appears) had zealously brought in the same doctrine among them, which
before was preached to the disciples at Antioch, viz. That except they were
circumcised and kept the law of Moses they could not be saved. Which then was
called a subverting their souls. (Act. xv. 24.) And now it is called a
perverting the gospel of Christ. (chap. i. 7.). Therefore the apostle warns
them sharply against such snares: and he intimates that the reason why men
cleave so close to the law, is because they don't hear the law, nor understand
its true nature and strictness, (context ver. 21.) And in order to make this
matter more plain, he sets before them the instance of Abraham's two sons that
he had, one by a Bond-maid, the other by a Freewoman, which things he shows to
be an allegorical representation of the two covenants: -- and after some
discourse upon each, he concludes with these words; -- So then, brethren, we
are not the children of the bondwoman, but of the free.

Which expressions naturally lead us to enquire who each of these women are;
and also to look into the characters, and conditions of their children.

I. Who is this Bondwoman? Answer 1. The moral law, as it was first given to
men, commonly called the covenant of works; the tenor of which is, Do this and
thou shall live, but in the day that thou sinnest thou shall surely die. Genesis
ii. 17. Lev. xviii. 5. Gal. iii. 12. which shows that in order to enjoy the
blessing promised, we must perfectly, and constantly live in a conformity to
this law without the least failure; for if we don't continue to do all things
that are written in the law, we are immediately bound under the curse, ( Gal.
iii. 10.) and so stand exposed to eternal damnation; from which nothing can
deliver but a complete satisfaction to divine justice for the offenses
committed, ( and without shedding of blood there is no remission. Heb. ix. 22.)
-- This law, and covenant of works was evidently given to, and made with our
Father Adam in Paradise, though we have it not so fully expressed, and recorded
till Moses's time. Then as Paul says, The law entered, (Romans v. 20) or was
published and proclaimed to the congregation of Israel, from mount Sinai, out
of the midst of the fire and smoke, even the ten commandments. Hence the
apostle says here (ver. 25.) that this Agor is mount Sinai in Arabia, i. e.
it is the law that was delivered from thence, which gendereth to bondage.

2. This bondwoman includes also the ceremonial law, which likewise was given
to Moses, and from him to the children of Israel at Sinai, Exodus xxv. etc. I
know indeed that the ceremonial law, as it was a shadow of good things to come,
and typified Jesus Christ, and the blessings of his grace, brought very joyful
news to perishing Souls; and those who were enabled by faith to look through
them signs to the things signified, enjoyed great blessings therein. But then
those rites and ceremonies in themselves could never take away sin: and they
seem to be given much after the tenor of the old covenant. If any man had
sinned, then he must provide his own offering, and bring it for his sin that he
had sinned: Lev. iv. -- And so for any uncleanness -- what a long train of
ceremonial labors must they do in order for cleansing? Lev. xivth and xvth
chapters. Dr. Watts, speaking of the Sinai covenant says, Some persons indeed,
call it a legal dispensation of the covenant of grace, (with whom I will not
contend) but it is more agreeable to the language of Scripture, to call it a
distinct covenant, or, a covenant and law of works, as a Jewish Appendix to the
gospel. -- Orthodoxy and Charity united, P. 36.
And from what the apostle says concerning the end of the law's being given,
viz. That the offense might abound; and that it was added because of
transgression. (Romans v. 20. Gal. iii. 19.) I humbly conceive that we may learn,
that one great thing designed in those ceremonies, was to show the heinous
nature, and great evil of sin, and thereby to discover more clearly man's
awful, and helpless Condition, and his necessity of a Christ. -- That when he
had brought the greatest, and most costly sacrifices, even thousands of rams,
or ten thousands of rivers of oil, ( Mic. vi. 7, 8.) all would avail nothing
for the taking away sin and guilt: As says our glorious mediator, sacrifice and
offering, and burnt-offerings for sin, thou would not (which are offered by
the law;) then said he, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God. He takes away the
first, that he may establish the second. Heb. x. 8, 9. -- Indeed it is plain
that the body of the forms and ordinances of the Jewish church are often
represented as a yoke of bondage. In the council at Jerusalem, Peter calls
them, A yoke which neither they, nor their fathers were able to bear. Acts xv.
10. And in our context, Paul shows that one part of the bondage which he warned
them people against, consisted in being held under those beggarly elements; and
in observing ceremonial days, months and years. ver. 9, 10.

And further, by the bondwoman, seems to be intended the Jewish church, in her
legal standing: hence the apostle adds; And answers to Jerusalem that now is,
and is in bondage with her children, ver. 25. and in the beginning of the next
chapter, he warns them as they would keep clear of this bondage, to beware of
circumcision. -- Should it be said that what is here designed, is not, that
them ordinances were such a yoke in themselves; but only that the Jews had
perverted them from their proper use. I reply, that it is in a measure so;
though in themselves they were an insupportable task. In short by the
bondwoman I understand the covenant of works in general, and all the ways in
particular, wherein men seek for life, by what they can do; and think either in
whole, or in part to satisfy for their sins, and purchase divine favors,
either by duties of morality, or by observing any ordinances and forms of
worship whatsoever.

II. Let us consider who her children are, and what a condition they are in.

And here the case is very plain that the children of the bondwoman, are all
that are born after the flesh (ver. 23.) that is, all mankind in their natural
condition. But should any say that Ishmael's being born after the flesh,
intends an unlawful birth, his mother not being Abraham's lawful wife. I answer
no, by no means for then he would have been a bastard, and such an one must not
come into the congregation of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 23. -- but he was circumcised and
admitted to outward privileges as well as Isaac. This objection might as well
be laid against four of Jacob's sons, as against this, their mothers being
maids or handmaids before; yet they are ever reckned to make up the 12 tribes
of God's Israel. But it is evident beyond dispute, that his being born after
the flesh, does not intend a being illegitimate, but only that he had no other
than a natural birth: he was never born again, without which none can enter
into the kingdom of God. And so now all who have only a natural birth are
children of the bondwoman. Paul says of himself, and other Saints, -- We are
by nature, children of wrath, even as others. Ephesians. ii. 3. and he tells the
Romans, that he had proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin,
Romans iii. 9 -- Jews, Pharisees, and all the world are guilty before God ver. 19.

And never did a child more naturally run to its mother for help, than man when
wounded with a sense of guilt flies to his own works for relief: his cry is,
Have patience with me, and I Will pay thee all: but very sad is the condition of
such souls. They may justly be called children of the bondwoman for these
reasons. 1. Because their work is hard. Slaves have often both hard work to do,
and are drove hard in it to do a great deal: So is the case here; the law
requires not only that which is hard, but that which is impossible, for us to
do. It requires us to make us a new heart, and a new spirit, as we would escape
death. Ezekiel. xviii. 31. And it demands that we make recompense for all past
faults, and walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity, as we
would hope to live. Ezekiel. xxxiii. 15. Yea, it follows the soul up so, that it
says, If thou keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, thou art guilty
of all. Jam. ii. 10. I know some say that God cannot justly require of us more
than we can do. But this discovers men's awful blindness, What! is it become an
unjust thing for this glorious Creditor to demand his full due, because man is
turned bankrupt, and is no way able to pay it! ( Luke vii. 42.) O heaven-daring
madness! Nay this sets aside all that Christ has done as vain, for he came upon
this very footing; namely because we were without strength, therefore in due
time he died for the ungodly, Romans v. 6. And what the law could not do, (i. e.
justify a sinner) God sent his son to do. Romans viii. 3. --

2. Souls under the old covenant are like bond-servants in this, that they can
claim no right to the inheritance, or even to a continuance in the family, but
may be sold away, or shut up in prison, notwithstanding all that they have done
when the master thinks proper. -- The servant abides not in the house for
ever; but the son abides ever. Joh. viii. 35. Since the law is broken, man can
claim nothing by it, but wrath and damnation. The law works wrath. (Romans iv.
15.) and as many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse. Gal. iii.
10. So that after all their performances which they boast themselves in, the
sentence will justly be given out, and executed upon them. -- Cast out the
bondwoman and her son; for the son of the bondwoman, shall not be heir with
the son of the freewoman.

3. Bond-servants, when they have toiled and labored many years, are no more
releast from their bondage, than when they began: so all that are under the
law, let them fast twice in the week, and make many and long prayers, and be as
exact as ever the Pharisees were, in all their walk; yet our Lord assures us,
that they must have a righteousness beyond all this, or they can in no case
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Matt. v. 20. -- By the deeds of the law, no
flesh living can be justified in the sight of God. So that every unbeliever,
will eternally remain under condemnation after all their doing. Ah! deplorable
case indeed! well might the apostle think that those who desired to be under
the law, did not hear it, nor know its true nature and strictness. Surely if
they did, they would soon cry (as Israel did at Sinai) for a mediator to stand
between God and them. -- Hence I proceed,

III. To show who the freewoman is, here spoken of. And by this I understand,
first the glorious covenant of grace, made between the Father, and the Son,
before the world began. Therefore God says, I have made a covenant with my
chosen, -- I have laid help upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen
out of the people. Psalm. lxxxix. 3, 19. The sum of which covenant (for I cannot
be large in describing of it) is, That the Son of God should assume our nature,
and in that nature perfectly obey the law which we have broken, and bear the
punishment due unto us for sin, and so make reconcilation for iniquity, and
bring in an everlasting righteousness, through which God could be just, and yet
the justifier of the ungodly: -- As the fruit of which, the Father engaged by
the influences of the holy Spirit, effectually to draw many of the sons of men
to Christ; work faith in their hearts, justify and sanctify their souls, and
keep them by his power, through faith unto eternal salvation: Heb. 2.9 -- 17.
Psalm. 40.6 -- 8. Dan. 9.24. John 16.7 -- 13. Romans 8.29, 30. 1 Pet. 1.2 -- 5.

Which glorious plan, is so far from destroying, or setting aside the law, that
it establishes, yea magnifies, and makes it honorable ( Romans 3.31. Isai.
42.21.) and shows how heinous every breach of it is, even so great that no
transgressor of that law could escape eternal punishment without a perfect
satisfaction for every offense against it. But by Christ's obedience and
sufferings there is a way opened wherein the greatest sinner may be pardoned,
and God's image be re-instamped on his heart, and that he may come to enjoy all
divine blessings here, and for ever more. Hence the Lord says, This is the
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those days; -- I will
put my laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts; and I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a people. Heb. viii. 10.

Further, by the freewoman is intended the gospel church in her pure standing
-- Hence in our context she is called Jerusalem which is above -- which is the
mother of us all ( ver. 26.) So in Heb. xii. 18 -- 24. it is said that we are
not come to the mount that burned with fire, but we are come to mount Sion, and
unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, -- to the general
assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven -- and to
Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that
speaks better things than that of Abel. -- On mount Sinai the fiery law was
proclaimed, ed, which gendereth to bondage; but now on mount Sion, or in the
church of the living God, is proclaimed the gospel of peace, and salvation: and
souls are brought to embrace the same. All the saints in heaven and earth, make
but one catholic church: but it is in the gospel church here below that God
appears to publish his grace, and to draw others in: therefore we are told
that, The law shall go forth out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, and many nations shall flock in, Isai. ii. -- And again, The Lord
shall send the rod of his strength out of Zion; -- the effect of which will be,
that his people shall be willing, in the day of his power. Psalm. cx. 2, 3. --
In short, by the freewoman, we may understand the glorious plan of salvation,
laid in the eternal mind from everlasting, which in time has been made
manifest, first by gradual discoveries thereof in the old testament, and then
by Christ's actually coming in the flesh, and working out salvation, which he
began to preach himself, and 'twas afterward confirmed unto us, by them that
heard him, whereby the gospel church was gathered, and increased: His usual way
of bringing others in, being to cause Zion to travel, and so to bring forth
children; for God is the Father, and the church the mother, of all the saints.
-- The apostle here (ver. 27.) adds a passage from the 54th of Isaiah, where,
note, that the foregoing chapter concludes, with the happy fruits of Christ's
sufferings, viz. That he should see his seed, justify many, etc. upon which the
church who had been desolate as a widow, is comforted with a declaration that
her maker is her husband, and that she should have a numerous offspring, and
her seed should inherit the Gentiles, etc. -- Which leads us

IV. To describe the character and State of her children. And here we are told,
that (as the child of the bondwoman was born after the flesh, so) the child of
the freewoman was by promise. God promised that son to Abraham long before he
was conceived in the womb; and he exercised a strong faith in that promise, by
which he gave glory to God. Romans 4.20. And 'twas through faith that Sarah also
received strength to conceive this seed. Heb. xi. 11. -- There appeared nothing
more than the actings of nature in Ishmael's birth: but in Isaac's there was
faith on both sides; which made him a wonderful type of the seed here pointed
at. He was promised before he had a being; and so was every child of the
freewoman here spoken of: They were chosen in Christ, before the world began.
Ephesians. i. 4. And God that cannot lie, promised eternal life, so early. Tit. i. 2.
Therefore Christ refers to this promise, in his glorious prayer. Joh. xvii. 1,
2. Father, -- glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee. As thou have
given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life, to as many as
thou have given him. But this election of grace is not known to us, 'till we
are born again: therefore, as Isaac was born according to promise; so every one
of these who are promised to Christ shall be converted in due time: hence he
says, All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out. Joh. vi. 37. Such are born, not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Joh. i. 13.

These souls may well be called children of the freewoman, because,

1. They are set free from that condemnation, and dreadful load of guilt which
they lay under before. There is now no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, -- for the law of the spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made them
free from the law of sin and death; yea so that no things present, nor things
to come, shall ever be able to separate them from his love. Romans viii. 1, 2,
38, 39. Agreeable to this is what our divine Master tells us. Joh. v. 24. that
he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life.
--

2. These children are set free from satan's tyranny. By nature they are his
slaves: he is called the prince of this world; and the spirit that works in
the children of disobedience. Joh. xii. 31. Ephesians. ii. 2. Hence we are told that,
Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, Christ took part of
the same: that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death,
that is the devil; and deliver them who through fear of death, were all their
lifetime subject to bondage. Heb. ii. 14, 15. Christ casts satan out, and
takes from him all his armor, wherein he trusted, and divides the spoils.
Luke xi. 22.

3. They may be called children of the freewoman, because they are made free
from the dominion of sin. -- Christ tells us that, Whosoever commits sin, is
the servant of sin* but if the Son shall make us free, we shall be free indeed.
Joh. viii. 34, 36. And Paul told the Romans, that being made free from sin,
they became the servants of God, had their fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life: yea says he, sin shall not have dominion over you; because ye
are not under the law, but under grace. Romans vi. 14, 22. Sin takes occasion by
the law, and often beats down, and overcomes souls, when they essay to reform
and turn to the Lord, by throwing their past transgressions and guilt in their
way, and representing to them, that such guilty creatures as they, can never
come to a holy God; and therefore they had better go on and get what pleasure
they can in sin, for they will never have any thing better. -- And God's own
children are often woried here, when they have backsliden from him; and satan
will not be wanting, to help to keep them back: -- hence he is called the
accuser of the brethren, which accuses them before God day and night. -- The
spirit of God convinces of sin, and the devil accuses of sin; but one special
difference between them lies here, -- The one shows us our transgressions in
order to awaken us to repentance and reformation, and says, It is high time to
awake out of sleep, and the time past of our lives may suffice, and more than
suffice, wherein we have served sin: but satan says, it is in vain to turn now
for there is no help for you. Nay because souls are got once into his snare, he
claims a sort of propriety in them, and if at any time they would attempt to
reprove another for iniquity, he will immediately throw their own faults in
their teeth, and tell them that it is in vain to pretend to deal with another,
when they are so vile themselves; and so because we have once done wrong, he
would make that a sufficient argument against our even doing right again. O
this cruel adversary! how miserably are sinners befooled, that they will hearken
to him more than to Jesus Christ! -- But what shall a poor soul do when the
tempter throws such things in his way as he knows he is guilty of? he cannot
deny the charge. Why we are told that they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto
the death. Rev. xii. 11. Therefore, O Soul, if satan tells thee of thy guilt,
learn to overcome him by flying immediately to the blood of the Lamb; who, if
we confess our sins, is (not only merciful and gracious, but also) just and
faithful to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1 John i. 9. Does the tempter say thy sins are very heinous? learn to make that
an argument with Christ, saying, Pardon O Lord mine iniquity; for it is great.
Psalm. xxv. 11. -- Which leads me

4. To another point of their freedom, which is open access to God. -- When
Adam had sinned, he was turned out of Paradise, and cherubims, and a flaming
sword were set to keep him off, and to guard the way of the tree of life, Genesis
3.24. But now through Christ we have access by one Spirit to the Father. Ephesians.
2.18. Saints have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but they
have received the spirit of adoption, whereby they cry Abba Father. Romans 8.15.
And they may come with as great freedom as children do to a father, for the
blessings they need. Luke. 11.13. Yea, we are bid to be careful for nothing,
but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with thansgiving to let our
request be made known to God. Phil. 4.6. --

Once more,

5. They are made free to serve God, and walk in his ways, so that his commands
are not a yoke of bondage; but a law of liberty to their souls. Jam. 1.25. And
as on the other side, the children of the bondwoman drag on like slaves, and
they say of Gods service, what a weariness is it: so the children of the
freewoman obey him, not out of slavish dread; (but like free born souls) they
serve him WITHOUT FEAR, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days
of their lives. Luke 1.74.75. Hence David reckons it his freedom to observe the
divine will; says he, I will walk at LIBERTY: for I seek thy precepts, Psalm.
119, 45. And the saints at Galatia, being brought into this freedom, the
Apostle (in the words next after our text) charge them to stand fast in that
liberty, wherewith Christ had made them free; and not to be entangled again
with the yoke of bondage.

In short, the children of the freewoman are freed from the condemnation of
the law, from the power of sin and satan, and have freedom of approach to God
through Jesus Christ; and it is made their freedom and liberty to walk in
holiness all their days, and they have the liberty of Christ's house, and have
a right to all the privileges of the sons of God here, and are heirs of an
incorruptible inheritance above; and by and by they shall be received to that
glory: and in the great day, their bodies shall be raised from the dust, and
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God. Romans 8.21, 23. -- And when the bondwoman, and all her
children shall be cast out into outer-darkness: then shall these children of
the freewoman be openly received to enjoy the kingdom, prepared for them
before the foundation of the world. -- Mat. 25. --

Let us now proceed to some Improvement of what has been said.

USE I. We may here see the great folly of all those that seek salvation,
either in whole, or in part by their own doings. This mount Sinai gendreth to
bondage, and those who would get life by the law, let 'em come before it and
see the darkness, fire and smoke, and hear the thundrings and the fiery law,
that comes from thence. Surely if souls come here, they will soon see the need
of a Mediator to stand between them and this God, who is a consuming fire.
Alas! how blind are men, that they should ever imagine that they can satisfy
divine justice, or get life by a broken law! Tell me ye that desire to be under
the law; do you not hear the law? What does it say? Why it says, If the wicked
restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life
WITHOUT COMMITTING iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Ezekiel.
33.15. Observe the terms well, you must restore the pledge, give again that you
have robbed; not only what you have unlawfully taken, from your fellow men, but
also what you have done against the eternal God; for he says, you have robbed
me, even this whole nation. Mal. 3.9. You must fully pay that dreadful debt,
and walk in the statutes of life for the future, without ever committing
another sin, else there is no life by that law. -- If you say, that this is too
strait; be entreated to look a little farther into the nature of the law, and
you will find it is so strait, that Heaven and Earth will pass away, before one
tittle of the law can pass away, 'till all be fulfilled. Matt. 5.18. When God
treats with men in the old covenant, he deals with them according to the strict
tenor of it: and when he treats with them in the covenant of grace, then though
their debts are very great, yet, when they have nothing to pay he frankly
forgives them all. Luk 7.42. But sinners vainly expect some of the blessings of
grace, while they yet cleave to the law.

USE II. Hence we may learn who have a right to the privileges of the new
covenant: viz. those (and those only) who are born again. The children of the
freewoman partake of her blessings; but the children of the bondwoman, shall
not be heirs with the children of the freewoman. -- I am sensible that there
are many contentions among professors of religion about these things. Many
think that sinners may claim a right to some of the pomises of grace:
particularly such as these, -- Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall
find. And if any man lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. -- But if they look a
little further, they are told that they must ask in faith, if they would think
to receive any thing from the Lord. Jam. 1.5, 6, 7. Indeed here God appeals to
their consciences, and says, are not my ways equal? (Ezekiel. 18.) are not your
ways unequal? If you keep under the old covenant, I deal with you according to
the tenor of it: if you perfectly obey it is precepts, you shall have the
blessings promised: but he that offends in one point is guilty of all; and then
there is tribulation and wrath, upon every soul of man that does evil. Romans
2.9. The promises and threatenings of the old covenant belong to the children of
the old covenant: and the promises of the new covenant belong only to her
children. Hence such alone are styled heirs of promise, who have fled for
refuge, to lay hold on the hope set before us: Heb. 6.17, 18. None others can
claim the promises of grace, for, All the promises of God IN Christ Jesus, are
yea, and IN him amen: 2 Cor. 1.20. Therefore to those only that come to, and
receive him does he give power (or privilege) to become the sons of God. Joh.
1.12. And if sons, than heirs to all the blessings of heaven, Romans 8.17. -- And
as these alone are heirs to those eternal blessings; so none others have a
right to the special privileges of Christ's house here below: -- this I shall
enlarge more upon.

As for preaching, exhortation, etc. God has given them forth in general to the
world, and calls all men every where to repent: But some imagine that the
Lord's supper was appointed for a converting ordinance; and so that unconverted
persons, if moral, ought to come to it. But if it was appoint- for conversion,
surely the profane have as much need of that as any; though it is evident that
this is children's bread, and therefore by no means to be given to dogs. Matt.
vii. 6. Many others think that Baptism is not confined only to saints, but that
their natural offspring are also to partake of it. And I find that the main
arguments for both, are fetched from the constitution of the
old-testament-church, holding that to be modled according to the new covenant:
-- though here in our text we are told that, This Agar is mount Sinai, -- and
answers to Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children: i. e.
the Jewish church in her legal standing: that church and the gospel church are
set as wide apart as the old covenant and the new. In Heb. viii. the covenant
at Sinai, is called Old; and God says expressly that the new covenant is not
according to that: and that old constitution we are told, was then ready to
vanish away, ver. 9, 13. The original constitution of that church was such,
that it took in whole households, and so a whole nation. -- Natural generation
(being born of professors of that religion) gave a right to circumcision, and
so to all the privileges of that church: and a being bought with an Hebrews
money, gave the servant a right both to circumcision and the passover. Exodus
xii. 44. And the covenant that Moses mentions in Deuteronomy. xxix. took in such as
had not an heart to perceive, eyes to see, nor ears to hear. But Paul shows
clearly that in the new testament, The children of the flesh are not the
children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. Romans
ix. 8. And least any should say that a being born after the flesh, meant an
unlawful birth, he immediately adds the instance of Jacob and Esau, as exactly
parallel, who were not only both born of one mother, but also at one time; and
yet Esau was in as bad a case as Ishmael, ver. 10, -- 13.

But what will, I apprehend, set this matter in the clearest light, is, to
consider it in the line of type and antitype. -- It is abundantly shown in
Scripture, that the Jewish church, and the forms and ordinances thereof, did
shadow forth, and typify heavenly things, Heb. viii. 2 -- 6. and ix. 9, 23, 24,
etc. The seed of Abraham, Isaac and Israel's being selected out of other
nations, and being redeemed with almighty power, and bro't near to God, to be
his peculiar people, and to partake of those ordinances and privileges which no
other nation then enjoyed, did remarkably shadow forth God's spiritual Israel,
whom he has chosen and by almighty grace redeemed; Out of every kindred,
tongue people and nation. Rev. v. 9. And as the Lord said to Israel at Sinai;
Ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, (Exodus xix. 6.) so these saints say,
Thou have made us unto our God kings and priests, ver. 10. And in the
forementioned 9th of Romans Paul evidently shows, that as Israel literally,
was chosen out of other people: so that Israel spiritually are chosen out, from
among both Jews and Gentiles. The same apostle calls the old testament
dispensation the Letter; and the new testament, the spirit. 2 Cor. iii. 6. That
church had a literal house and temple where God's name was fixed, and his
worship confined. Deuteronomy. xii. 13. 1 King. viii. 29.

But in the new testament we are confined to no place, ( John iv. 21.) but the
saints are God's house, who are builded for his habitation through the spirit.
Ephesians. ii. 20, -- 22. That old temple was built with stones which Hiram's
servants hewed: but this with lively (or living) stones; that was a worldly
sanctuary, (Heb. ix. 1.) but this is a spiritual house; -- there was offered
fleshly sacrifices; but here spiritual ones, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
1 Pet. ii. 5. -- Should any think that my discourse here, too much favors the
scheme of those who deny the outward use of Baptism. I reply, that a person's
experiencing of this, spiritually is so far from disproving the need of the
outward use of that ordinance, that the apostle Peter makes the evidence of
persons being baptized with the Holy Ghost, to be a sufficient proof that such
are meet subjects of, and ought to be baptized with water Baptism. Act. x. 47,
48. and xi. 16. which is such an evidence for our practice, as I never yet see
any writings on that side pretend to (...)
Hence, an outward cleansing was required, in order to receive the ordinances
of that church: but here that which is spiritual, even the purging of our
consciences from dead works, in order to serve the living God. Heb. ix. 13, 14.
And here let me remark one thing that is not generally observed, and that is,
that a ceremonial cleanness was particularly required in a child, before he
might be circumcised; which plainly appears in the first appointment of that
ordinance, in that he must not be circumcised 'till eight Days old. Genesis xvii.
12. The reason of which is shown in Lev. xii. 2, 3. which is that when a woman
had born a man-child, she should be unclean seven days; and in the eighth day
he should be circumcised: i. e. he must be circumcised as soon as he was clean;
which by the way proves undeniably, that circumcision in it is original
appointment, was designed to be a part of the ceremonial law; notwithstanding
what many say to the contrary. Therefore from hence I conclude, that as outward
cleanness was necessary in order for circumcision; and none might partake of it
without; so that spiritual cleanness is absolutely necessary now, in order for
any to receive Baptism, or the Lord's Supper aright. --

These brief hints may furnish us with an easy answer to many objections, that
are often urged against our refusing to give these precious ordinances to the
unconverted. I shall speak more particulary as to Baptism, and that will
sufficiently answer the other; for none will plead for persons coming to the
Lord's Supper, who have not a right to Baptism.

1 Object. God says to Noah, With thee will I establish my covenant -- and come
thou and all thy house into the ark. Genesis vii. 18. And Peter tells us that the
like figure whereunto, even baptism does now save us, (not the putting away of
the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. iii. 21. Hence we conclude that now,
children are taken into covenant with their parents, and they ought to answer a
good conscience in having of them baptized.

Ans. That which saved 'em was the ark that Noah built, which was a clear type
of Christ: and as the old world was destroyed when Noah entered into the ark:
So shall the wicked when the Son of Man comes for the salvation of his people.
Matt. xxiv. 38.39. But what is mostly hinged upon, is Noah's children's going
in, on their fathers right. Though they were saved only with a temporal
salvation, which cannot entitle to gospel church-privileges. But what will you
do with this here? the dispute is commonly about infant baptism: but here is
nothing like an infant, for they were all married men and women; Noah and his
wife, and his sons and their wives: and where is the person in our days that
will baptize such, only on their parents right? Thus by jumbling type and
antetype together, persons run themselves into a sad dilemma: whereas if we
take them distinct, the case is easy. Noah, as well as the ark he built, did
tipify Christ: his children were saved, so are all Christ's children: Noah's
children went voluntarily into the ark, at God's command. Genesis vii. 1, 7; so
must each one of us personally believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and answer a
good conscience toward God in obeying his commands; or else Noah, Daniel, nor
Job can never deliver son nor daughter from destruction. Ezekiel. xiv. 20.

Object. 2. But the Lord made the covenant of grace with Abraham, and said, I
will be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee; and so took his seed into
covenant with himself, which is called an everlasting covenant; and as a token
thereof, ordered him to circumcise his children, Gen xvii. So we believe that
now children are in covenant with their parents and ought to be baptized: --
hence Peter says on the day of penticost, to those who were pricked to the
heart, Repent and be baptized, -- for the promise is unto you, and your
children. Acts ii. 39.

Ans. This is the main hinge on which all the controversy turns; therefore I
will be a little more particular upon it. And first let us observe that Abraham
stood in a double capacity. -- As he stood personally before God, the covenant
of grace was no more made with him, than with any saint in the world. The
gospel was preached unto him, ( Gal. iii. 8.) and he believed it, and it was
counted unto him for righteousness, Romans iv. 3. -- But as he stood a type of
Christ, he appeared as the visible head of the Jewish Church, and the covenant
was made with him, and his seed after him, and they were all taken into the
church, and many favors were granted, or promised to them, -- Nextly, let us
examine who his seed are: -- and here I find that his seed is taken in three
senses in scripture.

1. His natural seed, which includes all that descended from his loins: These
were all taken into that typical covenant: and they had the privilege of the
oracles of God, and the outward ordinances of his woriship, which no other
nation then enjoyed: they had the promise of the land of Canaan, and of many
outward blessings there; and in conclusion that Christ should come out of that
nation; -- and they had the first offer of the gospel Romans iii. 1, 2, and 9, 4,
5.

2. Christ is Abraham's seed, in whom all the families of the earth shall be
blessed. Gal. iii. 16. and sundry of them ancient promises evidently point
directly to him, in whom alone they are fulfilled.

3. All saints are Abraham's spiritual children. -- Therefore it is of faith,
that it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the
seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the
faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all. Romans iv. 16. Now as to these
seed, God is indeed their God in covenant, which covenant and the blessings of
it are everlasting. But then take notice that, though all saints are Abraham's
children, yet they are not all made fathers as he was. He is the father of us
all; and they that be of faith are his children. Gal. iii. 7. As he stood the
head and father of that nation and church, he was as has been observed, a type
of Christ who is our everlasting father. (Isa. ix. 6.) and is head over all
things to his church. (Ephesians. i. 22.) In which sense no mere man upon earth now
stands as Abraham did. -- Now if we take these things distinct, there is no
difficulty; but to jumble them together leads into endless confusion. --
Typically, all Abraham's posterity were in covenant, both believers and
unbelievers: and ante-typically all his spiritual seed are in the covenant of
grace, both Jews and Gentiles. Romans iv. 11, 12. And so that text is limited in
Act. ii. 39. which is so much insisted upon. The promise is unto you and to
your children, and to all that are afar off, EVEN as MANY as the Lord our God
shall call. There is the limits; as many of us, and of our children as are
effectually called, are heirs of promise, and no others. Heb. vi. 17, 18, and
ix. 15. And to cut this matter short, we in general don't pretend to be
Abraham's natural seed; then show me if you can, how the natural seed of
believing Gentiles as such, ever become Abraham's spiritual children: that
which is born of the flesh is flesh: and how came those who are only your
fleshly posterity, any way to be Abraham's seed? -- If you say that you are
Abraham's seed, and they stand to you, as his did to him. -- Then let me
enquire where God has shown you that you shall be a father of many nations, and
that a church shall spring from you which shall be large, and that natural,
instead of spiritual birth shall bring persons into it? Here lies the pinch of
the point; a being born after the flesh did bring them into Jewish church,
which is evident because, if they were not circumcised, they must be cut off
from their people. ( Genesis xvii. 14.) which could not be if they were not in;
for there is no casting any out of the church that are not in it. Which if it
be the case now under the gospel, then we have a fleshly and not a spiritual
church, directly contrary to many texts that I have mentioned, and scores more
that might be brought to the fame purpose.

Here some bring Romans xi. to prove that the limits of the church stand the same
now as formerly, only is changed into different hands. Because from a
similitude of the olive tree, is represented the rejection of the Jews, and the
reception of the Gentiles, to partake of that which is called the root and
fatness of the olive tree; which they take to be a partaking of the same, or
like, external, as well as internal, privileges: from whence is argued the
right of professors now to baptize their children, because the Jews circumcised
theirs. -- But by the root and olive tree, I understand, Abraham typically, and
Christ spiritually, who is plainly pointed at in ver. 26.27. He is the vine,
his people are the branches. (Joh. xv. 5.) The Jews were broken off through
unbelief, and the Gentiles were g^^ffed in, and stand only by faith. ver. 20.
So that what appears from hence is, that true faith is absolutey necessary, in
order for any soul now to partake of these great blessings, described by the
root, and fatness of the olive; which blessings the Jews lost by unbelief,
though it is called their own olive tree, ver. 24. and they had the first offer
of grace when Christ came. --

Therefore whatever privileges are intended by the root, and fatness of the
olive, it is evident that as the branch must have a living union to the tree.
or vine, in order to receive nourishment therefrom; so every person, both great
and small, must by faith be united to Christ, in order to partake of them
favors: which shows, that no arguments can be drawn from hence to prove that
any others are subjects of baptism but real saints.

Object. 3. But it is evident that in old time, God did grant to the children
of those who were eminently godly, many favors and privileges that he did not
to others: and so the prophet speaking concerning the last times, tells the
saints that they shall be the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their
offspring with them, Isa. lxv. 23. and there is much more in Scripture to the
same purpose; from whence we cannot but think, that children now are taken into
covenant with their parents, and therefore have a right to baptism.

Ans. The first part of this objection is undoubted truth, but the consequence
drawn from it, I think has no foundation in scripture: for a great part of the
favors thus granted, are only of a temporal nature; and that not only to
children, but also to other friends round. Thus for instance, not only Noah's
and Lot's children were saved from being drowned and burnt up: but Rahab the
harlots father and mother, brothers and sisters, also were preserved from being
slain, for her sake, because she received the spies with peace. Josh. ii. 13.
and 6.23, 24. -- And how often does God speak of preserving the kingdom, and
the privileges of it, in the hands of the posterity of David his servant, for
their fathers sake. 1 Kings 11.13, 32, 34, 36. 2 Chronicles. 21.7. Isa. 37.35. So
that it appears that a great part of the favors, thus given are of a temporal
nature, which no ways entitles to gospel church privileges: -- If it did,
parents or brethren of the godly might claim a right to them, as well as
children, Yet.

2. If any spiritual favors are shown to children for their parents sake, they
are either the advantage of their godly examples, counsels and instructions,
and the enjoyment of the outward means of grace, ( chiefly because unto them
are committed the oracles of God. Romans iii. --) Or else out of regard to his
saints, and in answer to their prayers, the Lord is pleased to power out his
spirit on them, and savingly turn 'em to himself: then we readily own that they
have a right to all the privileges of the sons of God. -- I will pour my spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: -- What then is the
consequence? why, one shall say, I am the Lords: and another shall call himself
by the name of Jacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord,
and surname himself by the name of Israel. Isai. xliv. 3, 5. Note, first God's
spirit is poured upon 'em, and then they openly confess him. But what proof is
there from hence, that unconverted children have a right to church privileges?
The Lord in comforting Zion, in Isa. live. 13. says, All thy children shall be
taught of God: which chapter the apostle quotes in our context, to describe the
freewoman; and then adds, We, brethren are her children: all which shows, that
the churches children in a gospel sense, are only real saints. The same appears
also from what God said to Jeremiah, concerning the new covenant, that he would
make with his people: not according to the covenant that he made with Israel,
when they came out of Egypt: which new covenant, is a writing his law in their
hearts, etc. and in describing the extent of it, he says, They shall all know
me, from the least of them, unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: for I
will forgive their iniquity; and I will remember their sin no more. From which
it is evident to a demonstration, that none are actually in the covenant, but
such as know God, and have their sins forgiven. This is applied to the
gospel-state in Heb. viii.

Further let it be observed, that this point, of favors being shown to
children for their godly parents sake, was no ways confined to circumcision of
old, because it appears before, in the time, and after that was instituted. --
Before, it appeared in Noah's family, as observed above. -- In the time of it,
we may see the same in Lot's house, and that not only to his immediate
offspring, but also many generations after, God shows some regard to his
posterity for his sake, Deuteronomy. ii. 9, 19. Yet none of them were circumcised. --
And after circumcision was instituted in Israel, the same appears without any
special reference to that, as may be seen in the family of Phinehas, David, and
others, though all the rest of Israel were circumcised as well as they: which
proves that God's bestowing some favors on saints children, that he did not to
others of old, never could argue any right to circumcision, without an express
command: then surely no proof can from hence be drawn for baptizing believers
seed now, without the plain direction of the lawgiver.

Object. 4. According to this, you make as though saints in gospel times have not
so great privileges as they had under the law: but we believe them to be
greater now than then.

Answ. 1. In order to solve this difficulty, it is necessary to consider what
were truly the privileges that they enjoyed, under the law. And Paul plainly
shows that their chief privileges were the enjoyment of the oracles of God.
Romans iii. 1, 2. which were as means for their conversion and salvation: and
that they might not partake of these means without being circumcised is
manifest, because that Christ himself when he sent out his apostles before he
had by his death abolished the Jewish ceremonies, forbid their preaching to the
Gentiles or Samaritans, but only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Matt. x. 5, 6. But now our children may enjoy these means with vastly greater
clearness than they, without being baptized. --

Should any here say that Baptism is a means for conversion, and as such ought
to be used for children. I reply, that I conceive this was the footing upon
which the baptizing of infants was first introduced into the world: though I
don't pretend to be much acquainted with the history of those times, yet I
gather this from the account that Paedobaptists themselves give of this affair.
Mr. Clark in his late defense of the divine right of Infant Baptism: though he
can produce no express mention of infants being baptized in the two first
hundred years after Christ; yet he would persuade us that the fathers of the
third century had the apostles minds and practice right in this matter, who
plainly mention it. But one of the first passages that he cites is from St.
Origin in these expressions, viz. It is for that reason because by the
sacrament of Baptism the pollution of our birth is taken away, that infants are
baptized. P. 111. And hence they frequently called Baptism, regeneration: which
language the church of England retain to this day. But if all were regenerated
who are sprinkled in infancy, surely we should see other men of them, than
multitudes of them appear to be. And the notion of the pollution of our births,
being washed away by this outward application of water, looks so absurd, that I
would persuade myself that it is needless less among us to stand to confute it.
-- Were it needful, what the noted Mr. Joseph Allen (a Paedobaptist) in his
alarm to the unconverted, P. 10. lays down, is somewhat to the purpose. Says
he, It is not the end of Baptism to regenerate, 1. Because then there would be
no reason why it should be confined only to the seed of believers, for both the
law of God, and the nature of charity requires us to use the means of
conversion for all, as far as we can have opportunity. Were this true, no such
charity as to catch the children of the Turks and Heathens, and baptize them,
and dispatch them to heaven out of hand, like the bloody wretches that made the
poor protestants (to save their lives) swear they would come to Mass, and that
they would never depart from it, and then put them forthwith to death saying,
They would hang them while in a good mind. 2. Because it pre-supposeth
regeneration, and therefore cannot be intended to confer it. In all the express
instances in scripture, we find that Baptism does suppose their repenting,
believing receiving the Holy Ghost. Act. viii. 37. and ii. 38. and x. 37. Mark
xvi. 16.

I also observe in Mr. Clark that there is as early mention of Godfathers, and
Godmothers as there is of infants right to Baptism. P. 105. He likewise speaks
of a dispute that after rose among the churches whether infants might be
baptized as soon as they were born, or not till eight days old; which affair
was settled by a council in Cyprian's time. All which make me think that
instead of having this pattern from the apostles, these things were introduced
gradually among many other corruptions of those times.

Answ. 2. If you think we must have as many external ordinances of worship as
they of old, or else that our privileges are less, you are greatly mistaken,
for it is justly reckoned a great favor to have that large handwriting of
ordinances taken out of the way. Col. ii. 14. -- The Jews had three stated
feasts in which all their Males were to appear before God. ( Deuteronomy. xvi. 16.)
But there is but one stated ordinance in the gospel church which is so called.
1 Cor. v. 8. and who will say that our privileges are less than the Jews
because of that? Much of the glory of that church was outward (as of
circumcision the Lord says, My covenant shall be in your flesh. Genesis xvii. 13.)
and they had a great deal of outward splendour: -- in particular their temple
built by Solomon, doubtless far surpassed any house that any gospel church now
on earth have to meet in; yet that don't prove our privileges to be less than
theirs.

Ans. 3. Aaron was chosen God's high priest of old, and then the piesthood was
limittd to his natural seed; and the Lord says of his grandson Phinehas, Behold
I give unto him my covenant of peace: and he shall have it, and his seed after
him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for
his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel. Number. xxv. 12.13. Now
mark -- here is an everlasting covenant, made with Phinehas, as well as with
Abraham; but who will say, that gospel ministers privileges are less now, than
those ministers of God's sanctuary were then; unless the ministry may now be
limited to their natural posterity? A part of the priests work was to teach
Jacob Gods Judgments, and Israel his law. (Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 10.) which is the work
of gospel ministers now. Natural birth, and some outward ceremonies then bro't
persons into the church, and into the priesthood: but now spiritual birth, and
the work of God's grace is necessary, in order to bring souls aright, into the
church and into the ministry. As to both, it then ran in a natural, but now in
a spiritual line: and there is every whit as much reason to plead that
ministers in these times, must have all their offspring maintained by the
offerings of the people; and that none may come into the ministry, but their
seed; ( Deuteronomy. xviii. 1 -- 5.) or else their privileges are cut short; as to
say, that church members now must have all their children baptized, to prevent
a complaint of their privileges being abrid'd.

What has been said may be sufficient to answer that objection that is often
urged, viz. That children were once in covenant, and where were they cut off?
For they were only in a typical covenant, as has been shown: But when John the
baptist came to prepare the way for the evangelical administration, he told the
Jews to think no more about having Abraham to their father; for God was able of
stones to raise up children unto Abraham. q. d. Abraham's children are now to
be reckoned in another line; therefore think no more of having a right to
ordinances, only by virtue of natural generation. And he plainly shows that
evidences of repentance are necessary now in order for any to partake of
baptism; Matt. 3.8, 9. So that unconverted children were only in that old
covenant, which was then ready to vanish away (Heb. 8.13.) None are in the new
covenant, 'till God's law is written in their hearts (ver. 10.) and such never
can be cut off.

Neither will there need much more to be said upon the distinction that is made
between the external administration and internal efficacy of the covenant. This
Mr. Clark, a late writer insists much upon In his answer to Dr. Gill, on infant
baptism; I will recite some of his words, p. 246. He says, A man may be in the
covenant of grace, in respect of it is visible administration. -- and yet he may
not be in the covenant of grace in regard of it is spiritual dispensation and
efficacy. This is the case of all those hypocrites. p. 248. The invisible
church consists of all, and only real Saints, -- all the members of this
invisible church, it will be granted, are in the covenant of grace, in regard
of its spiritual efficacy. And further to evidence that there ought to be such
a distinction made in the church as visible and invisible he says, P 24^
"Christ has directed his ministers to baptize all that profess themselves his
disciples -- and appear such to a judgment of charity. -- But has Christ
promised salvation to all such professors without distinction, when he says,
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved? No, but to those only who
also believe in their hearts as well as confess with their mouths." And now
what place (...) Mr Clark got in the church to put children in before they
believe? I confess I can see none but only along with hypocrites, to whom he
acknowledges Christ has not promised salvation, but to those only who believe
in their hearts: and if it be a very great privilege to be in such a place,
then he may have some color for complaining of our cutting children off from
some valuable privilege, by not baptizing of them before they are converted.
: And he owns that none are in the covenant in the latter sense, but real
saints; but their children were in the former external administration, and so
he thinks they are now. But if the former administration was typical, and the
latter spiritual, as has been sufficiently shown; and if he is not now a Jew,
which is not one outwardly. -- But that he only is a Jew which is one inwardly;
and if now circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, Romans 2.28, 29. then surely
there is no more place here for children, than any others, till their hearts
are changed.

And a few words may also suffice to confute the argument that is framed from
the similitude of a king's giving out a patent, or grant of land, and certain
privileges to a number of persons, and their heirs sealed with red wax; and
afterward should call it in, and put a new seal, in white wax to to the same
patent: that in such a case there would be no need of expressing anew, who were
interested in it: from whence is argued that it is the same covenant and grant
that believers have now, which was given to Abraham, only that was sealed with
a red or bloody seal, and this with a white one Vide Mr. Dickinson's dialogue
on infant baptism.
. But, (to use this way of speaking) the difference appears vastly great, for
the old patent to Abraham contained a promise of a numerous offspring, that he
should be a father of many nations, and kings should come out of his loins,
that they should be God's visible covenant people, and they should have the
land of Canaan for an everlasting possession. ( Genesis xvii. 2 -- 8. The head and
capital of which country was Jerusalem. -- Whereas the new patent is given to
Jesus Christ the antetype of Abraham, which is justly called a better covenant,
established upon better promises, Heb. viii. 6. He has the promise of the
heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession; and all that can claim a right to the blessings of this testament,
are such as are effectually called: such have the promise of a better land than
the old Canaan ever was, even an eternal inheritance, Heb. ix. 15. The old
patent promised that some of Abraham's posterity should be made kings; but this
new one makes all Christ's seed kings, as well as priests to God; who shall
reign, not for a few years only, but for ever and ever. Rev. i. 6. and xxii.
25. The royal seat of them old kings, was Jerusalem below; which in Paul's time
was in bondage with her children: but these kings shall reign in Jerusalem that
is above, and is free, which is the mother of us all. -- They of old were God's
covenant people for a while, yet afterward for their breaking his covenant, he
says, he regarded them not. (Heb. viii. 9.) But those that are in this new
covenant, There is nothing present nor to come, that shall ever separate them
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans viii. -- And as
the articles in these two testaments are very different one from the other; so,
should we suppose (but not grant) these external ordinances to be seals, yet
there is a great difference between them also. For,

1. Circumcision was only for the males; baptism is both for males and females.

2. Circumcision might be administered by common persons: Moses's wife
circumcised his son, ( Exodus iv. 25.) and Zechariah's neighbors came to
circumcise John; Luke i. 58, 59. -- But Baptism is to be administered only by
Christ's messengers. Matt. xxviii. 19, 20.

3. Circumcision was not to be administered 'till eight days old; but baptism
has no other age fixed than only, if they believe with all the heart, they may
be baptized. Acts viii. 37.

4. Circumcision bound 'em to observe all those legal ceremonies, which
baptism, does not. Gal. 5 --

5. Circumcision was a type of what should come, even of Christ's being cut
off, and also of regeneration; Col. 2.11. Whereas baptism is not a type of what
is to come; but is an outward sign or manifestation of what is inwardly
wrought. As many as are baptized into Christ HAVE put on Christ. Gal. 3, 27. --
Here lies one special difference between the ordinances of the old testament,
and the new. Old testament ordinances were typical of what was to come: Whereas
the ordinances of the new, are open declarations of what is actually done. Thus
for instance, in the Lord's supper, we do show forth the Lord's Death: or from
time to time, hold up a public witness to the world that Christ has really
died for sinners; and this we are to continue in the practice of, till his
second coming. 1 Cor. xi. 26.

Hence we may see the reason, why those might be the subjects of circumcision,
that may not of baptism, viz. because that pointed forward to what was to be,
and so might be administered to subjects who had not the thing typified, wrought
in their hearts: but baptism is not a type that the subjects shall be
converted; but an open sign or witness that he is so; and thus the worthy
subject in attending that ordinance declares, that he has been crucified with
Christ, and is made dead unto sin and alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Romans vi. --

This view I conceive may give us a true idea of that text which is
considerably used in this affair. Romans iv. 11. And he received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith. -- From whence many
conclude, that the covenant of circumcision was the pure covenant of grace: and
that circumcision then, and baptism now are seals thereof. But you may observe,
that what the apostle is upon, is proving that great point of our justification
by faith alone: and he brings in the instance of Abraham as an evidence in the
case, and shows that he was justified by faith, without the deeds of the law.
Upon this there arises another question, which is, whether this great blessings
comes only on the circumcision, or on others also? to decide which he takes a
review of Abraham's case; from whence it appears that Abraham himself was
justified by faith, long before circumcision was instituted. And he received
the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he
had, yet being uncircumcised. --

Circumcision (as has been shown) was a sign of what was to come; but Abraham
had the thing signified then wrought in his soul; so that he had both the type
and antetype, and thus it was to him a seal of the righteousness of the faith
which he then had: but how could it be a seal to Ishmael, and thousands of
others of the righteousness of the faith which they had not? -- The apostle
from hence goes on to show that thus standing, Abraham was a father to all that
believed, though not circumcised: and a father to those of the Jews that were not
only circumcised; but also walked in the same faith that he had before he was
circumcised; which brings out just the same thing, that has been observed
before, viz. that typically he was father of all that church, both believers
and unbelievers, and spiritually he is the father of all the saints, both Jews
and Gentiles. And without this distinction it seems impossible to reconcile
many passages of scripture together.

Before I dismiss this point, I would show something of the absurdities and
enlargements which follow, upon holding, that all saints natural seed now are
in covenant with 'em, according to Abraham's covenant. This leaves men at a
loss about how large the church is; and who have a right to its ordinances.
Some hold, that church members should baptize both their children and their
servants; only it must be such as are young: yet then they can never tell
exactly, what age to fix. -- Numbers there are, who insist upon all baptized
children's coming to the Lord's Supper at sixteen years old, if not openly
scandalous: but most of the first Settlers of New England, would receive none
to the Supper, but such as they counted godly, and would baptize no children,
but only where one of the parents were church members: yet when these children
were grown up, they began to plead that they were in covenant, and therefore
must have their children baptized; or else they would be like heathens: and so
by degrees they got into the practice of admiting such to own the covenant (as
it is called,) and have their children baptized, who did not think themselves
fit to come to the Lord's Supper: which seems to bring in a sort of Purgatory,
or half way between the church and the world. This has been renounced by many
in the present day, who still hold to infant baptism: though other godly and
learned men when they have owned some scruple in the case, yet have said, "What
shall we do? they are in the covenant who have been baptized, and how can we
deny 'em the privileges?" -- Others say that though children baptized, have not a
right to the Supper, nor to bring their seed to baptism, till converted; yet
they are under the watch and care of the church, and if they are found
obstinate transgressors, they must be disciplined and cast out. But we are
commanded in any wise to rebuke our neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him; and
to reprove even the unfruitful works of darkness, and would you cast 'em out
from this? that is a great length indeed.

Now all these profess to hold to Abraham's covenant, and that they will show
themselves to be his children by doing his works; and yet there is not one of
them all, that come up to what they profess: for Abraham circumcised himself,
his son and all the MEN of his house; of which there were 318 trained soldiers.
Genesis xvii. 23. and xiv. 14. But these several sorts of persons discover
something in the new testament that contradicts so large a practice as that, --
therefore they take a part of it; some a greater part, and others less,
according as it appears clearest to them. -- The chief reason of all this
confusion, I conceive to be men's jumbling the constitution of the old
testament church, and the new together: whereas if we take them distant, the
limits of each are expressed very plain. The limits of the old church are expressed
as plain by Moses, as they were to Abraham. -- If any man would join with that
church and come to the passover, he must have all his males circumcised: and
every man's servant, bought with money, when he was circumcised, then should he
eat the passover. A foreign and an hired servant might not eat thereof: but all
the congregation of Israel should keep it. Exodus xii. 44, -- 48. There are the
bounds set exactly; and as plain are they in the new testament. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved. -- They that gladly received the
word were baptized; and the same day were added to the church: and they
continued in her fellowship. -- And the Lord added to the church daily, such as
should be saved. Mark xvi. 16. Acts ii. 41, -- 47. -- All who by birth or
purchase were incorporated into an Hebrew's family, had a right to all the
ordinances of that church: -- So all that by Christ's purchase and the
new birth, are bro't into the household of God; have a right to all the
privileges of the gospel church. Ephesians. ii. 19. -- 22. And to vary a step from
this, leads men into a jumble; and rather than yield the case, they will say,
that the scriptures have left this matter in the dark, about the subjects of
baptism: when in truth all the darkness is in their own minds.

Let none improve any of these things, to lessen their obligations of
discharging their duty faithfully toward their children's souls as well as
bodies. I believe that those to whom God has given children, ought to give
them up to him again, acknowledging their obligations to bring them up in his
ways; and let us bring them to Christ for his blessing as they did of old. But
some say, How can we bring them to him, but in the way of his ordinances? we
know not how to bring them to him but by baptizing of them, as the seal of our
faith.

Answ. Sick persons were then frequently brought to Christ as well as children:
and cannot you find a way not to bring your sick to Christ either publicly or
privately without baptizing of them? surely you can. -- And since there is no
more hint of baptism in one case, than the other, I think you may raise as good
an argument from hence, for having baptism administered as a seal of your faith
in bringing your sick to Christ, as your children. If it be urged that Christ
says, Of such is the kingdom of God. I reply, that he does not say all such,
but of such is the kingdom of God: and he immediately adds (both in Mark x. 15.
and Luke xviii. 17.) an assertion that, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom
of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. Which seems to relate
rather to the tempers, than to the persons of little children. But let all who
have an interest at the throne of grace implore it for their children as well
as others: and also use all their endeavors with them to bring them to know
God, through Jesus Christ: and when once there appears evidence of their being in
such a happy condition, then let them be as small as they will, it is readily
granted that they have a right to all the privileges of the sons of God.

USE III. What has been said may lead us to an examination of our condition.
Since all the world is divided into two families, as Christ says, He that is
not for us, is against us; so here, all are children either of the bondwoman
or, the free. Then surely it is of infinite importance for each soul to know
which mother they belong to: and the scriptures have given many plain marks
whereby we may come to know how our case is. -- For brevity's sake I shall
instance in but one, which is that, If thou art a child of the freewoman, it
is become thy LIBERTY to walk in holiness. Herein lies a special difference
between the least christian and the greatest hypocrite in the world. Both of
them pay some regard to the same commands, and in many things their external
walk may appear alike: but then the springs and motives of their obedience are
vastly different. The hypocrite sometimes does things to be seen of men, though
what most commonly moves him, is fear of hell if he neglects duty, and hopes of
escaping it by his performances. Hence you will often hear them pleading, that
it is dangerous for persons to be too confident; and that it is needful for to
always have some fear of miscarrying at last, lest we should grow remiss and
careless in duty; and some will plainly say, that if the doctrine which many
hold concerning perseverance and assurance is true, and if they knew that they
were in Christ, and should never perish, they would not care how they lived,
for all would end well at last. But how plainly do these men discover
themselves to be children of the bondwoman, for they look no further than
their ways, or to escape the whip? We all know that the greater confirmations
an obedient child has of his father's love, and the security of his favor, the
more cheerful, active and diligent he will be in doing his father's will, and
careful not to do any thing to offend him. And since it is so often asserted,
that saints love and delight in God's law, how can any rational soul, (if they
would let reason, instead of their own experience decide the case) imagine that
clear discoveries of God's love and favor, would make men less careful to
serve him! -- Don't we all know that what men love and delight in, they will
seek and pursue after, without being drove? as for instance, food that we love,
we labor for earnestly, and eat of it frequently, without being told that we
shall die if we don't. And Job says, that he esteemed the words of God's mouth
more than his necessary food. chap. xxiii, 12. and David counted the divine
law, to be sweeter than the honeycomb* Psalm. xix. 10. Also persons that we
love; -- without driving, we seek all opportunities to enjoy their company. So
will all those that truly love God, and his saints, -- yea such as love the
riches, honors, or pleasures of this world, not only voluntarily run after
them, but they also earnestly crave a great deal of them: and so do those who
love Christ and holiness; and they that are content with a little degree of
grace; never knew the glory and excellency of divine things. David says, I
shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. Psalm. xvii. 15. Nothing
short of this can fill the desires of a gracious soul. The first epistle of
John is peculiarly calculated to detect licentious hypocrites, and to press
home a holy life upon all professors of religion: and observe well the beloved
disciples method. -- My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye
sin not. -- But what if they should happen to be ensnared in sin? does he then
set the terrors of hell before them? No, he presents the grace and blessings of
heaven; -- If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the father; -- and if we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. chap. i. 9. and ii. 1. And further to
attain this glorious end, he sets saints to admiring the wondrous love of God
in taking them to be his children, and asserts that now they are the sons of
God, but what they shall be advanced to, does not yer appear; but says he, We
KNOW that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as
he is. There is the strongest assurance expressed; but will that make them slack
in their obedience? No, quite the contrary, for every man that has this hope
in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure; -- and he declares, that he that
can run on in sin, Has not seen Christ, neither known him. chap. iii. 1, 2, 3,
6. And now, are not hypocrites ashamed of their notion that assurance is a
licentious doctrine? -- O my readers, I entreat and charge you before God, who
shall judge us all, to search critically your own hearts, and see whether you
are governed by a spirit of bondage, and slavish fear, or by the spirit of
adoption, whereby you can cry Abba Father. Romans viii. 15. --

I shall only answer a scruple that may arise here in some gracious souls, and
then dismiss this head. -- Methinks I hear some such say, Alas, I fear that I
am a child of the bondwoman, for I often drag on heavily in duty, and I feel
my heart so dull and backward to spiritual exercises, that I cannot think there
is any grace in it. But this short question may easily decide the case, viz. Is
it the divine command which are burdensome to thee, or thy vile heart that
often hinders thee from doing the things that thou would? -- God's service
is a Weariness to hypocrites. Amos viii. 5. Mal. i. 13. But saints delight in
his law after the inward man, though they find a law in their members warring
against it. Romans vii. 21, 22, 23. Carefully observe this distinction, and you
may come to know what your condition is.

In the last place, I shall close with a short address to two or three sorts of
persons. And,

First, to those that hold the contrary from me concerning the subjects of
baptism, many of whom are very near to me. My dear friends, it may be some of
you will be offended, and others grieved with me, when you see the foregoing
lines. But I think I can truly say, that it is not out of bitterness, but rather
out of love to you, that I have penned what you here see. Therefore I would only
beg this one favor of you, namely, that you would heartily weigh what is here
said, in the balances of the sanctuary, before you censure or cast it by: and
in order for this, let the characters of all that have held the one side or the
other of this principle be put entirely out of the question, or you will never
come to the right of the case. That there have been good Men of both sentiments
is no scruple to me, and I believe not to you neither; and it is as evident that
there has been bad men on both sides: and should you try to find out which had
the greatest number, it would be little to the purpose. -- The mischiefs that I
have found by experience in these things makes me caution you against them.
David was a man of a much better character than Jacob; yet Jacob had the right
of the case concerning numbering the people. 1 Chronicles. xxi. -- Therefore let us
all obey the divine command to cease from man, viewing that all flesh is but
fadeing grass: and be willing that this matter should be decided alone by the
word of our God that shall stand for ever. (Isa. ii. 22. and xl. 8.) And if
after a diligent searching of the scriptures, you still remain of a different
mind from me; yet still remember that to his own master each soul stands or
falls, and so forbear all bitter censures. And O that each one would with
greater earnestness forget the things that are behind, and press toward the
glorious mark; believing that wherein we are differently minded, God shall in
his own time reveal the whole truth unto us. Phill. iii. 14, 15. Oh, when shall
that blessed day come, when saints will have done with all misunderstandings of
each other; when they shall all join with one heart and soul to praise our
glorious King for ever and ever.

Secondly, I shall say a word to such as are of my sentiments concerning
baptism. -- Brethren, what I have to speak to you is, Live up to your
principles. -- How inexcusable will those appear, who insist upon it that
persons must believe in order to be baptized; and yet admit such to this
ordinance who give no proper evidence of any thing more than an historical or
doctrinal faith? whereas a believing with all the heart is necessary to give a
right thereto. Act. viii. 37. And though God alone can search the heart; yet
fruits of repentance should be carefully looked after in this case. -- And as
little excuse can be found for them, that while they plead that we must be
buried with Christ in Baptism, yet behave as though sin lived and reigned in
their hearts still, instead of being dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans vi. 4, 11. Therefore let none while they
profess to know God, deny him in works: but be exhorted so to walk as to adorn
the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. -- This would have a much
greater tendency to bring others to embrace the truth in these things, than
many warm disputes without a good life. It Is not easy to imagine how much use
is made of the corrupt lives of numbers of those in the land who are called
Baptists, to bar the minds of thousands against receiving, or even heartily
weighing and examining what I firmly believe are truths which they hold. And
though I am not excusing such conduct; yet I would earnestly persuade you all as
much as may be to cut off occasion from those that desire occasion thus to
treat the truth and them that hold it. And if others say that we disregard, and
are cruel to our children, because we don't baptize them before they are
converted: let each head of a family, walk in his house with a perfect heart,
and behave so toward the little ones that God has given him, as to evidence
that he has a much greater regard for the spiritual, than the temporal welfare
of his children.

Lastly, I will close with a word to all the children of the bondwoman, My
dear fellow Men, be entreated to consider how sad your case and condition is.
If you flourish in the world more than the saints, and are let alone to live as
you list: this is but a miserable portion, which presently will be all stripped
from you, and God will say, How much they have glorified themselves, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give them. Jam. 5 -- Rev. 18.7. -- Many
of you are ready to think, that there is too much ado made about religion, and
can laugh at the devotions of the godly. But Oh! remember and take warning by
your old father Ishmael: he made a mock of his fathers joy, in seeing the
accomplishment of God's promise; which is here (ver. 29) called persecution,
for which he was cast out, not only from his fathers house, but also from the
blessings of Salvation, which he had despised. Now therefore be ye not mockers
least your bands, be made strong, (Isa. 28, 22) but fly to Christ, that your
souls may live. -- And are there any of you that are seeking help by the life
of your own hands; how does Christ expostulate with you ( Isa. 55.2, 3) saying,
Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor for
that which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good, and let your Soul delight itself in fatness. Incline your ear, and come
unto me; hear and your souls shall live, and I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. AMEN.

ERRATA.
PAGE 17. l. 13. from the Top, r. appointed. and l. 23. in the same Page, for
text r. cotext.


