A TREATY Between the Government of New Jersey, AND THE INDIANS, Inhabiting the
several Parts of said Province, Held at CROSWICKS, In the County of BURLINGTON
On Thursday and Friday the eighth and ninth Day of January, 1756.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM BRADFORD, Printer to the Province of
New Jersey.

A TREATY between the Government of New Jersey, AND THE INDIANS.
Thursday the eighth Day of January, 1756.

THE Commissioners and the following Indians being met.

The Names of the Indians.
Cranberry Indians, who pass by the English Names.
Thomas Store, Stephen Calvin, John Pumshire, Jo. Mikty, Thomas Kecahela, Isaac
Still, William Totaney, Oliver, Totamy, Sam. Gosling, etc. In all 27 Men,
sundry Women and Children.
Croswick Indians,
Quish, Loulax, Andrew, Tashee, Teach, Pombolus, Shockhicman, Cushee, etc. In
all 16 Men, sundry Women and Children.
Pompton Indians,
John Cooper, Pamaatock, Cachcow, Tongue Cawhow, John Janaway, Cobus Jeroliman,
Abram Shattaw, Weselshelahow, etc. In all 12 Men.
Southern Jersey Indians,
John Palmer, Peter ^ooley, Gabriel Mytop, Woilis, Tom Gale, In all 23 Men,
besides Women and Childen.

A Commission from his Excellency JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire Captain General and
Grvernor in Chief, in and over the Province of Nova-Caesarea or New Jersey, and
Territories thereon depending in America, Chancellor and Vice Admiral in the
same, etc. was published, impowering the Honorable Richard Saker, Lewis Morris
Ashfield, Charles Read, Robert Lawrence, Samuel Smith, Barzilla Newhold, and
Joseph Yard, Esqrs or any three or more of them, to treat with the Indians of
the Colony of New Jersey, and to agree upon such Things, as they should esteem
conducive to the Peace and Welfare of the Colony.

Jacob Howlings, Esquire and Stephen Calvin, Interpretors attended, after which the
Commissioners spoke to the Indians as follows.

Brethren,

WE are glad to see you here in Health, and hope those you have left behind you
in your Towns are in Health also.

The Reason of our meeting you at this Time, is, that we might have an
opportunity of talking freely with each other as Brethren ought to do.

We are appointed by the Government, to give you the strongest assurance of the
Affection your Brethren of this Colony, have and will always retain for our
Brethren the Indians.

If therefore any Thing you know of, that may on either side destroy the good
Agreement that has continued for near one Hundred Years, between your Fathers
and ours, you will now have an Opportunity of mentioning it. And we hope you
will do it in such a manner as that nothing may hereafter remain to give us or
you any Occasion of Uneasiness, therefore we hope you will open your Minds
freely.

We grieve for the Sufferings of our Brethren in Pennsylvania, who have
suffered much by Indians misled by bad and wicked Peoples Advice, but we hope
an end will be soon put to their Murdering your Friends and ours, and believe
the Indians will by the trouble they will bring themselves into by hearkening
to this wicked Advice, be made to repent of their bad Actions.

We hope none of our Friends and Brethren of this Colony are joined with the
Wicked Indians who have been destroying the People of Pennsylvania.

And expect you will let us know all you have heard of the Intentions of the
Indians, and if any of the Enemy Indians, or any strange Indians should come
among you, to put evil and false Things into your Heads, you will do well not
to believe them, and that you will deliver them to us, as dangerous to our
Peace and yours.

As we have heard some of the Enemy Indians have been in the upper Parts of
this Province, and Murdered one Man, and wounded another, this and the Murders
on the other side of the River, has made our People who live in the upper Parts
of this Colony so Angry, that it is become dangerous to any Indians to go
there, as they will not in the hurry know Friends from Enemies. Therefore we
would have you seriously consider with yourselves, that it will be necessary
for you to contrive some Bounds for your own Security, where you may be safe,
and our People easy with it. And as you are our Brethren, we would have your
Advice in this Matter, and if you have any request to make for your own ease
and both our Security's, you will do well to let us know it, and we shall give
it due Consideration.

Then the Indians withdrew.

Friday Morning, January the 9th 1756.
The Commissioners met.

The Indians came into Council, and having appointed Ohiockechoque, to speak
for them; he delivered in their Names the following Answer.

Dear Brethren,

SOME of our old Men can remember when the English were weak and few, and the
Indians strong and many. We then nursed them up in our Bosoms and treated them
as Friends.

We are glad our Friendship has continned so long, and hope it will always
endure.

Since our Fathers have sold so large a Part of their Lands to the English, we
find it much more difficult to maintain ourselves and Families by Hunting,
which is at least one half our Support.

But a worse evil than that has come to us, which is the Use of strong Liquor,
to which the Indians are too much addicted, and by which they are made Weak,
Idle, and Quarrelsome, and for strong Drink often sell those Skins, and other
Things, which would provide themselves and Families with Clothes and Bread, and
for this some of the English are too much to blame.

We beg you will take care to put a Stop to this wicked practice, which though it
may offend some of our foolish People at first, yet it will at last be best
liked, and be more for the Health of Soul and Body.

The bringing in the blessed Gospel, we esteem the greatest advantage we have
received by the English coming among us, and we trust it has been a means in
the Hand of God to reform the Minds and Manners of a Number of us, and we
prefer the Enjoyment of it and living with our Brethren the English even to
Life itself. It gives us a real concern, that any of our Acquaintance are
joined with the French and their Indians. The Reason of their going to them, we
believe was, that they were seduced by Lies and Falsity's, because the same
Methods were used with us, but without effect. As Times of great Distress are
come on us, as well as you, we are willing to agree as Brethren, upon any
Methods for our mutual Peace and Security.

We propose the following, which we hope may be effectual.

We who live on this side Rariton River, will not on any occasion, go to the
Northward of Rariton River at Brunswick, and of the great Post Road that leads
from Trenton to Brunswick, except in those Town spots, but confine ourselves
between the said Post Road and Delaware River, to the Sea Shores of this
Province, while the War continues, in which Bounds we hope we shall always have
the free Liberty of Hunting, and beg that good care may be taken, that no Traps
shall be set there, which is of late very frequent and is very dangerous both
to you and us.

If any of our Young Men go to War with you, we hope you will put them upon the
same footing with the English, and that when our Married Men go to War, you
will make some Provision for their Families.

As several of us are obliged to leave our Habitations in this time of general
Distress, we pray that some Releif may be provided for such. As it is the
Misfortune of some of us to be in Debt, and we, for the public Peace, are
willing to deprive ourselves of several advantages we formerly enjoyed, we pray
that care may be taken that our Creditors may not be two pressing, and we
promise as soon as we can, we will honestly pay our just Debts. We pray that
all abusive Words and Actions, which destroy Love, may be punished in both
Indians and English. We think we have still some Pieces of Land, for which we
have received no Consideration, if it should prove so, and we could get the
Money for them, we hope we should be able, with some Assistance from our
Brethren the English, to purchase a Piece of Land sufficient for us all to
settle together, and have the Gospel among us, which is our great desire.

And we Pompton Indians, and others, living beyond Rariton, will confine
ourselves within a Line to be drawn from that Part of the Sound between Staten
Island and the Main, which is nearest to John Jolines, to go the nearest Course
to the said John Jolines House, and straight three Miles further into the
Woods, and so by a Line to be drawn through the Woods, at three Miles distance,
back from the great Road that leads from John Jolines to Elizabeth-Town,
Nowark, Wezel, and John Jerolimans Mill, near the Falls of Passaic, and from
the said Falls near Jerolimans Mill to the Fork, and then to Pompton, and then
on the nearest straight Line through Bergen County, to the Jersey Line on the
Shore of the North River, or Hudsons River, and so by the Waters to were it
began on the Sound.

We have to complain to our Brethren, that ill minded Persons are apt to take
Advantage of the Indians when they are Drunk, and buy their Lands for a trifle,
and often from the Indians who does not own it. And we pray our Brethren, that
for the future no Indian Deed or Lease may be allowed to be good, but what is
made and Signed before the Governor, or two of his Council, who are to have a
Certificate from six Indians, that the Indian who sells the Land, is Owner of
it, under the Hand of some Magistrate, who sees the fix Indians Sign it, and
the Deed to have it wrote on the back, and signed by the Governor, or two of
his Council, that they saw the Certificate of the six Indians, Signed by the
Justice, and that the Indian who sells the Land, understood the Deed, and had a
reasonable Price as common for it.

As some bad People have got a long Lease from a Drunken Indian for the Indian
Lands at Wepink, and for which they pay mostly, or all in strong Drink, we beg
that they may be removed from that Land, and we hope care will be taken that no
loose People settle on our Lands, without buying them.

We heartily promise our Brethren, that if any strange Indians shall come among
us, we will immediately give Notice thereof to the next Justice or Captain,
that they may be satisfied for what end they come: And if any Indian should
attempt to come among us, to draw us back from our Brethren the English, we
will immediately secure them, and deliver them to our Brethren. And as this is
our fixed Resolution, which we desire may be made public, we hope our Brethren
will not give Credit to reports of strange Indians being among us, when such
Stories are told by ill minded People.

And if any of our own People should be unruly or abusive, we will deliver them
up to the English to be punished.

The Commissioners then spoke to them as follows.

Brethren,

WE have here three Men and some Women and Children, in all Seventeen, which
were taken in the upper Parts of the Province, where they have lived some
Years, and sent down to Trenton Gaol, for both theirs and our own Security,
from whence they have been escorted here, and are now in the Guard House, we
shall Order them to be delivered to you, to be examined, and if after due Care
and Consideration of this Matter, you think you can safely take them among you,
and Answer for their Good Behavior, we will show the Confidence we have in you
our Brethren, by releasing them to you; but if you suspect them, you must
deliver them back to the Guard. There still remains in Gaol at Trenton, one
Phillip an Indian, whose conduct has given us great reason to suspect him, and
whose Family is at Wiomen, and we shall detain him there till something more
appears in his favor. We shall wait your Answer till the Afternoon.

Friday Afternoon.
The Commissioners and Indians being met.

The Commissioners spoke to them as follow.

Brethren,

WE acknowledge the Kindness your Forefathers have shown to ours, and we shall
always Act kindly to you, as we hope you will always deserve it, as long as the
Waters run down Delaware.

We are glad to find you acknowledge that your Fathers have sold the Land we
now possess to our Ancestors, and we hope you have received Advantages by the
rising of the Price of your Skins, and Furs, and buying what you wanted at a
reasonable Rate, equal to the Loss you have suffered by the scarcity of Deer
and other Game.

We are pleased to hear that you are sensible of the Evils that arise by the
too great habit of drinking spirituous Liquors among the Indians, and we shall
lay that Matter before the Legislature of this Provinee, and shall endeavor to
get a Provision made against that Evil.

It is agreeable to us, to hear that you so much Value the Blessed Gospel, and
that it has amended the Lives of so many of you, and the more you practice the
Precepts of it, the better it will be for you.

We are glad that the Lies and Falsities of your and our Enemies, have not been
able to draw you off from us, your Brethren, for your true Interest is fast
bound to ours.

As to the Bounds you have proposed for yourselves, we agree with you as to
them, and shall take care that you shall be secure in them.

We hope none of our Brethren will distress you, unreasonably, on Account of
any Debts you owe them. And we recommend it to you to be Frugal and Industrious
till you can pay them.

We will lay it before the Legislature, to provide against your being deceived
or defrauded in any Bargains, Grants or Leases of Land, that you may make
hereafter.

As to your Lands at Wepink, we shall make a Report about it, and you may
depend upon ample Justice being done to you.

We receive kindly the hearty Declarations you make to us, that you will give
immediate Notice to the Officers of Government, when any strange Indians come
among you, and that you will secure such as are your and our Enemies. Let this
lay deep in your Hearts, and your fulfilling it punctually, will give us sure
Proofs that you are our hearty Brethren.

We will make these your Intentions public, and make no doubt but this
Declaration, which we believe comes from your Hearts, will make your Brethren
Love and Esteem you, and make them unwilling to believe any false Reports to
your disadvantage.

All manner of rude and bad behavior of the English and Indians to each other
shall meet with proper Discouragement.

As some of our Brethren, have sustained Losses by Attachment and Love to their
Brethren the English, We are willing to assistsuch of them as have left their
Places of abode in their present Necessity, and shall lay the Affair before the
Legislature for their Consideration.

As to such of our Brethren the Indians, as will go out to War with our People,
which we hope they will cheerfully do, when there is occasion, they will always
be put upon the same footing with their Brethren the English, as they have been
heretofore.

Then the Indians by Ohiockchoque returned the following Answer, to what the
Commissioners delivered to them this Morning.

Dear Brethren,

WE have considered what you said to us respecting the Indians who were bro't
from the back Parts of the Province. We have strictly examined them, and
according to the best Judgment we are able to frame, we verily believe they had
no bad designs against the English; but considering the deceitfulness of Man's
Heart, we dare not engage for any but ourselves, we would be Willing to take
them to our Town at Cranberry, and do our utmost to Watch over them, but the
Fears and Jealousies of our English Neighbors, are so great, that (as we are
informed) it would not be for their or our safety to have them among us, and
therefore do not choose to have any Connections with them, at least for the
present.

The Commissioners afterward enquired of the Indians, if they had the same
Objections to the taking them to any of their other Towns, and informed them,
that the Commissioners would make allowance of some Indian Corn toward their
support this Winter, as they were removed from their own Habitations. Upon
which Quish and the Chiefs of the Indian Town in the Branches of Croswicks,
agreed, as nothing appeared against these Indians, but that they were brought
from their Habitation for their own Security, and the Peace of the upper
Inhabitants, and that they could not return there again as being out of the
Bounds the Indians had prescribed to themselves, that they would take them
home, use them as Brethren, and have a careful Eye over them.

And the Indian Prisoners promissed to keep with the Croswick Indians, and to
be have orderly.

And they were delivered to them, whose Names were Abraham Lewis, John Price,
John Phillip, and Twelve Women and Children.

And the Commissioners informed them, that they would Order some Corn for the
relief of those who have suffered by their Love to us, and by being drove from
their Habitations.

And the Treaty broke up, and the Indians next Day went in an orderly Manner to
their Towns.

What follows is added by Order of the Commissioners.

IT appeared to the Commissioners in the Course of this Treaty, that the
Indians of Susquehannah, have for three or four Years past, used many
Endeavors to carry of to Susquehannah all the Indians from this Province, and
have brought Belts of Wampom, in the Name of the Mohocks, to Order them to
remove, though the Indians never believed them to have been sent by the Mohowks,
and have refused to leave us.

The Commissioners are convinced of the Sincerity of the Indians of this
Province, and recommend it to the Inhabitants to use them kindly, to be careful
not to supply them with strong Drink, whereby many disorders may be prevented.

They also request the Inhabitants not to use aggravating Language to the
Indians, whereby rude and threatening Expressions may be drawn from them in
their Drink, and those improved into Tales to alarm weak, People and raise ill
Blood between the Inhabitants of the Colony and the Indians, which ought to be
suppressed by all Means.

They recommend it to the Inhabitants to consider whether any Thing but their
Love and Friendship to us, could have prevented their being new among our
Enemies, and for this token of their Affection for us, they are entitled to our
Friendship.

As the spreading of reports, without a good Foundation, can only serve to give
the Inhabitants uneasiness, they request them carefully to suppress all Idle
Stories, as they will tend to destroy their own Quiet and Repose.


