When GOD's Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn
Righteousness.

To Worship GOD in Spirit, and in Truth, IS TO WORSHIP HIM IN THE True Liberty
of Conscience; That is in Bondage to no Flesh. And in this Spirit of LIBERTY, I
have Composed the following TREATISE, And Recommend it to the READER.

John Bolles, a Servant of JESUS CHRIST.

REV. 14.9, 10, 11. -- If any Man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive
his mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand. The same shall drink of the Wine of
the wrath of GOD, which is poured out without Mixture, into the Cup, of his
Indignation, and he shall be tormented with Fire, and Brimstone in the presence
of the holy Angels, and the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their
Torment ascends up for ever, and ever. --

With an ANSWER thereto; JACOB JOHNSON, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Groton.

Printed for the Author, MDCCLVI.

TO THE General COURT AT BOSTON, May 29th 1754.
THESE Lines are to Signify, that I have Examined your Confession of Faith, and
have Quoted out of said Confession four Articles; and by the Scriptures have
proved them to be Erroneous, being Contrary, and against plain Scripture, viz.

1. Your first Day Sabbath: 2. And concerning Swearing: 3. And Baptism: 4. As
also the Civil Government:
And these I have Quoted, not because they were easier Confuted than others;
but because to keep a good Conscience in the Opposing of these said Articles,
has proved a more direct Leading into Persecution: As a also in the Proving of
the said Articles to be Contrary to Scripture and against plain Scripture
proves your Confession to be Erroneous, or an Image made to the Beast, see,
Rev. 13. v. 14, and as by the following Treatise will appear and your
Established Ministers to be Antichristian Ministers, and your Churches
Consequently Antichristian Churches, or Synagogues of Satan, Rev. 3.9. And you
Rulers of the Commonwealth, whilst you use the Sword that GOD has put into
your Hands to Rule in the Commonwealth, only to do Justice, and Equity between
Man, and Man, are the Ordinance of GOD, and Ministers of GOD, Romans 13.1, etc. 1
Pet. 2.13, etc. But as you presume to Judge in Cases of Conscience, and that,
that Concerns the Worship of GOD, you become the Ministers of Satan, and Act
under the Power, and Authority of the Dragon, as is fully Declared, Rev. Chap.
13, and is described in diverse other Places in said Rev. By Worshipping the
Beast, and his Image. By the Beast, is to be understood the worldly Powers; and
by his Image, that form of Worship they Establish, and Defend.

And now let us take a View of the Conduct of our Ancestors, briefly touching
the Sufferings of the Anabaptists, and Quakers: as also the Evils that befell
New England afterward, as they have left them on Record in the Book of their
Confession, Page 94 in two Questions.

Question 1st. What are the Evils that have provoked the LORD to bring His
Judgments on New England?

As for the Sufferings of the Anabaptists it was for Separating from the
Established Churches in the Country, under a scruple of Baptism; accounting
their Baptism no Baptism, and the Baptizing Infants Unlawful, this Occasioned
the Civil Magistrates to put forth their Authority by Fining, Whipping and
Imprisoning the said Anabaptists, as may be seen more at Large in Daniel Neals
History of New England. Vol. 1. Page 278, to 291.

Soon after the Anabaptists, came the Quakers into Boston Colony, and were
proceeded against in like Manner, by Fining, Imprisoning, and Whipping: but
these Punishments proving Ineffectual to keep them out of their Government,
they proceeded to make many Laws, annexing many, and grievous Punishments, as
may be seen at Large in Bishops History of New England. Judged also (said Neals
History, Vol. 1 page 291. to last) till it came to cutting off Ears, and
Banishment, upon pain of Death, and putting to Death; so that by said Quakers
was Fulfilled that in Rev. 12.11. And they Overcame him by the Blood of the
LAMB, and by the Word of their Testimony, and they loved not their Lives unto
the Death. So that they have undeniably purchased to themselves the title of
worthy Martyrs, and they that Persecuted them, showed no better Spirit than
they that Persecuted, and put the Martyrs to Death in Queen Mary's Reign, as
they that Read the History of both may see.

Difference in Persuasions, and so to Defend differing Principles alters
nothing. There is but two Spirits Manifest in the World, that is the Spirit of
GOD, and the Spirit of the Devil, and these were always at Variance: Cain
Persecuted his Brother Abel; Ishmael Persecuted Isaac; the Egyptians, Israel;
backslidden Israel the Prophets: Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Thou
that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, etc.
Herod and the Jews Persecuted CHRIST and His Apostles: And so down to this day,
under the name of Christians, and a show of Holiness by outward Observations;
these Persecute the true Worshippers of GOD, that Worship Him in Spirit, and in
Truth. But, (says CHRIST) all their Works they do for to be seen of Men,
Matthew. 23.5. That is by their outward show of Holiness; And now to return to
said Question,

(1.) What are the Evils that have provoked the LORD to send His Judgments on
New England?

In Answer to this Question; I Quote something from their Answer, and something
out of the Scriptures, but very Briefly, first in p. 105, they say, GOD by a
continued Series of Providence for many Years one after another, has been
Blasting the fruits of the Earth in a great Measure, and this Year more
abundantly, etc. Now let us Compare their own Confession with Genesis 4.11, 12.
And now art thou Cursed from the Earth which has opened her Mouth to receive
thy Brothers Blood from thy hand, when thou Tillest the Ground it shall not
henceforth Yield unto thee her strength, a Fugitive and a Vagabond shall thou
be in the Earth. I do not see we need make any further Enquiry into the cause
of GOD's cutting us short of the Fruits of the Earth, than this one Sentence
from GOD's own Mouth, which was not limited to Cain only: But as he was the
first Persecutor, so all Persecutors expose themselves to the same Curse with
him to the end of the World, John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and
the lusts of your Fa^^^^ (...) will do, he was a Murderer from the Beginning,
etc. I say, make no further Enquiry 'till there be due Satisfaction made by
Confession and Repentance for the aforesaid Sin of Persecution; they also
Enumerate abundance of Evils as the procuring Causes of GOD's Judgments on
New England, which had they hearkened to the warnings of GOD by His Messengers,
the said Quakers, it might have prevented them, and not their own Mouths made
to cry out under them: But instead of hearkening, they Persecuted His
Messengers, as has been Declared, and so become fighters against GOD, so as to
provoke GOD to Punish them by his Judgments; for when a People are come to that
blindness, and hardness of Heart, as not to hearken to GOD's Messengers that He
sends, to warn them to turn them from their evil ways, but Persecute them, and
put them to Death: What can such a People expect but the Severity of GOD's
Judgments? Rev. 16.5, 6. And I heard the Angel of the Waters say, thou art
Righteous, O LORD, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged
thus, for they have shed the Blood of Saints, and Prophets, and thou have given
them Blood to Drink for they are Worthy. This is Written for the Encouragement
of GOD's suffering People, who will not suffer their Enemies to exalt
themselves over them more than is for his Glory, and their Good, Psalm. 76.10.
Surely the wrath of Man shall Praise thee: the remainder of wrath shall thou
restrain Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written
for our Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might
have Hope. But on the other hand, New England has Labored under Troubles in a
general way, of one sort or another since the aforesaid Persecutions; but
especially by the hand of the Heathen, who have Killed, and carried into
Captivity a multitude of People, and wasted the Country in a great Degree.

But in all the Enquiry what are the Evils that have provoked the LORD to bring
his Judgments on New England? Not a word is said, calling in Question the
aforesaid Persecutions, but say, page 98, Quakers are false Worshippers: Surely
this is an Evidence that the Blood of Persecution rests upon them. Rev. 17.4,
5, 6. And the Woman was arrayed in Purple, and Scarlet color, and decked with
Gold, and precious Stone, and Pearls; having a Golden Cup in her hand, full of
Abominations, and Filthiness of her Fornication: and upon her Forehead was a
Name Written, MYSTERY, BABYLON, THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND
ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH: And I saw the Woman Drunken with the Blood of the
Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of JESUS, etc.

And now New England, bring forth thy Robes of Righteousness, and see if they
are not here rightly Described, and that they bare a true Resemblance of this
Woman's Attire called the Mother of Har^^^, and whether our Ancestors did not
make themselves drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus, and
in this Drunkenness agreed upon a Confession of Faith; it is Time to examine
into these Things, for Judgment is before us both Temporal and Eternal.

As to their second Question, page 107, What is to be done that so these Evils
may be Reformed?

To this I Answer, first, a Reformation out of all Antichristianism, which
(...) Reform from the Practical part (...) our Confession, and to withdraw from
your Established Ministers that Preach for Hire: And the civil Government to
quit themselves of judging in Church Affairs, or in Cases of Conscience by
manifest Tokens of Repen^^^^ (...) Sins of that kind past, (...) to this Day:
These are the first and principal Things to be done.

John Bolles.
New London, (...) 1754.
True LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE IS IN BONDAGE TO NO FLES^
HAVING formerly (...) upon sundry Articles in the Confession of Faith, owned
and consented to by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches in the Colony of
Connecticut, in New England, Assembled by Delagation at Say-Brook; September
9th, 1708, etc. New London, New England: Printed by Thomas Short, 1710.

And in their Preface, page 3, say, It cannot be denied, that the usage of the
Christian Church, whose Faith wholly rested upon the Word of GOD, respecting
Confessions of Faith is very Ancient, etc. Page 4, 5, 6, 7. And when the light
of Reformation broke forth, to the dispersing of Popish Darkness, the Re^^^ied
Nation agreed upon Confessions (...) Faith, famous in the World, and of special
^ervice to theirs, and standing Ages ^ and among those of latter Times (...) in
our Nation most worthy of (...), and Acceptance we take to be (...) Confession
of Faith, composed by the (...) Assembly of Divines, Convened at Westminster,
with that of the Savoy, in the Substance and in Expressions for the most part
the same; the Former professedly Assented, and Attested to by the Fathers of
our Country by Unanimous Vote of the Synod of Elders and Messengers of the
Churches met at Cambridge, the last of the Sixth Month, 1648, the latter owned,
and consented to by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches Assembled at
Boston, May 12th, 1680. The same we doubt not to profess to have been the
constant Faith of the Churches in this Colony from the first Foundation of
them; and that it may appear to the Christian World that our Churches do not
maintain differing Opinions in the Doctrine of Religion, nor are desirous for
any Reason, to conceal the Faith we are Persuaded of; the Elders and Messengers
of the Churches in this Colony of Connecticut, in New England, by virtue of the
Appointment and Encouragement of the Honorable the General Assembly convened
by Delegation at Say-Brook, Sept. 9th, 1708, unanimously Agreed, that the
Confesson of Faith own^d and consented unto by the Elders and Messengers of the
Churches Assembled at Boston, (...) New England, May 12th, 1680, being the
second Session of that Synod; be Recommended to the Honorable the General
Assembly of this Colony at their next Session, for their Public Testimony
thereto, as the Faith of the Churches, of this, Colony, which Confession,
together with the Heads of Union, and Articles for the Administration of Church
Government herewith Emitted were presented unto, and Approved and Established
by the said General Assembly at New Haven, on the 14th of October, 1708. This
Confession of Faith we offer as our firm Persuasion, well and fully Grounded
upon the Holy Scripture, and commend the same unto all, and particularly to the
People of our Colony, to be Examined, Accepted and constantly Maintained; we do
not Assume to our Selves that any thing be taken upon Trust from us; but
commend to (...) People these following Counsels.

First, That you be immoveably and unchangeably Agreed in the only sufficient
and unvariable Rule of Religion, which (...) the Holy Scripture, the fixed
Cannon, ^^^^pable of Addition or Diminution, you ^ight to account nothing
Ancient that will not stand by this Rule, nor any thing New that will. Do not
hold your selves bound to unscriptural Rights in Religion wherein Custom it
self does many times Misguide: Believe it to be the honor of Religion to
Resign and Captivate our Wisdom and Faith, to divine Revelation.

Secondly, That you be Determined by this Rule in the whole of Religion. That
your Faith be Right and Divine, the Word of God must be the Foundation of it,
and the Authority of the Word the Reason of it. You may believe the most
Important Articles of Faith, with no more than an Humane Faith; (...) this is
evermore the cause, when the Pri^^^ple Faith is resolved into, is any other
than the Holy Scripture. For an (...) Christian to resolve his Faith, into
Education, Instruction, and the pers;wasion of others is not an higher Reason,
than a Papist Mohammedan, or Pagan can produce for his Religion.

Pay also unto God the Worship, that will bear the Trial of, and receive
Establishment by this Rule. Have alway^ ^s Readiness a Divine Warrant for (...)
Worship you Perform (...) God. Believe that Worship is accepted and that only,
which is directed unto, and Commanded, and has the promise of a Bissing from
the Word of God. Believe that Worship not Divinely Commanded is in vain, (...)
will answer the Necessities and expectations of a Christian, and is a
Wor^hipping, you know not what. Believe in all Divine Worship, it is not enough
that this or that Act of Worship is not forbidden in the World of God; if it be
not Commanded, and you perform it, you may fear, you will be found Guilty and
exposed to Divine Displeasure. Nadab, and Abihu paid dear for Offering in
Divine Worship that which the Lord Commanded them not. It is an honor done unto
Christ, when you account that only Decent, Orderly and Convenient in His House,
which depends upon the Institution and Appointment of himself, who is the only
Head and Lawgiver of his Church, etc.

Having taken the above Quoted out of their Preface to said Confession; we may
safely join with their advice in the general, and Examine their Articles, and
according as we find them to agree, or disagree with the Holy Scriptures to
bear Witness boldly.

And now I begin with the Confession of Faith of Boston, as in page next before
their Preface as follows.

At a General Court held at Boston, May 19th, 1680.
THIS Court having taken into serious Consideration, the Request that has been
presented by several of the Reverend Elders, in the Name of the late Synod, do
approve thereof, and accordingly Order the Confession of Faith agreed upon at
their second Sesson, and the Platform of Discipline consented unto by the Synod
at Cambridge, Anno. 1648. To be Printed for the benefit of these Churches in
present and after Times.

Edward Rawson, Secr.

In the Preface of the form of Church Government, Page 4 they say, That we
might Stand Perfect, and Complete in all the Will of GOD, and we trust it is
our sincere Desire that His Will, all His Will, and nothing else but His Will,
might be done among us to the Law, and to the Testimony we do wholly refer our
selves, and if any thing in the following Conclusion be Indeed found not to
Speak according thereunto let it be Rejected: These Words to the Law, and to
the Testimony, are in Isa. 8 20, The Words in the Verse are, To the Law, and to
the Testimony, if they Speak not according to this Word, it is because there is
no Light in them.

Thus far I have Quoted out of each Confession of Faith, and they both refer us
to the holy Scriptures, and not barely to take upon trust from their Word; and
I have compared both said Confessions together, and they are both one, being
Chapter for Chapter, Paragraph for Paragraph, Word for Word, (mistakes in
Printing excepted.) But in as much as in Boston Confession, they have not
brought one Text to prove one Article, throughout their whole Confession. I
have therefore made use of some Scripture Proof's out of Connecticut Confession
to Confute both, they being both one, as is said Word, for Word; and they are
Approved, and Established by the General Courts in each Colony.

First, the Elders, and Messengers of each Colony have Recommended them to the
civil Government; and the civil Governments have taken them under their
Protection to Defend them, that both Elders, and Messengers, and said General
Courts, and civil Governments as they own and defend them, they all stand
equally charged with an Answer.

Now let us take their Advice as was before Quoted; as also their Advice in
said Preface, Page 8. And commend the same to your diligent Perusal that you be
Established in the Truth, and your Faith rest upon it is proper Bases, the Word
of GOD. Follow the example of the Noble Bereans, Search the Scriptures, etc.
Acts 17, 11. These were more Noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they
received the Word with all readiness of Mind, and searched the Scriptures daily
whether those things were so, etc.

And now under the Consideration, that I have Written to all the Associations
in this Colony of Connecticut; and have Journeyed from County, to County, and
delivered in Writing to one of the Elders in each County, to be delivered to
their several Associations, as follows.

For as much as I have perused said Confession, and to me it appears, that
there are many dangerous, and hurtful Principles, some of which I have Quoted,
and presented before said Elders, to be delivered to their several Associations
desiring their further perusal, and if they appear not to have Scripture
Foundation, that they would Rectify them, but they disregarded my Request.

I therefore went to the General Court, to desire Them, under the Consideration
of the danger of being seated upon, and contending for unsound Principles, etc.
To put said Elders forward, to Answer my Request, which was as little Regarded
as the other. And this is now near thirty Years past; and each Government goes
on still in approving and defending each Confession.

And now GOD has put it into my Heart, to reprove both Governments, by your
own Confessions; by Rehearsing sundry of your Articles, and proving them to
contradict the Scriptures; and some to wrest the Scriptures, and to teach
another Doctrine than what was originally Given, etc.

But before I go any further, I think it not amiss to give some Account of my
own Life from my Infancy, and of GOD's Dealing toward me; as David says,
Psalm. 66.16. Come and hear all ye that fear GOD, and I will tell you what He
has done for my Soul. That was his Experiences of GOD's Goodness toward him.
And as to my self, my Father lived about a Mile out of New London Town; and my
Mother was at home with only three little Children, I being the Youngest (about
10 Months old) she with the other two were Murdered by a youth about 16 years
of Age, who was afterward Executed at Hartford; and I was found (as was said)
at my dead Mothers Breast.

And since in the course of my Life GOD has preserved me out of many eminent
Dangers, when there was but a Hairs breadth between Me and Death, which I have
a particular Remembrance of to this Day; and the most of them by Water. And I
was brought up in the Presbyterian way till I was about thirty Years old, and
had four or five Children, but Baptized none; for reading the Scriptures, and
as my Age gave me understanding to consider what I Read. It appeared to me by
the Scriptures, that we must first Believe, before we were Baptized, and in our
Baptism we must be Buried in Water. And now living to this Age in the neglect
of Baptism, my Conscience accused me, so that I read the Scriptures that I
might be fully Informed what was for me to do. And the more I read them, I was
confirmed in my first Belief, and accordingly was Baptized by John Rogers, a
Baptist Teacher.

And now as I had made a Profession thus far, and going on in my Christian
Progress, I found no command in Scripture for the first day Sabbath; and
therefore began to Work upon it, not thinking that the civil Authority would
rise up against me. For though I was Baptized by said Rogers, and joined in
Fellowship with that People that had suffered much for Conscience sake, by
Whipping, Imprisoning and setting in the Stocks, and loss of Goods, and
particularly, for Working on the first Day of the Week; yet of late, they had
not been Molested as at the first, though they Work't as freely, and openly:
but I was soon Presented, and brought before the Authority, and Fined, and then
they would let me alone till after three first Day and then send for me, and
Fine me, for three Days together; and now as the Battle grew hotter GOD gave me
more Courage, and I grew stronger, and stronger, that what was said of Israel
under the Oppression of Pharaoh, and the Egyptians was very lively with me,
Exodus 1, 12. But the more they Afflicted them the more they Multiplied, and
Grew; as also that of the House of Saul, and David, 2 Samuel 3, 1. Now there was
long War between the House of Saul, and the House of David, but David waxed
stronger, and stronger, and the House of Saul weaker, and weaker; and so it has
proved between me, and the Authority, for the Consolation that I enjoyed, set
me over the loss of my Goods, and herein I could Witness with the Apostle, 2
Cor; 1, 5. For as the Sufferings of CHRIST Abound in us, so our Consolation
also Abounds by CHRIST; for GOD gave me such a cheerful Spirit in this
Warfare, that when I had not the Knowledge that the Grand Jury man saw me at
Work, on said Day, I would Inform against my self before Witness, till they
gave out, and let me Plow, and Cart, and do whatsoever I have occasion to this
Day, and to this my Brethren can Witness, according to their Faith, as says
the Apostle, 1 John 5, 4 Whatsoever is Born of GOD overcomes the World, and
this is the Victory that overcomes the World; even our Faith, and in this are
we GOD's Witnesses, Isaiah 44, 8. Ye are even my Witnesses. Is there any God
besides ME? yea there is no God, I know not any. And herein have we had GOD's
Testimony, on our behalf, through the Answer of a good Conscience, and Gift of
the Holy Ghost, in bearing Witness against your Scriptureless Sabbath. And now
we Call for your Witness, as in Chap. 43, 9. Let them bring forth their
Witnesses, that they may be Justified, or let them hear, and say it is Truth;
or else be Convicted by the Prophet, Chap. 44, 9. They are their own Witnesses,
they see not nor know that they may be Ashamed.

Concerning the Sabbath, etc.
In your Confessions Chapter 22. 7 Paragraph, you say, -- So by His Word in a
positive moral, and perpetual Commandment, binding all Men in all Ages, He has
particularly appointed one day in seven for a Sabbath to be kept Holy unto Him,
which from the beginning of the World to the Resurrection of CHRIST, (you say)
was the last day of the Week, and from the Resurrection of CHRIST (you say) was
changed into the first day of the Week, which in Scripture (you also say) is
called the Lord's Day.

Answer,

Whereas you say, So by His Word in a positive, moral and perpetual
Commandment, binding all Men, in all Ages, He has particularly appointed one
day in seven for a Sabbath to be kept Holy unto Him, etc. This is making GOD's
Commandment of none Effect, which says Expressly, Exodus 20.9, 10. Six Days
shall thou Labor, and do all thy Work, but the seventh Day is the Sabbath of
the LORD thy GOD, in it thou shall not do any Work, etc. But you open a Door of
Liberty for every Man to Choose which Day of the Seven he will keep for a
Sabbath, and then set up your own Choice for the first Day of the Week, without
the least word in Scripture for it, and Require all Men to Conform to it.

Secondly, you say, -- Which from the beginning of the World, to the
Resurrection of CHRIST was the last Day of the Week.

Answer,

There is Evening and Morning ascribed to all the six Days in which GOD Created
all Things, Genesis 1. But to the seventh Day when GOD had finished all His Works,
there is no Evening nor Morning ascribed to it, which shows it was not reckoned
with the other six Days; and as the Scriptures inform us, Man was the last
thing GOD Made, or His finishing Work: so that, that Mom^^^t that GOD Breathed
into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, by which he became a living Soul, he
immediately entered into GOD's Rest, or Sabbath, that had no Evening, or
Morning ascribed to it, even a perpetual Rest; it was no Rest to Adam from any
Work that he had done, for he had done no Work to Rest from; but it was GOD's
Rest, or Sabbath, that GOD put Adam in possession of, when he was first
Created, even the Day he Blessed, and Sanctified, Chap. 2. ver. 3. And GOD
Blessed the seventh Day, and Sanctified it, because that in it He had Rested
from all His Work, which GOD Created and Made. And as to the length of (...)
that Adam continued in GOD's Rest or Sabbath; the Scripture is silent, neither
is it needful for us to know but to know this, that GOD Created Adam in a state
of Innocence, and set him in his own Rest, and through his Disobedience was
turned out of it, to Eat his Bread by the Sweat of his Face; and we Read of no
weekly, or seven Day Sabbath required of Man to be Kept, till in Exodus 16. When
GOD first gave Israel Manna, then he set a part the seventh Day for a Sabbath,
see ver. 26. Six Days ye shall gather it, but on the seventh Day which is the
Sabbath, in it there shall be none. And it is good Evidence to us, that they
had not lived in the practice of keeping a seventh Day Sabbath, nor that they
had any knowledge of it till now, by their Averseness to it, as in Ver. 27. And
it came to pass that there went out some of the People on the seventh Day for
to gather, and they found none. Ver. 28, 29. And the Lord said unto Moses, how
long refuse ye to keep my Commandments and my Laws: See for that the Lord has
given you the Sabbath, therefore he gives you on the sixth Day, the Bread of
two Days; abide ye every Man in his place, let no Man go out of his place on
the seventh Day. And for a final Confirmation, let us take Moses's Testimony,
Deuteronomy. 5.2, 3. The Lord our God made a Covenant with us in Horeb, the Lord made
not this Covenant with our Fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us
here alive this Day.

Thus it is sufficiently Proved that GOD's Church had no six Days Labor, and
seventh Day Sabbath given them to be observed, till it was given by Moses,
which by Scripture Date was 2513 Years after the beginning of the World.

And as to your Scripture Proof, Exodus 20, 8, to 11. Remember the Sabbath Day,
to keep it Holy, six Days shall thou Labor, and do all thy Work, but the
seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any
Work, Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy
Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy Stranger that is within thy Gates, etc.

In the 16th Chap. we read only of their being forbidden to gather Manna on the
seventh Day, or Sabbath; but now in this Text all manner of Labor is expressly
forbidden; and the Reason is given, in Ver, 11. For in six Days the Lord made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh Day,
wherefore the Lord Blessed the Sabbath Day and hallowed it.

Here we see Moses in Establishing the seventh Day Sabbath to Israel, puts them
in mind how that in six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh Day; wherefore (says he) the Lord
Blessed the Sabbath Day and Hallowed it.

And in this Blessed and Sanctified Day of GOD's Rest it was, that Adam's
Happiness consisted, so long as he continued in Innocence, but he for his
Transgression was turned out of it, to eat his Bread by the Sweat of his Face:
and this Blessed Day of Pleasure and Delight, was turned into a Cursed Day of
Labor and Sorrow, not to Adam only, but to all his Posterity descending by
natural Generation. And in this state of Labor and Sorrow it was that Israel
underwent their Bondage in Egypt.

Now let us consider the Reason given here for observing the Sabbath, with that
in Deuteronomy. 5.15. And Remember that thou wast a Servant in the Land of Egypt, and
that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, through a mighty Hand, and by a
stretched out Arm; therefore the Lord thy God Commanded thee to keep the
Sabbath Day.

Thus we see the seventh Day Sabbath was Commanded to Israel; not only in
Remembrance of the happy State that Adam stood in whilst in Innocence, before
his Transgression; but also in Remembrance of their Servitude in Egypt, and of
GOD's Delivering them by His Mighty Hand, and Stretched out Arm, etc.

And in Exodus 31.12, 13. And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, speak thou unto
the Children of Israel, saying, verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a
Sign between me, and you, throughout your Generations; that ye may know that I
am the Lord that does Sanctify you. Also, Ezekiel. 20.12. Moreover also I gave
them my Sabbaths to be a Sign between me, and them, that they might know that I
am the LORD that Sanctify them. Here we may see, by comparing these Texts that
Moses first puts Israel in mind of the Day of GOD's Rest from His Works of
Creation, which He Blessed and Sanctified, which Adams Happiness consisted in,
so long as he continued in Innocence.

Secondly, Of Isreal's Bondage in Egypt, and of GOD's Delivering them, as
aforesaid. --

Thirdly, That the LORD gave them the seventh Day Sabbath to keep as a Sign of
GOD's bringing His Church and People into His seventh Day Rest, or Sabbath
again, which had no Evening, or Morning ascribed to it; or into His everlasting
Rest, which Adam for his Transgression was dispossessed of: and of this Rest or
Sabbath, all the Faithful were Witnesses, from Adam till Moses; as CHRIST
Testifies, John 8.56. Your Father Abraham Rejoiced to see my Day, and he saw
it and was glad: That was through Faith he believed in the Promises as really
as if he had seen them Fulfilled, Heb. 11.17, 18, 19. And this is the Sabbath
or Rest, that every Child of GOD has to Labor to Enter into; as says the
Apostle, Chap. 4.11. Let us Labor therefore to enter into that Rest, lest any
Man Fail after the same example of unbelief: That is as Israel who through
unbelief, Numb. 14. Entered not into the Land of Canaan, but perished in the
Wilderness. Here the Apostle warns us by their Example, as also, 1 Cor. 10, 11.
Now all these Things happened unto them, says he, for Ensamples, and they are
written for our Admonition upon whom the ends of the World are come. And as the
observing those Signs and Shadows under the Law were no Instruction to Israel;
but as they saw the Mystery they held forth, so to us they are useless, because
we are come to the Substance of what they Contained, Gal. 3.24, 25, 26.
Wherefore (says the Apostle,) the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, that we might be justified by Faith, but after that Faith is come we
are no longer under a Schoolmaster, for ye are all the Children of God by
Faith in Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, You say, and from the Resurrection of CHRIST was changed into the
first Day of the Week, and for Proof quote Acts 20.7. And upon the first day of
the Week when the Disciples came together to break Bread, Paul Preached unto
them ready to depart on the Morrow, and continued his Speech until Midnight.

Now let us take your Advice, as in your Confessions; Chap. 1. 9 Paragraph, you
say; The infallible Rule of Interpretation of Scripture, is the Scripture it
Self, etc.

Now in as much as there is no Pre-eminence given to the Day; but called the
first Day of the Week, not Sabbath Day; and that their coming together was to
break Bread: Paul Preached unto them, etc. I see no further Interpretation of
this text of Scripture, than that their coming together to break Bread, was in
a Christian Fellowship of Love; except it might be a more general Thing at this
Time, Paul being there, and ready to depart on the Morrow, and to this it
Agrees with other texts of Scripture, as in Chap. 2. 42. And they continued
Steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine, and in Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread,
and in Prayers, ver. 46. And they continuing Daily with one Accord in the
Temple, and in breaking Bread from House to House, did eat their Meat with
gladness, and singleness of Heart; as also Jude 12. These are spots, in your
feasts of Charity, when they Feast with You, etc. So that from this text ot
Scripture you have no proof of the Sabbath, being Changed from the seventh Day,
to the first Day of the Week; in as much as there is not the Word Sabbath used,
nor any thing leading thereunto, neither now, nor before this Time; and as to
your other proof Genesis 2 2. And on the seventh Day GOD ended all His Work, which
He had Made, and Rested on the seventh Day, from all His Work, which He had
Made, etc. This Text only speaks of GOD's Resting on the seventh Day from all
His Work, that is to say, from His Work of Creation; and is therefore no Proof
for your first Days Sabbath; you also Quote, 1 Cor. 6.1, 2. Dare any of you
having a Matter against another go to Law before the Unjust, and not before the
Saints; do ye not know that the Saints shall Judge the World? and if the World
shall be Judged by You, are ye unworthy to Judge the smallest Matters? etc.
Here the Apostle is not speaking any thing concerning a Sabbath; but blames the
Church for ^^eir Contentions, and going to Law before the unjust or worldly
Judges, compared with ver. 6. But Brother goes to Law with Brother, and that
before the Unbelievers.

Now, whereas you Quote, Rev. 1, 10. And say upon it, which in Scripture is
called the Lord's Day, and apply it to prove your first Day Sabbath. I desire
to know from what text of Scripture, you prove that the Title Lord's Day is
given to the first Day of the Week, more than any other Day; or that any
particular Day of the Week is intended by it? Psalm. 74.16. We read, The Day is
Thine, the Night also is Thine. Jer 5.2. Says, And though they say the Lord
lives, surely they Swear falsely. Now they had Scripture enough to prove that
the LORD lived, but they had not the Witness in themselves; and therefore their
Witness was not True. And for you to set up the first Day of the Week for a
Sabbath; and then say which in Scripture is called the LORD's Day, without any
Proof from the Text, or any other Place of Scripture, is a false Assertion of
your own; and wresting the Scriptures to your own Destruction. 2 Pet. 3.16. Yea
it is a Secret that does not belong to us to know, till GOD reveals it: Deuteronomy.
29.29. The secret Things belong unto the Lord our God; but those Things that
are Revealed belong unto us, and to our Children for Ever, that we may do all
the Words of this Law. Yea, it is adding to the Text, which we are forbidden,
Chap. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the Word which I Command you, neither shall ye
diminish ought from it. Also Chap. 12.32. And says the Apostle, Rev. Chap.
22.18. For I Testify unto every Man that hears the words of the prophecy of
this Book; if any Man shall add unto these Things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this Book, etc.

The words in the Text are these; I was in the Spirit on the LORD's Day, etc.

In the Explanation of any Text of Scripture, it is safe first to consider the
Occasion of its being Spoken, so to inform our Understanding, and to deliver it
in as plain Words as we can, without the least Inclination either to Add, or to
Diminish. And so with your Advice, That the infallible Rule of Interpretation
of Scripture, is the Scripture it self.

I proceed to prove, that the word Day, in Scripture, is not always to be
limited to any particular Day in the Week, but the present Time: As in Psalm.
95.7. To day if you will hear his voice, etc. Ver. 8. Harden not your hearts,
as in the provocation; and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness;
compared with ver. 10. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, etc.

This Text informs us, that the Day here spoken of, contained the Children of
Israel's Forty Years Travel in the Wilderness: Also Psalm. 118.22, 23, 24. The
Stone which the Builders refused is become the head stone of the Corner; this
is the LORD'S Doing, it is mavelous in our Eyes: This is the Day which the
LORD has made, we will rejoice, and be glad in it.

Here is the word Day used, to set forth GOD'S great Goodness to David, and to
his Church, in destroying their Enemies, and establishing him on the Throne of
his Kingdom. A Day which cannot be ascribed to one single Day, or to any
particular Day of the Week; but to that present Time wherein they enjoyed the
Mercy there spoken of. As also 2 Cor. 6.2. For I have heard thee in a time
accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee: Behold, now is the
accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation.

Thus we see, the Text has no reference to any particular Day of the Week; but
the present Time.

To conclude with the words of the Text, I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day,
etc. is as much as if the Apostle had said, I was in the Spirit, or
Spiritualized in the day of the LORD'S Appearing to me, and requiring me to
write the Prophesies of this Book; which to our acceptance may be understood,
Time of the Lord's Appearing, compared with the fore cited Scriptures.

Thus you single out only these words of the Apostle, I was in the Spirit on
the Lord's Day, etc. for the proof of your First Day Sabbath; and add to the
Text, and say, Which in Scripture is called the Lord's Day, without proof
either from this Text, or any other Scripture, that the First Day of the Week
was ever so entitled.

You also Quote Exodus 20.8.10, to prove said Sabbath, and leave out the ninth
Verse, that says, Six days shall thou Labor, and do all thy Work: For that
would have been in right Opposition to your First Day Sabbath. But your proof
in the tenth Verse, is, But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God;
in it thou shall not do any Work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, etc.

Thus you bring the express Command For the Seventh Day Sabbath, to prove your
First Day Sabbath; and in so doing break God's Commandment in a Twofold Sense.

First, You command Rest on the Day that He commanded Labor.

Secondly, You Labor on the Day that He commanded Rest.

And herein you also go contrary to the command of the Angel of the Lord, and
of Christ himself, Mat. 28.7.10. who both commanded the Disciples to Labor, by
Traveling on the First Day of the Week, being the Day of Christ's
Resurrection. And for us to do the like, would be more Exemplary, than to
command, and do contrary.

There remains more of your proofs that I have not spoken to; but they are so
far from proving any Command for your First Day Sabbath, that they inform us of
no Example, Name, nor the least Breath leading thereunto. And the Apostle
says, Romans 4.15. Where no law is there is no transgression, Also Chap. 5. 13.
Sin is not imputed where there is no Law.

And now Connecticut, I turn your own Words back upon your selves. Page 7, of
your Preface you say, Believe in all divine Worship, it is not enough that this
or that Act of Worship is not forbidden in the Word of God, if it be not
Commanded, and you perform it, you may fear you will be found guilty, and
exposed to divine Displeasure, etc.

And also you of Boston in your preface, page 4 say, To the Law, and to the
Testimony, we do wholly refer our selves; and if any thing in the following
Conclusion be indeed found not to speak according thereunto let it be Rejected.

Boston Confession, by its Date, has been Printed more than seventy Years, what
Witness has been borne against it, I know not; but the length of Time has been
sufficient for them to have Perused it, and Corrected it, or Condemned it.

As for Connecticut Confession, it has been Printed more than forty Years, and
there has been public Witness borne against it, both before the Ministers, and
also before the Rulers of the common Wealth, but it was not regarded.

And now I speak to the Elders, and Messengers, and General Courts of both said
Governments, the former as you have recommended the abovesaid Confessions, the
latter as you have established them, and caused them to be Printed, and use the
carnal Sword to defend them, what have you to say for your selves? For as much,
as you have Verified it over, and over so many times in your Confessions, that
we should make the Scriptures, or the Word of GOD our rule of Life, and to that
Effect, and not to take any thing upon trust as from you, and say, in Chap. 21.
1, 2, Paragraph, GOD alone is LORD of the Conscience, and has left it free
from the Doctrines, and Commandments of Men, which are in any thing contrary to
His Word, or not contained in it, so that to believe such Doctrines, or to obey
such Commands out of Conscience, is to betray true liberty of Conscience, and
the requiring of an implicit Faith, and an absolute, and blind Obedience, is to
destroy liberty of Conscience, and Reason also.

I say, what have you to say for your selves in Defense of your first day
Sabbath? that has neither command, nor example, nor name, nor the least breath,
or title in Scripture for it; but express Commands to the contrary, both in the
old, and new Testament.

And whereas you say, GOD alone is LORD of the Conscience, etc. How do you
Prove it? where are your Witnesses? you only give Him the Title of LORD, but
take the ruling power of Lordship to your selves, to rule over Conscience; and
so with your carnal Weapons, as Stocks, Whips, Fines, and Imprisonments, and
the like, to Persecute CHRIST in His Members, that for Conscience sake cannot
conform to your institutions of Worship; they are so contrary to Scripture,
that they cannot both be obeyed: As CHRIST says, No Man can serve two Masters,
etc. Matthew. 6, 24. Yet you presumptuously require Obedience to your own
Institutions, against Scripture, against Conscience, and against your own
Counsels, page 5. 6. in Connecticut Preface; and why is all this? it is for the
sake of a little honor, and friendship of this World, as says CHRIST, John 5,
44. How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only? Thus CHRIST sets it forth as a thing
imposlible to believe in GOD, whilst we are seeking Honor one of another; and
James 4.4. says, Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the
friendship of the World, if enmity with GOD? whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the world, is the enemy of GOD; that is, to be in friendship with the
spirit of the World, makes us enemies to God: And most certainly, you are
twisted together in the honor, and friendship of the World, under a show of
Godliness: But by your Articles of Faith, that are so contrary to Scripture,
and your defending them by the carnal Sword, proves you to be Antichristians.

Concerning Swearing.
Chap. 23. 1, 2, paragraph, you say, A lawful Oath is a part of religious
Worship, etc.

An Oath is warranted by the Word of GOD under the New Testament, as well as
under the Old. And to prove it. Quote many Texts of Scripture out of the Old
Testament; but I make use of none of them, to prove it, or disprove it: For as
much as we read, Deuteronomy. 18.17, 18, 19. And the Lord said unto me, They have well
spoken that which they have spoken. I will raise them up a Prophet from among
their Brethren like unto thee, and I will put my Words in his Mouth, and he
shall speak unto them, all that I shall Command him, and it shall come to pass
that whosoever will not hearken unto my Words, which he shall speak in my Name,
I will require it of him. Matthew. 17, 5. While He yet spoke behold a bright
Cloud overshadowed them, and behold a Voice out of the Cloud, which said, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye Him.

So now let us hear your New Testament Proofs, Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36, But I say
unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven for it is GOD 's Throne; nor by
the Earth for it is His Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of
the Great King; neither shall thou Swear by thy Head, because thou can not
make one Hair white or black. Jam. 5.12. But above all things, my Brethren,
swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath,
but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, lest you full into Condemnation.

Here is full, and express Commands from CHRIST, and His Apostle, that forbids
us all manner of Swearing whatsoever: But you say, A lawful Oath is a part of
religious Worship, etc. And to refuse an Oath is Sin, in your 3d Paragraph.

Now who shall we obey, Christ or you? we cannot Obey both; because CHRIST
forbids us doing that, that you say, is a part of religious Worship, and Sin if
we refuse it, etc. And to bring Scriptures to confute you, that go so directly
against the express Commandments of GOD, and of CHRIST in the Scriptures, is
altogether superfluous, and would be but as casting Pearls before Swine, which
CHRIST has Forbidden us. I shall therefore conclude, with this Article as
sufficiently Confuted, by your own Scripture Proofs, and so leave it to the
Judgment of the Reader.

Concerning Baptism.
Chap. 29. 3d Paragraph, you say, Dipping of the Person into the Water is not
necessary, but Baptism is rightly administered by pouring, (...) sprinkling
Water upon the Person. For which you Quote diverse Scriptures, but they are
nothing to the purpose.

I shall therefore omit them, and Prove the contrary, both as it was
Administered in the Figure in the Time of the old Testament; and also as it was
practiced in the New. Exodus 14.22. And the Children of Israel went into the
midst of the Sea, upon the dry Ground, and the Waters were a wall unto them on
the right hand, and on the left; Compared with 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. Moreover,
brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our Fathers were
under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all Baptized unto
Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea.

Here we see, as all Israel were under the Cloud, and passed through the Sea,
that was a Wall on their right Hand, and on their left; the Apostle calls it
Baptism, or being Baptized unto Moses, says he, in the Cloud and in the Sea;
(...) does not apply Baptism, to the Water only, as it was a Wall on their
right Hand, and on their left, but to the Cloud also, as it was over them,
which shows forth a Burying; and Matthew. 3.13, we Read, Then comes JESUS from
Galilee to Jordan, unto John to be Baptized of him. ver. 16. And JESUS when He
was Baptized, went up straitway out of the Water. Mark 1.9, 10. And it came to
pass in those Days, that JESUS came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was Baptized
of John in Jordan, and straightly coming up out of the Water, etc. Here is two
Scripture Records, that inform us that CHRIST was Baptized in Jordan, and that
He came up out of the Water. What did He go down into the Water for, but to be
buried in Baptism? and do you say, this manner of Administration of Baptism is
not necessary, which CHRIST Himself has given us a Pattern by His own Example,
and says thus, It becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness: And in stead
hereof set up a Tradition of your own, and say, Baptism is rightly administered
by pouring, or sprinkling Water upon the Person. Thus you make void CHRIST'S
Pattern, and Example, and establish your own Tradition. Read also, Acts 8.38,
39. And they went down both into the Water, both Philip, and the Eunuch, and he
Baptized him, and when they were come up out of the Water, etc. It had no need
to be said, that they went both down into the Water, and when they were come up
out of the Water, etc. It Philip by taking a little Water in his Hand and
administering it by pouring, or sprinkling it on the Eunuch, would have been
accepted for Baptism.

Romans 6, 3. Know ye not, that so many of us as were Baptized into JESUS CHRIST,
were Baptized into His Death. ver. 4. Therefore we are Buried with Him by
Baptism unto Death, says the Apostle, that is, into the likeness of His Death,
and Burial, to show forth the death, and burial of the body of Sin in us; and
further says he, That like as CHRIST was raised up from the Dead, by the Glory
of the Father, even so also, we should walk in newness of Life; that is, as we
are quickened by the power of His Resurrection; ver. 5. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of His Death, we shall be also in the likeness
of His Resurrection. Col. 2.12. Buried with Him in Baptism, wherein also you
are risen with Him through the Faith of the operation of God, who has raised
Him from the Dead. By this Text the Apostle shows that as we are Buried with
CHRIST in Baptism, so we are also Risen with Him to newness of Life; and not
only this, but we bare an open Testimony to the World, of our Faith in His
Death, and Resurrection. But pouring, or sprinkling Water upon the Person,
bares no name in Scripture relating to Baptism, and is a Worshipping you know
not what: Or as CHRIST says, Matthew 15.9. But in vain do they Worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

Neither have you any Scripture for the Baptizing Infants, as you call it, but
it is an Invention of your own, to pretend to Baptize those that have no
Knowledge, neither of Good, or Evil. Deuteronomy. 1, 39. Moreover your little ones
which ye said should be a prey, and your Children which in that day had no
knowledge between good and Evil, etc.

Thus it appears that your Baptism is made up with Contradictions of Scripture:
And in the Administering it you say, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; which is a Lie both to GOD and Man:
Neither do I see it to be less than Blasphemy; for the Spirit of GOD and the
Scriptures agree in one: For says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.21. The Prophecy came
not in old Time by the will of Man, but holy Men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the Holy Ghost.

And for you to take God's Name to Witness to that is so contrary to the
Scriptures, we may safely believe it to be by the spirit of Antichrist; and
therefore a lie, as to what you pretend.

Here I conclude with your own Words, Chap. 22. Paragraph 1. But the acceptable
way of Worshipping the true God is Instituted by Himself, and so limited by his
own Revealed Will, that he may not be Worshipped according to the Imaginations,
and Devices of Men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any visible
Representations, or any other way not prescribed in the Holy Scriptures.

Concerning the Civil Government,
As it is the Ordinance of GOD, Romans 13.1, 2 Let every soul be subject unto the
higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God: the Powers that be are
Ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation,
etc. Ver. 5, 6. Wherefore, ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but
also for Conscience sake: for, for this Cause pay (...) Tribute also; for they
are God's Ministers, etc.

And herein we have Christ's Example, who paid Tribute, rather than to offend
them, Matthew. 17.25, 26, 27. And from this Example of CHRIST, the Apostle seems
to Exhort the Church, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14 Submit your selves, says he, to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake; whether it be to the King as supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well; for so is the Will of God, that
with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: as free,
and not using your liberty for a cloak of Maliciousness, but as the servants of
God.

The Apostle seems to speak in the same manner with CHRIST, who said, Lest we
should Offend them; that is, as Sojourners in their Kingdom, to do it for Peace
sake, rather than to Offend them; and not as a due Debt.

And whereas the Apostle says, As free, and not using your Liberty for a Cloak
of Maliciousness; but as the Servants of God: that is, to do it Cheerfully, not
Grudgingly; but in a free Spirit. Read Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject
to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good
Work, etc. That is, necessary Works for the public Good, but nothing relating
to Conscience or Godliness: For the civil Government then had not received the
Christian Faith; but were Idolaters, and Worshipped Idols.

And under this same Government, being the Roman Government, the Church
suffered Persecution the first Three Hundred Years after Christ, in the Time of
the Ten Persecutions, as we are informed by Church History. Yea, the Apostles
themselves were put to Death, and an innumerable multitude of Christians in
this Time, for Conscience, or Christ's sake; which is sufficient F^^idenee,
that the Apostle's Exhortations to Christians, to be subject to the higher
Powers, was only in Temporal Things, and nothing concerning Conscience.

So that from these Texts, there is no Enlargement for any Rulers of the Common
Wealth to Exercise any Authority over any man's Conscience; neither have we the
least Word in all the New Testament, to encourage Christians for Help that way:
but all on the contrary. As in Mat. 10.18. says Christ, And ye shall be
brought before Governors and Kings for my sake for a Testimony against them,
and the Gentiles.

And it is the run of the New Testament, that a Suffering Life is marked out
for a Christian's Life. And as the Children of GOD are said to be Strangers,
and Pilgrims in the World, so it is the Will of GOD, that they should live a
Peaceable and Quiet Life, in all Places where GOD is pleased to call them. But
in the case of Conscience, we must Obey GOD rather than Man. And we are
Exhorted to Contend Earnestly for the Faith, and not to Fear them that Kill the
Body, etc. Mat. 10.28.

But civil Rulers, not being contented in the Place that God has set them in
through the Pride of their own Hearts, and Malice of Satan, usurp Authority to
Rule in Church Affairs also; and to Exercise Lordship over Men's Consciences:
Whereas the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 33.22. says, The LORD is our Judge, the LORD
is our Lawgiver, the LORD is our King, etc.

But if we sit in his Seat of Judgment, to Judge, how is He a Judge? And if we
Exercise our selves in His Place of Lordship, how is He a Lord? And if we set
up our Authority to Rule over His Church, which is His Kingdom, how then is He
a King? For says Christ, Luke 17.20, 21. The Kingdom of GOD comes not with
Observation,etc. Or as we may say, not by observing outward Rules. For behold
says he, The Kingdom of God is within you. That is by the Revelation of GOD's
Spirit in our Hearts, which is out of Man's Sight to Judge of.

Thus it is sufficiently Proved that GOD has set up the civil Government to
Rule in the common Wealth, in Temporal things; and as well Proved that he has
not committed unto them the Government of His Church; and His Revealed Will in
Men's Consciences, which is a Secret, know only by GOD, and to him to whom GOD
is pleased to Reveal it, Rev. 2.17. He that has an ear let him hear, what the
Spirit says unto the Churches; to him that over comes will I give to eat of
the hidden Manna; and I will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone, a new
Name written which no Man knows saving he that receives it.

Thus I have Proved that the civil Government as they exercise their Authority
to Rule only in Temporal things are the Ministers of GOD, and that GOD has not
committed to them the Government of His Church, or to meddle in cases of
Conscience.

And now I speak to you Elders, and Messengers; as you have Recommended your
Confessions of Faith; and to you Rulers of the common Wealth, as you have
acknowleged them, and published them, and established them by Law, and defend
them by the carnal Sword, I speak I say to both Parties as One, as you are in
Fellowship with each other in these Things, and so proceed to prove that your
exercising your Selves in the affairs of Conscience, and matters of Faith
toward GOD, you do it under the authority of the Dragon, or spirit of
Antichrist. Rev. 13.1, 2, 3. And I stood upon the sand of the Sea, and saw a
Beast rise up out of the Sea having seven Heads, and ten Horns; and upon his
Horns ten Crowns, and upon his Heads the name of Blasphemy: And the Beast which
I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his Feet were as the Feet of a Bear, and his
Mouth as the Mouth of a Lion: And the Dragon gave him his Power, and his Seat,
and great Authority.

Now as has been said, the power, and authority of the civil Government is of
GOD, to execute justice, and equity among Men; and the civil Government as it
was Represented to John by a Beast rising up out of the Sea, or multitude of
People, as in Chap. 17. 15. had this power, and authority given them of GOD,
before that of the Dragon's, as it is set forth by the Beast, having seven
Heads, and ten Horns, and upon his Horns ten Crowns: So that it is very clear,
and evident that the power, seat, and authority given by the Dragon was an
additional power, not from GOD, but of his own Nature, a persecuting Power,
readily embraced by the Rulers of the common Wealth, for the sake of the glory,
honor, and friendship of this World; and this power, and glory he offered to
CHRIST, Luke 4, 5, 6, but CHRIST did not accept of it, but we see the Beast, or
worldly Powers did accept of it, in that they put it in Practice. And I saw one
of his Heads as it were wounded to Death, and his deadly Wound was healed. By
the Beast the Apostle here saw rise up out of the Sea, having seven Heads, and
ten Horns, and upon his Horns ten Crowns, etc. We are to understand the worldly
Powers, or Rulers that GOD has set up to Govern the World, or common Wealth,
whether Kings, Governors, or those of lower Degrees, compared with the
following part of Rev. 13, and more Particularly the 7 ver. And it was given
unto him to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them, and power was
given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues and Nations. And by the Dragon is to
be understood the Devil, or Satan, as in Chap. 12, 9. And the great Dragon was
cast out, that old Serpent called the Devil, and Satan, which deceives the
whole World, etc. And whereas it is said the Dragon gave him his power, and his
seat, and great Authority; this is to be understood by stirring up the powers
of this World, by the spirit of Persecution, to turn the Sword that GOD had put
into their Hands to execute justice among Men, to persecute the Saints, as in
Chap. 12, 7. And there was war in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against
the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels. Now though the Devil be said,
to be a Murderer from the beginning, as in John 8, 44. Y^ are of your father
the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do; he was a Murderer from the
beginning. Yet I understand the War here spoken of, between Michael and his
Angels; and the Dragon and his Angels, to intend more particularly the time of
the ten Persecutions, under the Roman Emperors in defense of their Heathenish
Idolatrous Worship, which said War by the Saints was not carried on by carnal
Weapons; as we may see Chap. 12.11. And they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony; and they loved not their lives unto
the Death: But in the End, the prevailing of the light of the Gospel, and the
Sword of Constantine, became the Overthrow of that persecuting Power, and the
wounding that head, or power of the Beast, received from the Dragon, by which
he became a persecuting Power; and by the spreading of the Gospel among the
Gentiles, according to what is spoken, Isa. 11.9. They shall not hurt nor
destroy in all my holy Mountain; for the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of
the LORD as the Waters cover the Sea.

This was a prophecy of the Gentiles receiving the knowledge of GOD by preaching
the Gospel unto them: For we receive the knowledge of GOD, and of the mysteries
or Godliness no other way but by the Gospel, and by our knowledge of GOD, and of
the mysteries of Godliness in and by the Gospel; the mystery of Iniquity is
also discovered, and the discovering the mystery of Iniquity in the time of
Heathenism, and their worshipping of Idols, to be a delusion or a work of
Satan, was the wounding as unto Death, as the Apostle says, that head or power
given to the Beast, by the Dragon and by the Sword in the hand of Constantine,
GOD executed His Judgments upon the Roman Pers;ecuting Power to their utter
overthrow, and deliverance of His Church out of their persecuting Hands.

Thus we are come to the end of Persecution, under Heathenism, or the Gentiles
opposing the Christian Faith, and the wounding the Beasts Head, or persecuting
Power given him by the Dragon.

The next thing to understand is, how his wounded Head was healed; which will
appear by reading and comparing the following part of Rev. 13. ver. 11, 12,
etc. And I beheld another Beast Coming up out of the Earth, and he had two
Horns like a Lamb, and he spoke as a Dragon, and he exercises all the power of
the firs;t Beast before him, and causes the Earth and them which dwell
therein, to worship the first Beast whose deadly wound was healed. The Apostle
calls this another Beast to distinguish it from the Beast mentioned in ver.
first, that rose up out of the Sea, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and upon
his Horns ten Crowns, etc. Which shows the perfection of the Power that GOD had
given him to govern the common Wealth; as in Chap. 12. 3. The Dragon is
described to have seven Heads and ten Horns, and seven Crowns upon his Heads:
This is also to show the perfection of his Power; and the Dragon giving the
said Beast his Power and his Seat, and great Authority; and the said Beast or
worldly Powers represented by it, exercising the Power given him by the Dragon,
becomes a persecuting Power, not only to Rule in the common Wealth, but also in
the Church, in things that relate to the worship of GOD, bringing both the
common Wealth and Church under one Government, and the Beast mentioned in ver.
11 12. Coming up out of the Earth, which shows his Earthly nature that is said
to have two horns like a Lamb, and to speak as a Dragon, and to exercise all
the power of the first Beast before him, and to cause the Earth and them that
dwell therein to worship the first Beast whose deadly wound was healed. Why
this Beast was represented to John in the appearance of a Lamb, was in
imitation to CHRIST, as CHRIST is set forth by the similitude of a Lamb, John
1.29. Behold the Lamb of GOD, which takes away the Sin of the World. Rev.
5.12. Worthy is the Lamb that was Slain, etc. And Abundantly in this Book
CHRIST is Represented by the similitude of a Lamb; so that it was in Imitation
to CHRIST, and His Ministers, as being sent by CHRIST, and coming in His Name:
But He is said to speak as a Dragon, which shows He was a Counterfeit, or
Antichrist, and did not come in a real Lamb-like Spirit, but in the Spirit of
Antichrist, or false Prophets; as CHRIST foretold, Matthew. 7 15. Beware of false
Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps Clothing but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves, And in the following Verses shows, that we shall know them by their
Fruits. And why he is said to have two Horns, is to show his exercising
Authority, not only in the common Wealth, but also in the Church: ver. 13. And
he does great Wonders, so that he makes Fire to come down from Heaven on the
Earth in the sight of Men. That is, by his Ministers, by their formal and long
Prayers, with seeming Holiness, and many and vain Repetitions forbidden by
CHRIST; Matthew. 6.7, 8. But when ye Pray, use not vain Repetitions as the
Heathen do, for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking; be
not ye therefore like unto them.

Rev. 15. ver. 14. And deceives them that dwell on the Earth, or Earthly Men,
by the means of those Miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the
Beast: That is to say, the first Beast, or Rulers of this World; and this is
also by his Ministers in singing holy Men's Psalms in a formal customary
Manner, without any quickening from GOD, being in a dead carnal State; by these
and the like performances, under a show of Godliness is intended the said
Wonders and Miracles, by which carnal and earthly minded Men are Deceived.

And further says the Apostle, Saying to them that dwell on the Earth, that
they should make an image to the Beast which had the wound by a Sword and did
live. This is the Beast coming up out of the Earth, in ver. 11, who represents
Antichrist, and and Antichristian Ministers; and by what the Apostle says,
stirs up them that dwell on the Earth, or earthly Men, to make an image or form
of godliness to the first Beast, as in ver. 1. Which had the wound by a Sword
and did live; who represents all Antichristian Authority throughout the World,
that exalt themselves over GOD's Church, to Judge in the affairs of Conscience.
Ver. 15. And he had Power to give life unto the image of the Beast, that the
image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not
worship the image of the Beast should be Killed.

In the time of the Old Testament the Images and Idols of the Heathen were dead
Idols; but this Beast or Antichrist, the Apostle says, had power to give Life
unto the image of the Beast, or form of Godliness maintained and defended by
the worldly Powers, that it should both Speak, and cause that as many as would
not Worship the image of the Beast should be Killed. Ver. 16. And he causes
all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in
their right Hand, or in their Foreheads. This signifies to require an active
and open Acknowledgement from all Men of every Rank as the words express, to
Worship, and to be Worshippers of the Image, or form of Godliness defended by
the Powers of this World. Ver. 17. And that no Man might buy, or sell, save he
that had the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name. For
such an one was to have no liberty to exercise himself in any Church Affairs,
neither to teach, nor to administer any of the Ordinances of CHRIST, or to do
any thing contrary to that prescribed form of Worship, or image of the Beast;
as is signified by being denied the liberty either to Buy, or Sell. Ver. 18.
Here is Wisdom, let him that has Understanding count the number of the Beast,
for it is the number of a Man, and his number is six Hundred, three Score, and
six; yea it is Wisdom indeed to understand so as to count this Number here
spoken of; for none but the Wisdom of GOD, can count this Number of the Beast,
or his Worship so as to understand it: For says the Apostle, it is the Number
of a Man, and as it is the Number of a Man, it contains all Precepts, Laws,
Doctrines, Ordinances, and institutions of Worship whatsoever made, and
required to be observed by the commandments of Men, in one Kingdom, and common.
Wealth after this manner, and in another after that: Yea it contains all the
pretended Worship to GOD throughout the whole World, set up by the Wisdom of
Men, and by them Commanded to be Observed: And says he, his Number is six
Hundred, three Score, and six.

Here we see the Apostle has Numberd it by the same Wisdom that he Recommends
to us to Number it by; for he received it by Revelation from GOD, and none can
count this Number but by the same Spirit of Revelation now GOD: And although
the Apostle has Numbered it to us, yet he counsels us to Number it; for else
how shall we understand it so as to escape it; as not to be entangled in it for
(...) concerns every private Christian to keep out of the delusion of
Antichrist, one as much as another.

The sum of the matter is this, by the Dragon, is to be understood the Devil,
Chap. 12. 9. And the great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent called the
Devil, and Satan, which deceives the whole World; and by the Beast that rose
up out of the Sea, Chap. 13. 1. is to be understood the powers of this World,
that GOD has Ordained to govern the common Wealth; who at that time was much
held under the Roman Power; and by the Beast coming up out of the Earth, ver.
11. That had two Horns like a Lamb, and spoke as a Dragon, is to be understood
Antichrist, and comprehends all false Teachers pretending to come in CHRIST's
Name, and deceives them that dwell on the Earth.

Says the Apostle by the means of those Miracles which he had power to do, in
the sight of the Beast, or worldly Rulers, and this came by the falling away of
the Church from the Apostles Doctrine; and their first Successors received in
the purity of it. As says CHRIST, Matthew. 5. 14. Ye are the light of the World,
a City that is set on a Hill cannot he hid: The light of which, that is, the
light of the Church discovered the delusions of the World in the time of
Heathenish Idolatry, to the wounding as unto Death that head or power of the
Beast given him by the Dragon; as says the Apostle; but by the falling away of
the Church, the light of the Gospel became Eclipsed, and Men's understandings
Darkened, so that the Devil got place again in the darkness of Men's
understandings to deceive them so as to believe himself to be GOD, 2 Cor. 4.4.
In whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
etc: and the Church to be Deceivers, And the Church of Antichrist as it got
place in the World to be taken for the true Church: So taking the false for the
true, and the true for the false; and as the false Church, or Church of
Antichrist Multiplied, it became Honorable in the World, so as to be received
by the World, and worldly Powers: For the true Church, that is now the false
Church, and World, and worldly Powers came into Fellowship together, so as to
Rule not only in the common Wealth, but also in the Church, by that usurped
Power received from the Dragon.

And as is signified by the Beast, having two Horns like a Lamb, but spoke as a
Dragon; and is said to exercise all the Power of the first Beast, or at least
that persecuting Power under Heathenism, and this is the healing of that head,
or persecuting Power of the Beast received from the Dragon; that is to say, now
in the time of Antichristianism, and as those Idols of the Heathen in the time
of the Law were dead Idols. Psalm 115.4, 5, 6, 7. Their Idols are Silver and
Gold, the work of Men's Hands, they have Mouths but they speak not, Eyes have
they but they see not, they have Ears but they hear not, Noses have they but
they smell not, they have Hands but they handle not, Feet have they but they
walk not, neither speak they through their Throat, Psalm 135.15, 16, 17. The
Idols of the Heathen are Silver and Gold, the work of Men's Hands, etc. So that
the Worshippers of them could ascribe no Glory, or Praise to them any further,
than they were the work of their own Hands.

But here it is said, the Beast that came up out of the Earth having two Horns
like a Lamb, and spoke as a Dragon, had power to give Life unto the image of
the Beast, or form of Godliness; that it should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the image of the said Beast, should be Killed;
appearing in as great Authority as Nebuchadnezzar, who saw no Power above
himself, and gave the like Sentence.

For as this Beast by his two Horns was a representation of Antichrist, and
Antichristian Ministers joining together in Fellowship and Worship with the
Powers of the World; so these also see no Power above themselves; having (in
their Imagination) all Power, both in Church and common Wealth: And in
imitation to the Prophets, and Apostles, as being the Church of GOD, using the
words of the holy Prophets and Apostles, in Prayer, and singing Praises.

But to who, even to him that gave this Power, and is thus Worshipped? Mind the
Apostles words; yea now all the Dominion, Glory, and Might, and wonderful Works
of GOD made known to Mankind in the Scriptures, is ascribed to another. Where^s
GOD says, Isa. 42.8. I am the LORD, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not
give to another; neither my Praise to graven Images. That now seems to be
fulfilled what is Written, 2 These. 2.4. Who opposes and exalts himself above
all that is called GOD, or is Worshipped; so that he as GOD, sits in the
Temple of GOD, showing himself that he is GOD: Compared with ver. 9. Even him
whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and
lying Wonders, etc.

So that the great Dragon, that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which
deceives the whole World, Rev. Chap. 12.9. Now under Antichristianism, has
obtained a far more Glorious Kingdom than in the time of Heathenism, and
worshipping those dead and dumb Idols, though made of Silver and Gold, and
never so curiously Wrought; for says the Apostle, Who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called GOD, or that ^s Worshipped; so that he as GOD,
sits in the Temple of GOD, showing himself that he is GOD: And by his
Ministers, can use the words of the Scriptures, and pray, and preach, and sing
holy Men's Psalms with great Earnestness, and show of much Holiness, and
Godliness, together with his other Institutions of Worship, compared with Rev.
Chap. 13.13. And he does great Wonders, so that he makes fire come down from
Heaven on the Earth in the sight of Men, ver. 14. And deceives them that dwell
on the Earth, by the means of those Miracles which he had Power to do in the
sight of the Beast, saying to them that dwell on the Earth, that they should
make an Image to the Beast which had the wound by a Sword, and did Live; That
is, the first Beast, or Rulers of the common Wealth: Thus we see by the
greatness of his Wonders the Apostle speaks as though he made fire come down
from Heaven on the Earth in the sight of Men; and says, He deceives them that
dwell on the Earth, by the means of those Miracles that he had Power to do in
the sight of the Beast; That is, the first Beast, or worldly Rulers; and these
are called lying Wonders; 2 These. 2.9. Even him whose coming is after the
working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders.

And this Image mentioned by the Apostle, we understand to be an Image of
Godliness, or a Form of Godliness.

And your Confessions of Faith, as your established Ministers, or Elders, and
Messengers have recommended them to the Civil Government in each Colony; and
they have established them, and defend them by the force of the Sword: This
evidently proves them to be the said Image, made to the Beast, divided to each
Government: For the Apostle is not speaking particularly to this, or that, or
the other Kingdom, but to the whole World, where CHRIST is Preached: And yet
uses the word Image, not Images; for though there may be a Thousand Kingdoms,
common Wealths, or Governments under Antichristianism in the World, and each of
them may have a differing form of Worship, or image of Worship, yet they all
make but one Image to the Beast.

As the Body has many Members, and yet make but one Body. And though the
Dragon be called Dragon, Serpent, Devil, and Satan, in Rev. Chapter 12.9. Yet
he is but one Spirit.

Thus it is proved that your Confessions of Faith, (as you call them) are not
agreeable to the Scriptures; but contrary to Scripture, and against plain
Scripture; and are therefore not Confessions of Faith in CHRIST, but Faithless
Confessions of Antichrist; as by your own Confessions, as aforesaid.

Chap. 22. 1. Paragraph, you say, The acceptable way of Worshipping the true
GOD is Instituted by Himself; and so Limited by His own revealed Will; that He
may not be Worshipped according to the Imaginations, and Devices of Men, or the
Suggestions of Satan, under any visible Representations, or any other way not
prescribed in the holy Scriptures.

And you Elders, and Messengers, (as you are called) as you stand to maintain,
and defend the said Confessions, are not Elders and Messengers of the Churches
of CHRIST, but of Antichrist.

And you Rulers of the Common Wealth of each Government, as you exercise your
selves as such in the affair of Conscience, and things Relating to the Worship
of GOD, you do it not under CHRIST, but against CHRIST, under the Power of
Antichrist; as by the Scriptures has, been fully proved.

In the Form of Church Government in Boston Confession, Chap. 17. Paragraph 6.
They say, It is the duty of the Magistrate to take care of Matters of Religion,
and Improve his civil Authority for Observing the Duties commanded in the
First, as well as for Observing the Duties commanded in the Second Table. And
further say, The End of the Magistrates Office is not only the Quiet and
Peaceable Life of the Subject in Matters of Righteousness and Honesty, but also
in Matters of Godliness, yea of all Godliness.

To this I Answer: The Figurative Kingly Office of CHRIST was Prophesied to
Descend of Judah; Genesis 49.10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
law giver from between his feet until Shiloh come, and unto him shall the
gathering of the People be. Which was Fulfilled in David, and the Kings of
Judah of his Generation, who Represented the Kingly Office of CHRIST in His
Church, and had Authority from GOD to Rule both in Church, and Common Wealth.
But as Jacob says, Until Shiloh come, and unto Him shall the gathering of the
People be.

We are to understand, that upon CHRIST's coming, the figurative Kingly Office
of the Tribe of Judah was at an End; as is Witnessed by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15. The
LORD thy GOD shall raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy
Brethren like unto me, unto him ye shall Hearken: And this was confirmed by GOD
Himself, Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well Pleased, hear ye
him; as also Acts 3.22, For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, says the
Apostle, a Prophet shall the LORD your GOD raise up unto you of your Brethren
like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.

Thus it appears by the above quoted Scriptures, tha^ the figurative Kingly
Office of Judah is Fulfilled and Ended.

As to the Kings of Israel, I shall briefly mention Jeroboam, and Jehu, who in
Particular were Ordained of GOD by His Prophets to rule over the common Wealth
of Israel; but had no Authority at all over His Church in those things that
concerned the Worship of GOD; and Jeroboam in taking upon himself to set up a
form of Worship, it was highly provoking to GOD: See 1 Kings 13.34. And this
thing became Sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy
it from off the face of the Earth; and the destruction of Israel also, Chap.
14.16. And he shall give Israel up, because of the Sins of Jeroboam, who did
Sin, and who made Israel to Sin.

And in that they say, The end of the Magistrates Office is not only the quiet
and peaceable Life of the Subject in matters of Righteousness and Honesty; but
also in matters of Godliness; yea of all Godliness:

And to prove it, Name Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, (...) Jehosaphat,
Hezekiah, Josiah, and they might as well have Named said Jeroboam, Jehu, Ahab,
and all the Kings of Israel; yea and Gentiles also.

And if there were this Day any of the seed of Judah, and also sincere
Christians, and chosen unto the Office of a Magistrate, they all stand upon a
Level, having no Authority at all to judge in any Case tending to Godliness;
but in that they commit to the Judgment of the Magistrate all matters of
Godliness; they take that Authority that GOD has given to CHRIST, and give it
to the Magistrate, and in so doing make the Magistrate head of the Church, and
not CHRIST. But says CHRIST, John 5.22.23. The Father Judges no Man, but has
committed all Judgment unto the Son, that all Men should honor the Son even as
they honor the father, etc. And says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.22. And has put all
things under his Feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church, etc.

From what has been now Proved from the Old Testament (save the two last
Proofs) the civil Magistrate is wholly Excluded from Judging in any case of
Conscience, under any Denomination whatsoever.

And as to the New Testament, the Gospel was Preached and Received in
opposition to the civil Magistrate, as is abundantly Recorded: And all the
Encouragement CHRIST has given to His Followers, is by way of Blessing under
Persecution,-Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are Persecut^^ for
Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; Blessed are ye when
Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my sake, rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is
your reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the prophets which were before
you 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea and all that will live godly in CHRIST JESUS shall suffer
Persecution.

I have quoted these Texts out of many, to prove that as the Jews that professed
themselves to be Moses Disciples, persecuted the Prophets; so likewise now
under the Gospel Ministration, they that profess themselves to be CHRIST's
Disciples, persecute those that live godly in CHRIST JESUS. And for any People
professing the christian Faith, to set up a form of Godliness, and establish it
by their humane Laws, and defend it by the Authority of the Magistrate, is to
exclude CHRIST from having any Authority over His Church, and themselves to be
the supreme head thereof.

Now Boston, and Connecticut, let us briefly enquire into the doings of our
Forefathers toward those that separated themselves from them for Conscience
sake, and testified against their form of Godliness as also the Anabaptists,
and Quakers that came among them.

To begin with Connecticut, they punished by setting in the Stocks, by Fining,
Whipping, Imprisoning, and chaining in Prison, and causing to set on the
Gallows with a halter about the Neck, and prohibiting the keeping quaker Books,
and that such Books should be Supressed; as also putting Father's and Mother's
both in Prison from their Children, and then enclosing the Prison with a
boarded Fence about ten Foot high with Spikes above, points upwards, and a Gate
kept under Lock and Key to prevent any communion of Friends or Relations with
the Prisoner's, or communicating any thing necessary for their Support, but
must first go near half a Mile to the Prison-keeper to have the Gate opened.

At New Haven, a stranger named Humphrey Norton, being put a shore, not of his
own seeking, was put in Prison and chained to a Post, and kept Night and Day,
for the space of twenty Days, with great weights of Iron, without Fire or
Candle, in the winter Season, and not any suffered to come to visit him; and
after this brought before their Court, and there was their Priest John
Davenport to whom said Norton proposed some Queries, to which said Davenport
made Answer, and said Norton endeavored to make a Reply, but was prevented by
having a Key tied A-thwart his Mouth till the Priest had done; then said Norton
was had again to Prison, and there detained ten Days, and then sentenced to be
severely Whipp't, and to be burnt in the Hand with the Letter H, for Heresy,
who (my Author says) was Convicted of none; and to be sent out of the Colony,
and not to return upon pain of the utmost Penalty they could inflict by Law:
And the Drum was Beat, and the People Gathered, and he was fetched, and stripped
to the Waste, and whip't 36 cruel Stripes, and burnt in the Hand very Deep with
a red hot Iron, as aforesaid, and then had to Prison again and tendered his
Liberty upon paying his Fine and Fees See George Bishop, New England Judged
page 203. 4. These and the like Things were done in Connecticut.

Now let us hear what was done in Boston Government, as it is to be seen in the
title Page of said Bishop's History, touching the sufferings of the People
called Quakers, a brief Relation says he, of the sufferings of the People
called Quakers in those parts of America, from the beginning of the fifth month
1656, the time of their first Arrival at Boston from England, to the latter end
of the tenth Month 1660, wherein the cruel Whippings, and Scourgings, Bonds,
and Imprisonments, Beatings, and Chainings, Starvings, and Huntings, Fines, and
confistication of Estates, burning in the Hand, and cutting off Ears, orders of
sale for Bondmen, and Bond Women, Banishment upon pain of Death, and putting
to Death of those People, are shortly Touched, with a relation of the Manner,
and some of the most material Proceedings, and a Judgment there upon. They also
burnt their Books by the common Executioner. See Daniel Neals's History of
New England, Volum. 1 Page 292.

They also impoverished them by compelling them to take the Oath of Fidelity,
which they scrupled for Conscience sake, and for their refusing of which, they
were fined Five Pounds each, or depart the Colony; but they not departing, and
under the same scruple came under the Penalty of another Five Pounds; and so
from time to time, and many other Fines were imposed on them, as for meeting by
themselves. See said History, page 320. But to justify their scruple, see
Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by
Heaven for it is GOD's Throne, nor by the Earth for it is His Foot stool,
neither by Jerusalem for it is the City of the Great KING, neither shall thou
Swear by thy Head because thou can not make one hair White or Black; but let
your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these
comes of Evil. Jam. 5.12. But above all things my Brethren Swear not, neither
by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your yea,
be yea, and your nay, nay, lest you fall into Condemnation.

Whether these express Commands from CHRIST, and His Apostle, that thus forbids
us all kind of Swearing whatsoever, be not sufficient witness for a Disciple of
CHRIST to scruple an Oath, I leave to the Reader; these and many more such like
Things the Anabaptists, and Quakers suffered at the hands of their Persecutors
in Boston Government, as may be seen at large in said Bishops, and Neals
History's. Now let us take a view of the sufferings of the Martyrs in England,
in Queen Marie Reign, as it is to be seen in a Book, the Title, the Spirit of
the Martyrs Revived, etc.

They were put in Prison, and then in Irons diverse ways to afflict them; and in
Prison put in Stocks, and their books Burnt, and themselves Beaten, and Whip't,
and many other ways despitefully used; and after all burnt to Death.

And in said Book is contained a briefs Relation of the barbarous Cruelties,
Persecutions, and Massacres upon the Protestants in foreign Parts, by the
Papists, some Drowned, some buried Alive, some burned to Death, and many other
Torments beyond the humanity of Man to Devise, much less to Inflict.

Thus Briefly I have given the Reader a Relation of the Persecutions by the
Papists; and their Authority is from themselves, by Laws of their own making,
to defend institutions of Worship set up by themselves: The Pope by their
Church Order, being entitled the most Holy Lord Pope, CHRIST's Vicegerent on
Earth, the Church of Rome, the Holy Mother Church of Rome, etc.

And now I return to Boston, and Connecticut with reference to what was said
touching the doings of bur Forefathers; they not being repented of, nor called
in Question, but a persisting in acts of force upon Conscience in some measure,
to this Day and their Authority is also from themselves, to defend their own
form of Worship; as appears by Boston Confession, as was cited.

In that they say, The end of the Magistrates Office, is not only the quiet and
peaceable Life of the Subject, in matters of Righteousness, and Honesty; but
also in matters of Godliness, yea of all Godliness.

Thus they assume to themselves the Whole Government of Godliness, and so so
rule over the revealed Will of GOD, in His Children: But CHRIST says, Matthew.
10.27. What I tell you in Darkness, that speak ye in Light, and what ye hear in
the Ear, that preach ye upon the House tops; and fear not them which, kill the
Body, etc.

So that this is not to oppose Man, but GOD; by the aforesaid acts of Cruelty,
to maintain and defend their own form of Worship, by rising up against GOD's
Message by the Mouth of His Messengers, to turn them from their evil Ways, by
warning them of GOD's Judgments; as says CHRIST John 7.7. The World cannot
hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it, that the works, thereof
are Evil.

Thus much of Boston.

And now a Few words touching Connecticut.

They also assume to themselves their Authority to rule over the Church of GOD,
and the Light of Conscience; as we may see in an Election SERMON, Preached
before the General ASSEMBLY, of the Colony, of CONNECTICUT, in Hartford, May
12th 1748, By Nathaniel Eells.

Page 31, 2. We are then, says he, the more bold toward you, to exhort you to
act in your advanced Stations, worthy our common Lord and Master, becoming your
Profession and Character, in all things showing Fidelity, and Uncorruptness.
Consider that as CHRIST is LORD of all, so you art His Vicegerents on Earth,
etc.

ORDERED, say they, that HEZEKIAH HUNTINGTON, Esquire and Col. JOHN WILLIAMS,
Return the Thanks of this ASSEMBLY, to the Reverend Mr. NATHANAEL EELLS, for
his Sermon delivered before them on the 12th day of May Instant, and desire a
Copy thereof that it may be Printed.

GEORGE WYLLYS, Secr.

Thus said Eells has declared them to be CHRIST's Vicegerents on Earth, and
they have confirmed it by putting it in Print; and in as much as there has been
no Confession nor Repentance of the aforesaid Persecutions of our Forefathers,
neither by them, nor since: But a willful going on against the light of
Conscience, and the express Command of CHRIST, to do to others as we are
willing to Receive: And says He, This is the Law, and the Prophets, Matthew.
7.12.

Thus much Connecticut.

Thus I have presented the Reader with a view of the Persecutions by our
Forefathers in Connecticut, and Boston Governments; as also of the
Persecutions in England in the Reign of Queen Mary, by the Papists; and also in
said foreign Parts by the Papists; and have showed that their Authority
proceeded from themselves: The Pope, by the Papists, being allowed to be
CHRIST's Vicegerent on Earth, etc. The Church of Rome, the holy Mother Church
of Rome, etc.

Now if these Titles are truly, and rightly applied to the Pope, and Church of
Rome, then why may they not devise, and make Laws, and join Punishments to the
breach of each Law according to their Discretion in the defense, and for the
preservation of their supposed holy Institutions of Worship, and accordingly
proceed to do all the aforesaid acts of Violence upon their fellow Creatures?

And why may not Boston Government, if it be true indeed, in that they say, The
end of the Magistrates Office is not only the quiet and peaceable Life of the
Subject, in Matters of Righteousness, and Honesty; but also in matters of
Godliness; yea of all Godliness.

I say then, why may not they devise, and make Laws according to their
Discretion, in the defense, and for the preservation of their supposed holy
Institutions of Worship; and accordingly proceed to do all the acts of Violence
upon their fellow Creatures, as aforesaid?

And why may not Connecticut Government also, if it be true, and from the
Spirit of Truth, that they are CHRIST's Vicegerents on Earth, Commissioned and
Sent, as they say, to defend his Cause, and do his Work. I say, if all this be
true, have they not a good Warrant to devise, and make Laws according to their
own Discretion, and appoint such Punishments as they think proper for the
breach of each Law, for the Support of their supposed holy Institutions of
Worship; and accordingly proceed to do all the aforesaid acts of Violence, upon
their fellow Creatures?

Thus for Connecticut, and Boston Government's ASSEMBLY Protestants.

England, in the Reign of Queen Mary, and said foreign Parts, being Papists,
these being Named as aforesaid; and each of them assume to themselves humane
Authority, to rule over the Church of CHRIST, and Light of Conscience.

And if we allow it to one, we must allow it to all, one as much as another;
and not only to these, but to all Papists, and Protestants, throughout the
World, even to all People that profess the Gospel.

For as CHRIST has not limited Kingly Power to any particular People, now
under the Gospel Ministration, as GOD did to the Tribe of Judah under the Law;
so that throughout the World where CHRIST is Named, whether Papists, or
Protestants; they have equal Right to set up Kingly Authority to rule over the
Church of GOD, as any of those already Named, Viz. The Papists in Queen Mary's
Reign, and those in foreign Parts; and Boston Government, and Connecticut.

And as I have thus given the Reader a brief View of the Works of each, I think
these sufficient to Judge them by their Works.

For as much as the Scripture says, In the Mouth of two, or three Witnesses,
the Matter shall be Established.

But if we will Read the History's Cited, we may see Hundreds more of
unrighteous, and inhumane Actions done to the Sufferers: And many of them by
the Officers.

To my knowledge was taken from a Man, only for the cost of a Justices Court,
and Court charge of Whipping him, for Breach of SABBATH, (so called) a Mare
worth a hundred Pounds, and nothing returned; And this is known by us yet
Living, to have been the general Practice in Connecticut.

And now I desire every Christian Reader, to give his Judgment particularly of
these above Named, whether their proceedings against the Sufferers were not all
of one Spirit? as for Instance, one partly put to Death by Burning, another by
Drowning, another by Hanging: Were not all these acts of Violence upon their
fellow Creatures? I call for Judgment. CHRIST says, A good Tree cannot bring
forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit. And says
He, By their Fruits ye shall know them. And the Apostle says, Rev. 13.15. He
(that is the Dragon) had power to give life unto the image of the Beast, that
the image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not
Worship the image of the Beast should be Killed.

And here we see the Apostles Prophecy fulfilled: And in differing ways in
Connecticut Confession, Chap. 24. they Quote to Romans 13. and Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet.
2.13, 14, 17. to prove the civil Magistrates Authority to rule in the Church.
And in Boston form of Church Government, Chap. 17. they also Quote to Romans 13.
1 Timothy 2.1, 2: in like Manner, to prove the Magistrates Authority in the Church.

Thus they borrow the heathen Magistrates Authority, that required the
Worshipping of Idols to rule, and govern the Church under a conformity to their
several Institutions of Worship; and so use the carnal Sword to defend their
own Institutions, as the Heathen did their's.

And thus the Dragon's Head that was wounded to Death, by the light of the
Gospel in the time of the primitive Church, now comes to be healed, by the
falling away of the Church in Antichristianism: But it is the same Dragon and
same persecuting Spirit that required the Worshipping of Idols, and persecuted
the primitive Church, that now professes himself to be a Christian, and
furnishes himself with College learned Ministers, nourish't up in Pride through
Idleness, and voluptious Living: And these are his Ministers; and they are the
same set of Men, that CHRIST thank't GOD that He had hid the mysteries of the
Kingdom of GOD from, Matthew. 11.25.

And he allures the Rulers of the common Wealth, that GOD has set to do
Justice among Men, to take under their Care ^^e Government of the Church also;
which is very pleasing to the Flesh, for the sake of more honor, and glory of
the World, together with the enmity between the two Seeds, Genesis 3.15.

So that he may rightly be said to be the GOD of this World, 2. Cor. 4.4. In
whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
etc. And to sit in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God, 2 These.
2.4. And says the Apostle, which deceives the whole World, Rev. 12.9, And in
Chap. 13. ver. 14, 15, Saying to them that dwell on the Earth, that they should
make an image to the Beast, etc. And cause that as many as would not Worship
the image of the Beast should be Killed.

Thus he appears to be the God of this World, having gotten all the outward
Glory of Religion, and the Powers of the World, on his side, to defend all his
Institutions of Worship, or Image made to the Beast.

And thus as we see by the Scriptures, the Antichristian Church Anotimized, and
laid Naked before our Eyes.

Let us take the warning given us, Chap. 14.9, 10. And the third Angel followed
them, saying with a loud Voice, if any Man Worship the Beast, and his Image,
and receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, the same shall drink of
the Wine, of the Wrath of GOD, which is poured out without Mixture, into the
Cup of his Indignation; and he shall be Tormented with Fire, and Brimstone, in
the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.

In the foregoing Treatise, the Reader may see how I have formerly been with
the Elders and Messengers, and General Courts of Connecticut, with this
Scruple, that sundry Articles in their Confession of Faith had not Scripture
Proof, but they regarded it not, and in the Year 1754, I went to the General
Court at Hartford, and also to the General Court at Boston; considering their
Confessions were both one; and that both Governments lie under the same Reproof
that they would peruse them, and consider them, but neither of them regarded,
so as to enquire into them.

And I have published three Treatises already, touching these Things; but there
has been no Answer made to any; and this is the Fourth; that after so much
Proof, I think it may truly be said of them, as in Rev. 2.2. And thou have
tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them Liars.

Liars Indeed, both to GOD, and Man, to give forth such a Body of Articles of
Faith for our rule of Life, that are so contrary to Scripture, and against the
plain commands of CHRIST as words can express; and yet recommend them to us,
and to our Posterity, as the unchangeable, and eternal Truths of GOD, founded
upon the holy Scriptures.

See Connecticut Preface, Page 8. And much more to this Purpose, I have quoted
out of said Preface, as the Reader may see; and they say, that GOD alone is
LORD of the Conscience: And has lest it free from the Doctrines, and
Commandments of Men, etc.

And then set up their own Doctrines, and Commandments to be observed, and
leave it to carnal Men to devise what Punishments shall be Inflicted upon the
Transgressors, in defense of said Doctrines, and Empower the Civil Magistrate
to execute them against the revealed Will of GOD in the Heart, which is the
light of Conscience, and so give GOD the Title of Lord-ship, but make
themselves Lord of the Conscience, by subjecting it under their humane Laws,
and carnal Weapons, by the Power, and Authority received from the Dragon, as in
Rev. 13.2. And the Dragon gave him his Power, and his Seat, and great Authority.

And from this Spirit of Persecution received from the Dragon, proceeds all
Persecution, that arises where CHRIST is Received; even so as to make divisions
between nearest Relations, in Families, Matthew. 10.34. etc. and it is also
hurtful to Kingdoms and common Wealths, to molest People that live Honestly,
and are diligent in their lawful Employments, and live under conformity to all
Things, relating to the good and benefit of the common Wealth, excepting those
Things that they Scruple for Conscience sake toward GOD; as in the case of
Daniel, Dan. 6.5.

I say, to molest such, by injuring either their Persons, or Estates, is so far
violating the peace, and good of the common Wealth, which the civil Magistrates
Work is to Preserve.

In a word, to go to rule the Church by the power of the Magistrate, is to
destroy the peace of both Church, Families, and common Wealths. But on the
contrary, CHRIST is said to be the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. And when he was
Born into the World, this Testimony was given of him from Heaven, Luke 2.13,
14. And suddenly there was with the Angel, a Multitude of the Heavenly Host,
praising GOD, and saying, glory to GOD in the Highest, and on Earth peace, good
will toward Men. As also, Romans 10.15. As it is Written, how Beautiful are the
Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad Tidings of good
Things.

And all that walk in his Spirit, follow his Example, to live peaceably toward
all Men, as also toward the common Wealth, and to pay Tribute, as he did, for
Peace sake, rather than to offend, Matthew. 17.24. etc. But not as a due Debt;
for says the Apostle, Tim. 1.9. The Law is not made for a Righteous Man, but
says he, for the Lawless, and Disobedient, for the Ungodly, and for Sinners,
etc.

Thus it appears by this Text, that the Law is not made for the Righteous, and
they are therefore not Indebted to the Law, so as to pay Tribute, or the like,
as a due Debt, but as a free, and voluntary Act, for Peace sake, rather than to
Offend.

There is no Compulsion in CHRIST's Church, neither toward GOD, nor Man; but
every Man, to whom it is given, is at his own free Will, to Choose, or Refuse
for himself; as 2 Cor. 5.20. We are Ambassadors for CHRIST, says the Apostle,
as tho GOD did beseech you by us, we pray you in CHRIST's Stead, be ye
reconciled to GOD. Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say Come, and let him
that hears say Come, and let him that is a thirst Come, and whosoever will,
let him take of the water of Life freely.

Thus we see, though all Power was given to CHRIST, as He says, Both in Heaven,
and Earth, Matthew. 28.18. Yet the Foundation of his Church is Love; as he says,
John 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes on him should not Perish, but have eternal Life.

And CHRIST has given it as an evidence to the World, to know his Disciples, by
their Love, one to another; John 13.35. By this shall all Men know that ye are
my Disciples, if ye love one another.

And our said Confessions tell us, Chap. 22 1. Parag. The acceptable way of
Worshipping the true GOD is Instituted by himself, and so limited by his own
revealed Will, that he may not be Worshipped according to the imaginations, and
devices of Men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any visible Representations,
or any other way not prescribed in the holy Scriptures.

And in the 7th, and 8th Parag. speaking particularly of their first Day
SABBATH, (so called) and in it is Sanctification, etc. in effect say, We must
Worship GOD according to the imaginations and devices of Men, and suggestions
of Satan, by subjecting it un^er the watch and power of Authority; and this
agrees with the Apostles Testimony, Rev. 13 4. And they worshipped the Dragon
which gave power to the Beast, and they worshipped the Beast, etc.

But as to said Sabbath, there is no command, nor example, nor name in
Scripture for it; as has been proved, and will stand proved, till it is
disproved.

Thus they deceive the World, in a show of extolling GOD, and the Scriptures;
but it is nothing but a flourish of Words, out of the smoke of the bottomless
Pit of Antichrist, to gain the stronger Authority for their Antichristian
Sabbath; the observing of which, is the great Idol of New England, which the
Worldly Powers defend by Stocks, Whips, Prisons, and taking away the Estates of
the King's peaceable Subjects, that support the common Wealth.

Concerning Signs, GOD made himself known to Pharaoh by Signs, and Miracles,
pronounced and wrought by Moses, and Aaron, till by great Judgments he was
forced to let Isreal go: So likewise when CHRIST was manifested in the Flesh,
GOD manifested himself in him by Signs, and Miracles, in doing merciful Deeds,
in healing the Sick, and curing all manner of Diseases and opening the Eyes of
the Blind, and raising the Dead, and casting out Devils, and the like: But
notwithstanding all these Signs and Miracle, the Jews presumptuously desired of
him a Sign from Heaven; he said unto them, O ye H^pocrites, ye can discern the
face of the Sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the Times? Matthew. 16, 1.
etc. As if these Signs were not from Heaven: As Indeed they said, This Fellow
does not cast out Devil's, but by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devil's: And they
counted him a Deceiver, and charged him with Blasphemy.

Thus it appears that they had no Judgment to Judge of Signs, whether they were
of GOD, or of the Devil: They had let in such a wilful Spirit of Unbelief, and
hardness of Heart, and Persecution, that the Devil had gotten that Power over
them, as to make them believe Lies, and oppose the Truth: In a word, they
trusted in their own Righteousness, and rejected the Righteousness of GOD in
CHRIST, and so procured this doleful Sentence against themselves, Math. 23 37,
38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children
together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would
not; behold your House is lest unto you desolate.

The destruction of their Fathers, was their not hearkening to the warnings of
the Prophets; but Persecuted them, and put them to Death: And the Destruction
of these, was, their wilful rejecting the Gospel Preached by CHRIST, and his
Apostles, and confirmed to be the Gospel of GOD, by the Sign, and Miracles that
they Wrought: They both former, and latter, were destroyed by a mighty
Destruction, and we can think no better of their eternal Estate without
Repentance; these are all gone to come to Judgment, to receive according to the
deeds done in the Body, and ought to be our Examples, to take Warning lest we
fall into the like Condemnation.

Now as touching our Forefathers who came out of England, because they were
not allowed to Worship GOD according to the light of their own Consciences, but
were Persecuted, and therefore came into this Country, that they might not be
debarred that Liberty; but how soon did they set up a form of Worship contrary
to Scripture, of humane Invention, and then subjected the observing it under
the Power of Authority; and so became destroyers of that Liberty that their
Fathers had purchased at so dear a Rate, and Persecuted those that for
Conscience sake withdrew from their established Worship.

I now sum up this Discourse, in proving that all the established Worship of
New England defended by the worldly Powers, is nothing but the Worship of the
Dragon, and the Beast, and his Image: For says the Apostle, Rev. 12.9. The
great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which
deceives the whole World, of which New England is a part; and their Worship,
or Image, made to the Beast, ( Chap. 13. ver. 14.) is made up of
Contradictions, of Scriptures; and therefore of necessity comes under the
Apostles Testimony, that they are deceived with the rest of the World.

And that it is defended by the worldly Powers, by the Power and Authority
given them by the Dragon; see Ver. 2. And the Dragon gave him his Power, and
his Seat, and great Authority.

That is to say, the power and seat of Persecution; and that it is the Worship
of the Dragon, and the Beast in fellowship together, see ver. 4. And they
Worshipped the Dragon which gave Power unto the Beast, and they Worshipped the
Beast, etc. And that the Power, Seat, and Authority given to the Beast by the
Dragon; is intended the Seat of Persecution: Let us compare it with ver. 15.
And he had power to give life unto the Image of the Beast, that the Image of
the Beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the
Image of the Beast, should be Killed.

By the Scriptures thus it is Proved, that all the established Worship of
New England, defended by the worldly Powers, is nothing, but the Worship of the
Dragon, and the Beast, and his Image; and also proved that the Power, Seat, and
Authority given to the Beast, or worldly Powers, by the Dragon; is the power,
and seat of Persecution to defend the said Worship, given to the Image of the
Beast.

And the Sin of false Worship, was the Crying Sin that provoked GOD to send his
Judgments upon Israel in the time of the Law, from time to time, to their utter
Destruction; as is abundantly Recorded in Scripture.

And if we will take the Scriptures for our Instructors, as the Apostle says,
All Scripture is given by Inspiration of GOD, and is profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. Then
let us hear how it Says, that GOD visits the Iniquities of the Fathers upon
the Children, and upon the Children's Children, unto the third, and to the
fourth Generation, Exodus: 34.7.

And this GOD does, in his Patience, and Forbearance by lesser Judgments, to
warn a People to turn from their evil Ways in time; and not only by his
Judgments, but also by his Messengers that he sends; Jer. 25.4. And the LORD
has sent unto you all his Servants the Prophets, rising early and sending
them, but ye have not Hearkened, nor inclined your Ear to Hear.

And these Warnings, both by his Judgments, and by his Messenger, GOD has been
warning New England, by visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers upon the
Children, and upon the Childrens Children, down to this Day; as by the Indian
Wars, that began soon after the Persecuting, and putting the Quaker's to Death,
from which New England has had no assurance of Peace to this Day.

And GOD has visited Boston, with the Smallpox, five Times, since they, put
the said Quakers to Death; and also other Sickness that has been very Mortal in
New England; and the Canker, that has been very Mortal among Children; and GOD
has cut us short of the Fruits of the Earth, by Blasting almost all sorts of
Grain, and by Droughts, and untimely Frosts, and Worms, and such like Things.

But there has been no returning to GOD, notwithstanding all these Judgments,
and Warnings; but a wilful maintaining, and defending the Worship of the
Dragon, the Beast, and his Image.

And whereas it is reflected upon the Quakers, that a Woman went into a Meeting
Naked, etc.

I find in George Bishop's History of the Quakers Sufferings, That two Women
went Naked, and both as Signs, one into a Meeting, the other went Naked through
the Streets of Salem, 'till she was laid hold on, and so also was the other,
and both had to Court, one at Ipswich, the other at Salem, and both Whip't as
an abominable Thing.

Now for our Instruction in the Thing, let us Consider; Reason will not allow
that they did it in any Spirit of Lewdness, or Whoredom, for the places would
not admit of any such Actions; no not so much as in the Countenance: But rather
that they did it in Submission to a divine Power, as Abraham was Commanded of
GOD, to offer his Son Isaac for a Burnt-offering, Genesis 22.1, 2. As a Figure,
Heb. 11.17. So also these as a Sign, to warn them of the Judgments of GOD that
was coming upon them for their blindness, and hardness of Heart, and cruel
Persecutions; instead of hearkening to GOD's Message, by the Mouth of his
Messengers.

And this bears a Resemblance of the Indians Custom, who are said to make their
Captives run the Gantlope Naked, through whole Companies of Indians; surely it
is time for this reproachful reflection to Cease, and to take the shame of it
to our selves; and so let it pass as a Sign, as in Ezekiel. 12.11. Say I am your
Sign, like as I have done, so shall it be done unto them, etc. As also Chap.
24. 24. Thus Ezekiel is unto you a Sign, according to all that he has done
shall ye do; and when this comes, ye shall know that I am the Lord God.

Now as to Boston, to prove the Magistrates Office over all Godliness, they
Name Moses, Joshua, David, etc. without confining it within the Church, as
Church Members, nor within the compass of New England; this gives equal
Authority to all Magistrates, whether Papists, or Protestants, throughout the
whole World, to exercise their Authority in, or over all Godliness; and so to
be a terror to the Church, or faithless Professors in it: As the Sons of Anak,
were a terror to faithless Israel, Numb. 13 33. And the Apostle speaks after
the same Manner of the Worshippers of the Dragon, and the Beast, Rev. 13.4. For
says he, They Worshipped the Dragon which gave Power unto the Beast, and they
Worshipped the Beast, saying, who is like unto the Beast, who is able to make
War with him?

And whether these do not bare a proper Resemblance of each other, let every
Reader judge, viz. The Sons of Anak, and the Worldly Powers.

I find in Daniel Neal's History of New England, Vol. I. Page 310, etc. That
the Persecuting, and putting the Quakers to Death in New England, was of such
ill Report in the several Nations in Europe, which obliged the Magistrates to
publish to the World the following Declaration, in their own Vindication; which
said Declaration is next following in said History; but I shall Rehearse but
little of it; for they in publishing it to the World to justify themselves,
plead to the Laws of GOD, and to the Judgment of all prudent, and pious Men;
but if they had had the Laws of GOD, for putting to Death those that differed
from them in matters of Religion, they should have brought them, to convict
those they past the Sentence of Death upon for Conscience sake, which would
have been the only Thing, not only for their Conviction, but also for their own
Vindication, both before GOD, and all prudent, and pious Men.

And toward the close of said Declaration, say, our own just, and necessary
Defense, calling upon us, other means failing, to offer the point which these
Persons have violently Rushed upon; and thereby become Felones de se, that is
to say, self Murderers; yet in Boston Preface to their Confession, page 1. 2.
We find how ready, say they, the Apostle was, to make a Confession of his
Faith, though for that hope sake, he was accused, and put in Chains.

And further say they, The Martyrs of JESUS, who have laid down their Lives in
bearing W^tness to the Truth, against the Infidelity, Idolatry, Heresy, and
Apostasy of the World, when Pagan Arian, or overspread with Popish Darkness,
having their Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, were free,
and forward in their Testimony, Confessing the Truth, yea Sealing it with their
Blood.

And further say, Nor is there a greater Evidence of being in a State of
Salvation, than such a Confession, if made in times, or places, where Men are
exposed to utmost Sufferings upon that Account.

Thus we see as the Jews, who said, If we had been in the Days of our Fathers
we would not have been partakers with them in the Blood of the Prophets; yet
were the only Men to have CHRIST put to Death: So likewise these commend former
Martyrs for their freeness, and forwardness in Sealing their Testimony with
their Blood; yet these Persecuted, and put to Death those that testified
against their evil Works in the like free, and forward Spirit, with their Lives
given up, (as was said) to Seal their Testimony with their Blood, the former
they Justify, calling them the Martyrs of JESUS; the latter they Condemned, and
put to Death, and say, they were Self-Murderers; and yet acknowledge such a bold
Confession as the greatest evidence of Salvation.

Having proved by the Scriptures, as aforesaid, that all the established
Worship of New England defended by the worldly Powers, is nothing but the
Worship of the Dragon, and of the Beast, and his Image; as also proved that the
Power, Seat, and Authority given to the Beast, or worldly Powers, by the Dragon
is the Power and Seat of Persecution, to defend the said Worship, given to the
Image of the Beast; and this Image recommended to the Beast by our
Forefathers, was by them Established, Worshipped, and Defended by Persecution;
and by them recommended to succeeding Generations, which we may now ^ay in
Scripture Phrase, That GOD has been visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers upon
the Children, and upon the Childrens Children, unto the thirds and fourth
Generation.

And GOD has been warning us by his Messengers, but it has not been Regarded;
but they have been inhumanly Persecuted, and some put to Death, as has been
Declared, and their Blood cries aloud for Vengeance, as in Rev. 6.9 10. And
when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar, the Souls of them
that were Slain for the word of GOD, and for the Testimony which they held; and
they cried with a loud Voice, saying, how long, O LORD, Holy and True, do
thou not judge, and avenge our Blood on them that dwell an the Earth.

O New England, New England, It is high time to awake out of Sleep, since it is
so loudly Sounded in your Ears, that all your high pretenses of Worshipping
GOD, is nothing but the delusions of the Devil, and worshipping the Dragon, the
Beast, and his Image; high time indeed to enquire into these Things, and to
entreat GOD to let you know Him, and to know your Selves; and so to set about
the work of Repentance, and Confessing your Iniquities, and the Iniquities of
your Fathers in all their, and your Persecutions, and acts of force upon
Conscience, and in particular their putting the Servants of GOD to Death, and
then to vindicate it to the World, say, they were Self Murderers, adding Sin to
Sin: But says CHRIST, Matthew. 5.23.24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and
there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift
before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come, and offer thy gift. So also David, Psalm. 26.6. I will wash my Hands,
says he, in Innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, O LORD.

Consider these Texts, and don't go to the Altar of GOD to offer the Sacrifices
of Prayer, with your Hands defiled with the Blood of his Saints, thinking to be
heard whilst the Blood of his Saints, and Martyrs under the Altar, are crying
aloud for Vengeance against you.

And not only to confess this Sin but to confess and repent of all other Sins,
but especially the Sin of false, Worship which you have so long made a
Righteousness of, which is to withdraw from all your established Ministers that
Preach for Hire, and from the practical part of your Confessions, and the civil
Government to quit themselves of judging in Church Affairs, or cases of
Conscience; and all those that have put their Sons to Colleges in order for
Ministers of the Gospel, to take them Home; For as in Lev. 20.2. etc. He that
gave of his Seed unto Molech was to be put to Death.

Now this was offering them to the Devil for burnt Offerings. See Jer. 19.5.
And Men putting their Sons to Colleges to be fitted for Minis;ters of the
Gospel, but is in Truth for Ministers of Antichrist, or Satan, who is said to
deceive the whole World, and done in as great Blindness as the Former.

For CHRIST thank't GOD that he had hid the Mysteries of GOD from such, Matthew.
11.25 Chap. 15. 14. They be Blind leaders of the Blind, says CHRIST, and if
the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch.

Also Repeal all Laws touching Religion, and Conscience.

These are the Things that call to be done speedily, lest GOD come upon us by
his final Judgments, and there be no Redemption: As he came upon the old World
after an hundred and twenty Years Preaching by Noah, and upon the Egyptians,
who notwithstanding all the Signs, and Wonders wrought in Egypt, went
presumptuously after Israel into the red Sea, and so were made to know the
LORD, Exodus 14.25. So Israel, notwithstanding the warnings of all the Prophets,
went on presumptuously to their own Destruction, and so were made to know the
LORD; as it is abundantly Repeated in Ezekiel, of GOD's Executing his Judgments
upon Israel for their manifold Sins: And then says he, They shall know the
Lord.

And now, New England has gone an above an hundred Years in worshipping (...)
Dragon, the Beast, and his Ima^^ and GOD has testified against them, (...) by
his Servants, and his Judgments, but they have Persecuted his Servants, and
gone on in their Sins; and in effect, say unto GOD, Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21. 14.

That without speedy Repentance, we may have cause to fear GOD's speedy
judgments, even such as to teach us See Daniel Neal's History of New England,
Vol. I. page 278, etc. in two Records, bearing Date 1651, touching the
Persecuting the Anabaptists, in defense of the then established Worship. to
know him, and to acknowledge his Servants, and his warnings from their Mouths,
and to acknowledge his Judgments to be Just, though to our own Destruction; and
GOD may rightly answer us in those Words, Prove. 1 24. etc. Because I have
Called; and ye Refufed; I have stretehed out my Hand, and no Man Regarded; but
ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof; I also will
Laugh at your (...), I will Mock when your (...) your Fear comes as Deso^^^^^^
and your Destruction as a Whirlwind, (...)

In a Word, GOD will (...) known by us, either in Mercy, or in Judgment. Thus I
leave it to each Government to do the works of Repentance, according to their
Sins.

Animadversions, WITH SOME BRIEF Remarks; by way of Answer, TO JOHN BOLLES, OF
New London, etc.

By Jacob Johnson, Pastor of a Church, at Groton, in Connecticut.

Printed, 1756.

Animadversions, With some brief Remarks, by way of ANSWER, TO John Bolles of
New London,
WHO has been writ^^ and Practicing against the civil Governments, and Churches
of Boston, and Connecticut, for more than 30 Years past; and no Body has taken
so much Notice of it, as so give him an Answer, according to his own
Declaration and Complaint made at Hartford, May last, before the Governor of
Connecticut, President of New Heaven College, and sundry other Gentlemen there
Convened, on the anniversary Election. Moreover, the Gentlemen I have Advised
with since, are generally of the Opinion, it is best, to take no public Notice
him. I should therefore have past the matter over in silence, had I not
encouraged him at Hartford, to expect an Answer from me, at a convenient
Season. And besides, some Gentle^an of worth, have thought the doing of it, may
be of real service to the cause of Truth, and Religion.

I shall therefore upon the whole (in brief) say, That I think, Friend Bolles
has offered nothing new (in Substance) but what we have had over, and over, by
Writers of his turn of Mind: But however, that I may become all Things, to all
Men; I will take some transient Notice of, and give some compendious Answers to
what he has Wrote; (tho in my Judgment, as well as many others, whom I esteem
of maturer thought, the pains, and trouble of Writing, and cost of Printing,
might better been spared on both sides) and I say,

REMARK I.
IN the Relation, Friend Bolles, has given of his Experience (tho the care of
divine Providence is to be seen, and acknowleged; and the Goodness of GOD,
which leads to Repentance; yet) the fruits of Repentance, are not so visible
(in Friend Bolles) as could be desired, viz. Humility, Meekness, Gentleness,
Kindness, Goodness, Forbearance, Peace, Benevolence, Charity, Honor to whom
Honor is Due, etc. And if what Friend Bolles has Written, be the sum of his
Experience, I cannot (to Speak plainly, and faithfully) but fear he is yet short
of Regeneration, and the sanctification of the Spirit, Unto a life of Holiness.
Tho at the same Time, I would put on charity, and hope. he is not a stranger to
true christian Experience, although he has not held it forth (at least) to me, in
the account be has given in Writing. But in case he be a real Christian (and
the Foundation stands sure, having this Seal, the LORD knows who are His.) The
sum of my Wish, Desire, and Prayer for him, and all other Friend Quakers, is,
that his, and their Light may so shine before Men, that others may see his, and
their good Works, (and I among the rest) and so Glorify their, and our Father
which is in Heaven: But if the case be otherwise with him, or them, of any of
them; would to GOD, they may have Repentance given them, to the acknowleging of
the Truth, and unto life Eternal.

REMARK II.
AS to the sufferings of the Quakers, friend Bolles complains of, with others
of his Community; perhaps enough, if not too much, has been said on both sides
of the Question. I could say much too, did I think it would answer any good
purpose in Religion: But the great Day will make Manifest, when every one shall
receive a Reward, according to his Works.

Nevertheless, I would say the mystery of Quakerism, at Boston, and the mystery
of Witchcraft at Salem were attended with such new, and strange Appearances,
and Circumstances, as to lead our great, and good Fathers, to use such severe,
and violent Measures, to Suppress them, as never could be Justified, had they
known so much, of the nature of the respective Opperations, at the beginning, as
they were let into by the process, and event of Things, and their Children, and
we their Posterity are made sensible of, and have cause to mourn, and lament
the Misapprehensions, and Mistakes of our venerable, and pious Ancestors; such
as Norton, Wilson, Mr. Wilson, like another Jacob, or Moses, when about to
depart this Life, lift up his hands and blessed the People of GOD, and those
present with him; and said, I shall now e're long he with my good old Friends,
Dr Gouge, Dr. Sibs, Dr. Ames, Mr Cotton, Mr Norton, etc and so with a short,
and affectionate Prayer fell a-sleep.
Mitchel, and others; who I doubt not, are now before the Throne of GOD, and
the LAMB, and for ought I know, with some of those they were instrumental in
putting to Death, and that both of the Quakers, Foul Quakers put to Death for
Heresy, Rebellion, and Sedition. As in thein Indictment. viz William Robinson,
Marmaduke Stevenson, William Leddra, and Mary Dyer.
and also of the supposed Witches, Twenty for supposed Witchcraft, etc
Sorceries, viz. the Rev'd M^ George Buroughs, Bridgit Bishop, Sarah Good,
Rebecca Nurse, Susanna Martin, Elisabeth How, Sarah Wilds, John Procter, John
Willard George Jacobs, Martha Carryer, Martha Cory, Mary East^ Alice Parker,
Anne Pudeater* Margaret Scott, Wilmot Redd, Samuel Wardel, Mary parker, and
Giles Cory, was pressed to Death; some of the Persons died as Christians, and
were afterward thought to be really so. See this at large in Neals History of
N. England I and II. Vol. Where you may also see in Brief, the Deaths and
Characters, of Governor Endicot, Rev'd Mr. Norton, Wilson, Davenport, and
others.
who were Condemned upon spectral Evidence.

REMARK III.
AS to the Calamities alighting on N-England; friend Bolles, after Bishop, and
others of the Quakers says, they were sent as a Judgment, for putting the
Quakers to Death: But what Master has taught him so? Has Job by his Sufferings?
see Chap. 19. 20. Has Solomon by his Wisdom? Eccl. 9 at the beginning, or has
CHRIST by his Doctrine, and Example Taught him so? Luke 13, at the beginning.
Nothing like it! But who were the Causes of the Quakers Sufferings, and Death?
were they not their own? Did the Magistrates, did the Ministers desire it? no
verily! Did they not use all proper measures to Prevent it? but nothing would
prevail! Perhaps, indeed they went too far, to Banish them upon pain of Death:
But when they had done so; did not the Quakers thrust themselves on the point
of the Sword, and so became, Felones de seipsis, or self-Destroyers? tho
perhaps, through Ignorance, and blind Zeal; which we trust, GOD has Overlooked,
and Forgiven; if otherwise their Hearts were right with Him.

REMARK IV.
BUT the Blood of the Quakers, says Friend Bollos, rests on the Head of us, the
Children of our Ancestors, who put them to death. Were it true as Friend Bolles
supposes, viz. That the Quakers died as Martyrs; Dr. C. Mather, says, Book 6
Pa. 59. As cited by Neal, Vol 1 Pa. 309. Hist. of N Eng. If any Enquite with
what Spirit these men, ( viz. Quakers) dyed, he must sincerely say, that as far
as he can learn, they showed little enough of the spirit of Martyrdom, they
dyed not like the true Martyrs of JESUS CHRIST, with the glorious Spirit of of
GOD resting upon them; But a sierce, a raging a sullen, and a revengful Spirit,
and a degree of madness rather Inspired them.

I fear the Dr's Remark has too much Truth in it; But tho'the Quakers had not
so much of the visible Fruit, yet I would secretly hope they had the Root of
the Matter in them, and so were Saved, though as by Fire.


yet to suppose us to be guilty of what our Fathers did, is expressly contrary
to the divine Declaration, Ezekiel. 18.3, 4, The Son shall not bear the iniquity
of the Father, etc.

Remark V.
FRiend Bolles, asks whether our Fathers, being Drunk with the Blood of the
Quaker Martyrs, did not then make choice of the Savoy Confession of Faith? I
answer, Whether drunk, or sober, they made choice of a very good Confession;
perhaps a better they could not have found in the whole Christian World.

GOD forbid, I should think all those excellent Divines, that composed, and all
those Ministers, and Churches that have received the Savoy Confession: I say
GOD forbid that I should suppose all, yea, or any of those excellent, and
venerable Persons, and christian Churches were drunk, with the blood of the
Quakers; since the Confession was made before any of them Suffered; i. e. were
put to Death.
and by Persons who had no hand in their Sufferings; and approved by Ministers,
and received by Churches, among whom, and by whom, viz. sundry of these
Ministers, and Churches.
we never heard of any Quakers Being, or Suffering. So that our Opponents
Question seems to be without Reason, or Foundation.

Remark VI.
BUt Friend Bolles tells us, there are 4 Articles of Faith wrong, and very
erroneous in the Confession; and others he could as easily Con^u^^; and that in
proving the 4 Articles erroneous, he shall of consequence prove the whole
Confession so. And if this be True, we have no Existence; and there is no
World; no holy Scriptures; yea, no living, and true GOD; no Mediator between
GOD, and Man; no Law; no Gospel; no Life; no Death; no Heaven; no Hell: For the
Confession of Faith, holds forth these Things; which our mysterious Antagonist
says are not True. O Monstrous Quakerism! -- But what are those 4 Articles, our
(shall I call him Omnipotent, or more than Omnipotent Antagonist, says, The
disproving of which will overthrow all Things; and even the Author of all
Things Himself! why!

The Sabbath, as set forth in the Confession, Chap. 22 Parag. 7. He says, GOD
instituted the seventh Day as a Rest for Himself, not for Man; contrary to the
express Words of our Savior, Mar. 2.27. The Sabbath was made (egenito) had its
Birth or was Begotten.
for Man. But when did it take its Birth? was it not from the Creation? Did not
the LORD bless, and sanctify the seventh Day, from the beginning? see, and
compare, Genesis 2.3. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; with
Exodus 20.11. Wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath Day, and hallowed it.

Friend Bolles says, The 7th Day which GOD ordained as a Sabbath, or Day of
Rest, was not a natural Day (for that no morning or evening is ascribed to it)
but an eternal Day of Rest. But what sense would this make of other Scriptures?
should we Explain them so. Jonah was sent to Nineveh, with this Message; Yet
forty Days, and Nineveh, shall be overthrown. But no morning, and evening, were
ascribed to the Days, were they therefore forty eternal Days? -- But there was
no Sabbath from the Fall of Man, to the falling of Manna, Exodus 16, 23. says my
Antagonist. And why? because no mention is made of it. No mention is made of
any Daughters being born, 'till a little before the Flood, (for more than a
thousand Years) and therefore was there none? No mention is made that the
Giants ( Genesis 6, 4:) descended from Adam, or any of his Posterity: Were they
therefore a new Generation of Men, no way related to Adam, and his Posterity?
Many of the Commands were not so much as mentioned 'till Moses's Day; did they
not therefore 'till then, belong to the Decalogue, or moral Law? But is it not
evident enough, that the Law of the Sabbath was published, and obligatory, long
before Moses's Time, even from the beginning? For that part of the original
Institution, is brought down into the second Publication of it in Moses's Day;
and that even word, for word. And it is plain beyond all reasonable Dispute (as
published by Moses, at the falling of Manna, and as it stands in the moral Law)
it is not considered as a new Command; but as old as the Creation. Tho'it had
been much abused, and profaned, by an abandoned wicked World; and even much,
and long violated by GOD'S own professing People: Therefore we find Moses
speaking of it, as what was already published, and known, Exodus 16.23. This
(says he) is what the Lord has said, (not what He does now Command,) Tomorrow
is, (not to morrow shall be) the rest of the Sabbath: Therefore we find the
Complaint made in the 23th ver. of the same Chapter; How long? mark the Words!
how long? Had they been strangers to the Command 'till then, they coud'nt had a
long Time to have broke it; as the Question imply's; Remember the Sabbath Day;
imply's it had miserably been neglected, violated, and even forgot!

Friend Bolles says, The Sabbath was only for the Jews, and continued 'till
CHRIST, and so come to an End; and since that all Days are alike. But will any
one believe this? who considers, That the Command to keep the Sabbath, is one
of the Ten Commands of the Decalogue; and is of a moral, as well as positive
Nature; and as to its moral Nature, is universally, and perpetually Binding. To
spend a part of our Time to worship, and serve GOD publicly, is of universal,
and perpetual Obligation; and this must respect Adam, and his Posterity, yea,
all his Posterity, one as well as another. Again, the reasons, and ends of its
Institution, are in general the same, and so common, and obligatory on Mankind.
As GOD'S finishing His works of Creation; His blessing, and sanctifying the
Sabbath Day, etc. And even where the Sabbath is called a Sign, and the keeping
of it Holy, a keeping Covenant with GOD; or GOD's perpetual, and everlasting
Covenant with His People, Exodus 31. I say, even there, 'twas not only
obligatory on the Jews; but Gentiles too. The Stranger, i.e the Gentile
Stranger, within the Jewish Gates, was bound to keep the Sabbath, as well as
the Jew; and as much needed the Sabbath as a Sign that GOD was an Holy GOD; and
that they should be an Holy People. They needed as much to be brought into
Covenant Relation, as the Jews did; and the Court of the Gentiles, was opened
for that End, to invite, and bring them in, and bind them to their Duty; and
especially to the keeping holy the Sabbath, which they had long, and
notoriously neglected and profaned, which was a sign, and evidence they were
Unholy, and Abominable in the Sight of GOD; while Jews, and proselyted
Gentiles, who were faithful in sanctifying the Sabbath, carried with them, one
very considerable Sign, and visible Evidence that they were an Holy People, and
Consecrated to an Holy GOD; and not desecrated to profane, and abominable
Idol-gods.

Indeed, we find the fourth Command enforced, from the consideration, that they
were Servants in the Land of Egypt; and that the LORD brough them out from
thence, with a high Hand, etc. Deuteronomy. 5 15. The Reasons of which Enforcement,
seem plain enough to be these two, more especially.

(1) Because they had with, and in the service of the Egyptians, profaned the
Holy Sabbath; therefore they were now more especially to take care, to sanctify
that Day, they had so often, Profaned.

(2) They being now by divine Grace, and a series of Miracles, brought out of
the Land of Servitude, and brought into visible Covenant with GOD, to be his
People; this, together with the other nine Commands of the Decalogue, was
reinforced, and this more especially, showing their Liberty from Servitude, and
great Privilege of keeping a Day of Rest, or Sabbath to the LORD. But then we
must remember agreeable to our Assembly of Divines the Reasons annexed to the
fourth Command (as binding on Gentiles, as well as Jews) are, God's allowing us
six Days of the Week for our own employment, His challenging, a special right,
and propriety to the seventh, His own example, and His blessing, and
sanctifying the Sabbath day.

Friend Bolles says, The first Day of the Week, is not the Christian Sabbath;
nor any Day, as distinguished, one from another; but all Days in common, etc.

I answer, There is a Christian Sabbath Day, as distinguished from the Days of
the Week in common: And that this Day is the First Day of the Week; which may
be evidenced diverse Ways.

[1] Agreeable to the fourth Command, which is of a moral, as well as positive
Nature; and according to the morality of the fourth Command, a certain part,
and proportion of our Time, is due to divine, and public Worship, viz. in
ordinary, and common he seventh part of Time; and which accordingly was
originally enjoined by a positive Command, to be the se^enth Day; and which was
again renewed, and ^^^forced, in Moses's Day. Thus it appears according to the
morality of the fourth Command (which if otherwise the fourth Command must be
thrown out of the Decalogue) That all Days are not like a Sabbath; but that a
seventh part of Time is a Sabbath; and that accordingly, the seventh Day was
set apart by a positive Command; and so continued till the Gospel commenced.

[2] That the first Day of the Week, is the Christian Sabbath: I argue from the
appellation, or name of First-Day-Sabbath, that is sundry Times given to it, in
the New Testament; Mat. 28.1. It is there said, according to the Original
Greek, In the End Sabbatoon, of the Sabbaths, viz. the Jewish Sabbaths, or
Seventh-day Sabbaths, as it began to dawn toward Mian Sabbatoon, the first day
Sabbaths, i. e. the Christian Sabbaths. I call ( Mian) the First Day, because
it is the same word used by the Septuagint, for the First Day of the Creation.
See Genesis 1.5. Hemera Mia the First Day.

So we read also, Mark 16.1, 2. And when the Sabbath, i. e. the Jewish Sabbath
was p^st, Diagenomenou (it might he rendered, was done with, or abolisht) came
Mary, etc. ver 2. And very early in the Morning, The Mias Sabbatoon: The First
of the Sabbath viz. of the Christian Sabbaths, or First Day Sabbaths, (as
before) they came, etc.

So also, Luke 24, 1. Now upon Te Mia toon Sabbatoon: The first of the
Sabbaths, viz. of the First-Day-Sabbaths, or Christian Sabbaths, or Gospel
Sabbath, very early, etc.

Now from these Scriptures (which I have honestly, and fairly Cited, and
Explained) it appears that the seventh Day-Sabbath, is come to an end, and
abolished: And nevertheless, that there is a weekly Sabbath; and so the
morality of the fourth Command remains; for that every first Day, is the
Christian Sabbath: This I might argue, and show at large, was there need of it.

But I proceed,

[3] To say, The first Day of the Week is the Christian Sabbath, as may appear
from the example of the Apostles, and Christian Disciples keeping that Day as a
Sabbath, Acts 20.7. And upon the first Day of the Week, Te mia toon Sabbatoon,
i e. the first Day Sabbath, or Christian Sabbath, when, viz. when the Disciples
statedly came together to break Bread, Paul Preached to them. So we read 1 Cor.
16.1, 2. Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given Order to
the Churches of Galatia, so do ye; upon the first Day of the Week; Kata Mian
Sabbatoon; from first-Day-Sabbath, to first-day-Sabbath, let every one of you
lay by him, The saurisown o. Now why was this Order given to the Churches, if
it was not of a public Nature? and why on the first Day of the Week, or first
Day Sabbath? If it was'nt the Christian Sabbath: And why must they deposit
their Collections in the Treasury on that Day? or to be put into the Treasury,
or public Stock, on that Day viz. the first-Day-Sabbath; if they did not
publicly meet on that Day; and why should they publicly meet on that Day?
Kata mian Sabbatoon; according to the first-Day-Sabbath, if it was not the
Christian Sabbath.

[4] That the first Day of the Week is the Christian Sabbath, I argue from
Analogy, Heb. 4, 10. For He, viz JESUS, That has entered into His Rest, viz
first-Day-Rest, has ceased, or rested from Katapausa
his own Work, viz. of Redemption, like as Oosper
(in a party analogy, or just like as) GOD did from His Works of Creation. And
how did GOD Rest from His Works? Why, by ordaining a Sabbath; not merely for
Himself (as Friend Bolles ^^inks) but for Man, Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11 At the end
of the Command, is subjoined Wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath Day, and
hallowed it, The Wherefore, shows the Sabbath was originally ordained for Man;
and that this was the Day, that followed the six foregoing Days, and so had a
Morning; and that it was a Day, viz. the seventh Day, and so had an Evening,
contrary to what Friend Bolles suggests. Now as GOD finished His Works of
Creation, and rested the seventh Day, as a Sabbath ordained for Man: So CHRIST
has finished His Works of Redemption, when He Rose from the Dead, on the
First Day, and ordained that Day for the Christian-Sabbath.

[5] I Argue the First Day of the Week, to be the Christian-Sabbath, not only
from the Disciples meeting on that Day: But CHRIST'S meeting and blessing them
on that Day; He first made His Appearance to His Disciples on that Day; Joh.
20, 19. Then the same Day at evening, being the First Day of the Week, Te mid
Toon Sabbatoon, being the first Christian-Sabbath, when the Doors were shut,
where the Disciples were Assembled -- came Jesus, and stood in the midst,
saying, Peace, etc. -- So again the next Lord's Day, or Christian
first-Day-Sabbath, He met them, ver. 26. And after eight Day^ again, that is,
with that Day, which brought them to the first-Day-Sabbath again, or as it may
be rendered, Meth' hemeras Octw, within eight Days exclusive i.e. the seventh
Day, from that Day which was the first Day, Jesus came again when they were
assembled together. So the holy Spirit was sent down on that glorious, and
memorable Day of Pentecost, Acts 2.1. Which was the First Day of the Week, or
Christian-Sabbath, when the Disciples (according to the Christian Institution)
were Assembled together.

[6] I might argue the point at large, both from the Old Testament, and New
compared: But I forbear.

[7] I might argue From Tradition, and bring no inconsiderable light, and
evidence in clearing the Truth before us. Ignatius contemporary with the
Apostles, to besure with St. John, the beloved Disciple, says, as having
received it from them, "Let every one that loves Christ, keep the Lord's Day,
as consecrated to His Resurrection; this is the prime, or beginning of Days in
the Christian Era, in which Death is conquered, and Life is sprung up" St.
Austin, after him, and agreably to other the renowned Fathers contemporary
with, and after Apostles, says, The Apostles ordained the Lord's Day, to be
kept with a religious Holiness, because in the same our Redeemer arose from the
Dead; and therefore it is called the LORD'S DAY, etc. This was the First Day of
the World, and the HOLY GHOST was given on this Day, etc. Now says the Apostle
Paul, 2 These. 3, 6. We command you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walks
disorderly, and not after he Tradition which ye received of us.

Finally, I could argue the Point more at large from Reason, Revelation, and
Tradition. But why should I light a Candle, to give Light to the Day! Or a
Lamp, to add brightness to the Sun! -- I shall therefore proceed to Friend
Bolles's,

2 Objection, viz. That an Oath is not Lawful under the Gospel, as set forth in
the Confession, Chapter 22 Para 2 And wherefore? why, Because our LORD has said,
Matt. 5.34, and on ward, Swear not at all; neither by Heaven, for it is God's
Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is His Footstool, etc. And His Apostle James
to the same purpose, Chapter 5. v. 10. Now I would ask, Wherein these two places,
of Scripture Cited, or any other in the New Testament, are we forbidden
Swearing by the Living, and True GOD? Was not an Oath sacred, under the Old
Testament, as well as New? Was it Lawful in the Old Testament Day, to Swear by
Heaven, Earth, or Jerusalem, etc. Did not the Law enjoin Men to Swear by the
Name of the LORD GOD? and consequently forbid them to Swear at all, by any
other Oath. Certain I am, if there be any moral evil in taking an Oath, it was
equally so under the Old, as under the New Testament: Therefore if there be any
evil in taking an Oath, it must be, because now positively Forbidden. But tho
it be positively, and peremptorily Forbidden, to Swear by any Thing, that is
not GOD; because a moral Evil so to do; as might be shown at large: Yet it is
not forbidden by any means, to Swear by the True GOD: Yea it is a moral Virtue
when the Case requites it; as might be shown at large: And so the Apostle Paul
understood it; who doubtless well understood the Sense of CHRIST'S, and His
Apostle James's Prohibition: And therefore we find him saying, Heb. 6.16. For
Men verily Swear by the Greater, viz. by the Great GOD, and an Oath for
confirmation, is to them an end of all Strife. Now observe all is uttered in
the present Time; not the past; the Apostle does not say, Men used to Swear in
the Old Testament Day; and that an Oath was then taken for Confirmation; but
is, viz. now under the Gospel Dispensation. Agreably we find the Apostle
Calling GOD for a Record, or to bear Witness, etc. being the substance of an
Oath, 2 Epist. to the Cor. 1.23. So we find him using the same Word in the
Greek that is used for Swearing, 1 Cor. 15.31. So we find him solemnly
enjoining the Thessalonians by an Oath, ORKIZO humas ton Kurion, i. e. I Swear
you, or lay you under an Oath to the Lord, etc. Hence I think it plain even to
a Demonstration, that the Apostle Paul did not understand all kinds of Swearing
forbidden; no, by no means, but only, a common, rash, and profane Swearing; a
Swearing by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, etc. To Swear by Creatures, is to deify
them, which ever was, and ever will be unlawful. To Swear in our common
Conversation; which should be, yea, yea, nay, nay, is to profane an Oath; which
should be always esteemed religious, solemn, and sacred: But to take an Oath
for confirmations, to end Strife, and to show our Loyalty, etc. is of a Nature
moral, religious, and praiseworthy, and unchangeable good, whether under the
Old Testament, or New But I pass on to Friend Bolles's,

3 Objection, Which is against Baptizing, by pouring, sprinkling: As also
against Baptizing Infants of believing Parents; as set forth in the Confession,
Chapter 29. Para. 3, 4. Holding that none but adult Believers, are to be Baptized;
and that by plunging, or dipping allover in the Water.

I Answer, That tho I hold dipping, or plunging in Water, is acceptable
Baptism, if otherwise rightly Administered: Yet I must say with the Confession,
I don't hold it necessary: But believe Baptism is rightly performed by pouring,
washing, or sprinkling of Water, etc. And that because, that although Bapto (from
whence Baptism) signifies dipping in Water, and is frequently used so: Yet
never do I find Baptizo, or Baptismos(from whence we have Baptism) I say, I
never find the latter to signify the dipping in Water; but Washing, whether by
laving, pouring, or sprinkling: And accordingly the word Baptism, is used for
the washing of Hands, Cups, Pots, brazen Vessels, and Beds, etc. which is
commonly done by the taking up of Water, and pouring on them. But you will say,
Why did John then Baptize in Jordan, and Enon? And I may ask, Why did he Preach
in the Wilderness? And why did he eat Locusts, and wild Honey? If you say, to
fulfill ancient Prophecy, he came a Voice, crying in the Wilderness; may I not
add, and say, To completely fulfill that Character, he Baptized in the River of
Jordan, and in the Brooks, or little Streams of Enon, near Salem. But you Will
say, They went down into the Water, and came up out of the Water. Yes, Philip
went down into the Water with the Eunuch: But was the going down into the
Water, or coming up out of it Baptism? no, no, this was done only for the
convenience of Baptizing; for Philip by going down into the Water, was not
Baptized; but Baptized the Eunuch, by pouring, washing, or sprinkling him with
Water, in the Name of the Sacred Trinity. But perhaps you will say, We are
Buried with CHRIST in Baptism unto Death: Allow it. But what was the Baptism,
with which CHRIST was Baptized unto Death? Was it not the pricking Thorns,
Nails, and Spear? which stained all His Raiment, as one that had been treading
in the Wine Press; a resemblance of the sprinkling of the Blood of CHRIST, for
the remission of Sin. Altho'I am nothing against dipping, or even plunging
all-over in Water when the Season will allow, or Constitution endure it; Yet I
must again say with the Confession, I don't see it necessary; but think washing
with Water full as Good; a^^eable to the Words of Ananias to Paul, Acts 22.16.
Arise, and be Baptized, and wash away thy Sins, Calling on the Name of the Lord
Jesus.

But Friend Bolles Objects, and say, Infants have no Right to Baptism.

I Answer, If believing Abraham's Children had no Right to Circumcision, the
believing Gentiles Children have no Right to Baptism: but if believing
Abraham's Children had a Right to Circumcision, why not the Gentile believers
Children to Baptism? since we are assured, the Covenant Blessing of Abraham, is
come upon, or unto the believing Gentiles. And why not the whole? Why a Part
only? Gal. 3.6, -- 10. If a Blessing to Abraham to have his Children in visible
Covenant; why not to us, to have Ours? May Not we love our Children as well as
he did his? and prize such a Favor as much as he? And are not our Children as
capable of Baptism, as Abraham's were of Circumcision? and may not it be
esteemed as great a privileged of as good use, and tendency to our Children, as
to the Children of Abraham? But it may be Friend Bolles will say, Circumcision
appertained to the Law, and was a sign, and seal of a Jewish ceremonial,
political, and national Covenant; all which are abolisht, under the Gospel,
both Covenant, Seal, etc And that now there is a new Covenant, new Seals, new
Subjects, etc. I answer, Circumcision no more appertained to the Law (in its
original Institution) than Baptism it self; being more than 400 Years before
the Law was given by Moses; being also a seal of that Covenant made with
Abraham, which Covenant we are assured, in the 3d Chap. of Galations, was a
Covenant of Promise, a Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant. And this ancient
Promise, Covenant, or Grant made to Abraham (to whom the Gospel was Preached,
as well as unto us: see Gal 3.8.) I say the same Convenant, or Pomise stands
good to all Abraham's Seed, viz. Believers, whether Jews, or Gentiles; and Will
do so to the End of the World.

In short, The old Abrahamitical Covenant is revived, renewed, and enforced;
formerly with a red Seal, signifying the Imputation of CHRIST'S Blood for the
Remission of Sin: The latter a white Seal, signifying the Virtue of that Blood,
applied by the Holy Spirit, to the cleansing away all Sin. Hence it appears,
that the Covenant of Grace was the same (in substance) in Abraham's Day, as in
Ours; and that Circumcision, and Baptism, are respectively. Seals of the same
Covenant; and belong to the same Subjects, viz. Believers, and their Infant
Seed. For if the contents of the Covenant be the same, the privileges of the
Covenant must remain the same to the federates, or subjects of the Covenant,
although in the reviving, renewing, and transcribing the Covenant (on behalf of
the Gentile World) a white Seal, should be affixt, instead of a Red.

Wherefore as Abraham, when he believed, or agreed to the terms of the Covenant
proposed (by the overture of divine Grace) had a right to the seal of the
Covenant, not only for himself (according to the Tenure of it, but also for his
Children: So in like manner, has the believing Gentile. And so we read: The
Jailer upon his believing, received the seal of Baptism with his (...) Lydia
with her Household, etc. Ag^^^bly, we find our LORD taking little Children in
his Arms; and blessing them; and saying, Of such is the Kingdom of God. i. e.
such are Children of the visible Covenant; and as such had a right to the Seal,
viz. Baptism. But enough has been said upon the divine Right of Infant Baptism,
by many before, and in our Day: And perhaps in saying any thing, I have said
too much: I shall therefore, no longer hold a Candle to see the Sun: But come
to Friend Bolles,

4th, And last Objection, viz. That the civil Ruler, has nothing to do with
Religion; as asserted in the Confession, Chapter 24. Para. 3, 4. But where in all
the Scripture, do we find the Cognizance, or Notice of the civil Ruler limited,
or restrained to things Temporal only? are not civil Rulers to be a terror to
evil doers, and praise to them that do well, Romans 13.3. Are not civil Rulers to
punish evil doers; encourage, and reward them that do Well? 1 Ep. Pet 2, 14.
The Characters of such as are disturbers of the Peace, and disorderly in the
State, are such as despise Government; speak evil of Dignities; who walk after
the Flesh; Presumptious, Self-willed, Riotous, Deceivers; such as forsake the
right Way; and (...) like Persons, 2 Ep. Pet. 2.10, and on ward (...) directs
Timothy to pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority; that under their
happy Influence, and Government, we may lead quiet, and peaceable Lives, in all
Godliness, and Honesty. It is Prophesied concerning the Gentile Church, and the
Church in the Gospel Day, Isai. 49.23. That Kings shall be their nursing
Fathers, and Queens their nursing Mothers. Now who can read all these, and many
more Scriptures of like import, and then with a tender, and good Conscience
say, The civil Magistrate has nothing to do with, and no care to take of
Religion, and of the Church?

Is the civil Ruler to be a Terror to Evildoers? Is he a revenger to execute
Wrath upon him that does Evil? And is not Blasphemy, Sodomy, and Beastality
doing Evil? And may not the civil Ruler take notice of it? Is not Atheism,
Antichristianism, Tritheism, Sabellianism, Arianism, Pelagianism, and other
such like abominable Herifies, I say are they not a forsaking the right Way,
even the way of Truth? And may not the civil Ruler take Notice of them, and
their abetters? Is a quiet Life, viz. a domestic private Life, as well as a
peaceable Life, viz. a social public Life, and is a Godly Life, as well as an
honest Life, coupled together (as exquisite and due in Conscience, to the right
discharge of Duty under civil Government) who then dare be so bold as to put
asunder, what GOD has joined together? And if GOD has promised, that the
Church (in the Gospel-Day) shall be favored with Kings for her nursing
Fathers, and Queens for her nursing Mothers; who dare be so brazen Faced, and
lost to all Modesty, as to say, The civil Ruler has nothing to do with the
Church, or Religigion? And has the civil Ruler nothing to do with Riotous, and
Infamous Persons? As Neal in his History of New England, as may be seen at
large from P 322 to 328. Vol 1.
Calls sundry of the Quaker-Reformers, and their methods of Reformation:
Particularly, Tho. Newhouse, who went into the Meeting House at Boston, with
two great glass Bottles, which he break, one against another, in face of the
Congregation, and said thus will the LORD break you in Pieces. Deborah Wilson
went through the Streets of Salem, stark naked as the was Born; for which she was
apprehended, and sent to the House of Correction. In like manner, Lydia
Wardwell came into Newbury, Meeting House, stripped s^ark naked; which threw the
Assembly into disorder, 'till she was had to the House of Correction.

I should not have mentioned, these monstrous Practices of the Quaker (which
Darkness it self is hardly black enough to cover) had I not found Friend Bolles
justifying of them as Things innocent, and lawful. And which, it seems with
him, are such cases of Conscience, and of so sacred, and religious a Nature,
that the civil Magistrate has nothing to do with 'em: Which, says Neal, is the
most ridiculous, and absurd Conclusion in the World.

But I must withdraw my Hand, having designedly, but touched upon those
Evidences, and Elucidations, I might have handled at large, and to greater
advantage, and especially on this last Objection, about which Friend Bolles has
drawn out his Discourse to so great a length, fetching his Evidence from the
Dragon, the Beast, etc. How he has Succeeded, How clear his Proofs, and how
just his Application, and how Christian like his Reflections, I leave to the
Reader to judge (if any has the patience to Read it) In the mean Time, I commit
all to Him that judges Righteously;

And am thy Friend, and Souls Well-wisher, for JESUS Sake; Jacob Johnson.
Groton, October, 27th, 1755.
Postscript.
IF there be Occasion; I may hereafter, show the nature, and extent of civil
Power, under the Gospel, as also of Christian Liberty; and what the civil Ruler
may, and what he may not do, (...) relation to Religion, and Conscience; and
what obedience (...) Christian may, and what he may not pay to the civil Ruler.
But at present I Know not, whether I need say more, on civil Government, the
Christian-Sabbath, Baptism, or an Oath, than I have (as it were in Transitu)
already.

J. J.

HERE FOLLOWS, A REPLY To Jacob Johnson's Answer to my Book, (...)
By John Bolles.
MY Book Printed, 1756; with an Answer by Jacob Johnson, etc. In said Answer,
Page 4. says he Four Quakers put to Death for Heresy, Rebellion, and
Sedition, as in their indictment, viz. William Robinson, Marmaduke Stevenson,
William Leddra, and Mary Dyar.

Answer, A Man may be Indicted for many things that he is as innocent of as a
Child unborn: CHRIST was accused of casting out Devils by Beelzebub, Mat.
12.24. And accused of Blasphemy, Chap. 26. 65. Called a Deceiver, Chap. 27. 63,
And says he, Chap. 10. 25 If they have called the Master of the ^ouse
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his Household? But I don't
find it in two Authors of the Sufferings the Quakers, (now by me) therefore to
me it is uncertain: But I find in Neals History, Vol. 1. Page 306. The Law of
Banishment upon pain of Death; that the said four Quakers were put to Death by
that Law, as follows, viz.

This Court does order and enact that every Person or Persons of the accursed
Sect of the Quakers, which is not an inhabitant of, but is found within this
Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended without Warrant, where no Magistrate is at
Hand, by any Constable, Commissioner, or select Man, and conveyed from
Constable to Constable, until they Come before the next Magistrate, who shall
commit the said Person or Persons to close Prison, there to remain without Bail
until the next Court of Assistants, where they shall have a legal Trial by a
special Jury, and being convicted to be of the Sect of Quakers, shall be
sentenced to be banished upon Pain of Death; and that every Inhabitant of this
Jurisdiction being convicted to be of the aforesaid Sect, either, by taking up,
publishing, or defending the horrid Opinions of the Quakers, -- or by taking up
their absurd and destructive Practices, viz. denying civil Respects to Equals,
and Reverence to Superiors, and withdrawing from our Church Assemblies, and
instead thereof frequent private Meetings of their own, -- or by adhering to,
or approving of any known Quaker, -- or condemning the Practice of Proceeding,
of this Court against the Quakers, -- Every such Person upon Examination and
legal Conviction before the Court of Assistants shall be committed to close
Prison for one Month, and then, unless they choose voluntarily to depart this
Jurisdiction, shall give Bond for their good Behavior, and appear at the next
Court of Assistants, where continuing obstinate, and refusing to retract, and
reform the said Opinions and Practices, shall be sentenced to Banishment upon
Pain of Death: And in case of the aforesaid voluntary Departure, not to remain,
nor again to return into this Jurisdiction without the Allowance of the Council
first had, and published on Penalty of being banished on Pain of Death.

It was with great Difficulty that this Law was obtained; the Court of,
Magistrates indeed passed it roundly without the Clause of being tried by a
Jury, agreeing that it should be executed by a County Court consisting of three
Magistrates, a Majority of whom were to give Judgment; but the Court of
Deputies would by no means give their consent, it being contrary to the Laws of
England, to put Men to Death without T^ial by a Jury, but the Magistrates at
last, by prevailing with two of the Deputies to change Sides, carried it in the
House of Deputies by the Majority of a single Voice, the Speaker and eleven
being against it, and thirteen for it. But the twelve that were against the
Bill resolved to enter their Protests, 'till the others agreed to qualify it by
adding those Words of being tried by a special Jury.

Four Quakers suffered Death by Virtue of this Law, William Robinson of London
Merchant; Marmaduke Stevenson of the East Part of Yorkshire, Countryman; Mary
Dyar, and William Leddra,

As also Bishop, Page 127, etc. See William Robinson's Paper to the Court.

William Robinson's Paper to the Court, before he was Sentenced to Death,
concerning the Cause of their coming into those Parts, for which they were put
to Death, which the Governor in a great Fury said, Should not be read, and that
the Court would not hear it. Which was in these Words.
On the 8th Day of the 8th Month, 1659, in the after-part of the Day, in
Travelli^^ betwixt Newport in Rhode Island, and Daniel Gold's House, with my
dear Brother, Christopher Holder, The Word of the Lord came expressly to me,
which did fill me immediately with Life and Power, and heavenly Love, by which
he constrained me, and commanded me to pass to the Town of Boston, my Life to
lay down in his Will, for the Accomplishing of his Service, that he had there
to perform at the Day appointed. To which heavenly Voice I presently yielded
Obedience, not questioning the Lord how he would bring the thing to pass, being
I was a Child, and Obedience was Demanded of me by the Lord, who filled me with
living Strength and Power from his heavenly Presence, which at that time did
mightily Overshadow me, and my Life at that time did say, Amen, to what the
Lord required of me, and had Commanded me to do, and willingly was I given up
from that time, to this Day, the Will of the Lord to do and perform, whatever
became of my Body: For, the Lord had said unto me, My Soul shall rest in
Everlasting Peace, and my Life shall enter into Rest, for being Obedient to the
God of my Life: I being a Child, and durst not Question the Lord in the least,
but rather willing to lay down my Life, than to bring Dishonor to the Lord:
And as the Lord made me willing, dealing Gently and Kindly with me, as a Tender
Father by a Faithful Child, whom he dearly Loves, so the Lord did deal with me
in Ministering his Life unto me, which gave and gives me Strength to perform
what the Lord required of me; and still as I did and do stand in need, he
Ministered and Ministers more Strength, and Virtue, and heavenly Power, and
Wisdom, whereby I was and am made strong in God, not fearing what Man shall be
suffered to do unto me: Being filled with heavenly Courage, which is Meekness
and Innocence, for the Cause is the Lord's that we go in, and the Battle is the
Lord's; and thus says the Lord of Hosts, the Mighty and the Terrible God, Not
by Strength, nor by Might, nor by Power of Man, but by my Spirit, says the
Lord of Hosts, I will perform what my Mouth has spoken, through my Servants
whom I have Chosen, mine Elect in whom my Soul delights. Friends, the God of
my Life, and the God of the whole Eart^ did lay this Thing upon me, for which I
now suffer Bonds near unto Death: He by his Almighty Power, and Everlasting
Love, constrained me, and laid this Thing upon me; and truly I could not deny
the Lord, much less Resist the Holy One of Israel. Therefore all who are
Ignorant of the Motion of the Lord in the inward Parts, be not hasty in Judging
in this matter, lest ye speak Evil of the Things ye know not: For, of a Truth,
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth Commanded me by his Spirit, and spoke unto me
by his Son, whom he has made Heir of all Things, and in his Life I Live, and
in it I shall depart this Earthly Tabernacle, if Unmerciful Men be suffered to
take it from me. And, herein I rejoice, that the Lord is with me, the Ancient
of Days, the Life of the Suffering Seed, for which I am freely given up, and
singly do I stand in the Will of God; for to me to live is Christ, and to Dye
is Gain; and truly I have a great desire and will to dye herein, knowing that
the Lord is with me, whatever Ignorant Men shall be able to say against me; for
the Witness of the Spirit I have received, and the Presence of the Lord, and
his heavenly Life does accompany me, so that I can say in Truth, and from an
Upright Heart, Blessed be the Lord God of my Life, who has counted me Worthy,
and called me hereunto, to bear my Testimony against Ungodly and Unrighteous
Men, who seek to take away the Life of the Righteous without a Cause, as the
Rulers of Massachusets-Bay do intend, if the Lord stop them not from their
Intent. Oh! hear ye Rulers, and give ear and listen all ye that have any hand
herein, to put the Innocent to Death: For, in the Name, and Fear, and Dread of
the Lord God, I here declare the Cause of my staying here among you, and
continuing in the Jurisdiction after there was a Sentence of Banishment upon
Death, as ye said, pronounced against me without a just Cause, as ye all know,
that we that were Banished, committed nothing worthy of Banishment nor of any
Punishment, much less Banishment upon Death. And now ye Rulers, ye do intend to
put me to Death, and my Companion, unto whom the Word of the Lord God came,
saying, Go to Boston, with thy Brother W. Robinson: Unto which Command he was
Obedient, who had said unto him, he had a great Work for him to do: Which thing
is now seen, and the Lord is now a doing of it; and it is in Obedience to the
Lord, the God of the whole Earth, that we continued amongst ye, and that we
came to the Town of Boston again, in Obedience to the Lord, the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, in whose Hand your Breath is: And will ye put us to Death for
Obeying the Lord, the God of the whole Earth? Well, if ye do this Act, and put
us to Death, Know this, and be it known unto you all, ye Rulers and People
within this Jurisdicton, That whosoever has a Hand herein, will be Guilty of
Innocent Blood. And not only upon your selves will ye bring Innocent Blood, but
upon the Town and the Inhabitants thereof, and every where within your
Jurisdiction, that had the least hand therein. Therefore be instructed, ye
Rulers of this Land, and take Warning betimes, and Learn Wisdom before it be
hid from your Eyes.

Written in the Common Goal the 19th of the 8th Month, 1659. in Boston. By one
who fears the Lord, who is by Ignorant People called a Quaker, and unto such
am I only known by the Name of William Robinson, yet a new Name have I
received, which such know not.

By these Two Records, the Reader may make some Judgment of the Justice, or
Unjustice done of both Parties.

In said Answer, page 5. says he, The Calamities alighting on New England,
Friend Bolles, after Bishop, and others of the Quakers says, They were sent as
a Judgment for putting the Quakers to Death: but what Master taught him so?

Answer,

The Scriptures, and in Particular. 2 Kings 9.7. And thou shall smite the House
of Ahab thy Master, that I may avenge the Blood of my Servants the Prophets and
the Blood of all the Servants of the Lord, at the hand of Jezebel. Matt. 23.34,
35, 36. Wheresore, behold I send unto you Prophets, and wise Men. and Scribes,
and some of them ye shall Kill and Crucify, and some of them ye shall scourge
in your Synagogues, and Persecute them from City to City: Note, the Whipping of
the Quakers at Carts-tails from Town, to Town, yea, through many Towns. See
said Bishop. Ver. 36. That upon you may come all the righteous Blood shed upon
the Earth, from the Blood of righteous Abel unto the Blood of Zacharias Son of
Barachias, whom ye Slew between the Temple, and the Altar. Verily, I say unto
you, all these things shall come upon this Generation. This is to be understood
the Generation of Persecutors.

Page 6 says he, The Blood of the Quakers, says Friend Bolles, rests on the
head of us the Children of our Ancestors, who put them to Death, expressly
Contrary to Ezekiel. 18.3, 4. The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father,
etc.

Answer,

It must be considered with Confession of our own Iniquities, and the
Iniquities of our Fathers in all the known Sins that they, and we have Sinned,
otherwise we ly under the guilt of their Sins, as well as our own. See Exodus
34.7. Visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, and upon the
Childrens Children, unto the third and fourth Generation. Lev. 26.40. If they
shall confess their Iniquity, and the Iniquity of their Fathers, etc. Yea, the
Jews if now Converted, have to confess the Sin of their fore Fathers in putting
CHRIST to Death: Yea, said Johnson is not out of danger, so far as he excuses
our Ancestors in putting said Quakers to Death.

Page 7. he pleads, That our Fathers could not be Drunk with the Blood of the
Quaker Martyrs, when they made choice of the Savoy Confession of Faiths, as in
my Book is Queried, Page 13. Because it was more Ancient than the Quakers
Sufferings.

Answer,

I meddle not with that of the Savoy, nor that at Westminster, but what they
themselves agreed upon, and ordered to be Printed in the Year, 1680. See my
Book Page 20. 21. and the Quakers Sufferings began twenty four Years before.
See my Book, Page 88. 89.

Page 7. 8. he says, Friend Bolles tells us, there are four Articles of Faith
wrong, and very erroneous in the Confession, etc. And that in proving the four
Articles Erroneous, he shall of Consequence Prove the whole Confession so.

Answer,

The Word whole was rased out before it went to the Press; but the following
Words, Or Image made to the Beast, See Rev. 13. v. 14. remains to be explained.
See my Book, Page 6. Line 10, 11.

In Page 8. he says, that I say God Instituted the seventh-Day as a ^est for
Himself, not for Man.

Answer,

These are words of his own Framing, and not as I have Spoken. And then he
says, I have said contrary to the express Words of our Savior, Mark 2.27. The
Sabbath was made for Man, etc. But as I have Written, I do not contradict our
Savior at all: For I allow all that is written in the Bible about the Rest, or
Sabbath, to be for Man, and for Man's Teaching; and I have no where said as he
has charged me. All which the Reader may observe in reading over what I have
Written, beginning at my 30th Page He ought to say, the words exact as they are
spoken.

He argues much for a Sabbath between Adam, and Moses, yet he has not shown one
place of Scripture that forbad Labor, nor one place of Scripture where any
person was blamed for Profaning the Sabbath in all that time; and
notwithstanding he has found neither Law nor Transgression about the Sabbath
until Moses, yet in his tenth Page, he complains, It had been much abused, and
profaned by an abandoned wicked World, and even much and long Violated by
God's own professing People. And much more he says to the same Effect.

Now whether we ought to join with him to Judge and Blame the World, and God's
People also, since God who is the righteous Judge, has not Blamed them at all
for profaning a Sabbath, in all them Thousands of Years, I leave this to the
Judgment of all Mankind.

Concerning the Sabbath I have written in full, by Quoting Scriptures both out
of the Old Testament and New, as the Reader may see, beginning at my Book, page
30. But now I say in short, There is no Command for the Keeping the First Day
of the Week as a Sabbath, neither in the Old Testament, nor in the New: And all
that said Johnson has said by way of Question, and Answer, and Argument,
Tradition, Reason, Revelation, and his pretended Original. And if he had said
an Hundred Times as much, it would not balance a Command. See Romans 4.15. Where
no Law is there is no Transgression, Chap. 5. 13. Sin is not imputed when there
is no Law. And says the Confession, (which he says, page 7, Perhaps a better
they could not have found in the whole Christian world.) page 7. Believe in all
divine Worship, it is not enough that this or that Act of Worship is not
Forbidden in the Word of God, if it be not Commanded and you perform it, you
may fear you will be found guilty, etc.

And as to his pretended Original, shall we lay aside the Bible as it is
Translated into our own Tongue, by so many Translators, and so often Revised?
Read the Title, The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament, and the New,
Newly Translated cut of the Original Tongues, and with the former Translations,
diligently Compared and Revised.

And we have God's Testimony to the Truth of it, who both speaks Comfort and
Reproof to us by it, as it is now in our Tongue; according to our inward
Temptations and Exercises of Mind, of which I am a Witness; and no doubt
Thousands besides. Shall we, I say, set all this at Naught, and that which has
been counted so great a Privilege, as to have the Scriptures in our own Tongue,
and now to take for Truth what one Man tells us is the Meaning of this or the
other Scripture in the Original, other ways than it is Translated in our
Tongue? Shall we, I say, believe one Man against all the Translators of the
Bible? Especially when he Witnesses for himself to prove his own Argument,
Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the Word which I Command you, neither shall ye
diminish ought from it Rev. 22.18 For I Testify unto every Man that hears the
words of the Prophecy of this Book, if any man shall add unto these things, GOD
shall add unto him the plagues that are Written in this Book. Also Gal. 1.8.

Concerning Swearing, etc.

After said Johnson has Cited Mat. 5.34, etc. and Repeated Christ's Words,
Swear not at all, Neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne, nor by the Earth,
for it is his Footstool, etc. And says he his Apostle James to the same
purpose, Chap. 5. 12. But above all Things, my Brethren, Swear not, neither by
Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath, etc. After these Texts
of his own Citing, says, Now I would ask, Where in these two Places of
Scripture Cited, or any other in the New Testament, are we Forbidden Swearing
by the Living and True GOD? etc.

Answer,

By these Two Texts cited, compared with Mat. 23.22. And he that shall Swear by
Heaven, Swears by the Throne of God, and by Him that Sits thereon. I say,
it evidently appears we are Forbidden to Swear by the Living and True GOD.

After this he goes on to prove the Lawfulness of an Oath; but I think these
Scriptures cited, with what is said already, is sufficient to convince those
that are willing to see; and they that are not, it does not lie in the
multitude of Words to help them.

Concerning Baptism,

We have no Command, nor Example throughout the New Testament, for Baptising by
pouring, or sprinkling Water upon the Person, nor for Baptising Infants of
believing Parents, though said Johnson says much for it by way of Argument and
Reasoning, and pleads for it in the room of Circumcision. Yet all that he has
said makes no Proof; but let the Reader Read what I have Written, together with
his Answer, and Judge as he pleases.

In page 26, said Johnson says, Where in all the Scripture do we find the
Cognizance, or Notice of the civil Ruler Limited, or Restrained to things
Temporal only?

Answer,

We Read, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver
from between his Feet until Shiloh come, and unto him shall the gathering of
the People be; and whereas it is said, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah,
etc. That is, the typical Kingdom, and Laws should be given to them to Rule by,
and to continue 'till CHRIST's Coming. And whereas it is said, and to him shall
the gathering of the People be; That is, by Faith, that he might Rule, and
Govern them in Righteousness, and in Peace. Also, Luke 1.32, 33. The LORD shall
give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall Reign over the House
of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end.

So it appears there was no Power given to other Kings to Rule in matters of
Religion before CHRIST came; but only to them Kings, and Priests which were
types of CHRIST; and now CHRIST is come there is no Kings to Rule over his
Church in matters of Religion, but only CHRIST Himself, who is their alone
King, Priest and Prophet, to Rule, and Teach them.

Further says Johnson, Are not civil Rulers to Punish evil doers, Encourage,
and Reward them that do well?

Answer,

Not in matters of Religion, but only in temporal Things; for both the
punishments, and rewards of the civil Rulers are all Temporal, and CHRIST has
left no Rule for any of his Church, so to Rule one over another: But his
Command is contrary. Luke 22.25, etc. And he said unto them, The Kings of the
Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise authority upon
them, are called Benefactors. But ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest
among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that does
serve. For whether is greater, he that sits at meat, at he that serves? is
not he that sits at meat? but I am among you as he that serves; also Matt.
20.25. etc.

We ought to consider that the Rulers, that the Apostles Peter, and Paul have
Commanded us to submit our selves to, were Heathen, that worshipped Idols; and
both these Apostles suffered Death for not submitting to the same Rulers in
matters of Religion; and so did many Thousands more, by which it is manifest
the Apostles did not mean to Command us to obey Magistrates in matters of
Religion, but only as the Apostles did themselves, in temporal Things, to
follow peace with all men, etc. Heb. 12.14.

Said Johnson also says, The Characters of such as are disturbers of the Peace,
and disorderly in the State, are such as despise Government, speak Evil of
Dignities, who walk after the Flesh, Presumptuous, Self-willed, etc. and for
proof he quotes. 2 Pet. 2 10, and onward.

Answer,

There is more Characters of false-Teachers in this Chapter; in the 3d Ver. it is
said, -- Through Covetousness shall they With feigned Words make merchandise of
you. In the 14th Ver. it is said, Having Eyes full of Adultetry, and that cannot
cease from Sin, etc. that is, they were adulterated from GOD, and lived in Sin,
and were not cleansed from all Sin as GOD'S Children are I John 1.7.

In the 15 v. it is said, They are gone astray, following the way of Balaam, who
loved the wages of unrighteousness: All these are Marks of false Teachers, also
in ver. 19, it is showed that while they Preach unto others they themselves are
the Servants of Corruption; and it may well be said as in. ver. 10, They walk
after the Flesh, when they live in such covetous Practices. It Is said, They
despise Gevernment, that is the Government that CHRIST has set in the Church,
they despise. It Is also said, They are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities,
that is, them which are in dignity, under CHRIST in the Church they are not
afraid to speak evil of. Thus it appears, false Teachers were then, as they are
now, speaking evil of the things they know not, despising the Ministers of
CHRIST which are made overseers of the Church by the HOLY GHOST, Acts 20.28.

Page 27. said Johnson says, Paul directs Timothy to pray for Kings, and for
all that are in Authority, that under their happy Influence and Government we
may lead quiet, and peaceable Lives, etc.

Answer,

Paul says nothing about happy Influence and Government; but he exhorts to Pray
for all Men, one as well as another saying, This is Good, and Acceptable in the
sight of GOD our Savior, who will have all Men to be Saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.1, etc.

Said Johnson saiths, Page 27. It is Prophesied concerning the Gentile Church
and the Church in the Gospel Day: Isa. 49. 23. That Kings shall be their
nursing Fathers, and Queens their nursing Mothers.

Answer.

This was concerning their return out of Captivity, and was fulfilled in that
Day by Cyrus and others, whom God raised up to be their nursing Fathers, and
nursing Mothers: Also Hag. 2.7. etc. it is said, I will shake all Nation, and
the desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this House with Glory
says the LORD of Hosts: The Silver is mine, and the Gold is mine, says the
LORD of Hosts: The Glory of this House shall be greater than the former says
the LORD of Hosts. Thus it appears, that GOD found ways to restore them with
Silver, and Gold, and all things needful to build his House, with the
Government, and Prist-hood also, which the Scripture shows were all Typical,
and were to continue 'till CHRIST came; but now in the Gospel it is said, Heb.
3.6. CHRIST as a Son over his own House, whose House art we, etc. And the Faith
he works in us is much more precious than Gold that Perishes, I Pet. 1.7. But
if it were a Promise that Kings should be their nursing Fathers, and Queens
their nursing Mothers in the Gospel Day, when has it been fulfilled? We know
that the Apostles and primitive Christians endured much Persecution; and the
Reformers out of Popery endured Much Persecution; and our fore Fathers endured
Persecution in ENGLAND and therefore came into a desert Land, but when GOD Tent
his Messengers to reform our Fathers, they were also Persecuted, and this has
been the practice to this Day, as the Scripture says, He that will live Godly
in CHRIST JESUS shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.

One who felt the Persecution in New England, says thus,

' New England for Religion did leave her native Land,
'And came into a desert amongst a Tawny Band:
'And surely for Religion, she made this Resolution,
'To come and leave her native Place to shun her Persecution:
'But soon she turns to Persecute, by which it does appear,
'That she is not the same she was when first she did come here:
And truly New England has showed; more bitter Spirit of Persecution than any
other part of the Kingdom, by Persecuting the Quakers in a more cruel manner,
even unto Death.

Further says Johnson, Is the civil Ruler to be a terror to evil doers? is be
a revenger to execute Wrath up him that does Evil?

Answer,

When he has purged all evil doers out of the Commonwealth, we may hope he
will find none in the Church. And as for Blasphemy, the civil Ruler had need be
very careful lest as the Jews who Persecuted CHRIST for Blasphemy, he also
Persecute him in his Members. Paul and the Martyrs Worshipped GOD in the way
which their Persecutors called Heresy; and as to the many other erroneous
Principles, or Doctrines, said Johnson has named the civil Ruler may now be as
liable to be mistaken as others were before him.

Said Johnson says, Page 28. Who then dare be so bold as to put asunder, what
GOD has joined together? (meaning the Church, and civil Rulers.)

Answer,

The Church of CHRIST is joined to himself who is her Head, Ephesians. 5.23. and over
which he ought to Rule: But both Himself and his Church have been Persecuted,
even to this Day: As it was foretold by him, and his Apostles; and it has
been the Practice of the false Church, to join with the Rulers to strive to put
CHRIST, and his Church asunder whom GOD has joined together.

Said Johnson further says, Who dare be so brazen Faced, and lost to all
Medesty as to say, the civil Ruler has nothing to do with the Church? etc.

Answer,

It was a brazen Face in the Rulers, and Teachers at all Times when they have
presumed to sit in CHRIST's Seat to Judge in cases of Conscience, or things
relating to the Worship of GOD. And now since more Light is come into the
World, it is more brazen Faced for Teachers to encourage the Rulers any longer
therein.

And further said Johnson Complains, That I have Justified two of the Quakers
for going Naked, etc.

Answer,

Isaiah went Naked, Isa. 20.2, etc. And as to what I have said that two Women
went Naked, and both as Signs, etc. I desire the Reader to peruse beginning at
my 116 Page and also Compare what I have Written with what Cotton Mather does
Testify in the following Pages of the Indians Cruelty, in Stripping New England
Captives, and Whipping them as Cruelly as said two Women were Whip't by the
Rulers of New England.

Said Johnson in Page 28. says, Has the civil Ruler nothing to do with riotous
and infamous Persons, etc. Particularly, Thomas Newhouse, who went into the
Meeting House at Boston, with two great glass Bottles, which be brake one
against another in face of the Congregation, and said, thus will the LORD break
you in pieces.

Answer,

See Jerem. 19.10. 11. George Wilson also Went through the Streets of Boston
Crying with a loud Voice, That the LORD was coming forth with Fire, and Sword
to plead with Boston. And many more of the Quakers Tcstisied publicly to the
same purpose, and the Judgments of GOD followed soon after, as Cotton Mather,
and others of their own Teachers have Recorded, as may be seen compared with
said Quakers Testimonies, in a Book put forth by John Whiting, in Answer to
Cotton Mather, Page 185, etc.

But said Teachers did not conisider that GOD had Warned them by his Messengers
whom they had Mocked, and Despised, as Israel did of old. See 2 Chronicles. 36. ver.
15, 16, etc.

AND here follows some of said Warnings, and Testimonies, and also some of
the Judgments of GOD as they are to be seen in said Book, Written by John
Whiting in Answer to Cotton Mather, Printed, 1702, from Page 185. to Page 212.
Which is as follows.

Fr. Howgil -- Though you lift up your Horns High, and push every way with them
against the LAMB, and his Followers, yet your Horn shall be broken by Him who
is their King, by his Horn of Salvation, which is now lifted up far higher than
the Horn of an Unicorn, and you shall be as Ashes under their Feet. -- Your Cup
shall be filled with the Wine of the Wrath of God, which shall be poured forth
without Mixture, and that will be your Portion to drink. -- For Woe and Misery
shall compass your Tabernacle, and the Dread of God is against you. -- Well,
the same Measure that you have Measured out to others, even the same shall be
measured to you. -- The Name of your General Court, and the Appointments and
Ordinances thereof, will be Crowned with Infamy and Reproach, from Generation
to Generation.

Edw. Borough, -- There is no Vision unto you of Peace and Prosperity in your
way, but you shall fall with no small weight of Dishonor, and Affliction which
shall be your Portion. -- His People shall have Peace, when you shall have
Trouble; his People shall have Joy, when you shall have Mourning; he shall
appear to their Joy, but you shall be ashamed; For your portion shall not be
like unto theirs, but the Wrath of the Lamb shall torment you, even the
Long-suffering of God, which has been great toward you, shall be turned into
a devouring Fire, and into Fury to consume you; this shall doubtless come to
pass, for the Lord has said it, -- In the dreadful Day of the Lord, and that
Day is coming upon you; and the Judgments of the Lord, the wicked shall not
escape.

Thus Reader, thou may see how they go on, adding Iniquity to Sin, not at all
Considering that the Rod of God is lifted up over them, who will assuredly take
Vengeance, for all these Works; therefore let all, in whom there is any
tenderness, and bowels of Love toward our Lord Jesus Christ, deliver
themselves from this untoward Generation, by turning with the whole Heart unto
the Lord, that so they may be saved from the wrath which is to come upon all
these. Things -- whose Visitation of Love you have with great hatred resisted,
thereby heaping Wrath unto your selves, and gaining the Plagues and Judgments
of God, which unavoidably will come upon you (as your due) for resisting so
great Love.

Richard Bellingham charging them with coming in Contempt to Revile Magistrates
and Ministers, and to break all Order in Churches, etc. threatening to cut off
their Ears, they replied You heap false Accusations upon us, and God will heap
his Judgments on your heads; and if we suffer loss of Members, or loss of Life,
our Blood will be required at your Hands, for the Lord has sent us hither. --
Surely God will take Vengeance for these Things, for whose Blood God will make
Inquisition, and in that Day you will be found Guilty, and it required at your
Hands, with a Voice more loud than all the rest of your crying Sins, for which
ye must Account.

G. Fox, But the Hand of the Lord is turned against you, and gone over you, and
his Mighty Power is stretched over you, that you cannot hide your selves, --
But the Lord God of Power will bring all your Actions to Light; and his Power
and Arm, you cannot escape, -- and the Power of God is far above it, which will
overthrow that Power and the Actors both.

J. Rouse, Therefore return while you have time, and let God be minded by you,
lest he break forth against you with an unresistable Flood, which you cannot be
able to escape -- lest in the Day of your Distress, your Houses be lest unto
you desolate, and your Habitation waste, and then you may wish, that while you
had time; ye had minded the things which belong to your Peace.

Hump. Smith, The Lord God will Answer you with that which you shall never be
able to resist, from the which you shall never be able to fly; neither shall
your coverings defend you; but God will visit in Secret, and the Almighty will
Rain Snares upon you -- and God's Righteous Judgments will enter within your
Dwellings, and a Day of Blackness from the Throne of God will come upon you,
and his Anger with Bitterness will be poured forth upon you, as a mighty Storm,
which comes on a sudden, and as a whirlwind, which none can stop, and as the
mighty unmerciful Raging Waves of the Sea, which none is able to Resist, even
so shall the day of your Calamity come, which is hasting as the Lightning,
whose breaking forth all your Fleshly Wisdom shall never be able to hinder. --
Behold I have heard a Voice of Terror from the Lord against your Unrighteous
Proceedings, and the Day of God's Vengeance is in his Heart, and who should
stand to plead with Him? -- And a Cup of Astonishment from the Righteous God of
Truth will be poured forth unto you; and as sure as you have thirsted after,
and drunk deep of the Blood of God's Chosen, -- so certain shall you have Blood
to drink, and Trembling, Horror and Amazement will most absolutely come in that
Day, which approaches as a Thief in the Night; -- and the Sound of God's
terrible Voice shall be heard in the midst of you, and from the dreadful Voice
of this War shall you never be able to cover your selves, with all your
Writings, Printings, nor Declarations: -- For great is the Woe that is coming
upon you; and that which I have heard concerning you, is none other than a
Voice of Terror: O the Trouble, Distress and Calamity that sounds in my Heart
concerning you, and from the Lord God will be poured forth and exceeding deep
shall you drink thereof.

Jos. Nicholson, -- When they that caused them to be put to Death, shall howl,
and lament; for their Day of Sorrow is coming on, for the Innocent Blood cries
aloud for Vengeance upon them, who put them to Death. -- Your Enchantments, and
Laws, which you have hatched out of Hell, shall be broken. -- And the People in
scorn by you called Cursed Quakers, shall inhabit amongst you, and you shall be
broken to pieces; the Lord has said it, and he will shortly bring it to pass,
-- Whose Innocent Blood cries aloud for Vengeance against you, -- who have shed
Innocent Blood; God's Judgments draws near; all you who had a Hand in shedding
Innocent Blood, the Blood of the Innocent is upon you; Woe will be to you for
evermore, except you Repent. -- Sorrow shall accompany you, wherever you go;
Vengeance from the Lord, and Punishment, as came upon Cain, shall come upon
you; -- In Sorrow shall you lie down, and so shall you rise up; and in Torment
shall you be, wherever you go; -- and you shall have Blood to drink, who have
shed Innocent Blood.

Isaac Pennington, There is a time of Righteous Judgment, wherein the most
inward Covers shalI be ripped off, and the Sinner appear what he is; and then
the Persecutor shall bear that Shame, that Burden, that Misery, which is the
Portion of that Spirit. -- But the same Lord God of Truth and Righteousness,
who has unmasked the Papists, and unmasked the Bishops, will unmask these
also, and their Nakedness shall more appear than the others, who would hide
themselves, and their own Cruelty, with that Covering which they themselves
judged in Others. -- The Lord also will judge between Cattle and Cattle; and in
that day ye will see, that as his Choice have heen your Outcast, so your Choice
is rejected by him; and that as his Spirit is the Abomination of your Eyes, so
your formal Way of Worship is the Loathing of his Soul. O that ye had Eyes to
see it! That your Hearts might not be utterly hardened against the Lord, his
Truth and People, even to your Utter and Eternal Destruction. Little do ye see,
poor deceived Hearts! What a narrow step there is between you and the Pit.

Willian Robinson and Marmaduke Stevenson You who are seeking the Life of the
Righteous, and that nothing but Blood will satisfy, the Lord will give you
Blood to drink; you that thirst for it, you shall have enough of it.

TO New England, How do thou think to expect any thing from the Lord, but a
sore Destruction, a Famine and Plague. which is hastening upon thee, if thou
continue still in Rebellion, in Persecuting his Servants? This has the Lord
said, and this will the Almighty perform upon thee in the Day of his Righteous
Judgments. Well, a little further you shall proceed to fill up the measure of
your Iniquities, and then shall you have your Reward with the rest of the
Uncircumcised. -- This know, if you put us to Death, when we return, that you
will bring Innocent Blood upon you, by so doing, which will not depart from
your Houses, nor from that Seed that is Guilty thereof. So these things we
speak, that you may no more be Guilty of Innocent Blood: For assuredly know,
that nothing shall fail of what the Lord has spoken by us, and through us,
concerning you, if you go on still in Rebellion, and Stiff-neckednese, and
refuse to hearken to the Voice and Counsel of the Lord God: And this know, that
you have been warned from the Lord of these thing, before they come to pass. --
For the Lord of Hosts is coming up against you, and your Power must be subdued,
and taken from you, by the Prince of Peace, -- who is come and coming, to make
void all your Ungodly, Inhumane and Bloody Laws, and to reward you according to
your Works: The Lord God has spoken it, and by Him it shall be accomplished
upon you; for the Decree of the most High is gone out against you; ye
unmerciful Men, whose Wickedness and Unrighteousness does exceed the Nations
about you, for Barbarous Cruelty, and Unmanlike Actions.

Mary Dyer, The Lord will overthrow both your Laws and you, and by his
righteous Judgments, and Plague, poured justly upon you; who now, whilst you
are warned thereof, and tenderly sought unto, may avoid the one, by removing
the other.

Eliz. Hooten, -- Still, do you thirst for more Blood? And you shall have Blood
to drink, except you speedily Repent. -- You are still striking and fighting
with the Innocent, till the Stroke return again from the Lord heavily upon you;
and the Hand of the Lord is stretched out against you, to destroy you. -- A Day
of Howling, and sad Lamentation, is coming upon you all from the Lord; and as
he has cried unto you to Return by his Servants, whom he sent, and you would
not regard; so shall you cry, and he will not hear you, nor regard your cry:
And so you may go to your Gods, whom you have served, and see if they will
deliver you. -- And now who shall plead for you? For your Misery is coming upon
you, like an Army of Men, and your Devices shall defend you no longer: For
look, what you have done to others, shall be filled upon your own Heads; for
you shall drink deeply of the Cup of God's Wrath.

George Bishop, And the time is at hand, yea, near to be revealed, wherein the
Righteous God will render unto you, according to your Deeds; -- when he shall
have thrown ye down from your Seats, and exalted the Humble and Meek: -- And
for this, expect that ye shall have your Reward from him, who is the Father of
the Fatherless, and the Husband to the Widow.

Thomas Harris's Warning, The dreadful, terrible Day of the Lord God of Heaven
and Earth is coming upon the Inhabitants of this Town and Country.

G. B. And when the Judgments of the Lord shall be made manifest upon you, this
shall remain as a Witness for the Lord and that he has not without cause
brought these things on you, who will be Glorified on you, when his Judgments
are made manifest: The Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, who will do
it, and the time is near.

Nich. Upshall declared unto you, That the Prosecution that Law ( viz. of
Banishment) would be a Forerunner of a Judgment on the Country (as it proved)
but ye would not hear him, but Banished him also.

G. Bishop, (having told them, how they should bear the Indignation of the
Lord, he says) Which will on you certainly Fall, and divide you your Portion
with the Hypocrites and Sinners, and avenge the Blood and Suffering of his
Servants, and plead their Cause, and execute Judgment for them upon you, and
that in the sight of the Heathen. -- (Having spoken of the (...) he has filled
to you, (in recounting the Sufferings) which ye have filled unto them) And have
doubled it upon you, (says he) in the Word of the Lord, who will fulfill it upon
you, that you shall not go haughtily, for this time is evil.

Wenlock Christison, Be not proud, neither let your Spirits be lifted up, God
does but wait, till the measure of your Iniquity be filled up, and that you
have run your Ungodly Race; then will the Wrath of God come upon you to the
uttermost.

George Wilson's Warning, That the Lord was coming with Fire and Sword to plead
with Boston.

G. B. The Day of Evil is coming upon you, and you shall receive according to
your Works, and the time is near. -- But you will be met with, and the Cup you
have filled to others, will be filled to you; and you shall know, that God is
the Lord, and that him in his People it is, you have so opposed and Persecuted.

William Hathorne, (before he was a Magistrate and Persecutor) That if an Acts
(as they were then about to restrain Preaching) should take place in
New England, he looked upon it as one of the most horrid'st Acts as ever was
done in New England, and would be as great a Token of God's Forsaking New
England as any.

Edw. Wharton, -- Surely the Lord will visit you for the Blood of the Innocent;
and your Day is coming, as it is come upon many, who but as yesterday were
higher in Power, than ever you were, or are like to be, but now are made the
lowest of many; and truly my Soul laments for you.

GOD will give you a Cup of Trembling, that you shall be a Byword and a Hissing
to all your Neighbor.

Many more I could mention to the same purpose, as fore-tellling the judgments
and Miseries that were coming upon them, for their Injustice and Cruelties; all
which C. M. must needs confess are fulfilled in a large manner, as I could
easily show by Letters of Reference to the following Confessions; but that I
leave to the Render to Compare, and make his own Remarks upon; and now I shall
proceed -- with this Scripture, -- God has prepared for the Wicked the
Instruments of Deaths he ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors, Psalm.
7.13.

First. Priest Higginson, after he has confessed to their Degeneracy, as
aforesaid, in the beginning, says, Neither was New England ever without some
Fatherly Chastizements from God, showing that he is not fond of the Formalities
of any People upon Earth, but expects the Realities of Practical Godliness,
according to our Profession and Engagement unto him. -- Lament our Gradual
Degeneracy from that life and Power of Godliness that was in them, and the many
provoking Evils that are amongst us, which have moved our God severely to
witness against us, more than in our first times, by his Lesser Judgments going
before, and his Greater Judgments following after; he shot off his
Warning-Pieces first, but his Murthering-Pieces have come after them; in so
much as in these Calamitous times, the Changes of Wars of Europe have had such
a malignant Influence upon us in America, that we are at this day greatly
diminished, and brought low, through Oppression, Affliction, and Sorrow.

C. M. Book 1. p. 27. c. 1. For now more than Twenty Years, the Blasting
Strokes of Heaven upon the secular Affairs of this Country, have been such, as
rather to abate than enlarge the growth of it. P. 29. c. 1. The many
Calamities, which have ever since been wasting of the Country, have so nipt the
Growth of it, that its latter Progress has held no proportion with what was
from the beginning. -- The Calamities that have carried off the Inhabitants of
our several Towns, have not been all of one sort; nor have all our Towns had an
equal share in any sort; Pestilential Sicknesses have made fearful Havoc in
diverse places, where the Sound perhaps have not been enough to tend the Sick,
while others have not had one touch from that Angel of Death; and the Sword
has cut off Scores, in sundry places, when others it may be have not lost a
Man by that Avenger.

P. 31. c. 2. There have been several Years, wherein the Terrible Famine has
terribly stared the Town in the Face. -- The Angels of Death has often shot;
the Arrows of Death into the midst of the Town; the Small-Box has especially
four times, been a great Plague upon us. -- Never was any Town under the Cope
of Heaven more liable to be laid in Ashes, either through the Carelessness or
-- Wickedness of them that deep in it. P. 32. c. 1. Ten times have the Fire
made notable Ruins among us, and our good Servant been almolst our Matter.

P. 38. c. 1. Ah Boston, thou have seen the Vanity of all Wordly Posfessions;
one fatal Morning, which laid Fourscore of thy Dwelling Houses, and Seventy of
thy Warehouses in a ruinous heap, not Nineteen Years ago, gave thee to Read it
in fiery Characters; and an huge Fleet of thy Vessels, which they would make,
if they were altogether, that have mis-carried in the late War, has given thee
to Read more of it.

C. 2. He tells how the Consuming Wrath of God is every Day on the Young Men,
saying, New England has been like a tottering House, the very Foundations of it
has been shaking; but the House thus oversetting by the Whirl-winds of the
Wrath of God, has (...) like Job's House, It falls upon the Young Men, and
they are dead; the Disasters on our young Folks have been so multiplied, that
there are few Parents among us, but what will go with wounded Hearts down unto
their Graves: Their daily Moans are, Ah my Son, cut off in his Youth! My Son,
my Son!

Book V. p. 85. c. 1. By Land, some of the principal Grains, especially our
Wheat and our Pease, fell under an unaccountable Blast, from which we are not
even unto this day, delivered: And besides that constant Frown of Heaven upon
our Husbandry, recurring every Year; few Years have passed, wherein either
Worms or Droughts, or some Consuming Disasters, have not befallen the Labor of
the Husbandmen: By Sea, we were visited with multiplied Shipwracks; Enemies
preyed upon our Vessels, and our Sailors, and the Affairs of the Merchant were
clogged with Losses abroad, or Fires breaking forth in the chief Seats of Trade
at home, wasted their Substance with yet more costly Desolations: Nor did the
Land and the Sea, more proclaim the Controversy of our God against us, than
that other Element of the Air, by the Contagious Vapors whereof, several
Pestilential Sicknesses did sometimes become Epidemical among us; yea, the
Judgments of God, having done first the part of the Moth upon us, proceeded
then to do the part of a Lion, in lamentable Wars, wherein the Barbarous
Indians Cruelly Butchered many Hundreds of our Inhabitants, and scattered whole
Towns, with miserable Ruins, (and reckoning up the Sins that Cyprian counted
the Causes of the Calamities that came on the Primitive Christians, he says.)

Page 68. c. 1 Truly if New England had not abounded with the like Offenses, it
may be supposed such Calamities had not befallen it: It intimated a more than
ordinary Displeasure of God for some Offenses, when he proceeded so far, as to
put over his poor People into the Hands of Tawny and Bloody Salvages; and the
whole Army had cause to enquire into their own Rebellions, when they saw the
Lord of Hosts, with a dreadful Decimation, taking off so many of our Brethren,
by the worst of Executioners. -- The serious People, throughout the Country,
were awakened, by these Intimations of Divine Displeasure, to enquire into the
Causes and Matters of the Controversy.

P. 87. c. 2. The Scourges of Heaven were employed upon the Churches of
New England, for their Miscarriages, and they were sorely lashed with one Blow
after another.

P. 88. c. 1. That God has a Controversy with his New England People, is
undeniable; the Lord having Written his Displeasure in dismal Characters
against us, though Personal Afflictions do often times come only or chiefly for
Probation, yet as to public Judgments, it is not wont to be so, Especially
when by a Continued series of Providence the Lord does appear and plead against
his people, 2 Samuel 21.1. as with us it has been from Year to Year; would the
Lord have whetted his Glittering Sword, and his Hand have taken hold on
Judgment? Would he have sent such a mortal Contagion, like a Besom of
Destruction, in the midst of us? Would he have said, Sword go through the Land,
and Cut off Man, and Beast? Or would he have kindled such Devouring Fires, and
made such Fearful Desolations in the Earth, if he had not been Angry? It is not
for nothing that the Merciful God, who does not willingly afflict nor grieve
the Children of Men, has done all these things unto us; yea, and sometimes
with a Cloud has Covered himself, that our prayer could not pass through.

P. 90. c. 1. Inordinate Passions, finful Hearts and Hatreds, and that among
Church Members themselves, who abound with evil Surmisings, uncharitable and
unrighteous, Censures, Backbitings, hearing, and telling Tales. -- Moreover,
the Sword, Sickness, Poverty, and almost all the Judgments, which have been
upon New England are mentioned in the Scripture as the woeful fruit of that Sin
c. 2. and the Lord has threatened for that Transgression, to give his People
into the hands of their Enemies, and that their Dead Bodies should be for Meat
unto the Fowls of Heaven, and to the Beasts of the Earth, which Judgments have
been verified upon us.

P. 91. C. 1. God by a Continued Series of Providence, for many Years one after
another, has been Blasting the Fruits of the Earth in a great measure, and
this Year more abundantly, etc.

P. 97, c. 1. This poor Land has labored under a long Series of Afflictions
and Calamities, whereby we have suffered successively in all our precious and
pleasant things, and have seen the Anger of the Righteous God against us,
^^^ressed in Characters, which ought to be as Terible, as they must needs be
Visible unto us.

P. 99. c. 1. Being also awakened, by the most heavy Judgments of Heaven, under
which the Country has been weltring and wasting for many latter Years to
suspect, lest in the Hearts and Lives of us in particular there may be found
some of those accursed things which have brought upon the Land such a long
variety of fore Calamity.

Book 6. p. 14. c. 1. New England has been a Country signalized with Mischiefs
done by Thunders as much as perhaps most in the world. If things that are
Smitten by Lightning were to be esteemed Sacred, this were a Sacred Country,
Rarely a Summer passes without some strokes from the Thunders on the Persons or
Houses, or Cattle of our People: (Col. 2.) to enumerate the Instances of
Damages done by Thunders in this Land, Houses fired, Cattle slain, Trees pulled
a-pieces, Rocks pulverized, Bricks vitrify'd, and Ships mortified, would be to
fill a Volume.

P. 28. c. 2. It may be said about the young Men of New England, as it was of
Old said about the Young Men of Israel, in Psalm. 78.63, The Fire consumed their
Young Men. -- Behold O our young Folks, the Earth, and the Sea, and the Pit,
have been terribly Swallowing up your Brethren. -- Young People, O that you
would suitably lay to Heart the dreadful Judgments of God, which are consuming
of your Generation among us: Behold, vain Youths, behold how the wasting
Judgments of God have been upon you, till we cry out, The Curse has devoured
our Land, and few young men are left. Know you not, that when our young Men
have been pressed into the Wars, they have been but numbered for the Slaughter,
and brought forth for the Murderer? Know you not, that our Young Men, hoping to
mend their Condition at Sea, have but Sailed the sooner to their Long Home, in
running abroad? Know you not, that the Angels of Death have struck our Young
Folks with the Arrows of Death, in Epidemical Sicknesses? Know you not, that
one strange Casualty after another brings many of our most hopeful Young Folks
to an Untimely End? And, Oh! how doleful, doleful Things have our Young People
seen, when they have been Captives in the Hands of barbarous Infidels? The
Cannibals of the East have hideously Tormented them: and as far off as the
scorching Tents of Africa they have been fainting under the bitter Servitude of
Mahometans.

Page 29. ( alias 37.) c. 2. Take a due and a deep Notice I beseech you, of the
notable Judgments with which we have seen the Contempt of the Glorious Gospel
Revenged by the God of Glory; we have seen the Gospel, or the Glad Tidings of
Salvation by the Lord Jesus Christ, for miserable Sinners, Graciously offered;
we have seen the Offer of this Gospel most Ungratefully Refused; but of this
Refusal, what Event have we seen? Truly a very Terrible Event.

Book VII. p. 47. c. 2. Heaven saw more Blood must be drawn from the Colonies,
before Health could be restored to them -- until the Flame of War was Raging
all over the whole Massachuset-Colony.

P. 51. c. 2. They stripped these Unhappy Prisoners, and caused them to run the
Gantlet, and whipped them after a cruel and bloody Manner; they then threw hot
Ashes upon them; and cutting off Collops of their Flesh, they put Fire into
their Wounds, and so with exquisite, leisurely, horrible Torments roasted them
out of the World?

P. 56. c. 2. But it must, after all, be confessed, that we have had one Enemy
more Pernicious to us than all the res;t, and that is our own backsliding
Heart, which has plunged the whole Country into so wonderful a Degeneracy, that
I have sometimes been discouraged from Writing the Church History of the
Country. -- And since this Degeneracy has obtained so much among us, the Wrath
of Heaven has raised up against us a Succession of other Adversaries, and
Calamities, which have cast the Land into great Confusions, to rescue us from
which, the jealous Kindness of Heaven has not made such quick Descents as in
former times -- God knows what will be the End.

P. 106. c. 1. That the Judgments of God, under which we have been Languishing
for Ten Years together, are a sort of a Book, put into our Hands, a Book indeed
all written in Blood; a Book yet full of divine Lessons for us.

C. 2 In this War we have seen the fruitful Land of almost one whole Province,
and another whole Country, turned into Barrenness; Doubtless not without
Provocations, of Wickedness in them who dwell therein:

P. 107. c. 1. And I must herewithal say, Come, behold the Works of the Lord,
what Desolations he has made in that Land. -- The Gadareens of old were loath to
have any thing of Christ in their Coast; and anon comes a Roman War, which
distressed all the Land, but the woeful Town of Gadara was the very first Town
besieged in that War, and sad things were done unto it. --

I would never have told you, that some young Men, twenty Years Old, in this
Land, never so much as once heard the Name of Christ in all their Lives, if I
did not think that the God of Heaven required us all to Mourn before him for
such a horrible thing in the Land.

P. 108. c. 1. The Sword by which we have been so Grievously harrassed, has
been in the Hands of God; and if our Father had not been very Angry, would he
have taken a Sword into his Hands? We are Blind before Lightning, we are Deaf
unto Thunder, If we do not sensibly perceive the Anger of God, in the
Tremendous Rebukes that we have suffered; and we are unaccountably and
inexcusably Stupid, If we do not Enquire what means the Heat of this Anger: It
was once the Commination of God, in Ezekiel. 7.24.27. I will bring the worst of
the Heathen, and they shall possess their Houses, and the Hands of the People
of the Land shall be Troubled; such Trouble has come upon us from the worst of
the Heathen: But what was the cause of all? It follows, I will do unto them
after their way, and I will judge them according to their deserts, and they
shall knew that I am the Lord. It is but seasonable for us now to look back
upon our own way, and see how much we have deserved all this Vengeance, by
going out of the way.

P. 110. c. 1. Inasmuch as all Ranks of Men have smarted under it; yea, it has
fetched Blood from all Ranks of Men among us.

P. 111. c. 1. But our young Men are they whom the Fury of War has been
chiesfly poured out upon. Alas, alas, for our young Men, they are the Persons
with whom it seems to have been the very Errand of this War, to manage the
terrible Controversy of God, New England sets a peculiar accent of Grief upon
this, among all her Lamentations, The Lord has trodden under foot my mighty Men
in the midst of me; he has called an Assembly against me to crush my young
Men. -- Yea, those Babylonians have dashed out the Brains of our little-Ones
against the Stones; and our little Ones have been hideously whipped unto Death
by those merciless Tigers, whose tender Mercies are Cruel

C. 2. Several Hundreds of our Neighbors, first and last, have been carried
into Captivity, by the most beastly and bloody Things that ever were the Shape
of Men in the World: New England makes that Moan, in Lam. 1. 18. Hear I pray
you, all People, and behold my Sorrow: My Virgins and my Young Men are gone
into Captivity. But, Oh! the prodigious and stupendous things that they have
undergone in this Captivity: What weary Days and Nights have rouled over the
miserable Captives, while they have not had a bit of Meat allowed 'em, except
what a Dog would hardly meddle with, while they have sometimes been pinched
with the bitter Frost, without Rags to cover their Nakedness; and sometimes
been parched with the burning Heat without any Cordial or Shelter to refresh
them; while they have seen their nearest Relations torn in pieces alive before
their Eyes; and yet those Eyes afraid of dropping a Tear at the mournful Sight;
yea, while they have every Hour looked when they should be themselves roasted
alive, to make a Feast and a Sport for the Horrid Cannibals. Need I tell you
that those Devils Incarnate, have tied their Captives unto Trees, and first
cutting off their Ears, have made them to eat their own Ears, and then have
broyled their whole Bodies with slow Fires, dancing the mean while about them,
and cutting out Collops of their Flesh, till with lingering Tortures they have
martyred them to Death: Such things have been done by the Inhamane Salvages
upon our Captives, that it is a sort of Inhumanity barely to mention them.

P. 112. c. 1. We must all ascribe it unto the mere Sovereign Mercy of God,
that we are not every one of us broken in the place of Dragons, as these
desolate Captives were. -- In the WAR that has been upon us, Whosoever is wise may
observe, a Work, a strange Work of Heaven, as it were devising of ways very
strangely, to distress all sorts of People, in all sorts of Interests. Truly
the very Character of our Calamity has all along been this, the great God has
written still upon it; we may read upon it, in a very legible Character, those
words in Jer. 18.11. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I frame Evil against you, I
devise a device against you; it has been as if ways had been deliberately and
exquisitely studied, and as if with much Contrivance plotted, for to bring us
all within the Reach of the General Calamity: We have now languished through Ten
Years, which have been the saddest, and the darkest, and the stormiest Years
that ever we saw: If the History of these Ten Years were to be written, I am
thinking what should be the Title; truly it might be Entitled, as Ezekiel's
Roll was, Lamentation, and Mourning, and Woe; yea, you shall now have the
History of these Ten Years written for you, I Will give it you in as expressive
words as can be, even in those words, 2 Chronicles. 15.5, 6. In those times there
was no Peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in; but great Vexations
were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries, for God did vex them with all
Adversity, etc. See more in the Book aforesaid, p. 183.

Ibid c. 2. Truly the Ten Years of our War have set many Ten Hundreds of
Persons a mourning over their dead Friends, we have seen every where the
Mourners go about the Streets: -- I say, nothing of that am^zing time, when the
Evil Angels in a preternatural and in an unparall'd manner, being let loose
among us, God cast upon us the fierceness of his Anger, and Wrath, and
Indignation, and Trouble, -- for our Apostasy ( -- the very Sin of the Evil
Spirits.) The God of Heaven a while a-go turned in the Armies of Hell upon us;
and in that matchless Dispensation of God, we underwent a bitter Destruction
from the Poison of the Serpents of the Dust. But there are other points not a
few, wherein the Great God has heaped Mischiefs upon us, and fulfilled unto
us, that holy Commination, Ezekiel. 7.26. Mischief shall come upon Mischief: What
shall I say, while the Lord of Hosts has been against us? The Hosts of the
Lord have been so too, all the Elements have, as it were, been up in Arms
against us.

P. 113. c. 1. Again, you may observe, that the Harvest has once and again
grievously failed in these Years, and we have been struck through with the
terrible Famine. -- The very Course of Nature has been altered among us; a
lamentable Cry, for Bread, Bread, has been heard in our Streets; the Towns
that formerly supplied other places with Grain, had now been famished, if other
places had not sent in a supply to them; and had a black Prospect of being
famished notwithstanding that supply: Once more, you may observe, that the Sea
has, in these Years, been swallowing up our Neighbors, and their Estates, far
more than the Sword of the Wilderness. -- No part of the English Nation has
been more frequently or sensibly preyed upon by the French, than what has gone
out of New England, ever since the WAR began; I say, has this been enough? No,
the Wrath of God said, This is not enough. I Appeal to you that have been
Owners of Vessels, or Sailors in them, whether Horrible Shipwracks have not
been multiplied since the WAR began. -- Ah, Lord! how many of us have shed
Rivers of Tears over our dead Friends, that have been buried in the Ocean.

Moreover, you may observe, that in these Years, those very Things which were
intended for our Defense, have oftentimes been so much improved for our Damage,
that it was hard for us to say, which was the Greater, the Defense, or the
Damage which we had from them. It was a lamentable time with the Jews, when
that Curse came upon them, That which should have been for their Welfare, Let
it become a Trap, and pour cut thine Indignation upon them. Truly the
Indignation of God has been poured out upon us in this Fruit of the Curse, no
less frequently than sensibly. --

Finally, you may observe what untimely Ends, and what surprising Fales, have
come upon our Sons, in these Years of the Wrath of the right Hand of the most
High.

C. 2. Truly, Sirs, our time of War, has in various ways of Mortality, been
imbittered with this Remark, The Fathers have been burying their Sons all the
Country over; many of us have had our Sons, even those very Sons, of whom we
said, This same shall Comfort us; we have had them violently snatched away from
us, and cropp'd in the very Flower of their Youth, and they have left us
deploring, Oh! my Son, with all my Heart could I have dyed for thee, my Son, my
Son. --

Thus in our long War we have seen those Changes on all Hands, and in all
Kinds, which have witnessed against us the dreadful Indignation of God, -- And
a wise Observation of these things will cause you to see, That the War which
has been upon us has been a War of God: The Indians have been but a small
part of those Armies which the Great God has been bringing out against us for
ten Years together; and we may conclude, that all the Land have been more or
less concerned in those Crimes, for which the Almighty God has been with these
Armies managing his Controversy with us.

P. 114. c. 1. Ah! New England, thy Father has been spitting in thy Face with
most humbling Dispensations; God has been bringing of thee down to sit in the
Dust; when the War commenced, New England might say, My God will humble me. --
Should a Child of yours be Refractory, and you, Sir, should bid a Negro, or an
Indian-Slave, in your House, Go, take that Child, and scourge him till you
fetch Blood of him? Surely this would be to humble him unto the uttermost. Thus
does thy God humble thee, O New England! by putting thee over into the vile
Hands of those, which are not a People, but a foolish Natition.

Again, Who are they, by whose means we are now crying out, We are brought very
low? -- Jer. 37.10. -- Truly we had Smitten the whole Army of the Indians that
fought against as, three and twenty Years ago, from one End of the Land unto
the other, only there were left a few wounded Men among them, in the Eas;t, and
now they have Risen up, every Man, and have set the whole Country on Fire;
certainly a more humbling Matter cannot be related.

Moreover, is it not a very humbling thing, that when about an Hundred Indians
durst begin a War upon all thtse populous Colonies, an Army of a Thousand
English raised, must not kill one of them all; but instead thereof, more or our
Soldiers Perish by Sickness and Hardship, than we had Enemies in the World, Our
God has humbled us.

Is it not a very humbling Thing, that when the number of our Enemies
afterward increased, yet an handful of them should, for so many Summers
together continue our unconquered Spoylers, and put us to such vast Charges,
that if we could have bought them for an Hundred Pound an Head, we should have
made a saving Bargain of it? Our God has humbled us. Is it not a very humbling
thing, that we should have had several fair Opportunities to have brought this
War unto a final Period, but we should still, by some fatal Oversight, let slip
those Opportunities? Our GOD has humbled us

C. 2. Is it not a very humbling thing, that whatever Expeditions we have
undertaken, for the most part we have come off Losers, and indeed but plunged
our selves into deeper Straits by our Undertakings? Our GOD has humbled us. --

Is it not a very humbling Thing, that we should have Evil pursuing of us at
such a rate, that in other Lands afar off, and on the Exchange in London,
Strangers have made this Reflection, Doubtless New England is a Country in ill
Terms with Heaven? But so our God has humbled us.

What shall I say? Is it not a very humbling thing, that when Peace is restored
unto the whole English Nation, and when Peace is enjoyed by all America, poor
New England should be the only Land still embroiled in War? But thus, our God,
thou have humbled us; and shown us great and fore Troubles, and brought us down
into the depth of the Earth. -- But if you will wisely Observe these things,
you will now get up, and sanctify your selves, and put away the accursed thing
from among you: O New-English Israel! -- After such humbling Things as have
befallen us, God forbid that it should be said of us as in Jer. 44.10. They are
not humbled, even unto this Day.

As it is much to be doubted they are not, by their persis;ting in their Abuses
and Revilings against the People of God, to the uttermost of their Power, to
this very Day, as appears by his History, and other scurrilous Books, that he
and others have written of late times, against the Truth and its Friends, whom
they still make the People of their Indignation, which is no Sign of any True
Repentance of their Murders and Persecutions.

Now the Query that naturally arises from all these Premises, is, Why
New England should be so Afflicted and Punished, as they have been, more than
other Countries, if they had not provoked the Lord in a greater manner than
many other Countries have done, in respect of Persecution? Let them not think
to Excuse themselves by that in Luke 13.2. for that will not serve their turns,
inasmuch as it is plain, they have been greater Sinners, in that respect, than
most, yea, than any called Protestants, that I know of.

Let them look upon all the English Plantations round about them, and see if
they can find any Compare, as to Persecution, or the Judgments that have
followed; I say, that New England, above all others, should be a Land of
Judgment, and not of Mercy, must needs Argue, that there is a Cause for it,
more than Ordinary.

I doubt not, but most other Countries are Guilty of other Sins, as well as
Them, (Except Hypocris;ie and Persecution to that Degree as they are) and yet
they have not been punished in so Eminent a Manner as New England; which shows
that Pers;ecution is a Capital Sin; and that though C. M. has confessed largely
their other Sins, as well as their Judgments; and also, in pretense, pressed an
Enquiry into the Cause of it, as if there might be some further Cause of their
Affliction, than they have yet found out; yet its plain they have not yet
pitched on the Right, or confessed the Chief Sins of it, viz: Their Persecutions,
and Murders; and that the accursed things, as he says, still remains among
them. -- These (as Sir WALTER RALEIGH says) were the lovers of other Men's
Miseries; and Misery found them out.

And I cannot but observe, that most of those Judgments that have come upon
them, have been since they put our Friends to Death; as any may see, if they
will peruse Inc. Mather's History of Remarkable Providence, and this Cotton's
History of New England, wherein the Reader will find very few, if any, before
the Year 1659. the time of putting the first of our Friends to Death, or at
least before the beginning of their Persecution; which still renders it and
them the more Criminal, by the Judgments that have followed; of which the Loss
of their Charter (having forfeited it, by denying of Appeals to England, in
case of Life, and Trials by Juries, etc. according to it) is none of the least;
of the Consequences of which, he gives such a dismal Prospect.

Book II. p. 19. 20. Which is the more to be taken notice of, in that they
could never obtain the Restoration of it, even in the Reign of King WILLIAM
(though so many others were Restored) and so they must come to submit to the
Fate of other Persecutors, to be Ruled over by others in their turns (for
Persecution and Tyranny is commonly Short-lived) who would have Ruled, and
Tyrannized over others; which, with all the other Judgments that have followed
them, above-recited, makes up a Scence of Tragedies, that I have hardly Read of
the like in any Story, but that of the Jews, for Murdering CHRIST the SON OF
GOD, that came to Save them; the Consequences of which was so Dismal and
Deplorable, that one would Think it should have been sufficient Warning to
Deter any from following their Steps, in Persecuting His Followers. But as it
was then, he that was Born after the Fles;h, Persecuted him that is Born after
the Spirit, ever so it is now, Gal. 4.29. And all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. For unto you it is given,
in the behalf of Christ, not only to Believe on Him, but also to Suffer for His
sake, Phil. 1.29. Nevertheless, it is a Righteous Thing with God, to Recompense
Tribulation to them that Trouble you; and to them who are Troubled, Rest, 2
These. 1.6.

These Things I do not Write, I can Truly say, that I Rejoice in them, (...) to
Vaunt over them; For I am Heartily Sorry for the Occasion, and them that gave
it; nor should I have brought them up, or mentioned it against them, did they
not still Appear in the same Spirit: And had not the said C. Mather still
Endeavored to set himself as an Adversary against GOD's Truth and People, by
Abusing of us as he has done; so that it is justly Improved against them, as a
Check to their Envy. And I hope none that are of a better Mind, will be
Offended at my plain Dealing with them; for to use his own Terms, The Catholic
Spirit of Communion wherewith it is Written, and the Liberty which I have taken
to tax the Schismatical Impositions and Persecutions of a Party, who have
always been as real Enemies to the English Nation, as to the Christian and
Protestant Interest. So that it is only against such that it is intended; and to
lay it before them whom it does concern, that they may come to a sight of their
Sin, and Repent, that the LORD may show them Mercy, and remove his Judgments
from them, which I truly desire, if it be the Will of the LORD; and that others
also may behold, and take notice of the Judgments that have come upon them, for
their Persecution and Cruelty to the LORD's People, and may Glorify GOD and
say, G^^^^ and Mavelous are thy Works, LORD, GOD ALMIGHTY; Just and True are
thy Ways, thou King of Saints: Who shall not Fear thee, Oh LORD! and Glorify
thy Name -- for thy Judgments are made manifest? Rev. 15, 3, 4.

And that they and all others may take Warning, and Hear, and Fear, and do no
more so Wickedly, which I truly desire for their sakes: For though I am an utter
Enemy to all Persecution, yet a Friend to all Men.

J. W.
London, the 10th of the 9th Month, 1702.
The Contents.
A Message to the General Court at Boston, May, 1754, Page 1 To the Elders and
Messengers of the Churches in Connecticut, Page 15 Concering the Sabbath, Page
29 Concerning Swearing, Page, 49 Concerning Baptism, Page 51 Concerning the
Civil Government, Page 56 Concerning Jacob Johnsons Answer, in Page 1 to 29,
shall leave to the Judgment of the Readers. In Answer to said Johnson's saying
Four Quakers being put to Death for reres;ie, (...) Law of Banishment, Page W.
Robinson's Paper to the Court, Page 5 Concerning the Sabbath, Page 15
Concerning Swearing, etc. Page^^ Concerning Baptism, Page 18 Concerning Civil
Rulers, Page 20 Several Testimonies of the Quakers, taken out of a Book,
written by John Whiting, Page 29 C. Mather's Observations on New-England's
Troubles, Page 44 More Remarks by John Whiting, Page 68
ADVERTISEMENT.
FRiend Bolles, Corrected one Mistake, in his Copy (which he let me know of)
before 'twas Printed; viz. That the Savoy Confession, was Composed by those who
put the Quakers to Death, at Boston; Instead of which, he put was agreed to. He
also Moderated another (which he didn't let me know of, 'till his Performance,
and my Answer to it, were Published) viz. Instead of saying, he should prove
the whole Confession erroneous, etc. He put, he should prove the Confession so.
There is I confess, something that appears Ingenuous, and Commendable in these
Corrections, as far as they go: But then observe, he still continues
notwithstanding, to condemn the Confession, by the Lump; which carries an ill
Face enough; especially since he offers no Proof, or Evidence that I can see,
but only his say-so. He seems hardly willing to own a Christian Sabbath,
because Mia Sabbatoon in our Translation, is rendered First Day of the Week,
and not First-Day-Sabbath, as the Original speaks. Had he paid as much
Deference, to the Assemby that composed the Confession, as he seems to do to
the Translators of the Bible, we had found him undoubtedly pleading for, rather
than Cavelling at the Confession. He seems unwilling to believe, Swearing by
the Name of the Lord is Lawful; because Swearing by the Temple, by Heaven, etc.
is a kind of Swearing by GOD, the Form of which is forbidden. He says the
Prophecy, concerning the blessed state of the Church in the latter Day, Isai^
49.23. was fulfilled, in the Reduction of the Jews out of Babylon by Cyrus: But
who can poslibly believe it, that Reads and Compar's ver, 6. with the 22. of
the same Chapter? But enough: More might be said, if thought expedient,

By thy Friend, Jacob Johnson.
Groton, May 4th, 1756.
N. B. I have only had a few minutes sight (yesterday) of Friend Bolles's Reply
to Mine (at Mr. Green's Printing-Office) And although there were some Reflections
in it, I think deserve no Answer; yet I observed none, that appeared to me
Unanswerable; or Indeed that needs any farther Answer than what is already
given.


