A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE SYNOD of NEW YORK, CONVENED AT NEWARK, in
NEW JERSEY, September 30, 1756.

By AARON BURR, A. M. President of the College of NEW JERSEY.

Published by the DESIRE of the SYNOD.

ZECHA. xiv. 6, 7. And it shall come to pass, in that Day, that the Light shall
not be clear, nor dark; but it shall be one Day which shall be known to the
Lord; not Day, nor Night: But it shall come to pass, that at Evening Time, it
shall be Light. NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by H. GAIN, at the BIBLE and CROWN,
in Queen Street, between the Fly and Meal-Markets, 1756.

A SERMON, etc.
ISAIAH xxi. 11, 12. The Burden of DUMAH. He calls to me out of SEIR,
Watchman, What of the Night? Watchman, What of the Night? The Watchman said,
The Morning comes, and also the Night, if ye will enquire; enquire, ye;
return; come.


IT may doubtless, at first View, appear strange to my Brethren, that I have
chosen this obscure Passage of sacred Writ for your Entertainment; when it
might be expected, that the Dignity and Duties; the Comforts and Trials of the
ministerial Office should be explained, or the best Method of securing good
Discipline and sound Doctrine in the Church, laid open. These Subjects, I
confels, are highly proper to be insisted on, and should generally be the
Topics of our Discourse, on such Occasions as these. But, some dark
Apprehensions, as to the Times into which we are fallen, turned my Mind to this
Subject: And as it will lead our Thoughts to the present Dangers and Trials; to
the farther Prospects and Hopes relating to the Church of CHRIST, it will, I
imagine, when properly explained and applied, be thought not unsuitable for
those, who are assembled to consult its Welfare and Prosperity.

WHAT I shall attempt, is,

I. To explain the Woras, and illustrate the Prophesy, by such historical
Events, as seem to point out the Fulfillment of it, in its primary View.

II. Apply it to the State of the Church in general, and to the Times into
which we are fallen, in particular.

THIS enigmatical Prophesy, seems in its primary View, to denote some further
Calamity on the IDUMEANS, after the JEWS should be delivered from the Darkness
they were then under; that while the Morning arose to the one, the Night should
be continued to the other. It is called the Burden of DUMAH, because it brings
sad and dark Tidings, what would prove an heavy Burden, hard to be born. DUMAH
here, by a Contraction not unusual in the sacred Writings, seems evidently to
be put for EDOM; and so for the Country IDUMEA, where the EDOMITES dwelt. This
appears plain, by SEIR's being mentioned as the Place from whence the Voice
came, which was that mountainous Part of IDUMEA, that lay next to the Land of
CANAAN. The SEPTUAGINT therefore well translate it, To' Horamatees Idumaias, i.
e. the Vision of IDUMEA. In this prophetic Scene, there is one from that
Country introduced, as addressing the Prophet in great Earnestness, about the
State of the Night, or that State of Affliction and Oppression, which both the
JEWS and IDUMEANS were under. He calls (or there is one that calls, or
cries) to me out of SEIR. The Word must be taken collectively, not denoting a
particular Person, q. d. there is a Cry, or the Voice of these that cry from
that Country; this appears from the Answer of the Prophet, If ye will enquire,
etc. It Is observed that the original Word Karah, has an Emphasis in it, and
denotes the Cry of Men in Anguish and Distress, impatiently waiting to see the
End of their Calamity, and the Dawn of the Morning of their Deliverance. This
shows a Beauty in the scenical Representation; as the Prophet is on the
Watchtower among the JEWS, at a great Distance from Mount Seir, the Voice must
be loud, in order to be heard. The Question follows, Watchman, What of the
Night, or from, or concerning the Night? The Conjecture of COCCEIUS, and some
other learned Commentators, that the Voice is directed to GOD the Father, under
the Character of a Watchman, because he is styled the Keeper of ISRAEL; or to
the SON, who is represented as the Shepherd of his People, I think groundless.
It is not supposable, that the Idumeans had any such distinct Notion of the
Father or the Son, as to address one or the other by this Title. -- To apply it
to the Prophet himself, seems much more natural; the Prophets being well known
by the Character of Watchmen, as pointing out the Design and Duties of their
Office: And thus they are frequently styled in sacred Writ, ISAI, lxii, 6.
I have set Watchmen on thy Walls, O JERUSALEM, I have made thee, says GOD to
EZEKIEL, a Watchman to the House of ISRAEL. EZEKIEL. iii, 17.
The Character is taken from those that are set to guard a City, or on a
Watchtower to descry approaching Danger, and give the Signal: And they ought
to be Men of Courage, that will not be frighted at the Shaking of a Leaf;
faithful, who will not betray their Trust; vigilant, that will not suffer the
Enemy to come by Surprise while they are asleep; quick sighted, to spy the
Danger; constant and unwearied in their Attendance on the Duties of their
Station; and being continually awake, it might be expected could readily give
the Hour of the Night. It Is easy to see how applicable this is, not only to the
Prophets, but to all the Ministers of the Gospel, who are set as Watchmen, on
the Walls of GOD's Jerusalem; whose Duty and Business it is, to watch over the
Heritage of the Lord; to give seasonable, plain and faithful Warning to Saints
and Sinners. The various remarkable Dispensations of GOD to his Church, were
revealed to the Prophets; they foretold the desolating Judgments that were
brought not only on the Jews, but the neighboring Nations; knew something of
the Time, Manner and Duration of the dark Night they had to pass through; and
so might properly be enquired of as to this Matter -- Watchman, What of the
Night? What have you discovered as to the State of the Night? How far is it
advanced? What remains? Do you discern any Signs of the Morning? Any Signs that
the present Scene of Darkness will soon be over? The Question is undoubtedly
not about a natural but metaphorical Night, -- that State of Calamity and
Distress the Jews and Idumeans were under by the Assyrians or Babylonians; or,
that dark Dispensation of the Law, the End of which was then expected, and
earnestly desired. The Repetition of it, represents the Panic they were in;
their Distress, or rather their Impatience, for an Answer.

IT may perhaps seem strange at first View, that the Idumeans should make this
Inquiry. What had they to do with the Prophets or the divine Oracles? EPM, ii,
12.
Who were Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the
Covenant of Promise. -- But, the Difficulty will vanish, if we consider that
the Scheme of this Prophesy is emblematical and figurative. The Idumeans are
introduced here by the Prophet, as breathing after Deliverance under their
Calamities, and making such anxious Inquiries as it is natural to suppose a
People in their Situation would; and hearing that Deliverance was expected by
the Jewish Nation, it was natural for them to desire to know the Time and
Manner of it, in Hopes they also might Share in its Favor. -- To this may be
added -- That the eastern Nations had a Veneration for the Prophets of the GOD
of Israel, whose Fame was spread among them. And if we apply it to the then
dark State of the Church, an Enquiry respecting a more glorious Dispensation,
in which themselves, and all the gentile World were concerned, comes from them
with singular Propriety. Some suppose the Question put by way of Derision, but
I think without Foundation; had that been the Case, the Prophet would have
given them a very different Answer. They seem to have a Degree of Earnestness
about the Matter, and yet do not enquire with that Faith, and such religious
Views as they ought. This is evident from the Prophets reply. The Morning
comes, and also the Night, of ye will enquire; enquire, ye; return; come. (i.
e.) The Morning will be as dangerous as the Night, say some. Others translate
it, the Morning comes, and yet it is Night. i. e. Though there be a Deliverance
from present Calamities, yet it will be but partial; Light comes, but Darkness
will be intermixed with it; or according to our Translation, The Morning
comes, but the Night will soon succeed. It may mean, That though the Morning is
coming to the People of GOD, it would still be Night with the Idumeans. It Is
easy to see, that as Night is put for a State of Affliction, Day is a proper
Emblem of Joy and Comfort. If ye will enquire; enquire, ye; return; come. The
old English Translation under Henry the VIIIth, has it thus, If ye will enquire
indeed, and ask Questions in Earnest, enquire of GOD; first ask his Mercy, and
then come again, and you shall have a more favorable Answer, which seems not
far from the true Meaning.

As the Question, though not put with that Seriousness and Sincerity as it ought,
implied a Desire to know the Purpose of GOD relating to their present dark and
dismal Situation; the Answer seems to be to this Purpose, viz. Since you
Idumeans, in your distressed Condition, seem to come to yourselves, express a
Desire of returning to GOD, and knowing his Will concerning you, be in earnest
in the Matter, enquire with Hearts suitably affected, with the Dispensations of
divine Providence, with sincere Desires to know and comply with your Duty.
Return to the God of Israel, come into the Bosom and Communion of the Church;
since you are descended from Abraham, show yourselves to be his Children
indeed; come with Sincerity and Faith, to me and the other Prophets, to know
the Mind and Will of GOD, and be suitably prepared to meet him, when he shall
come forth against you. The Sum of what I have said is this: The neighboring
Notions, groaning under the same Oppression from the Assyrian and Babylonish
Princes, as the Jews were, though the peculiar People of GOD, and favored with
his true Prophets; the Idumeans are introduced, enquiring after the Duration,
and End of this common Calamity, in too careless a Manner, with too little
Reverence or religious Sense of the Divine Dispensation. They have for Answer,
That the Morning was coming, i. e. Light and Liberty to the Jews; but that the
Night still awaited them; i. e. their present Afflictions and spiritual
Darkness, would continue, while they maintained their present Temper of Mind
toward GOD, and remained Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel. He
therefore exhorts them to return to GOD, and enquire with a religious
Disposition, and right Views about this Matter.

THIS Interpretation may be illustrated by historical Events; either by
refering it to the common Calamities that befell the Jews and Idumeans, with
other neighboring Nations, under Senacherib King of Assyria; or to that which
afterward befell them under the Kings of Babylon. If to the former, the Morning
that arose to the Jews, must be the miraculous Deliverance granted them, by the
terrible Destruction of the Assyrian Army by an Angel. 2 Kings, xix. 35.
The like Deliverance not being granted to the Idumeans, with them it remained
Night. But, I rather suppose it may refer to the Babylonish Captivity, which
involved the Jews and Idumeans in one common Night of Calamity and Distress,
after which long Night, wherein the Church seemed as it were buried, a glorious
Morning arose to the Jews, from the Deliverance granted by Cyrus; while the
Idumeans continued in Darkness; as appears by Malachi, who lived after the
Return of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity; and describes the Idumeans as
impoverished, unable to return and rebuild their waste Places; being under the
peculiar Displeasure of Heaven. Mal. i. 1, 2, 3, 4.
We come now,

II. To another View in which this prophetic Description may be taken, and with
Propriety applied to some remarkable Periods in the Church.

As the Prophets were set as Watchmen, on the Walls of God's Jerusalem, to
publish his Designs of Mercy and Judgment to the Church and the World; such as
were concerned to know the Times and Seasons of God's favoring his Zion, would
naturally enquire at their Mouths, and as the Idumeans sprang originally from
the same Family with the Jews, and bordered upon them, they had doubtless some
acquaintance with their sacred Writings. Some Prophesies had a particular
Reference to them. It was foretold, that Edom should be a Possession, and Seir
a Possession of their Enemies Numb. xxiv, 18.
It is natural therefore to suppose, that the more thoughtful among them, were
looking for this Period, and being oppressed with Difficulties, were excited to
enquire after the Time when they should be delivered from their spiritual
Darkness, and united to the People of God. This Prophesy of Edom's being a
Possession of their Enemies, was in Part accomplished under the Asmonean
Family, when the Edomites were subdued by the Jews, many of them brought to
embrace their Religion, and their Country became their Possession. To this
Time, the Prophet may have a View, when it is supposed they would not neglect
the sacred Writings, but get some Acquaintance with those Prophesies, wherein
glorious Things were spoken of Zion, when the present dark and gloomy
Dispensation should be at an end, and the Gentiles partake of the same
Privileges with the Jews. This must excite in all who had any due Esteem for
spiritual Blessings, a Desire to be informed when the happy Era would arrive.
In this View, the Question, the Answer of the Watchman, his Admonition, to
return and continue their Enquiries with more Seriousness and better Views, all
appear natural and proper.

BY the Night, we may understand the obscure Dispensation they were then under,
which was ushered in with Blackness, Darkness, and a thick Tempest. It is
therefore called a Ministration of Death, and Condemnation, and proved so to
the carnal Jews, who rested in the Law graven on Stones, not looking to him who
was the End of it for Righteousness to all that believe.

THAT Ministration was indeed glorious, as it refered to, and pointed out the
Glories of the Gospel; but how divinely glorious soever it was in itself, yet
in Respect to the transcending Glory of that Dispensation of Light and Grace,
which it shadowed forth, it might be said to have no Glory; the Luster of it
was swallowed up by the surpassing Glory of the Gospel, as the dim Light of the
Moon and twinkling Stars, vanishes before the rising Sun. This Dispensation was
not only gloomy and dark, when compared to the superior Light of the Christian
Revelation, but was in a peculiar Manner so, by Reason of the Blindness,
Prejudices and Unbelief, of those to whom it was given; which is fitly
represented by the Vail Moses put on his Face while he delivered them the Law,
to cover its dazzling Brightness, which they could not behold. This Vail, the
Apostle expressly tells us, was on their Hearts 2 Cor. iii. 13, 14.
, so that they could not look to the End of that which was to be abolished.
They were as unable to behold the Mind of Moses in that Economy, as they were
his Face; when he turned to the Lord he took off the Vail; which implies, that
that Dispensation, as it came from God, and was revealed to him, was full of
Grace, and shone with a divine Luster; but when he conversed with the People he
had it on, for the internal Glories of his Ministration which were delivered in
Types and Figures of good Things to come, were rendered obscure and dark, by
the Blindness and Prejudices of their carnal Hearts. When they shall turn to
the Lord, at the blessed Period of their general Conversion, this Vail shall be
taken away, and they shall clearly see how the glorious Grace of the Gospel was
revealed under all the Types and Shadows of the Law. But, by Reason of the
Darkness of their Minds, and the obscure Manner in which Christ, and the
Blessings of his Kingdom, were then typified, the Church continued in a dark
and benighted State. There was indeed a Mixture of Light with that Darkness;
the Prophets were like so many shining Stars in the Church, and they had many
sure Words of Prophesy, to which they might give Heed; but it was only as to a
Light shining in a dark Place, till the Day Star appeared, and the glorious Sun
of Righteousness arose.

AND it is worthy Observation, that the Night was peculiarly gloomy, toward the
Close of this Dispensation, when the Darkness was much increased, by almost
continual Persecutions and Oppressions, from the Kings of Syria without; while
the internal Glories of it were greatly obscured, and almost wholly lost, by
those dangerous Corruptions in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship, which then
overspread the Jewish Church, and those scandalous Divisions into which it
fell.

IT was also eminently Night, with the gentile World, who being sunk into
deplorable Darkness, were given up to the most abominable Idolatry and vile
Affections. But as an Expectation of the Coming of the Messiah, the promised
Deliverer, began now to prevail and become general, it is not strange, that some
among the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, are represented, crying to the
Watchman, What of the Night? When will the Darkness of the present Dispensation
be over, and a Deliverer come out of Zion, to turn away Iniquity from Jacob?
When will those Times of Ignorance which God has hitherto winked at in the
gentile World, be at an End, and Light arise to those that now sit in the
Region of the Shadow of Death? How much of this dark Season is past? What yet
remains? When will the Day break by the Appearance of that glorious Person, who
is to be a Light to the Gentiles, and a Glory to God's People Israel? It might
be supposed, that the Watchmen who were enquiring and searching diligently,
what Manner of Time the Spirit in them did signify, when it testified before
Hand, the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow, could give an
Answer to such a Question, as the Time and Manner of his Appearance were so
clearly pointed out. They might see, that the Scepter was about to depart from
Judah, according to Jacob's Prophesy (...), 10.
. That Daniel's 70 Weeks, or 490 Years, were near expiring. And as it must be
during the Standing of the second Temple, to which he was suddenly to come, and
fill with his Glory, according to Malachi (...)
, it could not be long delayed. By these Hints, the Watchmen might know the
Night was far spent, and answer as in the Text, The Morning comes, the long
expected Day is at Hand. In this View of the Words, the Watchman's Answer, that
the Morning comes, may point out the Light and Joy brought to the World by the
Appearance of the Son of God. The Day began to dawn under the Ministry of John
the Baptist. He was indeed a burning and a shining Light, compared with the
other Prophets; but was not the true Light, though like the Morning Star he
ushered in the Day. But, when the Sun of Righteousness, arose with Healing
under his Wings, he diffused Light, Life, and Joy, through a dark, dead, and
chearless World. The Shadows of the former Dispensation and the thick Clouds of
heathenish Ignorance and Superstition, fled before him, as the Darkness of the
Night before the rising Sun. It was prophesied of him, that his going forth,
should be prepared as the Morning. (...). LUKE ii, 11. Rev. xii, 1.
As the natural Sun in the Morning spreads Joy and Gladness, through the wide
Creation, so did CHRIST through a lost and ruined World. The Angel brings the
News of his Birth, as Tidings of great Joy to all People, The Gospel preached
in his Name, was a ravishing Sound to all that heard and received it; Like the
Morning Light, it spread far and wide; grew brighter and brighter, toward a
perfect Day. It had free Course, and was glorified; triumphing over all the
Opposition of Earth and Hell.

WITH what divine Luster and Beauty did the Church shine, in this Morning of
her Days, when the pure Doctrines of the Gospel, were raught without that
corrupt Mixture, which the Pride and Ignorance of Men have since introduced.
She was as a City set on a Hill, and Multitudes both Jews and Gentiles rejoiced
in her Light. She seemed to answer the Description given of her, by ST. JOHN,
in his prophetic Vision; where she is represented, as clothed with the Sun,
having the Moon under her Feet, and a Crown of 12 Stars on her Head; a
beautiful Image, expressing, in a lively Manner, the Glory, Honor, and Dignity
of the Church. There appeared in her Members, In this early Age, such genuine
Piety, and fervent Devotion; such lively Hope, and strong Faith; such warm and
unfeigned Love to one another; such Meekness, and undissembled Humility, such
Heavenly-mindedness and Deadness to the World; such universal Holiness, and
Purity of Life; as made them shine like Lights in the World. Religion then
appeared amiable and alluring, as exemplified in the Lives of Professors; which
tended greatly to the propagating the Gospel. The Brightness of this Morning
was soon obscured. Many Errors of pernicious Influence crept into the Church,
even while under the Conduct of inspired Men: But after the Apostles Decease,
Men of corrupt Minds, began with more Freedom, to propagate their dangerous
Doctrines, and licentious Practices, bringing swift Destruction on themselves,
and their Followers. Toward the Close of the first, and during the second, and
third Centuries, the Church was greatly infested with Persons, who advanced the
most absurd and dangerous Opinions, tending to the Destruction of all natural
and revealed Religion, -- the Nicolaitans, various Sects of the Gnostics,
Corinthians, Valentinians, Marcionites, and Manichaeans, with a Train of other
Heresies, who appeared in the early Ages of the Church, venting many impious
Notions about God and Christ; the Origin of Good and Evil; the sacred Writings,
and the Way of Salvation by Christ; to the great Reproach and Hindrance of the
Gospel. Some making GOD the Author of 5th, others denying the Unity of the
Godbend; some the Divinity, and many the Humanity of CHRIST; while others even
blasphemously pretended to be the Savior of the World themselves. What added
to the Seandal of their Errors, the vilest Debaucheries, -- the most abominable
Crimes were countenanced and practiced, under the Cloak of Religion, which the
Enemies of Christianity, were malicious enough to impute, however unjustly, to
all its Professors. While the Church was thus darkened, corrupted, and
exceedingly sandalised by Heresies within; The was almost continually harrassed
with violent Oppressions and cruel Persecutions, under the heathen Emperors
from without; which continued with but little Intervals of Peace and Rest,
during the three first Centuries. Though there was, in those early Ages of
Christianity, much spiritual Light, and plentiful Communications of Divine
Grace; yet during the ten general Persecutions, which so quickly succeeded one
another, it might well be called Night; when compared to that State of external
Peace and Prosperity, which the Church shall enjoy in the latter Days, etc with
Respect to the glorious Diffusion of Gospel Light, which may then be expected.

AT the Close of the third, and Beginning of the fourth Century, the Church was
reduced to the last Extremity, by a Number of cruel Periecutors, who seemed to
combine together, for the utter Destruction of the Christian Name and Cause.
Galerius, Diocletian, Maximin, and Maxentius, acted as if they vied with one
another, in the unheard of Cruelties, and monstrous Barbarities, exercised
toward the innocent Disciples of CHRIST: But the Churches Extremity, is GOD's
Opportunity; He begins to make bare his Arm; visibly to espouse the Cause of
his distressed People; and to recompense Vengeance to those that afflicted
them. Galerius, being seized with an incurable and intolerable Disease, expires
in the Midst of most bitter Anguish and Torment. Diocletian, forced to resign
his Authority, oppressed with a Load of Guilt, groans and sighs away his
miserable Life. Maximin, after being defeated by Licinius, attempts to put an
End to his own Life; but dies a lingering Death, amidst the most amazing
Torments, acknowledging his Guilt, in having persecuted the Christians. In this
dark Period, GOD also raises up that great Deliverer and Defender of his
Church, Constantine; who, A.D. 312, gains a complete Victory over that cruel
Tyrant and grand Persecutor, Maxentius; which gave rest to the Church in the
West: And the Death of Licinius, which happened soon after, who was first a
Favourer, but afterward a cruel Persecutor of the Christians, seemed to put an
End to all their Troubles: They enjoyed free Liberty every where. --
Constantine ascribes the Glory of all his Victories, to the God and Father of
our Lord, JESUS CHRIST. And as a Token of Gratitude, gives public Countenance
to the Christian Religion; secures it by Edicts and Laws; crects Schools;
builds and endows Churches; bestows many Immunities and Privileges on the
Clergy, and distinguishes them with many public Marks of Honor and Respect.
Thus the Darkness which had overspread the Church, began to scatter, and the
Morning to appear. The Gospel had free Course and was glorified; there was
opened an effectual Door, which no Man was allowed to shut. A delightful Scene
seemed now to open on the Church, and looked like the Beginning of a bright and
glorious Day. Many had raised Expectations, that the happy Period was now come,
when the Kingdoms of this World, would become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and his
Christ: But alas! how different did the Event prove. This Morning was soon
overcast, and succeeded by a dark and dismal Night. The Honors, Dignities and
Riches conferred on the Clergy, and the Church, introduced Luxury, Pride and
Ignorance, with a long Train of dangerous Consequences. About this Time, the
Arian Heresy sprung up, and spreading itself over a great Part of the Christian
Church, proved destructive to the Faith once deliverea to the Saints, threw the
Church into great Confusions, and produced very sore Persecutions: The Emperors
favoring sometimes the Arian, and sometimes the orthodox Party; which brought
infinite Scandal on the Christian Name, and caused the Enemy to blaspheme.

SOON after Christianity had spread over a great Part of the Roman Empire,
under Protection of the Government; the most terrible Desolation, was brought
on the Western Empire, by the northern barbarous Nations, viz. the Goths,
Vandals, Almains, Sarmatians, Picts and Scots; who seemed to conspire together
for its utter Ruin, and for a long Time continued wasting, burning, and
destroying all before them. About A.D. 410, Alaricus the Goth, sacked and
plundered Rome; about Fifty-five Years after which, it was again plundered, and
burnt by Gensericus, the Vandal. Soon after, it met with the same Fate froth
Richomerus 472; twice by Totila; and again by Attila, King of the Huns, who was
above all the Rest, a sore Scourge, in the Hand of Providence, to the
degenerate Christians of that Day.

WHILE the Empire was in this dreadful Contusion, by those barbarous Nations,
gross Ignorance began to overspread the Christian World; for, by the Ravages
they committed, Schools were dissipated, Ministers banished, and Learning
buried. Those who were then on the Stage, being soon wasted with the Sword and
Age; the rising Generation grew up in lamentable Ignorance. The most indeed of
the Rulers of those barbarous Nations embraced Christianity; but being very
Ignorant, became an easy Prey to the Pride and Policy of the corrupt and
degenerate Clergy of the Day. This Opportunity the Bishop of Rome improved, to
set himself up as the Head of the Church; the Successor of ST. PETER; CHRIST's
Vicar on Earth; and found it but too easy a Matter to impose on those weak
Princes, and an ignorant People, and thus to introduce those gross Corruptions,
Superstitions, and false Doctrines, which have since proved so fatal to the
Church. Thus Antichrist began to be revealed, and gradually grew up to that
Height of Wickedness, which he afterward discovered; exalting himself above
all that is called God. The Darkness of this Night, brought on the Church, by
Ignorance, Superstition, and the abominable Corruptions of Popery, were greatly
increased by the Rise of that false Prophet and grand Impostor Mahomet, who
made his Appearance, A. D. 606; and notwithstanding the People of Mecca,
attempted to crush the Impostore in the Bud, yet, A.D. 615, it began to spread;
for having by an apostate Jew, and Nestorian Monk, composed his Alcoran, and
deluded his Followers, with a Notion of his being raised up by God, to
institute a new Religion; he teaches them, that it is to be propagated by the
Sword, and that it is meritorious to die for it.... By this Means, he soon
brought all Arabia into his Power; and his Followers (who, from their pretended
Descent from, Sarah, Abraham's Wife, were called Saracens) soon overrun the
greatest Part of Asia, and began to spread themselves exceeding fast in Europe,
till their memorable Defeat by Charles (...), A. D. 734.

THE Miseries brought on the Christian Church, by the Spread of this Impostore,
were exceeding great. The glorious Light of the Gospel, which began to be
obscured, with the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, seemed as if
it would have been wholly extinguished. By this they brought such Ignorance and
Error, Deceit, Violence and Slavery, where ever they came, that it seemed as if
the bottomless Pit had been opened, and Salan an the Head of the Powers of
Darkness, come forth, according to the prophetic Description of the Rise of
this Impostore, Rev. ix. 2. And be opened the bottomless Pit, and there arose a
Smoke out of the Pit, as the Smoke of a great Furnace, and the Sun and Air were
darkened by Reason of the Smoke of the Pit, and cut of the Smoke Locusts come,
which fitly enough describes the Milery and Woe, stupid Ignorance and
Superstition, which every where attended the Progresss of the Mohammedan
Religion. The coming up of the Locusts, and Destruction they make where ever
they go, emphatically represents the amazing and destructive Progress of the
Saracens.

THIS dark and dismal Night, brought on the Church by the Rise of Popery, on
the one Hand, and the Mohammedan Impostore on the other, continued for a long
Time with but a little glimmering of Gospel Light, among a few that kept the
Faith; Religion and Learning seemed likely to be banished from the World. But
at the Close of the 15th, and Beginning of the 16th Centuries, the Day began to
dawn, by a glorious Reformation, which had been attempted, and struggled for,
by Wickliff, in England; the Waldenses and Albigenses, in Frances and John
Huss, in Germany, long before; But was now carried on by Luther, under the
Protection of the Elector of Saxony, with surprising Success, in many Parts of
Germany; who was joined by Melancton, and other noble Reformers; whilst Calvin,
at Geneva, Zwinglius and Farellus, with a Train of faithful Witnesses for the
Truth, who appeared about this Time, were strenuously supporting, and
vigorously carrying on, (though with some small Difference, in lesser Matters)
the same glorious Cause. The Light of the Gospel seemed for a Season to shine
brighter and brighter, spread far and wide in Spite of all the Methods the
Popish Party made use of, by Bulls, Decrees of Councils, and the most unheard
of Cruelties, to stop and suppress it. The Pope's Authority began very fast to
decline. The Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the northern Kingdoms
of Denmark and Sweden, with great Numbers in France, Hungary and Bohemia, all
received the Reformation, and disclaimed any Subjection to the Kingdom of the
Beast.

THESE Things appeared like the Beginning of a joyful Day, and many were ready
to think, the glorious Things spoken of Zion, in the latter Days, were now at
Hand. There appeared in many of the first Reformers, such a Love to the Truth,
and Zeal for practical Godliness, as gave a fair Prospect of a thorough
Reformation; from all the Corruptions in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship,
which had crept into the Church: But the Event fell far short of the raised
Hopes of Zion's Friends. In many Places it was carried on chiefly by the civil
Magistrate, who went no farther than to answer their political Schemes, and in
most it was too much a formal, nominal Thing, conducted by the Wisdom of this
World. So that it soon came to a Stand, and has been for many Years past on the
Decline, as to the Principles and Practice of real Religion, and this sad
Declension is growing fast on the present Generation.

SOME may be ready perhaps by this Time, to put to Me the Question in the Text,
Watchman, what of the Night? Whereabouts are We? Is it Night, or Day? What are
the Signs of the Times, in which we are fallen? What may we look for? To which
I answer, I am very far from pretending to a Spirit of Prophesy, or any such
Insight into the prophetic Writings, as precisely to six the Dates of those
Times and Seasons, about which learned and pious Men have so widely differed; I
may venture however, to affirm, some Things that appear evident and plain, and
modestly offer my Thoughts bout others, more doubtful and uncertain.

IT is, I think, very evident, that the Night brought on the Church, by the
Delusions and Superstition of Mahomet, and the Pope, still continues.
Notwithstanding the frequent Appearances of the Morning, the Darkness still
remains, and at present seems to increase. Popery did indeed receive a great
Wound at the Reformation, and the Pope considered as a temporal Prince, has, as
to his secular Power, been ever since, very much on the Decline, very little
Regard being paid him to what formerly was; but this in many, arises more from
Contempt of the Gospel, and all revealed Religion, than a Dislike to the
Corruptions of Popery, or Regard to the Truth; and however, he be declined in
secular Power, the Popish Religion, still greatly prevails. The greatest Part
of Christendom are Professedly of that Communion, and acknowledge Subjection to
the Pope, as their spiritual Head; and the corrupt Doctrines of that Church,
have of late Years very much prevailed in Protestant Countries.

THE Turks, who, when they defeated the Saracens, adopted their Religion and
Manners, which they have ever since been propagating, by their victorious Arms,
(though they have been something weakened by their late Wars with the Germans)
are yet in Possession of a considerable Part of Asia, Europe, and Africa, where
the Christian Religion formerly flourished. The Mahometans have over been
professed Enemies to Christianity, and endeavor to root it out wherever they
come, and are at present, the greatest Obstacle in the Way of spreading the
Gospel. And how great a Part of the World is yet involved in heathenish
Darkness and Idolatry? When with these Things; we consider the sad Declensions,
Corruptions and Divisions of she Reformed Churches, we are constrained to
pronounce it Night. The Light of the Gospel does indeed shine, but it is like
twinkling Stars in the Midst of Darkness, and Error.

SHOULD it now be enquired, What of this Night? How far is it advanced? And how
much is yet to come? I answer, it appears to me, that we are in the Close of
this dark Night, and that the Morning comes. Could we determine when this
Night began, it would be easy to fix on the Time of it is End; the Duration of
it being plainly pointed out in prophetic Writings. The Beast to whom the
Dragon (the Roman Emperor) gave his Seat, Authority, and Power, was to continue
speaking great Things and Blasphemies, 42 Months, REV. xiii. 2 and 5; which is
just equal to the Time, Times, and half Time; while the Woman, i.e. the Church
is drove into the Wilderness, and there nourished, REV. xii. 14. During this
Period, the Witnesses are to Prophesy in Sackcloth, or the faithful Messengers
of CHRIST, are to Labor under Discouragements and Opposition, which was to
continue 1260 Days, REV. xi. 3. These several Numbers in prophetic Style,
taking a Day for a Year, make the same Period 1260 Years. So long the
persecuting Power of the Beast will continue; and while it does, the Church
will be in a wilderness State, and the faithful Ministers of CHRIST will
Prophesy in Sackcloth. This persecuted, oppressed, benighted State of the
Church, will be succeeded by those glorious Times, when Satan will be confined
to the bottomless Pit, that he may no longer deceive the Nations, and when
there shall be nothing to offend in all God's holy Mount. But when this dark
State of the Church shall End, or where to fix it is Beginning, is a Matter of
Uncertainty, as it seems to have come gradually on. ST. PAUL, indeed tell us,
That the wicked one, whose coming was to be after the Workings of Satan, with
all Power, Signs, and lying Wonders should be revealed, when be that then let
or bindered, was taken out of the Way. By him, that Let, the ancient, as well
as modern Expositors, understand, the Roman Emperor, who, as long as he held
his Seat and Power, prevented the Pope of Rome from deceiving the Nations, with
his lying Wonders. The ancient Christians, therefore used to pray for the
Continuance of the Roman Empire, that the coming of Antichrist might be
delayed. If the Downfall of the Roman Empire, may be reckoned from Rome's being
sacked, and taken by the Irruptions of the Northern Nations, when almost the
whole Empire, was over run and divided among them; when the ten Horns, or
Kingdoms arose, and gave their Power and Strength to the Beast; Rev. xvii. 12,
13.
the Destruction of Antichrist, and the End of this Night of Popish Darkness,
is near at Hand, when he shall be destroyed, by the Breath of CHRIST's Mouth,
and the Brightness of his Coming. But, though this Night is evidently far spent,
and the Day draws nigh, yet it appears to me not improbable, that the darkest
Part of the Night yet remains, and that the glorious Times, the Church will
enjoy in the latter Day, will be preceded with a Season of the sorest Calamity
and Distress. It is the Opinion of many learned Divines, that there will be a
general. Slaughter of the Witnesses, who have through all the dark Ages of
Popery, born a faithful Testimony to the Truth and Ways of Christ, a little
before the seventh Angel sounds his Trumpet, for the utter Destruction of
Antichrist's Kingdom, just when they are about finishing their Testimony, and
consequently that this Event is future. But as some eminent Divines and One,
for whose Judgment I have the highest Veneration, are of a different Opinion,
and think it is already past, I shall offer what I have to say on this Head,
with all Humility, and much Diffidence of my own Sentiments, about so dark an
Event: The Account we have of it is Rev. xi. 7 -- 13. And when they shall have
finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit,
shall make War against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them; and their
dead Bodies shall lie in the Street of the great City, which spiritually is
called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. And they of the
People, and Kindreds and Tongues, and Nations, shall see their dead Bodies
three Days and an Half, and shall not suffer their dead Bodies to be put in
Graves. And they that dwell upon the Earth, shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send Gifts one to another; because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the Earth. And after three Days and an Half, the
Spirit of Life from God entered into them: And they stood upon their Feet, and
great Fear fell upon them, which saw them. And they heard a great Voice from
Heaven, saying unto them, "Come up hither". And they ascended up to Heaven in a
Cloud, and their Enemies beheld them.

THE Sum of which Passage seems to be this, viz. That when these faithful
Witnesses who have so long prophesied in Sackcloth, are about concluding their
Testimony, there will be a severe Persecution raised by the antichristian
Party, whereby all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, will appear to be
silenced or slain, and that in the most public, open, and ignominious Manner,
so that their Enemies shall triumph as though the Day were their own; but this
will continue only for a short Time, three Days and an Half; which, if it does
not mean three Years and an Half, taking according to prophetic Style, a Day
for a Year; yet it doubtless means, that this Time of their Suffering will be
but short, compared to the Time of their prophesying in Sackcloth; it will be
but as a Day to a Year, as that is a Time, Times and half a Time, 1260 Years.
After this they shall not only be restored to their former Liberty, but exalted
to such a State of Dignity and Security, as they never before enjoyed, and that
in the Presence, and to the Confusion of their Enemies; and the Reasons which
have made it appear to me not improbable that the Church has this distressing
Scene yet to pass through, are such as these:

1st, IT is to be at the Conclusion of their prophesying in Sackcloth, when
they have just finished their Testimony. When they shall have finished their
Testimony. Thus we translate it, which indeed seems the most natural, genuine
Construction of hotan teles^si, cum perfecerint, when they have about
completed or finished off their Testimony, as the original Word properly
signifies; at the Close of 1260 Days, when the Period of Antichrist's Reign
will be just at an End. But, as yet, this Period evidently continues, the
faithful Ministers of Christ may, on many Accounts, be said, still to prophesy
in Sackcloth, as the Mohammedan and Antichristian Darkness yet remains, and they
are carrying on their Work under great Discouragements.

2d, HISTORY affords no past Events to which the slaying and Resurrection of
the Witnesses, can well be applied. Some learned Men have, I know, endeavored
to find the Accomplishment of it, in sundry Persecutions, bro't on the faithful
Witnesses for the Truth, none of which seem fully to answer the prophetic
Description given of that Event. The Waldenses (Followers of Peter Waldo, a
Merchant of Lions, in France) A. D. 1160, were persecuted with great Severity:
It Is computed, that not less than 80,000 sealed their Testimony to the Truths
of God, with their Blood. Above a Million of the Albigenses (so called from
their native Country in Languedoc) fell a Sacrifice in the same glorious Cause;
but these were of too early a Date to answer the Description; of too long
Continuance, and confined to a particular Country; whereas the slaying of the
Witnesses will be a general Thing; and it is worthy of Remark, that this was in
a Country where the Witnesses have, almost ever since, prophesied in Sackcloth,
as all acquainted with the History of France, well know. If they were slain in
that Place, it is hard to say, when they rose, or were exalted. Much less can
we find this Event accomplished, in the short Persecutions by Queen MARY, in
England, or under the Duke of Savoy, in Piedmont, which were confined to so
small a Part of the Church, however exactly they may seem to answer as to
Duration. Many severe Persecutions have been carried on by the Papists, against
the Protestants, in Hungary, Bohemia, many Parts of Germany, and repeatedly in
France; but all these were only partial slaying of the Witnesses. They were
never so universally cut off, as the Prophesy seems to represent.

3d, IT would be difficult to show, that there ever has been that Resurrection,
and glorious Exaltation of the Witnesses, which is to follow immediately after
their lying dead three Days and an Half. What like this has happened upon any
of the Persecutions that have yet been on the protestant Churches? They are not
only to be restored to Life, but to ascend up into Heaven, i. e. to be exalted
to an higher State of Dignity and Power, than they have ever yet enjoyed; and
this is to be in a public, open Manner, in the Presence, and to the Confusion
of their Enemies. They are to put off their Sackcloth, and put it on no more.
The Reproach of their former suffering State, will be wiped away: But the
faithful Witnesses of Christ don't seem ever yet to have enjoyed any such State
of Honor, Power, Influence and Security, as is here represented. Something
indeed, like this, seemed to have happened at the Reformation, when many of the
first Reformers were protected and encouraged in their Work, against the
Attempts of their Popish Adversaries; but when we consider the Opposition they
met with, the frequent Persecutions in many Parts of the Protestant Countries,
the great Discouragements one Way or another, under which the faithful
Witnesses of Christ have labored; we cannot but conclude, that the Time of
their prophesying in Sackcloth yet continues.

4th, THE second Woe, does not appear yet to have passed away, nor any such
Destruction and Consternation to be brought on the Seat of the Beast, as is to
be at the same Time with the Slaughter and Resurrection of the Witnesses.

IF the second Woe, or Plague of the Sixth Trumpet, was brought on the Church,
by the pouring out of the fifth Vial, when a Way was prepared for the Kings of
the East; or, the Turks suffered to overrun a considerable Part of Europe; or,
if it be referred to the Destruction and Darknese brought on many Parts of
Christendom, by the Saracens; I say, to which soever of these Events it is
referred, it is evident, this Woe brought by the Mohammedan Imposture, is not yet
passed away, great Part of the World still groaning under it; and it is
probable, this Woe is to end with the total Destruction and Abolition of the
Turkish Empire. Neither does there appear to have been any such Destruction and
Revolution in the Antichristian Dominions, as is represented by the great
Earthquake; the Destruction of the Tenth Part of the City, and slaughter of
7000 Men of Name; especially the Time never has yet been, when the Rest were
affrighted, and gave Glory to God. They have been grieved, vexed and tormented,
at the Progress of the Reformation, the Liberty granted to the faithful
Witnesses; but so far have they been from repenting, and giving Glory to God,
that, on the Contrary, they have been continually venting their Spite and
Malice against the Reformed Churches, and laboring, by all their hellish Arts,
and popish Rage, to ruin and destroy them.

5th, IT has been God's usual Method to prepare his Church and People for
extraordinary Favors, by extraordinary Trials, and in the present corrupt
State of Things, it seems highly proper that it should be so.

THE Affairs of Jacob's Family, are in the most distressed Situation, before he
hears that Joseph was yet alive, and that by him a Door was open for their
Relief. The Children of Israel were reduced to the last Extremity, in their
Egyptian Bondage, just before their remarkable Deliverance. When was David in a
greater Strait than at the Burning of Ziklag, a little before he was exalted to
the Throne of Israel? The Persecution of the Church under the Emperors of Rome,
was by far the most extreme and dangerous under Dioclesian, when her
Deliverance drew nigh, and she was ready to be exalted under Constantine. The
Experience of many Christians can testify, that those Seasons in which they
have been most highly favored, with special Communications of Light and Love,
have been preceded by remarkable Darkness and Perplexity. That he should
therefore prepare his Church, for those glorious Things spoken of it in the
latter Days, by some extraordinary Trials, is no improbable Supposition. This
Observation will be much strengthened, by considering the present degenerate
State of the protestant Churches, which is such, that it can hardly be expected
God should pass by, without some special Tokens of his Displeasure.

AND if the Slaying of the Witnesses is not yet past, it is probable it may be
near at Hand. But however it may be as to that particular Event, The Reasons
for supposing this Event already past, are set in a strong, and clear Light, in
that excellent Treatise, An humble Attempt to promote extraordinary Prayer for
the Revival of Religion; which I had not by me when I wrote this Discourse, but
on a Review of it since, find that such a Season of Trials, as I suppose the
present degenerate State of the Church requires, may be expected on the
Author's Scheme that the Witnesses are slain; for he says, Page 125, It Is true
there is abundant Evidence in Scripture, that there is yet remaining a mighty
Conflict between the Church and her Enemies, the most violent Struggle of Satan
and his Adherents, in Opposition to true Religion, etc. And some Parts of the
Church may suffer hard Things in this Conflict.
about which I would be far from making any positive Conclusions, many Things
may make us expect that difficult and trying Times are coming on the Church and
the World. The dark Cloud that gathers so fast over our Nation and Land, seems
to forebode Distress and Calamity, to the protestant Churches in general. The
British Nation has been for a long Time the great Bulwark of the Reformation,
and should it be subdued, the other Protestant Powers in Europe could, by no
Means, be a Match for their antichristian Enemies, when united together; and a
Door would open for a distressing Scene of Persecution, throughout all the
reformed Churches. It gives me no Pleasure to be a Messenger of evil Tidings,
nor would I make positive Assertions about future Events; yet I must say, our
public Affairs wear a dark Aspect. The Nation we are engaged with in War, is
numerous, powerful and politic. France abounds with Men, and the King commands
as many as he pleases into the Field; on every Occasion shows himself superior
to our Expectations; and his being an absolute Monarch gives great Advantage in
Point of Secrecy and Dispatch.

OUR old Friend and Ally, the Queen of Hungary, has joined the King of France,
and so far as we can judge from her Conduct, designs to forsake us, whatever
plausible Pretenses, she may make to the Contrary. No other Construction can be
put on her joining our sworn Enemy, when at open War with us, in the Manner she
has done; No Power in Europe, under greater Obligations to the British Nation;
almost all the Wars we have been engaged in, since the Accession of King
William, have been undertaken in Favor of the House of Austrian Louisbourgh,
that important Fortress, was given up, that the Places the King of France had
taken from her in Flanders, might be restored; yet now she has forsaken us at a
critical Juncture; and what may we then expect from other Popish Powers. Spain
appears waiting for nothing but a favorable Opportunity of declaring against
us. The King of Poland, (Elector of Saxony) by a strange Turn of Politics,
seems inclined to espouse the Interest of France. The Connections of the King
of the two Sicilies are such, that he will readily join their Confederacy: And
perhaps the King of Sardinia, will be obliged to join or stand neuter, in his
own Defense. When to this, we add the Coldness, to say no worse, with which we
are treated by some of our Protestant Allies; it gives the Situation of our
public Affairs a dangerous and threatening Aspect. And if we cast our Eyes on
the British Colonies in America, Things look still darker. All our Schemes
hitherto prove unsuccessful; our Enemies, small and contemptible as their
Numbers appeared to us, every where get the Advantage. Braddock's mournful
Defeat last Year, has been attended with a Train of destructive Consequences.
It Is not easy to conceive, what we have suffered from the barbarous Natives,
under the Influence, and by the Assistance of the French; scarce a Paper from
the Southward but brings Accounts of new Depredations and Murders. What ruinous
Consequences may we expect from the Loss of Oswego? What an Advantage is hereby
put into the Enemy's Hand; the Lake wholly at their Command, where we have
expended such Sums. Our Shipping, Artillery, with the other Warlike Stores and
Provisions, which we had conveyed there with great Cost and Labor; all fallen
into the Hands of the Enemy, to be employed against us. All the fine Country
adjacent, lost; and the few Indians that have hitherto continued in our
Friendship, will probably forsake us; and those that have remained neuter, join
in with the Enemy; for now seems verified the Observation they made in a late
Treaty at Albany, "The French act like Men, build Forts and defend them; but
the English act like Women.

DARK Tidings of late, like Job's Messengers, come in thick Succession, one
after another. In the Midst of our Lamentations for the sad Fate of Oswego,
comes the melancholy News, of Port-Mahon's being taken: The Loss of a Fortress
so important, of such Consequence to the British Trade, in the Mediterranean,
and which gives so much Advantage to the Enemy, must be exceeding great, highly
aggravated by the disgraceful Circumstances which attended it; the Ferment into
which it has thrown the Nation, and the lasting Dishonor done to the British
Flag. I shall leave it to the Politicians of the Day, to point out the Cause of
those sore Calamities, and make but one Remark, which must be obvious to all
serious and thinking Persons.

THAT our Misfortunes have come upon us, in such a Manner, as plainly to point
out the Hand of God therein; and shows us, that our Dependence on our own
Wisdom and Strength, while by our Sins, we engage Heaven against us, is as vain
as it is sinful. -- We have been greatly disposed to boast of our superior
Strength by Sea, and glory in our Fleets, as a sure Refuge in a Time of Danger;
but even they have failed us, and at a Season, when we most needed their Help,
and seemed to have the highest Reason of Dependence upon them. This might serve
to cure us of our Infidelity and vain Confidence, and teach us our entire
Dependence on God, and how great our Danger is, while his Hand is so evidently
stretched forth against us. Our Expedition to Crown-Point, will probably again,
like the Rest of our Schemes, prove abortive. These Things, together with our
divided Counsels, and dilatory Methods of proceeding, make the Situation of
public Affairs, look exceeding dangerous, and may well alarm our Fears, as to
what is coming on our Nation, and Country. -- And if we consider the present
State of the Protestant Churches, will it not tend to increase our dark
Apprehensions on this Head. What mournful Declensions, as to Doctrine,
Discipline, and practical Godliness! God has evidently withdrawn his Spirit; --
a sad Decay, as to vital Piety, is almost every where lamentably visible; -- A
Midnight Security seems to have fallen on the Churches; -- Both Ministers and
People, Saints and Sinners, slumber and sleep. Iniquity abounds; the Love of
many waxes cold. -- Lukewarmness and Indifference, in spiritual and divine
Things; Want of Affection to God and Christ, to the Truths and Ordinances of
the Gospel, are growing fast on the Professors of this Age. The Things that
remain are just ready to die, and our Works are not found perfect before God.
-- The Gospel, and all its Glories, grow more and more contemptible in the Eyes
of Sinners, and less precious in the Eyes of Saints. -- The Lord's Day, public
Worship, and Ordinances of his House, disregarded and slighted; -- The
Ministers of the Gospel treated with Contempt by many, with too much Neglect
and Disregard by all; their Persons and Families poorly supported, their
Character and Office little reverenced, and the importans Messages they bring,
undervalued and rejected. How widely different are Things in this Respect, from
what they were in the Memory of many now alive! How little of that Reverence
and Esteem for the ministerial Character, which was so remarkable among our
Forefathers, is to be seen in our Day, and these Things are waxing worse and
worse. Whether this arises from Declensions among Ministers or People, or both,
it must be esteemed a dark Symptom on the Church. Time would fail me, to speak
of the mournful Growth of Infidelity, Profaneness, and all kind of abominable
Immoralities: And when we consider these Things, have we not Reason to fear,
that God will purify his Churches in the Furnace, that they may come forth as
Gold tried and refined? Can we expect, that so much Dross and Corruption, as is
now found among us, will be purged off any other Way? The Popish Powers may be
suffered to unite their Strength, to prevail, and carry all before them for a
Season; to slay, or silence the faithful Witnesses of Christ; to rejoice, and
send Gifts, as if the Day was their own, and to imagine they have nothing to
fear from them, who used to torment them Night and Day. This, as it will be the
last Effort of the Man of Sin, and his Adherents, may, probably, be one of the
most desperate Attacks, he has ever made on the Reformed Churches. Satan will
seem to be loosed from the bottomless Pit, and will come in great Wrath,
because his Time is short. But, blessed be God, though this will be a Time of
great Darkness and Distress, yet it will soon be over. The triumphing of the
Enemies of Christ, will be short. When they think themselves most secure, and
that there are none to oppose their Designs, sudden Destruction shall come upon
them, as on a Woman in Travil, and they shall not escape. When the Whore of
Babylon, or mystical Rome, shall say, I sit as a Queen, am no Widow, and shall
see no Sorrow; then her Doom draws nigh, her Plagues shall come in one Day;
Death, Mourning and Famine; and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire REV.
xviii. 7, 8.
. Happy shall they then be, who have come out from her, and are not Partakers
of her Sin, that they may not receive of her Plagues. The Destruction of
Antichrist, will not be all at once; yet on the Resurrection and Exaltation of
the Witnesses, he shall receive a deadly Wound, of which he shall never be
healed, but consume away by the Breath of Christ's Mouth, and Brightness of his
Coming. Such sudden and awful Judgments will then be brought upon him, as shall
affrighten the Rest of the World, and cause them to give Glory to God. This,
with the passing away of the second Woe, in the Overthrow of the Turkish
Empire, will open a Door for that glorious Spread of the Gospel promised in the
latter Days. The third Woe, under the sounding of the seventh Angel, which
comes quickly, will issue in the final and complete Destruction of Antichrist,
and Confusion of all the implacable Enemies of the Church. Then shall be heard
great Voices in Heaven, and the joyful Sound will spread far and wide on the
Earth, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord,
and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever REV. xi. 14, 15.
. Then, My Brethren, though we may be entering on the darkest, and most gloomy
Part of the Night, which has continued so long, we may lift up our Heads with
Joy, our Salvation draws near. The Night is far spent, and the Day is at Hand.
The Morning comes, and will usher in a glorious Day, when the Sun of
Righteousness shall arise, and dispel the dark Clouds which now hang over his
Church, become a Light to the Gentiles, and a Glory to God's People Israel;
when the Light of the Moon shall be as the Light of the Sun, and the Light of
the Sun sevenfold as the Light of seven Days ISAI. xxx. 26.
. This Day of the Churches Prosperity, is to continue for a Thousand Years;
some suppose, prophetically taken, 360,000 Years, that Christ may have a longer
Reign, and greater Number of Subjects, than the Prince of Darkness has had; but
this may be accomplished in the Space of 1000 Years, (literally taken) of such
Peace and Prosperity as the Church will then enjoy, when the Increase of
Mankind will be to much greater, and their Destruction so much less than at
other Times See this particularly illustrated in the Treatise above mentioned,
Page 47 and 48.
. Some suppose Christ will reign personally here on Earth, during these 1000
Years, and that his bodily Presence will be the Glory of his Church; that the
Saints, or, at least, the Martyrs, will be raised from the Dead, and reign with
him. But such perplexing Questions and Difficulties, are started on this Head,
as I have never yet seen answered; and since it is represented as a greater
Blessing to the Church, to have Christ interceding in Heaven, and the Presence
of his Spirit on Earth; I see no Reason, either to desire or expect it. It Is
expedient (says Christ John xvi. 7.
) That 1 go away; for, unless I go, the Comforter will not come unto you.
Without pronouncing any Thing decisively, about the exact Circumstances of
these glorious Times, and the Manner in which they will be brought on, I will
only say. That it seems evident by the prophetic Description given of those
Times, that their Glory will consist in the universal Promotion of true
Christianity and real Religion, in the Gospel's having its genuine Effect on
the Hearts and Lives of Men; such as were before hateful, and hating one
another, will then have Hearts glowing with Love to God, and one another; such
as were before the Plagues and Pests of Society, will then become its Ornament,
Delight and Defense; such as were before fierce and savage, malicious and
revengeful, barbarous and cruel, will then become kind and gentle, courteous
and forgiving, meek and humble. The Lion will be turned into the Lamb: and
there shall be Nothing to offend in God's holy Mount. When supreme Love to God,
and undissembled Affection to one another, reign, it will produce universal
Harmony and Peace. Wars and Contentions, angry Jars and Disputes, will cease;
the Lamb shall lie down with the Wolf, and the Nations of the Earth will learn
War no more. Such a glorious Change, in such a corrupt apostate World, can be
brought about by Nothing short of a plentiful, out-pouring of the Spirit of all
Grace, who has immediate Access to the Hearts of the Children of Men, by his
enlightening, purifying, and all-conquering Influences. That the Change must
begin here; that without this, all Means must prove ineffectual; and that this
is sufficient to effect it, might be easily proved. Such abundant Effusion of
the divine Spirit, will open an effectual Daor for the Gospel, to have free
Course and be glorified, which no Man shall be able to shut. A preached Gospel
will be attended with such Life and Power, as will subdue and soften the
hardest Heart; it will shine with such Light and Glory, as that the Remainder
of Pagan, Popish and Mohammedan Darkness, will flee before it, as the Shadows of
the Night before the rising Sun. The Inhabitants of the Earth shall be filled
with the spiritual Knowledge of God and Christ, as the Waters cover the Sea
Isai. xi. 9.
; Conversions will be greatly multiplied; Sinners will flock to Christ, as
Clouds, and as Doves to their Windows; -- it will seem as if Nations were born
in a Day: Then will God remember Mercy for his ancient People, the Jews. They
shall be brought in with the Fullness of the Gentile World, which will be Life
from the Dead Romans xi. 15.
. This is expressly promised Hosea iii. 4. 5.
, The Children of Israel shall abide many Days without a King, and a Prince,
without a Sacrifice, Image, Ephod, etc. Afterward shall they return, and seek
the Lord their God, and David, their King. Then may it be said to the Church,
Arise; shine forth; for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee; his Glory shall be seen upon thee, and the Gentiles shall come to
thy Light, and Kings to the Brightness of thy Rising Isai lx. 1, 2, 3.
.

PRINCES and Potentates, will, I imagine, partake of this plentiful Effusion of
divine Grace, whereby Kings shall be made nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing
Mothers to the Church Isai lx. 16.
, disposed to cast their Crowns at the Feet of Jesus, and employ all their
superior Advantages for the Honor of his Name, and Advancement of his Cause;
and with what striking Beauty and Force will Religion then shine, when
recommended by such distinguished Examples!

MINISTERS of the Gospel, will doubtless have a double Portion of the Spirit,
when it is so remarkably poured forth. They will then be like the Angel spoken
of in Revelations, who flew through Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel. They
will fly on the Wings of Zeal and Love, to publish the Wonders of divine Grace
to a lost and ruined World. And their Meekness, Humility and Wisdom, will be
equal to their Zeal. How different in that Day, will be the Preaching,
Conversation and Examples of Ministers, from what we now behold? And what
glorious Effects may be expected from the Gospel, when it is published by those
whose Hearts are full of a Sense of its Excellency, Truth and Importance; and
when this shines forth in their Lives, Alas! how little do we know of this in
the present Day? what a mournful withdrawment of the divine Spirit! our Words
freeze between our Lips; the divine Art of reaching the Heart, and alluring
Souls to Christ is departed from us. Long experienced Unsuccessfulness damps
our Spirits; we speak as those that expect to labor in vain, and spend our
Strength for Naught.

CHRISTIANS, in general, will be favored with unusual Communications of divine
Grace, and shine as Lights in the World. There will be something convincing and
alluring in their Example: That mean, low, sordid Temper, that contentious,
jangling, quarrelsome Spirit, which now appears in most Professors, obscures
the Beauty of our holy Religion in the Eyes of Strangers, and is one of the
greatest Obstacles to the Spread of the Gospel. But when true Religion comes to
be properly exemplified in the Lives of Christians, there will appear such a
Charm, and Excellency in it, as will strike and allure the Beholders, and have
a peculiar Tendency to propagate it throughout the World.

FAMILIES will then, it is probable, be as remarkable for being Nurseries of
Piety, as they now are for being Scenes of Disorder, Corruption, and Vice; when
Children will indeed be trained up for God, and come on the Stage of Action
with Hearts animated with Love to him, and to all Mankind, and glowing Desires
of being distinguished Blessings in their Day.

PUBLIC SCHOOLS, and Seminaries of Learning, will probably become Seats
remarkable for Virtue, and true Religion; where it shall shine with divine
Luster, and diffuse its benign Influence far and wide: From those Fountains
thus purified, will issue Streams that shall make glad the City of our God. I
hint at these Things, as probable Means whereby the glorious Designs of God's
Grace will be carried on, in the latter Day, that with our fervent Prayer, we
may unite our earnest Endeavors for their Accomplishment.

WHAT a glorious Change will soon be produced, when God shall visit these dark
Abodes, with such plentiful Effusions of his Spirit! What a new Face of Things
must then appear in the moral World. Behold, I create a new Heaven, and a new
Earth; be ye glad, and rejoice, for ever, in what I create, for I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her People a Joy ISAI. lv. 17, 18.
. My Heart is enlarged on this delightful Subject, but having greatly
transgressed my Bounds, I must conclude with a very brief Address, to My
Reverend and dear Brethren, in the Gospel, who are convened on the present
Occasion.

Is It, LET us prepare for dark and distressing Times, if God should see fit to
bring them on the Church in our Day.

THOUGH it be not for us to know the Times and Seasons which God has reserved in
his own Power; yet when he is both by his Word and Providence, giving
Intimations of approaching Judgments, we ought, like Noah, to be moved with
Fear, and prepare to meet them. This may especially be expected of us, who are
appointed as Watchmen, to give warning to others. Though we cannot pretend to
penetrate into the Council of Heaven, as to future Events, yet he that runs,
may read the present threatening Aspect of divine Providence; the loud Calls.
God is giving to the World, and to his Churches, to prepare to meet him: He
speaks once; yea, twice; and that in a most solemn and moving Manner; though few
regard him. The Cloud gathers thick and dark upon us; our Nation and Land,
filled with Sin against the holy one of Israel; challenging God to vindicate
the Honor of his Majesty; -- engaged in War with an ambitious, politic and
warlike Nation, strengthened by a powerful Confederacy, -- a Nation that has
long been drunk with the Blood of the Saints; -- our Councils and divided
Schemes, turned into Foolishness; our vain Boastings and groundless
Expectations, repeatedly disappointed. Have we not then Reason to tremble, for
Fear of those Things that are coming upon us? Should our Enemies, enraged as
they have been, and flushed with Victory as they now are, be suffered to
prevail, and put in Execution their wicked Designs, to fill with Desolation and
Woe, with the direful Effects of popish Bigotry, and lawless Tyranny, this once
happy Land, which has so long been distinguished with Peace and Plenty, with
Gospel Light and Liberty; what a lamentable Scene would it open! and what can
we expect, but that Judgment will begin at the House of God. The Watchmen will
doubtless first be attacked; -- the Shepherd smitten, that the Sheep may be
scattered. What are we better than our Fathers? than the glorious Train of
Martyrs, who have sealed their Testimony with their Blood; and why should we
expect to die quietly in our Nests? And are we, My Brethren, prepared for such
trying Times as may soon come upon us? Is Christ, his Truths, and Ways, dearer
to us, than our Lives? And can we freely sacrifice the latter in Defense of the
former? Should we who are Leaders in Christ's Army, give back, and cowardly
desert the glorious Cause where with we are entrusted, our Guilt and
Condemnation would be exceeding great. This would be to crucify the Lord
afresh, and put him to open Shame, and for such there remains no more Sacrifice
for Sin, but a certain looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation.

WE may, perhaps, in a warm Mood, like Peter, say, Though all Men forsake thee,
yet will not we. But have we that Self-denial, Faith and Love, that would carry
us through the fiery Trial, bear us up under all the Variety of Tortures, which
the Wit and Malice of our Enemies may invent? It must be Love, stronger than
Death, such as many Waters cannot quench. We are loudly called in this Day, to
stand with our Loins girt, and Lamps burning; to have all our Graces, in a
lively vigorous Exercise; our Evidences for Heaven clear, that we may be ready,
if the Lord should come as a Refiner's Fire, and Fuller's Soap, to purify the
Sons of Levi Mal. iii. 2, 3.
. Let us continually look to the Author and Finisher of our Faith, and be
animated cheerfully to suffer with him here, under the glorious Prospect that
we shall reign with him for ever.

2d. WITH what Pleasure should we look forward to the joyful Period, when the
Kingdoms of this World shall become, the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ; and how ardently should we long and pray, for the Approach of it?

THOUGH many Trials may yet await us, and we should be called off from the Stage,
before the Darkness of the present Night be past; yet it must be a delightful
Thought, that the Morning comes, and will usher in a glorious Day to the
Church, when the Cause of Truth and Holiness, Peace and Purity, shall
universally prevail, in Opposition to all the Heresy and Wickedness, Tumults
and Corruptions, which have hitherto overspread the Earth; when the Prayers of
the Saints in all Ages, for the Prosperity of Zion, shall be answered, and the
glorious Things spoken of her in the sacred Oracles, be fully accomplished.

WE, indeed, may be laid in the silent Dust, before this blessed Day appears;
but we can now behold it, as Abraham saw the Day of Christ; and if we are
possessed of the same excellent Spirit, shall rejoice and be exceeding glad. An
Heart touched with a dutiful Sense of God's Honor and Interest, cannot but be
pleased, that he will be highly glorified in this apostate World, where he has
been insolently affronted, and provoked, for so long a Time: Such must feel
some peculiar Emotions of Joy. While some say with the Psalmist, in Faith, be
thou exalted, O! God, above the Heavens, and thy Glory above all the Earth
Psalm cviii. 5.
. To a Soul animated with unfeigned Love to, and zealous Concern for, the Cause
and Kingdom of the dear Redeemer, how delightful the Prospect! -- that he will
one Day, have the greatest Interest in the Hearts of Men; take to himself
Power, and reign from Land to Land, and Sea to Sea; that his blessed Gospel,
which is now treated with Scorn, and Contempt, by lost and perishing Sinners,
shall triumph over all the Opposition of Earth and Hell, have free Course and
be glorified, throughout the World.

O! WHAT a refreshing, what a reviving Thought! that these Regions of Darkness,
Guilt and Misery, shall be filled with spiritual Light, Life and Joy. The
present languishing State of true Religion, is, indeed, distressing; and the
more so, when we consider, that it may possibly continue to the End of our
Lives: But how pleasing the Contemplation, that it will certainly be revived,
and flourish, though among future Generations; that God shall be served and
glorified, by our Posterity, in a far better Manner than he has ever been by
us. And that a People which shall be created, shall praise the Lord Psalm cii.
18.
. This may solace us, under the near Views of approaching Death, if, with good
old Jacob, we can say to our Children, We die, but the Lord will be with you
Genesis xlviii. 21.
. As a believing View of Zion's further Prosperity and Glory, should support
and comfort us, under our present Labors and Trials; so it should enlarge our
Hearts, in constant, fervent Supplications to the Throne of Grace, that it may
be accomplished. The Representation I have given, of the exceeding corrupt and
degenerate State of the Church, with other dark Prospects in the present Day,
should be so far from discouraging, that it should greatly enliven and animate
our Prayers; partly, as it tends to give us an affecting Sense of our entire
Dependence on God, for so great a Mercy; and the utter Insufficiency of all
Means for the Revival, and general Spread of true Religion in the World,
without a plentiful Effusion of the divine Spirit: And, partly, because
Infidelity and Wickedness have arrived to so great an Height, and Religion is
brought to so low an Ebb, that it seems as if Things were come to the last
Extremity, and that it was a fit Time for God to appear, and display the
Greatness of his Power, Love and Faithfulness, to his Church, to convince the
World, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. Instead therefore
of desponding, under the present gloomy Appearance of Things, let us be awakned
to greater Fervency in Prayer, and look forward with more earnest Expectations,
for the Dawn of that glorious Day, when the whole Earth shall be filled with
the Knowledge of the Lord. And though he should come as a Refiner's Fire, to
purge and purify his Churches, in the Furnace of Affliction, yet let us, with
united Hearts, say, Come, Lord Jesus; come quickly.

FINALLY, Let us be awakned in this dark and difficult Day, to a faithful
zealous Discharge of the Duties of our Stations. It would be sad indeed, if, at
such a Time, we should do the Work of the Lord carelessly and deceitfully; if by
our Sloth and Negligence, we should increase the deplorable Darkness and
Deadness, which is already on the Churches, and suffer the Cause of God to die
in our Hands. We have every Motive to awaken our Zeal, and quicken our
Diligence, in our great Work. What we find to do for God, the Souls of our
Hearers, and our bleeding Country, we should, in such a Day as this, do with
all our Might. Allow me in particular, to press the Necessity and Importance of
uniting our most vigorous Attempts for a thorough and general Reformation. This
is what we proposed in our Judicatory, and to which we unanimously agreed, viz.
That we would not only explain, and warmly press in our public Discourses, the
Necessity of a Reformation, but exert ourselves in our several Spheres of
Influence, to bring it about. This is what God is most evidently and loudly
calling us to, in the present Day. He has of late been giving extraordinary
Warnings, of impending Judgments, by mighty Winds, proeternatural Inundations,
and terrible Earthquakes in diverse Places. The Frame of Nature seems to have
been cast into a trembling Disorder, at the Approach of an angry God, and as it
were in Astonishment, solemnly to call on the Inhabitants of a guilty World, to
repent, and return, before his Wrath comes upon them to the utmost. The
Displeasure of Heaven has been once and again testified against our Nation and
Land. We have felt the Rebukes of an incensed Deity. The Cause of all which
Calamities, is notorious and evident to all, who have any due Sense of God on
their Minds, or believe that he rules among the Children of Men. God is openly
and publicly affronted; -- his Name used and profaned, in the most
atheistical Manner; -- his Laws violated; -- his Authority despised; -- the
loud Calls of his Word and Providence disregarded; -- and all the Riches of his
Grace, in the Gospel, slighted; -- while Profanity and Infidelity, Luxury and
Debauchery, Pride and Oppression, reign without Control, among those that make
no Pretensions to Religion. Decays in Faith, Love and Zeal, a Conformity to the
World, and Deadness to spiritual and divine Things, are visible, and
lamentable, among its Professors. These Things have kindled the Anger of Heaven
against us, and it is not turned away; but his avenging Hand is stretched out
still. And shall not God punish for these Things? Will be not be avenged on
such a People as this? Can we expect, that all the public Contempt thrown on
his Authority and Government, will be passed by without Tokens of his angry
Resentment, unless Repentance and Reformation prevent.

IT is well known, that I have not been backward in using the little Influence
I have, in animating my Countrymen, to a vigorous Defense of their Lives and
Liberties, in the use of all proper Means; and I wish it were in my Power, to
awake in them a greater Sense of the Necessity of being alive, and thoroughly
engaged in this Matter. But I must freely declare, I have no Expectations of
Safety to the Nation or Land, from any of our Preparations, tell a Sense of our
Dependence on God, and a Disposition to return to him by Repentance and
Reformation, prevails. The Judgments of Heaven are manifestly on us; but who
lays it to Heart? Who suitably regards the Works of the Lord, and the
Operations of his Hand? We can discern, or imagine we discern, the Cause of our
Calamities, in the Weakness of one, the Cowardice of another, and the Treachery
of a third, whilst the procuring Cause of all is overlooked and forgot. That
our Danger is great, and near, is acknowledged by all; but where do we look for
Deliverance? Is it not to our victorious Fleets? -- the Wisdom of our
Commanders? -- the Number and Bravery of our Men? Our mournful Disappointments,
instead of curing, do but increase our Infidelity and Folly. We can see the
Error of our last Scheme, and determine to rectify it in the next; almost every
one imagines, he could conduct Matters better, and point out a Way of Safety,
if he was at the Head of Affairs; but forgets, that the Race is not to the
Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong. The Hand of God is disregarded; -- no
suitable Pains taken, to remove the Cause of his awful Displeasure against us.
But till there be some public, visible Humiliation for, and Reformation of,
those open Abominations, which cry to Heaven for Vengeance; we need not think
it strange, if God should send such a Spirit of Confusion into all our
Councils; -- suffer such cross Interests, mutual Jealousies, and Distrust; such
Divisions and Perplexities, to prevail in our Schemes, as naturally tend to
defeat all our Attempts, and bring about our Ruin. Should this, Isay, befall us,
it would be no strange Thing; it is no more than what has frequently happened to
a sinful, impenitent People; -- no more than what we have Reason to expect, if
Repentance prevent not ISAI. lx. 12.
. We, My Brethren, who are set on the Walls of God's Jerusalem, to give Warning
of approaching Danger, cannot but see the Necessity of Repentance and
Reformation, to avert impending Judgments; and surely it concerns us, to join
in with the alarming Calls of divine Providence, and endeavor to awaken in all
around us, a Sense of these Things. The Eyes of God, Angels and Men, are upon
us, to observe our Conduct in this Day of public Calamity and Distress. From
us, the beginning and carrying on, this so necessary a Work, is justly
expected, whose Obligations to, and Advantages for it, are great and
distinguishing.

THE Glory of God; the Interest of Religion; the Welfare of our bleeding
Country, and the solemn Account we must soon give to our Judge, call aloud for
our diligent Activity and Zeal, in this Matter, as well as our own public
voluntary Agreement, that we would unite our Endeavors, and exert our
Influence in our several Stations, for this Purpose; in which we humbly hope,
and earnestly desire, that we may be joined by our Brethren of every
Denomination throughout the Land. The Example and Advice of those of the sacred
Character, we might reasonably expect, would animate Magistrates, and Heads of
Families, to engage in the same laudable Design, prove the Means of bringing
about the so much needed, and wished for Reformation, and so of saving a
sinning Land, from deserved impending Ruin. Let our Attempts for this Purpose,
according to our Proposal The Synod agreed to recommend it to their
Congregations, to spend a Part of the last Thursday of every Month, in
extraordinary Prayer to God, on Account of the distressed Situation of our
public Affairs.
, be accompanied with extraordinary Prayer to God, who has the Hearts of all
Men in his Hand; and to this we may be excited and encouraged, by a Variety of
Motives; and in particular, from a Prospect of being joined by many in several
Parts of the Land. Our Brethren, in some Parts of New England, have set us a
laudable Example, in this Respect, and I hope their Zeal and Forwardness, will
provoke very many; and now God begins to pour out a Spirit of Prayer, and
Supplication of Repentance and Reformation, on Ministers and People While I was
transcribing this Part of my Discourse, received some encouraging Accounts of
this Kind.
, we ought to esteem it a Token for Good; -- it should animate our Prayers; --
envigorate our Hopes; -- and enliven all our Attempts for the Safety and
Deliverance of our Country. And while we are opening to our People a dark
Scene, from the crying Sins, and distressing Calamities of the Day, to alarm
and arouse them from their Security and vain Confidence; I trust we shall not
fail to animate them to a vigorous Defense of their Lives and Properties, by
setting before them all the Horrors of Popery, Slavery and Death, which may
follow the victorious Arms of our antichristian Foes, on the one Hand; and on
the other, all the invaluable Privileges of unadulterated Christianity; British
Liberty and Property, in a delightful and fruitful Country, which may be the
happy Consequences of our vigorously exerting our selves to bring them to
honorable Terms of Peace. -- Privileges of infinite Value! for which we should
bravely resolve, to spend our last Breath, in Prayer; the last Penny of our
Estates, and the last Drop of our Blood. The Face of our public Affairs has
indeed hitherto looked dark, from a Spirit of Animosity and Division, which has
spread through the Country; -- divided our Councils; -- confused and greatly
weakened all our Schemes. But, blessed be God, there is now a Foundation laid,
for our happy Union under a noble Commander, a Branch of that illustrious
Family, which has so long been distinguished for their warm Attachment to, and
Zeal for, the Religion and Liberties of their Country. The signal Proofs he has
already given, of his good Conduct, unshaken Loyalty, and steady Attachment to
our excellent Constitution; his generous disinterested Love to the British
American Colonies, which induced him to submit to all the Fatigues and Dangers
of his important Station, for their Relief, joined with all the amiable
Qualities he has discovered; conspire to raise him high in our Esteem and
Regard; and must naturally tend to raise our drooping Spirits, and enkindle in
every Breast, a noble Ardor to distinguish themselves in the Service of their
Country.

AND, should the several Colonies harmoniously unite, to strengthen his Hands,
and nobly exert themselves in the common Cause, he might be, under God, a happy
Instrument of retrieving our shameful Losses, of humbling our ambitious
triumphing Foes, and restoring Peace and Tranquillity to this bleeding Land.
Which, may GOD, of his infinite Mercy, grant, through JESUS CHRIST, our LORD,
AMEN.

FINIS.

