A FAREWELL SERMON. Delivered to the INHABITANTS of SALISBURY, May 23, A. D.
1756. BY Their Reverend Pastor JONATHAN LEE, A. M. Occasioned by His leaving
them, to go Chaplain in the First Regiment of the Connecticut Forces, in an
Expedition to Crown-Point.

Published at the Desire of the Hearers.

With a Preface by the Rev. Mr. John Graham, V. D. M. in Southbury

ECCLES. ii.23. For all his Days are Sorrow, and his Travel Grief; yea, he
takes (...) ^est in the Night. This is also Vanity.

2. CORIN. xiii.11. Finally Brethren farewell, be perfect, be of good Comfort,
be of one Mind, ^ive in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.
--

NEW HAVEN: Printed by JAMES PARKER, and COMPANY, at the Post Office.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH War be in its Nature and Tendency, a sore Calamity, and natural Fruit
of Man's primitive Rebellion against his glorious Creator; and the just and
holy Sovereign of the Universe, be in this Way bearing Testimony against the
crying Sins and Abominations of this Land, and showing his just Displeasure
against an ungrateful and rebellious People: Yet, adored he his great Goodness,
he is intermixing much Mercy with his Judgments; in that he still continues to
send his Messengers to invite us to Repentance; that so, in this Way, our final
Ruin may be prevented. -- Particularly --

It must be looked upon as a real Smile and signal Favor of Heaven upon our
military Enterprises, that divine Providence calls and disposes, one and
another of his faithful Servants in the Ministry, to go forth with, and become
Teachers of our Army: Such a one I look upon the Author of the following
suitable and affecting Discourse to be; through which he breathes forth Love to
his glorious Master, and his dearest Interest; as well as a Heart disposed to
comply with the Call of Providence, and follow the Lamb wheresoever he leads,
as one entirely resigned to his Lord's Will. -- May Almighty GOD fasten deep
these parting Counsels, on the Hearts of his dear People; keep them, feed them,
and watch over them in the Absence of their subordinate Steward and Watchman;
be with the Author and his reverend Brethren, gone forth with him, on the same
pious and important Design; make them fervent in Spirit, faithful in reproving,
and successful in dispensing the Word of the Kingdom; that through their
Labors the Camp may become the Birthplace of many Sons to GOD, and our whole
Army be made truly Christian-Soldiers, under the great Captain of our
Salvation. -- That he and his Brethren may be preserved amidst all Dangers; and
after our Army, under the divine Conduct, has obtained a glorious Victory, and
removed the unjust Encroachments of our perfidious Foes, be returned in Safety,
and made, for a great While yet to come, rich Blessings to their respective
Flocks. -- That this and all the painful Labors of his dear Servant, may be
blessed, for the spiritual and eternal Good of Souls, to the Praise of his own
most glorious GRACE, is the earnest Prayer of his Fellow Labourer, --

JOHN GRAHAM. And let all the People say AMEN.
Southbury, June 15th, 1756
A Farewell SERMON.
ACTS XX.37, 38. And they all wept sore, and fell upon Paul's Neck, and kissed
him: Sorrowing most of all for the Words which he spoke, that they should see
his Face no more. And they accompanied him to the Ship. --


SUCH is the State of this World wherein we dwell, and such the Nature of
Things here, that we can find nothing certain or permanent, but all Things in a
constant Fluctuation, and we are presented with a Scene of uninterrupted
Change. -- What Being then, endued with rational Powers, and acting like
itself, can choose his Portion here, or vainly expect Happiness in the Fruition
of such changing and uncertain Trifles, as all the Creatures of Time, and
Objects of Sense are? -- As we find a constant Vicissitude, every Good in the
Creature must necessarily be uncertain; so that what we call our Property
Today, may be in the Possession of another Tomorrow; and what we have raised
Expectations of enjoying, may never be ours. The Events of the present Moment
we see, but who can tell what will happen the next? All before us is dark and
unknown, except what is discovered by divine Revelation, or depends upon the
Promise of eternal Truth. -- No Wonder then, that such as discard Revelation,
not only become Skeptics, but fully commence a^^omplish'd Atheists, in the
Issue. -- We may look back and view those changing Scenes of an all-wise
Providence, that we have passed through; Peace and War, Sickness and Health,
Adversity and Prosperity, and set the one over against the other: But if we
look forward to a Space of Futurity, equal to that of our past Lives, who can
say what shall happen? Shall not most, or all of us, be in the eternal World,
where we shall see no more Changes? Blessed surely, and happy is he, that
watches and keeps his Garments. --

Friendship is one of the strictest Bonds, and sweetest Enjoyments of human
Nature; yet by Reason of the changeable State of Things, this also is Vanity,
and a Preparatory to Sorrow; for dearest Friends must part, and the strongest
Ties of Nature be dissolved; the most kind and generous Benefactor, the most
pleasant, obliging and agreeable Companion, the most sure and faithful Friend,
must be removed; Lover and Friend will be put far from us, and our Acquaintance
into Darkness, Psalm. 88, 18.

It is a most amiable, as well as essential Property of the Christian Religion,
that it disposes to Love and Kindness. Benevolence truly so called, and
brotherly Love are peculiar to the real Disciples of Jesus Christ. Though from
Constitution, or what is called, natural Temper, some may appear to be more
amicable, kind and obliging, than others; yet that gracious Disposition, which
the Gospel calls brotherly Love, has something truly divine, in its Nature; and
is specifically different from any Thing that mere Nature does, or can produce,
in fallen and depraved Humanity; there is something from Heaven rendered
visible in the Object, which suitably influences the Subject: The divine Image,
or Resemblance of God's moral Perfections in the Former, and an agreeable
Temper, or Relish for moral Beauty in the Latter, whence Love arises in the
Subject toward its Objects, from proper and genuine Motives. --

The Felicity of the heavenly State consists in perfect Love, Freedom from Sin,
and the full immediate Fruition of the ever-blessed God, who is the Sum and
Comprehension, of all Glory, Excellency, Perfection and Blessedness; and just
so far as we are disposed to love God here, and one another, upon the same
Grounds, and from the same Motives, as the blessed, and perfectly holy
Inhabitants of the World of Glory, love God and one another; just so far are we
real Christians, and no farther. Such a divine Temper as this, such a Relish
for moral Excellency, in the real undissembled Disciples of our blessed
Emmanuel, was the Source of all that Grief which possessed their Hearts, and
Spring of those Rivers of Tears, which flowed from their Eyes, at the Departure
of Paul, their spiritual Father, the great Apostle of the Gentiles. --

In the Words of our Text, the Holy Ghost intimates, that it was not merely the
Apostle's Departure for a Season, that so deeply affected their Hearts, but it
was this Expression of his, That they should see his Face no more, which
pierced them to the very Center of their Souls. -- The blessed Apostle went up
to Jerusalem, expecting Persecution, and his Expectation met with no
Disappointment; hence the Disciples greatly feared, or rather reasonably
concluded, that they should see his Face no more. Now the dark and gloomy
Moment was come, wherein they must be, in all Probability, for ever deprived of
so eminent an Instrument of their Comfort and Edification; but especially, that
by his Departure, they should lose such a bright Resemblance of God's moral
Perfections, and shining Example of every Christian Grace and Virtue, which had
in it the Force and Power of all other Motives, to excite them to Imitation:
This, ah! This, was what did rend their Hearts with Grief, and filled their
Eyes with Tears.

Upon the Whole, these Words teach us the endearing mutual Love of Christ's
Disciples, one toward another; and especially to their spiritual Guides and
Teachers: Yet that there is no Relation, in Life, so near and dear, but must be
dissolved, and a dark departing Hour must come; and such is the imperfect State
of the most sanctified Christian in this Life, that it would be next Door to
impossible to exclude every Degree of unsuitable Dependence on Ministers, or
inordinate Affections toward them; and no Doubt at Paul's Departure, there was
some Excess, in the Disciples Mourning. --

From the Words, in this View of them, we may infer these three Propositions,
as the Subject of the following Discourse.

I. That there is a very peculiar Love and Affection that subsists between the
true Disciples of Jesus Christ*

II. That the dearest Christian Friends should so live together and conduct
toward one another, as that when they are called to a Separation, they may
depart in Peace.

III. That God's People are liable to have too great a Dependence upon such as
faithfully labor for their spiritual and eternal Benefit. --

I. Prop. That there is a very peculiar Love and endearing Affection subsisting
between the true Disciples of JESUS CHRIST.

Love so much enters into both the Character and Temper of the true Christian,
that the divine Author of this holy Religion makes it the Criterion of
Sincerity, and discriminating Badge of his guileless Followers. It is the only
convincing visible Evidence of Discipleship; John 13, 35. By this shall all Men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another: And it is a
satisfying internal Evidence to every Believer's own Heart, i. John 3, 14. We
know that we have passed from Death unto Life, because we love the Brethren.
Love is an essential Branch of the Religion Christ taught, and a most important
Duty which he has, both by his indisputable Authority and bright Example,
enjoined. How often does he repeat it! How pressingly insist upon it! And with
what powerful Motives does he inculcate it upon the Minds of his Disciples!
John xiii, 12.xv, 34. -- And how full are the Apostolic Writings of the most
cogent Arguments and Incentives to this God-like Principle! 1 These. 4.9. But as
touching brotherly Love, ye need not that I write unto you, for ye yourselves
are taught of GOD, to love one another. -- Let brotherly Love continue -- above
all Things have fervent Charity. -- If we have not Charity, we are Nothing. --

One great Design of the Gospel, is, to train Men up, meeten, and qualify them
for the Fruitions and Employments of the heavenly State; to beget in them a
Relish for, and a Temper suited to that Kind of Felicity, that Heaven consists
in; which is perfect Love, eternal Peace, and universal Harmony. No contrary
Interests, no jarring Lusts, no unruly Passions, or inordinate Affections,
shall ever enter or subsist there; but perfect Love will for ever reign. --

This divine Propensity is the first Principle of all holy living, the very
Root of all Conformity to the preceptive Will of God. Our blessed Savior, who
spoke as never Man spoke; and taught as One having Authority, plainly declares,
that Love to God and our Neighbor, are the two grand Topics, or important
Commands, in which all, both the Law and the Prophets, are comprehended: And
the Apostle makes Love, as it were, the Comprehension of all Religion; when he
says, Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Nor is there any Thing, wherein the
Christian can more resemble the blessed God, than in This. Hence he says, He
that dwells in Love, dwells in God, for God is Love. Love, therefore, is
that divine Principle which sovereign Grace implants in the Soul. The Face of
Things veiled with any Degree of Darkness, may be brightened and illustrated by
their Opposites, and judged by their Contraries: So here, -- If we find a
malevolent Temper, or Ill Will toward our Brethren and Fellow-Men, especially
if it arises from those very Motives on which we ought to love them; it is a
sad Sign that we are destitute of a gracious Principle at Heart. -- All Malice,
Strife, Envy and Hatred, are diametrically opposite to the true Temper of a
real Christian. It is the peculiar Property of the Christian, to have the same
Mind, Temper or Disposition, in him, which was in Jesus Christ. He that is
joined to the Lord is one Spirit, like minded with Christ; that is, he loves
what Christ loves, and hates what Christ hates; upon the same Motives. He that
is begotten of GOD, and so is made truly gracious; so far as he is renewed and
sanctified, resembles his heavenly Father; and in nothing more than in Love.
All Christ's Disciples are in Love with, and bear a Resemblance of the same
infinitely amiable Object; therefore it is the Image of God, which the Saint
sees in his Brother; which is the Ground of his brotherly Love and Christian
Charity. He that loves Him who begets, loves Him also, who is begotten of
Him; and that, on the Account of these amiable Qualities, wherein he sees him
to resemble his heavenly Father: The divine Image discerned in Christians,
must, and cannot but attract every Heart that loves GOD supremely. The same
Reasons hold for our Love to the Brethren, as for our Love to GOD; though not
in the same Degree: GOD is infinitely, and absolutely amiable in himself; and
the Saint is derivatively amiable, and therefore to be loved; not for himself,
but for his Father's Sake, and in Proportion to that Degree of Likeness he
bears to him. -- by the Way --

Hence we may see, how much it concerns such as would be esteemed as Saints,
and held in Charity; to act out and exhibit a divine Temper in all their
Conduct. Your Brother cannot see your Heart, otherwise than as your Life,
Conduct and Conversation must be taken as an Index of the inward Frame and
Temper of your Mind. -- In vain therefore, do loose, frothy, carnal, careless
Professors claim the Charity of the People of GOD. -- In a Word,

How can it be but that such an endearing tender Love, should subsist among all
Christ's Disciples, one toward another; seeing they are Children of the same
Father, Branches of the same Family, Members of the same Body, fighting under
the same glorious Captain, all engaged in the same Interest, fed at the same
Table, led by the same Spirit, initiated into the same Privileges, traveling
in the same Way, running the same Race, and Heirs of the same Inheritance; nay
enrolled Citizens of the same new Jerusalem, where they all hope, ere long, to
meet in one great and general Assembly, to take Possession, each for himself,
of a Crown and Kingdom, dwell for ever together in Fullness of Joy, bow before
the Throne, and with all their Hearts and Tongues join in one eternal Song of
Praise: Ascribing Glory and Honor, Thanksgiving, and Blessing to God, and to
the Lamb for ever and ever. --

II. Prop. It concerns christian Friends and Brethren so to live and conduct
toward one another, that when they are called to a Separation, they may part
in Peace. --

Here I shall, agreeable to the present moving and affecting Occasion, consider
briefly, two Things.

i. That such is the present State of Things in this Life, that the dearest
Friends must part.

ii. Show how they ought to conduct, one toward another, while together; so as
their Parting may be comfortable and peaceful. -- I am to show,

i. That such is the State of Things in this Life, that the dearest Friends
must Part. -- Here let it be considered,

1. That divine Providence may call Them to part, though they be continued in
Life, and so in a State of Probation. This is so much our own present Case,
that no other Instance need be introduced for Illustration. I am by an
all-disposing Providence, called, so far as I am capable of judging in the
Case, to part with my reverend and greatly esteemed Brethren, my beloved People
and dear Family; and were it not that I fear lest I should be found to
counteract infinite Wisdom in it is providential Conduct; my strong Affections
to Those I leave behind, in the various Relations of Life, must have
preponderated all other Reasons, determined my Continuance, and so prevented my
present Design. The Scene, which is just now opening to me, and the Province I
am ready to enter upon, I can most freely say is what I never have either
coveted or sought after; and as I have not, my dear People, looked upon your
generous and self-denying Consent to my leaving you, in Order to serve the
public Interest, as any Argument at all of your Want of suitable Affections to
your Minister; but as the genuine Fruit of a truly generous and public Spirit;
so I hope you will not entertain my Departure (with your own manifest Consent)
as arising from any Want of Love to you, or of real and tender Regard for your
Good; for it is the common Cause that I am still going to plead, and (as far as
I shall through Grace be enabled) to promote. -- As I do not entertain the least
Doubt of your Affections toward me, even far beyond my Deserving; so I am very
conscious of my own tender Regard to you, and hearty Concern for your
Prosperity and Welfare in all your Interests. Yet how closely soever we may be
knit together in Affection; we must part, at least for a Season. -- None can so
well tell, how dear a People are to a faithful Minister of Christ as he
himself; nor indeed can he so well judge of this, as when he is called to part
with them: But be the Ties ever so strict, the Love ever so great, even though it
should exceed that between David and Jonathan, and so our Nature should recoil
with greatest Reluctance; yet he who has this Name upon his Vesture and upon
his Thigh, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, has an undeniable Right to
separate us, at Pleasure; and deny us the Comfort of Co-habitation, Converse or
Communion together, for just so long a Season as his infinite Wisdom sees fit.

2. Death will most surely part us. -- This relentless Tyrant, who has levelled
all preceding Generations with the Dust, spares neither for Age, or Sex,
Relation or Character on Earth. He strikes as boldly at the Palace of the King,
as at the Cottage of the Beggar; regardless of Royalty, unmoved by all the
struggling Reluctances of dying Nature, and wholly unaffected with all the
Groans and Tears of the Afflicted, he strikes his Dart through the Liver, gives
the mortal Blow, causes human Beauty at once to decay as a Moth, and sends our
earthly Tabernacles to inhabit the dark and solitary Mansions of all his
Subjects, that House prepared for all Living: Where we must abide till the
Heavens are no more. We must ere long, as well as All that have gone before us,
take our Turn in the dark and doleful Valley of the Shadow of Death, bid an
everlasting adieu to Time and Sense, with all their Objects and Fruitions, and
become Strangers to all the Living; and how soon this will be the Case, or what
One of us will be the next Trophy of that grand Conqueror of human Nature, who
can tell? I am now going into the Midst of Deaths, where his Darts fly thick,
making an awful Carnage, by spreading Slaughter and Bloodshed, and which of
them may have Commission to smite my Heart, and dislodge my Soul, no One
besides the great Author of Life knows: But should I escape, what may I expect
to hear, but the bitter heart-rending Groans of the Wounded and Expiring, and
view the affecting crimson Scene, of Garments rolled in Blood! What can my Mind
forbode, but to see my Fellow-Mortals, on all Hands, falling by the prepared
Instruments of Death and Devastation; and to hear Many, whilst their guilty
Souls are passing away by the gaping Wound, or sallying forth in a Flood of
reeking Gore, cry out in dying Agonies for the Savior, they have all their
Lifetime slighted and lived Strangers unto, whilst with the most affecting
Accents of bitterest Grief, too late, alas! too late, they lament the Sins and
Follies of a misspent Life, and feel the now remediless Misery of a Christless
State. -- Most awful Scene! Most rueful Spectacle!

Nor am I insensible, that I cannot abide, by Reason of Death: The Prophets do
not live for ever! -- When ever as an Hireling I have fulfilled my Day, and
arrived at the Bounds over which I cannot pass, I must go the Way whence I
shall not return, whether it be at Home or Abroad, in the Field or on the Bed,
amongst Friends or Enemies, in a natural or violent Manner, in the full Vigor
of Life or under the Decline of old Age; in that Way which infinite Wisdom
pleases, I know God will bring me to Death, and to the House prepared for all
Living: And should the Kindness and Indulgence of Heaven make my frail Life
it is Care, preserve amidst the Instruments of Death, guard my Constitution from
the Power of those Diseases, that are the usual and almost inseparable
Attendants of the Camp, and restore me to you again; I never -- never expect to
find you all alive. You are I know deeply concerned for my Safety and
Preservation, and afraid I shall not live to return; but has Death nothing to
do but in the Field? May not you be smitten by the Pestilence that walks in
Darkness, as suddenly as I may fall by the Arrow that flies at Noonday? What
therefore I would say both to myself and to you all is this, Prepare for Death.
Live, Oh! Live in a constant Readiness for that solemn, that trying Moment of
your great and last Change. -- So many Things must be hinted, in the Space of a
few Moments, that I must hasten to say, --

2. How Brethren ought to live and walk together in Order to part in Peace. Now
in Order to a comfortable and peaceful Parting, you must live and walk just so
as you will wish you had when you come to dye, or so as to have no
Self-Condemnation, or the Sting of a reproaching Conscience when you come to
part. Every personal and relative Duty must be religiously attended and
faithfully performed; all the Rules of Christianity, relating either to Heart
or Life, must be practiced; good Examples must be set; every Opportunity and
Advantage must be wisely improved, to promote the Good of our Fellow-Men in all
their Interests; their Characters tenderly used and defended, their outward
Estates promoted, and their Prosperity rejoiced in, their Adversity, to our
Power, prevented, and grieved for; the spiritual Interest of their precious
Souls sought and promoted, as far as ever the Influence of a pious Example,
wholesome Counsels and faithful Reproofs can reach. -- Now my dear Brethren we
are coming to the Trial, and may have Occasion to review our past Conduct
toward one another. And now, just so far as you have thus conducted toward
your Minister; so far as you have been tender of my Character, befriended my
Interest and Influences, and promoted my Usefulness in my sacred Office, I
heartily thank you for it; and you will now experience the Comfort of it, --
upon our Parting; even though it should prove a final Parting as to Time. So far
as I have in any Respects failed toward you, I entreat your Forgiveness, and
earnestly implore divine Pardon from a heavenly Father, through his beloved Son,
the great Mediator. I am sensible of various and great Imperfections, and my
Subjection to like Passions and Infirmities with others; yet I am conscious of
a painful Desire, and honest Endeavor to procure and promote the eternal
Welfare of precious Souls; and in every Respect to answer the great Design of
my sacred Office. The little Fruit I have brought forth, and the small Success
I have had in winning Souls to Jesus Christ, pains my very Heart: Not that I
mean to reproach you, my dear Hearers, but to mourn over you, in Imitation of
my compassionate Lord and Master. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! etc. -- How often
would I have gathered thy Children! etc. How often have I had Reason to
complain, with the unsuccessful Prophet, Lord who has believed our Report, and
to whom has the Arm of the Lord been revealed! Yet fruitless as my Labors have
been, I must leave you; and what will be the Consequence with Regard to you,
God only knows; but into his merciful Hands I commit, and to his compassionate
Care I leave you, with myself and my dear Family. -- And proceed to the

III. Prop. People are disposed to have too great a Dependence upon the
faithful Ministers of Christ.

Men are exceeding prone to trust in Means, or rely upon Instruments, that have
done good to them; and I am the more afraid that this is the Case with you,
while I see such large Expressions of over bearing Grief now I am going to
leave you. O what mean you, my People, thus to weep and to break my Heart! I
feel a Desire to comply with the Call of Providence, whatever befall me.
Remember I am but a frail Instrument, and have this Treasure in an earthen
Vessel: I can give no Efficacy to the Truths I deliver. Paul may Plant and
Apollos Water. It is God, who gives the Increase. O! then, weep not for me,
but weep for Yourselves and your Children. Beware of Extremes, neither despise
Means, nor idolize them. To trust in Means is to set them in the Room of
Christ, which is very dishonouring to the divine Redeemer, and therefore
extremely provoking to an holy and jealous God. -- Means are indeed very
precious Blessings, but it is only by the Influence of the blessed Spirit of
all Grace, that Means are of saving Benefit. They will not awaken one stupid
secure Sinner, or so much as restrain from the Practice of one Sin; far less
will they change the Heart of Stone into an Heart of Flesh, or alter the moral
Temper and Disposition of the Soul, without a divine Blessing, or the immediate
and powerful Agency of the Holy Ghost. Doubtless the Christians of Miletus and
Ephesus had too great a Dependence on Paul, when drowned in Floods of Tears,
they fell on his Neck, with Expressions of uncommon Grief at his Departure. But
our whole Reliance should be on God alone, in the Use of Means: This is the Way
for a Blessing. --

What now remains is to make some Improvement of what has been observed.

I am now to take my Leave of you, the Flock of my Charge; you may easily
believe my sorrowful Heart is greatly born down with a Sense of those Things
that have now been spoken. -- I remember well my Ordination Vow, and know I
must give an Account in the Capacity of a Watchman, and as One, who has been
charged in particular to Watch for your Souls. The Occasion that calls me away
is melancholy, my Departure is attended with Sorrow, and the State, wherein I
leave this dear Flock of the Lord, grieves me sorely. I must leave Many awfully
asleep in carnal Security, some just born into Christ's spiritual Kingdom, who
need Milk and not strong Meat; whilst damnable Errors abound, ravening Wolves
seeking to devour the Sheep, little Foxes spoiling the tender Vines. My
Vineyard appears to me in a deplorably dangerous State; the Hedge broken down,
the Watchman called away, Enemies on every Side, fashionable deistical Heresy
just in the Bud, Moravian Inconsistency and Jargon, with all the wheedling and
delusive Insinuations of Flattery, and false Pretenses to Love, Meekness, and
Humility, ready to scatter Snares and Darkness in your Paths, by which it is a
Thousand to One but Some will be caught, and eternally undone. -- I most
earnestly beseech you, from the very Bottom of my Heart, in the Bowels of the
compassionate Jesus, that you do not take the Opportunity of my Absence to
destroy Yourselves. -- If you dread eternal Damnation, and desire everlasting
Happiness, take the Counsels that have been given you, and live in the Religion
I have taught you, and be on your Guard. -- Watch and Pray that ye enter not
into Temptation. --

The more Love and Friendship there is among us, the more grievous is our
Parting; but if our Love be of the right Sort, and well grounded, we love God
above all, and one another in Him. -- Though I must leave you, yet I hope and
trust the blessed God will never leave nor forsake you; but the great Shepherd
will himself feed the Sheep and Lambs of his own Flock, which he has purchased
with his own Blood, and watch over you for Good, Day and Night. I thank you for
all your Kindness toward me, and pray God forgive such as have merited a
different Character. -- However trying it be to me to part with You and my
Family (which I leave with You, and for whom I now bespeak your tender Care and
Kindness in my Absence) yet I have this to support me, even the Testimony of my
own Conscience, that I have not shunned to declare the whole Counsel of God
unto you; and I doubt not but I have a Testimony in your own Breasts, that I
have not trifled with you, or only complimented you with dry fashionable
Harangues, or pleased your carnal Taste, and fed your natural Pride with polite
Declamations, in Praise of heathenish Morality: Nor have I studied to please
Men, but God who put me in Trust with the Ministry of his dear Son. Ye are my
Witnesses, my Brethren, that a crucified Christ has been the great and
delightful Theme of my public Performances, and how I have ever insisted on
the great and essential Doctrines of Faith, Repentance and Regeneration. -- You
have not this to say, in your own Excuse, that you have never heard that there
is a Holy Ghost, never heard the Way of Life, and Gospel-Terms of Peace with
God: Or never had the Nature of Conversion opened and explained to you, and the
absolute Necessity of it warmly urged upon your Consciences. I have never
taught you that the Law is abated in Proportion as we have lost our Power; nor
have I ever endeavored to gain you over to that God-contemning deistical
Conceit, that the great God has made the Creature his last End, and regards not
the Honor and Glory of his adorable Perfections, by far so much as he does the
Creature's Happiness; or that no Afflictions or Sufferings are of a penal
Nature, but merely corrective and purgatorial; and that Such as are obstinate,
and will not be reclaimed here, shall, when they die, commence a new State of
Probation under more severe Discipline, until they are brought to a right
Temper of Mind, and so in the final Result all rational Nature shall be happy;
and herein the ultimate End of the great Creator be fully attained. -- All such
Stuff, I now take an Opportunity, to bear public Testimony against as
damnable, and therefore most dangerous Heresy. God must be esteemed the wisest
as well as best of Beings, and therefore must accordingly esteem Beings, and
the Happiness and Honor, of each One of them according to their true Worth and
Excellency. -- I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. For it is the Power of
God to every One of every Nation, that believes; and it pleases God by the
Foolishness of it to save Those that believe, that in this Way he may confound
the Wisdom of the Wise, or crafty Disputers, of this World. I am cheerfully
willing to venture my own eternal Interest upon the Truth of that Religion, I
have taught you -- I hope I am far from making a vain glorious Boasting: But
the Occasion, with all its attending Circumstances and Prospects, will justify
me in every candid and unprejudiced Mind, when I say, I have never daubed with
untemper'd Mortar, nor sewed Pillows under your Arm-holes; but have labored to
search the Wound to the Bottom, and to beat you off from all Trust in your own
Strength and Righteousness, and lead you to Jesus Christ for complete
Salvation; and still I love you, and long for your Salvation; and my Hearts
Desire and Prayer to God for you, Night and Day whilst in this World, shall be
that you all may be saved. -- I have been careful to leave you under as good
Circumstances as I possibly can, and am willing farther to spend and be spent
for you; and hope, through the good Hand of my God upon me, yet to labor amongst
You. -- But the Will of the Lord be done. --

Have I not repeatedly called upon you, that are Parents, to order your
Families according to your Covenant-Vows, by governing your Households in the
Fear of the Lord, instilling good Principles into Youth, training them up for
God, in the Way they should go, whilst their Minds are tender and easily
impressed; and by setting before them an Example of all virtuous and holy
Living? How frequently have I urged upon you that are young, Obedience and Duty
to Parents, and to remember your Creator in the Days of your Youth, to forsake
the Foolish and live, and walk in the Way of Understanding? But what Effect my
Counsels and Warnings have generally had upon Old and Young, I know not; and
now perhaps this may be the Case, that Ye shall see my Face no more: Let me
therefore, fill up our parting Interview with what a beloved People may justly
expect from a faithful Steward in the House of God. -- Suffer me then, briefly
to hint to you the Sins that are most prevalent amongst us, and call loudly for
Repentance and Reformation: And finish with my best Counsel and Advice to you.
-- Time will not allow me either to make a methodical Arrangement of common
Vices, or open up their Nature and Aggravations; but are not these provoking
Evils found amongst us? Great Contempt of Gospel Grace; Profanation of the
Lord's Day; mispense of precious Time; awful Security in Sin, and under
Judgments; Neglect of Worship, Instructions and Government in Families; as well
as great and manifest Carele^^^ess respecting public Worship and Ordinances; a
great Want of brotherly Love, whence arise Backbitings, Slanderings, letigious
Lawsuits, and unchristian Contentions of diverse Kinds; Intemperance,
Chambering and Wantonness, Rioting and Drunkenness, Pride and Covetousness;
with sundry more that might be named. -- My parting Advice therefore, to Old
and Young, is to reform and repent of all these Abominations; and O! Be
concerned, yea even dread a Continuance in a carnal, Christless and unrenewed
Estate. -- Bend your Minds to the Things of another World, and labor to keep
this World under your Feet. -- Get into Jesus Christ, and make thorough Work of
Religion; earnestly cry to the Father of Lights to give you a saving
Acquaintance with his dear Son, and an Heart to love Him supremely, and one
another fervently. -- Be constant and importunate in secret Devotions; give Way
to no Temptations; bear hard against every Sin. -- Maintain religious
Conferences, and Seasons of Prayer* search the Scriptures daily; study the
Things that make for Peace, and whereby you may edify one another. -- I
earnestly bespeak your servent Prayers to God for me, that I may be faithful to
the Trust reposed in me, preserved amidst all Dangers, and by the Will of God
have a safe and joyful Return unto you. -- If this is my final Remove, -- Let
me beseech you; beware of every One who would bring you another Gospel than you
have received; even though it were an Angel from Heaven receive him not, hear him
not, neither bid him Godspeed: But if you have any Regard to the Interest of
Christ, any Love to your own Souls, and the Souls of your dear Posterity, seek
One to succeed me, who gives all proper Evidence both in Conduct and Preaching,
that he has saving Acquaintance with Jesus Christ, the great Subject of
Gospel-Preaching, and the Life of God in his own Soul. Never, ah! never, my
dear Brethren, knowingly commit the Guidance of your Souls, and the Souls of
Yours to the Blind. I had much rather, you should spend the Lord's Day in
Prayer, in Reading and Hearing sound practical and experimental Discourses,
that have been published by godly Divines, than in a cold, formal Round of
fashionable Declamations from this Desk. -- O may a merciful God forbid, this
should ever be your sad Case. And should You and I never meet any more, till we
meet in the eternal World, let this last Advice of a departed Friend abide upon
your Minds. -- Finally Brethren I commend you to God and to the Word of his
Grace. -- Beware lest after my Departure grievous Wolves enter in among you,
not sparing, but rending and devouring the Flock. And lest even from among
Yourselves Men should arise speaking perverse Things to draw away Disciples
after them. -- Be perfect, be of one Mind; live in Love and Peace. And may the
God of Peace dwell with you. To the Youth, ye dear Lambs of this Fold! as I
have often heretofore, so I now, once more, and perhaps once for all, beseech
you to flee all youthful Lusts; betake Yourselves to a serious and religious
Life; learn to pray and live to God. If your Parents are faithful you will hear
many good Counsels, and improving Instructions, as well as be under the daily
Influence of pious Examples, besure hearken to the One, and imitate the Other,
and herein comply with the Advice you have repeatedly had from this Desk; and
if I should see your Faces no more in this World, let me find none of you,
among that wretched Crew on Christ's left Hand at the last Day, lest all the
Pains taken with you, and Privileges enjoyed by you, enhance your Guilt, and
then aggravate your Misery; and I, who am now your compassionate Counselor, be
then a swift Witness against you. But pursue Repentance toward God, and Faith
in Jesus Christ* that ye may be found in Him, and we may rejoice together; that
when I shall be called for, I may with Pleasure answer, Lord here am I and the
Children which thou have given me. -- Which God of his infinite Mercy grant,
through Jesus Christ, to whom be Honor and Glory for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

