Mr. Foxcroft's SERMON, ON Like precious Faith, etc.

Like precious FAITH obtained, through the Righteousness of our GOD and
Savior, by all the true Servants of Christ.

A SERMON, Preached (in Sum) at the Old-Church-Lecture in Boston, Thursday,
March 25th. 1756.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT, A. M. One of the Pastors of the said Church.

Luke xvii. 5. And the Apostles said unto the LORD, Increase our Faith.

Joh. ix. 35, -- 38. Jesus said unto him, Do thou believe on the Son of God?
He answered and said, -- LORD, I believe. And he worshipped Him.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND, Printed and Sold by Green and Russell, at their
Printing-Office near the Custom-House, and next to the Writing-School in
Queen Street. M,DCC,LVI.

Like precious FAITH obtained, by all the true Servants of Christ, etc.
2 PET. I. 1. Simon Peter, a Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them
which have obtained like precious Faith with us, through the Righteousness of
God and our Savior Jesus Christ.


IN these Words, which contain the Inscription of this Epistle, we have --

1. The Writer's Name and Style. " Simon Peter, a Servant and an Apostle of
Jesus Christ." -- It is not, like some other of the sacred Epistles, anonymous:
but in the Face of it carries the Penman's Name; as well the additional one his
Divine Master had put upon him, as that which his Parents had originally given
him. -- Also to contribute Authority and Weight to his Letter, and gain
Attention to it, he superadds a notable Appellative, signifying his being an
inspired Minister of Christ, and suggesting that he wrote as he was moved by
the Holy Ghost. -- But while he claims the Honor of being an Apostle, he does
it in such a Manner as at the same Time discovers his deep Humility. For he
affects not to distinguish himself by any pompous Characterisms; as, the Chief
of the Apostles; -- the First Apostle, -- or, the Apostle of the Circumcision
(much less by those vainglorious Titles, which his pretended Successor at Rome
arrogates to himself; such as, the universal Bishop, Vicar of Christ, supreme
Head of the Church on Earth, or the like) but only calls himself in simple
Terms, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, in common with others dignified with the
same reverend Appellation. And even this he qualifies, by joining with it that
most diminutive Title, a Servant. Though the Lord had said to his Apostles,
"Henceforth I call you not Servants, but Friends"; yet Peter modestly declines
the latter, and assumes to himself the former Denomination. Truly he glories in
being Christ's Servant; notwithstanding he was an Apostle, and more than a
Prophet, yea, greater in the Kingdom of God than John the Baptist himself,
though among them that are born of Women there had not before risen one greater
than he. -- Even Apostles, with all the Honors of their immediate Divine
Mission, Inspiration and extraordinary Gifts, had but a Ministerial Power in
the Church: they were not Lords over God's Heritage. They own themselves
Servants of Christ; and even Servants of the Church for Jesus sake. -- It Is a
humble, yet truly honorable Title, this, a Servant of Christ. And indeed it
belongs to Christians in common; who have all one Master, and are all Brethren
in Christ: the Ministers of the Word being only a Sort of upper Servants in
their Lord's Family, who have some special Trusts committed to them, as
Stewards and Overseers, to feed the Household, to inspect and regulate it, and
to enlarge it, by drawing in others to become the Servants of Christ.

Let us all then bear in Mind the Title we sustain, the Profession we make; and
study to adorn it by showing all good Fidelity, as becomes Servants, in our
Lord's Business. What will it profit us, my Brethren, to wear an empty Title!
To style ourselves Servants of Christ, and yet not do our Master's Will; but do
the Will of Man, or the Will of the Flesh, and serve diverse Lusts and
Pleasures! -- Or can we imagine, that Christ will be pleased with our giving
him an empty Title; complimenting him with the Name of Master and Lord, while
yet in Works we deny him, or at least regard Iniquity in our Hearts, but
disregard his Honor and Interest! "If I be a Master (says the Lord) where is
my Fear?" And if we be his Servants, where is our Duty? where is the Homage and
Obedience we owe him? -- "But will thou know, O vain Man, that Faith without
Works is dead!" That the mere Title of Servant, and idle Professions of
Service, will avail us nothing; nay, will rather turn to our vast Disadvantage
in the End, and dreadfully aggravate our future Condemnation, in proportion as
it enhances our present Guilt!

What says the Scripture? "That Servant which knew his Lord's Will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his Lord's Will, shall be beaten
with many Stripes." A Consideration, that should awaken our most serious
Concern and Dread, lest, while we call ourselves Servants of Christ, we incur
the Reproach and Doom of slothful and unprofitable Servants; as having been
negligent of our Duty to him, practically independent of him, and only serving
other Lords, who have no Right of Dominion over us. "Know ye not, that to whom
ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are whom ye obey?" --
The Case is peremptorily decided by an infallible Judge. "No Man can serve two
Masters: ye cannot serve God and Mammon." -- So neither can we serve Christ and
Belial; or Christ and Sin. Vain therefore are our Pretensions to be Christ's
Servants, so long as Sin reigns in our mortal Bodies, and we obey it in the
Lusts thereof. And is not that universally the Course of this World? -- What
the Apostle Paul charges on the Roman Christians, "Ye were the Servants of
Sin," such by Nature, and such by Practice, is it not applicable to all in
every Age? And while we are the Servants of Sin, the same inspired Writer
assures us, we are "free from Righteousness," Now surely "they that are such,
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ. -- But if by a regenerating Change, if by
Faith purifying our Hearts, we are "made free from Sin, and become the Servants
of Righteousness, having our Fruit unto Holiness," then are we indeed Servants
of Christ; such as are now accepted of him, and whom he will in the Day of
Judgment distinguish by that gracious Euge, "Well done, thou good, and faithful
Servant! Enter into the Joy of thy Lord." -- O that all who are making their
Boast of God, and saying to Christ, LORD, LORD, would allow themselves to
recollect their past Experiences, to review God's Dealings with their Souls,
and enter into a solemn Self-Debate, whether they have ever yet passed from
Death unto Life, in the New Birth, that most important Change. For, as our Lord
has given us the express Assurance, Verily, verily, except a Man be born again
(born of the Spirit) he cannot see the Kingdom of God. -- Nor are any in Truth
the Servants of Christ, but such as are the Children of God by Faith in Christ,
-- obedient Children. Hereby do we know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments.

And our Text instructs me to remind myself, and my Brethren, who are the
Servants of Christ in a peculiar Sense, as Ministers of his Word, of the solemn
Charge and Vows of God upon us, to take Heed to ourselves, that we be indeed
sanctified and meet for the Master's Use, prepared unto every good Work; that
we study to show ourselves approved unto God, Workmen who need not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth: and to take Heed to our Ministry,
which we have received in the Lord, that we fulfill it, in all the various Parts
and Labors of it; watching for Souls, as they that must give Account. -- So,
when the Master of the House comes, though ever so soon or suddenly, to require
of us an Account of our Stewardship, we shall give it with Joy, and not with
Grief; and be Partakers of the Glory, that shall be revealed, even the Grace
that is to be bro't unto us at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, that great
Shepherd of the Sheep, the chief Bishop of Souls, and the Lord of all. To Him
be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Thus much for the first Thing in the Text. I pass now to what I had
principally in View. We have here,

2. A Description of those to whom Peter writes this Epistle: namely, To them
which have obtained like precious Faith with us, through the Righteousness of
God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

It is called an Epistle general, -- not as being written by one that claimed
to be Head of the Church catholic, or universal Bishop, but as being of common
Concernment and Use; and directed, not to any particular Person or Society, but
to the Saints indefinitely. Accordingly, the Character of true Saints or
Servants of Jesus Christ, contained in the Superscription, being applicable to
all such in every Age, indifferently, the present as well as primitive, I
propose now to consider this in its excellent and various Contents, whether
expressed, or implied: and shall then conclude with some suitable Application
of the Subject, as the Time will allow.

Let it be observed distinctly,

I. Here is the Faith of the Saints: which is a primary and most essential
Article in the Character of good and acceptable Servants of Christ.

Now, Faith is sometimes spoken of in it is objective Notion; as meaning the
Doctrine of Christ, "the Faith of the Gospel, -- "the Faith once delivered to
the Saints. But in our Text, as in many other places, it is thought, Faith is
to be understood in the subjective Notion; as meaning the Grace, or evangelical
Principle in the Heart, that goes under that Name. The Word seems most
frequently used in the practical and experimental Sense: As, where we read of
"the Shield of Faith, -- of "the Joy of Faith, -- of "living by Faith, -- of
"showing our Faith by our Works, etc. Undoubtedly in all such places it refers
to an inward vital Principle, whereby "with the Heart Man believes unto
Righteousness." -- This being a radical and primary Grace, fundamental to the
other Graces of the christian Life, always subsisting in Union with them, and
influential to the Exercise of them, they are thought to be sometimes all
collected and summed up in this one comprehensive Word, Faith. -- But at other
times it is to be considered in a more limited Sense, in its simpler Notion, as
a particular Grace, though a cardinal and leading one. For Instance, the Apostle
in our Context exhorts Christians to "add unto their Faith Virtue. -- So
elsewhere it is said, "Faith works by Love. -- And of Abraham we are told
"how Faith wrought with his Works, and by Works was Faith made perfect.

The Word, Faith, seems indeed sometimes applied only by way of Allusion, or
Accommodation to Men's Pretenses and Professions: as, where we read, "What does
it profit, though a Man say he has Faith, and have not Works? Can Faith save
him?" i. e. Can a mere worldy Ostentation of Faith, or "a Man's saying he has
Faith," profit him to salvation? -- So, where it is said, "Faith without Works,
is dead," this means only a verbal Profession of Faith, exclusive of its
genuine Effects. It does not imply, that there is any such Thing in Fact,
properly speaking in the Sense of the Gospel, as a Faith that is dead; a really
existent true Faith, separate from Works. For the Faith thus described,
whatever it may possibly have of real Existence, yet is but feigned Faith, if
it be considered in a relative View, and under the Notion of its being that
which the Gospel-Precept requires of us, by the Name of Faith, in Order to
Salvation. Because the Faith of the Gospel, or that unfeigned Faith which the
Gospel-Requisition refers to, is ever a living practical Principle; of an
operative and an imperative Nature; attended with a prevalent moral Efficacy
and Command over us; always disposing and enabling us to follow Holiness; and
producing an habitual Obedience in Heart and Life to all the Divine
Commandments, as believing them to be holy, just, and good. Hence we read of
"the Obedience of Faith, -- "the Work of Faith, etc. -- But often there is the
Profession and some Show of this Faith, and Men imagine themselves Subjects of
the true Gospel Grace, although it appears not in all its genuine Actings and
Effects. Now such a wordy Profession and airy Show is but analogically and
equivocally styled Faith. -- I look upon it only as Irony or Sarcasm, when it
is said in the Epistle of James, "Show me thy Faith without thy Works." It is a
Proposal founded on an absurd Hypothesis; on the Supposition of an impossible
Case, or a Thing never existent in Fact; Activity and Efficiency being
inseparable Properties of a lively (i. e. unfeigned) Faith. -- There may be a
sort of Philosophical or mere moral Faith, which has something of Reality in
it, and may produce some real Fruits: yet if it claim to be the evangelical and
saving Grace, it is in Scripture-Account but Faith falsely so called. --
However, sometimes by Way of Allusion or Accommodation to human Pretensions and
some visible Appearances, (...) has put upon it the Title of Faith, which yet
is little or nothing better than the Faith of Devils, who are said to believe
and tremble. Such a Belief surely is ineffectual to the proper End of Faith,
the Salvation of the Soul. At best, it is comparatively but an impotent frigid
Opinion, a lifeless Notion swimming in the Brain, and never descending to the
Heart, nor powerfully influencing the Life. Or, whatever Resemblance there may
be of Faith, in its Effects and Operations, if it be not a Principle inlaid in
the Heart, it is but a Counterfeit; and far from being that Faith which is
intended in the Gospel-Demand. Undoubtedly a Profession of Faith, how specious
soever, that is without Works, internal, as well as external, corresponding to
it, is but Faith which is dead; dead in it self, as well as dead to the proper
Ends and Uses of Faith: and no more deserves the Name of Faith, than an
inanimate breathless Corpse does that of a Man. In such a Case, the Scripture
intimates, that a Man does but say he has Faith: and boasts of a false Gift,
like the Man that pretends to Charity, though he shows it only in good Wishes and
Professions of Benevolence, while he neglects the proper Offices of Love and
Kindness.

Faith, in its most simple primary Idea, and strictest Acceptance, I grant, is
Assent, -- Assent upon Testimony. -- Divine Faith is an Assent upon Divine
Testimony. The Subject Matter of this Belief is, in general, the Revelation God
has made of his Mind and Will in his holy Word; though, more especially and
eminently the Record he has given of his Son, and the Promise of Life which is
in Christ Jesus. Gospel-Faith, whether in its doctrinal or practical Notion,
does not terminate in the Mediator, as such: but ascends to the supreme Being,
the God of Truth and God of all Grace. Therefore it is sometimes called Faith
toward God. Yet the same is also called Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
It commonly has this latter Denomination, not only with a View to distinguish
it from that Faith of Jews and others, which is defective either in its Nature,
Matter, or Grounds of Belief, but likewise to signify Christ's being its
proximate and special Object. Gospel-Faith more immediately respects the
Savior, and is eminently a Belief of the Peculiars of the Christian
Revelation, -- of the Truth as it is in Jesus. Nor indeed (as I said) an idle
Notional Belief, a cold and unaffecting Assent: but a warm and vital,
impressive Persuasion, rooted in the Heart, and producing all correspondent
Biasses (...) the Will, all agreeable Appetites and Passions. In the Scheme of
Salvation, and in Experience, Sanctification and Belief are connected; and the
latter instrumental to the former. We are therefore said to be sanctified through
Faith. -- Viewed particularly in this light, as the sanctifying Principle, and
regarded in its Connections and Results, Belief or Faith admits of a complex
Notion: and hence the Word seems used sometimes in Scripture with a Latitude,
or in an extensive Sense, taking in concomitant Graces and consequent Effects,
the genuine Evidences of its Sincerity; such as Love to God, Sorrow for Sin,
Resolutions and Endeavors of Obedience, etc. -- "Faith indeed comprehends in
it self the Seeds of all other Graces; which will spring up in due Time, and in
their proper Orders. -- "No sooner is any Measure of Belief entered, than
accordingly it influences the Soul to suitable Actings; and some of them are so
immediate and inseparable, that they seem rather to be the same Thing with that
Belief wrought by the Spirit, than any consequential Actings of it.

Belief, or Faith, considered according to the Gospel-Use of the Word, does in
its essential Notion imply Heart-Consent to the Method of Grace in saying us by
a Mediator, cordial Approbation of the appointed Redeemer, entire Submission
to, and Trust in him. -- Faith, viewed in its Reference to Justification before
God, nextly and especially regards Christ, as the End of the Law for
Righteousness to them which believe; or as made Sin for them, and made
Righteousness to them; and signally operates by way of Recumbence or Dependence
on him for Justification of Life. This is judged to be emphatically the leading
uniting Act of Faith. -- Hence those peculiar Phrases in Scripture, of
believing in (or into) Christ, -- Faith in his Blood, -- Faith in the
Righteousness of Christ; as in our Text, according to the Reading which some
prefer. -- Faith, though it knows Christ is not divided, yet viewing him in his
distinct Capacities, primarily and very eminently regards him in his Office of
a Priest; as having once offered himself a Sacrifice for Sin, and entered with
his own Blood into the holy Place: and accordingly receives, approves, and
makes Use of him in that Capacity; trusting in him as the only Mediator both of
Atonement and Intercession, the Procurer of Pardon and Peace, Righteousness and
Life. -- Yet Faith extends its Views and Applications to him in his other
Capacities. It eyes Christ in his Office of a Prophet; considers him as the
Apostle, as well as High Priest of our Profession: and accordingly repairs to
him for Instruction, by his Word and Spirit, in Divine Things, and trusts in
him as the Light of the World. It also eyes him in his Office of a King, bows
to his Scepter, and confides in him as the Prince of Life, the grand Trustee of
Divine Power, and supreme Administrator of Divine Government and Judgment, the
sacred Repository and immediate Source of Divine Blessings, for all that Grace
and Comfort we need; realizing the Exhibition of all Good to us in the
Gospel-Promise, relying on his Faithfulness and Ability to fulfill his Word, and
looking for the Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal Life.

In Sum, to believe in Christ imports, not merely that with the Mouth we make
Confession of him, in the united Characters of Prince and Savior, the Messiah
promised to the Fathers, but that we believe in him with all our Heart; that
under a Conviction of our Sin and Misery, of the Excellency and Greatness of
his Salvation, and of his Sufficiency and Willingness to save to the uttermost
them which come unto God by him, we do accordingly receive him for our Savior;
sincerely entertaining and employing him in all the Offices of his Mediation;
applying and leaning to him, or resting in him alone, for all the Benefits of
his Redemption, as exhibited to us in the Gospel, and freely granted to all
that are sincerely willing to accept the same, and do commit themselves to him
to be saved by him. -- So that Faith imply's a Persuasion (not indeed, that
Christ and all his Benefits are actually ours before our Believing, or that we
are in a pardoned and justified State already, but) that Christ and his
Benefits are in the Gospel-Promise held forth to us, in such a Manner, as to
warrant our seeking them, and to give Liberty for our accepting them, according
to the Tenor of the Word of Reconciliation. "In this Sense (says a judicious
Divine) all these Things belong so to us, as that we may without any Let or
Hindrance apply them unto ourselves, for all those Ends and Uses for which they
are appointed"; or in other Words "may in Faith of the Gospel-Exhibition apply
them to ourselves in God's Way, -- in the Way and Manner prescribed in the
Promise, -- where the Matter (says he) is so contrived, not that every one may
say positively, Christ and his Benefits belong to me [ i. e. in special] but
none can say, They do not," i. e. in common with others under the Gospel-Call.

And this seems the more necessary to be observed, not only as it points out
one eminent Difference between the Faith of Men and that of Devils, founded in
the Difference of their relative Circumstances, respecting a Savior and the
Promise in him; but also "as it is very common for a poor humbled broken Soul
to put these Things away from himself, upon the Pretense, that they belong not
to him. To which Objection it may justly be answered, They do belong to him,"
in the Sense abovementioned: and therefore such may safely conclude, since they
have this Ground of Faith, it is no Presumption in them (as they too readily
surmise) to flee for Refuge, and lay Hold upon the Hope set before them, in the
Gospel of the Grace of God, -- while the fallen Angels at the same Time are
left in a State of absolute and final Despair, without all Remedy.

Such, in my View of the Thing, is that Faith by which the Just do live. Such
is that Faith, by which the Elders obtained a good Report; even God's Testimony
that they were righteous before him. Such is that Faith, by which Christ dwells
in our Hearts: Such that Faith, without which it is impossible to please God.
-- This I consider as the Faith of God's Elect: so termed, because it springs
from electing Love; is the universal Characteristic of the Election; and
peculiar to those who being from the Beginning chosen to Salvation, are in Time
called into the Fellowship of the Son of God, and made Partakers of the Benefit.

Which leads us to another Remark on the Description of those this Epistle is
directed to.

II. The Faith attributed to them is here spoken of as a Thing they had
obtained. -- "To them (says the Apostle) which have obtained like precious
Faith with us. -- According to the Notation of the Greek Word, which is very
emphatical, the Meaning is, -- Which have had the Grace of Faith Divinely
allotted and dispensed to them, -- have shared in this precious Benefit, or
been made Partakers of it, through the special Interposition and immediate
Agency of Heaven, as it were by the sacred Lot. The Word is (...); Sortitis. i.
e. Iis qui quasi Sort adepti sunt. -- A Derivative from it is Lachesis, the
Name of one of the three Destinies, or fabulous Deities, in Pagan Story: which,
say they, draws out the Thread of human Life, i. e. prolongs it, and governs
Events to that End. -- The same Word is used where we read of Zacharias, "His
Lot was to burn Incense. -- And where the Soldiers that crucified Jesus, say
among themselves of his seamless Coat, "Let us cast Lots for it, whose it shall
be." -- I find the Word used once more, in another Case, and translated as in
our Text. "He was numbered with us, and had obtained Part of this Ministry. --
It is evidently an Allusion to Men's coming to the Possession of some valuable
Good (as the Israelites had their Inheritance in Canaan divided to them) by a
Lot; which, how casual soever to Men, undoubtedly God is the wise Director and
sovereign Determiner of, in Exclusion to an imaginary Fortune. Thus says the
true Proverb, "The Lot is cast into the Lap, but the whole Disposing thereof is
of the LORD. -- As for Men, Time and Chance happen to them all: but with God
there is no such Thing as Time or Chance. For his Understanding is infinite,
and at one View are seen and known to him all his Works, from the Beginning, to
the End of the World; his Works of Grace, in particular. He always infallibly
knows, who already have obtained an Inheritance in Christ, and who hereafter
shall have their Lot of Inheritance in him: they being predestined according
to the Purpose of him, who works all Things after the Counsel of his own
Will, that they should be to the Praise of his Glory, as trusting in Christ. He
always knows who do, and who will believe; since of Him it is given Men to
believe, according as he has chosen them in Christ before the Foundation of
the World. He is most certainly ever conscious to the eternal Purpose, which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord; and to his own Donations in Time, pursuant
thereto, wherever and whenever it is given any to believe. -- But still the
Gift is a Casualty to us; like the Lot, which though under the wise Direction
and providential Disposition of him who rules over all, is to Men a Thing
quite adventitious or contingent: and they are alike passive in one Case, as
the other; having no more Hand in planting in themselves the Principle of
Faith, than in procuring to themselves a Prize in a Lottery. It is the Gift of
God, and comes at first, as it were by Surprise, or by Accident, to human
Apprehension; unexpected, unmerited, uninfluenced. Zaccbeus, the Publican, when
climbing the Tree out of Curiosity to see Jesus, little thought of having
Salvation come to his Soul, by Faith's being wrought in him. And Saul, the
Pharisee, when furiously pursuing his bloody Errand to Damascus, as little
thought of being apprehended as he was of Christ Jesus. The happy Event that
befell the one and the other, was unsought, unlooked for, and to them quite a
Casualty. In the Experience of Believers, in common, first Faith is a like
Contingence and Surprise. It happens to them according to that Word of God, "I
am found of them that sought me not. -- Seeking is unquestionably a Duty, of
universal Obligation: but both right Seeking, and Finding, are wholly owing to
the Interposition and Efficacy of special Grace; insomuch that unless the Lord
pleases first to seek us, and effectually call us by his Spirit, we shall never
seek him aright, nor find in our Hearts truly to believe in him. However, there
is a general Invitation to adventure in the spiritual Lottery, to attend the
Means of Grace, and cast ourselves at the Foot of Divine Mercy, requesting to
be made Partakers of the Benefit: and while we thus are applying to the Throne
of Grace for the Gift of God, there is Room to hope, and equal Encouragement to
all to wait for it; though there is no Probability that all will obtain it, nor
is there an absolute Promise of it to any one in particular. Hence, before
Sinners attain first to believe, it is an utter Uncertainty to themselves and
others, whether they ever will, there is but a Peradventure in the Case: and
when it happens they do, this is an Event as fortuitous or precarious, as
unpromised, unforeseen and surpriseing to them, even as a Benefit accruing by
the Lot; which they could have no Foreknowledge of, and have no Promise of, nor
might pretend any Claim to in point of Justice, and therefore must impute their
Success to the mere Goodness of God, who with a sovereign Hand has so disposed
the Event in their Favor. In like Manner, he gives or denies the spiritual
Blessing after his own Pleasure: neither they that are Partakers of it, may
ascribe it to any Merit of theirs; nor can they that miss of it, complain of
Wrong done them, any more than he may who draws a Blank in a Lottery.
-- This seems plainly deducible from the proper Import and customary
Application of the original Word, here rendered, obtained: which alludes to the
getting a Prize in a Lottery, purely by the Hand of God, without any
interposing Skill and determining Will or Influence of Man in the Case; so that
it signify's as much as obtained gratis, by Divine free Favor.

But I shall more distinctly note the following Particulars, as implied in the
Phrase, "Them that have obtained like precious Faith. -- As,

1. That Faith is no innate Principle, nor an hereditary Privilege: -- even as
that which we receive by a Lot, is far from being either the Result of Nature,
or the Prerogative of Birth and Parentage.

No Man is born a Believer; either such in Fact, or of Right. -- Faith does not
spring up of itself, from some latent Seeds in our degenerate Nature: but is
altogether of a foreign Extract, and supernatural Rise.

Alas, if we give any Credit to the holy Scriptures, or consult our own
Experience and Observation, we must confess, this holy Faith in a Thing no Man
brings into the World with him: but we are born with an evil Heart of Unbelief
in us. We are all in the Number of the Many, who by one Man's Disobedience were
made Sinners: and there is an inbred Principle of Infidelity (a secret Root of
Bitterness) in the corrupt Nature we derive from apostate Adam. Foolishness is
bound up in the Heart of a Child: and nothing can drive it out, but the Rod of
his Strength, who makes his People willing in the Day of his Power. The carnal
Mind is Enmity against God, and not subject to his Law, -- is Enmity against
Christ, and not subject to his Gospel, -- neither indeed can be, without a
transforming Change wrought upon us. So self-conceited, so sensual, and stupid
is the Mind of Man (vain Man, born like the wild Ass's Colt) that while it
remains under the uncontrouled Power of this native Enmity, it neither feels
the Need of a Savior, nor sees the amiable Excellency and Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ: nay, though reduced by Convictions to some Sense of Guilt and
Danger, and put in Fear, yet still its habitual Tendency is to rise up in
Opposition to Jesus Christ the righteous. It labors of perverse Prejudices
against his Divine Person and Perfections, his Medittorial Character and
Offices, his Doctrine and Precepts, his Atonement and Merits, and the Way of
Salvation by Grace through Faith in his Blood. These Things, which the Angels of
Light aspire to look into, and in which they discover the manifold wisdom of
God, are nevertheless very Foolishness to the unenlighten'd Mind of Man. It
relucts against those Self-denying Duties of Christianity, Repentance toward
God and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. It knows not how to come
brokenhearted and empty-handed, to God and our Savior, for the free Pardon of
Sins, Redress of Miseries, and Supply of Wants. In its natural Operation, at
best, it puts Men upon going about to establish their own Righteousness; and,
as of it self, is unreconcilable to the whole Method of Gospel Grace, as well
both in justifying us through Faith, and in sanctifying us through Faith. The
haughty Spirit of the vain natural Man, till subdued by the Power of the Holy
Ghost, cannot tell how to brook, either the Washing of Regeneration, or
Sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus. The unhappy Temper of the Self-righteous and
Self-sufficient Pharisee is habitually prevalent in the Carnally-minded. -- If
they think at all about the Salvation of their Souls, they are for being saved
in their own Way; either in their Sins, or else by Works of Righteousness,
which they do themselves. By the Principles of Nature, unrenewed Men are
Enemies in their Minds, as well to the Grace of God and the Merits of Christ,
in the Scripture-Notion of them, as to his Holiness and moral Government. If
ever they be saved, they desire but to save themselves, and care not to be
beholden to another. -- Or, if by any Means, under Parental or Ministerial
Instructions, they have had beaten into their Heads some Notion of the
Scripture-Doctrine concerning Christ's Satisfaction, and the Righteousness
which is of Faith, they usually either take up a false Notion of this Faith, or
else resting in some similar, but imperfect Exercises of Mind, they deceive
themselves with a false Appearance of Faith; while yet really they have a
secret Displicence and Reluctance against the Thing in Truth. Nay, even under a
Work of Conviction, when in some notable Degree illuminated and assisted by
common Grace to see themselves under the Curse, and in Hazard of perishing for
ever, without an Interest in Christ, and a Change of their spiritual State, yet
how does an Attachment to the Law, usually restrain them, and the Spirit of the
Pharisee operate and prevail in them? Insomuch that although they have some Sort
of Desire toward a Savior, and in a Manner seek to be justified by Christ,
they however are for tempering and compounding Matters, mingling Law and
Gospel, or going a middle Way between them. They aim (it seems) at "washing
away their Sins by the Tears of Repentance, joined with Faith in the Blood of
Christ," as they have sometimes expressed themselves: or else they hope to make
a Righteousness (as it were) of their Reformations, Prayers, and Duties, though
as yet destitute of Faith; thinking, by such Things, to recommend themselves to
the Grace of God, to win Christ, and get entitled to his Benefits. At best, the
Pride of their unbroken Hearts will not let them come to Christ as Sinners,
naked and blushing at their Shame, wretched and trembling under the
Apprehension of their Misery and Danger; worthless and helpless in themselves,
depending on him to make them righteous, and to work in them both to will and
to do.

Upon the whole it appears, we are by Nature, not only Strangers, but Enemies
to holy and unfeigned Faith; so far is this from being a connate Principle in
us.

Nor is it a Thing hereditary, or as a Family-Privilege entailed upon us.
Indeed there has sometimes been a beautiful Series of Examples of Faith, in the
same Family; an uninterrupted Succession, from Parent to Child, for a Number of
Generations. An Instance the Apostle mentions in his second Epistle to Timothy:
where speaking of unfeigned faith, he says to him, "Which dwelt first in thy
Grandmother Lois, and in thy Mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that in Thee
also." Here was Faith exemplified in the same Family for three Generations
successively. So, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob afford a like Example: and there
have been many such. Yet the Case is comparatively rare. -- Nor in such
Instances is this Faith transmitted to Posterity in the Manner of an hereditary
Privilege. None are born the lawful Inheritors of it. We do not succeed to it
as the Inheritance of Fathers. We do not come by it in Right of our Ancestors,
in Consequence of our visibie Covenant Relation to God, or by Virtue of our
pious Parentage, though we had even Abraham to our Father. On whatever Account
the Faith of a Parent may benefit his Infant Seed, yet the Adult must every one
have a Faith of his own: nor does this belong to the spiritual Patrimony we
enjoy as the natural Descendents of believing Progenitors. They that now have
unfeigned Faith dwelling in them, were not by Birth the rightful Heirs (any
more than actual Possessors) of the Grace of Life: but have since obtained it,
without any previous Title or Claim to it.

I go on to observe,

2. Neither is this Faith a Thing of their own Procurement and Acquisition; the
natural Effect or proper Produce of human Endeavors. -- As it is not a
Principle born with us, or rooted in the Nature We bring into the World, nor an
Heritage derived from our Parents by Succession; so neither is it an acquired
Habit, which we work up ourselves to, or procure to ourselves, in Virtue of our
own moral Improvements on natural Reason and Conscience, or any such Remains of
the Image of God in fallen Man.

There is indeed in our lapsed Nature that which some call a passive
Receptivity of this and every other holy Principle, or gracious Habit; but no
Power of active Production, or Efficiency. I mean, although the Spirit of Man
still retains natural Faculties suitable to be wrought on, nor is any Violence
done them by the Power exerted upon us, in bringing as to believe; and so has
what is by some termed an objective Capacity of believing: yet nevertheless it
has not properly a subjective Capacity, or a sufficient Ability in itself to
accomplish the blessed Effect by its own solitary Endeavors. -- It is granted,
that the Effect is to be sought after, as by Prayer, so in a diligent Use of
the Means of Grace; especially God's Word, which is called the Word of Faith,
perhaps partly because Faith comes by Hearing. -- And it is granted, that
Efforts or Trials are to be made by us, if peradventure it may be given us to
believe. So, the happy Event may be, that while we are feebly essaying, as it
were, to stretch forth the withered Arm at the Lord's Bidding, we may
experience the powerful Influence of an invisible Agent, effectually enabling
us (impotent as we are in ourselves) to stretch out the Hand of Faith. -- But
if left to ourselves, though accommodated with the most desirable
Creature-Helps and subservient Means, all our Attempts to believe in Christ
will leave us short of that Faith which is unto Salvation. For it is always to
be remembered, this is not the mere Result of our own Endeavors; not the sole
Product of Means and Instruments, in natural Consequence of our Attendance on
them, however sedulous and constant: but whoever obtain this holy Principle of
Faith, derive it from an extrinsecal Cause, in a way of supernatural Influence;
and are made Partakers of it by a secret Power, beyond or out of themselves,
and above the Reach of mere human Agency, as much as is that which has the
Disposing of a Lot. -- This I suppose to be connoted in the significant Phrase,
obtained Faith. -- But to proceed, this implies,

3. That it is a Gift received from GOD; that Men have this Faith wrought in
them by a Divine Energy, in the Way of free Grace.

All Success of Means depends entirely on the Divine Presence and Blessing, and
is entirely gratuitous. "Who is Paul, and who Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye
believed, even as the LORD gave to every Man.

"To them (says the Apostle in our Text) which have obtained like precious
Faith with us; and doubtless obtained it in like Manner, from the like Cause.
Now whence did Peter and his Brethren obtain, or how get their Faith? Did they
challenge to themselves the Honor of acquiring it by any Power of their own,
or by any Merit of theirs? No, but they give God all the Glory. In like Manner
they teach us to own a Divine Author and Finisher of our Faith. They represent
it as " given us to believe. They speak of Saints in Christ Jesus as those
"which had believed through Grace, -- "which in Time past had not obtained
Mercy, but now have obtained Mercy; and are called to Glory and Virtue, or (as
some read it) by Glory and Virtue, i. e. by God's glorious Power, or by the
Power of his Grace, which is sometimes styled Glory.

Faith is of the Operation of God, by a mysterious Display of his Power and
Grace. -- So much seems evidently imported in the Language of our Text, --
obtained like precious Faith: A Phrase alluding to God's overruling the Lot, to
bring out a Benefit for us, by an admirable, but secret Operation of his kind
and all-governing Hand; from whence it comes to us as a mere Gratuity of
Providence.

I come now to observe,

4. That where Faith is given to any, it is given for a Possession, secure and
abiding, never to be taken away from them. -- This is a Truth that may be
suggested in the Phrase, obtained Faith; as it alludes to a Lot, which gives
one a certain and stable Property in what accrues to him hereby. Even so in the
present Case, when by a Divine Allotment Faith comes into our Hearts, it is
designed for Perpetuity, and it is ours for ever; a sure and lasting
(everlasting) Possession; which, however it may be forfeited, yet shall never
be lost. In the Name of all true Believers the Apostle says, "We are of them
which believe to the saving of the Soul," i. e. effectually and finally, so as
not to fail of the Grace of God at the last. -- Faith is of that Nature, that
it will not decay and waste away by Exercise. -- It is of such Account with the
Believer, that he will never voluntarily alienate or part with his happy
spiritual Possession. -- Neither shall the Adversary of Souls ever be able by
Force or Fraud to rob him thereof. -- And besure the Believer's Friend and
Father, the original Donor of this Benefit, will never in Wrath deprive him of
it. It belongs to the good Part, which the Scripture of Truth assures us shall
not be taken away. Unfeigned Faith, wherever it is, is said to dwell in its
Subject, because it is not a transient, but fixed, permament Principle. It is
the Faith of God's Elect: and electing Love, the Source of it, will secure its
Perseverance to the End. It is the Fruit of the Spirit, who, wherever he has
begun a good Work, will perform it to the Day of Jesus Christ. Its Stability or
Duration is owing to the Supply of the Spirit, procured by the Intercession of
Christ. Hence that Saying of his to Peter, "I have prayed for thee, that thy
Faith fail not." Agreably Believers are said to be "preserved in Christ Jesus.
-- In Virtue of his Intercession, the Habit of Faith (at least) is
never-failing: though (as in Peter's Case) its Actings may be sadly interrupted
and suspended for a Season, and in the End the Form of its Exercise may be
changed, when the present Scene of Action is closed.

But a hint or two further shall conclude this Head. -- It is implied in our
Text,

5. That Faith is a special Property; not a Gift common to all, but a
distinguishing Favor. The Phrase, "Them which have obtained Faith," denotes
this to be the Privilege of a happy select Number, in Distinction from others.
As in a Lottery it is not every one's Case to have a Prize fall to his Share,
so in the Dispensation of Grace the Divine Gift of Faith does not fall to every
one's Lot. "All Men have not Faith." Even in the professing World, and among
those of the best Morals too, it is not every Man has Faith. No; but they are
in Scripture-Account a peculiar People, that have unfeigned Faith dwelling in
them. This is an Attainment appropriate to a chosen Generation, the same that
our Apostle in his first Letter describes as " Elect according to the
Foreknowledge of God the Father. -- But still to every one of them it must be
said, "Who makes thee to differ? This Faith, the Fruit of the Spirit, is
produced by Him, where he will, in a way of discriminating Grace; yet without
the least Partiality, since it is not an Act of Justice, but of Grace, and done
in Quality of a Benefactor. In giving of Faith, God exercises a sovereign
Beneficence, without Respect of Persons; preferring none for any national
Considerations, for their civil Distinctions, for their Parental or
Ecclesiastical Connections, for their worldly Circumstances, for their
intellectual, or even moral Endowments. "Ye see your calling, Brethren," how
God so orders the Case, in his unspotted Sovereignty, that "no Flesh shall
glory in his Presence. Truly, "they are not all Israel, which are of Israel:
neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children of the
Promise, as was Isaac.

In a word, the Description in our Text, "Them which have obtained Faith,"
gives the true Character of Saints in Christ Jesus, exclusively of all others;
and speaks their peculiar Dignity, their super-eminent Excellency above all
others. It was intended by the Apostle for a commendatory, as well as a
distinctive Character. And truly it is a very shining Character, full of Glory
and Praise.

But this brings me to observe, under another general Head.

III. Their Faith is here denominated precious Faith, like precious with that
of Peter and others that first trusted in Christ.

The Apostles, who were our Lord's earliest Disciples, and special Favorites,
are eminently the Standard or Pattern of Faith under the new Testament, as
Abraham had been under the Old. Indeed the Faith of Abraham and of Peter, the
Faith of the Patriarchs and Apostles, that of primitive Jews and Christian
Gentiles, were specifically all one and the same, however gradually and
circumstantially varying. "Know ye therefore, that they which are of Faith, the
same are the Children of Abraham, -- are the Children of the Prophets and
Apostles. Hence Peter directs his Epistle in this Form, "To them which have
obtained like precious Faith with us.

It will not, I hope, be unprofitable, to make the following Remarks here
distinctly.

1. We will suppose it insinuated in this Expression, that there may be a Sort
of Faith, which is of a different Complexion and Character from that of the
Apostles and first Followers of Christ: -- a Faith, which so far as it has any
Reality, is of an inferior and baser Kind than theirs; or, if it claims
Affinity with that, and pretends to be like precious Faith, is but falsely so
called.

Not to speak now of the constrained Faith of Devils, who say of the holy
Jesus, "What have we to do with Thee! -- nor of the Faith of Pagan Moralists,
that never heard of Christ; -- nor of the like natural Faith of Deists, who
explode all revealed Religion, and renounce the Hope of the Gospel; -- nor of
the Mohammedan Faith, which, though it honors Christ as a great Prophet, yet
advances a vile Impostor above him; -- to say nothing more particularly of
these, -- there is the once authentic, but now counterfeit Faith of the Jews;
who, though they profess to believe the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets,
that wrote of the Messiah, yet misunderstanding both "What, and what Manner of
Time the Spirit of Christ which was in them, did signify," do refuse JESUS of
Nazareth, as a Deceiver. They pretend to believe the Gospel as it was preached
before unto Abraham and the Fathers, and adhere to the Law and the Prophets,
yet still expect the future Coming of the promised Messiah. But their Faith is
vain, and far from being like, in Nature and Effects, to theirs who believe in
Christ as already come in the Flesh. -- Indeed before his Coming, while the
Jews walked in the Steps of that Faith of their Father Abraham, which he had
when he saw Christ's Day and rejoiced in Hope, they were sound in the Faith,
and acceptable Believers. Such were Simeon and Anna, and others. But the
pretended Followers of their Faith, the Jews of the present Age and of every
Age since the Christian Dispensation has been established, have not obtained
like Faith with them. No; it is but a groundless, worthless, corrupt, rotten,
and dead Faith, at best, which such have to boast of.

There is also the like worthless, adulterate and false Faith of Heretics, who
name the Name of Christ, yet abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, but turn
aside to another Gospel: We may well then suppose such to have also another
Faith. For, however involuntary lesser Mistakes in the Doctrine of Faith may
consist with the Being of the Grace of Faith, yet surely damnable Heresies,
that subvert the former, can by no Means stand with the latter.

In fine, there is the like worthless and feigned Faith of Hypocrites, or mere
Formalists in Religion, who perhaps in Theory hold a Creed sufficiently
Orthodox; but still they have little better than a mere Head-Knowledge. Though
they profess Belief of the Truth, it is done in Pretense, not sincerely, but to
deceive others: or, at least, they make a Profession without any true
Engagedness of Heart, and rest in a spiritless dead Faith, deceiving themselves
with the Workings of some false Affections and seeming Graces. A Faith
therefore not of the Apostolic Kind, not of the same Species, not of the same
Quality with that which those primitive Servants of Christ were Teachers and
Examples of; and which implies our sincerely receiving of Christ, giving him
our Hearts, and committing our Souls into his Hands, to be washed with his
Blood, sanctified by his Spirit, justified in his Name, and preserved to his
heavenly Kingdom. The Scripture distinguishes this by the Name of Faith
unfeigned, in Opposition to the feigned or counterfeit Faith of mere nominal
Christians. -- It is a Faith, that transcends the highest Seize of
unregenerate Nature. It is said indeed of the very Devils, that they believe
and tremble. But surely they do not believe in the same Sense, and to the same
Purposes, as such do who are said to believe unto everlasting Life. Neither did
Simon the Sorcerer believe with the same Faith, as Simon the Apostle.

I come then to say,

2. The Faith of the Saints in common is of the same Kind, with that of the
Apostles themselves. -- This is implied in the Phrase, "Them which have
obtained like precious Faith with US.

Indeed the Apostles had a particular Faith, of the prophetic Kind, and for
miraculous Effects. But the Text has no Reference to this: nor in Truth does
the Epithet, precious, belong to this, in Comparison with that Faith which
works by Love, without which a Man is Nothing. The Apostle undoubtedly had
his Eye to the Grace of Faith: and this is existent in every Period of the
Church, common to the Saints of every Age. The meanest real Saint has Faith (in
Kind) like that of the ancient Fathers, and very chief of the Apostles, or
rather the same with theirs, in all essential Respects. It is the same with
theirs in its general Nature, Properties, Actings, and Effects. It has the same
Object, the same Seat, the same Original, the same Design and Issue; the same
Operations, the same Influences attending it, the same Privileges annexed to
it, and the same Blessings consequent upon it. -- All are alike justified through
Faith, alike sanctified through Faith, and alike finally saved by Grace through
Faith. -- But I go on to observe,

3. Faith is precious, -- alike precious, in every Instance. Says our Text,
"Them that have obtained like precious Faith with with us. -- It is one
compound Word in the Orignal. (...) -- Ex (...), par, aequalis, similis, idem;
et (...), honor, decus, dignitas, jus, pretium.
Some read it coequal: and it is so in regard of its general Properties,
Objects, Ends, Uses, and final Result; though not always so in the Degree of
its Vigor, Operation, and Influence. -- Others read it equally excellent: and
so it always is in the Kind; whatever Disparity there may be in the particular
Exercises and Effects of it. -- But our english Version well enough renders it
like precious. So that although it implies the Faith to be of the like Nature,
or of the same Species; the Faith of one corresponding to that of another: yet,
I confess, the direct Meaning is, that it is alike precious. The Faith of the
least of all Saints is of similar Excellency, -- of the same Preciousness, in
Proportion, -- as that of the very chiefest of the Apostles.

Faith is precious, wherever it is found; in one Subject, or another, and in
whatever Degree. -- And it may be so called for its Rarity: which is a
Circumstance that usually advances the Rate of Things in human Estimation.
Among Men, we know, as Propriety gives an additional Luster to the Excellency
of any valuable Enjoyment, so when that Good is scarce, and falls to the Share
of Few, this is a Circumstance that heightens the Worth of it in the
Possessor's Account, and draws others, through a Principle of Curiosity or
Emulation, the more to covet it, and be willing to give the greater Price for
it. Diamonds, chiefly for that Reason, are called precious Stones. So, Faith
may be termed precious, it being the most uncommon Jewel.

This Epithet points also to its valuable Nature, and admirable Utility. Faith
certainly is most excellent in a comparative View; as it excells all other
Graces on some Accounts; and as the Faith of Christians excels the Faith of all
others. -- But considering Faith in an absolute Light, it appears a Thing most
worthy and beneficial; deserving the Name of Gold tried in the Fire, even the
most refined Gold, as useful as it is ornamental. The Value of the Object
derives an answerable Preciousness to the Faith employed upon it. -- So the
Price, which procured this Blessing for us, this stamps an Excellency on Faith,
and speaks it preferable to Thousands of Gold and Silver. -- Likewise its
Original, which is eminently divine and heavenly, it being the First-fruit of
the Spirit, this puts a further Dignity on Faith, and argues its superlative
Excellency. -- It Is Seat is in the inward Man, the noblest Constituent of human
Nature. -- In fine, this Faith is of a most excellent Tendency, and admirably
subservient to the most excellent Designs in the Kingdom of Grace. Love, as
excellent as it is, is founded in Faith, and springs from it: Yea, Faith is the
Root and Life of every christian Grace and Duty: and in the Nature of Means, by
Virtue of a Divine Institution, and in Subordination to Christ, it is the prime
Source of all spiritual Good and Comfort. It is the special uniting, applying,
participating, and appropriating Principle.

Faith has this high Office peculiar to it, to justify us in the Sight of God,
as we thereby receive Christ, and thus make his Righteousness our own, for that
blessed Purpose. And subordinately to Christ, Faith is the Foundation of new
and excellent Privileges; the Basis of new and excellent Relations; the Spring
of a new and excellent Life in this World, and Preparative to a better in the
next; the Preservative from Hell, and the Pledge of Heaven.

Faith invests us with a Title to great and precious Promises, nor does it fail
of obtaining the Promises, sooner or later. "Whosoever believes on Him, shall
not be ashamed. -- "The Trial of Faith works Patience: and "the tried Faith,
being much more precious than refined Gold, shall be found unto Praise and
Honor and Glory at the Appearing of Jesus Christ, -- in that Day when he will
"bind up his Jewels.

Well then may the Faith of the Saints have this Distinction put upon it, to be
called precious Faith. It is admirably excellent and precious in itself, most
necessary for us, and more gainful to us, than, if the whole World were given
us. -- And this Faith appears, by the whole Tenor of Scripture-Representation,
very precious and amiable in the Sight of GOD. It is so likewise in the Eyes of
holy Angels, who rejoice over one Sinner brought to repent and believe. -- And
in the Eyes of the Just themselves, that live by Faith, certainly it is of
great Account.

Let it now be added, The Faith of Saints, in common, is alike precious in
every Case. Being a rich spiritual Blessing, purchased by the same infinite
Price, the Blood of Christ; and bestowed by the same Divine Power and Grace;
having always the same Object, the same Seat, the same Nature and Qualities,
the same Actings, the same Results, and the same final Issue, in general; it
must, of Consequence, be alike precious in all Saints.

The blessed God bears the like Benevolence to all true Believers, without
Respect of Persons. All are alike the Children of God, Heirs of God, and
Joint-Heirs with Christ Jesus. They are all one in Christ; are in one spiritual
State, of one heavenly Nature, of one Heart, and bound for one End: and in
general, God deals with them all alike, in one Way; by one Covenant, by one
Mediator, and by one Comforter, appointing them to one common Salvation. Which
argues the Faith of all to have one and the same Pretiosity in his Sight: only
allowing for a gradual Difference in the various Cases of a weak and a strong,
or a little and a great Faith; according as it more or less gives Glory to the
God of all Grace, and to the Son of his Love; in whom he is ever well-pleased,
and for his sake is well-pleased with Believers, putting no Difference for
their outward Circumstances. -- "Hearken, my beloved Brethren, has not God
chosen the Poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom?

I pass now to the last Thing in the Text.

IV. After that Part of the Description, "Which have obtained like precious
Faith with us," it follows, "Through the Righteousness of GOD and our Savior
Jesus Christ," or, of our God and Savior, according to strict grammatical
Conctruction.

Indeed it is the Title of LORD, that is most commonly given Christ in this
Epistle; and sometimes the Style is, "Our LORD and Savior: But in the Text it
is, "our GOD and Savior. And no Wonder, since those Names are of equal Dignity
and Importance; and are accordingly applied in this Epistle indifferently, as
of equivalent Meaning. -- The Day of the LORD and the Day of GOD, are Phrases
here conveying one Idea. It concludes with ascribing Glory to Christ under the
united Characters of "our LORD and Savior": And is it at all strange, that it
should begin with doing Honor to the Righteousness of Christ under the like
Characters, of "our GOD and Savior Jesus Christ,

We elsewhere read of "Grace reigning through Righteousness unto eternal Life by
Jesus Christ our Lord. ( Romans 5.21.) It means a Righteousness that is a Gift to
us; it is called "the Righteousness of One; -- and is the same Thing with "the
Obedience of One; by which, it is there said "Many shall be made righteous. --
A Mystery this, that any should be constituted righteous by the Obedience of
Another! Much more, that Many should be made so by the Obedience of One! That
one Righteousness should suffice for as many as believingly accept the Gift,
unto Justification of Life! -- I think, this is to be accounted for only by the
Consideration, that it is the Righteousness of our GOD and Savior: not a mere
humane, but a Divine, not a mere personal, but a mediatorial Righteousness;
wrought out for his People's Use and Benefit, by One who by Nature is GOD, as
well as Man, and who by Office is Mediator between God and Men.

Christ's being here styled our Savior, points out the special Capacity, in
which he wrought out this Righteousness; -- and the End in View, namely,
Salvation, no otherwise to be effected; -- as also the Party whose Benefit was
respected, not the sinning Angels, but fallen Mankind, even as many as receive
him in his Character of Savior. In the way of Grace and Faith, this
Righteousness becomes ours, to the Salvation of the Soul. -- In the Counsel of
God, it was ours by original Intention: and upon believing, it becomes ours by
actual Application. It is ours with respect to its being accepted for us, and
reckoned to us, or placed to our Account, as wrought in our Stead. It is ours,
to all the Purposes for which we needed a Savior's Righteousness. It is so
ours, upon our receiving the Gift, that we may plead it with God, in Answer to
the Challenges of offended Justice, and as a Ground of Claim to Pardon and
Favor. Having this Righteousness for ours, we may have Confidence toward God,
in Life and Death; and shall have Boldness even in the Day of Judgment. It is a
Righteousness admirably glorious in itself, infinitely amiable and dear to God,
infinitely important and beneficial to us.

And no Wonder, since it is the Righteousness of Christ, our GOD and Savior.
-- I think, some have questioned whether there is any express Mention ia
Scripture of "the Righteousness of Christ," in so many Words. But it seems they
had forgot our Text, which presents us with an Instance; and where the Phrase
is used in a Manner extremely advantageous to that Cause which they are no
Advocates for. "The Righteousness of Jesus Christ, our God and Savior. -- It
means the same that is often called "the Righteousness of GOD. -- And it is so
called, not only for its transcendent Excellency, or for its being of God's
Contrivance and Appointment, or because approved and accepted by him, or
because it is God's Gift to those he justifies: but rather because Christ, its
Efficient, is GOD, as well as Man. The Text points out this Construction of the
Phrase, as our Lord is here expressly named, and it is called "the Righteousness
of our GOD and Savior, Jesus Christ. -- The Operator and immediate Subject of
it is the same who is elsewhere characterised "The LORD of Glory, -- "GOD
manifest in the Flesh, -- "GOD blessed for evermore. -- Its being the
Righteousness of a Divine Person, incarnate in our Nature, this speaks its
absolute Perfection, entire Fitness to its Design, and universal Suitableness
to our Case. -- It is that everlasting Righteousness, the Messiah was to bring
in. -- Well might the Apostle Paul glory in this, and comparatively despise his
own. And well might he impute it to the Jews Ignorance, that they went about to
establish their own Righteousness, and submitted not themselves to the
Righteousness of GOD.

The same is often called "The Righteousness which is of God by Faith: --
denoting Faith to be the Medium of its Reception, the Means of its becoming
actually ours. Some read the Text accordingly, -- not through, but with the
Righteousness of Christ: signifying, that this accompanies Faith, and is made
ours in the way of believing. Hence we are said to "believe unto Righteousness.
--

Others (as the Greek Preposition is 'EN) render it, in the Righteousness of
Christ; as specifying the Object of Faith. Agreably we read of "Faith in his
Blood. -- But then Evangelical Faith respects the Blood of Christ, not as its
Object only, but it is Price, or meritorious Cause, and in the View of Divine
Grace, the sole Reason of its being given. So we read, "Unto you it is given in
the behalf of Christ (that is, for the sake of his Righteousness, and in
Consequence of his Merits) to believe on him. -- Accordingly many translate the
Greek Particle (EN, per) by or through; our English Bible ^^^ds the Text,
Through the Righteousness of Christ. -- And thus rendered, some have turned it,
through the Mercy of Christ: and certainly "the Grace of our Lord is exceeding
abundant, with Faith. -- But others prefer the usual Sense of the Word,
Righteousness: and keeping to this, some think the Text may intend, that Faith
is precious through Christ's Righteousness, or in Virtue of its Relation to
this, as both its Object and its Price. But rather the Word obtained seems to
be the Antecedent; and in this Connection, the Text means, that the Grace of
Faith owes its Existence (as well as Value) to Christ's Righteousness, as its
procuring Cause, and the Reason or Ground of its being obtained by any.

Christ, by his Obedience, purchased for his People this precious Gift of
Faith; and by his Intercession, in Virtue of his Merits, procures the actual
Bestowment of it: and the Spirit comes in his Name, to call them into the
Fellowship of the Son of God, by persuading and enabling them to believe on
him. -- Indeed the Righteousness of Christ, presented to the Eye of the
awakened Mind in a true and powerful Light, has an objective Force, an
attractive Efficacy and moral Power (in the Manner of a Medium or Argument) to
excite the Principle of Faith, where the Spirit has implanted it, to its
genuine Exercises, in a way of active receiving Christ, submitting to his
Righteousness, and depending on his Mediation. -- In all these Regards, Faith
is obtained through (or in Virtue and by Means of) the Righteousness of Christ.

I will only add, that many have thought there is some Act of Divine
Sovereignty referrible to the Head of Justification (viewed as Constitutive, in
Distinction from Declarative) which co-incides or falls in with the Instant of
Regeneration or passive Conversion, and is previous even to the very first
Exercise of Faith: Which Act of God, they suppose, is what the Scriptures call
his " bringing near his Righteousness. -- But I may not tarry to say any Thing
for the Illustration of this Point. --

The APPLICATION remains. And here,

1. Is Christ our GOD and Savior? Then we should believe on him, and confess
him, in both these his Characters; as well in what he is by Nature, as what he
is by Office.

By Office he is our Savior, and in this Capacity he has all the Authority of
a Prophet, Priest, and King; has all the excellent Qualifications, and does all
the important Works, belonging to these mediatorial Characters. Accordingly he
expects and demands, that we own him as the Author of eternal Salvation to all
that obey him; and that we take him to be our Savior, put our Trust in him,
and pay him all the Honor and Homage due to him as Mediator.

Yet we must remember, this is not his highest Capacity. For in this he
sustains "the Form of a Servant. With respect to his created Nature, and his
mediatorial Office, "Christ is God's," is " of God, -- derivative from him,
dependent on him, subordinate and accountable to him. And therefore all the
Honors we pay to him in this inferior Capacity, should be ultimately referred
to the Deity, and terminate in the supreme Being. Carrying up our Views beyond
the Mediator, as such, we must "by him come to GOD. -- And indeed in coming to
Christ, we must not finally terminate our Views in his Humanity and delegated
Office, but rise to his superior Capacity, and take in the Consideration of his
Divine Nature, and Unity with the Father and Holy Ghost: always remembering,
"There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, which Three are One;" the same in
whose Name the christian Baptism is administered, and the Blessing pronounced.

Truly, we may with full Assurance of Faith avouch Jesus Christ to be our GOD,
as well as our Savior; since inspired Apostles have sat us an Example, and
since, the holy Scriptures instruct us to "follow their Faith. -- Certainly
none but so extraordinary a Person, the God-Man, was capable of sustaining and
executing the arduous and high Office of Mediator between God and Men. For he
must be "One mighty to save, -- able to save unto the uttermost, -- able to
destroy the Works of the Devil, -- to make an End of Sin, and bring in
everlasting Righteousness, -- and to bring many Sons to Glory. -- But, Who is
sufficient for these Things? Only He was equal to the vast Undertaking, to whom
our Text applies the exalted Names of our God and Savior Jesus Christ. The
same who is elsewhere characterised "the great GOD and our Savior, -- "the
true GOD: and eternal Life. -- Indeed he could not be the latter, without being
also the former. He who claims to be our Savior, and so eternal Life to us,
must be One having " all Fullness, -- even "the Fullness of the Godhead, dwelling
in him: -- and of Consesequence, one who must be held " by Nature GOD; not one
who is merely a Deify'd Creature, a God by Office only, and so a mere titular
God. -- Such a God as this, how dignified and exalted soever, is at most only a
subordinate, dependent God; and in Comparison of the living JEHOVAH, a poor
petty Deity; a comparatively ignorant, impotent, deficient, worthless God. But
such a God we can never consistently imagine our blessed Savior to be. An
inferior God, having but an inferior Nature, but created Perfections and
Powers, and only a subdivine Authority, methinks, must make but an incompetent
Savior, and have at best but a defective Salvation for them that trust in him.
-- Indeed the Scripture tells us, "A God that cannot save, is no GOD." And one
who has the Name, but in Truth is no God or Savior, how unfit is he to be the
Object of our holy Worship? how unworthy of our supreme Affection, Submission,
and Affiance? -- To suppose our dear Lord JESUS to be but such a Savior-god as
this, exceedingly derogates from the Riches of his redeeming Grace, as well as
from the Dignity of his Person; and by Consequence, from the Glory of the
Father's Wisdom and Love, in his Mission: manifestly subverts the
Scripture-Doctrine of Atonement and Justification; and tends to overturn the
whole revealed Scheme of Redemption. On such a Supposition, no wonder if Men
deride the Notion of an imputed Righteousness; explain away, by perverse
Comments, the blessed Doctrine of our being saved by Grace through Faith; make
light of the Spirit of Christ, in his Person and Operations; deny the
Perseverance of Believers, etc.

As a very worthy Divine (the late Dr. Calamy) observes, The denying Christ's
proper Deity [i. e. his essential eternal Divinity] is just like opening a
Sluice, to let in Floods of Errors, to the endangering a common Deluge. If
Christ once passes with us for a subordinate and metaphorical God, we shall
soon count him a metaphorical Priest, and his Death a metaphorical Sacrifice.
-- Then, of Course, he will pass for a metaphorical Savior, and it is to be
feared, we must content ourselves at last with a metaphotical Salvation. In
short, a mere nominal God will make but a nominal Savior: And "a God without
infinite Perfections, is only a nominal God." And to suppose a mere nominal God
to be endowed with infinite Perfections, is to suppose a created true God, or
an infinite Creature: which carries in it more of Absurdity, than the greatest
Difficulty, that the Doctrine of the Trinity has attending it, can be charged
with, -- with any Color of Reason.

Let us then take Heed to ourselves, that we fall not from our own
Stedfastness, in this important Point of Christ's Divinity. Together with
solemn Prayer for Divine Light and Help, we must be searching the Scriptures.
-- One of the best Methods for our Establishment in the Truth, is, to review
and consider our Wants, Miseries, and Dangers, our Guilts, Pollutions, and
Demerits, that we may see what Kind of a Savior will suit our Case; and then
to compare herewith the Scripture-Representations of Jesus Christ, in the
Constitution and Excellencies of his Person, the Nature and Designs of his
Mediatorial Office, the Perfection of his Obedience, and the Greatness of that
Salvation, which, in Virtue of this, he is become the Author of; -- and
likewise at the same Time to maintain in our Minds a solemn Concern, that we
may make sure of an Interest in Christ, and his Redemption, through Faith in his
Blood. -- A settled Assurance of Christ's being ours, in point of special
Propriety and actual Possession, will make us readily avouch him to be our GOD,
as well as Savior. We shall then have the Witness in ourselves, that He and
the Father are One. As there is all the same Evidence from God's Word and
Works, of the Deity of the Son, as of the Father, so we shall have the same
Testimony of it within ourselves from our Experience of the Power and Grace of
our Lord and Savior. -- We shall not then be soon shaken in Mind, by any
Suggestions of Gainsayers, as if because Christ is Mediator, therefore he is a
mere subordinate God; or, as if because there is only one God, therefore Christ
is God in a figurative Sense only, that is, no God in the proper Sense. Nay,
but we shall detest all such Notions of him as unscriptural and absurd and most
pernicious; and shall cleave to the LORD with Purpose of Heart, in his whole
Character of our GOD and Savior. -- But to proceed --

2. Is Faith so precious, as has been represented? It should then be of high
Account with us. -- We should value the Principle, the Profession, the Life of
Faith. It should be precious to us, for it is excellent Nature and Effects: and
so should all Things in Connection with it, or related to it; the Objects the
efficient and procuring Causes, the Means, the Subjects of Faith, etc. -- But
on the contrary, how base is Unbelief? Vile in God's Sight, and should be so in
ours. This is eminently "the Evil; to be mourned and abhorred and deprecated by
us.

3. Is Faith like precious in all? We should then have the like Esteem for it
in all, without Partiality. "My Brethren, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus,
the Lord of Glory, with Respect of Persons.

4. Is this Faith obtained through the Righteousness of Christ, while yet we
receive this Righteousness through Faith? Here is the Wisdom of God in a
Mystery, that should be glorious in our Eyes; and will be so, if truly
enlightened by the Spirit of Christ. Nor shall we then vainly imagine the
Doctrine of imputed Righteousness to be a Doctrine of Licentiousness, but truly
according to Godliness. For, Faith is the Principle of godly living.

5. Let such of you as have obtained this precious Faith, give Glory to our
God, and be thankful. It is a high and happy and peculiar Attainment; for which
you are indebted to Christ and Grace. You should ponder the vast Value of this
spiritual Blessing; its Divine Rise; the Riches of Mercy, in the Purchase and
Application of it; the Distinction put upon you, by this precious Gift of
sovereign Grace; and give God our Savior the Praise, while you take the
Comfort. And you should be concerned, that your Faith may grow exceedingly, and
produce all its proper Fruits, to the Glory of God, as well as your own joyful
Account at last.

6. Let such as are still in Unbelief, be concerned that they may obtain the
important Gift of Faith. -- Be convinced of your Unbelief. -- Cry to God for
the Spirit of Faith, that you may obtain like precious Faith with the Saints in
Christ Jesus. Rest in nothing short of this. This Faith is a precious Thing,
worth your seeking; and of absolute Necessity, you must perish without it. --
It has been obtained by Thousands of others: which Examples may encourage you
to seek and hope to find. -- It is obtainable, even by the chief of Sinners,
through the Righteousness of our GOD and Savior, which is of sufficient Virtue
to procure the richest Gift for the vilest Sinner. -- Seek this precious Faith
as a Gift, in Consequence of Christ's Purchase; sensible of your own
Unworthiness, of your Insufficiency to procure it for yourselves, as well as
Incapacity to produce it in your own Hearts. -- Seek with unwearied Constancy,
in the Use of appointed Gospel-Means, with earnest Prayer: and who knows but
ere you are aware, you may obtain the Blessing?

7. Let what has been said, excite us to, and direct us in the grand Inquiry,
whether we have this Faith.

The Preciousness of Faith, its Excellency and Rarity, are Motives to induce us
to a careful and impartial Self-Examination. And the Text suggests to us some
Rules, or Marks, for our Direction therein. Thus, if we have true Faith, then
it will be precious in our Esteem -- Then we have obtained it; were not born
with it, nor have worked up ourselves to it, but received it from God. -- Then
it has been obtained by us through the Righteousness of Christ, and we shall
consider this as the Price, as well as the immediate Object of it. -- Then it
is like precious Faith with that of Apostles and primitive Believers. Reviewing
the Scripture-Account of their Faith, its Properties and Effects, and comparing
ours with theirs, we may thus come to know whether our Faith be genuine. Well,
have we been pricked in our Heart, and become dead to the Law, as they were? --
Is Christ truly precious to us, as he was to them? Does our Faith, like theirs,
work by Love? -- Purify our Hearts? -- Overcome the World? -- Shield us against
the fiery Darts of the Wicked? -- Show itself by good Works? -- Do we live by
the Faith of the Son of God, the Lord our Righteousness and Strength, our God
and Savior? -- And hope to die in Faith, counting all Things but Loss, that we
may win Christ, and be found in him? -- We are thus to examine ourselves,
whether we be in the Faith. -- And we should do this prayerfully; begging the
Spirit of God to witness with our Spirits. -- O let us consider the Hazard of
deceiving ourselves with a spurious Faith; -- the Possibility, by divine Help,
of attaining Assurance; and the Advantages of this. -- Let such Reflections
engage us to make sure of unfeigned Faith. -- In fine, Exercise will, under the
Spirit's Influence, increase our Faith: and by its Growth we may come to know
its Truth. As our Faith improves, the proper Effects will abound more and more:
and its genuine Efficacy will serve to evidence its Reality. -- Then in this
Way be seeking Assurance.

Agreeable is that Exhortation in our Context, 2 PET l. 5. -- 11 [which the
Reader is desired to turn to.]

FINIS.

