The Law, our Schoolmaster.

A SERMON, Preached at Litchfield June 8, 1756. Before the Association of
Litchfield County.

By Joseph Bellamy, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Bethlem.

Published with great Enlargements

For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God.

St. Paul. NEW HAVEN:^^^^ted by JAMES PARKER, and COMPANY, at the Post Office.

THE CONTENTS.

THE Character of the Galatians. Their Notion of Justification by the Deeds of
the Law. Page 2 (...) Manner ^^easoning with them. Page 4 A general View of the
Law given on Mount Sinai. Page 8 It required perfect Obedience. Page 11 On that
Condition promised eternal Life. Page 12 For the least Failing threatened
eternal Misery. Page 13 No Flesh can be justified by it. Page 17 Yet all were
obliged heardly to approve of it as strictly just. Page 18 Which would prepare
them for the Gospel-Way of Life. Page 19 Which was painted out by various
Types. Page 21 The State of the Gentiles under the Law of Nature. Page 25
^jections answered Page 28 (...) Arminian Scheme inconsistent with St. Paul's.
Page 37 (...) are justified by Faith, not for Faith Page 49 (...) Necessity and
Nature of Preparation for Christ. Page 56 (...) Nature of justifying Faith.
Page 61 (...) Belief that our Sins are forgiven quite a different Thing from
true Faith. Page 66 ^n important Case of Conscience resolved Page 70 The true
State of a Christless Sinner Page 71 The only Way of Relief Page 75
The Law, our Schoolmaster.
GALATIONS III. 24. WHEREFORE the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto
CHRIST, that we might be justified by Faith.


THE chief Design of the present Discourse is to give the true Sense of this
Text; which will go far toward leading us into the Nature of the Jewish
Religion, and of the Christian; and help to remove several dangerous Mistakes,
which Mankind have been apt to run into. -- Now, in Order to understand any
Text of Scripture, we are to consider the various Circumstances of the
Discourse; such as, the Character of the Persons spoken to, the Manner how the
Text is introduced, and for what Purpose: That, we, seeing the Occasion of what
is written, and the Scope and Design of the inspired Writer, may the more
readily and certainly discern the true Sense of the Passage. -- Here, therefore
let us enquire into -- the Character of the Persons St. Paul had to deal with
-- the Occasion and Design of these Words, and how they were introduced in the
Thread of his Argument -- and the Grounds he saw in the Nature of the Mosais
Dispensation for this Observation, That the Law was ^ Schoolmaster to bring us
to Christ.

I. As to the Character of the Persons St. Paul had to deal with. -- They, at
least the Ringleaders of them, were, by Birth Jews, by Education Pharisees,
and now lately converted to Christianity; but yet zealous for some of their old
Pharisaical Notions, fond of making Proselytes to their own Scheme, a Scheme,
in the Apostle's Opinion, subversive of Christianity.

WHILE of the Sect of the Pharisees, before their Conversion to Christianity,
they expected Justification wholly by the Deeds of the Law. (Romans x. 3.) But
now, since their Conversion to Christianity, they expected Justification by the
Deeds of the Law; and yet it seems, not wholly; for they hoped that Christ
would profit them some, be of some Effect, and they had some Dependence on
Grace, as is implied in the Apostle's Manner of Reasoning in Gal. v. 2, 3, 4.
-- As to their Notions of the Law of Moses, by which they expected
Justification, it seems, they considered it, not at all, as a Dispensation
preparitory to Christianity, suited to show them their Need of Christ, and to
lead them to Faith in him by Types and Shadows; but only as a Rule of Life, to
which, if they conformed, they should be saved. And it seems they did not
doubt, but that such a Conformity to it, as they were capable of, would answer
the End: Little considering, that if they depended upon their Circumcision, and
their others Works for Life, they were obliged to keep the whole Law. -- Just
as now a Days there are those, who ignorantly imagine, that if they endeavor
to do as well as they can, they shall be saved; little thinking, that if they
depend upon their own Righteousness for Salvation, they ought to yield a
perfect Obedience, as they would not finally be disappointed.

HAD they viewed the Law of Moses as a Dispensation preparatory to
Christianity, they might more readily have soon the Propriety of its being
abolished, and giving Place to the Gospel of Christ; but while they considered
it, with all its Rites and Ceremonies, only, as a Rule to which they were to
Conform, as a Condition of Salvation, Christ only making up for their
Deficiencies, it was natural to think it of perpetual Obligation; and that not
only to themselves, but also to the Gentile Converts. When therefore they
observed St. Paul constantly preaching Justification by Faith alone without the
Deeds of the Law, and the Gentile Converts received and embraced as good
Christians, without their paying any Regard to the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Mosaic Law, they were chagrined, and set up themselves to oppose St. Paul,
affirming that unless the Gentile Converts were circumcised and kept the Law of
Moses they could not be saved. Act. XV. 1, 5.

AND as the Jews were, in tho^ early Times, the greatest Enemies Christianity
had, and the most bitter Persecutors, enraged to see the Rites of Moses's Law
neglected; so these Pharisaical Christians, by their Zeal for Moses's Law,
ingratiated themselves very much, in the Favor of these bitter Enemies of
Christianity, which made them the more zealous in their Way, that they might
not only avoid Persecution from the unbelieving Jews, but also have it to glory
in, that they had proselyted so many Gentiles to be circumcised. Gal. vi. 12,
13. -- So that they were not only bigoted to their Scheme by their Education
while Jews, and attached to it, as it suited their self-righteous Temper; but
also proud of it, as it freed them from the chief Odium of Christianity, and
screened them from the Malice of its bitterest Enemies. -- And they were in
some Places more than a Match for St. Paul with all his extraordinary Gifts.
They raised such a Dust at Antioch, as that Paul and Barnabas could not settle
the Point; but were obliged to refer it to the Apostles at Jerusalem. And they
made such sad Work in the Churches in Galatia, that although the Converts there,
once, could have even plucked out their Eyes and given to St. Paul, yet they
were now much disaffected toward him, and even become his Enemies. And these
Seducers were in eminent Danger of even overthrowing Christianity in all that
Country; which at last obliged St. Paul to write this Epistle to the several
Churches in Galatia.

II. Now these were the Men the Apostle had to deal with; and the Method he
took, which was wisely adapted to let in Light upon, their Minds and thoroughly
convince their Judgments, may be fully seen, if we carefully read through this
Epistle: But I may now only give you a brief and cursory View of some Parts of
it, just to let you see his Manner of Address, and his Way of Reasoning, and
how our Text is introduced in the Thread of the Apostle's Argument. -- Which
take as follows --

THIS Epistle is sent to the Churches of Galatia, from Paul, an Apostle, who
received his Mission not of Men, neither by Men, but immediately from Jesus
Christ: And it is approved by all the Brethren with him, and it comes wishing
you all Blessings. -- But I am astonished and greatly marvel, after all the
Pains I have taken with you to instruct you into the true Nature of
Christianity, to see you so soon drawn away by these Seducers, to quite another
Kind of a Gospel; which indeed is no Gospel: But is a most dangerous Scheme. --
These Seducers, how plausible soever they appear, ought not to be regarded.
Yea, if an Angel from Heaven should preach any other Gospel, than that I have
preached, let him be ACCURSED. -- I speak plainly: For I am no TRIMMER. I do
not make it my ultimate End to please Man; but mean, in the Uprightness of my
Heart, to be faithful to Jesus Christ. -- And I know, I received the Gospel I
preached to you by immediate Revelation from God, after, as it was publicly
known, I had been exceedingly zealous in the Pharisaical Scheme; being met with
in a very extraordinary Manner, as I was going to Damascus: Ever since which
Time, I have constantly preached this Gospel; being instructed, not even by any
of the Apostles, but by immediate Revelation. -- And I have constantly
maintained, that the Gentiles need not be Circumcised, or keep the Law of
Moses; and that no Man is justified by the Deeds of the Law, but only by Faith
in Christ. etc. Chapters i, and ii.

NOT that I countenance Licentiousness. For at the same Time, that I through the
Law am dead to all Hopes of Justification by the Law, I am but hereby prepared
to live with a single Eye to the Glory of God: Still having all my Hopes of
Acceptance founded on Christ. -- And indeed I could not consistently preach up
Justification by the Law. For if I did, I should quite overthrow the Gospel.
For if Righteousness and Justification come by the Law, and is to be obtained
by our own Works, then there was no Need of Christ: But he is dead in vain.
Chap. ix. 17.21.

O FOOLISH, infatuated Galatians, may I not appeal even to your own Experience?
Cannot you recollect that an extraordinary Outpouring of the Spirit, in his
miraculous Gifts, has attended the Preaching of the Doctrines of Grace, and not
of the Pharisaical Scheme, as in all the Churches, so also among you? And is
not this a sufficient Confirmation that they are from God? And were not even
you yourselves converted to Christianity by these Doctrines attended with a
divine Influence? And can you think to perfect yourselves now by going off from
this spiritual, divine Scheme, to one, so mean and low? Chap. iii. 1 -- 5.

AND this indeed, is not any new Doctrine. It is the old Way of Justification.
Your Father Abraham was, two Thousand Years ago, justified in this Way. And in
this Way all his Children are justified. Ver. 6 -- 9.

BESIDES, you cannot be justified by the Law, if you are ever so desirous of
it. All your Hopes are built upon ignorant and mistaken Notions. For it is
evident that the Law requires sinless Perfection under the severest Penalty. --
Therefore, so far from being justified will you be, if you adhere to this Way
of Justification, that every Man of you, who does so, will inevitably fall
under the Curse. For it is expressly written, cursed is every one, that
continues not in all Things, which are written in the Bock of the Law, to do
them. Ver. 10. -- And therefore, see you remember, that if you are circumcised,
and intend to be saved by the Law, that you yield a sinless Perfection. For I
Paul assure every Man of you, that is circumcised under that Notion, that he is
a Debtor to keep the whole Law, he is bound to yield a perfect Obedience, as he
hopes to be saved. For if you go this Way to obtain Justification, I assure
you, whatever you think, Christ will profit you nothing: You shall, however you
may flatter yourselves, have no Benefit from him: But must stand, or fall, as
you yield a perfect Obedience, or not. Chap. v. 2, 3, 4. An Arminian might
justly query -- Why did not the Galatians reply to St. Paul, and say -- Sir,
you quite abuse us, we have no Notion of being justified by Law in your Sense.
We only depend upon our sincere Obedience, and hope and expect to receive some
Benefit from Christ, and free Grace, as you are sensible. We are in the Main,
exactly of your Mind. The Dispute is only about Words. We mean the same Thing
you do. For when you say, That a Man is justified by Faith without the Deeds of
the Law, You only mean that he is justified by sincere Obedience, and not by
perfect. And this is just the Thing we would. And ^ou yourself know we do not
pretend to perfect Obedience. Why then do you bear down so very hard upon us?
And even pronounce the Man ACCURSED, that teaches our Scheme? Pretending that
it is so essentially different from yours. We think we obey God in being
circumcised, and observing the Rites of Moses's Law. And you think you obey God
in not doing these Things. We own we have been too uncharitable in thinking
none could be saved, unless they were circumcised and kept the Law of Moses.
But, if this is all the Error we are in, you are full as uncharitable toward
us, to doom us to Destruction for such a Mistake. Therefore, being now willing
to give up this one Point, as for all the Rest, we think your own Words will
equally suit us both. Romans xiv. 3, 4. Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not. And let not him that eats not, judge him that eats. Who art
thou that judge another Man's Servant? For as to the Terms of Justification,
that one Mistake excepted, we are exactly of your Mind.

AND had St. Paul been in the same Scheme with our modern Arminians, I do not
see how he could have answered them: Being obliged to own, as he would have
been, that their Notions about Justification were right in the Main, although
he had condemned them by wholesale.

BUT if St. Paul denied Justification, by any Kind of Obedience, short of
absolute Perfection, how sincere soever it might be, as it is plain he did;
then there was no Room for the Galatians to make this Reply to his Manner of
arguing. Nor is there any more Room for the Arminian Way of Justification by
sincere Obedience, consistent with the Apostle's Way of reasoning. -- For if
they will be justified by their Obedience, Christ will profit them nothing,
will make up for none of their Defect. They therefore must yield a perfect
Obedience, or fall under the Curse; but they do not yield a perfect Obedience.
As many, therefore, as are, not only in Head, but in Heart, in the Arminian
Scheme, are under the CURSE, according to St. Paul. Gal. iii. 26.




AND if to all this you should object, and say -- And what was the Law given
for, if we are not to justified by it? -- I reply, it was given to answer many
wise Ends, as for Instance, to check and restrain Vice. Chap. iii. 19. But
especially to be a Schoolmaster, to bring us to Christ, that we might be
justified by Faith. For by the Law all Sin was forbid under the highest
Penalty. And so by it we were shut up under Sin and Condemnation. and shut up
to the Faith. There was no Way to escape the Curse, but by Faith. All other
Ways were shut up. And thus the Law was to teach us our Need of Christ and free
Grace: And to bring us to look this Way for Justification and eternal Life.
Ver. 22, 23, 24. And thus we see the Occasion of the Words, and how they were
introduced in the Thread of the Apostle's Argument.

III. AND now that we may more fully understand them, let us turn back to the
sacred Books of Moses, and take a View of the Law given on Mount-Sanai, that we
may see what Foundation there was in that Dispensation, for this Observation of
the inspired Apostle.

LET us begin then with the xixth Chapter of Exodus, and see the particular
Steps divine Wisdom took to introduce that Dispensation, after that God had
already in general prepared the Way for it, by redeeming the Children of Israel
out of Egypt, by an outstretched Hand, by Signs and Wonders, and led them
through the Red Sea. -- Two Months they had now been in the Wilderness
(miraculously supplied were they with Water out of the flinty Rock, and with
Bread from Heaven) when they came to the Mount of God -- and all to teach them,
that the God of Abraham was the MOST HIGH GOD; and to make them sensible, that
they were under the greatest and strongest Obligations to him.

ISRAEL pitched in the Wilderness of Sinai, and there they camped before the
Mount. And that it might be seen whether they would receive his Law, God called
unto Moses out of the Mountain, and sent him to the House of Jacob, and bid him
tell the Children of Israel, -- "Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians,
and how I bare you on Eagle's Wings, and brought you unto my self. Now
therefore if ye will obey my Voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall
be a peculiar Treasure to me above all People: For all the Earth is mine." To
which the Children of Israel made Answer -- "All that the Lord has spoken will
we do." -- "And Moses told the Words of the People unto the Lord." -- And the
Lord sent him to sanctify the People that Day, and the next, that they might be
ready against the third Day, when he would come down in the Sight of all the
People upon Mount Sinai. -- "And it came to pass on the third Day in the
Morning, that there were Thunders and Lightnings, and a thick Cloud upon the
Mount, and the Voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud: So that all the People that
was in the Camp trembled." -- Upon which " Moses brought forth the People out
of the Camp to meet with God. And Mount Sinai," to look to, "was altogether on
a Smoke. And the Smoke thereof ascended as the Smoke of a Furnace: And the
whole Mount quaked greatly. And the Voice of the Trumpet sounded long, and
waxed louder and louder." Exodus xix. "And the Sight of the Glory of the Lord
was like DEVOURING FIRE on the Top of the Mount, in the Eyes of the Children of
Israel." Chap. xxiv. 17. -- And all this, to fill the Hearts of the whole
Congregation with a Sense of the Greatness and Majesty of God, and their
infinite Obligations to be obedient.

Now from the Mountain, with all these solemn and awful Things attending, God
gave forth his Law, with a Voice so exceeding loud, as to be heard by the whole
Congregation, containing perhaps near three Millions of Souls: Which filled the
whole Congregation with so great Terror, that they besought that God would not
speak any farther to them in this awful Manner, lest they should die under it.
Chap. xx. 18.19.

"AND God spoke all these Words, saying,"

"I AM THE LORD THY GOD, which have brought the out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the House of Bondage."

"THOU shall have no other Gods before me."

"THOU shall not make unto thee any graven Image," etc.

"THOU shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain," etc.

"REMEMBER the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy," etc. etc. etc.

Even Ten Commandments.

THE Sum of all which was "thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart.
-- And thy Neighbor as thyself."

AND it was charged upon the Children of Israel, when they had passed over
Jordan, that they should stand, Part on Mount Gerizzim, and Part on Mount Ebal:
and that the Levites should say, "CURSED be the Man, that makes any graven, or
molten Image," etc. -- "And all the People shall say, AMEN." And the CURSE was
to be repeated twelve Times, according to the Number of the twelve Tribes of
Israel, and all the People were to say AMEN. -- And to sum up the Whole, the
Levites were to say, "CURSED be the Man that confirms not all the Words of
this Law, to do them." (Or according to St. Paul, "that continues not in all
Things, written in the Book of the Law, to do them.") "And all the People shall
say, AMEN." -- Thus the Law, as requiring sinless Perfection under the Penalty
of the CURSE, was, in this public Manner, and with the utmost Solemnity, to be
approved by the whole Congregation, as holy, just and good. And all the People
shall say, AMEN. Deuteronomy. xxvii.

IN Case of any Trangression, the only Way provided and prescribed to obtain
Pardon; was by Shedding of Blood. And without shedding of Blood, there was no
Remission. Heb. ix. 22.
The Transgressor was to bring a Bullock for a Sin-offering to the Tabernacle,
and present it before the Lord; and having laid his Hands on the Head of the
Bullock, the Priest was to slay him, sprinkle the Blood, burn the Bullock, and
so make an Atonement for the Sin: And in this Way, it should be forgiven. Lev.
iv.


ONCE in every Year, on the great Day of Atonement, the High Priest, dressed in
his holy Robes, with the Names of the twelve Tribes of Israel on his Heart, and
with the Blood of Atonement in his Hands, was to enter into the most holy
Place, even into the immediate Presence of God, who dwelt there, over the
Mercy-Seat, in the Cloud of Glory, to make Atonement for the whole
Congregation. -- After which, on the same solemn Day, the High Priest was to
lay both his Hands on the Head of a live Goat, and confess over him all the
Iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their Transgressions in all their
Sins, putting them on the Head of the Goat, and then send him away by the Hand
of a fit Man into the Wilderness: and the Goat was to bear upon him all their
Iniquities, unto a Land not inhabited. Lev. xvi.


AND thus the Law, by its requiring prefect Obedience, and denouncing a CURSE
for the least failing, discovered the Necessity of an Atonement. And thus the
Law by its Sin Offerings, and its Blood of Atonement, and its escape Goat,
pointed out Christ. And thus the Law was in its Nature suited to be a
Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ that they might be justified by Faith.

IV. BUT that this Point may stand in the clearest Light, and the Justness of
the Apostle's Observation be seen in the plainest Manner, these following
Particulars may be distinctly noted and illustrated.

1. "THAT the Law given on Mount Sinai required sinless Perfection of the whole
Congregation of Israel." -- If sinless Perfection be defined to be, "a feeling
and acting toward intelligent Beings, as being what they are;" this, their Law
required. For it required them, "to love God with all their Heart, and obey him
in every Thing; and to love their Neighbors as themselves, and to do as they
would be done by:" Which would have been to feel and act toward God and their
Neighbors, as being just what they were. -- Or, if sinless Perfection consists
in always doing that, "which is right and fit and beautiful to be done, all
Things considered:" Still it comes to the same Thing. To love God with all our
Heart, and obey him in every Thing; and to love our Neighbors as ourselves,
and do as we would be done by; is the Sum of what is to be done by us, "as
right and fit and beautiful." -- Or, if sinless Perfection consists in a
perfect Conformity of Heart and Life to the Will and Law of God:" This was
plainly required. For it is essential to every Law, to require an exact, and
entire Conformity to itself. And it is a plain Contradiction to suppose, that
God did not require them to do all that he did require them to do. They were
always to obey God, and never to disobey him. And the Law respected their
Hearts and Lives, their Thoughts, Words and Actions; all their inward Tempers,
and all their outward Behavior: And it was never lawful for them to commit the
least Sin, or to omit the least Duty; but, as to all Things written in the Book
of the Law, they were to do them. -- And

2. THIS perfect Obedience was the Condition, upon which, the Law promised
Life." -- "Ye shall keep my Statues and my Judgments, which if a Man do, he
shall live in them. Lev. xviii. 5. This is repeated four Times more in the
Old Testament; once in Neh. ix. 29. thrice in Ezekiel. xx. 11, 13, 21. And twice
in the New Testament; once in Romans x. 5. and once in Gal. iii. 12.

AND, that this Life, thus promised in Moses's Law upon Condition of perfect
Obedience, implied in it ETERNAL LIFE and Happiness, is evident from the
Testimony of our Blessed Savior, in Luke x. 25 -- 28. "What shall I do to
inherit ETERNAL LIFE?" Said a certain Jew to Christ. To whom our Savior
replied, turning him back to the Law of Moses with these Questions, "what is
written in the Law? How read thou?" -- To which the Man answered and said,
-- "Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Strength, and with all thy Mind; and thy Neighbor as
thyself." -- This he gives, as the Sum of Moses's Law. -- To which our Savior
replied, -- "Thou have answered right. This do, and thou shall live." i. e.
Inherit ETERNAL LIFE. -- The same Reply our Savior made to another Man, who
also came to him, to know, what he should do that he might have ETERNAL LIFE:
-- "If thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments." Said our Blessed
Savior, Matt. xix. 16, 17. -- It is plain, that in both these Passages, our
Savior means to declare how Eternal Life was to be obtained by the Law: And he
gives the same Answer that Moses had done before. Which, if a Man do he shall
live in them. So that according to our Savior's Interpretation of the Law of
Moses, ETERNAL LIFE was implied in the Life therein promised.

THIS also is plain from the Testimony of St. Paul, in Romans x. Where opposing
the Way to Justification and eternal Life by the Law, to that which is by the
Gospel, and showing the Difference, he says, ver. 5. "Moses describes the
Righteousness which is of the Law, that the Man that does those Things, shall
live by them." And then adds, ver. 6. "that the Righteousness which is by Faith
speaks on this wise, etc. etc. -- He that believes shall be saved." ver. 9,
10, compared with Gal. iii. 12. Where he intimates that the Law does not
promise Justification to Faith, but to perfect Obedience; plainly taking it for
granted, that the Life, promised in the Law, implied ETERNAL LIFE. -- I have
insisted the longer on this, because, if the Life promised in Moses's Law
implied eternal Life; no doubt, the Death threatened, implied eternal Death:
Which seems to be the Meaning of Romans vi. 23. "The Wages," (i. e. according to
Law) "of Sin is Death." i. e. Eternal Death and Misery: Even as "the Gift of
God is eternal Life through our Lord Jesus Christ." -- Therefore I may venture to
affirm

3. "THAT the CURSE threatened in Moses's Law, against the Man that broke it in
any one Point, implied in it, ETERNAL DAMNATION, and that without any
Abatements made on Account of their inability."

How great their Impotency was, whether from their native Corruption, or from
their contracted bad Habits, I shall not pretend now to determine. But, as they
were Descendants of Adam, and had been educated in Egypt; so, I suppose, they
were, at least, as bad as the Generality of Mankind. -- But, be it so they were
ever so bad, ever so disinclined to yield this perfect Obedience in Heart and
Life, yet the Law is not brought down to their vitiated Taste, and corrupt
Hearts; but they are still required, to love God with all their Hearts, and
obey him in every Thing, under the Penalty of the Curse. --

Now that the Law did curse every One, who continued not in all Things written
in the Book of the Law to do them, is plain from Deuteronomy. xxvii. -- and that this
Curse comprised the Sum total of the Punishment due to Sin, according to the
Law, there is no Doubt. -- And that ETERNAL DAMNATION was implied in the
Punishment threatened in the Law, and comprised in the Curse in Deuteronomy. xxvii. I
think is evident. --

FOR otherwise the wicked Jews, who died in their Sins, were not exposed to
Hell: But we see they were exposed to Hell, from the Representation Christ
gives in his Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus. "The rich Man died and was
buried, and in HELL he lift up his Eyes being in Torments." Luke xvi. 22, 23.
-- This Parable was spoken to the Jews, then under Moses's Law. -- But they
could not have been exposed to Hell, unless it were by their own Law, for St.
Paul expressly affirms, that they should be judged by that, and by no other:
"As many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law." Romans ii. 12.
And therefore if their Law had not threatened Hell, they would not have been
exposed unto it.

BESIDES if the Jews, who enjoyed the Benefit of divine Revelation, were not
exposed to Hell for their Sins; it is not to be supposed, that the benighted
Gentiles were. -- And if neither Jew nor Gentile were in Danger of Hell,
previous to the coming of Christ, why did Christ come, and die, to save both
Jew and Gentile from the Wrath to come? 1 These. i. 10.


INDEED it is plain from the three first Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans,
that St. Paul takes it for granted, as an indisputable Point, that the Jews by
their Law; as well as the Gentiles by the Law of Nature, were exposed to the
Wrath of God, for the least Sin. Romans i. 18.
And that this Wrath should be revealed and executed at the Day of Judgment.
Chap. ii. 5, 6.
When, as we know, the Wicked of all Nations are to go away into everlasting
Punishment. Matt. xxv. 46.
So that if the New Testament may be allowed to explain the Old, there can be
no Doubt but eternal Damnation was implied in the Curse of Moses's Law. -- And
every unbiassed Reader will naturally view that Passage in Gal. iii. 10, 13. in
this Light. "As many as are of the Works of the Law, are under the Curse. For
it is written, Cursed is every One that continues not in all Things written in
the Book of the Law to do them. -- But Christ has redeemed us from the Curse
of the Law, that the Blessing of Abraham might come upon us." -- For as the
Blessing of Abraham implied eternal Life and Happiness; so the Curse of the
Law, from which Christ redeemed us, implied eternal Death and Misery; as St.
Paul viewed the Case. OBJECTION. Grant it, when St. Paul says, Christ has
redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, that, by the Curse, he means eternal
Damnation; and, by the Law, he means the Law of Moses: Yet how could St. Paul
justly give this Sense to the Curse of Moses's Law, which seems to intend
nothing more than temporal Judgments? As it is written Deuteronomy. xxviii. 16, 17.
Cursed shall thou be in the City, and Cursed shall thou be in the Field. Cursed
shall be thy Basket, and thy Store. And so on for above fifty Verses together,
without one Word of eternal Damnation.

ANSWER. God designed the whole Jewish Dispensation as a SHADOW of spiritual
Things. -- Their Bondage in Egypt was a Shadow of our spiritual Bondage --
Their Redemption out of Egypt a Shadow of our Redemption by Christ -- The Land
of Canaan, with all the Milk and Honey, a Shadow of Heaven and its eternal
Delights and Joys -- Their being turned out of the Land of Canaan for their
Sins, and Cursed in all their temporal Interests, a Shadow of an eternal
Banishment from Heaven, and of the everlasting Miseries of Hell. -- So that the
Curse of Moses's Law was, in its spiritual Meaning, of the same Import, with
the Curse that shall be executed at the last Day; when the Judge shall say,
"Depart from me, ye CURSED, into everlasting Fire." Matt. xxv. 41. And
accordingly, St. Paul understood it so. -- This is the true Solution of the
Difficulty. And it must be quite satisfactory to those who believe, that the
Jewish Dispensation was by God designed to be a Shadow of spiritual Things. For
this being supposed, and taken for granted, as indeed it is every where in the
New Testament, St. Paul might be full as certain what was the spiritual, as
what was the literal Sense. -- Nor was this spiritual Sense designed to be
wholly hid from the whole Congregation of Israel, as the learned Dr. Warburton
seems to imagine; (vid. div. Leg. Mos.) but rather, we ought to think, God
designed to give them some general Idea of the Substance by all those Shadows,
which were held forth before their Eyes, (and in which the Gospel was preached
to them: Heb. iv 2.) because otherwise these Shadows would have been of no
Service to lead them to look to the promised Messiah, who was to come: And so
the End for which they were appointed, would have been frustrated. They were,
therefore, not designed to secret; but to reveal spiritual Things: Not indeed
clearly; but yet to give a Shadow of them: And such a Shadow, as was well
suited to lead their Minds to the Substance. As might be largely shown. --
Particularly, all the Curses written in their Law against the Sinner, were
designed and suited, not to hide and secret the Wrath of God, but to reveal
and realize it to the Heart. And while the guilty Jew died sensibly under the
Wrath of God, and Curse of the Law, he could have a Prospect of nothing but a
miserable Eternity, nor expect any Thing short of eternal Damnation. i. e. To
continue forever under the Wrath of God, an accursed Creature. -- But whether
every Reader shall think this, the true Solution of the Difficulty mentioned in
the Objection, or not; yet this is plain, that by the Curse, the Apostle means
that eternal Misery from which Christ redeems Sinners: and by the Law, he means
the Law of Moses, of which he had been speaking, and out of which ^e had quoted
the Passage he refers unto, when he says, Christ has redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law. Read Gal. iii. 10. and compare it with Deuteronomy. xxvii. 26. and
you may see, it is as evident as it can be, that he is speaking of the Curse of
Moses's Law. Wherefore Dr. Doddridge's Note on Gal. iii. 13. is not
satisfactory. -- But to conclude, if the Life promised in the Law of Moses,
implied Eternal Life; as it is certain, from our Savior, that it did: Then,
according to the same Rule of Interpretation, the Death threatened must imply
eternal Misery; as we see it did according to St. Paul. And no Doubt that
Interpretation of the Law of Moses must be right, which is thus confirmed by
two such Divine Expositors.


-- So that, as the Law required sinless Perfection of the whole Congregation
of Israel, and promised eternal Life upon that Condition; so it threatened
eternal Death and Misery for the least Failing: And that, all their Inability
notwithstanding. Therefore,

4. "BY the Deeds of the Law no Flesh could be justified in the Sight of God."
Romans iii. 20.
But every Jew whose Conscience was thoroughly awakened, would by Experience
find, that, the Law which was ordained to Life, which promised Life upon
perfect Obedience, did sentence him to Death. Romans vii. 10.
Indeed, if the Law could have given Life, then Men might have been justified
this Way. Gal. iii. 21.
And so the Death of Christ had been needless: For if Righteousness might have
come by the Law, then Christ had died in vain. Gal. ii. 21.
But the Law was weak through the Flesh, unable to give Life by reason of human
Depravity. Romans viii. 3.
It could convince of Sin Romans iii. 20.
if Conscience was before ever so stupid, and Men's false Hopes ever so high
and strong; yet, if the Commandment was set home, it could cause Sin to revive,
and all their false Hopes to die. Romans vii. 9.
And it could work Wrath, and fill the guilty Creature with Terror. Romans iv. 15.
For it shut him up under Sin, Gal. iii. 22.
and bound him over to eternal Condemnation, Gal. iii. 10.
and so was to him a Ministration of Death: 2 Cor. iii. 7.
But it was impossible he should ever obtain the Favor of God and eternal Life
this Way. For neither his Circumcision, nor any of his Duties, would profit
him, unless he kept the whole Law. Romans ii. 25.
He was a Debtor, he was bound, to keep the whole Law, Gal. v. 3.
in order to Life. Therefore the Jew wa^ properly shut up under Sin, Guilt and
Condemnation, and bound over to eternal Wrath, nor was there any other Way to
obtain Pardon, but by Shedding of Blood. Heb. ix. 22.
But the Blood of Bulls and Goats could not take away Sin. Heb. x. 4,
Therefore the Jew was shut up from all other Ways, and driven to an absolute
Necessity, to look to the promised Mesiah, that he might be justified by Faith
in him. And thus the Law was so constituted, as to be adapted, not to give
Life, but to be a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, that they might be
justified by Faith. -- Which will still farther appear if we consider,

5. "THAT the whole Congregation of Israel were obliged, even in the Sight of
God, who searches the Heart, to approve of the Law, in all its Rigor, as
strictly just." For in the most public and solemn Manner, all the Congregation
of Israel, when the Curse was denounced twelve Times going from Mount Ebal,
were twelve Times to answer, and say, AMEN. Deuteronomy. xxvii.
And this was to be in the Sight of God, their Lawgiver, who looks at the
Heart: And who would esteem their saying, Amen, a mere Mockery, unless their
Hearts approved of it, at the same Time their Lips pronounced Amen to it. --
And indeed, had they not heartily approved the Law, they must have appeared, in
the Character of Enemies and Rebels, in the Eyes of their Lawgiver. Even the
least Degree of Disapprobation of the Law, being just so great a Degree of
Enmity against God their Lawgiver, who in His Law to them had given a
Transcript of his Nature. To dislike the Law in such a Case, (...) been the
same Thing in effect, as to dislike God himself. -- And, besides, had they not
heartily approved the Law, in all its Rigor, as strictly just; their ever
pretending to bring a Bullock, or a Goat before the Lord, and there lay their
Hands on the Head of the consecrated Animal, and deliver it to the Priest to
kill, to sprinkle the Blood, and to burn the C^rcass, in order to make
Atonement for them, that their Sin might be forgiven, I say, all this must have
been a mere Farce. For, if the Jew who had sinned a Sin, did not deserve the
threatened Curse, why did he bring his Atonement to God? Why did he practically
say, "my Blood deserves to be shed, as this Bullock's is; and I deserve to be
consumed in the Fire of God's Wrath; as this Bullock in this Fire?" If he did
not approve the Law, as strictly just, what was all this, but lying to God? AND
as the Jew could not consistently bring his Sin-Offering, or exercise Faith in
the promised Messiah, without an hearty Approbation of the divine Law; so
neither could he love God, or repent, or yield any sincere Obedience. -- For,
if he thought the Law (...) Severe, he would think God too Severe, for giving
of it; and ^o, not love, but dislike him: He would be disposed to justify
himself in breaking it: And in all Respects, have the Heart of a Rebel. -- So
that, under the Jewish Dispensation, there could be no virtuous Action done,
nothing that had the Nature of real Piety, or that had the least true Goodness
in it, in the Sight of God, until the Law was approved of. Till this, they must
be considered as Enemies to God and his Law, and uninterested in the great
Atonement of Christ, and all their religious Performances and costly
Sacrifices, as so many splendid Pieces of Hypocrisy. -- Where there is godly
Sincerity in the Heart, God's Law will be sincerely approved of; and no where
else. Romans vii. 12, and viii. 7, 8.
-- From all which, it is plain; that the Children of Israel were obliged
heartily to approve of their Law in the Sight of God, in all its Rigor as
strictly just. And to say, with St. Paul, the Law is holy, the Commandment is
holy, ^ust and good.

6. "BUT if they had such a View of Things, and such a Temper, ^s would lay a
Foundation for them heartily to approve the Law, the same View of Things, and
the same Temper, would prepare and dispose them heartily to approve of the
Gospel, and comply with it: And so, their Schoolmaster would bring them to
Christ, to be justified by Faith."

IT was impossible the Jews should heartily approve their Law, in its requiring
them, "to love God with all their Hearts, and obey him in every Thing;" unless
under a View of his supreme Excellency, his entire Right to them, and absolute
Authority over them, attended with an answerable Frame of Heart. -- Nor could
they possibly approve of it, as equal and right, that the Favor of God,
should, by their Law, be suspended on this Condition; unless they saw, that no
Creature is worthy to be beloved by God, but those, who love him with all their
Hearts, and give unto him, in all Respects, and at all Times, the Honor and
Glory which is his Due. -- Nor could they heartily approve of it, that the
least Contempt, by them, cast upon the DEITY, should expose them to his
everlasting Displeasure; unless they saw the infinite Evil of such a Crime,
resulting from God's being infinitely worthy, to be loved with all the Heart,
and obeyed in every Thing. -- Nor could they heartily take all the Blame to
Themselves, notwithstanding their Inability to yield perfect Obedience; unless
they felt, that their Inability did not lessen their blame. -- Nor could they
reconcile the eternal Torments of Hell, threatened by their Law, to the infinite
Wisdom and Goodness of the supreme Governor; unless they saw, that Sin deserved
so great a Punishment; that it is a wise and good Thing, for the supreme
Governor of the World, to punish those, that treat him with Contempt, according
to their Deserts; that this Honor and Respect, herein shown to the DEITY, is
due to his sacred Majesty, and is needful to establish his Authority, and
secure the Honor of his Government.

But let a Jew have these Views, and an answerable Frame of Heart; even, such a
supreme Respect to the Deity, and Regard for his Honor, as, in the Nature of
the Thing, is absolutely necessary to reconcile him to the Law, and induce him
heartily to approve of it; and he would at the same Time be disposed to approve
of, and comply with the Gospel. -- If the Law, although a Ministration of Death,
appeared glorious, to the Jews; as being suited to exalt God, to secure to him
his just Rights, to maintain the Honor of his Government and Authority, to
deter from every Instance of Rebellion: Much more would the Gospel appear
glorious; as being suited, not only to answer these Ends to the best Purpose;
but being also, at the same Time, a Ministration of Life. -- If it appeared
Glorious to the Jew that these Ends should be answered, although by the eternal
Damnation of the Sinner; much more glorious would it appear, if these Ends
could be all answered, and yet the Sinner eternally Saved. If therefore he
approved of the Law, he would be even ravished with the Gospel; which not only
exalts God, and discountenances Sin: But also humbles and saves the Sinner, and
glorifies Grace, as it it written, "the Letter kills:" i. e. The Law dooms
the Sinner to eternal Death: "But the Spirit gives Life:" i. e. The Gospel
gives eternal Life to the Sinner. Now therefore, "If the Ministration of Death
was glorious," as indeed it was, " the Glory of Moses's Countenance," being a
visible Emblem of it; "shall not the Ministration of the Spirit be rather
glorious? If the Ministration of Condemnation be GLORY, much more does the
Ministration of Righteousness," and Justification unto Life, "exceed in GLORY?"
2 Cor. iii. 6-9.


7. AND the Jew being used to see Bulls and Goats brought to the Tabernacle,
and presented before the Lord, and substituted to die in the Room of the
Transgressor of the Law: and having often himself brought a Bullock, or a Goat
before the Lord, and laid his Hands on the Head of the Animal, that it might
die in his Room, and make Atonement for his Sin: I say, the Jew being thus used
to see, that which was without Spot or Blemish substituted to die for the
Guilty, and this Method of Atonement having grown familiar by long Custom, he
would be prepared to understand the Gospel, and to take in the Idea which it
exhibited of the Death of Christ, on whom the Iniquities of us all were laid
Isaiah liii. 6.
and who died the Just for the Unjust, 1 Pet. iii. 18.
-- being brought as the Bullock of Old, and set forth to be a Propitiation for
Sin, -- that by Faith in his Blood we might be justified, Romans iii. 25.
-- himself being made a Curse for us, that the Blessing of Abraham might come
on us. Gal. iii. 13, 14.


AND the Jew, on the great Day of Atonement, from Year to Year, all his Life
long, having been used to see the High Priest, dressed in his holy Robes, with
the Names of the Children of Israel upon his Heart, and Holiness to the Lord
written in his Forehead, enter the Tabernacle, to go into the most holy Place,
into the immediate Presence of God, with the Blood of Atonement in his Hand,
Exodus xxviii. Lev. xvi.
-- would be hereby prepared understandingly to behold our great HIGH PRIEST,
CHRIST JESUS, with his own Blood, enter into Heaven, there to appear in the
Presence of God for us. Heb. ix.
And thus the Law was, in its whole Constitution, wisely framed and suited to
be a Schoolmaster, to bring the Jew to Christ, that he might be justified by
Faith. OBJECTION, Under the Jewish Dispensation the Priest made Atonement for
Sin, by sacrificing a Beast, ONLY as that was a Sign and Testimony of the
Sacrificer's pure and upright Heart. Tailor on Atonement. page 22. Nor would
they be finally saved but by their own Obedience. p. 114.

ANSWER. Then the Law was not a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, that
they might be justified by Faith: As St. Paul affirms. -- But rather a
Schoolmaster to bring them to their own Righteousness, that they might be
justified by that, It was adapted to train them up in a self-righteous Temper,
and effectually to prepare them to reject the great Atonement of Christ. Romans
x. 3.




AND thus we have gone through what was proposed, have considered the Occasion of
the Words -- viewed the Character of the Persons the Apostle had to deal with
-- seen how these Words were introduced in the Thread of the Apostle's Argument
-- and particularly considered what Ground there was in the Nature and
Constitution of the Mosaic Dispensation for this Observation -- from all which,
the exact Sense of the Words may be clearly determined.

And that which may, if Need (...) still farther confirm us in it, that we have
entered into the Apostle's very Sentiments in this Point, is, that this Sense
of the Text seems exactly to harmonize with St. Paul's own Experience in the
Case. -- For he was born a Jew, and educated a Pharisee, and was once very
zealous in the Scheme he is now confuting, and now and then in his Epistles he
drops a Hint, or rather plainly declares, how he himself was brought off from
the Pharisaical Scheme of Justification, to an entire Dependence on Christ
Jesus for Salvation. -- While he was a Pharisee, he had the same superficial,
indistinct and confused Notion of the Law, as the Rest of that Sect had; as a
Rule, to which, if he conformed his Life, he should enjoy the Favor of God,
and eternal Happiness: Not once imagining, that it required sinless Perfection
on pain of eternal Damnation. -- No, so far from it, that I not only thought I
could, but thought I actually did, live up to what the Law required. For as
touching the Righteousness which is in the Law, I was blameless, for I was then
without the Law, without any Knowledge, or Sense of its true Meaning: And this
was the Reason my Sinfulness was by me unobserved. For in those Days, I saw
little, or no Corruption in my Heart: And what I did see, did not terrify me: I
apprehended no Danger. For while I was without the Law, Sin was Dead. -- And
now in these Days I was an Enemy to Christianity, and persecuted it, and did
all I could to suppress it. -- For I was alive without the Law at that Time,
confident of my own Goodness, and of God's Favor, and in high Expectations of
eternal Life upon the Foot of my own Virtue, ignorant of God, and of his Law,
and of my own Heart. -- But when the Commandment, as requiring sinless
Perfection on Pain of eternal Damnation, came into View, and was set home upon
my Heart and Conscience by the Spirit of God, my fancied Goodness began to
appear as Dung, a Heap of Filth, and Sin revived, even all the ^ckedness of my
Heart and Life rose up into clear View, and stared me in the Face; and I
immediately felt myself under the Curse, and exposed to have it executed in a
Moment. -- I stood Guilty before God -- I was shut up under Sin -- I saw no Way
to escape -- my Heart failed me -- I died -- I felt I was a dead Man, a lost
Man, by Law; and I gave up all Hopes of ever obtaining Life this Way. -- The
Law which was ordained to Life, and by which I thought Life was to be obtained,
I found to be unto Death. It slew me. It killed all my false Religion, and all
my self-righteous Hopes, and made me for ever despair of obtaining Life by my
own Goodness. And my Mouth was stopped, I had nothing to say, because I saw the
Law was holy, and the Commandment holy, just and good. -- And thus I through the
Law, became dead to the Law. -- But ever since that solemn Hour, when Jesus
Christ, and the Way of Salvation by free Grace through him, was revealed in me, I
have sought to he found in Christ, and expected to be justified by Faith
without the Deeds of the Law. And in a Word, all my Hopes and Expectations are
so entirely built on Christ, that I may truly say, that the Life I live in the
Flesh, is by Faith on the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. So
St: Paul experienced, and so he believed, and so he preached, and so he wrote
in all his Epistles. See Romans iii. 19, 20^ And Chap. vii. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Gal. i. 13 -- 16. And Chap. ii. 16, 19, 20. Phil. iii. 3 -- 9. Perhaps, by this
Time, some Readers may begin to pause, and reason within Themselves, and say.
-- How can these Things be? I never experienced any such Thing. And there are
many good Men I known of, who never did. Nor do they think it necessary: But
think as I do, that if Men are sincere in the Service of God. they will be
saved at last. -- And it must be so: For neither Abraham, nor David, were
perfect. And there is no Man that lives, and sins not.

ANSWER 1. HOWEVER sincere a Man may be, in what he calls Religion; yet he
cannot possibly be sincere in the Service of God, properly speaking, until
after he has (...) brought to this right Understanding of the Law, and to this
^^rty Approbation of it. -- He must have this right Understanding of the Law,
or he does not so much as know what the Law of God is, or what God would have
him do: And therefore he cannot so much as desire to do it; or exercise any
Kind of Sincerity about it. -- And if he has this right Understanding of the
Law, he must also approve of it; or he is so far from Sincerity in God's
Service, that he is an Enemy to God. He, to whom, the Law, although a
Ministration of Death, does not appear gloricus, in all its Rigor; to him, God
himself does not appear glorious. For the Law is but a Transcript of the divine
Nature. It is the very Image of God's Heart. -- Or, if any Such imagine they
love God, it is but a false Image of God they have framed in their own Fancy.
For no Man loves God, who does not love the Law. He that is an Enemy to the ONE
is to the OTHER. Romans viii. 7. And there is nothing in the Religion of such Men
that pleases God. Romans viii. 8. --

2. AND if a Man is brought rightly to understand, and heartily approve of the
Law, it will effectually kill a self-righteous Spirit, and bring him to Christ,
to be justified by Faith. So Abraham and David were justified, and all other
good Men. -- Therefore be not deceived with vain Words. -- But perhaps you will
say, (for the Sinner dreads to be shut up under Sin, and Shut up to the Faith.)
-- "We never were under the Law of Moses, and so all this is Nothing to us." --
Well, this comes next to be considered. -- To the Law, and to the Testimony let
us go.




AND now, there is but one Thing more, that needs to be observed, in order to
our full Understanding of the Apostle's Reasonings upon this Subject, and to
prepare the Way to apply all, that has been said, to us, who are not Jews, who
were never under Moses's Law, but are by Nature Gentiles. viz.

THAT the Law given at Mount Sinai, as to its moral Precepts, was nothing more
than a new and plainer Edition and Republication of the Law of Nature, which
had been in Force from the Beginning of the World, and was equally binding to
all Nations, and in all Ages. To love God with all the Heart, and our Neighbor
as our Selves, being equally the Duty of the Gentiles, as of Jews; and the
least Sin exposing Gentile, as well as Jew to the everlasting Wrath of God.

ALL this is implied in Romans i. 18. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven,
against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men -- He means, be they, Jews,
or Gentiles, as is plain from what follows. -- One as well as the Other, is
exposed to the Wrath of God, for any Ungodliness, or Unrighteousness; i. e. for
any Neglect of Duty to God, or Man; i. e. for any Defect of perfect Holiness,
in Heart, or Life. And that, which makes it evident this is his true Meaning,
is, that in these Words he designedly lays down a Maxim, upon which to build
his whole Argument, by which to prove the whole World to be guilty before God,
and that no Flesh, whether Jew or Greek, could be justified in the Sight of
God, by their own Virtue and good Deeds. The Sum of his Argument is this --
"every Sin exposes to the everlasting Wrath of God: But both Jew and Gentile
ha^ sinned: Therefore both Jew and Gentile are exp^^ed to the everlasting Wrath
of God." The whole World stand Guilty before God. "No Man can be justified by
Law, unless he yield a perfect Obedience: But there is none Righteous, no not
One in this Sense: Therefore no Flesh can be justified in the Sight of God by
Law." -- This, I say, is the Sum of his Argument. -- Which plainly supposes,
that the Gentile was bound by the Law of Nature to sinless Perfection, just as
the Jew was by the Law of Moses: And was equally exposed to the Wrath of God
for any Neglect. -- For otherwise, the Apostle's Reasoning, although it might
prove, that no ONE Jew could be justified by the Law of Moses, which he was
under: Yet it would not prove, that no ONE Gentile could be justified by the
Law of Nature, which he was under. Which yet the Apostle intended to prove;
that the Gentile, as well as the Jew, might be convinced of his Need of Christ
and Gospel Grace. --

BESIDES, if the Gentile could be justified by the Law of Nature, he might
justly reject the Gospel of Christ, upon the same Ground, upon which, the
unbelieving Jews, unjustly rejected it. They rejected the Gospel, because they
thought they could be justified by their Law. But if they could have obtained
justification by their Law, the Apostle virtually owns their Conduct was
reasonable. For, he grants, that, if there had been a Law given, which could
have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law. Gal. iii. 21.
And he grants, that, if Righteousness come by the Law; then Christ is dead in
vain. Gal. ii. 21.
Which Positions, the Gentile might have l^id hold of, and turned against the
Apostle, and out of his own Mouth have demonstrated, that there was no
Necessity of Christ's dying for them, if the Law of Nature, which they were
under, did not require sinless Perfection, under pain of eternal Damnation, as
did the Jews's Law: but only required them, as some seem vainly to imagine,
sincerely to endeavor to do as well as they could, and to be sorry for their
Failings, and study Amendment, and to trust in the Mercy of God. -- If Life
might have been had in this Way by the Gentiles, then Christ had died in vain,
as to them.

AND if this had been the Case, as to the Gentiles, that they might have been
thus saved by the Law of Nature; it will follow, that there never had been any
Need of Christ's Death for the Jewish Nation, had it not have been for the Law
given on Mount Sinai. Had they remained only under the Law of Nature, they
might have been saved by it too, as well as the Gentiles. And so the Death of
Christ was made necessary merely by the Sinai-Law. And so instead of being a
Schoolmaster to teach the Jews their Need of Christ, it was the only Thing
that made Christ needful. To suppose which, would overthrow Law and Gospel too.
-- All which Absurdities, plainly following on the present Hypothesis, do
sufficiently prove it to be false; and demonstrate that the Law of Nature did
require sinless Perfection on Pain of eternal Damnation of the Gentiles, just
as the Law from Mount Sinai did of the Jews. -- And now the Apostle's Argument
will be conclusive, and no Flesh, whether Jew or Gentile, by their own good
Deeds can be justified in the Sight of God. -- For neither the Law of Nature,
nor the Law from Mount Sinai could give Life. -- And there was a Necessity for
Christ to die for the Gentile, as well as the Jew. -- All having sinned -- and
the whole World standing guilty before God.

To conclude, it may be added, that Sin did, according to Reason and strict
Justice, deserve eternal Damnation, antecedent to the giving of the Law from
Mount Sinai, or it did not. -- If it did; then, by the Law of Nature, eternal
Damnation was Due. -- If it did not; then, the Law from Mount Sinai was too
severe, in threatening a greater Punishment for Sin than in strict Justice it
deserved. But God forbid! For we are sure the Judgment of God is according to
Truth, says the inspired Apostle in this very Case. Romans ii. 2.
And again, is God unrighteous who takes Vengeance? God forbid: For then how
shall God judge the World? Romans iii. 5. 6.


IF it should be said, (and what is there that will not be said by guilty
Sinners, rather than own they deserve eternal Damnation for their Rebellion
against the GREAT GOD?) If it should be said, that "neither the Law of Nature,
nor the Law from Mount Sinai threatened eternal Damnation for Sin -- it must be
said by the same Men, in order to be consistent with Themselves, that neither
did Christ come to save Jew or Gentile from eternal Damnation; as antecedent to
the coming of Christ, not One of Mankind was in danger of eternal Damnation,
according to them. -- And as Christ himself said, he did not come into the
World to condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved; so
these Men will not say, that Christ's coming exposed the World to an eternal
Hell, they were in no Danger of before. -- No: So far from it, that the same
first Principles that will carry Men to say as above, will naturally carry them
one Step farther, to say, that those who die impenitent from under the Light of
the Gospel, are in no Danger of eternal Damnation. Some of their first
Principles are -- "God's only End in the moral Government of the World is the
Happiness of the Creature. There is no Evil in Sin as it is against God. Sin,
strictly speaking, deserves no Punishment. All the Miseries which God inflicts
upon Sinners, in this World, or the next, are in mere Mercy, to purify and fit
them for Happiness. The Devils and all the Damned will finally be saved. -- For
-- Goodness, or Love to the Creature, is the only moral Perfection of the
divine Nature." -- A Scheme that pefectly suits the Heart of a secure Sinner.
-- But a realizing Sense of the Being and Perfections of the GREAT GOD, as
revealed in the holy Scriptures, set home on the Heart, by the Spirit of God,
would dash it to Pieces in a Moment.


AND yet will Any be so inconsistent as to say thus, when the Eternity of Hell
Torments is as expressly asserted in the BIBLE, as the Eternity of Heaven's
Joys? They grant the Happiness of Heaven will be Eternal; and will they deny
the Eternity of Hell Torments, which is expressed in just the same Language?
These shall go away into everlasting Punishment: But the Righteous into li^e
Eternal. Matt. xxv 46.
Christ has said, that their Worm shall never die, their Fire never be
quenched, and repeated it over and over. Mark ix. 43 -- 48.
And this Fire is (...) designed for their Purification, as some Dream, (...)
expressly for their DESTUCTION, Matt. x. 28. 2 These. i. 9.
for their second DEATH, Rev. xx. 14.
for their EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT, Matt. xxv 46.
than which nothing can be plainer to determine against their Notion. The
Righteous will be considered as the Wheat, and the Wicked as the Chaff, and the
Tares, which are not to be purified, but to be burnt, and that with
unquenchable Fire, Matt. xiii. 30. Lake iii. 17.
and the Smoke of their Torments shall ascend for ever for ever. (...) xiv. 2.
And this is so far from being out of Love to them, as being designed at last
for Happiness, that in them God means to show his Wrath, and make his Power
known, as being Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction. Romans ix. 22.
-- Thus God reaches us his Word; nor can Any with the least Show of Reason
say, but that the Eternity of Hell Torments, and that under the Notion of a
Punishment, is as plainly and fully expressed, as though God had intended we
should believe it. -- Why then is a guilty World so loath to believe it?
Doubtless it is, because they do not feel that they deserve it. And not being
sensible, that they deserve eternal Damnation, they venture to disbelieve it,
and endeavor to evade the Testimony of divine Revelation; and then proceed to
raise Objections from Reason against it.

As to their Methods of evading the Testimony of divine Revelation, they need
no particular Answer; because these Men Themselves are sensible, that the
Scriptures speak quite plain enough. And if they would, for once, speak out
their Hearts, they would say, that it is not because the Eternity of
Hell Torments is not plainly revealed in Scripture, but only because they do
not like to believe the Doctrine, that makes them doubt it. It seems too severe
that the Sinner should lie in Hell to all Eternity. Therefore they set
Themselves to evade Scripture, and to raise Objections against it. -- And no
sooner will these Men have heard, what has now been advanced concerning the Law
of Moses, and the Law of Nature, as requiring perfect Obedience on Pain of
eternal Damnation; but these Objections will be in their Minds.

1. "IT is not right for God to require of his Creatures more than they can do,
under the Penalty of any Punishment at all."

2. "IF some Sins do deserve some Punishment: Yet no Sin, how great soever,
deserves eternal Damnation."

3. "OR rather, strictly speaking, Sin deserves no Punishment at all."

Now, these Positions, every One will soon discern, need no particular Answer
from divine Revelation. Because, the Whole of divine Revelation is itself a
standing Confutation of them. -- Did not God from Mount Sinai require the whole
Congregation of Israel, to love the Lord their God with all their Heart, and
obey him in every Thing? And was not the Curse denounced against the Man that
should fail in any one Point? Now could the whole Congregation yield this
sinless Perfection every Day of their Lives, without the least Defect in Heart,
or Life? And did not the Curse, mean, at least, some Punishment? And thus the
whole Law of Moses is a standing Confutation of their first Mo^im. -- And as
for the other Two, if any Regard was to be had to the plain Declarations of the
New Testament, Sin not only deserves Punishment, but everlasiing Punishment;
and, at the Day of Judgment, it will be inflicted on all Christless Sinners. --
But it is no Satisfaction to these Men, to have their Objections answered, and
their Mouths stopped, by the Word of God. For, although they pretend to believe
the holy Scriptures to be Divine; yet, finding so many Things in the BIBLE,
that do, by no Means, suit them; they do, as St. Paul did in another Case,
appeal to CAESAR, as the higher Power, and where he hoped to have better Justice
done him. So, with the same View, these Men appeal to REASON; nor will they
believe the Scriptures mean this, or that, how plainly soever expressed, unless
it quadrates with their Notions, and so appears to them RATIONAL. -- Now were
there no Depravity in their Hearts, to blind and biass their Minds, I should
have no Fear of joining Issue according to their Desire, and submit these
Points to be decided solely by REASON. For I believe they can be demonstrated
from Reason as fully, although not so easily, as from Scripture. The Scripture
has given us an Edition of the Law of Nature much plainer and more legible,
than that which we have by Nature. And this indeed is the true Cause, that
these Men appeal from it, as the Light of Truth there, shines too insufferably
bright, and refer Themselves to Reason, which, our Depravity being so great,
they can more easily shut their Eyes against. -- However, who knows, but that
their Hearts may be touched, when the GREAT GOD is brought into View, and set
before their Eyes! -- Therefore

LET us place ourselves before the awful Tribunal of Christ, and attentively
view these Points, in the Light, in which, they will stand, at that solemn Day,
when every Man's Conscience will be convinced, that God's Law is strictly just.

WHEN Christ comes in the Glory of his Father, and all the holy Angels with
him, and the insinite Majesty and Greatness of the invisible GOD shines forth
in Him, and it appears that all the Nations of the Earth are as the small Dust
of the Balance, or Drop of the Bucket before Him: Yea, that the whole created
System is as Nothing and Vanity, when compared to God, THE GREAT BEING, THE
ALMIGHTY CREATOR, now each of these Objections will be sapped at their very
Foundation. FOR these Objections, and the whole Scheme they belong to, in all
its various Shapes, grew up out of the Heart's Insensibility of the infinite
Greatness and Glory of God. -- It would otherwise, be quite impossible, that
Men, and Men of Thought and Penetration, should ever once imagine, that, in a
persect moral Government, where an exact Proportion is, as Themselves
acknowledge, always observed, and what is most sit and right and beautiful is
always done, -- that, in such a Government, the GREAT GOD should be less
regarded, than the created System; the INFINITE CREATOR less respected, than
the sini^e Creature: -- For it is a more gross Absurdity, than it would be for
a Mathematician to affirm, that a Million such Systems as ours, would be less
than a Bin's Point. -- And yet, as absurd as it is, it lies at the Bottom of
almost all the corrupt Schemes of Religion now in vogue. -- First, they lay it
down for a MAZIM, that the Honor of the DEITY is not at all considered, or
regarded by the supreme moral Governor of the World; but only the Good of the
Creature. And upon this Foundation -- Chevalier Ramsay builds his Scheme, and
so do the ingenious Hutcheson and Turnbull, and the celebrated Tailor, and so
does Tindal the famous Deist. -- And each, taking this Point for granted, seem
to demonstrate their various Schemes. -- Ramsay, "that all even the Devils not
excepted, will be finally happy." -- Hutcheson and Turnbull, "that we naturally
have the moval Image of God in our Hearts." -- Tailor, "that we are not fallen
Creatures." -- Tindal, that the Old and New Testament are not from God.

But let this Stupidity be removed from the Heart, and a realizing Sense of the
infinite Greatness and Glory of God fill the Soul, so as thoroughly to convince
the Heart, that an infinite Regard is, and ought be had, to the Honor of the
DFITY in the moral Government of the World, and all their Schemes will fall to
the Ground at once. -- For now we shall see, why Sin is punished eternally --
and that human Nature is, in fact, totally Corrupt -- that the Doctrine of
original Sin is true -- that the Old and New Testament are perfectly agreeable
to the Perfections of God, and Needs of fallen Man, and have all the internal
Marks of Divinity. -- It will be self evident, that -- it is an infinite Evil
to sin against such a God -- we naturally have none of that Temper toward him
which we ought -- we are fallen, lost Creatures -- we need such a Redeemer and
such a Sanctifier as are exhibited in the Old and New Testament -- it is fit
God should be exalted, the Sinner humbled, and Grace glorified, agreeable to
the Scripture-Plan. --


-- When God appears, and appears in his infinite Greatness, clothed with
infinite Majesty, vested with an Authority insinitely binding, the Commandment
will come, Sin revive, and the Sinner die. Reason and natural Conscience will
be fully convinced, that the Law was strictly just. And every guilty Creature
will be forced to say, when doomed to depart into everlasting Fire, the LORD is
righteous! -- Then the bold Libertine, in the utmost Horror, will see the
Weakness of all his former Pleas. Methinks, I hear him say, trembling before
the Bar of Christ, --

WHAT did I mean, stupid Wretch that I was, to say, that Sin deserved no
Punishment? -- What! Was it no Crime to affront the dread Majesty of Heaven and
Earth to his Face, as I did in every Sin? Was it no Crime to treat with
Contempt, HIM, whom all Heaven adores? Was it no Crime to turn my Back upon my
Maker and revolt from my rightful Sovereign? And by my Example to encourage
Others to go on boldly in Rebellion? And if these were Crimes, and dreadful
Crimes I now see they were, does it not now become the righteous Governor and
Judge of the World to be displeased, and to testify his Displeasure, and to
make his wrath Smoke against such a Wretch? -- I once scoffed at serious Piety,
and ridiculed strict Godliness, and was really an open Enemy to Jesus Christ:
And is it not sit that He should now treat me according to my Character? And
with Indignation banish me for ever from his Presence! And from the Presence of
all his Saints, whom once I despised! To dwell for ever with Devils, whose
Interest I served!

THIS is the GOD, the infinitely GREAT GOD, whose Law I said was too severe!
The Height of what he required of me was to love him with all my Heart; as I
now see yonder Saints, and Angels love him. But I did not love him! I did not
like his Ways! I loved my vain Companions, and my sinful, carnal Pleasures! His
threatening to Punish me for it, instead of reclaiming, did but make me hate his
Law and Government the worse. And I loved to indulge hard Thoughts of him, as
being too severe; pretending for my Excuse, that I had no Power to love him;
only, alas, because I was not suited with him; but hated all his Ways. -- In
this, I was like the Devil, that I had no Heart for God, to love him, or live
to him; but was disposed to walk contrary to him in all Things: And for this,
God may justly hate me, and cast me off, with the Devil for ever. -- For such a
Kind of Inability, I never thought, excused any of my Fellow Creatures,
whotreated me with Disrespect and Ill Nature on Earth. And if they alleged,
that they could not help hating me, by Way of Excuse, if the Fault was not in
me, but in Themselves; I never thought them the less to blame, but the more.
Their saying, they could not help hating me; instead of excusing the Fault,
always made it seem worse. -- Now, this GREAT GOD will deal with me by the same
Rule. I said, I could not love him; but the Fault was not in Him, but in me.
For, to other Beings he appears infinitely amiable; and I only am ^o blame,
that he does not appear so to me: And, it is right and just, I should be
punished.

AND now I behold the Judge ready to pronounce my final Doom, the dreadful
Sentence, -- Depart ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. Matt. xxv. 41.
-- I would not believe Hell Torments to be eternal, although expressly a^erted
in God's Word. I, stupid Wretch that I was, did not feel that I deserved
everlasting Punishment. I was like the Fool, who said in his Heart, there is no
God. Psalm liii. 1.
But now I see, there is a God -- an infinitely GREAT GOD -- whom All are under
infinite Obligations to honor and obey. -- I might have been before convinced,
that God was infinitely worthy to be loved, honored and obeyed -- and that his
infinite Worthiness laid me under an infinite Obligation -- and that an
infinite Obligation rendered me infinitely to blame -- and that infinite Blame
deserved infinite Punishment, i. e. the eternal Torments of Hell. -- I might
have known this before: But I shut my Eyes against the Light. -- I pretended,
that because I could not comprehend his infinite Gr^^^^es and Glory, that
therefore I could not (...) under an infinite Obligation thereby. -- But I
might have known, that a Conviction of his infinite Greatness and Glory did
infinitely oblige. -- Conviction, without Comprehension, I always knew did
obl^^e in others Cases. As when I have been convinced, that Others had more
Knowledge and Wisdom than myself, I never doubted but that I was thereby
obliged, so much the more, to pay them a superior Respect on that Account,
although their Knowledge and Wisdom were above my full Comprehension. Nor did I
ever doubt, but that those who were convinced, that the Torments of Hell were
eternal, were guilty of infinite Folly, in rushing into such an endless Misery,
although dreadful infinitely beyond their Comprehension. -- And why might not I
have known, that a Conviction, without a Comprehension, of God's infinite
Worthiness to be loved, honored and obeyed, would render me infinitely to
blame, in treating him with Disrespect and Contempt! -- I might have known it:
But I loved Darkness rather than Light. -- I loved the Ways of Sin -- and God
was not in all my Thoughts! But now, alas! The Day is come! And I am at the
Bar, ready to receive my final Doom! -- God is just! My Mouth is stopped! I am
self-condemned! Thus, at the Day of Judgment, the Sinner's Reason and
Conscience will be thoroughly convinced, -- that he deserves to be punished --
all his Impotency notwithstanding -- and that, even with the eternal Torments
of Hell. And so, that will be, not only a Day of Wrath; but also, of the
Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, Romans ii. 5.
-- And since all Mankind must see the Justice of God's Law sooner, or later;
would it not be wiser, for them, who esteem Themselves the Wits of the World,
instead of endeavoring to blind their Minds by false Reasonings, rather to lay
open (...) Minds honestly to the Light, while there is yet (...) in their Case?
Since otherwise, with all (...) ^asted Wit, they Themselves, to their unspeak^
(...) Regret, will eternally think, they acted the Part (...) ^ools.

THUS, then, to sum (...) in a few Words, it appears, that the Law from Mount
Sinai, given immediately by God himself, (...) the whole Congregation of
Israel, -- required sinle^ ^erfection -- as the Condition of eternal Life --
an^ ^or the least Failing threatened eternal Damnation -- and therefore, by this
Law not any could be justified in the Sight of God -- and yet the whole
Congregation were obliged heartily to approve this Law to be strictly just in
all its Rigor -- which, if they did, would prepare them to understand,
believe, approve of and comply with the Gospel -- and so the Law was, in its
own Nature, suited, to be a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, that they
might be justified by Faith. -- And the Law of Nature, being, for Substance,
the same with that from Mount Sinai, is suited to answer the same End, with
Respect to the Gentile Nations, who were never under the Jewish Dispensation.
And so Jew and Greek are all under Sin -- the whole World stand guilty before
God -- And by their own Virtue or Goodness no Flesh can be justified in his
Sight -- and so all stand in absolute, perishing Need of Christ, and free
Grace. -- And now upon a Review of all that has been said, the following
Remarks and Inferences may justly be made.

1. THE Law of Moses and St. Paul's Manner of Reasoning upon it, are
inconsistent with the Arminian Scheme of Religion, and do as effectually
confute it, as the Scheme of the Pharisees, and Pharisaical Christians of that
Age.

ONE of the most fundamental Maxims in the Arminian Scheme, is, -- That, in the
Nature of Things, it is not just for God to require more of his Creatures than
they can do, and then threaten to punish them for not doing. AND so they
suppose, that God was bound in Justice to make some Abatements in his Law, and
to bring it down to a Level with our present State; and yet are so absurd and
inconsistent, as to suppose, that Christ died to purchase these Abatements, i.
e. died to get Justice done us. -- And if we will yield sincere Obedience to
this new, abated Law, we shall be justified and saved. -- This sincere
Obedience, it seems, is the utmost, that God in Justice can require of us. So
then, if we yield this, we shall be justified, because we have come up to the
Rule of our Duty. Or, if we have any Defects, (i. e. are not so sincere as we
should be,) Christ will make up for them. These are the Notions of Many And
they, for Substance, being the very same the Pharisaical Galatian: had, St.
Paul's Arguments lie full against them. And was St. Paul to deal with them, he
would say, -- I Paul say unto you, that your Duties will not save you, unless
you yield a perfect Obedience. And while you seek to be justified by your own
Goodness, Christ will be of no Effect to you, will make up for none of your
Failings. Gal. v. 3, 4, 5. Therefore, every Man of you, that is of this
self-righteous Disposition, is under the CURSE. Gal. iii. 10.

N. B. IT is worthy of Observation, that the Apostle's Argument is not -- "you
are not sincere in your Obedience: Therefore you cannot be justified." nor
would this have been so convincing; because the Men, he had to deal with,
verily thought they were sincere. -- But his Argument is, "you are not perfect
in your Obedience: Therefore, you cannot be justified." -- Now they had nothing
to say, only, that they h^ped Christ would make up for their Defects. (But says
the Apostle, "Christ shall profit you nothing.") -- Unless they added, "if we
cannot be saved by our Duties, what good do they do?" -- Wherefore then s^rveth
the Law? -- "To be a Schoolmaster," says Paul, "to bring you to Christ, that
ye might be justified by Faith."


And when they are told that we ought to distinguish between that Inability,
which consists in, or results from the Want of natural Faculties; as a Man that
has no Legs cannot walk, a Man that has no Hands cannot work, etc. in which
Cases, Men ought not to be commanded to do what they cannot, and then punished
for not doing, it being manifestly unjust, as is acknowledged on all Sides: --
I say, when they are told, that we ought to distinguish between such a Kind of
Inability, and that which consists in and results from a BAD and WICKED HEART;
as, " Joseph's Brethren hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him," Cen.
xxxvii. 4.
the Pharisees "hated Christ, and could not hear his Words," John viii. 43.
etc. in which Cases, Common-Sense teaches, that Men are not the less to blame
for their Inability, and may justly be commanded to do their Duty, and
punished, if they do it not: -- I say when the Arminians are told of this
Distinction, they say, there is nothing in it, it is a mere metaphysical
Nicety, Inability is Inability, if Men cannot they cannot, and it is impossible
it should be just in God to require of his Creatures what they cannot do, and
then damn them for not doing.

WELL, -- be it so -- How then will they reconcile their Scheme with the Law of
Moses? -- Did not the Law of Moses require perfect Obedience? It is plain it
did. It is a Fact that cannot be denied. Arminians Pelagians, Socinians, that
are Men of Learning do not pretend to deny it. -- Well, had the whole
Congregation of Israel POWER, in the Sense Arminians use the Word, to yield
perfect Obedience, in Heart and Life, all their Lives long, without ever
failing in the least Degree, in any one Point, at any one Time? It is plain
they had not. Yea, no Arminian ever pretended they had. -- Well, when the
Levites said, Cursed be the Man, that confirms not all the Words of this Law,
to do them; were not all the People to say, Amen, and so approve the Law in all
its Rigor? This again is plain Fact. -- So that here, the Arminian has no
metaphysical Niceties, (as he loves to call those clear Distinctions, and
conclusive Arguments, which he is not able fairly to get rid of,) to grapple
with; but plain Facts. Facts acknowledged on all Hands. -- Now Facts are
stubborn Things. -- Here we see, God gave a Law, required more than they could
do, denounced the Curse against the Man, that failed in the least Point; and
yet, in express Contradiction, the Arminian says, it is absolutely unjust for
God to require more of his Creatures than they can do, and then threaten to
punish them for not doing. Wherefore, it is manifest, that the Arminian Scheme
is, in this, directly inconsistent with the Law of Moses. And therefore, if the
Law of Moses came from God, their Scheme in this fundamental Maxim, and in all
that depends upon it, is false.

THIS is a short and easy Way to confute the Arminian Scheme, quite level with
the Capacity of common People, who are not so well able to attend to a long
Chain of Arguments. And it was designed by a God of infinite Wisdom, who knows
how to let in Light upon weak and ignorant Minds, in Effect, for this very
Purpose. For it was designed to convince Men, that, in Themselves, they are
absolutely lost and undone. -- And every Thing meets in this Method of
confuting the Arminian Scheme, which could be desired, to give the fullest
Satisfaction to the Minds of Men. For the Argument is not founded upon, here
and there, a dark Text of Scripture, of doubtful Signification, and seemingly
capable of several different Meanings; but upon the plain Nature of the whole
Mosaic Dispensation; upon Facts, so evident, as to be acknowledged on all
Hands. Nor is there so much as Room left to suspect, that we misunderstand the
Mosaic Dispensation, and view the Facts in a wrong Light, inasmuch as St. Paul
has led the Way before us, and, under divine Inspiration, has shown this to be
the Nature and Design of the Mosaic Dispensation, viewing the Facts in the same
Light, and arguing from them in the same Manner, as has been already observed.
That if we may give Credit to the Law of Moses, or to the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, or to a Method of Reasoning full of Light and Demonstration, or to
all together, we may sit down here fully satisfied.

AND as the Law of Moses, and the Gospel of Christ, are in a perfect Harmony;
and, as on this Account, what is inconsistent with one, must be with the other:
So it is manifest from the Apostle's Manner of reasoning, that the aforesaid
Arminian Maxim is quite inconsistent with the Gospel. For, according to that
Maxim, Mankind have power to do that, which would entitle them to the Favor of
God, if Christ had never died. But, says St. Paul, if there had been a Law,
which could have given Life, verily Righteousness had come by the Law. And if
Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is Dead in vain. Gal. ii. 21. and
Chap. iii. 21. IF the Arminian Scheme is inconsistent with the Law, and with
the Gospel, it will unavoidably follow, that the religious Exercises, of those
who are Armenians at Heart, are not in Conformity to Law or Gospel, but of a
contrary Nature; even, their Love to God, their Faith in Christ, their
Repeniance, their sincere Obedience, and every other Branch of their Religion.
The whole Spirit and Frame of their Minds is contrary to Law, and to Gospel,
just as their Scheme of Religion is. And indeed, the Scheme of Religion they
have in their Heads, grows up out of the Frame of their Hearts. They are both
of the same Nature. They feel, as they believe, it is not just for God to
require sinless Perfection on Pain of eternal Damnation. If I do as well as I
can, it is not fair I should be damned. -- They would not love God, if they did
not think he was of their Opinion. Their Faith in Christ, and their Hopes of
Heaven, harmonize with these Opinions; and so does their Repentance, and their
Obedience. So that if these Principles are inconsistent with Law and Gospel, it
will follow, the whole System of the Religion of their Hearts is so too -- the
Scheme in their Heads, and the Religion of their Hearts, being exactly suited
to each other.

SOME Comfort themselves much, that the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, which Christ and his Apostles had so low an Opinion of, had nothing
of the Nature of true Virtue in it; supposing this to be the only Reason they
could not be justified by it. Little thinking, that, it is their own Case. That
there is not the least real Goodness in all their Religion. -- But it is
sometimes so, that what is highly esteemed among Men, is Abomination in the
Sight of God. (...).




I THINK, in this, the (...) are much more consistent. For, while they
maintain, "that God cannot justly require more of us than we can do Ourselves,"
they add, "that we did not need Christ to obey or die in our Stead," and
accordingly, they say, "He never designed any such Thing." But then, if God
Almighty had designed to guard against their Scheme, and to prepare the Way for
the Reception of the Doctrine of Atonement by the Blood of Christ, it is hard
to say, how he could possibly have done it to better Purpose, than he has done
in the Mosaic Dispensation.

No serious, pious Jew, who understood the Law, as requiring sinless Perfection
under Pain of eternal Damnation, and who had heard the CURSE, and heartily said
AMEN, could have embraced the Arminian Scheme, or ever once believed their
fundamental Maxim. -- Nor, could any serious, pious Jew, who had seen the
High Priest, from Year to Year, on the great Day of Atonement, lay his Hands on
the Head of the Scapegoat, and confess over him, and lay upon him, all the
Iniquities and Sins of the Children of Israel; and who had, himself, Scores of
Times, with a humble and broken Heart, brought a Bullock, or a Ram before the
Lord; and laid his Hands on his Head, that he might die in his Room, and make
Atonement for his Sin, that it might be forgiven him -- I say, no such pious
Jew could possibly have embraced the Socinian Scheme, or ever rejected the
Doctrine of Christ's Atonement.

THE Arminians and Socinians are angry at Creeds, Confessions and Catechisms;
because they are taught to Children, and tend to Prejudice the rising
Generation against their Scheme. But no Creeds, no Confessions, no Catechisms,
were ever so framed to prejudice one against Arminianism and Socinianism, as
the Law of the GREAT GOD given at Mount Sinai. Creeds, Confessions, Catechisms
contain only a Number of Words and Sentences. But here in the Law of Moses
every Thing was acted over, and that exceedingly to the Life. God spoke the Law
HIMSELF, and that with an exceeding loud Voice. It thundered and lightened, the
Mountain quaked and trembled, God appeared like the Flame of a devouring Fire
in the Eyes of all the Congregation of Israel. And thus the Greatness and
Majesty, the Holiness and Authority of God were represented, and brought into
clear View; and thus the Law was set home. -- And Half the Tribes stood on
Mount Gerizzim, and half the Tribes stood upon Mount Ebal, and while the
Levites, before all the Congregation, repeated the Curse twelve Times going,
all the People answered, and said, AMEN. And thus, the Reasonableness and
Equity of the Law was visibly represented in this public Transaction. -- And
yearly, and monthly, and weekly, and daily, in a Variety of most significant,
solemn and public Transactions, the Substitution of Christ, as of a Lamb
without Spot, to die as an Atonement for Sin, that Sin might be forgiven, was
visibly represented. -- So, that it seems beyond the Art of Man to contrive any
Method more wisely suited, to set the guilty, lost, perishing State of the
Sinner, and the Doctrine of Atonement, in a more clear and striking Light, than
it is in the Law of Moses; especially, as now explained to us, by the Gospel of
Christ. -- Well, therefore, in so clear a Case, and in Points of so great
Importance, might the divinely inspired Apostle say, as in Gal. i. 8, 9. if
Any, though an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel, let him be ACCURSED.
Nor have Those, who after all venture to do so, just reason to expect, to
escape the Apostle's repeated Curse. -- In all Things lawful, the Apostle would
readily, become all Things, to all Men, for he was of a very condescending
Disposition. But when any of the great Doctrines of the Gospel were assaulted,
he would not abate one Hair; for he was no Trimmer; he was no Man-Pleaser; but
a Servant of Jesus Christ. Nor are those Ministers, who seek to please an
ungodly World, by curtailing the Gospel of Christ, any of them, the Servants of
Christ, according to the Judgment of the inspired Apostle. Gal. i. 10. If I
pleased Man, I should not be the Servant of Christ.

INDEED, there have been, by Those who expect to be justified by their sincere
Obedience, various Ways contrived, to evade the Apostle's Arguments, and escape
his Curse; but all equally vain. Which Way soever they turn, St. Paul is ready
to answer them, and stop up their Way, and shut them up under Sin, and shut
them up to the Faith.

SOMETIMES they say, The Galatians expected to be justified by Circumcision,
and observing the other Rites of the ceremonial Law, which being abolished,
there was no Virtue in these their unrequired Duties, and so they could not be
justified by them. -- But St. Paul's Argument was not -- "you trust in Duties,
which God does not require: Therefore by these Duties you cannot be justified."
-- But it was this -- "you do not yield perfect Obedience to the whole Law;
therefore you cannot be justified." -- Therefore

THEY say, it is true, we cannot be justified by a Law that requires sinless
Perfection, nor do we expect it. But this does not prove, but that our sincere
Obedience will justify us through Christ, according to the Gospel. -- But St.
Paul's Argument was not -- "you expect to be justified by sinless Perfection,
but cannot." -- But it was this -- "you expect to be justified by an Obedience
short of sinless Perfection: But no Obedience short of sinless Perfection will
justify you. For Christ will not make up for your Defects. He Will profit you
nothing, if you go this Way for Justification." Gal. v. 2. Behold, I Paul say
unto you, that if yebe circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. -- Not
that Circumcision, merely of itself, would seclude them from the Blessings of
the Gospel. For Paul circumcised Timothy. Acts xvi. 3. -- Nor that by their
being circumcised, they meant to renounce Christianity, and embrace Judaism.
For they had not a Thought of that, as is plain from the whole Epistle. -- But
because they trusted in their Circumcision, and in their other religious
Performances, to recommend them to the Favor of God, and entitle them to
eternal Life. -- Not that they looked upon their Obedience, as perfect. For
they never once imagined that sinless Perfection was necessary, or ever thought
they were bound to keep the whole Law. ver. 3. -- Nor that they trusted in
their imperfect, sincere Obedience, without any Dependence on Christ. For they
were so strong in the Faith, that Christ would profit them, and be of Effect to
them, that St Paul could hardly beat them off from their false Hopes. He
speaks, as knowing they would not readily believe him. BEHOLD, I PAUL SAY UNTO
YOU: And so truly as I am divinely inspired, you may depend upon it: Christ
will prosit you nothing: Will make up for none of your Failings, as you vainly
expect. -- So that it appears, the Galatians professed Christianity, and
depended upon Christ, and hoped, that through him, they, by their sincere, although
imperfect Obedience, should obtain the Favor of God, and eternal Life. Just as
our Arminians do now a Days. Nor is there any essential Difference between
their Schem^. --


AGAIN, they say, The Obedience of the Galatians was not sincere. And that was
the Reason they could not be justified by it. But our Obedience is sincere. --
But St. Paul's Argument was not -- "your Obedience is not sincere; therefore
you cannot be justified by it." -- But it was -- "your Obedience is not
perfect. Therefore you cannot be justified by it."

AGAIN, they say, Christ has purchased an Abatement of the Law. And promised
Justification to our sincere Obedience. -- But St. Paul says, "the Law is not
abated one Title; but requires sinless Perfection still: And Curses the Man,
that ever at any Time fails in the least Point. Nor will any Obedience justify,
short of Perfection." -- So that, which Way soever they turn, St. Paul meets
them. And there is no escape.

"YES," say they, we hold Justification by Faith, just as St. Paul did. By
Faith, he meant, sincere Obedience, and so do we. -- "No, no," says St. Paul,
"if by Faith, you mean sincere Obedience, you cannot be justified by it. For I
constantly affirm, that no Obedience short of sinless Perfection can justify
you. If you will be justified by Obedience, it must be perfect. Sincere
Obedience will not answer. For it is written, cursed is every Man, that
continues not in all Things, written in the Book of the Law, to do them."

SEEING then, nothing is to be done with St. Paul, but still he will be against
them, therefore they run to St. James to help them against St. Paul, and look
all over the Bible for Help. And so having strengthened Themselves, by
perverting some Passages of Scripture, they venture out, and boldly say, That
if St. Paul does in Fact mean, that our sincere Obedience will not justify us,
he contradicts almost the whole Bible, which constantly declares, -- that
Repentance is absolutely necessary to Forgiveness -- that we are justified by
our Works and not by Faith only -- that none but good Men shall ever be saved
-- yea, that keeping the Commands is what gives a Right to the Tree of Life.

DOUBTLESS, these Men, had they lived in the Apostle's Day, would have been as
zealous against St. Paul, as ever any were at Galatia, or Antioch. Nor would
his single Authority have satisfied them. And, if a Word, or Sentence, of
another Sound, at any Time, dropped from any other of the Apostles, on whatever
Subject they were preaching, it would have been picked up with Joy, to prove
St. Paul's Scheme to be singular. -- It was this same Spirit, which obliged St.
Paul to write this labored Epistle, to vindicate himself, and establish the
Truth. And he plainly demonstrates that their Scheme was contrary to the Law of
Moses, and to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and pronounces the Man accursed,
that ventured to preach it. -- Vain is it, therefore, now, to bring in a
detached Sentence, or two, from here and there in the Bible, to overset a
Doctrine, that, St. Paul affirms and proves, cannot be overset, without
oversetting both LAW and GOSPEL. -- These Men must prove, that St. Paul's Words
did actually mean some other Thing, or they must believe him to be right, or
they must call his Inspiration into Question, as Some, of the same Stamp, did
1700 Years ago. -- But it is not all the Wit of Man can ever show St. Paul's
Words capable of any Sense consistent with the common Arminian Scheme. They
have tried, but all in vain, this many a Year, till many have argued Themselves
into downright Infidelity; for he could not have framed his Argument better,
had he been to have written against Arminianism in its very present Dress. --
As to the Sentences of a different Sound, here and there in the Bible, which
they refer to, their Consistence with St. Paul's Doctrine, has been often
shown by Divines, and till these Men have, at least, attempted an Answer, it is
needless to offer much at present. This was done in Mr. Edwards's Sermon on
Justification, Printed at Boston N. E. 20 Years ago, to which, any Answer, as
yet, never has been attempted.
-- However, I will just observe,

FIRST. THAT it is true, "that Repentance AND because, where there is true
Repentance, there is always a Disposition heartily to sorgive those that have
injured us, and no where else; therefore our Savior teaches us, that those,
and those only, may expect Forgiveness from God, who do from the Heart forgive
others Matt. vi. 14, 15. -- Those who have not an Heart to forgive and (...)
their (...) are impenitent, unhumbled, thristless Sinners.
is absolutely necessary to the Forgiveness of Sins." For it belongs to the
very Essence of justifying Faith, which implies in its Nature, such a Sense of
the great Evil of Sin, as effectually turns the Heart from it, to God, to be on
his Side, and on the Side of his Law, against Sin and Self, as I shall
presently show. And yet this is Nothing against St. Paul's Doctrine, as I shall
also make appear under the next Inference.

SECONDLY. "THERE is not the least Difficulty, in what St. James says, of
Abraham's being justified by Works, and not by Faith alone." -- It being so
very plain, in what Respect, he was justified by Works, when he offered up his
Son Isaac. -- Only turn back to the twenty second Chapter of Genesis, and there
you may read the whole Story, and you cannot be at a Loss. And it came to pass
after these Things, i. e. fifty Years after Abram had been in a justified
State, ( Heb. xi. 8.) that God did tempt, (i. e. try) Abraham. -- Take now thy
SON, thine ONLY SON ISAAC, whom thou LOVE, and get thee into the Land of
Moriah, and offer HIM there for a BURNT OFFERING, etc. -- Abraham, whose Love
to God was Supreme, readily obeyed. -- Now follows his Justification, in these
very Words -- ver. 12. NOW I KNOW THAT THOU FEAR GOD, seeing thou have not
withheld thy SON, thine ONLY SON. -- And indeed this was sufficient Proof that
he did fear God. -- And thus he showed his Faith, which he had had about 50
Years, by his Works. -- And now he might with peculiar Propriety be called the
Friend of God. -- And in this same Sense all true Believers are justified by
Works. i. e. by external, visible acts of Obedience, under great Trials, it
becomes manifest that they do fear God: While stony Ground Hearers at the same
Time fall away. Matt. xiii.
-- All which, has not the least Show of Inconsistency with our being justified
by Faith, without Works, in the Sense, and according to the Language of St.
Paul.

THIRDLY. AND if the whole Bible does constantly declare, "that none but good
Men shall ever be saved." -- So does St. Paul too. -- But this does not prove,
"that they are saved by their Goodness."

FOURTHLY. Yea, it it constantly maintained by St. Paul, and by all the
Apostles, "That Perseverance in all holy living, through all the great Trials
they may meet with, is absolutely necessary to an Admittance into Heaven at
Last. -- Compare Rev. ii. 7, 11, 17, 26. and Chap. iii. 5, 12, 21. with Rev.
xxi. 7. and Chap. xxii. 14. -- Yea, St. Paul, speaking to true Believers, says,
if ye live after the Flesh ye shall die. Ron. viii. 13.
But this does not prove, that they are justified, or saved by this their
Goodness. Yea, notwithstanding all this, and in a perfect Consistence with all
this, it remains true, that we are saved by Grace, through Faith, not of Works.
Ephesians. ii. 8, 9.
-- But how? -- Why thus the Difficulty may be easily solved. -- We are all the
Children of God, by Faith in Jesus Christ. Gal. iii. 26, 29.
And if Children, then Heirs; Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ to the
heavenly Inheritance. Romans viii. 17.
And if our actual Enjoyment of the heavenly Inheritance is suspended, upon our
being the Followers of God, as dear Children; Ephesians. v. 1.
this is but a proper Test to determine our Character. For, some, who profess
to be Children of God, fall away, like the Stony-Ground-Hearers, who indeed
never had any Root in Themselves, when a Time of Trial comes. Matt. xiii. 20,
21.
Now, if we persevere through all Trials, it proves our Sincerity; and
demonstrates, that we were not merely the Children of God in Name; but in
Truth. And shows that we did really believe in Christ, not with a dead, but
with a true and living Faith. -- Thus Abraham, in this Sense was justified by
his Works. And thus, in this Sense; They, that do the Commandments, have Right
to the Tree of Life. -- For, NOW I KNOW THAT THOU FEAR GOD -- Now I KNOW
thou art a TRUE CHILD of God -- becomes applicable to Such. -- And if Children,
then Heirs, according to the Tenor of the New Covenant.

YEA, I may add, that, to persevere in all holy living, is but to show the
Heart, and act up to the Character, of a true Child of God. It is, in Effect,
but to maintain the Temper of a Child. And this is but the same Thing, viewed
in another Point of Light, with that Faith whereby we become Children. For
justifying Faith implies in it every filial Grace, as we shall afterward see.
-- So that Perseverance in all holy living, is implied, in our Perseverance in
Faith. But it is necessary, we should persevere in Faith, in Order to our final
Admittance into Heaven, for the same Reason, that it was necessary that we
should be first united to Christ by Faith, in Order to our being interested in
him. Let the Marriage Union be dissolved between the Husband and the Wife, and
the Woman has no longer any Right in the Man's Estate. It is necessary that
they continue united, in Marriage, that she may have Right to his Estate. So,
it is necessary that we continue in Christ, that we may remain the Children of
God through him; that being Children, we may be Heirs, and so have Right to the
Tree of Life. John xv. 6.
-- But to prevent Misunderstandings, it is needful to observe, the Contents of
the next Inference, If the Reader would see this Subject thorougly discussed,
let him read Mr. Edwards's Sermon on Justification by Faith alone.
which, now at Length, I proceed unto.

2. FROM what has been said, we may learn, "That, although, we are justified by
Faith; yet we are not justified for Faith." That is, our faith, considered, as
Something holy, virtuous and good in us, is not that which recommends us to
God, in Whole, or in Part. Nor has it, viewed in this Point of Light, any Hand
in our Justification. -- For

THE true Believer, considered as in himself, without any Relation to Christ,
does, in strict Justice, deserve Damnation, after he believes, as much as he
did before. The Act of Faith makes no Amends for his past Sins, none at all.
The Account stands just as it did. Only, as he falls short of sinless
Perfection every Moment; so every Moment he merits Damnation afresh; according
to Law: A Law holy, just and good. -- And indeed, it must in Reason be so. For
if we should perfectly devote Ourselves to God in Heart and Life for the Time
to come; we should but give God his just Due: For we are His: wholly his. But
doing our Duty for the Future, cannot make up for past Neglects; any more than
our paying the Debts we may contract for the Time to come, will satisfy for
Debts contracted in Time past. -- Besides, our Sins are infinite Evils: But our
Virtues are of finite Worth: But Finite put in Balance to Infinite is Nothing.
For when it is subtracted, the Remainder is still infinite. Therefore only the
mere defects, attending our best Services, our highest Exercises of Grace, in
this imperfect State, merit eternal Damnation: Nor does all the Grace and
Goodness in us make the least Amends. -- So that the Believer, in his purest
and highest Act of Faith, considered as in himself, without any Relation to
Christ, merits eternal Damnation; instead of Justification to eternal Life.

OR, if we leave Speculation, and come to Experience; still the Point before us
appears to be true. "For the Believer feels that Hell is his proper Due, that
very Moment he exercises Faith in Christ." -- For why else does he apply to the
Atonement of Christ? For if he does not deserve to go to Hell, he does not need
the Sacrifice of Christ to save him from Hell. His looking to Christ by Faith,
to be saved from Hell supposes, he feels Hell to be his proper Due. Elfe, it is
a mere Mockery.

BUT it is plain from Moses, and from St. Paul, "That no Goodness short of
sinless Perfection can entitle us to the Favor of God." Faith, as it is our
Virtue, cannot do it, any more than Repentance, or sincere Obedience. For
nothing short of sinless Perfection can do it. But Faith is not sinless
Perfection. Therefore we cannot be justified on the Account of our Faith. -- In
a Word. St. Paul's Reasonings do as effectually prove, that Faith cannot
justify us in this Sense, as that Works cannot. And, indeed, Faith, viewed in
this Light, is as much a Work, as any other Christian Grace whatsoever, or as
any external Act of Obedience a Man can do. And he that depends upon his Faith
to recommend him to God, depends upon his own Righteousness, as much as the
Galatians did. He is in the same Scheme, only a little refined. There is no
essential Difference. -- The Galatians trusted in their own Righteousness: So
do these. -- The Galatians nevertheless hoped and expected that Christ would be
of some Effect to them, and profit them some: And so do these. -- The Galatians
had never had the Law sufficiently set home upon their Hearts: So it is with
these. -- The only Difference is, that the Galatians seem to have trusted
chiefly in their external religious Performances; and these trust chiefly in
the internal religious Frame of their Hearts. But, as there was Nothing of the
Nature of true Virtue, in the Duties of the self-righteous Galatians; so there
is Nothing of the Nature of true Faith, in the Faith of these self-righteous
Believers: It being as inconsistent with the Nature of Faith in Christ, for a
Man to make a Righteousness of his Faith; as it is to make a Righteousness of
any Thing else.

IF it should be enquired, "in what Sense then, are we justified by Faith?" --
I answer. -- When the Jew brought a Bullock for a Sin-Offering, and presented
it before the Lord, and laid his Hands on the Head of it, that it might die in
his Stead, and make an Atonement for his Sin, that it might be forgiven; if he
acted understandingly, and uprightly, it implied, an hearty Approbation of the
Law; which he could not have, without a supreme Love to God; which would
naturally lay the Foundation for Repentance, and sincere Obedience: Yet, it was
not, that Approbation of the Law, nor that Love to God, nor that Repentance,
nor that sincere Obedience, nor his bringing the Bullock, nor his laying his
Hands on his Head, which was to make Atonement for his Sin; but the Blood of
the Bullock: According to the constant Language of the Law of Moses. -- So,
although true Faith in Christ implies, an hearty Approbation of the Law; which
cannot be without a supreme Love to God; which will naturally lay a Foundation
for Repentance, and sincere Obedience: Yet, it is not this hearty Approbation
of the Law, nor this supreme Love to God, nor this Repentance, nor this sincere
Obedience, no, nor the Act of Faith itself, that makes Atonement for Sin; but
only the Blood of Christ; according to the constant Language of the
New Testament. Nor are any of these, therefore, to be depended upon; but only
Jesus Christ. -- Nor can Faith do any Thing toward justifying us, unless as it
UNITES us to Christ. For in the very Act of Faith, all Pretenses to the divine
Favor, on our own Account, are given up; and Hell is owned to be our Due. And
we look only to the Merits and Atonement of Christ. -- Leave all other Refuges,
and fly hither. -- Are divorced from the Law, and married to Christ. According
to the Language of St. Paul. Romans vii.
-- And the married Wife, we know, is interested in her Husband's Estate. For
they Two are become one Flesh. Ephesians. v. 31.
They are One in Law. And in Consequence of this Relation, this Union, or
Oneness, she is interested in all his Riches and Honor. Even, if he is a
Prince; and she, before, but a poor, despised Maid. And this Marriage Union,
St. Paul considers, as resembling the Union between Christ and Believers, and
dwells upon it at large, in Ephesians. v. 23 -- 32. -- And as the Husband pays his
Wife's Debts; so Christ GAVE HIMSELF for his Church, to pay the ten Thousand
Talents she owed, and to redeem her to himself, to be his Wife. -- To be for
ever One with Him, as He and His Father are One. John xvii. 21.
-- And therefore a new Convert is said, to be espoused to Christ. 2 Cor. xi. 2.
For in the first Act of Faith, the Match is made, for Eternity. -- And the
whole Church, being but One mystical Body, is called the BRIDE, the LAMB's
WIFE. Rev. xxi. 9.
And, if the Church is the Lamb's Wife; then the Church is God's Daughter:
God's Child: And every true Believer is a Child of God. As it is written, as
Many as received him, to them gave be Power, or a Right, to become the Sons of
God, even to them that believe on his Name. John i. 12.
Wherefore they are All the Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. iii.
26.
And if Children then Heirs; Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ. Romans
viii. 17.
And thus, by Faith we are united to Christ; and so interested in him, and in
all Blessings through him. And this is the Reason, that Believers, in the
constant Language of the New Testament, are said, to be IN CHRIST. But Christ
is God's beloved SON; and so we are accepted IN the BELOVED. Ephesians. i. 6.
And after our Persons are accepted; then also our spiritual Sacrifices, all
our religious Duties and holy Exercises, in which we present Ourselves to God,
as a living Sacrifice; Romans xii. 1.
are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. ii. 5.
-- And thus we are Justified by Faith, not as an holy Act, recommending us to
God; but as an uniting Act, uniting us to Christ. -- Just as a married Wife,
being One in Law with her Husband, is consequently interested in his Estate.
Not because her marrying her Husband was an Act of Virtue; but because her
Marriage made her One with him.

St. PAUL dearly loves, in his Writings, to illustrate Gospel Truths by Jewish
Types; that People, their Law, and almost all God's Dispensations toward them,
being designed by God to be Shadows of good Things to come. -- The earthly
Canaan was a Type of the heavenly; and Isaac, the promised Son, was a Type of
Christ, the promised Seed. And, as the Israelites were entitled to the earthly
Canaan, not by Law, but by Promise, the Promise made to Abraham in Genesis xii. in
which God made a Grant of all that Country to him, and to his Seed; so it was
not any Goodness in Abraham's Seed, but only their Relation to Abraham, that
gave them a Title to that good Land. If They were Abraham's Seed, they were
Heirs according to the Promise. The Law, which was given 430 Years after, not
being designed to disannul their former Title, or to appoint any new Terms. (
Romans iv. 14. Gal. iii. 16, ^7, 18.) -- Even so it is in this Case, says the
Apostle. Our Title to the heavenly Canaan is not by Law, not by any Goodness in
us, but if we are Christ's, then are we Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to
the Promise. (ver. 29.) For the Promise was to Abraham and to his Seed; not to
Seeds, as of many; but as of One, to thy SEED, which is Christ. (ver. 16.) And
so Christ was appointed Heir of all Things. (Heb. i. 2.) Now therefore, if we
are Christ's, i. e. if we are in Christ by Faith we are joint Heirs with him.
And so our Title to the heavenly Canaan results, not from any Goodness in us;
but only from our Relation to Christ. Therefore Faith justifies us, not as an
holy Act recommending us to God; but as an uniting Act, uniting us to Christ.
Just as a Descendant of Abraham was entitled to the earthly Canaan by Birth;
not because it was a Virtue to be born of Jewish Parents, but only because by
this Means he was a Child of Abraham: And so an Heir according to Promise.

AND thus we are saved by Grace, through Faith, not of Works, lest any Man should
beast. Ephesians. ii. 8, 9.
Not in the least Degree, or in any Respect, for any Goodness in us considered
merely as in Ourselves, that there might not be the least Ground of Boasting:
But that all the Glory might be given to free Grace through Jesus Christ. Ephesians. i.
6.
-- Armimans and Neonomians suppose it is, in some Degree, for some Goodness in
us; and to take some of the Glory to Themselves and give the Rest to Christ,
and free Grace. -- Socinians suppose they are justified wholly for their own
Goodness; and to take the whole Glory to Themselves. For, they consider Christ,
on the Cross, not as a Sacrifice of Atonement; but only as a Martyr. -- But St.
Paul gives quite all the Glory to Christ and free Grace. -- And the Reason is,
because the very best Man on Earth, afresh, merits eternal Damnation, every
Hour, according to Law, and strict Justice; and all his Goodness does not make
the very least Amends. So, the Law, which is School Master, by divine
Appointment, teaches. -- O, learn this! and then you will understand the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and know why St. Paul after all his
Seize so earnestly desired to (...) found in Christ. Phil. iii. 9.


3. FROM what has been said, we may see "What Views, and Dispositions are
absolutely necessary, in Order to a Sinner's, understandingly and consistently,
exercising Faith in Christ, to the End he may be justified through him. -- He
must have a View of himself, as he is, compared with the Law; and of his State,
as it is, according to Law: And heartily approve the Law, as being strictly
just."

As when the Children of Israel were about to enter into the Land of Canaan,
which was a Type of Heaven, the Law was by Moses repeated in the Plains of
Moab; and, just as they took Possession of the holy Land, they were obliged to
signify their hearty Approbation of the whole Law, in its utmost Rigor, by
answering, AMEN, twelve Times going, as the Levites denounced the Curse; so
before a Sinner can come to Christ, and be, through him, entitled to the heavenly
Canaan, the Commandment must come, be set home on his Conscience, that Sin may
revive, and his guilty State appear, and all his Hopes grounded on his own
Goodness die. Nor can he, consistently, apply to Christ, the great Atonement,
unless, from his Heart, he approves the Law, by which he stands condemned, as
strictly just.

As the Israelites had no Title to the Land of Canaan by Law, in Consequence of
their own Righteousness, being a stiff-necked People, but only by the Promise
made to Abraham: Gal. iii. 18.
So it was fit, they should see and be thoroughly sensible, that God did not do
those great Things for them, for their Righteousness. And therefore such a
Method was, by God, taken, with that Generation, for the Space of Forty Years,
as had the most direct Tendency to answer this End. D^ut. viii, and ix.
And so it is, in a resembling Manner with Sinners, according to God's ordinary
Way of preparing them for Christ; and a Title to eternal Life through him. For
they were our Ensamples, and their History was written for our Instruction. 1
Cor. x, 11.


BUT, inasmuch as the Necessity of a preparitory Work, is denied by Some, and
the Nature of it, is still more misunderstood; therefore let us stop here a few
Minutes, and see what Light, the Subject we have been upon, will pour in upon
these Points.

THE Necessity of Preparation for Christ, must, without Dispute, be granted; or
we shall undermine the Jewish Dispensation, which was, by God, designed for
this very Purpose. -- God intended that the Light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ should shine into this benighted World -- He intended it, in the Days of
Moses -- But the World was not prepared for it then. Therefore, first, he gives
the Law; appoints that, to be a Schoolmaster; and keeps up the School, for
near two Thousand Years; to prepare the Way for the Gospel-Revelation: That it
might be the better understood, the more readily believed and embraced. -- God
saw many preparatory Lessons needed to be taught, and that the Necessity was so
great, as that it was best to delay the Gospel Dispensation, and set up a
preparatory School, and appoint a preparatory Schoolmaster. -- So that, there
needs, no farther Proof, of the Necessity of Preparation, in Order to Faith in
Christ; as the Mosaic Dispensation takes this for granted, and was chiefly
designed to answer this End. OBJECTION. IF every particular Sinner needs the
Law to be his Schoolmaster to bring him to Christ, as much as the Jewish.
Nation did; why was the Jewish Dispensation ever to be at an End? Why was it
not to be perpetual?

ANSWER. 1. THE Law of Nature, requiring sinless Perfection; on Pain of eternal
Damnation, which was the chief Part of the Law given at Mount Sinai, all the
Advantages of which new Edition, or Republication of the Law of Nature we still
enjoy; I say, this Law of Nature, as it was in Force, previous t the Jewish
Dispensation, among all Nations; so it is still. And by it, all Nations ever
were, and still are exposed to the everlasting Wrath of God, as the Jews were
by their Law. Nor is there any Way of Escape, but by Christ. Now, here is a
perpetual Schoolmaster. Romans i. 18. and iii. 9, 19. Acts iv. 12.

2. BUT there is now no Need to offer the Blood of Bulls and Goats, or
constantly to attend to and look upon, any other of the Jewish Shadows: Because
Christ the Substance is come. Therefore the ceremonial Law is to be no longer
in Force.


For, as if any Man should boldly say, that Mankind have no Need of a Savior,
it would wholly undermine and overthrow the Gospel Revelation; which takes it
for granted, that Mankind do need a Savior, and just such a Savior as is
provided: So, if any Man should boldly say, that Nothing is wanting to prepare
a Sinner for Christ, it would undermine and overthrow the Mosaic Dispensation,
which takes it for granted, that Sinners did need Preparation, and just such a
Preparation, as that Dispensation was suited to work.

Now, read through the whole Law of Moses, with the History interspersed in
those sacred Books, of God's Dealings with the Children of Israel, those Forty
Years in the Wilderness; and it will appear, that the Whole is admirably
suited, to realize the Being and Perfections of God; to show us exactly how he
looks upon Himself, and how he stands affected toward Sin. "I AM THE LORD," He
says, an Hundred Times, he speaks it with the Majesty of a GOD, and he shows an
infinite Regard to his own Honor, and expects All to love and worship him, to
fear and obey him, on Pain of Death. If his Anger waxes hot, behold! the Earth
opens her Mouth, and swallows up Hundreds! Or, the Plague rages, to kill
Thousands in a Moment! And if he is pleased to have Mercy, and not execute all
his Wrath; it is, like an absolute Sovereign, over Criminals, that have no
Claim. I will have Mercy, on whom I will have Mercy: And I will have
Compassion, on whom I will have Compassion. Exodus xxxiii. 19.
Thus they are in the Hands of a Sovereign God. -- Mean While, the Law teaches,
that no Mortal can, on the Account of his own Goodness, be approved of God,
unless he is perfectly holy in Heart and Life. And that, the least Defect
merits and exposes to eternal Damnation. And yet, at the same Time, forbids a
complaining Thought, and obliges to an hearty Approbation. Nor could the poor,
guilty, helpless Jew, without an hearty Approbation of the Law, with any
Consistency, lay his Hands on the Head of the consecrated Animal, and present
it to die in his Room. And yet, this was the only Door of Hope: For, without
shedding of Blood, there was no Remission. And now it is plain, what Views and
Dispositions, all this, effectually realized to the Mind, and set home upon the
Heart, was suited to work. -- It would effectually awaken his Conscience, and
bring the Jew to feel, what he was, by Nature, and by Practice, in the Sight of
God, and compared with his Law; and what he stood exposed unto; without any
possible Way of Escape, but by the Blood of Atonement; which, yet, he could
not, consistently, have recourse unto; unless, first, he heartily approved the
Law, in all its Rigor, as strictly just. -- And herein, as in a Glass, we may
see, the true Nature of that Preparation, which is necessary, in Order to
exercise Faith in Christ.

AND impartial Reason approves it all. For -- is it fit the Sinner should be
pardoned, before he sees and owns, what he is, and wherein, and how much, he
has been to blame? -- Or, is it fit, the Sinner should be pardoned, till he
clearly sees he deserves to be punished? -- Or, is it fit, a Sinner should be
pardoned, by God, the Lawgiver, before he sees and feels the Law is just, by
which he stands condemned; so as to cease complaining; yea, so as actually to
approve, justify, and acquiesce in it, as quite right and altogether equitable?
-- Or, can a Sinner, till then, see any proper and rational Ground for an
Atonement? Or, discern his Need of Christ? Or, see the true Beauty and Glory of
the Gospel-Way of Life? Or, heartily acquiesce in it?

OR, may not these be laid down, as Maxims, near, or quite, self-evident? -- I
must see, wherein I have been to blame, and how much, before I can see wherein,
and how much, I need a Pardon. -- I must see, I, altogether, deserve the
threatened Punishment; before I can see it, altogether, free Grace, to be
delivered from it. I must see it, reasonable, fit and beautiful, that Sin
should be, so punished, as the Law threatens; before I can see the Law,
reasonable, fit and beautiful, in threatening, so to punish Sin. -- I must see
the Law reasonable, fit and beautiful; before I can be satisfied at Heart, that
it was ever best it should be executed upon the Sinner, or upon Christ his
Surety: -- I must see it, to be of infinite Importance that God be honored,
and Sin discountenanced; before the Severity of the Law will appear beautiful,
or the Death of Christ needful, or the Way of Life through his Blood glorious, or
I heartily approve of the Law, (...) cordially acquiesce in the Gospel. -- I
must heartily acquiesce in the Gospel-Way of Life; or I cannot sincerely, and
from the Heart, fall in with it. --

Now, these, and, each of these Particulars, are essential to the Exercise of
Faith in Christ, for Pardon and Justification. Nor, need any Thing farther be
added, in Order to determine exactly, the Nature of that Preparation, which is
necessary, to the Exercise of Faith in Christ. -- Precisely, how much of this,
is wrought in the true Convert, previous to Regeneration, and goes into the
Idea, of what is called legal Humiliation, and how much is consequent upon
Regeneration and divine Light, and belongs to what is called evangelical
Humiliation, I shall not stand to determine. IT may not be amiss to add here,
That previous to Regeneration, while the Si^^er is without any Seed of Grace in
his Heart, ^ John iii. 9. dead in Sin, Ephesians. ii. 1. at Enmity with God and his
Law, Romans viii. 7. He may, through the Law set home upon his Conscience, by the
Spirit of God, be made to see and own, as in the Sight of God -- 1. That there
is no Goodness in his Heart, that he is quite dead in Sin, an Enemy to God, and
his Law. -- 2. That he is, in himself, entirely helpless, absolutely lost and
undone. -- 3. That God is not obliged to help, or save him, for any Thing he
can do. -- 4. That he is in the Hands of God, who is at Liberty, to have Mercy
on him, or not, as he pleases. -- 5. That it is a just and righteous Thing in
God, to cast him off for ever. --

BUT it is, after Regeneration, that other Things come into View. Such as, --
1. The transcendent Beauty and Excellency of the divine Nature. -- 2. The
Beauty of the Law. -- 3. The Glory of the Gospel-Way of Life. -- All which lay
a Foundation for -- 4. A supreme Love to God, an hearty Approbation of the Law,
a cordial Acquiescence in the Gospel, an actual Compliance with that Way of
Life, etc. -- Besides, that, now, the Justice of God in the Damnation of the
Sinner, and the Reasonableness of his acting as a Sovereign, in the Salvation
of Those, that are saved, appear quite in a new Light. They appear even to be
glorious. ^ Cor. iii. 7. Matt. xi. 25.


-- But this, I desire, may be remembered, that there can be no Exercise of
Faith in Christ, for Pardon, and Justification, by a new Convert, or by an ^ld
Saint, without these Views and Tempers, at least, for the Substance of them.
THERE is the same Necessity of these Views and Tempers, in Order to the
Exercise of Faith in Christ, at any particular Season, through the Course of a
Man's Life, as there is, at his first Conversion. The same Reason, that makes
them necessary, to any Act of Faith, makes them necessary, to every Act of
Faith. -- Indeed, they become habitual, to the true Believer, who daily lives
by Faith on the Son of God. -- For, it may be observed, that these legal
Terrors, and all those Struggles, and Workings of the Sinner's Heart, while
unregenerate, which are commonly experienced, previous to a saving Conversion,
are left out of the above Representation; as being, in a great Measure,
peculiar to that Season, and not essential to any Act of Faith, but only
naturally arising from the Sinner's then present State and Temper.

A TRUE Saint, yea, the most holy Man on Earth, according to Law and strict
Justice, deserves Damnation as much, yea, more, than he did at his first
Conversion, considered, merely; as in himself. -- Not, that he is, at present,
so bad a Man, as once he was. No, by no Means. -- But because his present
Goodness make no Amends for any of his Sins committed before Conversion or
since. -- So that, if he was to be dealt with, according to Law strictly,
without any Relation to Christ; he must be accountable for all his Sins before
Conversion, and for all Sins since Conversion. -- And the Sins of a true
Convert deserve Damnations, as well as the Sins of the Unconverted. -- And so,
according to Law, considered merely as in himself, he runs daily deeper into
Debt, and so stands in still greater Need of Christ and free Grace. -- For,
That Popish Notion, That the Goodness of a Saint make^ some Amends, in the
Sight of God, for his Sins, is inconsistent, both with the Law, and with the
Gospel. For, then a Saint might possibly be so good, as to make full Amends for
all his Sins; and so stand in no Need of Christ. -- Yea, the Church of Rome
think, upon this same Hypothesis, that some Saints are so good, as not only to
make full Amends to God for their own Sins, but that, over and above, they have
some to spare for their poor Neighbors, who have not enough for Themselves. --
And it is well, if the Hearts of some Protestants are not tinged with this
Popish Doctrine.


They are so essential to justifying Faith, that it cannot exist, without them.
Which, after all that has been said, seems too plain and evident, to need any
farther Proof. -- Therefore.

4. WHAT has been said, may serve to determine these following Things,
concerning the Nature of justifying Faith.

(1.) IN General. It implies an hearty Approbation of the Law, and an hearty
Acquiescence in the Gospel; as being suited to honor God, and discountenance
Sin: -- And therefore more particularly,

(2.) IT implies, a Conviction, and some realizing Sense, of the infinite
Greatness and Glory of God; as also a supreme Love to God, and Regard to his
Honor. For otherwise, we can never approve the Law, from the Heart; nor will
it ever appear beautiful, or agreeable, that God's Honor is so much consulted
and set by, both in the Law and Gospel.

(3.) IT implies Regeneration. Or, that a new, spiritual, divine Nature, Taste
and Relish, is communicated to us from God. For, there is no Principle in
unrenewed Nature, from which, a Man may have such a supreme Regard to God and
his Honor, as from the Heart to approve the Law, in requiring sinless
Perfection on Pain of eternal Damnation. The Law never appeared Glorious to an
unregenerate Heart. But every unregenerate Heart is at Enmity against it. Romans
viii. 7.

(4.) IT implies a Conviction, and some realizing Sense, of the infinite Evil
of Sin, as it is against a God or infinite Glory. For otherwise it cannot
appear as an agreeable, amiable Thing in God to punish it with eternal
Damnation: And so the Law cannot be really approved of and liked.

(5.) IT implies true Repentance. In that, we are thus heartily turned against
Sin, to God, to be on his Side, to approve and justify his Law, and stand for
his Honor. For now the Rebel is become, and has the Heart of a loyal Subject.
-- And so,

(6.) IT implies a Principle of new Obedience. -- Yea,

(7.) IT implies the Seeds of every moral Virtue, and every christian Grace.
For, they are comprised in a hearty Approbation of the Law, and Acquiescence in
the Gospel. -- And so,

(8.) IT implies, virtually, a Preparedness of Heart, to deny Ourselves, take
up our Cross, and follow Christ, and be true to him at all Adventures. -- A
Character absolutely essential to every true Christian. Luke xiv. 25 -- 33. --
And so beyond all Dispute,

(9.) Justifying Faith is an HOLY ACT. -- And yet.

(10.) IT implies, that we have no Dependence, no, not the least, on any
Goodness, of any Kind, which is inherent in us, to recommend us to God's Favor
and Acceptance. -- For,

(11.) IT implies, that we see and feel, that eternal Damnation is, at that
Moment, our proper Due, according to Law and Reason, according to strict and
impartial Justice. -- Yea,

(12.) IT implies, that we are so far from a Disposition to think hard of God,
and complain of his Law, as too severe; that on the Contrary, we are disposed
to think well of God, and to think the Law to be just what it should be, quite
right, altogether right, just and fair. -- Yea,

(13.) IT implies, that the Law, although a Ministration of Death, appears to be
glorious. For, otherwise, it cannot appear fit and beautiful, that the Honor
of it should be secured, by the Blood of the SON OF GOD. And yet, unless this
does appear fit and Beautiful, the Gospel-Way of Life cannot be heartily
acquiesced in.

(14.) AND if the Law, although a Ministration of Death, appears to be glorious,
as it is suited to honor God and discountenance Sin; the Gospel will appear
much more exceedingly glorious: as being wisely calculated, not only to answer
these Ends, to even better Advantage than the Law; but also to humble and save
the Sinner, and glorify Grace. -- And therefore, in the Exercise of Faith, the
Gospel-Way of Life by free Grace through Jesus Christ, will be admired, loved,
esteemed, rejoiced in, as being full of the manifold Wisdom of God; while we
behold, how Satan is disappointed, God exalted, the Law honored, God's
Authority established, Sin punished, the Sinner humbled and saved, and Grace
glorified, all at once.

(15.) Justifying Faith, these Views and Tempers, being thus supposed and
implied, consists more especially in a cordial Compliance with the Gospel-Way
of Life, by trusting in and entirely depending upon Jesus Christ, -- that Lamb
of God, typically slain in daily Sacrifices from the Foundation of the World;
who, in the Fullness of Time, bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree -- died,
the Just for the Unjust -- being set forth, as the Bullock of old, to be a
Propitiation for Sin, that God might be just -- and who is now ascended into
Heaven, to appear, as our great High Priest, in the Presence of God -- and is
able to save to the Uttermost, all that come to God by him. -- So the pious
Jew, with an humble and broken Heart, laid his Hands on the Head of the
Bullock, or the Goat, which he had presented before the Lord, to die in his
Room. The consecrated Animal was slain, his Blood sprinkled, his Carcass burnt,
and so Atonement was made. Without shedding of Blood, there was no Remission.
Even so now, we are justified by FAITH IN CHRIST'S BLOOD. i. e. by an entire
Trust, Dependence, Reliance, on the Atonement, Merits, and Mediation of Christ,
for Pardon and Acceptance in the Sight of God, and for eternal Life. -- This
FAITH IN CHRIST'S BLOOD -- is St. Paul's Definition of justifying Faith. in
Romans iii. 25. -- And

(16.) It implies a firm Belief of the Truth of the Gospel. For, otherwise, a
Sinner, so wide awake, would not dare, to venture his Soul and eternal
Concerns, thus wholly and entirely, upon it, without any other Dependence. --
And lastly,

(17.) IT implies a supreme Value for the Favor of God, above all the World.
As this will naturally arise from a Sense of his supreme Dignity, Greatness and
Glory.

THESE Things are all so easy to be understood, and so evidently true, from
what has been already said, that they need neither farther Illustration, nor
farther Proof.

AND thus, from the Nature of the Law, and of the Gospel, -- from the very
Frame and Constitution of these two Dispensations, we learn the Nature of the
preparatory Work, and the Nature of Saving Faith. -- And nothing can be more
satisfactory than to see these two Things, which lay the Foundation for all
experimental Religion, i. e. for all real Religion, thus growing up, as it
were, out of the whole Bible, not resulting from, here, and there, a detached
Sentence; but the natural and necessary Consequence of both Dispensations,
jointly viewed. And this joint View set in a divine Light, by the great Apostle
of the Gentiles, before our Eyes. -- And thus, the Religion of the Heart
answers exactly to the Bible; as Face answers to Face in a Glass. As it is
written, we all beholding, as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same Image. 2 Cor. iii. 18.
i. e. beholding the Glory of the Lord, as shining in the Law; which, although a
Ministration of Death, was glorious: And in the Gospel, which much exceeds in
Glory: We are changed into the same Image, are transformed into an exact
Resemblance, into a Frame of Heart, that is exactly answerable. -- This Image
is begun at Conversion, and it increases, from Glory to Glory, by the continual
Influences of the Spirit of the Lord; who begins, carries on, and compleats
this glorious Renovation.

AND from these Things, it is evident, that justifying Faith is entirely of a
different Nature, from any Thing, an unregenerate Man experiences; who has
neither these Views, nor these Tempers, which are implied in it, and properly
belong to its Essence, And accordingly, we find, that he, who faith, He that
believes not, shall be damned: Mark xvi. 16.
Says also, Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. John
iii. 3.
-- And particularly

WE may now, in the Light of all these Truths, see, as in the Light of
Noonday, that for a Man, merely, to believe that his Sins are pardoned, and
that God loves him, has in it nothing of the Nature of justifying Faith; but is
altogether a different Thing.

(1.) JUSTIFYING Faith is a Grace, it is an holy Act. But there is nothing of
the Nature of Holiness, merely, in believing my Sins are forgiven. Yea, many a
graceless Sinner believes so.

(2.) JUSTIFYING Faith is a saving Grace. But Salvation is no where promised to
a Man's firmly believing his Sins are forgiven.

(3.) JUSTIFYING Faith is wrought, and can be wrought in the Heart by none but
the Spirit of God. But this Belief may be the Effect of a Man's own
Presumption, or of the Devil's Delusion.

(4.) JUSTIFYING Faith implies all the Seeds of Holiness in it, and so
naturally lays a Foundation for a holy Life. But this Belief, as there is no
Holiness in it; so it may naturally lay a Foundation for a wicked Life: As it
tends to embolden a graceless Heart in Sin.

(5.) JUSTIFYING Faith implies Regeneration, and cannot exist without it. But
this Belief may be without it. There is no Necessity of Regeneration in Order
to its Existence.

(6.) JUSTIFYING Faith implies a thorough Conviction of Sin. But a thorough
Convicton of Sin would be a Hindrance to this Faith. If They saw how bad they
were, they would not be so apt to believe their Sins forgiven. Yea, thorough
Conviction would effectually prevent this Belief, and keep them from this
Delusion, and show them their Need of Christ indeed. Sudden Terrors, without
any deep Conviction, are Preparation enough for this Belief. Yea, the
Moravians, who think this Belief true Faith, are against any Convictions, or
Terrors, as doing more Hurt than Good.

(7.) JUSTIFYING Faith supposes, that eternal Damnation is seen to be justly
due: Nor can there be an Act of Faith without it. But deluded Sinners may be
strong in this Belief, when quite secure in Sin, and at the greatest Remove
from a Sense of their Desert of Damnation.

(8.) JUSTIFYING Faith supposes, that the Law is approved of, and loved. But
this Belief may be in an Antinomian Heart, that hates the Law.

(9.) JUSTIFYING Faith supposes the Way of Salvation, by free Grace through Jesus
Christ, is rightly understood; as it results herefrom. But a right
Understanding of the Gospel-Way of Life is not needful to this Belief; as it
does not take its Rise from the Gospel, but from a new Revelation. Yea, a clear
Insight into the Gospel-Way of Life, would do more Hurt than Good; as it would
tend to convince them of their Delusion.

(10.) JUSTIFYING Faith supposes, that we believe the Gospel to be true. But
that Belief a Heretic may have. Yea, a professed Infidel may have it: A Turk,
or a Jew may as firmly believe that his Sins are forgiven, as any Christian.
And doubtless some of them do.

(11.) JUSTIFYING Faith supposes, that the Gospel is heartily approved of and
loved. But this Belief is consistent with an habitual Enmity to the Gospel, as
well as the Law.

(12.) JUSTIFYING Faith has for its Object, Jesus Christ. But this Belief has
for its Object, no Being; but only a supposed Fact. viz. That my Sins are
forgiven.

(13.) JUSTIFYING Faith, is that, by which, we are justified. But this Belief
supposes the Man was justified, that his Sins were actually pardoned before he
believed. -- Therefore,

(14.) As justifying Faith is founded only on Truth; so this Belief is founded
only on Falsehood. -- And

(15.) As justifying Faith is founded only on Truths revealed in the written
Word; so this Belief is only on a supposed Fact, no where revealed in the
written Word. Yea, contrary to the written Word, which teaches, that before
Faith our Sins are not pardoned: But the Wrath of God abides on us. John iii.
18, 36.


(16.) JUSTIFYING Faith is wrought by the Spirit of God, enlightening our
Minds, spiritually to understand the Truths of the Gospel already revealed in
the written Word. But this Belief is begotten by an immediate Revelation, of a
Fact never revealed before. -- Yea, of a Fact not true.

(17.) JUSTIFYING Faith attaches the Heart to that whole System of Truths
revealed in the Gospel. But this Belief leaves the Heart open to Error, and
inclines it to Antinomianism.

(18.) IT is every Sinner's Duty, that hears the Gospel, to believe on Christ
with a justifying Faith, But it is not every Sinner's Duty to believe his Sins
are forgiven.

(19.) AN Aversion to the Exercise of true Faith in Christ, is a Sin in all
Cases. But a Backwardness to believe his Sins are forgiven, is no Sin, in one,
who is unpard^^ed.

(20.) JUSTIFYING Faith, the stronger it is, so much the better, always. But
this Belief, the stronger it is, in a self-deceived Hypocrite, so much the
worse.

(21.) JUSTIFYING Faith works by Love to God, as glorious and amiable in
himself. But this Belief works only by Self-Love. As the Israelites, at the
Red Sea, were, from Self-Love, filled with Joy, in a Sense of their
Deliverance, without any true Love to God in their Hearts; so a Man may be
filled with Joy, in a firm Belief that his Sins are forgiven; and yet be (...)
^stitute of true Grace, as were that ungodly (...), to whom God swear in his
Wrath, that they should never enter into his Rest.

(22.) THE true Believer naturally makes Holiness of Heart and Life his
Evidence of a good Estate, as this is the natural Fruit of true Faith. But this
Belief naturally leads Men to make, what they call, the immediate Witness of
the Spirit, their only fundamental Evidence; as all their Faith, and all their
Religion, arises from it, and is entirely dependent on it: And disposes them to
think Sanctification, a very dark, unsteady, uncertain Evidence; their own
religious Frames being such.

(23.) THE first and fundamental Article of a true Believer's Creed, and that
on which all his Religion and Hopes are built, is, that the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament are the Word of God. Ephesians. ii. 20.
But the first and fundamental Article of the other Sort, and that on which all
their Religion and Hopes are built, is, that the immediate Discovery they have
had of the Love of God, and that their Sins are pardoned, is from God. -- Shake
them here, and you Shake their very Foundation. -- Destroy this Belief, and you
destroy all their Religon and all their Hopes, and leave them quite uncertain
in every Thing.

(24.) IN justifying Faith the Believer is married to Christ, becomes One with
him; and so is interested in all his Benefits. But in this Belief, They are
persuaded, that the Benefits of Christ are Theirs, without being ever married
to Him. -- To render this perfectly familiar to the weakest Capacity, let me
add, -- That the Church, in Scripture, is called, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife.
And being thus united to Christ, is considered, as being IN CHRIST, and so
interested in all his Benefits. -- Now there arises this Question -- What is
the Nature of that Faith, whereby the Soul is thus united to Christ? -- When a
Woman is married to a Man, there is, (1.) the Transaction itself, in and by
which, they are married. (2.) A Consciousness of the Transaction, at that Time.
(3.) A Remembrance of it afterward. (4.) Duties and Privileges flowing from
it. So it is in true Faith. -- But what if a Woman should take it in her Head,
without ever being married, to believe, (1.) such a Man is my Husband. (2.) He
has paid all my Debts and given me all his Estate. -- Objection. No, but you
are not married to him. -- Answer. Yes, I am. For Marriage consists in
believing he is my Husband, and has paid all my Debts. -- Might it not in this
Case be affirmed? -- Believing I am married, is not the whole Essence of the
Marriage-Covenant, nor any Part of it. -- So it is equally plain and certain,
that -- believing that Christ is mine, and that my Sins are pardoned, is not
the whole Essence of justifying Faith, nor any Part of it. Although it appears,
so clear a Case, that justifying Faith, and a mere Belief that my Sins are
pardoned, are two distinct, different Things, in their whole Nature and
Effects; so that, it seems strange, how they should be taken for One and the
same Thing, unless where Men are biassed by their own corrupt Experiences: Yet,
still I have Charity for some Divines, who seem to think, that justifying Faith
consists in such a Belief, hoping they have a better Faith in their Hearts,
than that, which they describe in their Books, -- But their being good Men,
does not make this Notion of Faith, ever the better; but on the Contrary, the
Danger of its doing Mischief in the World, is greatly increased, when it is
espoused and recommended by Men of great Names. And, therefore, there is the
greater Reason, and the more Need, so particularly, to point out its Difference
from true Faith.
To proceed

5. FROM what has been said, the following Case of Conscience may be easily and
safely resolved. -- viz. -- A Man is greatly at a Loss about the State of his
Soul. He has been awakened, and has been comforted, and has frequently had
something like Communion with God. He makes Conscience of all his Ways. And
yet, for several Reasons, is at a great Loss, whether, what he has experienced,
be a common, or saving Work of the Spirit. -- He opens his Case to his
christian Friends; they are afraid to speak comfortably, lest it should settle
him down on a false Foundation, if all still be wrong. But they dare by no
Means speak discouraging; because, according to his Account, his Case is
hopeful, although not clear. So they know not what to say. -- Now what is the
best Advice that can be given to a Man in such a Case?

TELL him, that although he is at a Loss, about his State; yet these three Things
he may be certain of. They are true, and may be depended upon. viz. He is a
Sinner -- the Gospel is true -- and it is his Duty to comply with it. -- Thus
tenderly address him.

Although you are Conscientious in all your Ways, yet you know, you have been,
and still are a Sinner. Your Heart is not what it ought to be. Your Temper
toward God, Christ and divine Things is not as it should be. Nor do you take
that Pains in the Use of Means, in Prayer, Meditation, keeping the Heart, etc.
as you might. -- You are to blame. -- You are wholly to blame. -- God is
righteous in his present Dealings with you. -- Yea, you deserve infinitely
worse than all this: Even, to be sent immediately to Hell. -- Wherefore, see
it; own it; come down, and lie in the Dust at the Foot of God. And learn
habitually to understand, realize and approve of God's Law, as holy, just and
good.

AND, as it is true, that you are a Sinner, and deserve Hell; so it is equally
true, that Christ has died for Sinners, and God is ready, through him, to be
reconciled to all that believe. -- And the Truth of these glad Tidings may be
depended upon. And you cannot reasonably desire, that God should be reconciled
to you, in any other Way than this, which is so perfectly adapted and suited to
honor God, discountenance Sin, humble the Sinner and glorify Grace.

Now whether you was ever savingly converted or not; yet it is equally your
Duty, in a Sense, that Hell is your proper Due, and that you are absolutely
helpless and undone in Yourself, and in a firm Belief of the Truth of the
Gospel, to apply to the great Atonement of Christ, and to look to the free
Grace of God through him, for Mercy to pardon, and Grace to help according to all
your Needs. -- And through Christ to devote and give up Yourself to God, to love
him, live to him, and to be for ever His. -- And in this Way your State may be
cleared up, and your Doubts removed.

OBJECTION. But is there not Danger, that all This may Jettle him down on a
false Hope; if as yet be never was converted?

ANSWER. (1.) IF he never was converted, then he never yet heartily approved of
the Law, or really believed the Gospel, or ever heartily complied with it.
Therefore, putting him upon these Things, will tend to convince him, that he
never did. For it will tend to show him, that it is not in his Heart to do it.
And consequently, that there is no Seed of Grace there: But that he is quite
dead in Sin. And that, therefore, unless he is born again, he shall never see
the Kingdom of God. -- I say, it will tend to convince him of all this; and if,
after all, he remains unconvinced, the Fault will be his own.

(2.) IF he has been savingly converted, then this Method of dealing with him,
will be like pointing out the Way to One lost in a Wilderness. -- He likes the
Directions -- he takes them -- he hastens toward the Road -- he finds it -- he
remembers it -- he rejoices -- and takes better Heed to keep the right Path
through the Rest of his Journey. For the true Convert, although under great
Backslidings, has still the Root of the Matter in him. Has it in his Heart to
justify the Law, to be pleased with the Gospel-Way of Life, and to look to free
Grace through Jesus Christ for all Things. -- Like Jonah in the Belly of Hell,
when the Weeds wrapped about his Head, and he was ready to say, that he was cast
out of God's Sight; and his Soul fainted within him. Then he remembered God, and
looked again toward his holy Temple, where God dwelt in the Cloud of Glory
over the Mercy-Seat, under which the Law was laid up in the Ark, in the most
holy Place of the HOLY of HOLIES, into which the High Priest entered once a
Year with the Blood of Atonement. -- He looked hither -- his former Ideas of
God revived: He remembered the Lord: And a Sense of God, as there manifested,
encouraged him to pray. -- He prayed, and God heard him, and delivered him out
of all his Distresses. -- And many a poor broken hearted Backslider has done in
like Manner, and found it good to draw near to the Lord. And thus the Truth
clearly held forth to the Conscience, as it tends to kill the false Hopes of a
self-deceived Hypocrite; so it tends to awaken and encourage the true Saint to
such Exercises of Grace, as may be plainly discernible, and lay a Foundation
for a full Assurance. To conclude

6. FROM what has been said, "the true State of the Christless Sinner appears
in a clear Light." For, while we view the Sinner, as under a Law, that requires
sinless Perfection under Pain of eternal Damnation, we may easily see how the
Case stands with him. -- He is under the Curse -- he cannot obtain Deliverance,
by any Works of Righteousness, which he can do -- he daily runs deeper into
Debt^ -- he has no Claim to any Mercy, of any Kind, temporal, or spiritual --
till he sees this to be his Case, and heartily approves the Law, by which he
stands condemned, it is impossible he should see his Need of Christ, or approve
of or fall in with, the Way of Salvation by him.

"HE is under the Curse." For as many as (...) of the Works of the Law, i. e.
of a Disposition to trust in their own Doings, (as All are, until through the
Law, they are become dead to the Law) are under the Curse. And that, as really
as if Christ had never died. For Christ will profit them nothing, will be of no
Effect to (...) -- as it is written, Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Gal. v. 2.
Christ is become of no Effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the
Law; ye are fallen from Grace. Gal. v. 4.
-- Not that Circumcision, simply and in itself, proved them to have no
Interest in Christ. (For Paul circumcised Timothy. Acts xvi. 3.
) But if they were circumcised under a Notion of recommending Themselves to God
by their Duties, and obtaining the Favor of God by their own Righteousness, as
was professedly the Case with some of them, then it was a sufficient Evidence
of their Temper, and of their State. -- They were of the Works of the Law; and
so under the Curse. Gal. iii. 10.
-- Wherefore, let it be observed, that, according to St. Paul, every
self-righteous Sinner is out of Christ, and every Sinner out of Christ is under
the Curse. Being actually under a Law, which requires sinless Perfection on
Pain of ^ternal Damnation, he is by this Law doomed to eternal Destruction. For
They are Debtors to do the whole Law. Gal. v. 3.
And therefore the Curse takes hold of them, if they fail in any one Point. --
Therefore,

"THE Christless Sinner cannot obtain Deliverance, by any Works of
Righteousness which he can do." Because nothing short of sinless Perfection
will entitle him to Life. -- And it is too late for this. -- He has sinned
already -- and so is a lost Creature -- nor is there any Hopes in his Case, on
Account of any Thing he can do -- he is quite undone in himself -- and his Case
hourly grows Worse. -- For,

"HE continually runs deeper into Debt." As his Sins are constantly
multiplying, and his Guilt increasing, and nothing done, in the least, to make
amends so he is constantly treasuring up Wrath. Romans ii. 5.


"A^^ he has no Claim to any Mercy, of any Kind, temporal or spiritual." He can
claim nothing by Law; unless he had fulfiled the Law. And he can claim nothing
by Christ, unless he were IN Christ. And so having no Claim by Law, or Gospel;
he has no Right to any Thing. No Right to his Life. That is forfeited, and all
the good Things of this World are forfeited. And his Soul is forfeited. Yea, he
is actually under the Sentence of Condemnation. John iii. 18.
It is true, he is reprieved; but it is only of God's Sovereign pleasure. He
dies, he drops into Hell, when God pleases. He has no Claim to the Day of
Grace, or Means of Grace, or to any Help from God. -- Hell is his due -- he can
claim nothing better. -- Hell is his present Due, and he can claim no
Forbearance. In every Respect, he lies at God's sovereign Mercy.

"WHEN he sees this to be his Case, and heartily approves the Law by which he
stands condemned;" then, and not till then, is there any Door of Hope, or any
Way of Escape. But he is shut up under Sin. Gal. iii. 22.
and bound down under Wrath. John iii. 36.
For until this, it is impossible, he should -- understand -- or believe -- or
approve of -- or acquiesce in, the Gospel-Way of Life. -- Or trust in Christ,
as therein set forth.

UNLESS he thus heartily approves of the Law he cannot understand the
Gospel-Way of Life. For while it does not appear best, that Sin should be so
punished, he cannot understand why Christ died. He cannot understand what good
End needed to be answered, or was answered, by his Death. He cannot understand
his Need of him, or what it is to believe on him. It is all hid from him Matt.
xi. 25. 2 Cor. iv. 3.
. It is all profound Darkness. And all the Seeds of Infidelity are in his Heart.

HE cannot realy believe the Gospel to be from God. For While he does not see
what Ends needed to be answered, it must appear incredible, that the SON OF GOD
should become INCARNATE and DIE. 1 Cor. xii. 3. 1 John v. 1.


HE cannot approve of the Gospel. For this would imply an hearty Approbation of
the Law. If it does not appear reasonable, fit and beautiful, that he should be
punished, as the Law threatens; it cannot appear reasonable, fit and beautiful,
that the SON of GOD should bear the Curse in his Stead. If the Law is too
severe, it ought to be repealed.

THEREFORE, he cannot acquiesce, heartily acquiesce, in such a Way of Life. It
does not suit his Heart. He is not pleased with it.

AND so he can have no genuine Disposition to look to, and trust in Christ as
set forth in the Gospel, the whole Plan being virtually disliked, while it does
not appear best, and a Thing desirable, that Sin should be punished with so
great Severity. -- Therefore, he must remain in profound Darkness, shut up
under Sin, bound down under Wrath, and in fearful Expectations of everlasting
Destruction, until his uncircumcised Heart is humbled. Lev. xxvi. 41.


BUT no sooner is the Sinner brought, heartily to approve the Law, under a
Sense of the infinite Greatness and Glory of God, so as sincerely to say, AMEN
to it; but every Thing appears in a different Light. The Controversy is now at
an End. The Enmity is slain. The Sinner, the Rebel, is turned to be on God's
Side, is become a Friend; and, even, rejoices to see God's Honor so
effectually secured. -- And the Gospel is understood, believed, approved of,
acquiesced in; yea, with all his Heart he complies with this Way of Life.
Trusting in Christ, as set forth to be a Propitiation for Sin, that God might
be just, and yet justify and save Sinners through him. Romans iii. 25, 26.
-- In Consequence of which, he is justified, -- has Peace with God -- and
rejoiceth in Hope of the Glory of God. Romans v. 1, 2.
-- And being now dead to Sin, he can live no longer therein. Romans ^i. 2.
For through the Law, be is dead to the Law, that he might live to God. Gal. ii.
19.
And he is married to Christ, that he might bring forth Fruit to God. Romans vii.
4.
And being now a Child of God, the Spirit of Adoption is sent forth into his
Heart, Crying, Abba, Father. Gal. iv. 6.
And so he follows God as a dear Child. Ephesians. v. 1.
And from this Day, and forward is kept by the Power of God, through Faith, unto
Salvation. 1 Pet. i. 5.
Growing in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
2 Pet. iii. 18.
-- And all from the good Pleasure of God's Will, to the Praise of the Glory of
his Grace. Ephesians. i. 5. 6.
Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA,
Page 1 Line 1 read Galatians, p. 5. 1. 2. r. Chap. ii. 17. 21. p. 7 1. 2 r.
not to be last 1. Mar. r. Gal. iii, 10. p. 24 l. 2 from Bottom, r. know, p. 32
1. 2. Mar. r. grow up, p. 33. 1. 7 r. moral, p. 41 l. 2 r. Arminians, p. 55 1.
6 and 9, r. and so take, p. 61 1. ^ Margent, r. those Legal.


