The Earthquake, a Divine Visitation.

A SERMON Preached to the Old Church in BOSTON, January 8. 1756.

BEING A Day of Public Humiliation and Prayer, throughout the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND: Upon OCCASION Of the repeated Shock of an
EARTHQUAKE on this Continent, and the very destructive Earthquakes and
Inundations in diverse Parts of Europe, all in the Month of November last.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT, A.M. One of the Pastors of the said Church.

Isai. xxviii. 29. This also comes forth from the LORD of Hosts, who is
wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working. Chap. viii. 13, 14. Sanctify
the LORD of Hosts himself, and let Him be your Fear, and let Him be your Dread.
And he shall be for a Sanctuary. -- BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND in
Queen Street, and T. RAND in Cornhill. MDCCLVI.

The EARTHQUAKE, a Divine Visitation.
ISAI. xxix. 6. Thou shall be visited of the LORD of Hosts, -- with Earthquake
and great Noise. --
THIS Chapter begins with a Prophecy of Times of Distress and Sorrow coming on
Jerusalem; named here Ariel, which signify's the Lion of God. It might be so
called, either because it was a great and strong City, thought to be
impregnable; or because it was the Royal City, where King David had his Throne,
who was a signal Type and Ancestor of the holy Jesus, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah; or because it was the City GOD had chosen for his own Habitation, and
fortified by his Presence; or because there was the Altar of God for
Burnt-offering (sometimes called Ariel) which was a notable Symbol of the
Divine Presence, the chief Strength and Glory of the City, and which as a Lion
devoured the Sacrifices offered thereon continually. -- Yet, Iniquity being
found in this Favourite-City of God, here is a WOE denounced against it. The
Inhabitants are assured by the Prophet, that notwithstanding all their
Temple-Privileges, on Account of which they seemed to have a Lion-like
Fortitude and Confidence, they should for their Sins be distressed, and brought
down wonderfully: and that all their Oblations and Devotions, whereby they
thought to appease an incensed God, should be vain, and not serve to secure
them against the Judgments, which their abounding Iniquity deserved. They might
go on killing their Sacrifices, making many Prayers, and multiplying their
public Solemnities; yet none of these Things should profit them at all, but a
righteous and provoked God would still pursue his Controversy with them.

Alas, we may flatter our selves, and deceive our Neighbors, with a Form of
Godliness, and a fair Show in the Flesh; but the omniscient Eye of Him with
whom we have to do, can see through the thickest Mask of Hypocrisy: and as He is
not capable of being deluded, so neither will He bear to be mocked, with
heartless Services, and mere external Formalities in Religion. The most
splendid and abundant Oblations, exclusive of a broken Heart and a contrite
Spirit, which are the Sacrifices of God, will never please Him; much less avail
to appease his offended Justice, and atone for our Sins. But notwithstanding
all such Attempts to stay the Current of Divine Judgments, God's Hand will be
stretched out still; nor will He turn away his Anger from us, while our Hearts
remain unhumbled, and our Sins unrepented.

The Prophet here lets the People of Ariel know, that however they might add
Year to Year, proceed to keep their annual Fasts, and from time to time abound
in their expiatory Sacrifices, stated and occasional; yet, seeing they were a
People impenitent and unreformed, a holy God would maintain his Controversy
with them, and testify his just Displeasure in a Succession of wasting and
distressing Judgments; against which all their Helpers should afford them no
Protection: but in Case of final Obstinacy, their Destruction should be sure
and inevitable; and their Desolation should come in an Instant suddenly, when
they were not aware, by Means unthought of, subject only to the Direction of
Divine Providence, and uncontrollable by all the Power of Mortals. -- Thou
shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with Thunder, and with Earthquake, and
great Noise, with Storm and Tempest, and the Flame of devouring Fire.

Some understand the Prophet as speaking metaphorically; using this Variety and
Pomp of Words only to express the very miserable State the People of Ariel
would be reduced to, by the numerous and great Calamities hastening upon them.
-- But whether we are to take these Expressions in a figurative, or in a
literal Sense, I shall not now stand to dispute. Doubtless both Constructions
may be safely admitted. Yet I choose at present to follow the Letter of the
Text, as the Generality of Expositors view it in that Light, and as the Design
of this Discourse principally is to lead you into some devout Reflections,
suitable to the late tremendous Dispensations of Providence, which are the
special Occasion of the Appointment of this Day of general Humiliation and
Prayer; I mean, those great and terrible Earthquakes in diverse Places, whereby
some noted Parts of Europe have been destroyed, and wherewith we in America
have been alarmed.

I might profitably employ some Meditations on the other Articles enumerated in
the Divine Threatening before us; which are of Importance enough to claim our
Attention. But for the sake of Brevity, as well as Pertinence, I have singled
out That, some Instances of which gave Rise to this Day's Solemnity, for the
particular Subject of the present Discourse.

Thou shall be visited of the LORD of Hosts, -- with Earthquake and great Noise.

In speaking to these Words, I propose to pursue the following Method. First, I
shall take Notice of the Character, by which the Divine Majesty is here
described; The LORD of Hosts. -- Then speak of his visiting his People. -- And
of his doing this particularly by Earthquake and great Noise. -- Finally, apply
the Subject, in some seasonable Reflections and Exhortations, as the Time will
allow.

I. I am to say something upon the exalted Character, under which GOD is here
spoken of; The LORD of Hosts.

The Prophet now speaking in the Name of God, and delivering a Divine Message
and Menace to his People, he fitly inserts this Divine Character, to give the
greater Weight and Importance to his Words, by pointing out the irresistible
Author of the Judgments denounced in that awful Threatening, which the Prophet
was only the Messenger to bring unto them. He might have contented himself with
barely saying, Thou shall be visited with this and the other Judgment: but it
gives an additional Force and Emphasis to his Words, there is a sacred Energy, a
peculiar Dignity, Majesty and Solemnity in the Language, when he says, Thou
shall be visited of the LORD of Hosts. His naming the Divine Being, under this
august Character, tended to strike an Awe upon the threatened People, to draw
Attention to the Prophecy, and indeed to persuade to the Belief of it. For the
inserting of GOD's Name in this terrible Commination, was an implicitly pawning
of GOD's Veracity for the Truth of it: and the Mention of Him under so grand a
Character, carried in it a further Motive of Credibility, respecting the
Certainty of the Event; since there can be no resisting the Power, nor flying
from the Presence, of Him who is the LORD of Hosts. -- It is observable, the
Judgments, specified in this Denunciation, are such as carry with them very
legible Signatures of the Finger of GOD. Natural Reason apprehends an invisible
almighty Agent very eminently and more immediately operating in them. Thunder,
and Earthquake, and Tempest, and the Flame of devouring Fire (especially if
this be understood of the Lightning from Heaven, or the scorching Beams of the
Sun, or the Eruption of subterraneous Fire) these are such Events as evidently
claim the great GOD for their prime Efficient, and exclude all human Agency.
When therefore the Prophet was denouncing a WOE to Ariel, which it was GOD's
sole Prerogative to execute, there must be allowed a Decency and Fitness in the
Thing, that he should explicitly mention GOD's Name in the Denunciation, and
that he should mention Him under this sublime and striking Character, "the LORD
of Hosts."

It is a Divine Appellation frequently occurring in Scripture, "The GOD of
Hosts." (In the Hebrew, sometimes ELOHI, sometimes ADONAI, Tsebaoth.) But here,
and in some other Places; it is (JEHOVAH Tsebaoth) "the LORD of Hosts."

Jehovah is the appropriate Style of the supreme Being; "the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, -- "which Three are One, the
only "living and true God. And it imports his necessary Existence, and
Self-existence, his Self-sufficiency, and All Sufficiency, his Constancy and
Immutability. It intends much the same with that Title or Name, under which he
revealed himself to Moses, I AM Some judge, we have a Name of our Savior
equivalent to this in the Greek Testament. One observes, "That Romans 9.5. O'ON,
etc. may be rendered, The I AM, God over all, -- by way of Apposition.
(and, I AM THAT I AM) or that to John in the Revelation, "I am Alpha and
Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, (the First and the Last,) which is, and
which was, and which is to come, the Almighty." One who is Being it self, and
has all Fullness of Being in Himself; a Being inderivative, independent,
infinite, eternal, unchangeable, in his Nature and Perfections. -- "His Name
alone is JEHOVAH." This Name, though common to the several Persons in the sacred
Trinity, who all have the same common Essence, yet is not attributed to any
other Being in the Universe. It is generally translated by the Septuagint,
KYPIOS, which, Critics observe, comes from,KYPO, that signify's, "I am." --
The Word, JEHOVAH, is judged to be properly of absolute Signification; not in
its primary Sense a Word of Relation, not a mere Title of Office, or Authority;
but (as much as Man is) a Title of Nature, or Essence: and commonly so used.

But here it seems to have a relative Application: JEHOVAH Tsebaoth, translated
"The LORD of Hosts. The Name, used in this Conjunction, speaks God's supreme
Excellency and universal Dominion. He is "JEHOVAH of Hosts," or (in the
Language of the New Testament) "LORD of all, -- "GOD, over all, blessed for
evermore." It teaches us his excellent Greatness. "His Name alone is excellent;
his Glory is above the Earth and Heaven." -- And it teaches us his extensive
Power and Rule. He superintends and governs all Hosts, whether of Heaven,
Earth, or Hell. They are all under his Feet, at his Command and Dispose; as
well as inferior to Him in point of Nature and Properties.

This Word, Tsebaoth, is retained in the Greek Testament, though according to
the Idiom of that Tongue, it is read Sabbath. Nor have the Authors of our
English Version seen fit to translate it; but give us the original Word in
several Places. ( Romans 9. 29. and Jam. 5. 4.) In that Passage quoted by the
Apostle Paul, from the Prophet Isaiah, what in the Hebrew is JEHOVAH Tsebaoth,
is in the Greek Kurios Sabbath; which, turned into English, is "The LORD of
Hosts." It may serve to correct a vulgar Mistake, if I observe that some of the
Unlearned very corruptly read it Sabbath; and miss-understand the Places where
they meet with it, as if "the Lord of Sabbath," and "the Lord of the Sabbath,"
were one and the same Title: whereas they are two Titles, of very different
Meaning. -- Several of the Fathers mistook Sabbath for one of the Names of GOD:
they seem to have construed it as put in Apposition with Jehovah, or Lord. But
were it a Name of God, we should doubtless have found it sometimes used alone
by it self, as his other Names frequently are: Whereas, this Word is never so
applied to Him, but always in express Conjunction with some one or other of his
known Titles. And indeed Expositors, well understanding the Hebrew, in which
Language the Word properly signifies "Hosts," or Bands of Soldiers, have
usually translated it, whether into Greek, or Latin, or other Tongue, by some
Word of that Import. Though sometimes, when mentioned in Relation to GOD, they
have given it a lax Construction, and rendered it by the Word "Omnipotent," or
Almighty. The Septuagint-Version retains the Letter of the Original in our
Text: but in several other Places it uses a Liberty, and turns the same Phrase
in this free Manner (KYPIOS PANTOKPATOP) the "LORD Omnipotent." -- Not that the
Seventy took the Hebrew Word, TSEBAOTH, properly to import a Name or Attribute
of God: but they chose a free Translation of it sometimes; and that not
unjustifiably, since He who is called "the LORD of Hosts," indefinitely, and so
"the LORD of All," must needs "be the Lord omnipotent," or "God almighty." --
At other Times they render it, KYPIOS TON DYNAEON, Dominus Virtutum, "the LORD
of the Powers:" meaning either his being possessed of every Power (or
Perfection) in himself, and so it speaks the superlative Excellency of his
Nature; or his governing all created Powers, and so speaks the Supremacy of his
Dominion: -- which, in the Result, come much to the same Thing. So that it is
well expressed in our English Translation, "The LORD of Hosts." This is the
Name by which He is known, in Opposition to false Gods, and to Gods
metaphorically so called. Amos 5.27. "The LORD, whose Name is the GOD of
Hosts." "Even the LORD GOD of Hosts, the LORD is his Memorial." Hos. 12. -- 5.
By this "we know, that the Lord is great, and that our LORD is above all Gods."

This descriptive Appellation speaks the blessed GOD supreme Monarch of the
Universe, infinitely superior to all second Causes, transcendent in Dignity
and Majesty to all other Beings; having all Agents whatever, in universal
Nature, under his resistless Government, and at his absolute Disposal. It seems
to carry in it an Allusion to some powerful Captain General, having vast Armies
under his Command, entirely subject to his Will, and disposed, ordered, and
managed as he pleases. GOD is truly the sovereign and universal Commander,
having all Things in Subjection to Him, and all Events under his Conduct and
Control, All Creatures, in all Worlds, "in the Heights above, and in the
Depths below," belong to GOD's Hosts; and are, in their various Degrees and
Ways, subservient to his Glory, as well as governed by his Providence.

For instance,

There is "the Host of Heaven," which we often read of in Scripture: and if by
Heaven we understand the World of Spirits, the upper and the invisible eternal
World, called "the holy Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens," then by the Host of
Heaven are meant especially the Angels of God, "the Principalities and Powers
in heavenly Places." We are told of "the Armies of Heaven," among whom the
great GOD does whatsoever He pleases: and of a "Multitude of the heavenly
Host, praising GOD," at the Birth of the holy Child JESUS: which means "an
innumerable Company of Angels." -- We read (1 Kin. 22. 19.) Micaiah said to the
King of Israel, "I saw the LORD sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of
Heaven standing by Him." These mean "the Angels of Heaven," who are "ministering
Spirits," ever waiting on the most High, attending his Orders, and fulfilling
his Will. Hence that of the royal Prophet ( Psalm. 103. 20, 21.) "Bless the
LORD, ye his Angels, that excel in Strength, that do his Commandments,
harkening to the Voice of his Word. Bless ye the LORD, all ye his Hosts; ye
Ministers of his, that do his Pleasure." -- These are they whom the LORD spoke
of, when he answered Job out of the Whirlwind, saying, "The Morning-Stars sang
together; and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy," at his laying the
Foundations of the Earth. -- And of "the Angels of Light" especially we are to
understand that in the Levites Prayer ( Neh. 9. 6.) "Thou, even thou art LORD
alone; thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with all their Host: --
and the Host of Heaven worshippeth Thee." -- Though, it is not to be understood
exclusively of "the Spirits of just Men," received up into Glory. For these
also belong to "the heavenly Host, and are continually "worshipping Him that
lives for ever and ever." These are a Multitude, that no Man can number." And
all are still in Subjection to "the Father of Spirits," he Rector of human
Souls, and Lord of Angels. Both Species may be comprehended in Enoch's
Prophecy: "Behold, the LORD comes with ten Thousands of his Saints, to execute
Judgment, etc.

But if by Heaven we understand the lower Heaven, the visible Region of the
Sky, "the Firmament of his Power," then by the Host of Heaven are meant more
immediately the Sun, Moon, and Stars. These seem especially intended where we
read of Men's "worshipping the Host of Heaven," an Idolatry of ancient Date,
and of universal Practice in the heathen World. Hence that Caution to the
Israelites, who having the Example so near them, were in Danger of getting a
Snare to their Soul, by learning the Way of the World: Deuteronomy. 4. 15, etc. Take
ye good Heed unto your selves, lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a
graven Image, -- and lest thou lift up thine Eyes unto Heaven, and when thou
see the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, even all the Host of Heaven,
should be driven to worship them. -- The celestial Bodies are in the Number
of JEHOVAH's Hosts; not to be worshipped, but to serve him, and to lead Men up
to the Worship of Him, their Creator and Lord. Psalm. 148. Praise ye the LORD.
Praise ye the LORD from the Heavens: Praise Him in the Heights. -- Praise ye
him, all his Hosts. Praise ye him, Sun and Moon: Praise him, all ye Stars of
Light. -- Let them praise the Name of the LORD: for he commanded, and they were
created. -- It was he, that "made great Lights, the Sun to rule by Day, and the
Moon and Stars to rule by Night." He "by his Wisdom stretched out the Heavens:"
He "prepared the Light and the Sun; and the Moon and Stars has He ordained."
-- He "appoints the Moon for Seasons:" and by his Constitution and
Providence, "the Sun knows his going down. He causes "the Dayspring to know
his Place. "He tells the Number of the Stars, and calls them all by their
Names. -- "They continue this Day according to his Ordinances: for all are his
Servants." He maintains them in their Being, Situation, Motion, Operation and
Influence: and all, in their Place, do his Will. They minister to the Designs
of Goodness, and of Justice, in his Government of the moral World, and
contribute much to the Advancement of his Glory. They even "stand still," at
his bidding, and when it will serve his Ends. So, the "Sun stayed in the midst
of Heaven, over Gibeon, and the Moon over the Valley of Ajalon, in the Days of
Joshua, when the LORD fought for Israel, until the People had avenged
themselves on their Enemies." And we read in the Song of Deborah, "They fought
from Heaven, the Stars in their Courses fought against Sisera.

But, to descend now to the lowest Territories of Heaven, the Meteors of the
Air belong also to the Host of GOD. "He creates the Wind, and brings it out
of his Treasuries. "The Lord has his Way in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm,
and the Clouds are the Dust of his Feet. "He causes the Vapors to ascend; He
covers the Heaven with Clouds, and they are turned about by his Counsel. --
He prepares the Dew and Rain for the Earth, and "waters the Hills from his
Chambers. He is the Father of the Rain, and sends it where, and when, and in
what Measure he pleases. "He causes it to come, whether for Correction, or in
Mercy. -- He also "thundereth with the Voice of his Excellency, and scatters
his Lightnings, like Arrows. -- He produces and commands "the Treasures of the
Snow, and the Treasures of the Hail; which he reserveth against the Time of
Trouble, against the Day of Battle and War. -- "He scatters the Hoar-frost:
He casts forth his Ice. Who can stand before his Cold? -- The Cold is his;
and so the Heat: they rise to what Degree, and in what Place, he pleases:
According to his Covenant with Noah, they cease not to this Day, and by them He
smites whom He will, with their pinching or scorching Powers. -- He "makes
Winter and Summer," and orders all the varying Occurrences and Events of both.
"He sends forth his Commandment," and they obey. He faith to one, Go; and it
goes: and to another, Come; and it comes. "Fire, and Hail, Snow, and Vapor,
and stormy Wind, all fulfill his Word. -- And I may properly enough add here;
The living Creatures in the Air, "the Fowls of the Heaven," these also are
under his Rule, and execute his Will. They are to be reckoned among "the Armies
of Heaven": and when "the Lord utters his Voice before this his Army, his
Camp is very great," and he appears "strong to execute his Word," whether by
"Birds of Prey," or by "Swarms of Flies," such as we read of among the Plagues
of Egypt, which God sent "to the End they might know, that He is the LORD in
the midst of the Earth.

Besides all these, GOD has his Terrestrial Host. The Earth has its Host, as
well as the Heavens. Hence we read in Moses's History of the Creation, "Thus
the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all the Host of them." By the
Earth here is to be understood the whole Terraqueous Globe, including both Sea
and Land. Now, "the Sea is his; for he made it: and his Hands formed the dry
Land. -- "The Earth is the LORD's, and the Fullness thereof; the World, and they
that dwell therein. For he has founded it upon the Seas, and established it
upon the Floods. -- "He created the Earth, and all Things that are therein; the
Sea, and all that therein is: and he preserves them all." They are his Work,
his Care, and applied to his Use, as he sees fit, from Age to Age. "He does
whatsoever he pleases in Heaven, and Earth, in the Sea, and in all deep
Places. -- "In his Hand are the deep Places of the Earth; the Strength of the
Hills is his also. -- "He rules the raging of the Seas;" and raises or
stilleth the Waves thereof. "The Earth is full of his Riches, so is this great
and wide Sea, wherein are Things creeping innumerable, both great and small.
There go the Ships: and there is that Leviathan, whom he has made to play
therein. These all wait on him." The Ships that (richly laden) pass through the
Paths of the Ocean, and all the living Creatures, that inhabit the watery
Element, are under his absolute Government, Direction, and Control. So are all
the numberless Species of Animals, that cover the Face of the Earth. The Beasts
of the Field, as well as Fishes of the Sea, and even the Worms of the Dust, as
well as Birds of the Air, sensitive Creatures of every Kind, which swarm in all
Parts of the Universe, they universally belong to GOD's Armies, and he employs
them to what Purposes he pleases, in the Kingdom of Providence. Any of these
appear to Men a formidable Host, when God commissions and arms them to destroy.
"The Adder in the Path, "the Boar out of the Wood, "the Bear by the Way, "the
Lion in the Wilderness, etc. are a Terror to Mankind; much more, Troops of them
collected together. It is therefore remarked, as an aggravating Circumstance of
our Savior's Temptation in the Wilderness, "He was with the wild Beasts." --
But they are all in Subjection to the great LORD of the Universe. "The wild
Beasts of the Field (says he) are mine: every Beast of the Forest is mine, and
the Cattle on a thousand Hills. -- "The Eyes of all wait upon him. "He gives
to the Beast his Food." -- And therefore claims his Service. "Praise the LORD
from the Earth, ye Dragons, -- Beasts, and all Cattle, creeping Things, and
flying Fowl. -- "Let every Thing that has Breath praise the LORD. -- They are
all among the Hosts, of which GOD is the LORD. Having mentioned "Heaven and
Earth," as the Sum of the Universe, he says (Isai. 45. 12.) "ALL their Host
have I commanded. -- Nor are we to overlook Things inanimate, the Trees of the
Wood, the Herbs of the Field, the Minerals of the Ground, Treasures hid in the
Sand, etc. these also are to be numbered among the LORD's Hosts: and by them he
executes his Pleasure, whether in Judgment, or in Mercy.

But among the numerous Hosts in this inferior Creation, Mankind bear a
distinguishing Figure. And when God is styled "the LORD of Hosts," it sometimes
more immediately refers to the intellectual Part of the World, who are united
in various Communities, Kingdoms, Provinces, Towns, Families, etc. of all which
GOD is the supreme Head, Former, Preserver, and Ruler. "He created Man upon
Earth. -- "He has made of one Blood all Nations of Men, for to dwell on all
the Face of the Earth. He determines the Times fore-appointed, and the Bounds
of their Habitation. -- "He rules in the Kingdoms of Men, -- and is "the
Governor among the Nations:" -- presiding over all Societies and Persons;
ruling the Spirits, as well as the Bodies of Men, and ordering all the
Incidents of human Life. -- If we speak of public Calamities, those "three
sore Evils, Pestilence, Famine, and Sword," are the grand Artillery of Heaven,
the Judgments of GOD's Hand, which he sends to punish a sinful People. In
particular, the Sword is his: and he sheaths or unsheaths it, as he pleases. He
"mustereth the Host of the Battle," and succeeds, or defeats, at his Pleasure.
The Events of War are at his absolute Dispose. "The Victory is his," on
whatever Side it turns. He is "the LORD of Hosts, -- "the GOD of Armies, -- in
the literal, military Sense. -- More especially is he "the GOD of Israel," LORD
of the Church, the religious Assemblies of his People, which are sometimes
figuratively called his Hosts. He only is the Object of Worship, and he has the
sole Right of Empire over his People in the Matters of Divine Worship. He is
the sole Lord of Conscience; and he only has "Dominion over our Faith." -- It
is written, "Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. -- "Worship him, all ye Gods. -- Kings of the Earth, and all People;
Princes, and all Judges of the Earth; both Young Men and Maidens, Old Men and
Children: let them praise the Name of the LORD: for his Name alone is
excellent; his Glory is above the Earth and Heaven.

But to add one Remark further,

Even the infernal Host is under a Divine Restriction and Providential
Government. "The Angels that sinned," were immediately "cast into Hell, and
clapped in Chains of Darkness," even "everlasting Chains." These, although in a
Sense sometimes said to be "loosed out of their Prison," and the Devil compared
to "a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour," yet are always under Check.
"The Devil and his Angels, with all their confederate Forces, Sinners on Earth,
and lost Souls in Hell, -- the whole "Power of Darkness," have a Divine
Restraint upon them: and the glorious GOD, by his infinitely superior Wisdom
and Strength, overruling all their Plots and Efforts in Opposition to him,
makes even these Rebel-Spirits subservient to his Designs, "though they mean
not so.

Thus we see, Heaven, Earth, and Hell have their several Hosts; which are all,
in one Sense or another, the Hosts of the LORD. So that he has numberless and
most powerful Armies under his Command.

"Great then is the LORD: and greatly to be praised." The Enlargement on this
Reflection, and several Paragraphs in other Places of this Sermon, were omitted
in the Preaching, for Brevity: and indeed the whole but summarily delivered, in
Accommodation to a Winter-day.
He indeed only is the proper Object of our devout Addresses and religious
Regards. He deserves and claims our highest Homage, the supreme Love of our
Hearts, and entire Service of our Lives. GOD is worthy, and makes the Demand,
that a Respect to him should be our reigning Principle, his Will our governing
Rule, and his Glory our predominant End. This is of moral Obligation upon us.
-- But alas, we are in a fallen State, and can never rise up to the Perfection
of moral Duty, becoming the Majesty and Holiness of him "with whom we have to
do." Nor can we hope to do him acceptable Service, without previous Repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New
Covenant, the Propitiation for our Sins, and our Advocate with the Father. With
what Humility does it become Sinners to approach the Majesty of Heaven? And
what Care to make use of the Mediation of Christ? Always "coming to God by him;
and whatsoever we do, in Word or Deed, doing all in his Name," with a believing
Eye to the Merits and Intercession of the Lamb of God: And indeed "calling on
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ," paying him all the Homage, and giving him
all the Glory, due to "the LORD of Hosts." Thus, "honoring the SON, even as we
honor the FATHER," both being ONE, with Respect to Union in "eternal Power and
Godhead;" for which Reason, we are assured, "He that so honors not the SON,
neither honors he the FATHER himself. -- There is "one GOD, even the
Father," and there is also "one LORD," even the Son. The Phrases, One God and
One Lord, are of the same Import in Scripture-Use; being meant in
Contradistinction, not to one another, but to the "Gods many, and Lords many,"
falsely so called. -- Not all the Wit of Man, I believe, can devise a Medium
between the Creator and the Creature, or form an Idea of Something between God
and an Angel. Were the Son of God a mere Creature, whatever Excellency of
Nature, or Dignity of Station, he might be distinguished by; suppose him a
Super-angelic Spirit, incarnate in human Nature; still he must be only ranked
with the Hosts of the LORD; and not be distinguished by the honorable
Ascription of this most elevated Divine Character, "the LORD of Hosts." Without
the Belief of which, as justly belonging to him, it would be nothing short of
Idolatry, to pay him Divine Honors, by making him "our Hope," by "calling on
his Name" in Prayer, by dedicating our selves to him in Baptism, by religiously
commemorating him in the Lord's Supper, and by "living to him," or "living by
the Faith of the Son of God. By this we may safely form a Judgment of Arian
Doctrine and Romish Devotion. The former denies Christ the Glory of his Deity;
and the latter gives the Glory of his Mediatorship to Saints and Angels. --
Query, How then can the one be true Gospel; or the other, true Christianity? --
And what mighty Difference is there between Arian and Papal Worship? How
cautious should we be of all Approaches to either?


But, to add another Reflection,

This Divine Character, "the LORD of Hosts," administers abundant Consolation
and Encouragement to all sincere Believers and true Worshippers of God. Surely
it is your Safety, Interest and Honor, and therefore your Wisdom, my Friends,
that you are engaged in the Service of him who is "the LORD of Hosts;" a Name
"great in Zion," and such as speaks him your most rightful Proprietor, King,
and Judge, and all-sufficient Savior. It is your happy Privilege, that he
"whose you are and whom you serve," is "able to do for you exceeding abundantly
above all that you ask or think." Verily, the LORD of Hosts is on your Side:
and since HE is for you, who or what shall be against you? Nay, being in
Friendship with him, you are also in League with all his Hosts in Heaven and
Earth; nor shall the Host of Hell it self, however they may hate and distress
you, be able finally to "prevail against you": much less need you "fear what
Man can do unto you." -- O follow "the Captain of your Salvation"; and he will
in the End bring you safe to Glory, by the Conduct of his almighty SPIRIT. Yea,
he "makes his Angels ministering Spirits;" and they "encamp round about them
that fear GOD," and who shall be Heirs of Salvation. -- Even all his mighty
Hosts, celestial and terrestrial, shall side with you against the infernal
Host, and conspire to promote your eternal Safety and Blessedness. The Hills
may be levelled with the Valleys, and Mountains be removed, and sink in the
mighty Waters: yea, Earth and Heaven may pass away: but you being "joined to
the LORD in an everlasting Covenant," the Promise is sure, from his Power and
Faithfulness, that "all Things shall work together for Good to you." You being
CHRIST's behold, "All Things are yours, and shall turn to your Salvation." The
most violent Gusts of adverse Winds shall eventually do you no real Hurt; but
rather "blow your Happiness," and waft you apace Heavenward. All the loyal
Hosts of JEHOVAH shall afford you their friendly Aids, in your Progress toward
that everlasting "Rest, which remains for the People of God. -- Amidst your
troublesome and tedious Travels through this evil World, amidst all the Perils of
the present Time, realize it, you are "kept by the Power of GOD through Faith
unto Salvation. -- Having therefore the LORD of Hosts for your Patron, "with
whom is everlasting Strength," and having "your Heart established with Grace,
-- "your Heart fixed, trusting in GOD, -- you need not be "afraid of evil
Tidings"; you need not, you ought not, to be "afraid with Amazement", under the
most frightful Aspects of Providence; no, not under the Apprehensions of Death
it self, or of eternal Judgment. Though "God comes out of his Place to punish
the Inhabitants of the Earth," though "he makes of a City an Heap; of a
defenced City, a Ruin;" though "all Joy is darkened, the Mirth of the Land is
gone, and all the Merry-hearted do sigh": yet "the LORD will ordain Peace for
you", whether exempted from the common Calamity, or not. And conscious of
having secured an Interest in Christ by Faith, you may glory in the LORD, and
say in that Day, "Lo, this is our GOD; we have waited for him, and he will save
us: this is the LORD, we have waited for him, and we will rejoice in his
Salvation." Though even universal Nature were all in a Combustion, though the
Heavens were blazing over your Heads, the Earth burning under your Feet, and
all the Hosts of both seemingly arming for your Destruction; yet are you safe,
perfectly safe, in the Hands of him who is "the LORD of Hosts;" nor need be
dismayed, in the least, even at the Terror of a dissolving World. -- You I
mean, who are among his peculiar People, reconciled to God, and righteous
before him in your Generation.

But "the Ungodly are not so." You that are of an impious Character, are in an
unsafe Condition, both living and dying; nor shall be able to "stand in the
Judgment. -- So long as you remain impenitent and unbelieving, you are assured,
"the Wrath of GOD abides on you": and all the Hosts of the LORD are against
you, "skilful to destroy," and ready to "execute Judgment," whenever he gives
out the fatal Order. Surely, "the LORD is great; and greatly to be feared."
With the LORD of Hosts is terrible Majesty, and irresistible Power. "Our GOD is
a consuming Fire. -- "Who shall not fear him!" Shall not " Man, that is a
Worm," consider and be "afraid of him!" Much more sinful Man, that is odious to
his Holiness, and obnoxious to his revenging Justice! Oh, "who can stand before
this holy LORD GOD, when once he is angry! or, whither can you flee from his
Presence! -- "His Eyes behold the Nations;" his Eyes, that are "as a Flame of
Fire," penetrate the darkest, and reach the most distant Recesses; "his Hand
shall find out all his Enemies:" and he has his powerful Hosts every where,
prepared to "fight the Battles of the LORD"; by the very least of which he can
bring you low, yea, destroy you in a Moment. Should the LORD commission his
Hosts to make War against you, for your Destruction, how weak will be your
Resistance, and how certain your Ruin? Should a righteous GOD bid "the Decree
bring forth," and call to the Ministers of his Vengeance to do their Office,
you may look that "the Heaven shall reveal your Iniquity, and the Earth rise up
against you." And Hell gapes to receive your guilty Soul. The Hosts of the
LORD, every one of them, from an Angel to an Insect, wait his Commands, and
ever stand ready to put them in Execution. Realise it, you are surrounded with
his numerous Hosts, on every Side. They are above and beneath you, they are
before and behind, on your right Hand and on your left, yea, even within, as
well as without you. There is no resisting, nor escaping, if the LORD of Hosts
empower and arm and send them against you. Will you not then "tremble for Fear
of him? And will you not instantly "seek Peace with him? -- Know it, this is
your only Security; and therefore your highest Wisdom. "Acquaint your selves
now with him, and be at Peace; thereby Good shall come unto you." Get
reconciled to God in Christ, fear and love, and serve him: so you will be
secured of his powerful Friendship, and the Friendship of all his Hosts. But,
continuing impenitent Rebels* what remains for you, but "a fiery Indignation,
that shall devour the Adversaries? -- Certainly, "dying in your Sins," you will
"fall into the Hands of the living God," under the Revenges of his unappeasable
Justice: and then all the Hosts of the Lord will join in pouring Indignation
and Contempt upon you. -- Even in the present World, awful Judgments await you.
For "God is angry with the Wicked every Day." And if he should arise, and whet
his Sword, and come to deal with you in his hot Displeasure, "could your Heart
undure, or your Hands be strong!" Oh, "whither will you flee for Help in that
Day? And, where will you leave your Glory?" -- How will you defend your selves
against the Wrath of Almighty GOD? Or, how will you be "able to abide in the
Day of his fierce Anger?" Before it be too late, "consider this, ye that forget
GOD, lest he tear you in Pieces, and there be none to deliver!" O consider
"what you will do in the Time of Visitation:" or rather inquire now, "what you
must do to be saved," even with an everlasting Salvation! -- And hasten the
Flight of Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, who only can "save you from your
Sins:" and "who delivers from the Wrath to come." Do this, as ever you would
obtain Consolation, that "strong, that "everlasting Consolation," which is the
Privilege and Portion of them "who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold of the
Hope set before them.

But thus much for the first Thing in the Text; the Character, under which GOD
is spoken of. -- I have enlarged upon it beyond my Intention; but much below
the Merit of the important Subject.

In the next Place,

II. I am to say something of GOD's visiting his People. -- Says the Prophet to
Ariel, "Thou shall be visited of the LORD of Hosts. --

This is a figurative Expression, frequent in Scripture-Use. The Word, visit,
properly signifies, one's going to see another, or meeting him, in Token of
Friendship toward him, Care of him, or Respect for him. -- When used less
properly, it signifies in general a remembering and performing of something
relative to others, whether Good promised, or Evil threatened. When God fulfils
his Promises, or his Threatenings, in sending Good, or Evil, he is said to visit
us.

It may not be amiss to premise here,

The Scripture sometimes speak of Divine Visitations for Good, and in Favor.
To "visit the Widow and Fatherless," is to care for them, to relieve and supply
them in their Necessities, to benefit and comfort them, according to the
Obligations of Charity. It means a loving and merciful Visitation. -- In the
like Sense, GOD is sometimes said to visit his People. We read how "the Lord
visited Hannah," and how he "visited Sarah, as he had said, even doing unto her
as he had spoken." These were favorable Visitations, in Consequence of
gracious Promises, or in Answer to Prayers of Faith. -- When Joseph in Egypt
lay on his Deathbed, he assured his Brethren, by the Spirit of Prophecy, that
"GOD would visit them, and bring them (...) of that Land." Accordingly, when
GOD raised (...) for a Deliverer, and sent him to the Israelites, he saluted
them with a consolatory Message in those Terms, "The GOD of your Fathers has
appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you." And of the People,
believing the glad Report, it is said, "When they heard that the LORD had
visited the Children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their Affliction,
they bowed their Heads and worshipped." This was a Visitation for Good, in
Mercy and in Truth. -- So with Respect to the Jews Restoration from their
Captivity in Babylon, GOD is said to "visit them, and perform his good Word
toward them". -- These Providential Visitations were Typical of that more
abundantly gracious Visitation, which GOD made to his People, in the Fullness of
Time, by his Son Jesus Christ, the great Savior, "worthy of more Glory than
Moses." Even the fame which that godly Priest Zacharias celebrated in his Song
of Praise. "Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel; for he has visited and redeemed
his People; and has raised up an Horn of Salvation for us." This is what the
royal Psalmist, if interpreted by the Apostle, seems to have had principally in
his Eye, where he says, "What is Man, that thou art mindful of him? and the Son
of Man, that thou visitest him?" Which is in the New Testament applied to the
Incarnation of GOD the SON, "who loved the Church, and gave himself for it. --
The Scriptures also represent the Revealing and the Applying of purchased
Redemption, under this Notion of a Divine Visitation. "The Dayspring from on
high has visited us, to give Light to them that sit in Darkness. -- "A great
Prophet is risen up among us; and, GOD has visited his People. -- "God did
visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a People for his Name. -- These are
spiritual Visitations, through Jesus Christ; by his Word and Ordinances, and by
his holy Spirit. These are Visitations of the Souls of Men: super-eminent in
their Nature, of the highest Importance, and eternal Consequence to us.

I thought it not unmeet to premise the Mention of these Visitations for Good,
and in Mercy, though not intended in the Text: And surely wherein we have been
"visited of the LORD of Hosts," in this beneficial Sense, we should take a
thankful and admiring Notice of the gracious Condescension and Kindness of GOD
to us. -- We should pray for such Divine Visitations, whether of a temporal, or
a spiritual Reference. "Remember me, O LORD, with the Favor thou bear to
thy People: O visit me with thy Salvation; that I may see the Good of thy
Chosen." -- And we should be concerned, that we may "glorify GOD in the Day of
Visitation", in every such Day, when visited with Good, in any Instance, and of
whatever Kind.

But besides these there are other Visitations, that are in a Way of Judgment:
and these are directly pointed to in our Text. -- The Scripture speaks
elsewhere expressly and abundantly of a being "visited with Evil." In this Sense
we are to understand those general Expressions: "Shall not I visit for these
Things? says the LORD. -- "This is the City to to be visited. Agreably we
read, "I will bring Evil upon them, even the Year of their Visitation. -- And
again, "What will ye do in the Day of Visitation, and in the Desolation that
shall come from far? -- We read of God's "visiting Transgressions with the Rod:
-- and visiting in his Anger. -- There are judicial and penal, disciplinary and
angry Visitations, as well as gracious and beneficent. "Thou have visited and
destroyed them." -- These Visitations are the Matter of many Divine
Threatenings. "Now will he remember their Iniquity, and visit their Sins: they
shall return to Egypt," their ancient House of Bondage. -- "They shall fall,
among them that fall: in the Time of their Visitation they shall be cast down,
says the LORD. -- And again, "In the Time of their Visitation they shall
perish. -- Accordingly our english Translators sometimes chose to depart from a
literal Version of the Word, and only give the Sense. As where we read, "I will
punish," in the Original it is, "I will visit upon -- the Fruit of the stout
Heart of the King of Assyria. -- "The LORD has a Controversy with Jacob, and
will punish ( Heb. visit upon) Jacob according to his Ways. -- "What will thou
say, when he shall punish (visit upon) thee?

When God remembers and executes his Words of Threatening, he is said thus to
visit, i. e. in Anger, and with Evil. -- By an usual Figure in Speech (a
Synechdoche of the Genus for the Species) the indefinite or general Word,
visit, is often used, when Anger is particularly meant, and Punishment
designed. -- To visit, in the punitive Sense, connotes Forbearance for a Time;
when a merciful God seems to "wink at Men's Sins, and suffer their Manners,"
to "keep Silence," and not animadvert upon them in his Providence: but
"waits, that he may be gracious. -- Yet, his Patience being abused, He at
length arises, and comes to them in a Way of Judgment; and this, frequently at
a Juncture "when they are not aware." He emphatically visits, in Anger, when
he sends unexpected Calamities, after long Patience: As, when he "visits the
Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children. And when Destruction comes "in an
Instant, suddenly": as is often the Case, when he visits with the Evils
specified in our Text.

These Visitations, in a Way of Anger and Punishment, are fearful Visitations,
and to be deprecated by us: yet certainly to be looked for, as they are justly
deserved, if we "provoke the Lord to Jealousy," by "going on still in our
Trespasses," notwithstanding Divine Warnings and Reproofs, and by "despising
the Riches of his Goodness and Longsuffering toward us.

When angry Visitations are begun, it highly imports us, to be concerned that
their Progress may be prevented; and therefore, to "lay them to Heart, to
humble our selves under the mighty Hand of GOD, and turn to the Lord," in the
Methods of Faith and Repentance, Confession and Supplication, with Amendment of
our Doings. This is called "our visiting him, in the Time of Trouble. -- He
certainly expects this Return from us. And thus the End of his corrective
Visitations being answered, we may hope, that he will not proceed in a Way of
Controversy with us; or at least, that he "will not make a full End of us, but
correct us in Measure," and forbear to pour out all his Wrath. -- If we do
indeed "return to the most High," and "visit him," in the Name of the blessed
Mediator, with our penitential Confessions, and our believing Prayers,
following the same with "Fruits worthy of Repentance," and "showing our Faith
by our Works," we may humbly hope, that he will "arise for our Help, and show
us his Mercy;" that he will "visit us with his Salvation," and "not rebuke us
in his sore Displeasure.

But it is Time I come to that particular Instance of Visitation, which the
Occasions of this Day more especially point our Views to. Yet, as you have been
already entertained with a Variety of Discourses on this Subject, I shall
consider it with the greater Brevity at this Time.

III. I am to speak of God's visiting us with the Earthquake.

Among the various Articles enumerated in our Text, this is one. "Thou shall be
visited of the LORD of Hosts with Earthquake and great Noise. -- What the
Earthquake means, and what the great Noise attending it, none of you who have
so lately felt the one, and heard the other, can want any Description. All
therefore I shall do here, is briefly to assert a Divine Agency in this Event;
and then consider it under the Idea of a Divine Visitation.

1. The Earthquake is undoubtedly one of the wondrous Works of the LORD of
Hosts. -- He that originally gave Being to the Earth, also gives Birth to the
Events that happen therein. He is "the Creator of all the Ends of the Earth."
He laid the Foundation of it, in the Beginning, and established it by his
Wisdom and Might. He projected and executed the primitive Plan of its Form, its
Composition, its Place in the Creation, its Powers, Motions, Productions, and
Effects: and in all he supports, preserves, and governs it to this Day. He has
given it such a Proportion of Magnitude, so equally poised it on every Side, so
adjusted all its relative Circumstances, so contempered all its various
internal Contents, and made every Thing therein "in Number, Weight and
Measure," in such Harmony, Consistency, and Regularity, with such Aptitude and
Inclination to the several Ends and Uses they were designed for, and with such
powerful Tendencies to the Good of the Whole: that we may reasonably suppose,
the Earth would never have experienced such Disorders, nor suffered such
Convulsions, as it does, had it not been for the Sin of Man; and were it not
for the special Interpositions of a DIVINE AGENT, whose overruling Hand, and
sovereign (all-controuling, but uncontrollable) Dominion extends to the whole
System of Nature.

What says the Scripture? "In his Hand are the deep Places of the Earth;"
subterraneous Caverns, and whatever passes in them, all at his absolute
Dispose: "The Strength of the Hills is his also;" their Magnitude, Altitude,
Consistence, and Influence, given or taken away by him, at his Pleasure. "The
Sea is his," and "He treads on the Waves of the Sea." He has "appointed the
Sands for the Bound thereof." He governs it in all it is Motions, Fluxes and
Refluxes, and the various Consequences thereof* He retains it within it is
destined Limits, or causes it to break over its Boundaries, in terrible
Inundations, where and when he pleases. "And his Hands formed the dry Land;"
which gives him therefore a Right of Propriety in it, and of Dominion over it;
and over all Things either upon the Surface, or within the Bowels of it. --
"The Earth is the LORD's, and the Fullness thereof." And whatever Revolutions or
Vicissitudes happen on it, or in it, he presides, and governs all. The Fullness
of the Earth is his: all its Produce, all its Incumbents, all it is Contents, at
his absolute Disposal; and he adds, or diminishes, as he pleases, and with a
resistless Power moderates in all terrene Affairs. The Earth itself is the
LORD's. He "formed it to be inhabited," by whom, and in what Parts he pleases:
and as he has an indisputable Right, where he will, to "make it a Land desolate
and not inhabited," so whenever this Event happens, and wherever, or by
whatever Means, a Divine Agency is to be seen and owned therein. "Lo; he that
forms the Mountains, and treads upon the high Places of the Earth; the
LORD, the GOD of Hosts is his Name:" and at his Pleasure, he converts them into
Valleys, or sinks them in the Ocean; or only threatens their Overthrow, by a
mighty Tremor and Convulsion. Be the Force and Effects of an Earthquake in one
Degree or another, we are ever taught to ascribe it to GOD. Sometimes "He
removes the Mountains," and is said to "shake the Earth out of its Place:" but
if only "the Pillars thereof tremble," if the perpetual Hills bow, though they be
not scattered, it is still the Operation of his almighty Hand. In every such
Case, we must make the Psalmist's devout Confession, "THOU have made the Earth
to tremble;" even although we have no Occasion to add his Complaint, "Thou have
broken it; heal the Breaches thereof." -- Though it be said in the Story of
God's Appearances to the Prophet Elijah, that "the LORD was not in the
Earthquake," this is by no Means to be understood as if God were not the Author
of it, but only that hereby he made no special Discoveries of his Mind and Will
to the Prophet.

There may have been Earthquakes purely miraculous, and supernatural; not owing
to any natural Causes, at least in their natural Course of Operation. As, that
in the Case of Elijah: And that at the Promulgation of the Law of Moses, when
"GOD came down on Sinai, and the whole Mount quaked exceedingly." So that in
the Case of Corah: And those which accompanied our LORD's Death and
Resurrection: So, that which "shook open the Prison-Doors," in the Story of the
Jailer: And perhaps that miraculous Event on the Day of Pentecost, was the
Earthquake and great Noise. "Suddenly (it is said) there came a Sound from
Heaven, as of a mighty rushing Wind, and it filled the House;" filled it with
Noise and Tremor, at least: in which the Apostle notices the Fulfillment of
ancient Prophecy: "I will show Wonders in Heaven above, and Signs in the Earth
beneath.

But, without Question, usually the Earthquake, though a rare and surprising
Phenomenon (and never yet fully accounted for, on any Hypothesis) happens
agreably to the Laws of Nature, and has its immediate Origin from Causes
natural: very much the same perhaps with those that give Rise to Thunder. --
But the Investigation of these is the Business of Philosophy, and the
Controversies on this Head may well enough be left to "the Disputers of this
World.

Theology points us to GOD, as the first Cause. Whatever be the secondary
Causes, and Reasons in Nature, without Controversy "the LORD of Hosts" is the
grand Operator, the prime Efficient. Being the Creator and Proprietor of the
universal World, the Author and Preserver of all natural Causes, and of all
their Virtues, Instincts, and Principles of Operation; He has an indisputable
Claim to Government over them, and exercises his sovereign Right (as before
observed) in guiding, influencing, limiting, and overruling them, according to
the Counsel of his own Will, in Subserviency to the Designs of his Providence.
Indeed such are the strange Appearances sometimes in the natural World, that it
looks as if Nature had then broke loose from all Law and Order, and natural
Agents were left to act at Random, with a wild Rage and unbounded License. But
the Truth is, amidst all their Impetuosity, mutual Contrariety, and Confusion,
they are "not without Law to God," but still are restrained and governed by his
almighty Hand, and "fulfill his Word." Not an Earthquake happens, whether great
or small, and whatever its natural Causes or Effects, but GOD is the supreme
Author. It is primarily the Work of him who is the LORD of Hosts.

2. It is a Divine Visitation, wherever it comes. "Thou shall be visited of the
LORD of Hosts with Earthquake and great Noise." It is always a Visitation from
Heaven: but of various Intention and Influence not always on the same special
Design, nor uniformly productive of the same Effects.

Permit me to say here distinctly,

1. In general, this Visitation from the LORD of Hosts is an eminent Display of
his Majesty and Power, and carry's with it very signal Tokens of his awful
Presence and Agency in this World of ours.

To this Purpose those Passages in Deborah's Song: LORD, when Thou wentest out
of Seir, when Thou marchedst out of the Field of Edom, the Earth trembled, --
the Mountains melted from before the LORD, even that Sinai, from before the GOD
of Israel. -- And those Passages in one of Asaph's Psalms: I will remember the
Years of the Right Hand of the MOST HIGH. -- Who is so great a God, as our GOD?
Thou art the GOD that do Wonders: Thou have declared thy Strength among the
People. -- The Waters saw Thee, O GOD, the Waters saw Thee: they were afraid;
the Depths also were troubled; the Earth trembled and shook. -- Remarkable
likewise are those Words in the Prayer of Habakkuk: GOD came from Teman, and
the HOLY ONE from Mount Paran. His Glory covered the Heavens, and the Earth was
full of his Praise. He stood and measured the Earth; -- the everlasting
Mountains were scattered, the perpetual Hills did bow, -- the Curtains of the
Land of Midian did tremble.

The Scriptures speak as if at such a Season the LORD of Hosts "arose to shake
terribly the Earth." He "rises up out of his Place, boweth the Heavens, and
comes down," and at his Presence the Earth trembles. -- "The LORD GOD of
Hosts is he that touches the Land: -- He looks upon the Earth," and the
Mountains shake, the Rocks quiver, universal Nature is struck with solemn
Dread. -- "Earthquake and great Noise" (though it proceed no further) is a
Terror even to the Brute-Creation. -- Besure scarce any Thing more sensibly
strikes the human Mind with Awe and Surprise. The Reasons of this, whether
natural or moral, are obviously such as these. It is an uncommon Event, it
comes suddenly, threatens Destruction in a Moment both to us and ours, throws
all about us into Consternation and Confusion, is an Image and Presage of the
final Judgment, and Dissolution of the World at the last Day, when Sinners will
find all Refuge fail them; in a Word, is a loud and awakening Lecture to
Conscience, upon the Being, Perfections, and Providence of GOD. -- It
peculiarly exhibits him in the Greatness of his Power, the Extent of his
Dominion, and the Glory of his Majesty, perhaps beyond any other of his Works
of the like Kind. It is singularly calculated to alarm and rouse a secure
World, to intimidate the bold Criminal, to shame and humble the haughty
Worldling, to surprise the Hypocrite; in short, to make all Men "know there is
a GOD who judges in the Earth," and "know themselves to be but Men." -- We
read in the Prophet Ezekiel, In that Day there shall be a great Shaking in the
Land of Israel, -- so that all Creatures shall shake at my Presence. -- Thus
will I magnify my self, and I will be known in the Eyes of many Nations, and
they shall know that I am the LORD. -- The Earthquake is a Dispensation
strongly tending to keep up a Sense of GOD in the World, a Reverence for
Religion, and a Restraint upon the Wickedness of the Wicked: Perhaps Infidelity
and Atheism would be rampant, were it not for such convincing Witnesses and
awakning Monitors of a Divine Being and Providence. -- Even good Men may
sometimes need these shaking Dispensations to quicken them, and make them more
careful to "walk humbly with their GOD. -- That Earthquake, which holy Elijah
felt the Shock and saw the Terror of, was to show him the Glory and Majesty of
GOD, to strike him with a deeper Awe, and prepare him for the more lowly and
reverential Entertainment of the Divine Messages and gracious Discoveries he
was going to receive in the "still small Voice." --

But I hasten to observe,

2. The Earthquake has sometimes been so circumstanced, as to be an evident
Token of GOD's Favor to his People: and he has by Means thereof wonderfully
visited them with his Salvation.

Of old, when GOD has been "sore displeased with the Heathen, that were at
Ease," and were implacable Enemies to his chosen Nation, He has "shaken the
Earth," and thereby "overthrown the Kingdoms of the Heathen," or greatly
weakened their Power, by its being the Occasion of routing their Armies. If the
Earth has not opened, and by swallowing up their Adversaries brought Salvation
to God's People; yet this Effect has been accomplished by Means of a Panick
siezing the Enemy on such an Occasion. This was instrumental toward Jonathan's
famous Triumph over the Philistine Enemy. We read, There was a Trembling in the
Host, and in the Field, and among all the People: the Garrison, and the
Spoilers, they also trembled, and the Earth quaked: so that it was a very great
Trembling [a Trembling of GOD.] And the Watchmen of Saul in Gibeah looked; and
behold, the Multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one another.
-- An Earthquake, if it was not among the Means made Use of for the Israelites
Escape from the pursuing Egyptians, in the Days of Moses; yet in the Time of
Joshua it was among the "Wonders GOD wrought," at Israel's passing through
Jordan, in Token of his Favor to them, and for a Terror to their Enemies. To
which notable Story the Psalmist alludes: When Israel went out of Egypt, the
Sea saw and fled: Jordan was driven back. The Mountains skipped like Rams; and
the little Hills, like Lambs. What ailed thee, thou Sea! -- thou Jordan! -- Ye
Mountains! -- [the Occasion of it is hinted in the following Clause] Tremble,
thou Earth, at the Presence of the LORD, at the Presence of the GOD of Jacob.
-- In a previous Speech to the People Joshua had told them the Meaning of this
Wonder. Hereby ye shall know, that the living GOD is among you, and that he
will without Fail drive out from before you the Canaanites. -- God assured
Joshua, it was designed in Favor and Honor to him, in special. This Day will
I begin to magnify thee in the Sight of all Israel, that they may know I will
be with thee, as I was with Moses. -- And the Divine Presence with Moses had
been testified by the Earthquake, not only at the Promulgation of the Law, but
also in the Affair of Corah's Mutiny against him. -- In that Regard, Moses and
Joshua were eminent Types of CHRIST, who had a Testimony borne him from Heaven
repeatedly by the Earthquake, at his Death, and at his Resurrection. -- In like
Manner, his Apostles and primitive Disciples were repeatedly honored with this
Token of God's special Presence and Approbation; as you read in the Book of the
Acts. -- That "great Earthquake" in the Story of the Jailer, at Philippi, was
not only honorary to those imprisoned Ministers of Christ, Paul and Silas, and
the Means of their Deliverance out of the Hands of their cruel Persecutors
(who, probably being intimidated on that awful Occasion, were the rather
willing to discharge them) but it proved more significantly beneficial to the
abusive Jailer himself, who thereupon had his Conscience awakened, and was
brought solicitously to enquire after eternal Salvation. -- Truly, whenever
this is a Consequence of the Earthquake, it is, however for Correction, yet in
Mercy. Though a terrible Visitation, yet is it a merciful one in the Event,
when sanctified of God for saving Advantage to Souls; especially when
considerable Numbers are the happy Subjects of good Impressions, at such a
Season. A gracious Visitation by the HOLY SPIRIT, attending this Visitation in
Providence, however grievous and tremendous for the present, turns it into a
beneficial one, and joyous, in the Reflection. Yea, though it prove the
Destruction of many Lives, yet if "the Remnant are affrighted, and give Glory
to the GOD of Heaven," by making a wise Use of such a bereaving and desolating
Visitation, to the Ends of Religion, and the saving of the Soul, it is to them
eventually a Visitation in Mercy, and for their best Good.

It remains to observe, more directly to the Purpose of our Text,

3. The Earthquake is most commonly a Visitation in holy Displeasure at a
People, for their Sins.

The Earthquake usually carry's the Face of an angry Visitation, procured by
Sin. The first Sin of Man, not only brought Wrath upon himself, and on his
Offspring; but "subjected the Creature to Vanity," and entailed a "Curse upon
the Ground:" which the accumulative Guilt of new Rebellions, among the
successive Inhabitants of the Earth, provokes God to put in Execution from Age
to Age. So outrageous and obstinate was the Wickedness of the Generality even
of Adam's more immediate Posterity, that "God repented he had made Man upon the
Earth;" and accordingly, by a terrible Execution of Justice, the World that
then was, being overflowed with Water, perished." An universal and most fatal
Inundation! An Example of "Perdition of ungodly Men," not to be paralleled, but
by the final Conflagration, which "the Earth that now is," we are assured by
Revelation, is "reserved unto." Yet in the mean Time, particular Cities, or
Countries, are not exempt from a similar Overthrow and Desolation: Instances of
which there have been many, both ancient and modern, and some very recent. As
"GOD spared not the old World," so neither spared he Sodom and Gomorrah, and
other heathen Cities in the new World, in like Manner giving themselves over to
Filthiness, but "condemned them with an Overthrow, making them an Ensample of
Vengeance, to them that after should live ungodly." Nor has God spared even
his own professing People (whether Jews, or Christians) when their Apostasy has
ripened them for Destruction. Hence that of the Prophet Amos, speaking to
Israel, in GOD's Name; "Some of you I have overthrown, as I overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah." An express Scripture-Instance of this we have in the Case of Corah
and his wicked Accomplices, who were partly destroyed by Fire from Heaven, and
partly swallowed up by an Earthquake, in the Days of Moses. -- The Words of
Amos, dated expressly "two Years before the Earthquake," when he prophesied,
"that the Land should tremble," and that GOD would "smite the Winter-House,
with the Summer House, and the great Houses should have an End; that he would
"smite the great House with Breaches, and the little House with Clefts; that
"the Songs of the Temple should be Howlings in that Day, there being many dead
Bodies in every* Place," etc. this Prophecy, it is thought, was fulfilled in
that memorable Instance which the Prophet Zechariah refers to, where he takes
Notice how the People "fled from before the Earthquake in the Days of Uzziah
King of Judah". Which, by this Hint, seems to have been a great and terrible
Earthquake, something like that which "all Israel fled" from before, in the
Wilderness. Perhaps the Prophet Isaiah, who was contemporary with Uzziah,
refers to this same Event, which he might be an Eyewitness to in those Words
of his* Because they have despised the Word of the Holy One of Israel,
therefore is the Anger of the LORD kindled against his People, and he has
smitten them; and the Hills did tremble, and their Carcases were torn in the
midst of the Streets. -- Josephus the Jewish Antiquary seems to confirm this
Thought, when he informs us, from Tradition, of such Circumstances attending
this Earthquake; that "it rent the Roof of the Temple, and tore down a
Mountain, which rolling along choked up the Highways, and coverd the King's
Gardens all over with Rubbish." It might then happen, according to the Prophecy
of Amos, that there were "many dead Bodies;" or according to Isaiah's Report,
that "the Carcases of Men were torn in the Streets." While they "fled from
before the Earthquake," the falling Mountain might catch and crush them; the
Rocks, thrown down and rolling along, might overtake and destroy them; and many
might perish by the Fall of the Houses, that were shook down. This was a
judicial Visitation: the Prophet expressly ascribes it to "the Anger of the LORD
kindled against his People; and" visiting their Transgressions upon them. --
These Scripture-Accounts teach us always to view it as an angry Visitation, for
Sin, when the Earthquake is the Means of awful Deaths and Devastations, in
whatever Part or Age of the World this happens. Such undoubtedly was that which
the Jewish Antiquities acquaint us, fell out in the Reign of Herod (a little
before Christ's Coming) when the whole Land was shaken in a most amazing
Manner, a Multitude of Houses thrown down, and some Thousands of the
Inhabitants buried in the Ruins. -- And such undoubtedly were the "Earthquakes
in diverse Places," that fell out according to our LORD's Prediction, not very
long after his Ascension, when (as History informs us) some great and populous
Cities, yea, Numbers of them at a Time, were overthrown and destroyed: in which
Desolations, not Pagans only, but Jews* and Christians too, many of them were
involved. -- And we have Reason to think, such also were those in following
Ages, which befell many Cities where Christianity had once flourished, but
Apostasy having taken Place and prevailed, this proved their utter Ruin.

The Time would fail me, to tell of Antioch (the City first honored with the
Name Christian) of Sardis, of Smyrna, of Laodicea, etc. (in the Number of the
seven Churches in the Revelation; which have long since perished by
Earthquakes, that left them scarce any Mark or Memorial where they stood) and
of several Parts of Sicily and Naples, (often visited with Earthquakes, and
sometimes almost entirely demolished by them) and of Constantinople (formerly a
Christian City, though now Mohammedan; always subject to Earthquakes; a very
terrible and destructive one befell it about two Years since) and of Lisbon,
with adjacent Places, (very lately, and most dreadfully overthrown) and of
Cadiz (another recent Instance) with other Places, where Earthquakes and
Inundations have destroyed much Substance, and many Lives* As also of Places in
the American Parts of the World* Antigua, Nevis, Jamaica, Lima, etc. which have
sometimes been almost destroyed by Earthquakes. -- Nay, though we are not to
judge the People of such Places to have been "Sinners above all Men", yet if
the like Sins were abounding among them, as the Scriptures tell us were the
procuring Causes of like Desolations in other Places of old, it is no Breach of
Charity, to suppose the Places I have mentioned, were "visited of the LORD of
Hosts," in this fearful Manner, for their Transgressions; and have been "thrown
down in his Anger. -- "Righteousness exalts a Nation: but Sin is the Reproach
of any People." When "the Foundations of the Earth are moved exceedingly, when
a Place "falls," and especially if it "rises not again," it is a Sign "the
Transgressions thereof are heavy upon it," and a Token of "Wrath gone out from
the LORD against it. -- When "the Curse devoureth the Earth," in particular
Spots of it, and spreads Desolation among its Inhabitants, the Scripture
teaches us to look on it as a Sign, that "the Earth is defiled under its
Inhabitants, because of their Transgressions," and that an angry Providence has
"visited for these Things. -- As it is written, "Who has hardened himself
against GOD, and has prospered? Which removes the Mountains, and they know
not: which overturneth them in his Anger." -- But is the Lord displeased at the
Mountains? Or is his Indignation against the Earth? No, but against them that
dwell upon it; who by their Iniquities provoke him to Wrath, which he sees fit
sometimes to manifest in this terrible Way. -- Such angry Visitations are
divine Remonstrances to the suffering People, against their Sins: and loud
Warnings to the rest of the World, to hear and fear. "Go ye now (says the
Lord) to my Place which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first; and
see what I did to it, for the Wickedness of my People Israel.

However, supposing there be only Earthquake and great Noise, without any
detrimental Effects, yet is it to be looked on a Visit from the LORD of Hosts,
and usually in Anger. Though Houses stand, and no Life be lost, no destructive
Inundation breaking in, nor "Flame of devouring Fire" breaking out; yet may it
be an angry Visitation. There are various Signs of Resentment, besides stabbing
with the Sword, or smiting with the Fist. Anger may be shown by the
Countenance, as well as by the Hand; by a Frown, as well as by a Scourge: And
by lighter Strokes, or mere Shakings of the Rod, as well as by heavy and
destroying Blows. If God "appoints over us Terror," though without Consumption;
especially if he "smites us with great Terror and Astonishment," as in the
Earthquake, if it rises to any high Degree; when "our Lips quiver, and our
Flesh trembles," at the dreadful Sound in our Ears, and threatening Agitation
we feel and see of all Things about us; and when withal a guilty Conscience, at
such a distressing Season, awakes, and smites, the Sinner with Remorse and
Horror, in the Remembrance of Sin. and under the Apprehension of an angry God
visiting his Iniquities. Though indeed this may eventually "turn to his
Salvation," yet is it really a Dispensation of Wrath, a Display of the "fiery
Law" and incensed Justice of Heaven; and appears such, at present, to the
alarmed Sinner.

The Earthquake that fell out at our Savior's Crucifixion, proclaimed a Divine
Indignation at the horrid Fact. The Psalmist probably refers to that, where he
prophetically says, "Then the Earth shook and trembled, because GOD was wroth."
And though in the Scripture-Story we do not read of Devastations by it, of Houses
falling, or of Lives lost; yet we do of "the People's smiting their Breasts,"
and returning from the Place of Execution in great Consternation and
Astonishment. The Earthquake with great Noise, though in the Event harmless, as
to outward Effects, yet carry's in it a tremendous Appearance, has the Aspect
of an angry "Visitation from the LORD of Hosts;" and in all common Cases is to
be considered by us in that Light. As it is written, The LORD is the true GOD,
he is the living GOD, and an everlasting King* at his Wrath the Earth shall
tremble.

But it is Time I come to a CONCLUSION; which I shall do with applying this
Subject in a few practical Reflections and Exhortations.

1. In general, let us then see and own the Agency of GOD in the great and
terrible Earthquakes, this and other Places have lately felt. Let us realise
it, that herein they and we have been indeed " visited of the LORD of Hosts. --
It would be Atheism, to ascribe these Events to mere Casualty, or Chance: and
it would be vain Philosophy, to terminate all our Inquiry in mere natural
Causes. The Christian (so called) would be "worse than an Infidel," not to
carry up his Views, to that ALMIGHTY AGENT, who governs all Events in universal
Nature. May none among them that name the Name of CHRIST, have that Complaint
lying against them; "LORD, when thy Hand is lifted, they will not see." -- O
that there never were Occasion to declare this in the House of Jacob, and
publish it in Judah, saying, Hear now this, O foolish People; and without
Understanding, which have Eyes, and see not, which have Ears, and hear not!
Fear ye not ME? says the LORD: will ye not tremble at MY PRESENCE?

2. Let us admire the Patience and Long-suffering of GOD toward a World lying
in Wickedness, that he no oftener repeats his angry Visitations by destructive
and terrible Earthquakes.

This Dispensation may, for its Unusualness, be termed "his strange Work. Men's
perishing by Means of an Earthquake was on^^ called "a new Thing* ( Number. 16.
30.) And it has been a rare Thing ever since, comparatively with their dying by
Sickness, called "the Visitation of all Men." It is less infrequent indeed in
some Parts of the Earth, than in others, and perhaps will become more and more
common in this last Age of the World. In a natural Sense, "the Earth waxes old,
as does a Garment:" and an old Garment easily admits of Rents. But if we take
it in a moral Sense, as the World grows old in Sin, and the final Dissolution
approaches nearer, we may reasonably expect a greater Frequency of this Divine
Judgment. -- In the mean Time, what admiring Thoughts should we have of the
Riches of God's sparing Goodness and Forbearance toward "this present evil
World," in general!

3. In particular, let us take a thankful Notice of his distinguishing Mercy to
us; while we ascribe Righteousness to him, in his terrible Doings toward
others.

How should "our Souls magnify the LORD, and our Spirits rejoice in GOD our
Savior," that We have never yet been "visited of the LORD of Hosts" in the
like destructive Manner as many other Parts have been! -- We have learnt by
Experience, that we dwell in a Land liable to the Earthquake. And doubtless
there are the like Provisions in Nature for Earthquakes of equal Force, to
produce calamitous Effects, correspondent to those in other Places: Nor have we
any Grounds to flatter our selves as if sufficient moral Causes were not found
among us, even among us. -- Who then has made us to differ? And why are we
distinguished from others? Certainly we must resolve it into the sovereign
Pleasure of Him "who has Compassion on whom he will have Compassion." To this
it is entirely owing, that the Visitations made us in this Way, though we have
Reason to conclude them angry Visitations, have hitherto been but disciplinary,
and mingled with much Clemency and Tenderness.

As vast as the Mischiefs impending over us in the Time of our Visitation, so
great is the Deliverance we have received! Let us reflect, and realize, how the
LORD of Hosts appeared "marching through the Land in Indignation," threatening
every Town with instant Ruin, every Family with immediate Desolation, every
Person with sudden Destruction! -- Let us think; Might not our Houses, which
tottered and reeled in so amazing a Manner, have fallen in Pieces, and become
our Graves! -- Or might not the Ground have cleaved under our Feet, and
swallowed us up in its dismal Hollows! Might not the Flame of devouring Fire
have broken out, and consumed us in a Moment! Or the Sea have rolled in it is
angry Billows, and overwhelmed us with a desolating Flood! -- Truly, we were
visited in a fearful Manner, and we trembled "because of the Shaking of the
Hand of the LORD of Hosts, which he shook over us:" but be* hold, he has saved
us out of our Fears, and has wrought for us "this great Deliverance." -- Not a
House is fallen, -- not a Life is lost, -- not even a Limb broken! "Praise ye
the LORD." -- "How great is his Goodness!" and how great his Power, -- in our
wonderful Preservation! The same Divine Hand, that shook our Dwellings in so
tremendous Manner, held their several Parts in Union, and rescued their
respective Inhabitants from being crushed by the Fall of them. The same
Almighty Arm, that shook the Land and Ocean, kept the Foundations from breaking
up, and prevented our being deluged by invading Waves, or consumed by
resistless Flames. He who is "mighty to save," as well as able to destroy, has
wrought marvellously for us. His Wrath was kindled, his Hand was stretched out,
he terribly shook us, and threatened to smite with a killing Blow: but "Mercy
rejoiced against Judgment." He listened to the Pleadings of his own Bowels: and
"in the midst of Wrath be remembered Mercy." The compassionate Keeper of the
Vineyard interceeded for the barrest Figtree, "Spare it this Year also." And we
are once more reprieved from impendent, merited Destruction. Though the great
Terror has been repeated, yet so likewise has* been the great Deliverance. We
must confess, "It is of the Mercies of the LORD, that we are not consumed," and
made the Monuments of his vindictive Justice, even as others.

Very surprising and most melancholy Accounts we have had of late Desolations,
made by the Earthquake in various Parts of Europe; more especially at LISBON,
the Metropolis of Portugal, and one of the wealthiest Cities upon Earth: but
now lying in Ruins, supposed irreparable. "Alas, Alas, that great City! for in
one Hour is she made desolate. -- In one Hour so great Riches are come to
Naught!" The Buildings all demolished, Thousands of Lives (it is thought, not
less than fifty Thousand) lost, -- and Thousands of the Survivors reduced to
Beggary, or extreme Want. -- Truly they are just Objects of our Sympathy: and
all ought to pity and pray for them; wishing them all needful Help in this Time
of Trouble; but above all, wishing that they may "glorify GOD in this Day of
their Visitation," by Repentance and Amendment of their Ways, by deserting "the
Man of Sin," and "turning to GOD from Idols, to serve the living and true GOD,
and to wait for his SON from Heaven," the sole Head of the Church, and the one
only Mediator between God and Men* -- We should be the more affected with that
amazing Catastrophe, as its Influence will be so extensive in the trading
World, reaching doubtless to Numbers among ourselves; and as it happened within
the same Month in which we were awfully threatened with the like Calamity, but
spared through the tender Mercies of our GOD. The Coincidence of such different
Events at the same Juncture, makes both the more remarkable, "Behold the
Goodness and the Severity of GOD!". His righteous Severity on them which fell;
but toward us unmerited Goodness! -- By the one, we see what might have
befallen us, and how wonderfully we have escaped imminent Ruin. -- By the
other, we see what inexpressible Obligations we are under to GOD, our sole
Deliverer: who, when he might justly have destroyed, did but shake and terrify
us; and now having quieted the Earth, has also delivered us from the
disquieting Terror. -- "Stand still, and see the Salvation of GOD! -- "Stay
your selves, and wonder. -- Wonder at the Distinction made by sovereign
Goodness: and "be ye thankful. -- And such surely have a superadded Obligation
to this, who have had the Visitation in Providence accompanied to them with a
Visitation of the Holy Spirit; sanctifying the same to them, either for their
Awakning and Conversion, or for their Quickening and Edification. These have had
a blessed Visitation indeed! Doubly merciful! Such have eminent Occasion to be
thankful; and We, on their Account.

4. Let us all be concerned to have these Providential Visitations sanctified
to us; that we may learn the Lessons of Wisdom therein taught us, and may make
a right Use thereof, to the End GOD may be glorified, and our selves benefited
thereby, in the most significant Sense.

"GOD has spoken in his Holiness." -- We have had a loud Lecture on the
Existence, Providence, and Perfections of GOD; on the Frailty of Man; the
Vanity of Creature-Helps; our Need of a better Portion than one in the Earth,
"this little Dewlling Place of Worms," unstable too, and liable to such
shocking Vicissitudes; our Need, consequently, of an Interest in GOD, who is
"the Portion of Jacob," through Faith in CHRIST; and so, the Wisdom of the
happy Few, that have "chosen the good Part;" but the Folly of the wretched
Multitude, that "forsake their own Mercies." -- O let us "hear Instruction, and
be wise, and refuse it not. -- We have had a loud Call, to "fear the Lord of
Hosts; -- to "stand in Awe, and sin not; -- to "humble our selves under the
mighty Hand of God; -- to "consider our Ways, and turn our Feet unto his
Testimonies; -- to "seek Peace, -- and "flee for Refuge, to lay hold of the
Hope set before us, in the Gospel of Reconciliation. -- Not only the destroying
Judgments of God on others, but the threatening Visitations we our selves have
been under, speak this our Duty and our Wisdom.

In the Earthquake, we have had a practical Sermon, preached to us in very
awful Accents, upon the absolute Necessity of Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. -- It thundered out the Menaces of the Law against
secure Sinners; ringing that doleful Peal in their Ears; "WOE to them that are
at Ease in Zion. -- It cried aloud, in the Language of that Gospel-Caveat, to
awakened Sinners, "Quench not the SPIRIT. -- It gave a solemn Admonition to the
Children of God, to "awake out of Sleep, to "arise, and trim their Lamps; and
to "look diligently, lest any Man fail of the Grace of God;" to pray and labor
for the Conversion of others; and in their respective Places to promote a
general Reformation. -- The Call indeed is of universal Extent, to all
Societies, and all Persons, of every Character, Color, Condition, Rank, Sex,
and Age: "Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.

Have our Lives been awfully threatened, yet mercifully spared? Shall we not
then devote them to the Honor of that God, in whose Hand our Breath is; and be
led to Repentance, by his Goodness, which we are such remarkable Monuments of!
The more so, as on the very same Day of our Visitation ( viz. Nov. 18.) a
severer one, we are informed, was made in some Parts of Barbary, on the
Continent of Africa: viz. the City FEZ, Capital of the Kingdom of that Name;
MEQUINEZ, another strong City; and TETUAN, a considerable Town, all said to be
then destroyed by the Earthquake.


Have our Households been saved alive in the Time of common Hazard? And shall
not Heads of Families be awakened to a greater religious Care of all under
their Charge respectively? Each taking up Joshua's Resolution; "As for me and
my House, we will serve the LORD." -- And will not our Children from this Time
fear GOD? and pay a greater Regard to the fifth Commandment? "Which is the
first Commandment with Promise.

Have our Dwellings not been cut off? Let it then be our humble Resolve, with
David, that we will "walk in our Houses with a perfect Heart." God knows how
many "Houses full of Deceit," but empty of Godliness and Honesty, have been
awfully shaken; that it is a Wonder they were not thrown down upon the guilty
Dwellers therein, bringing them into Desolation in a Moment! And will not such
now "put away all Iniquity far from their Tabernacles? -- Were there not many
prayerless Closets terribly shaken? And will not the Neglecters of secret
Devotion now be awakned to improve their wonderfully prolonged Opportunities
for sacred Retirements?

Have our Possessions been mercifully preserved to us? And shall we not be
engaged to a greater Care, that we "honor the LORD with our Substance? -- Will
not the rich Man take the Caution, "not to trust in uncertain Wealth, but in
the living GOD? And the Poor, "not to envy them that prosper in the World," but
to learn Patience and Contentment? -- Will not the Husbandman think of the
Earthquake, when he goes into his Field; and the Trader, when he goes into his
Store; the Artificer, when in his Shop: and learn to practice Honesty, with
Industry, and to do common Actions after a godly Sort?

Do our Houses of Worship yet stand; the Fall of which would have turned the
Songs of the Temple into Lamentation, and perhaps had been the final
Dissolution of some of our religious Assemblies? And shall we not now have a
higher Value for our Sanctuary-Privileges, "set our Affections more to the
House of our God, and more diligently frequent it, "in Season, and out of
Season?

How should the Churches, by a Sense of the Goodness of God, in not dissolving
them, or not diminishing their Numbers by a destroying Earthquake, be excited
to a Care of reforming what is amiss in them, of maintaining brotherly Love,
and improving in Purity of Doctrine, Worship, and moral Practice?

Will not the Ministers of the Word, by solemn Reflection on the Uncertainty of
their Opportunities, as their own and their Hearers Lives appear so uncertain,
be quickened to "redeem the Time," and double their Diligence in all the Duties
of the Pastoral Care?

Do our Schools and Colleges yet stand, through the Mercy of God? And shall not
these public Means of Education be more prized, be better attended, and their
genuine Ends more carefully pursued?

In a Word, Do our Court-Houses yet stand, through the sparing Goodness of God?
And shall not our civil Affairs be carried on more in the "Fear of an Oath? --
Will not our Magistrates do wisely, to apply the late Visitation as a Motive to
greater Care of Fidelity in the Discharge of their respective Trusts;
especially in the Execution of those good and wholesome Laws made against
Profanity and Vice? -- And should not all of us be "put in Mind to obey
Magistrates," in every such Case, "not for Wrath, but for Conscience sake? It
is a judicious and seasonable Clause in the excellent Proclamation, by his
Honor Lieut. Governor PHIPS, appointing the late Day of Humiliation and
Prayer, -- which deserves to be remembered: -- I take this Occasion, to require
all Persons in Civil Authority to use their utmost Endeavor, that the Laws for
punishing Immorality and Profaneness be strictly observed, and to take
effectual Care, that all Breaches thereof be duly punished. And I earnestly
recommend to Persons of every Age, and every Order, Amendment of Life; a due
Sense of their entire Dependence upon the Favor of GOD for every Moment of
their Lives, which being thus remarkably preserved, they are more than ever
bound to devote to his Service. -- May all that bear the Sword of Justice, and
all subject to it, hear these united Calls from GOD and Man.


Sure I am, there is great Occasion; from the abounding Iniquity of the Times,
for all to join their Endeavors to promote a Reformation of Manners: and we
have had a loud Call to this, in the late awful Visitation. If we hear and
obey, we may hope, that God will "repent him of the Evil he may have thought to
bring upon us." But otherwise, we may expect still angry Visitations from his
provoked Justice, and Destruction in the End. If we go on to abuse his
Patience, we may look, that he will do more terrible Things in Righteousness;
that he will not only shake our Earth, but tear up its Foundations; dissolve
both Church and State, and bury an impenitent People in one common Grave of
Desolation and Ruin. -- "Thou Capernaum, which art lifted up to Heaven, shall
be brought down to Hell. -- "Be instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart
from thee, lest I make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited. -- "Ye that make
mention of the LORD, for Zion's sake keep not Silence, and give him no Rest,
until he make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth, until the Righteousness thereof
go forth as Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns." --
The Divine Author of an Earthquake is equal to this grand Effect. He is
superior to all Difficulties. He can remove Mountains of Guilt, and shake down
the strong Holds of Sin and Satan. He can demolish the Kingdom of Darkness,
establish and advance the Kingdom of his dear SON. He can effect the most
glorious and happy spiritual Revolution, and that very suddenly. But "for this
he will be enquired of, to do it for us. -- O let all the Friends of our Zion
unite their fervent Cries to the GOD of all Grace, that "the SPIRIT may be
poured from on high. -- This, and this only, will bring on a settled and
prosperous State of Things; and thus shall "Glory dwell in our Land.

To conclude,

Those Divine Visitations with the Earthquake, we have been meditating on,
should remind us of Death and Judgment, hastening upon us. -- Though we should
never see another Visitation in that Way; yet there is "the Visitation of all
Men" certainly awaiting us. "There is a Time to die;" and "the Grave is ready
for us. -- By Sickness, or Accidents, more common than the Earthquake, and
equally irresistible, Death may arrest us. Then the Earth will be opened for
us, and we must go down into the Pit of Corruption. Nor know we the Day of our
Death. It may come as suddenly as an Earthquake. And Oh how deplorable our
Case, if surprised in our Sins, unprepared for so great a Change! -- We look
also for eternal Judgment: and we are told, "That Day will come as a Thief in
the Night; will come upon Men unawares; even as the Flood of old did upon the
World of the Ungodly, and as the Vengeance upon Sodom, in a Day when they
looked not for it. -- "Be ye therefore ready, lest the LORD coming suddenly
should find you sleeping. -- Oh the Consternation and Horror, which in an
Instant unprepared Sinners will be thrown into, at the unexpected coming of the
Day of GOD! You may see a faint Resemblance of it in the Descriptions given by
the Prophet, Isai. 2. 19, etc. and by the Apostle, Rev. 6. 15, etc. which I
leave you to read at your Leisure. -- Verily "the Day of the LORD JESUS," when
he shall "be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire,"
though it will be a joyful Day to "his Saints, in whom he then will be admired
and glorified," yet will it be a terrible Day to Christless Sinners, whom he
will then "take Vengeance on, and punish with everlasting Destruction;" which
also will be "swift Destruction;" and attended with every aggravating
Circumstance.

O let us all now be "persuaded by the Terror of the Lord," to seek an Interest
in Christ; and be concerned to secure Him for our Friend, who is to be our
Judge. So shall we have Peace in Life, Hope in Death, and Boldness in the Day
of Judgment; that great Day of GOD our SAVIOR, when the Earth shall open, not
to swallow up the Living, but to give up the Dead; when "all that are in their
Graves shall come forth; they that have done Good, to the Resurrection of Life,
but they that have done Evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation:" When "the
Heavens shall be dissolved and the Earth burnt up, with all the Works therein.*
"Nevertheless we, according to his Promise, look for new Heavens, and a new
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. -- "Wherefore, Beloved, seeing ye look
for such Things, be diligent that ye may be found of Him in Peace, without Spot
and blameless. And account the Long-suffering of our LORD Salvation. -- To HIM
be Glory and Dominion for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
Errat. Page 19. l. 2. for your, read you.


