Dr. Chauncy's SERMON Occasioned by the late EARTHQUAKES.

The EARTH delivered from the CURSE to which it is, at present, subjected. A
SERMON Occasioned by the late EARTHQUAKES in Spain and Portugal, as well as
New England; AND Preached at the BOSTON- Thursday-Lecture, January 22, 1756.

Published by the general Desire of the Hearers.

By Charles Chauncy, D. D. One of the Pastors of the first Church in BOSTON.

The Day of the Lord will come, -- in the which the HEAVENS shall pass away
with a great Noise; -- the EARTH also, and the Works that are therein, shall be
burnt up. -- Nevertheless, we (according to his Promise) look for NEW HEAVENS,
and a NEW EARTH, wherein dwells Righteousness. Apostle PETER. And I saw a new
Heaven, and a new Earth; for the first Heaven, and the first Earth, were passed
away. Apostle JOHN. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by Edes and Gill, at their
Printing-Office, next to the Prison, in Queen Street, M,DCC,LVI.

The World in which there is NO CURSE.
Rev. xxii. 3. And there shall be no more CURSE. --
MY text falls in that part of the revelation of God to his servant John, by
Jesus Christ, which relates to the resurrection-world; and among the
characteristicks here given of this world, that is an observable one, no more
CURSE shall be there.

The words evidently allude to that Curse, which the righteous God, in the days
of Adam, and for his sin in eating of the forbidden tree, fastened on the
earth; changing it from its paradisaick state, to one that was adapted to be an
occasion of toil, and sorrow, and death, not only to him, but to his posterity,
throughout all generations.

I cannot therefore give you a more just or lively idea of the
resurrection-world, as described in my text, than by dilating upon the state of
our present earth, by reason of the primitive curse; for one of the
distinguishing marks here given of that world is, that it has no such CURSE
cleaving to it.

It Is both seen, and felt, by unhappy experience, that the earth, in its present
state, is such, as that it is impossible for any son or daughter of Adam to
possess life on it, but in suffering circumstances, in a less or greater
degree. As the scripture speaks, Man that is born of a woman is of few days,
and full of trouble: He is born to trouble as the sparks fly upwards. And such
indeed are the inconveniences and trials, such the labors and sorrows, we are
all subjected to, by the very constitution of the earth we live upon, so
various in their Kind, and so unavoidable in their nature, that the present
state of existence may properly be considered as a scene of vanity, suffering,
and death; and the longer we any of us continue in it, the more thoroughly we
are convinced, that this is the real truth of the case. Some, perhaps, suffer
more evil than they enjoy good; and if any enjoy more good than they suffer
evil, it is but in a small degree. The same earth that is fitted to give us
pleasure, is fitted also to give us pain; and every convenience is so attended
with some opposite inconvenience, that it is hard to say, in many cases, on which
side the balance most commonly turns. At the best, our condition here is so
chequered with interchangeable evil and good, that we may all take to our
selves words, and with accurate truth say, vanity of vanities, all is vanity,
and vexation of spirit.

And was this the state, in which God created the first of our race? The
scripture says no such thing; but quite the reverse: Informing us, that, upon
man's becoming a living soul, that is, a being capable of communication with
material nature, in a way of perception and enjoyment, he found it every way
adapted to his convenience and delight, as well as support in life. The earth
was endowed with prolifick virtue, and caused to bring forth every kind of
fruit, pleasant to his sight, and good for food. And as to death, he was
guarded from its touch by the tree of life, planted in the midst of the
paradise of God: Nor was there, in this happy place, any of those occasions of
pain, and sorrow, and tears, which we now groan under. It was owing to the
disobedience of the one man Adam, in the special article wherein he was tried,
and the CURSE of God thereby bro't on the earth, that death entered into the
world, with its forerunners, and appendages, in all their frightful and
tormenting forms; and has reigned ever since, and even over those, who sinned
not after the similitude of his trasgression.

It Is plain from revelation, however undiscoverable any other way, that the
state of the earth, and the circumstances of mankind, as living on it, are
vastly different from what they would have been, had not Adam fell by
transgression. The Curse inflicted on the earth, by reason of his sin, can be
explained in no intelligible sense, upon any other supposition.

The words of Moses are express in declaring, that it was for man's sake, that
is, for his sin; and that he might be subjected to a state of labor, and
sorrow, and death, that the earth was cursed. But, in what conconceivable
sense, could God's cursing the earth be a means of subjecting man to these
disadvantages, if the earth was not thereby changed into a worse state than it
was in before his fall, that is, a state less fitted to give him pleasure, and
more adapted to be an occasion of grief, and to bring on death? It should seem
certain, if the earth, in its original state, was similar to what it is in its
present condition, there would have been no need of a curse from God in order
to its bringing forth thorns and thistles, and being an occasion of toil and
sorrow. And as God cursed the earth upon this express design, that it might be
adapted to these ends, it is from hence demonstrable, that its condition, before
the lapse (so far as we regard revelation) was not the same it has been since.
If it was, what is the meaning of the curse? What signification, carrying in it
any important sense, can be put upon it?

The plain truth is, We, the posterity of Adam, come into existence since his
lapse, and live on this earth in consequence of it, not as it was in its
pristine state, but as it lies under the actual curse of God, that is, adapted
to render life, as long as it lasts, a scene of labor, vanity, and sorrow.

The Apostle Paul certainly viewed the matter in this light. For he says, Romans
8. 20, The creature is made subject to vanity. And again, v. 22, The whole
creation groaneth, and travaileth together in pain until now. And when it is
said, in my text, by the Apostle John, in his description of the
resurrection-world, that there is no more curse there, the propriety of this
characteristick is evidently founded on those numerous occasions of sorrow,
mankind, at present, are subjected to, by reason of the curse that is on the
earth. But if the state of the earth now is, and all along has been, the same
it was before the fall, how can it be said to be under a curse? It must be a
strange sort of curse, that would leave the earth just as it found it. It can
have no meaning, if it did not so change the earth as to make it less
advantageous to man, less fitted to be a place of happiness. Besides, if the
curse did not greatly change the earth for the worse, how shall we account for
those scripture passages, which speak of the state of good men, in the other
world, under the emblem of a paradisaick one? Our Savior declared to the
penitent thief on the cross, This day thou shall be with me in paradise. The
Apostle Paul says of himself, I was caught up to paradise. And, in the book of
the revelation, the promise to him that overcomes is, that he shall eat of the
tree of life in the midst of the paradise of God. The happy state described, in
these texts, under the resemblance of paradise, is, beyond all controversy,
greater than can be enjoyed on this earth, as it is constituted at present; and
consequently the ancient paradise, from whence the allusion is borrowed, must
have been vastly different from our earth, in its present condition. The
ancient paradise, it is true, was a particular spot of the earth, selected by
God for the habitation of man in innocence: But there is no reason to think,
there was any considerable difference between that spot of earth, and the earth
in common. To be sure, if the rest of the earth, in that day, was similar to
the earth in this, there would have been no need of a Curse from God in order
to its being an occasion of toil and sorrow. A mere expulsion from paradise
would, in this case, have answered all the ends of the curse, rendering it
quite needless. So that it should seem a point beyond all controversy, among
those who profess faith in the revelations of scripture, that this earth, by
means of the curse for Adam's sin, has been changed from its first state; and
so changed as to be the unavoidable occasion of vanity, labor, sorrow, and
death, in a multiplied variety of forms, to all who have lived on it since the
lapse.

If any should here ask, What the change is, in particular, that the curse has
bro't upon the earth, less fitting it for happiness, and more adapting it to be
an occasion of sorrow and suffering?

I answer; -- It seems to me very evident, it is this that has changed the
seasons; making them, instead of equable, and gently distinguished from each
other, subject to those extremes of heat and cold, and sudden turns from one to
the other, we now experience, to our being exposed to manifest inconveniences,
and, many times, great hardships and sufferings. -- It is this that has changed
the fitness of the ground for the purpose of vegetation; causing it to bring
forth its fruit, in all its various kinds, with less perfection, and
consequently with less virtue to nutrifie; which must, conformably to the
established connections of nature, affect our bodies, rendering them less
perfect, and therefore less suited to be the instruments of our souls in the
exertment of their several active powers: Besides which, it now invigorates
those thorns, and thistles, and weeds, which are the occasion of infinite toil
to the sons of men. -- It is this that has changed the air from its former
purity, subtilty, and perfect adaptation to the purpose of breathing, and its
other uses in the animal and vegetable kingdom; subjecting it to those steams,
exhalations, and heterogeneous mixtures, which are the causes, under God, of
those storms and tempests, of those thunderings and lightings, of those
droughts and rains, and, in a word, of those various pestilential affluvia,
which has done so much hurt in all ages. -- It is this that has filled the
bowels of the earth with those materials, whatever they are, that are the
secondary causes of that terrible phenomenon we mean by an earthquake: And its
bowels, in all its quarters, are stored with these materials for the production
of this awful event, either for warning, or destruction, in a less or greater
extent, as God pleases. -- In a word, it is this that has so changed the whole
external constitution of nature, as that, instead of tending to render the
earth a paradisaick one, it conspires to make it a place of vanity and sorrow,
suffering and death.

One that has wrote a very learned and ingenious Theory of the earth has
endeavored to assign the mechanical causes of this change of the earth from
its paradisaick, to its present state. I will not affirm, that they are the
true ones, of those God was pleased, in fact, to cooperate with in order to
effect this change. But thus much I will venture to say, that this change, as
owing to these causes, is both intelligible, and credible, upon the strictest
phylosophical reasoning; and that we have therefrom a clear and just account,
how the curse, the scripture speaks of, might come upon the earth in
consequence of the sin of the first parents of men, and change it from its
former state; making it, in the natural course of things, an occasion of all
those inconveniences, difficulties, fears, sorrows, sufferings, and deaths, we
are now subjected to, and so earnestly groan to be delivered from.

I may pertinently add here, it is highly probable, that the alwise righteous
God so adjusted all second Causes, when, by his curse he changed the external
state of nature, as that they should operate, in all ages, and in all places,
as might best answer his designs in the moral government of the creature. What
I mean is, He might settle such laws with respect to natural causes, so
proportion their force, sphere of action, manner and degree of operation, as
that, under his all-powerful and alwise concurring influence, they should
conspire together to produce those effects, at such times, and in such places,
as were best fitted to their moral state, and might serve for warning and
correction, or total desolation and ruin, as he should judge expedient. And in
consequence of this settlement of the course of nature, taking rise from the
sin of the one man Adam, it may come to pass, that his posterity, in all
after-ages, as they forsake God, are involved in those calamities, which either
warn and discipline them, or totally destroy them from off the face of the
earth, as the ends of government make the one, or the other, fit and proper.

We see, in fact, that the heavens over us, and the earth under us, are charged
with materials that are fitted, whenever God pleases, in a variety of ways, to
awaken the attention of a careless world, and call them to the faith, and fear,
and service of the great sovereign of the universe; or to put a period to their
existence here, if they are incurably turned to infidelity and wickedness. It
is from these materials in nature, that tempests, famines, pestilences,
earthquakes, and the like, take their rise. And these are the great instruments
of providence. It is by these, that God keeps our degenerate world under
restraint. Were it not for the displays he makes, at proper times, and in
proper places, of his being, and perfection, and governing providence, in these
ways of terror, mankind might, at length, forget there was a God, or live as
though there was none.

The final cause therefore of God's cursing the earth, and fitting it for the
production of so much evil, in the course of providence, might be the good of
mankind. Such a world as this now is, and by the curse of God too, may be the
most suitable one for such creatures as we are since the lapse: Had the earth
remained in its paradisaick state, giving no room to expect death, or those
occasions of sorrow, and fear, and suffering, we are now subjected to, it might
have been an abode altogether unadapted to the business of training us up for
the enjoyment of God, the supreme Good. It was, perhaps, highly expedient, if
not absolutely necessary, that we should live in a world of discipline; a world
that would, in the natural course of things, be the occasion of many
difficulties, inconveniences, and trials, by means of which, we might be
formed to a meekness for another world, in which we should be totally freed
from them. An interrupted state of ease and pleasure would, morally speaking,
be the ruin of mankind. We need a mixture of evil with good, to check our
pride; to restrain our bodily appetites; to take off our affections from the
things of the earth; and to excite in us a just sense of our dependence on God.
And we need also, every now and then, to be alarmed by this or that
dispensation, that shall speak with a voice more loud and awful than is common
and ordinary. The inhabitants of the world in general, and the inhabitants in
this or the other place in special, are sometimes sunk into a state of such
carelessness and stupidity, have so little faith in God, and are so given up to
commit all iniquity with greediness, that, humanly speaking, there is no room
to expect their reformation and amendment, but by such manifestations of the
power, and greatness, and majesty of God, as will even force a faith in him,
and a serious attention to his character as the moral governor of the world.

Accordingly, the course of nature, since the lapse, and in consequence of it,
is wisely and mercifully adapted to both these ends: Giving occasion, at all
times, for disciplinary trials; and bringing on also, at certain intervals,
such tremendous events as either alarm the fears of men, and solemnly call them
to repentance, or destroy them from off the earth by hundreds and thousands,
having filled up the measure of their iniquities. And this course of nature
will continue, and operate to these ends, producing both ordinary and
extraordinary evils, more or less extensive and fatal, as the state of mankind
shall make them necessary, till the world is ripe for that dissolution by fire,
of which we are particularly forewarned by the Apostle Peter, in the 3d chapter
of his 2d epistle; the provisions for which were all, doubtless, laid in store,
when God cursed the earth, and so adjusted, as that they should all unite and
operate at the time set therefore in the counsels of God: Though it ought to be
remembered here, the fire of this Day of God's wrath, which is reserved for the
perdition of ungodly men, will be so far from finally ruining this world, as
that it shall be a mean, under the government of the all-powerful and all-wise
God, of taking off the curse from the earth, and reducing it to its paradisaick
state, or one that is much better.

Blessed be God, we have good reason from the revelations of his word, to
expect such a state as this; though the present heaven and earth shall be
dissolved by the fire of the great day. Our Savior, speaking of those who had
followed him, says, that, in the regeneration, they shall set upon twelve
thrones, Matt. 19. 28. The word here translated regeneration, is the very one
(as Dr. Burnet observes) that is used, both by the greek philosophers, and the
greek christian fathers, for the renovation of the world. And, doubtless, the
new form of existence that is to be given to all things, their being, as it
were, born again to another and better state, is what our savior has here in
view. In the Acts of the Apostles, chapter 3. ver. 21, The heaven is said to
receive Christ, UNTIL THE TIMES OF THE RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS. The Apostle
Peter, in agreement with this though it, bespeaks the christians he wrote to in
such language as that, 2 Epistle, 3 chap. ver. 13, We, according to his
promise, look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.
The Apostle John also, in his vision, saw this present earth and heavens, flee
away, so as that there was no more place found for them, Rev. 20. 11. And when
the earth and heavens, that now are, were passed away, he saw a new heavens,
and a new earth, rise up in their room, Chap. 21. 1. And it is in consequence
of these visions, that he introduces him that sat on the throne, saying, as in
the 5th ver. of this chapter, Behold, I make all things new.

Some have though it, that these new heavens and earth will be formed before the
general resurrection and judgment; but it is with me beyond all doubt, that they
are herein mistaken. For the dissolution of the present earth and heavens,
which the Apostle Peter speaks of; and the passing away of the earth and
heavens, which is spoken of by the Apostle John, mean one and the same thing.
And it is remarkable, the Apostle John saw the dead, both small and great, arise,
and come forth to judgment, before he saw the erection of a new earth and
heavens, in the room of the old which had passed away.

It should seem therefore very plain, that the new heavens and new earth, so
particularly spoken of, both by the Apostle Peter, and the Apostle John, are
this world of our's bro't back to its paradisaick state, or one that is better;
and that the very world we now live in, thus changed and made new, is the
place, where good men, after the resurrection, and judgment, shall live and
reign with Christ forever and ever.

And in truth, where else should be the place of the abode of good men, in the
resurrection-state? As one expresses it, In the boundless space that surrounds
us, we know of nothing but suns, or fixed stars, earths, and moons, and comets.
Neither of these, except the earths, can be though it fit to be the habitation of
good men in the future state. In such a place, in the new earth, the Apostles
Peter, and John say, good men shall dwell. Why then should we seek for another
unknown place, of which the scripture never speaks. Mr. Joseph Hallet, from
whom the above passage is cited, makes the following Observation, which may be
worthy of notice. The word, Heaven, never once in all the bible signifies the
place in which good men shall dwell after the judgment-day. I venture, says he*
to be pretty positive in asserting this, because I have examined every place in
the new testament, in which Heaven is mentioned, with a view to this. The word,
Heaven, in scripture signifies the throne of God, the place where Christ now
is, where angels, and spirits of just men, now dwell. When the Apostles speak
of good men, after the day of judgment, they never call it Heaven; but the holy
city, the new Jerusalem, eternal life, glory, honor, immortality, a crown, a
Kingdom, and the like. Notes on peculiar texts, Vol. I. page 198.

He observes likewise, That the new Jerusalem, the holy city, [the present
heaven of good men] shall come down up the new earth. Rev. xxi. 2, 10. I John
saw the holy city, new jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven -- He
showed me the great city, the holy jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven. Agreeable to this account are many other places of scripture; as 2 Cor.
5. 1. The house not made with hands, in which good men shall dwell, is, at
present, in the heavens; but hereafter it shall be an house from heaven, v. 2,
i. e. it shall come down from heaven. The hope of christians is, at present,
laid up in heaven, Col. i. 5. Their inheritance is, at present, reserved in
heaven, 1 Pet. i. 4. They have an enduring substance now in heaven, Heb. x. 34.
Their Treasure is, at present, in heaven, Matt. vi. 20. The place prepared for
them is now in heaven, Joh. xiv. 2. This house, this hope, this inheritance,
this substance, this treasure, this place are in the new jerusalem. And as the
new jerusalem is in heaven, these things cannot but be there too. But
hereafter, when the new jerusalem shall come down from heaven upon the new
earth, then these things shall come down in and with it. St. John is not
peculiar in representing the place of good men's habitation in the other world
as a city. St. Paul has frequently done the same; as in Heb. xi. 10, and 16.
Heb. xiii. 14. St. Paul also agrees with St. John as to the name of this city,
the heavenly jerusalem, Heb. xii. 22. Both St. John and St. Paul call it a
city, and jerusalem; and both say, that though it be now in heaven, it shall
hereafter come down from heaven. Vol. ibid. Page 194, 195.


Especially, when the promise of our Savior to those who finally overcome is,
that they shall reign with him on earth.

But be the place of the abode of good men, after the resurrection, where it
will, whether on this earth made new, or any other globe in heaven, that is one
of the essential characteristicks of it, No curse shall be there.

We may then form some clear and just idea of the future state of good men, by
comparing it with the present, and leaving out, in the comparison, all the
inconveniences and evils, the curse has subjected it to.

Our life on earth, in consequence of the curse, is a continual labor; the
business of it, in great part, a sore travel which God has given the sons of
men to be exercised with. We must toil at our several occupations for the
support of our selves, and those who have their dependence on us; for that is
the appointment of heaven, in the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread, till
thou return to the ground. But, in the resurrection-world, good men shall be
eternally freed from these cares and labors. The constitution of things there
is such, as that they will no more have occasion for food, or raiment, or
habitations. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall
the sun light on them, or any heat, or cold, or storm; for these, and all such
occasions of anxious thoughtfulness, and toilsome care, are removed away.

Our bodies, since the lapse, and the curse in consequence of it, are liable to
weakness and weariness, to diseases and pains, to accidents and harms; and, at
length, must, in one way or another, be destroyed by death. But, in the
resurrection world, there is neither sorrow nor pain: Neither shall there be
any more death. Our corruption shall put on incorruption, our mortal shall put
on immortality, and death be swallowed up of life.

The earth we now live upon is, by the curse, become a place of discipline and
trial; giving frequent opportunity for the excitement and exercise of patience,
self-denial, silence and submission to the sovereign pleasure of God. But good
men, in the resurrection world, shall be no more subjected to any trials of
this kind. Their warfare is accomplished, their time of discipline is over; and
they are now in a world which is so formed, as to give no more occasion for
ever for any inconvenience, for any suffering, in any kind or degree, to try
their faith and patience.

The earth, by the curse, has been furnished with materials to produce those
events, which are fitted to alarm our fears, and awaken us to call on God; or,
if we are obdurate and incorrigible, to punish us with sudden and awful
destruction. But good men, in the resurrection-world, are no more in danger of
forgetting God, or neglecting to pay him the homage that is his due. They cease
not day, nor night, ascribing blessing, and glory, and honor, to him that
sits on the throne, and to the lamb. They are therefore placed in a world,
where they shall no more be broken with storms, nor persecuted with tempests;
where they shall no more be afraid for the terror by day, or the arrow that
flies by night; for the pestilence that walks in darkness, or destruction
that wastes at noonday. God's voice now shakes the earth, and the people
tremble; but they are then in a kingdom that cannot be moved; for its founder
is the Lord; and he dwells in the midst of it as its King and God.

In a word, good men, in the resurrection-world, shall neither feel nor fear
evil any more. Death shall be turned into life, pain into pleasure; and,
instead of those calamitous events which now occasion fear and distress, they
shall uninterruptedly rejoice in the tokens of the divine savor; for the lamb,
who is in the midst of the throne, shall lead them to fountains of living
waters, and eternally wipe away all tears from their eyes.

There are other discriptions, in the sacred writings, of the
resurrection-world; such as given us an idea of its fitness to make good men
positively and perfectly happy: -- But my text considers this world only in the
view I have given of it, as having no Curse; the meaning of which, so far as we
are capable of taking in a full idea of it, I have endeavored to explain to
you.

And the reflections, naturally deduceable from what has been said, are these
that follow.

1. We may herefrom learn to think justly of the heinous guilt of the first
sin, the sin of the first parents of men, in eating of the forbidden tree. For
it was this that bro't down a curse from God, that changed the earth from the
state in which it was created, to that which has fitted it to be an occasion of
much trial and sorrow to the sons of men ever since. Abstracted from those
inconveniences and sufferings, which are owing to the personal vices of
mankind, there are others, and many too, that are unavoidable from the present
constitution of nature. Toil, sickness, and death, in a variety of forms, we
are all subjected to, be our personal character what it will. And these evils
are a standing demonstration of the great guilt of the first transgression; for
they took rise from it, and are the effect of the curse of God for it. And it
might be an instance, not only of justice, but of wisdom and goodness in God,
thus to testify against this sin; for the evil effects occasioned by it may
reasonably be looked upon as so many moral admonitions, in the government of
providence, powerfully fitted to teach mankind the necessity of an obediential
regard to the authority of him, who is our Lawgiver, King and Judge.

2. We should learn, from what has been said, a fear of sinning after the
similitude of Adam's transgression, lest the heavens and earth, being furnished
with materials therefore, should conspire, in one way or another, under the
agency of a provoked Deity, to make us know and feel how evil and bitter a
thing it is to sin against the Lord. It was principally with a view to serve
the ends of moral Government, that material nature was so changed by the curse,
as to be made capable of bringing on those events, that might warn, distress,
and destroy the inhabitants of the world: And to serve these ends, that is, to
restrain mankind from wickedness, or, when they are grown wicked, to correct
them for it, the alwise Governor of the universe will make use of these
provisions in nature in a way of judgment. Thus he has done all along from the
beginning of the world. Which of those calamitous evils, nature is endowed with
a power, under the divine direction, to bring upon sinful nations, and
provinces, and cities, have not in fact been bro't upon them? How have they, in
all ages, and in all places, been sorely affrightened, distressed, and, in a
less or greater degree, destroyed, by the sword, by the pestilence, by
tempests, by fires, by inundations, and the like? And what awful desolations
has that terrible evil, in particular, the earthquake, made in the earth? It
has, at one time and another, in this part of the world or that, fearfully
destroyed cities, and towns, and villages; shaking down their houses, and
burying the inhabitants in their ruins; or opening such wide chasms in the
ground as have swallowed them up in one fatal minute? Hundreds and thousands
have, in this way, been suddenly and surprizingly buried in one common grave,
at one and the same time! And if the inhabitants of the world, instead of
learning righteousness by these judgments of God, grow forgetful of him, and
senseless of their obligations to him, taking no care to pay him that fear, and
worship, and obedience, which are his due, there is no reason to think, but he
will employ those natural causes he has armed with power for this purpose, to
chastise them, and, if they obstinately persist in their wicked ways, to
destroy them.

Would we, the inhabitants of this Town, and Land, know our deserts, and learn
what we may expect, if we continue in our sins, and will not forsake them, let
us, in our serious contemplations, go to Cadiz, In consequence of the
earthquake at Cadiz, there came on an inundation of the sea, which swept away,
in a few minutes, an awful number of souls; and it must have overwhelmed the
whole city, had not the rising and rolling waves been happily stopped, in their
progress, by the strong and high walls with which the city was encompassed
and Seville, In Seville, besides the loss of many lives by the falling of the
houses, either wholly, or in part, other damage was done to the amount of some
millions of dollars.
and St. Ubes, It is said, that St. Ubes was sunk down so as to be entirely
covered with water; the consequence of which must have been the destruction of
its inhabitants, who are reckoned to be about 3000. Several towns and villages,
both in Portugal and Spain, are likewise said to have been swallowed up by
opening chasms in the earth.
and Lisbon, and see what God has done to those places, for the wickedness of
his people. This tremendous dealing of God, especially with the great, rich,
and populous city of Lisbon This great city was entirely ruined in one fatal
minute. Though it contained, at the lowest computation, thirty thousand houses,
besides the King's palace, many large churches, and other public buildings, yet
they were all, in a manner, thrown down, and hundreds and thousands of men,
women, and children, of all ranks and conditions, buried together in one common
grave. And the treasure also that was lost, by this amazing occurrence, is
beyond all account; especially as it occasioned the houses to take fire, and
burn with violence that carried all before it. The merchants in London have
suffered greatly by the sufferings of Lisbon; and the same may be said of other
merchants in most of the trading cities all over Europe: Nay, there are numbers
of merchants in Boston, and other places in America, who are partakers in the
loss that has been sustained by this awful catastrophe. This minds me of those
observable words in the 18th Chapter of the book of the Revelation, And the
merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man buyeth her
merchandise any more, the merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones,
and wine, and oil. -- All things which were dainty and good are departed from
her. The merchants of those things which were made rich by her, shall stand
afar off for fear of her torment, weeping, and wailing, and saying, alas, alas,
that GREAT CITY, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and
decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls, for IN ONE HOUR so great
riches is come to naught. And every ship-master, and all the company in ships,
and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off, and cried, when they
SAW THE SMOKE OF HER BURNING, saying, what city is like unto this great city?
And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping, and wailing, and saving,
Alas, alas, that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the
sea, by reason of her costliness: For IN ONE HOUR SHE IS MADE DESOLATE.

I will will not affirm, that the awful desolation, brought on the city of
Lisbon, is the judgment directly intended in this prophetic passage of
scripture; and that it has hereby been fulfilled according to its real meaning:
But thus much I will venture to say, that there is a surprising analogy between
what has come, in the governing providence of God, upon this famous city, and
what is foretold in this prophesy; for its desolation was accomplished IN ONE
HOUR; it was followed with a BURNING, the SMOKE WHEREOF was SEEN by the
companies of eight hundred sail of vessels, then lying in its spacious harbor;
and its consequences extend to, and cause a wailing among, many of the
merchants all over the trading world, together with shipmasters, and sailors,
who have lost their effects, and may no more make themselves rich with the
merchandise of this city, which has been so dreadfully laid waste.


, may be a more immediate warning to the nation of which it is a part, and to
the nations round about, calling upon them to give glory to the supreme
Governor of the world, by repenting of their sins: But it may reasonably be
looked upon as a call to us also; and the rather, as we were visited in the
same month, by a like shaking of the earth, and to a more terrible degree than
was ever known in the country before. Surely, the voice of providence loudly
bespeaks us, in the language of our Savior to the men of Jerusalem, upon
occasion of the destruction of a number of them, by the falling of the tower of
Siloam, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. What reason have we to
expect any other? Don't we deserve a like destruction? We are certainly a very
sinful people. Our iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespasses
have reached unto the heavens. And how soon they may pull down the divine
vengeance upon us, we know not. God has other judgments besides that of an
earthquake. And if he should not destroy us in this way, he may in some other.
And how far he may make use of our French neighbors, and the Indian-natives in
their interest, to impoverish, weaken, and gradually depopulate us, is more
than we can any of us say at present. The face of our affairs, in military
respects, looks dark. What a vast sum of national money has been worse than
thrown away upon the southern expedition, as it has turned out a fruitless one?
Nor is this the worst of that unhappy enterprise. The horrible slaughter of
British troops, near the Monongehala, and the shameful defeat occasioned
thereby, has exposed the southern colonies to more and greater barbarities,
within a few months, than from their first settlement to this day. -- And what
have we, in New England, got by our Crown-point-expedition? Our troops, it is
owned, have gained, under the blessing of heaven, a glorious victory over a
numerous army of French and Indians, near Lake-George. But then, it must be
added, this victory was far less glorious than it would have been, humanly
speaking, if it had been wisely and resolutely pursued. Why it was not, is
matter of just wonder! Especially to those who have heard, that the private
soldiers would gladly have pursued, but were restrained. And it must be added
yet further, there would have been no opportunity for gaining even this less
glorious victory, had it not been for that overruling providence of God, which
brings things to pass beyond the design of man. It was not by our counsel, but
by the enemy's thrusting themselves in our way, that this battle was fought;
and had it not been for their officiousness in coming to us, it now appears
that our army would have been disbanded without doing any thing worth
mentioning. It Is certain, notwithstanding the advantage gained against them, our
troops were never carried one step further toward Fort-Frederick; and it is as
certain, that the true design of the New-England-Governments, in raising, and
sending, and subsisting so great an armament, was thereby entirely defeated:
And the defeat is followed with a burden of charge very grievous to bear; and
the more so, as we are in far worse circumstances, with respect to the taking
of this place, than before we were involved in this heavy charge, which now
lies upon us as a dead weight we groan to be delivered from. What future
expeditions may be projected, or how they will be managed, must be left to time
to discover: But it is, at present, manifest, that we are under the scourge of
God, and loudly called upon to consider our ways, and repent, and reform: And
till we are bro't to this, we lie continually exposed, not only to this rod of
his anger, but to all the judgments this Earth is capable of being used as the
secondary cause, under God, of bringing upon us. The plain truth is, there is
no safety, no security for us, whether as particular persons, or a people, on
this earth, which, by the curse, is stored, in all places, with materials for
correction, or destruction, as God pleases, but by making him our friend through
Jesus Christ; which cannot be done but by putting away our iniquities, or in
other words, by getting that moral change introduced in us, which will render
us meet objects of the divine fafavor: And we should make haste, and delay not,
in so interesting and important a matter.

3. What has been discoursed opens to our view the folly of those who depend on
this world for happiness. Thus it is with a great many. This world is the chief
object of their desire, and pursuit. It engrosses their affections, and engages
all their endeavors. They look for happiness from earthly good things;
imagining they might sit down contented and satisfied, could they once come to
the obtainment of them. But they are herein chargeable with great folly. For
the world we live in is not, in its present state, fitted to be a place of
happiness; and this we know, or easily may know, from observation and
experience in thousands of instances. Who indeed, among the multitudes, that
have searched for happiness among the things under the sun, have ever found it?
Not a single man! No one, perhaps, that ever lived was better qualified, or
situated, for such a search than Solomon, the son of David, and King over
Israel; and yet, after all his searches and researches, and this among all the
objects of earthly pleasure and delight, that is his conclusion, Behold, all is
vanity, and vexation of spirit, and there is no profit under the sun, Eccles.
2. 11. And we may depend, it is a just determination upon the case. Most men
indeed are disposed to imagine otherwise. Instead of trusting to Solomon's
experience, they are for making trial themselves; hoping that they shall meet
with happiness, though he failed in the attempt. And how often, from this vain
expectation, have the same experiments been repeated over and over again, in
proportion to men's advantages and opportunities? And what has been the effect?
They have always ended in emptiness and disappointment. And how could it
possibly have been otherwise, when the earth they live upon is under a Curse
from heaven, which has fitted it to be an occasion of toil and sorrow, in
numberless cases? The short of the matter is, God never intended that this
world, since the lapse, should be capable of yielding pleasure without pain,
good without the mixture of evil. The present constitution of nature is
incompatible with unmingled happiness; and if any look for the enjoyment of
such happiness, they do but deceive thamselves: they imagine a vain thing; and
will surely meet with disappointment. The present heaven and earth must pass
away, and a new heaven and earth rise up in their room, before any son or
daughter of Adam can possess life without passing through a multiplied variety
of inconveniences, disappointments, vexations, and sorrows, all trying to
their patience, and not to be endured without greatly alloying their comforts
in other respects.

And it is best it should be thus. Instead of complaining against God for mixing
so many grievances with every state of life we can be in, we have reason rather
to thank him for his wise goodness. For hereby the temptations that may arise
from worldly good things are lessened in their strength, and our danger of
being ruined by being too much attached to them, in the same proportion,
prevented. We are, in this present state, under discipline, in a school, as it
were, to be trained up for another and better world: And it is for our real
benefit, that this earth, and the things of it, are no more tempting to us. We
should say within ourselves, were that the case, it is good to be always here;
and the hazard would be awfully great, lest our ruin would thereby be procured.

4. We are directed, from what has been said, where to look for happiness, if
we would not be disappointed, namely, in the resurrection-world; in which there
are none of those occasions of fear and distress, which now disturb our grief,
and try our patience. Blessed be God, such a world as this is opened to our
view in the Gospel, through Jesus Christ; a world of freedom from toil and
sorrow; a world in which there is neither sin, nor pain, nor death; a world in
which there shall be no more any sighing or tears, but unmixed joys ever
flowing from the right hand of God. Let us then give up all hope of happiness
from this earth, or any thing in it; extending our views beyond the grave to
the resurrection-world, as the only one that is suited to yield us entire
satisfaction and delight. This is what we must come to first or last, if we
would not be frustrated in our expectations. For solid and complete happiness
is to be had no where else. We may imagine otherwise, and seek for it in this
or the other earthly enjoyment; but we shall certainly meet with
disappointment. They will all say, upon trial, it is not in us: Neither is it
to be found any where but in that world, concerning which my text says, there
is no Curse there.

What therefore remains, as the conclusion of all, but that we so live in this
present state, as that we may (...) fail of being happy in that which is to
come. In order whereto, we must moderate our regard to earthly things, and keep
our desires, hopes, and pursuits, with reference to them, under the restraints
of reason and religion. If we seek the Things that are on the earth, it must be
in due subordination to the greater Things that are above. The better country,
even the heavenly, should be principally in our eye; and the good things of it
should have the first place in our hearts. We should make them the chief
objects of our hopes and pursuits. And as there is no way in which we can be
secure of an interest in them, but by doing the will of God, his will which
requires faith in Jesus Christ; his will which requires our sanctification in
spirit, soul, and body; his will which requires our active obedience to the
precepts of his word, and a patient submission to the disposals of his hand: I
say, as the only way to obtain the blessedness of the resurrection-world is by
thus doing the will of God, this must be the great business of our lives. And
if we frame our hearts, and order our conversation, by this rule of duty, we
shall not fail of complete satisfaction, perfect happiness, in the end.

We may, while in this world, have our evil things. They are, indeed,
unavoidable attendants on us here. There is no living in a world, constituted
as this is, without sufferings of one kind or another, in a less or greater
degree. The greatest holiness we can attain to will not secure us from them: Nay,
as we live in a world that lies in wickedness, we may be sufferers, even, by
those tremendous judgments of God, that are sent upon the earth, in testimony
of his just displeasure against the sins that are committed in it. But we have
no reason for disquietude, be the evils, ordinary or extraordinary, what they
will, we are called to suffer. For our hope is not here, but within the vail,
whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus our high priest; which
hope should be as the anchor of our souls, to keep us steady amidst all the
storms of fear and trouble we may be exposed to in this tempestuous world. The
utmost that present evils can do, be the terror they are accompanied with what
it will, is to kill our bodies, and send our souls into another state. And why
should we be anxiously concerned about this? Is not this other state the great
object of our faith, and hope, and desire? Can we be happy till we arrive at
the Jerusalem that is above, this city that has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God?

Let us, my brethren, make religion the grand care of our lives, and we need
not distress ourselves about any of the events of time; for they shall all work
together for our good; and though not joyous for the present, but grievous, they
shall in the end, yield unto us the peaceable fruits of righteousness. For it
is a Gospel saying, and a faithful one, if we suffer with Christ here, we shall
reign with him hereafter. The trial of our faith and patience, being like that
of gold which is tried in the fire, shall be found to praise, and honor, and
glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ; for we shall then receive the crown of
life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him: And this crown will
be bright and weighty, in proportion to the sorrows and sufferings we have been
called to, and have born with humility, meekness, silence, and submission to
the alwise righteous Governor of the universe.

Let us comfort ourselves, and one another, with these blessed hopes, that are
opened to our view in the revelations of God by Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
in the Church, throughout all ages.

AMEN.

