A NARRATIVE OF THE Sufferings and surprising Deliverances OF William and
Elizabeth Fleming, Who were taken Captive by Capt. Jacob, Commander of the
Indians, who lately made the Incursions on the Frontiers of PENNSYLVANIA, as
related by themselves.

Psalm iii. 4. I cried unto the LORD, and he heard me. A NARRATIVE necessary to
be read by all who are going in the Expedition, as well as every BRITISH
Subject. Wherein it fully appears, that the Barbarities of the Indians is owing
to the French, and chiefly their Priests.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND,

Printed and Sold by Green and Russell, at their Printing-Office near the
Custom-House, and next to the Writing-School in Queen Street. 1756.

A Narrative, etc.
WILLIAM FLEMING, (who was taken about the first of November last) after giving
a small Account of the Escape of one BURNS, who was taken by the Indians, goes
on:
I Was in the Neighborhood where Burns had been taken Prisoner by the Delaware
Indians some Time before Fleming, and was carried to their Wigwams, but being
one Day sent to a Spring for Water, with an Indian Guard, in returning, he
stopped under Pretense of tying his Mockasheens which were loose. All the
Indians who was his Guard, got out of Sight; when he immediately mounted a
horse nigh at Hand, and rode full Speed to the inhabited Parts of the Province.
Burns gave the above Relation, 7 Miles from my own Home, and though many who
heard him, treated it as only the groundless Surmises of the Timorous, having
too favorable an Opinion of the friendly Attachment of these Indians to this
Province; yet I was determined however not to be too Foolhardy, but hasten
home, and remove my Wife and Effects to a neighboring Fort. But, alas! by the
Time I had got within two Miles of my House, two Indians started from behind
the Root of a Tree, close by the Way Side, and had hold of my Horse's Bridle by
the Time I well saw them. They commanded me to alight, very complaisantly shook
Hands, and told me (for they could speak good English) I must go with them: But
oh! what Tongue can utter the Horror and Confusion which in an Instant
overwhelmed me, on finding myself in the very Hands of those I was flying to
avoid: I stood trembling and Speechless for some Time, which my Enemies, savage
as they were, took Notice of, and endeavored to encourage me, by clapping me
several Times on the Shoulder, and bidding me not be afraid, for as I looked
young and lusty, they would not hurt me, provided I was willing to go with
them, and promise to stand by them, in Case they should be attacked by the
English in our future Proceedings: One of them who was pretty well dressed,
told me his Name was Captain JACOB, and that he was Captain over the Indians in
that Expedition, being 50 in all: He said he knew I could be of Service in
leading him to those Houses that were most defenseless; and added, that if I
proved faithful, he would use me well, and said, that though he was Captain over
the aforesaid Indians, yet he had only one with him, and they were afraid to
venture on Houses that had many Inhabitants, and that he would spare my Life on
Condition I would help.

Upon these fair Promises I began to recover my Senses, and finding I must
either act the Part he had assigned me, or submit to the most cruel Torture, I
concluded it most expedient to do the Former, remembering the saying in Job, All
that a Man has will he give for his Life: But when I reflected on the Part I
had undertaken to act, when I considered the dreadful Consequences of my
Informations, I was grieved beyond Measure, and led the Way more like a
condemned Criminal to meet his Fate, than one that had a Promise of Life and
Happiness: Besides the Thoughts of leaving my poor dear Wife for ever, without
being able to inform her of my Fate, or her own Danger, almost distracted me.
My Master perceiving me dejected, and somewhat backward in my Intelligence,
concluded I should be more Trouble than Advantage to him, and began not only to
alter his Conduct, but gave me to understand that I was no longer at my own
Disposal: This obliged me, though with Reluctance, to confess, I had a Wife not
many Miles off, and that all my Concern was for her; upon which he told me he
was glad to hear that, for they wanted a Woman to make Bread for them, and
therefore insisted on my leading them to my House: Though indeed from some Part
of their former Treatment, I had no Reason to expect any Arguments to induce me
to a Compliance, in whatever they thought proper to demand, yet whatever might
be the real Motive, they used several on this Occasion; one of which was, that
it would be better to have her along with myself, than suffer her to stay where
she was, as there was great Danger of some other Indians coming that Way, which
if they did, she need expect no Mercy at their Hands; for he, Captain Jacob,
had ordered his Indians to spare none but young Men and young Women. This
Information quite revived me, and I was even glad of the Privilege of leading
them that Way: I knew we had to pass by one Hicks's, who had a numerous Family
of able young Men, and was in great Hopes of being rescued by them: But when we
came within Sight of the House, they did not advance toward it as I expected,
but passed by at a Distance, and then stopped to consider what was most proper
to be done. Whilst we tarried here, it unfortunately happened that two of
Hicks's Sons came out from Dinner, in order to work at an adjacent new
Settlement: The Indians on seeing them ran behind Trees, and ordered me to do
the same between them: I complied, but was in hopes these Two would be followed
out by some more of the Family, which might afford me an Opportunity of Escape;
but my Hopes were soon frustrated, for they having no Suspicion of Danger,
advanced carelessly on till the foremost came opposite to the Indian that stood
nearest to me, who immediately sprung out and seized and pinioned the unhappy
Victim. He screamed in a most piteous Manner for Help, but alas! there was none
to be found. His Brother fled back to the House with the utmost Precipitation,
whence not one would venture out. For my Part I was not in a Condition to
afford the least Relief, not being allowed to carry even a Stick about me. They
then hurried us away toward my House with the utmost Speed, fearing their new
Captive might be released by his Relations.

The unhappy Youth not being accustomed to such Treatment as he now met with;
and not being apprized of the bad Consequences that might attend the least
Resistance, discovered great uneasiness, and could not be prevailed upon to
keep silent: Had not the Indians been acquainted with the English Tongue, I
should have thought it my Duty to admonish him to a Compliance with their
capricious Humors, till Providence might favor us with an Opportunity of
Escape: But as I could advance nothing to mitigate his Grief but what might
tend to betray my Intentions, and convince my Enemies that I was not so taken
with my present way of Life, nor so much attached to their Interest as they
imagined, I was obliged to be entirely silent, and leave him to their
Management.

Though they spoke all their Secrets in their own Language, I could plainly
perceive Resentment kindle in their very Looks, which made me shudder and
tremble for his Fate: But why do I say his, seeing my Life was as much at the
Disposal of these merciless Wretches as his, and I had no Reason to expect but
that when they began, we should equally fall a Sacrifice to their cruel
Resentment: All the Advantages I had to boast of superior to him were, that I
had been longer in their Service, and had the Policy to counterfeit a cheerful
Behavior, whilst he continued obstinate to the last Degree; but whether they
would condescend to take these Things into Consideration, I was at a Loss to
determine.

We had now got within a Mile of my House, when my poor Wife should have
employed all my Thoughts, had they not been diverted by my own melancholy
Situation: For being now in the midst of a considerable Thicket, our Masters
came to another consultation concerning their future Proceedings. Which being
done, one of them being placed near a Tree, ordered me to advance toward him,
which I did, with my usual Submission, not in the least suspecting his Design:
But if I had, the least seeming Reluctance might have proved my Ruin. He then
placed himself on the opposite Side of the Tree, ordered me to sit down with my
Back to the Tree, and after pulling my Arms backwards round it, tied them with
a Deer's Sinew, then put on Leather Muffs on my Hands, to keep me from using my
Fingers, and then tied them likewise together. I had the Mortification to find
my Timerity only excited Ridicule and Laughter in my cruel Persecutors, who
made Sport of my Miseries and mocked at my Fears.

Being so intent upon my own Preservation, it may easily be imagined I could
not be very attentive to the Fate of my unhappy Companion: I saw him however
seized by the Indian who was with Capt. Jacob, whose Name was Jim, who with
remorseless Cruelty gave him a Blow with the Back of his Tomahawk which stunned
him; but before he fell, another was repeated in the same Manner, which brought
him to the Ground, where he lay some Minutes motionless: The inhuman Wretch
stood over him, in order to discover if any Signs of Life remained, and upon
finding him stir, and put up his Hand to his Face to wipe off the Blood which
quite blinded him, took up the same Tomahawk that had brought him thus near his
End, and with one fatal Blow sunk it in his Skull. This tragical Scene renewed
their Sport, they affecting to imitate his expiring Agonies: There remained
nothing now to complete their inhuman Barbarity but to scalp him which was done
almost in an Instant. It is impossible to describe my Horror on seeing this:
Death attended with its most frightful Terrors stared me in the Face, and I
even wished I had been so happy as to have been first out of Pain, and not
lived to see what I undoubtedly thought next Moment would be my own Fate thus
barbarously acted in that of my Companion. The cruel Monsters all over besmared
with his Blood advanced toward me, and told me with an Air of Insult, nothing
out my good Behavior for the future, should save me from the same Treatment;
and so untied my Hands, which were so benumbed that I hardly ever expected to be
able to use them.

We now advanced again toward my House, and in a little Time came within Sight
of it! But alas! with what Regret did I introduce my Guests to my poor Wife:
She, poor Thing, upon seeing them, had like to have fallen into Fits. I gave
her all the Consolation I was able, though Horror and Despair was visible in my
very Looks: I told her, Cries and Tears would now avail nothing, and she could
not better recommend herself to our Master's Favor, than by being cheerful,
and ready to obey. Whilst I was thus employed the Indians were busied in
ransacking the House from Top to Bottom, of every Thing they thought worth
taking, and after they had made up a Sack of Meal for me, and a Bundle of
Clothes for my Wife to carry, commanded us to depart. Here our Grief was again
renewed on leaving our House, Stock, Grain, and in short our All, behind us,
without being able to depute any one to take Care of them in our Absence, or
the most distant Prospect of ever returning to them. These Reflections however
just, availed us Nothing, for before we left Sight of the House, the Captain
ordered Jim, to return and set Fire to it, which he did so effectually, that in
a few Minutes the whole was in a Blaze. As complaining of this Hardship to our
cruel Persecutors would have no more effect than speaking to the Wind, we
addressed ourselves to the ALMIGHTY for his Protection, with a becoming
Refignation to whatever might be our Fate; when we set off from my House it was
about 3 o'Clock in the Afternoon, we directed our Course right back in the
Woods about Half a Mile, they bid us put down our Luggage, and the Captain
ordered Jim and me to go and hunt Horses to carry my Wife and the Luggage,
which we accordingly did, but not getting any, we went to the aforesaid Hickss,
and in going down the Lane toward the House Jim took hold of me by the
Shoulder, and in approaching the House always kept me between him and it,
thinking they would not shoot at me, and if they did, I should screne him from
the Shot; when we came up to the Door of the House, which was open, he quitted
me, and jumped into the House, with his Tomahawk in one Hand and Gun in the
other, but found the People all gone, for on the Alarm aforesaid, the whole of
the Family, seven in Number, had deserted the House, and were making toward a
Fort, but, unhappily for them, fell in with another Party of said Indians, who
murdered two of them, and took the rest Prisoners [as I afterward was informed
by the Inhabitants of Conecochieg.] When he found that the House was deserted,
he rumaged up such Things as pleased him best, and carried 'em to some Distance
where he laid them down, then he set Fire to the House, and ordered me to
gather up all things that were of Use to the Owners and put them therein, and
at the same Time bid me set Fire to the Barn, in which was a large Quantity of
Grain, and likewise to several Barracks of Grain and Fodder, that stood by it,
which I seemed heartily to comply with, but purposely avoided firing the Barn
and Grain by employing myself in gathering up the first-mentioned, and burning
them. When all Things were thrown in the Fire that was near the House, we went
to make up our Bundles in order to make off, but Jim by looking about him,
discovered that the Barn, etc. were not fired according to his Orders; he asked
me what was the Reason I had not done it? I excused myself by telling him I was
fully employed in burning the other Things: he then hastily ran and took a
Brand of Fire, and quickly set them all in Flames. We then made the best of our
Way with the Plunder to the Place where we had left Capt. Jacob and my Wife,
found their Bundles, but they gone; while I was conjecturing the Reason, Jim
gave a Whistle, and the Capt. answered (who had moved himself to some Distance,
for Security, lest I should by some Means or other kill Jim, and bring the
white People upon him.) When we discovered where they were, we ran to him, and
Jim related our Success, and told how well (as he said) I had behaved. Upon
which the Capt. gave me his Hand, and said, Well done Brother, you shall go to
(...) with us Tomorrow.

My Wife's Relation of what passed betwixt her and Capt. Jacob, after I and Jim
went to catch Horses, is as follows: She was very uneasy to be left alone with
Capt. Jacob, and wanted to go after us to help catch the Horses; but he would
not suffer it, saying, She was not able, and she must stay with him till we
returned, further adding, that she need not be afraid of him for he would not
hurt her; he then threw a Shirt of mine to her, and an old Petticoat, ordered
her to strip and put on the Shirt and Petticoat, which she complied with, and
while she was doing it, he turned his Back on her, and went to some distance
with the other Indian's Bundle, and plundered it of such Things as he liked.
When he returned he took the Cloths she pulled off and put them in his Bundle,
and bid her not to tell Jim what he had done; then they moved off to some
Distance, where we found them.

About Sun-down we pitched on a Place for our Lodging, and our next Business
was to get Wood and make a Fire, round which we sat without Distinction; which
to Persons in our Circumstances, may be esteemed a Mark of no small
Condescension.

My Wife being embold'ned by the Familiarity of our Masters asked them several
Questions touching their Reasons for using the English as they did, seeing they
had always treated the Indians (particularly the Delawares and Shawanese) with
the greatest Friendship: To this they answered, That when a Number of Indians
offered to join G -- l B -- k against the French, he did not use them well, and
had threatened to destroy all the Indians on the Continent, after they had
conquered the French, and they were informed by the French, the Pennsylvanians,
Marylanders and Virginians had laid the same Plot. She then asked, what they
intended to do with those they took Prisoners: To which the Captain answered,
That they had been ordered by the French to bring them all to the Ohio, when
you get there, you shall live well, and be given as Kindred to our Friends.
(Which I did not believe, as they told my Wife one Story, and me another; but
expected every Moment to be sacrisic'd by them; yet so far as I could learn,
the French were to allow them a certain Sum per Scalp and for Prisoners, if
they were young, and fit for Business; but the old People and Children they
killed and scalped, as well as such as were refractory and not willing to go
with them.) She then asked them if they did not think it a Sin to shed so much
innocent Blood? They answered, That the French were better off than the
English, for they had a great many old Men among them that could forgive all
their Sins, and these Men had often assured the Indians it was no Sin to
destroy Heretics, and all the English were such. They then told me not to be
afraid that they should abuse my Wife, for they would not do it for Fear of
affronting their God, (and pointed their Hands toward Heaven) for the Man that
affronts his God, will surely be killed when he goes out to War; this,
(continued they,) is what makes the English have such bad Luck.

They sat up eating Bread and Cheese, and dried Peaches, and smoking Tobacco,
(which they got at Hicks's,) having had no Tobacco, as they told us, for four
or five Days, and were in great Want of it. While they were thus employed, I
heard a Noise, which I could not tell the Reason of. The Indians observing my
listening, said, It is nothing but the Spirit of that Son of a Whore whom we
killed. My Wife then asked them if they were not afraid of his Spirit? They
answered, No! for they were frequently used to see them, not only of white
People, but of the Indian Nations they were at War with; but that Spirits could
not hurt them.

About Two Hours before Day our Masters being tired with Acts of Cruelty, began
to think of composing themselves to Rest. They first showed us where and how to
lie, then lay down themselves with their Guns under them, lest we might use
them to their Prejudice: Being thus disposed, it was not long before they fell
into a deep Sleep, which my Wife being watchful to observe, began to think on
making use of the Opportunity put into our Hands of making an Escape: She
communicated her Sentiments in Whispers to me, and it is reasonable to think, I
should readily concur in whatever might have a Prospect of accomplishing what I
so ardently desired: But as a Miscarriage in an Attempt of this Nature would
infallibly have proved our Ruin, common Prudence required we should act
cautiously, and be sure they were in reality in as deep a Slumber as they
pretended to be: To this end, we got up, and went to the Fire, under Pretense
of mending it, and warming ourselves, (and indeed we stood in need of it having
nothing to defend us from the Inclemency of the Weather, but a single Blanket.)
In all which we made so much Bustle and Noise, as we judged might awake Persons
in an ordinary Sleep: But finding they still snoared on, I took up a Tankard,
and told my Wife I would go toward a Spring, at which I had been frequently
before, and if after I had got there they still slept on, desired she might
follow: And added, that if they should awake e're we got off, our having the
Tankard might convince them we really wanted to quench our Thirst.

When we took leave of our cold Lodging, we had no Intention of separating: For
though we left the Fire at different Times we intended to meet at the Spring: But
after I had got there, and waited some Time, I at last saw her a coming, I
threw down my Tankard intending to hide myself on the other Side the Run in a
Thicket, till she came up; but in my Hurry, I ran against a Sappling which
stunned me, and I lay in this Condition some Time (during which I suppose my
Wife came to the Run and not finding me made the best of her Way off.) When I
recovered, I went on in the best Manner I could till Day began to dawn, when I
found myself within Sight of a House to my unspeakable Joy: When I advanced
near it I knew the Place, which however was quite abandoned by the Dwellers.

Having now a tolerable good Knowledge of my Situation I made directly to the
next inhabited Part of Conecochieg, when I got there, I was informed that a
Company of Three Hundred Men from Marsh-Creek were out in quest of the Enemy
under Colonel Hamilton, I joined myself as soon as I could with these,
intending to return with them and try to find out my Wife, with whose Condition
I was now more affected, being out of Danger myself.

We went on viewing the Devastation, till we came to Adam McConnel's
Plantation, where we met with a Party of Ten Men, who had separated from this
Company some Time before: These brought in a Woman who they said was found by
them at an Oven in great Distress; and whom, upon my nearer Approach, to my
unspeakable Surprise and Joy, I found to be my Wife.

After greeting each other in the most affectionate Manner, with Tears of Joy,
we returned Thanks to that indulgent Being who led us safe through the
Wilderness, and preserved us from the Jaws of Death. When she recovered her
Transports, we desired a Relation of her Adventures from the unhappy Moment she
and I parted; which she gave in Substance as follows:

An ACCOUNT of the surprising Deliverance of Elizabeth Fleming, (Wife of
William Fleming,) who was taken Captive by Capt. Jacob.
A Few Minutes after my Husband was gone from the Fire, finding the Indians
took no Notice of it, I concluded they were still asleep, and according to my
Promise followed him, but not finding him at the Spring, knew not which Course
to steer, which threw me into the utmost Confusion; yet I resolved to make my
Escape, and endeavored for that Purpose; but really I seemed in as bad a
Situation as ever. How dreadful was this Night to me, an unhappy Wanderer! With
what Floods of Tears did I pass the Time? No Friend to relieve me, no
Habitation in which to shelter myself from the Inclemency of the Weather: My
Husband gone I knew not where, and myself a wretched forlorn Wanderer, in
Danger every Moment of falling a Prey to savage Fury, or torn to Pieces by
ravenous wild Beasts. I either heard, or my frighted Imagination suggested, the
hideous Roaring of Wolves, Bears and Panthers, which terrified me almost to
Death: Yet I was not so lost and overwhelmed as to be incapable of Reflection;
I remembered there was a just, a merciful and an Almighty Power, who saw my
Miseries, and knew I had not brought it on myself by any Imprudence, unless
endeavoring to save my Life by Flight might be termed such.

However after I had wandered some Time, I came to a little Hill, which when I
had ascended, found myself still nearer my Enemies than I desired, for I could
plainly perceive the Fire blaze, by the Light of which I saw them lie in the
same Posture I left them. I made off with as much Precipitation as I could, and
continued wandering till Day, during which Time I fell over a dead Man, which I
concluded to be Hicks, and therefore directed my Course accordingly for our own
Corn-field, near the Remains of our House. The Joy however I conceived at this
was soon allayed by hearing two Indian Holo's, and the Report of five Guns.
Fancying myself now in the Jaws of Death, I made directly to some Heaps of
Fodder, and hid myself, and lay there some Time; when I left this I directed my
Course along a Path nine Miles to a Fort, but found it deserted, and every
Thing about it in the greatest Disorder; concluding there was little Shelter to
be had here, I ascended a Hill hard by, from the Top of which I imagined I
should be able to discover some Settlements, or at least some Road that might
lead that Way; but when I began to look about, I saw so many Houses in a Blaze
that I almost concluded the whole Province was in Flames. The Smoke flew so
thick that it darkened the very Air about me to that Degree, as to prevent me
from distinguishing any Thing at a Distance from the Fires. Let any one figure
to themselves the Melancholy of my Condition; no Husband to relieve me, or
eleviate my Grief! Yet how light, how trifling was all I now endured, to those
Hardships which soon after I was obliged to bear.

I soon after left the Hill, and was going I knew not where, when I came up to
a House almost consumed to Ashes, and saw near it several Cows newly killed, by
which I concluded the Enemy could not be far off; I ran to look for some Place
in which to secure myself from their Fury, but could find none: I perceived one
of the Cows these inhuman Butchers had shot was not quite dead, and as she lay
almost close to a Fence, strctched myself down behind her; but had not been
long in that Posture before I heard two Guns go off, by which I apprehended the
Enemy were advancing toward me, and consequently the Place in which I had now
taken Refuge, could not be very safe: So I crept to a Thicket, where I lay till
Half an Hour past Sun-down, when hearing all quiet round me, removed to an
Oven, belonging to Robert McConnel, and after some Difficulty got into it, and
rested about an Hour; but being terrified with frightful Thoughts, and not
being able to reconcile myself to it longer, left it, with an Intention to go
to the Top of another Hill. Before I got quite up, I happened unawares almost
on a Fire, by the Side of which lay two Indians, with white Match-coats: The
Sight almost frighted me to Death, but I had no other Shift than to run behind
a Tree, where I stood trembling for near Half an Hour. As I had no Notion of
being so near Ruin, I advanced carelessly on, and made so much Noise among the
Leaves and Shrubs as I then apprehended awaked these Bloodhounds, who
immediately started up, took up their Guns, then listened: I now resigned
myself to the Will of Providence, thinking my Miseries near at an End, but all
on a sudden they returned to their Fire making a loud Laugh; by this I found my
Glass was not yet run. This Conduct at first appeared truly surprising, for
though indeed I now stood behind a Tree, I was almost fure they had seen me.
Whilst I was thus conjecturing the Reason of the miraculous Preservation, I
heard two or three Hogs grunt and stir among the Leaves (which my Fright had
not suffered me before to observe) between whom and the Enemy I was behind a
Tree, I concluded that it had been the Noise made by them they had been awaked.
How wonderful, how mysterious, are the Ways of Heaven? By what unseen,
unguessed at Means are frequently the greatest Deliverances bro't about.

Being thus surprizingly saved, I tarried behind the Tree till I judged the
Enemy had got to sleep, and then made the best of my Way, blessing God for his
remarkable Deliverance, and wandered through the Woods till Daybreak.

When I got pretty clear, I perceived a large Mountain which I conjectured to
be that between the Great and Little-Cove, and by the Idea I then formed of the
Country and my own Situation, imagined going over it would be the nighest Way
to the inhabited Parts. As the Road was very bad, and the Mountain at a
considerable Distance, it cost me great Difficulty to reach it; and before I
got to the Top, found myself so feeble, and my Spirits so much sunk, that I was
unable to proceed any further: So I lay down, whilst a cold Sweat poured off
me, and I suffered all the Agonies of Mind, a Person in my Condition (being
with Child) could undergo. I continued thus for Half an Hour, when being a
little revived I reflected that I must either endeavor to move farther, or
inevitably perish: I attempted again to climb up, but my feet being all in
Blisters, and the Mountain so inaccessible, that before I had got a
Musket Shot up, found it necessary to rest again: And thus I continued resting
and crawling for about three Hours, till at length I attained the Summit; when
I found myself so much spent with Fatigue and want of Food, that I was obliged
to throw myself flat on my Face, and in that Posture lay for near an Hour. When
I raised myself up, I espied some Chestnut Husks, and was in hopes of finding
amongst them some Chestnuts; but found that Squirrels or other Vermin had
deprived me of that Satisfaction. I then looked around me in order to discover
some Place that was inhabited, but the Sky was so darkened with Smoke, that I
could only distinguish two Houses in Flames. It is impossible to defcribe the
Horror of my Condition in this Place, which was augmented by my not knowing
(even if I was able) which Side to turn to: Every Place I could lay my Eyes on,
seemed to be filled with Desolation and Ruin. A Train of melanchollic
Reflections rushed on my Mind: I was even weary of Life, and could have wished
my Being at an End: Yea I had nigh loaded the Day of my Birth with as many
Imprecations as Job: And asked, Why was I reserved for so much Misery? It would
indeed, have been utterly impossible for me to have (...) survived, weakened as
I was by hard Living, and the (...) Fatigue I underwent, had not that Almighty
(...), who when we think him farthest off, is often nearest to us with his Aid,
snatched my almost sinking Soul from the Miseries in which I had long been
plunged and graciously encouraged me to hope Deliverence in his own good Time.

Having thus given Vent to my Grief, by Tears and Reflection, I thought on
returning whence I came; which I did in the best Manner I could: But before I
had got two Miles, was overtaken by a Horse, who came after me full Speed, with
his Bridle Head and a Bell on, and seemed to be very much frighted: I used my
best Endeavors to stop and catch him, for I thought if I could once get on
Horseback, I should be able to make much greater Speed in my future searches:
But he soon made his Way from me, and as I was not in a Condition to follow
him, was obliged to drop all Thoughts of that Nature. Whilst I was thus
engaged, I was alarmed by an Indian Holo, by which I judged the Owner of the
Horse had fell a Prey to these Blood-thirsty Wretches, and consequently they
could not be far from me: I was now at my Wits-end to find a Place of Shelter,
being afraid even to look about me, lest I might see them at my Back: I hasted
on with my crawling Speed, till I came to a large Gum Tree, into which I crept,
though with much Difficulty: It was well however I got in at any Rate, for I
heard the Feet of two Indians, and saw them pass pretty near me; they were too
intent in Pursuit of the Horse to look much about, which if they had, I should
unavoidably have been discovered; but as Providence ordered it, I was safe,
judged it best to lie here a considerable Time, that so the Enemy might get a
good Way off. Whilst I lay here, I heard the Report of two Guns, which was
accompanied with a terrible Shriek. Every Moment of my Time now seemed
precious, and I thought so much of it as was spent in any one Place, save the
mere Necessity of saving myself from Danger, lost; so I got myself out, and
wandered better than a Mile through a great Thicket till I came to a small
Path, which I gladly pursued, but unfortunately went the wrong Way in it, which
I was not sensible of, till I had gone about a Mile and a Half, when I found
the Path end in the Woods. Now again I was put to a Nonplus, and burst into
Tears at my Disappointment.

To wander again in the Wilderness seemed certain Death, and to return the same
long Way I came afforded a Prospect little better; yet maimed as I was, I think
I could have cheerfully gone many Miles, if I had done it on my Knees, to have
met with my Husband, or any one in a Condition to relieve me: But I was now
forlorn in the Wilderness, and had no other Comfort than to sit down on the
cold Earth, indulge my usual melanchollic Reflections, and bathe my bleeding
Feet with my Tears. -- This being done, I tore off a few of the remaining Rags
(for the Bushes had nigh deprived me of most of them) that my merciless
Ravagers thought not worth taking from me, and with the Hem of my tottered
Petticoat (for Gown I had none) tied them round my Feet, and returned the same
Way, and continued my Course till I got to a Corn-field, where I found three
Ears of Corn: I saw several Stacks of Fodder, but was afraid to take up my
Lodging in them, lest when the Indians came that way they might set Fire to
them; for they seemed to make it a Rule from their first setting out to destroy
every Thing of Value they met with: So I took two or three Arm-fulls, carried
it to a good Distance, and laid it by a Fence, and so crept amongst it,
conjecturing they would not, if they saw it, think it worth their while to set
Fire to so small a Heap; and in this was my Lodging three Days and three Nights
nor daring to stir much out all that Time, as I repeatedly heard the Report of
Guns and Indian Holo's: But indeed, if I had not been prevented through Fear, I
was now so spent and fatigued, that I found it absolutely necessary to cease
rambling till I got recruited; though alas! I had but a poor Prospect of this,
for I was almost famished to Death, having had nothing to live upon but the
three Ears of Indian Corn aforesaid, and as I knew not when or where to get
more, was obliged as it were to count the Grains I eat.

On the Third Night of my being in this lonely Lodging, I heard a Cock crow and
a Dog bark, and next Morning made toward the Place I heard them at; but after
I had got the Length of the Field, saw three Trees which appeared to be newly
set on Fire: so I lay down about an Hour by the Fence, in which Time I heard 3
Guns go off about a Mile above me: However hearing no more Noise, I made
toward a House, which apeared on my nearer approach, to be a Stable, all the
Houses being burnt: This Place I found afterward belonged to one Donaldson: I
here found some Fowls, and attempted to catch one of them, but they were too
nimble for me; then I went into the Garden, where I made a very plentiful Meal
of green Keal and Parsley: I then went to the Spring, and drank about three
Pints of Water) not having seen any for several Days before) I then crept into
the Oven (which was left standing by the Savages) and slept pretty soundly till
Midnight, at which Time I awoke and hearing Cock crow, made to the Stable, and
caught one, and dressed it by some burning Logs of the Dwelling house. But alas
the very Smell of the Fowl so overcame me, that I was ready to faint several
Times ere it was ready; so I put it whole into my Handkerchief, and returned to
the Oven, where I slept till Day when I got out and went again in Search of
inhabited Houses. After I had got about Half a Mile, I heard a Man whistle,
which at first I took to be a white Man's Whistle, but upon listening more
attentive, had Reason to believe it an Indian Decoy; so I hasted back to my
Lodging, and had not been in it long before I heard the Noise of Horses, and
the Voices of several white Men, which made me look out, and seeing one pass by
at some Distance, I cried out to him for God's sake to pity my distressed
Condition, and take me under his Protection: The good Man being startled at my
sudden Appearance, and the strange Figure I cut (being entirely in Rags, and as
black as any Chimney-sweep) presented his Gun, and if it had not missed Fire,
he would certainly have deprived me of that wretched Life I had gone through so
many Difficulties to preserve; another of the Company perceiving it, cried out,
Hold, hold, she is a white Woman by her Voice. Soon after they all came up to
me, and I found them to be a Party of ten Men, separated from a Marsh Creek
Great Company of three Hundred. One of them (Mr. Dickey,) was so kind as to
take me up behind him on his Horse, and after tying me on with a Belt (for I
was so weak as not to be able to sit) took me about three Miles to his House,
where I got refreshed with warm Milk, and such Things as I was able to take,
and this Morning was brought to this Place; but what is my Astonishment and Joy
when here my Eyes are once more blessed with the Sight of my Husband! [ Surely,
they might well cry out with David, the devout Psalmist! I cried unto the LORD
with my Voice, and he heard me out of his holy Hill.]

FINIS.

