Mr. Ballantine's SERMON To a Military Company just before their March against
the Enemy.

The Importance of God 's Presence with an Army, going against the Enemy; and
the Grounds on which it may be expected. REPRESENTED IN A SERMON Preached at a
LECTURE in Westfield, ON Wednesday June 2, 1756. Just before Captain John
Mosely, and His Company, began their March toward Crown-Point.

By John Ballantine, M. A. Pastor of the Church of Christ in Westfield.

Made public at the Desire of the Hearers.

Be strong and courageous, be not afraid, nor dismayed, for the King of
Assyria, nor for all the Multitude that is with him: For there be more with us,
than with him.

HEZEKIAH. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, next to the Prison, in
Queen Street, 1756.

The Importance of God's Presence with an Army: And the Grounds on which it may
be hoped for.
EXODUS XXXIII. 14, 15. And he said, My Presence shall go with thee, and I will
give thee Rest.

And He said unto Him, If Thy Presence go not with we, carry us not up hence.


ISRAEL were upon their March to the promised Land; and notwithstanding the
wonderful Displays of divine Power, they had been Witnesses of, both in Egypt,
and in the Wilderness; and notwithstanding the Success of their important
Enterprise depended entirely on the Blessing of God; yet they fell into the Sin
of Idolatry, than which nothing could have been more hateful. God was justly
incensed against them, and testified his Displeasure by the Death of three
Thousand of them in one Day, as the foregoing Chapter informs us.

But though they were unmindful of their Duty to God, God was not unmindful of
his Promise. In the three first Verses of the Context, we have an Account of
his saying to Moses; Depart and go up hence, thou and the People, which thou
have brought up out of the Land of Egypt, unto the Land, which I swear unto
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, Unto thy Seed will I give it; and I
will send an Angel before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the
Amorite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite: unto a Land flowing
with Milk and Honey. --

Though God determined to give them the Land He had promised; yet He would bring
about the Event by the Interposition of an Angel, lest, if there should be any
extraordinary Tokens of His Presence, their Sins, being aggravated by the
Favor and Honor done them, should provoke Him to cut them off.

The People having humbled themselves for the Tokens of God's Displeasure;
putting off their Ornaments -- rising up and worshipping, every Man at his Tent
Door, when they saw the cloudy Pillar standing at the Tabernacle Door: And
Moses, having got near to God, even to His Seat, thus pleads with Him, 12 and
13 of the Context, Thou say unto me, bring up this People: and thou have not
let me know whom thou will send with me. Yet thou have said, I know thee by
Name, thou have also found Grace in my Sight. Now therefore, I pray thee, if I
have found Grace in thy Sight, show me now thy Way, that I may know thee, that
I may find Grace in thy Sight: and consider that this Nation is thy People.

God said, in Answer to this Request of Moses: My Presence shall go with thee,
and I will give thee Rest.

Then we have Moses's Reply to God: If thy Presence go not with me, carry us
not up hence. -- Which Expression of Moses shows, that he was sensible of the
vast Importance of having the Presence of God with them in their War against
the Canaanites. Oh, that every Commander of an Army, and all other Officers,
and all that belong to Armies; yea that all, were as sensible of the Importance
of the divine Presence, as Moses was, and did as earnestly seek it!

In speaking from the Words, I shall first endeavor to show what it is to have
the Presence of God with us, in the Sense of the Text.

2. Show the Importance of an Army's having the Presence of God with them, in
their Enterprises against their Enemies.

3. Show, when we may on good Grounds hope for the Presence of God with us, in
our Enterprises against our Enemies. Then make Application relative to the
Occasion of our present Meeting.

First, What is it to have the Presence of God with us, in the Sense of the
Text? And He said, My Presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee Rest.
And He said unto Him, If thy Presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.

1. We must not understand by the Phrase in the Text, that God is not
essentially present every where. He fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence.
There is no fleeing from His Presence. Let us be where we will, in what State
soever, or doing what we will, God is present. How could we exist; how could we
be; if God were not present to uphold us? Reason and Scripture teach us the
Omnipresence of God.

Nor,

2dly. Must we understand by the Phrase in the Text, God's being present with a
People to ruin and destroy them. As we read in the 5th Verse of the Context, I
will come up in the midst of thee in a Moment, and consume thee. When there are
extraordinary Displays of divine Power for the Ruin of a People, God may be
said to be present, as well as when there are extraordinary Displays of Power
for their Benefit. We read of Destruction from His Presence. --

But God's Presence going with His People is a Blessing, promised as such:
God's giving Rest is coupled with his Presence going with them. Moses prays,
that God would not carry them from thence, if He did not go with them. The
Presence of God for their Destruction would not have been desirable. That is
the most terrible Destruction, that is from the immediate Hand of God.

3dly. By God's Presence with us, in the Sense of the Text, is meant his
favorable assisting Presence. God's being present with a Person or People, in
any Affair they are engaged in, notes his Concurrence, Direction, and Blessing
in that Affair -- as has been already observed: God's Presence going with them
is promised as a Blessing; giving them Rest is coupled with it. -- It is
promised to Moses, because he had found Grace in God's Sight, 17th Verse of the
Context -- and Moses, in pleading with God, says in the 16th Verse. For wherein
shall it be known here, that I and thy People have found Grace in thy Sight? Is
it not that thou go with us? so shall we be separated, I and thy People,
from all the People that are upon the Face of the Earth.

Moses here seems to represent the Presence of God going with them, as a
Characteristick, or distinguishing Mark of God's People: indeed it is the most
demonstrative one to Pagan Nations.

Wishing God to be with a Person, or People, was a very usual Form of Blessing
among the Jews: It was the same, as wishing them well, wishing them Success,
and Prosperity. Thus Saul blessed David, when he had intimated his Mind to
attack Goliath. Go and the Lord be with you, i. e. succeed, and bless you, in
your Attempt. 1 Samuel 17.37. It was a frequent apostolic Benediction. 2 Thessalonians.
3.16. The Lord so with you all.

It was not uncommon to encourage to great Undertakings with this
Consideration, that God was with them. Thus God encourages Joshua to go against
Canaan, by telling him, He would be with him, therefore he might be of good
Courage, he should bring the Children of Israel there, Deuteronomy. 31.6, 7, 8, 23.
Josh. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Thus God incourages Gideon to go against the Midianites.
I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the Midianites as one Man. Judges
6.12.16. And thus the Priests were to encourage the People of the Jews, when
they were going to Battle. Deuteronomy. 20.1, 2, 3, 4. When thou go out to Battle
against thine Enemies, and see Horses and Chariots, and a People more than
thou, be not afraid of them, for the Lord thy God is with thee, which brought
thee up out of the Land of Egypt. And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto
the Battle, that the Priest shall approach and speak unto the People, and shall
say unto them; hear, O Israel, you approach this Day unto Battle against your
Enemies: let not your Heart faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye
terrified because of them. For the Lord your God is He that goes with you, to
fight for you against your Enemies.

And wherever we read of God's being with a Person or People, we read of their
Prosperity and Success. It is said of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 18.7. And the Lord was
with him, and he prosper'd whithersoever he went forth: and he rebelled against
(or shook off the Yoke of) the King of Assyria, and served him not. And smote
the Philistines even unto Gaza, and the Borders thereof, from the Tower of the
Watchmen to the fenced City. From these Things it is evident, that by the
Presence of God going with us in any important Enterprises, in the Sense of the
Text, is meant his Direction, Concurrence and Blessing. But according to the
proposed Method, I am,

Secondly, To represent the Importance of having the Presence of God with an
Army, in Enterprises against their Enemies.

Moses, sensible of the Importance of it, deprecates the want of it. If thy
Presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.

To have God with us, is the same as to have God for us; if God be for us, if
God is on our Side, we need not care who is against us. Let them be ever so
many or mighty, there is more with us, than with them. Thus Hezekiah incourages
his People against their Enemies, from the Confidence he had, that the Lord was
them, 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. Verses. Be strong and courageous, be not afraid for the
King of Assyria, nor for all the Multitude that is with him: for there be more
with us, than with him; with him is an Arm of Flesh, but with us is the Lord
our God to help us, and to fight our Battles. Though an Army be ever so
numerous and strong, their Power is limited, and finite, whereas God's Power is
unbounded and infinite. So that an Army, though small, that has the Presence of
God with them, is more formidable, and dreadful than the hugest Host, that ever
was raised, that has not the Presence of God with them. God is the Lord of all
the Hosts in Heaven and Earth. He has all Things at his Command. Our most
avowed Enemies can do nothing against us, but what God permits, and allows
them; and we have no Reason to fear, if God's Presence is with us, that He will
permit them to do much against us; but rather have Reason to hope that He will
be against our Enemies, an Adversary to our Adversaries; that our Affairs will
be under the best Direction; that there will be a Concurrence of favorable
Circumstances on our Behalf.

God's Presence with an Army going against their Enemies will be a Remedy
against Fear. We are not made without Fear: and the confused Noise of the
Warrior, and Garments rolled in Blood, will be apt to excite Fear. Fear, as it
were, binds Men's Hands, is a Bar to noble, and heroic Actions. But a
Persuasion, that God is with them, is a good Antidote against Fear. God often
uses this Argument to conquer the Fear of his People, in Cases of Difficulty
and Danger, Thus He did with Joshua. Deuteronomy. 31.6.8. Josh. 1.9.

The King of Syria sent an Army large enough to compass a City, only to seize
the Prophet Elisha: his Servant, when he saw it, feared, and was ready to think
it was a gone Case. Elisha told him not to fear, for they that be with us, are
more than they that be with them. He prayed that God would open his Eyes, and
when his Eyes were opened, his Fears vanished. Elisha, by the Help of God, took
that whole Army Captive, and led them into Samaria. 2 Kings 6.14 -- 20.

If we knew we had greater Strength, greater Wisdom, greater Advantages on all
Accounts than our Enemies, would not Fear be unreasonable: if an Hundred Men
were going against one Man, would not their fearing be an Argument of a base
low Spirit. One Man's Strength and Wisdom bears some Proportion to the Power
and Wisdom of an Hundred; but the Power, and Policy of the greatest Army bears
no Proportion to the Power and Wisdom of God, which is infinite. If God
therefore be with us, we need not fear. David, in an Address to God, says,
Psalm. 23. Though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death (which a hot
Engagement has some Resemblance of) I will fear no Evil, for thou art with me,
thy Rod and thy Staff shall comfort me.

The Presence of God with an Army, inspires with Courage. It not only expels
Fear, but fills with Courage. As our Fears will encourage our Enemies, so
Courage will dishearten them. Courage gives Life to Strength, which would be in
a Manner useless, if we durst not exert and put it forth. Courage assisted by
Strength, and directed by Wisdom, is often the Spring of glorious Achievements
-- And what has a greater Tendency to inspire with Courage, than to be
persuaded on good Grounds, that God is with us. This is an Argument which God
uses to excite Courage, Deuteronomy. 31, 6, 7, 23, Ver. Josh. 1.6, 9, Ver. What more
suitable Argument can there be, when we think of the Perfections of God?

When it is apparent that God is present with an Army, their Enemies will be
filled with Fear. Let us flee (said the Egyptians) from the Face of Israel, for
the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians, Exodus 14.25. -- When the
Philistines understood that the Ark of God was come into the Camp, they were
afraid, for they said, God is come into the Camp. And they said, Woe unto us;
for there has not been such a Thing heretofore. Woe unto us, Who shall deliver
us out of the Hands of these mighty Gods? These are the Gods that smote the
Egyptians with Plagues in the Wilderness, 1 Samuel 4.6, 7, 8, Ver. The Presence
of God is a Pillar of Fire to direct and guide his People; and a Pillar of the
Cloud to confound his Enemies.

If God is with an Army in an Enterprise, they have Reason to expect Success.
We have Joshua saying, Chap. 14.12. Thou heardest in that Day how the Anakims
were there, and that their Cities were great and fenced; if so be the Lord be
with me, I shall be able to drive them out. And they may say to those that
attack them, as in 2 Chronicles. 35.21. Forbear from meddling with God, who is with
me, that He destroy you not. And thus may they bid Defiance to their Enemies,
as in Isa. 8.9, 10. Ver. Associate your selves, O ye People, and ye shall be
broken in Pieces; and give Ear, all ye of far Countries: Gird your selves, and
ye shall be broken in Pieces; gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in
Pieces. Take Counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the Word, and
it shall not stand: for God is with us. See what Assurance an Army, that has
the Presence of God going with them, has of Success. Zech. 10.5. And they
shall be as mighty Men, which tread down their Enemies, in the Mire of the
Street in the Battle, and they shall fight because the Lord is with them. --
Numb. 14.9. Only rebel not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the People of
the Land; for they are Bread for us: Their Defense is departed from them; the
Lord is with us, fear them not.

If God be with us, it will dispose others to an Agreement with us. It made
Abimeleck, though a King, seek the Alliance and Friendship of Abraham and Isaac,
Genesis 21.28. and 26.28. Ver. We read 2 Chronicles. 15.9. That they fell to Asa, King
of Judah, in Abundance, out of Israel, the revolted Tribes, when they saw that
God was with him. -- And Zech. 8.23. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, In those
Days it shall come to pass, that ten Men shall take hold out of all Languages
of the Nations, even shall take hold of the Skirt of him that is a Jew, saying,
We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you. Once more,

If God be with us, we may on good Grounds, expect a Freedom from a great
Variety of Evils. See Ezekiel 34.30. The Prophet having enumerated a Variety of
Evils they should be freed from, and a Variety of Blessings they should be the
Subjects of, says, Thus shall they know that I the Lord their God am with them,
and that they, even the House of Israel, are my People, says the Lord God.

But if we have not an Exemption from Evils, we shall be carried safely through
them. Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the Waters, I will be with thee; and
through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: When thou walk through the
Fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the Flames kindle upon thee.

These Things are sufficient to show the Importance of having God with us. It
is of more Importance, than to have the greatest Number of the wisest and most
powerful Men. I dye, said Joseph, but the Lord will be with you, which is of
more Importance to you, though he had born great Sway at the Egyptian Court, and
God had made him an Instrument of great Good to them. -- Men are ready to
think, that in War, their Safety depends on Numbers. We trust too much to an
Arm of Flesh. Nothing is of equal Importance to having the Presence of God with
us. We read, Deuteronomy. 32.30. How should one chase a Thousand, and two put Ten
Thousand to Flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them
up?

But on the other Hand, If God is not with us, we have Reason to fear a Series
of most dismal Events. As God's Presence with us, is a very signal Blessing, so
God's not being with us, or forsaking us, is a most terrible Evil, deprecated
by those, who, with Moses, knew the Importance of having God's Presence with
them. If God is not with a People, they are exposed to become a Prey to their
Enemies, See 2 Kings 21.14. Judges 6.13. Jer. 12.7.23.39, 40. How sensible Saul
was of his Calamity, in being without the Presence of God, appears from that
Lamentation, 1 Samuel 28.15. I am sore distressed, the Philistines make War on
me, and God is departed from me. -- Having shown the Importance of having the
Presence of God with us in Enterprises against our Enemies; I proceed,

Thirdly, To show the Way to have God's Presence go with us -- To know the
Importance of having the Presence of God with us, will be of no Service to us,
if we never knew how to obtain it: but since there is a Way to obtain it, which
may be known; to know of what Importance it is, may engage us to seek it.

People may conclude He is with them, when He is not, on Account of some
religious Privileges they are distinguished by, 2 Chronicles. 13.12. And may
conclude God is not with them, when He is, on Account of some adverse
Providence, Judges 6.13.

We may on good Grounds hope for the Presence of God with us. -- If we are
contrite or patient; if we see our Sins; are so grieved for them as to turn
from them to God. God dwells with the Contrite.

2. We may on good Grounds hope for the Presence of God with us, when we be
with Him. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin, the Lord
is with you, while ye be with him. You see that it is here promised to Asa,
That if he would be with God, God would be with him. No Scripture is of private
Interpretation. If we are with God, we may be encouraged to hope that God will
be with us, from this Promise, though it was particularly applied to Asa, and his
Subjects: It was recorded and handed down for our Direction and Encouragement.
But now our Inquiry may be, What it is to be with God? This is a Phrase that is
used sometimes to express the Happiness of the Saints, in the future World. So
shall we be ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. ult. But this is not the Idea that
is conveyed by the Phrase, in the Passage under Consideration.

But the being with God, to which God's being with us is promised, implies in
it.

1. A Reconciliation with God through Christ. How can two walk together, except
they be agreed? In Order to be with God, there must therefore be a laying down
the Weapons of our Rebellion, and returning to Him, on the Act of Grace which
He has issued, wherein He has promised Pardon to those that believe and repent
and return to Him -- We were Enemies to God by wicked Works: When we come to be
with God, the Enmity is slain by the Blood of Christ, and from Enemies we come
to be Friends.

2. Being with God, to which God's being with us is promised, is a being for
God, on the Side of God. If we are at War with a People, when we say -- such
are with us -- We mean, they are on our Side; This Idea is conveyed 2 Chronicles.
32.7.8. There be more with us, than with them, i. e. there are more on our
Side, than on theirs.

There is a War between God and Sin: To be with God, is to be against Sin in
ourselves and others. As a People seek the utter Ruin and Destruction of those
they are at War with; so those, that are with God, seek the utter Ruin and
Destruction of Sin, mortify it, and crucify it. They that are Christ's, crucify
the Affections and Lusts. They that are with God, reprove Sin in others, use
their Influence to suppress it, exert themselves in their respective Spheres
against it, implore the Help of God against it.

3. The Being with God, to which God's being with us is promised, means a
promoting His Cause, and advancing His Glory. Those that are heartily with God,
against Sin in themselves and others, will be with God in promoting a
Conformity to His Mind and Will in themselves and others. That which influences
us to exert ourselves for the Suppression of Sin, will influence us to exert
ourselves for promoting a Conformity to God. If the End of our Actions is
right, our Zeal in promoting a Conformity to God, will be in Proportion to our
Zeal against Sin. If we are with God in this Respect, see what Encouragement we
have to hope that God will be with us, 2 Kings 18.4, 5, 6, 7. He removed the
High Places, and brake the Images, and cut down the Groves, and brake in Pieces
the brazen Serpent, that Moses had made; for unto those Days the Children of
Israel did burn Incense unto it -- He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so
that after him, was none like him, among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that
were before him; for He clave to the Lord, and departed not from following him,
but kept his Commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses, and the Lord was
with him, etc. See Amos 5.14. Seek Good and not Evil, that ye may live; and so
the Lord, the God of Hosts will be with you.

4. Being with God may mean, a being much with Him in Prayer.

Lastly, Being with God may mean acting as in His Presence. As being with a
great Personage would restrain us from what might displease, and dispose us to
honor him. So realizing God's Presence would be a great Restraint to Sin, and
incentive to Duty.

APPLICATION.
1. Does God ever vouchsafe His Presence with a People, in their Enterprises?
Learn his Grace and Condescension. What an infinite Distance is there between
God and Man? That such a Being should direct and guide them in their
Enterprises, argues the Condescension and Grace of God. We not only read of
God's Presence with his People, in his Word, but we in this Land have
experienced his Presence with us, in former important Enterprises, we have been
engaged in. What Obligations did those wonderful Favors, lay us under to love
and serve Him? but how does our Ingratitude and ill-requiting the Lord call for
our Humiliation and Abasement? But we like Hezekiah have not rendered again
according to the Benefit done unto us, therefore there is now Wrath upon us. 2 Chronicles. 32.25.

2. Does God ever vouchsafe His Presence with a People in their Enterprises?
Learn the Wisdom of seeking it, and the Folly of the contrary. It is the
highest Wisdom to seek the Presence of God with us in our Enterprises. We think
it Wisdom, and justly too, to have wise and faithful Persons, and Persons of
Strength and Courage, engaged in our warlike Enterprises. How much more so is
it to have the Presence of God, who is infinitely wise, true and powerful? If
the Philistines were imbolden'd to defy the Armies of the living God, because
they had the Presence of the tall Giant of Gath; certainly, we may defy the
Armies of the uncircumsised, if we have the Presence of Almighty God with us.
As it is a great and invaluable Blessing to have the Presence of God with us,
so it is an unspeakable Misery to have God forsake us; the greater the Blessing
in having God with us, the greater the Misery in being deprived of it As it is
great Wisdom to seek the Presence of God; so it is great Folly to do any Thing
to provoke God to forsake us.

I shall now particularly apply myself to those of our Brethren, and Friends,
who are engaged in the Expedition on Foot, and are about to take their Leave of
us.

Dear Friends, Our meeting together in God's House this Day, is occasioned by
you.

I hope enough has been said to show the Importance of having the Presence of
God going with you, and to excite your Desires after it.

The Cause, you are engaged in, is undoubtedly good. Our Rights have been
unjustly invaded. Lands ceded to us in the most solemn Treaties have been
incroach'd on. We have Reason to fear, that if our Enemies meet with no Check,
we shall not only be dispossessed, but enslaved Body and Soul -- The Blood of our
Friends has been most cruelly spilt in Times of profound Peace. -- We have
been hindered extending our Settlements on Lands, our Enemies don't pretend to
dispute our Right to -- Settlements have been broken up, People have been
driven from their Farms, by which Multitudes of Families have been
impoverished. -- If a Community may punish such Things, in its own Members, (as
undoubtedly it may) I don't see why they may not exert themselves for the
Punishment of another Community, which commits such Hostilities against them.
We are to set a greater Value on our Liberties and Privileges, than tamely to
suffer our selves to be deprived of them.

The People, you are going against, are a Limb of that MOTHER OF HARLOTS, whom
God has devoted to utter Destruction, whose Destruction is plainly foretold in
the Word of God -- The French Nation, in God's Account, stands chargeable with
the Blood of many Saints and Martyrs, which, like the Blood of Abel, cries
aloud for Vengeance against them. How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou
not judge and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth. Rev. 6.9, 10.

God has of late been pouring out the Vials of His Wrath on the Antichristian
States. He has been testifying His Displeasure against them by tremendous
Earthquakes, which we also have felt in a Degree sufficient to awaken us. But,
blessed be God, they have not been destructive, as they have been elsewhere.

You will have the Prayers of God's People for you. With this Moses encourages
Joshua. Exodus 17 9. -- What Encouragement will these Things be, if over, and
above you are concerned to be with God.? -- Therefore let me beg of you to put
away every Thing that may separate between God and you. It is Sin that
separates between God and a People. It is Sin which hides God's Face. Let me
beg of you to give up yourselves to God, through Christ, to be for him forever.
-- This is the best Ground to hope for Success -- this will assure you of the
Presence of God with you -- this will give you Confidence to look to God in
Times of greatest Danger -- this will animate and encourage you. The Righteous
are as bold as a Lion. God says, Exodus 23.20, 21, 22. Behold I send an Angel
before thee to keep thee in the Way, and to bring thee into the Place, which I
have prepared. Beware of Him, and obey his Voice, provoke Him not: for He will
not pardon your Transgressions; for my Name is in Him. But if thou shall indeed
obey his Voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an Enemy to thine
Enemies, and an Adversary to thine Adversaries. Says God to Joshua, Chap. 1 --
7, 8. Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou may observe to do
according to all the Law, which Moses, my Servant, commanded thee: turn not
from it to the right Hand or to the left, that thou may prosper
whithersoever thou go. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy
Mouth, but thou shall meditate therein Day and Night, that thou may observe
to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shall make thy
Way prosperous, and then thou shall have good Success.

Be concerned, to go to War with Men, at Peace with God: Then whatever may be
the Fate of the Army, you are Members of, it will be well with you in
particular. Let it be your Concern to be in a State of Favor with God. Your
Calling is a dangerous Calling, you will be in Deaths often, as the Apostle Paul
speaks. Which upon a late awful Occasion I have applied to you. May 14. 1756.
William Gormer of Newbury, David Davis of Rumsord, Robert Willis of Westford,
Soldiers on their March toward Crown-Point, were drowned in Westfield River.


You will, I make no doubt, be sensible of the Importance of having God's
Presence with you, before you return. Many, who never cried to God in their
Lives, will undoubtedly, in the Progress of this Affair, have such
Apprehensions, as will put them on crying to God for Help. The Issue, you know,
is uncertain; let me entreat you, to set not only your Houses, but your Souls
in Order.

I will leave with you a few Cautions and Directions.

1. Do Violence to no Man. This is what the Baptist said to the Soldiers, who
asked him what they must do. You may possibly think, this is a strange Piece of
Advice to be given to Soldiers, who are to effect their Designs by Force and
Arms. But this, without Dispute, you may gather from it, that you should offer
no Violence in the Towns of your Friends and Countrymen, through which you are
to march. Soldiers often take Liberties, at a Distance from Home, which they
would not do at Home. Those you are going to defend, should not be insulted by
you: Some I have seen march along, have needed this Caution -- Or, this Passage
of John may be a Prohibition of fighting with your Fellow Soldiers -- This
Passage of the Baptist may be a Caution against depriving your Countrymen, or
Fellow Soldiers, of their Property, violently, or unjustly. --

2. Beware of Drunkenness. Some may be in Danger of falling into this Vice:
This is a beastly Vice; it transforms a Man into a Beast -- it exposes a Man to
do, and suffer all Manner of Evils in this World, and to inexpressible Misery
in the next World. -- It is a Vice that renders very unfit for the Business of
a Soldier. It is a Vice that infeebles and dispirits a Man -- Hosea 4.11.
Whoredom and Wine take away the Heart. He that strives for the Mastery, should
be temperate in all Things.

3. Beware of profane Swearing. This is a Vice, I apprehend, you will be much
exposed to fall into. Joseph in Egypt, learnt to Swear by the Life of Pharaoh.
In such a Concourse of Men, there will be doubtless many, who will be addicted
to this Vice. Men are apt to follow bad Examples -- This Vice gratifys no
sensual Appetite -- It is highly provoking to God. I would have you remember
your Success depends on God: Can you, on good Grounds, hope for Success, when
you thus dishonor Him?

4. Beware of a mutinous Spirit and Disposition. The Safety of the Army, under
God, depends much on their Harmony and good Agreement. If it should be divided
against itself, it cannot stand. The Enemy would have an easy Conquest -- you
would do your Enemies Work for them in a great Measure. Therefore let none of
you foment Divisions, nor try to make any uneasy, and discontented; but try to
promote Concord and Unity: You will have Enemies enough without the Camp: You
need not make any in it.

5. Neglect not your Duty in an Engagement, though attended with Difficulty and
Danger. Don't think it will do to leave the Work to others, while you are
sneaking in some Hole. By such Conduct you will be unfaithful to your Trust --
you will defraud the Country of what you receive of them -- you will betray
your Fellow Soldiers; if any of them fall through your wilful Neglect of Duty,
I don't see but their Blood must be required at your Hands. -- You will weaken
the Army, and expose it to be overthrown. --

6. Be much in Prayer. Though you may not have much Opportunity to retire for
Prayer, yet be much in ejaculatory Prayer. Let these Places have Weight with
you, Jam. 4.2. Ye Fight and War, yet ye have not, because you ask not. Ye ask,
and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it on your Lusts.
And Psalm. 91.15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him, I will be with
him in Trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him.

7. Attend on the public religious Exercises of the Army, as often as you have
Opportunity; you will be taken off from this often; but let not Sloth or
Indisposition to it, hinder you. --

I commend you to God. I pray God to be with you in all the Ways you shall go
-- to hold you in the Hollow of his Hand -- to preserve you amidst all the
Dangers you will be exposed to -- to fit you for the great Work, you are called
to do -- to make you Instruments of reducing your, and your Countries Enemies
-- to return you with Songs of Praise in your Mouths; and that we and you may
rejoice in the happy Issue of this Expedition. -- Above all, That God would
make you Overcomers in your spiritual Warfare, and entitle you to the Rewards
of such.

You are going from us, dear Friends: Whether we shall all see each other in
this World, God only knows. The Lord grant we may meet in Heaven.

Farewell! I wish you well here, and for ever.

I would say a Word to those, who are about to part with Consorts, Children,
Brethren, or other near Friends -- It is, no doubt, a Day of Trouble with you
-- you call to mind, no doubt, our dear Friends, and Neighbors, that lost
their Lives the last Campaign -- Major Noah Ashley, and Capt. Jonathan
Ingersol, and Richard Campbell, of this Town, were slain in Battle. Jonah
Styles, Jun. and Samuel Ponder, of this Town, died with Sickness
But remember God's Providence is not confined to this Place, or that Place: He
can keep safe in Places of greatest Dangers, as well as elsewhere -- Commit
them to God, put your Trust in God. Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of evil
Tidings, his Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. -- Be much in Prayer to God
for them, that they may have the Presence of God with them, then they will do
well. I pray God, you may from Time to Time, have comfortable Accounts from
them. Though now you part in Tears, may you meet in Joy -- The Lord fit you for
his Will.

And may this whole Assembly look on themselves interested in the Event of this
Expedition. Our Friends that are going from us, not only expose themselves in
Defense of their own Liberty and Property, but in Defense of ours. They are
entitled to our Prayers. Let us be much in Prayer for their Prosperity and
Success, that God's Presence would go with them, and that He would give them
and us Rest, from the Calamities we have long groaned under. When the Host
goes against the Enemy, let us keep from every wicked Thing, Deuteronomy. 23.9. -- I
shall leave with you a gracious Word of God, and have done, Psalm. 81.13, 14,
15. O that my People had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my Ways. I
should soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned my Hand against their
Adversaries. The Haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves to Him;
but their Time should have endured for ever.

The END.

