A TREATY HELD WITH THE CATAWBA and CHEROKEE INDIANS, AT THE CATAWBA-TOWN and
BROAD-RIVER, IN THE Months of February and March 1756.

By Virtue of a Commission granted by the Honorable ROBERT DINWIDDIE, Esquire,
His Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief of the Colony and
Dominion of VIRGINIA, to the Honorable PETER RANDOLPH and WILLIAM BYRD,
Esquires, Members of His Majesty's Council of the said Colony.

Published by Order of the GOVERNOR.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by W. HUNTER, M, DCC, LVI.

INTRODUCTION.
HIS Honor the GOVERNOR having received several undoubted Assurances of the
sincere and hearty Dispositions of the Catawba, and Cherokee Indians toward
His Britannic Majesty's Subjects in general, and this Colony in particular, and
considered the great Importance of securing those war like Nations to our
Interest at this perilous Juncture, when the French are laboring to seduce them
from their Fidelity to us, was pleased to propose in Council the Sixth of
November last, That proper Commissioners should be sent as soon as possible to
those Indians with an handsome Present, and to conclude a firm and permanent
League with them. Whereupon the Council judging that no better Use could be
made of Part of the Money His Majesty had been graciously pleased to advance
and send to his Honor for the general Service, unanimously agreed thereto. And
PETER RANDOLPH and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires, being nominated and approved of as
Gentlemen perfectly well qualified to conduct and carry into Execution the
proposed Treaties; they, in Consequence thereof, having received his Honor's
Letter, with his Commission, and Instructions, and Speeches to the Chiefs of
the said Nations, proceeded immediately on their Journey, and concluded the
Treaties and Engagements, which are presented to the Public in the following
Sheets.

A LETTER FROM THE GOVERNOR TO PETER RANDOLPH and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires.
WILLIAMSBURG, December 23 d, 1755. Gentlemen,
"ENCLOSED you have your Commission, my two SPEECHES to the Catawbas and
Cherokees, with some Instructions for you which are but short, as I have a
great Dependence on your known Capacity and Understanding; I think proper to
give you a few Hints which may be of Service in your Negotiations with those
People. -- You will first meet with the King and great Men of the Catawbas;
after the Council is met and Ceremonies of Reception over, you are first to
read your Commission, after that (as the Custom of the Indians is) you are to
tell them their Brother, the Governor of Virginia, is going to speak to them;
then read my Speech; as they are tedious in their Councils they probably will
require some Time to answer it. You are to take all possible Care to convince
them of our Regard and Love for them; let your Treaty with them be offensive
and defensive, which must be committed to Writing, and signed by all the Chiefs
present, and the Counter-Part by you in Behalf of this Colony Endeavor to get
them to mention the Number of Warriors they may agree to supply us with, and
the Place they will march them into our Country, when we may have Occasion for
their Assistance; and by what Message we are to give them Notice to come in to
join our Forces, that we may provide for their Reception: If they should
intimate any Expectations of being paid for the Men they may send in to our
Assistance, you may come into such Terms as you may think reasonable* but if
they do not mention any Thing of that Nature, you may assure them of being
properly taken Care of. -- Do all you can to raise their Resentment against the
French and their Indians, and that they may discourage and hinder their coming
into their Nation.

THE Catawbas, I hear, have long complained of being much confined by the
English settling on their Land, that they wanted to sell their Land, and go
further to the Westward; if they mention any Thing of this, you may assure them
I shall do every Thing in my Power with the Neighboring Governors for their
Service. You will have Occasion to go through the forementioned Ceremonies, etc.
with the Cherokees; but you are to consider them as a much more numerous
Nation, and their Lands very extensive: The French have been endeavoring for
many Years to bring them over to their Interest, and to build Forts in the
Upper Cherokee Country, but I hope they have not as yet built them; if they
have, endeavor to prevail with the Indians to destroy them, and by no Means to
allow them any Settlement in their Nation; and if possible, to hinder any of
the French or their Indians, having any Consultations with them, unless they
bring a Certificate or Message by one of the Six Nations or their Brothers the
English, otherways they will endeavor to deceive them. -- Persuade them to
take great Care of the Passes over the Mountains to the Upper Cherokees, to
prevent any Surprise. Make an Excuse for not sending them some Arms, let them
know they were not to be had here, but we will endeavor to provide some for
them; you will find the Traders from South Carolina, will do all they can to
harrass you in your Treaty. -- There is one Smith, a Native of this Country,
and a Trader from Charlestown, he bears a good Character, you may send for
him, he probably may be of Service to you. Be sure to return the Cherokees
hearty Thanks for the Men they sent in with Mr. Paris to our Assistance against
the Shawnese.

AS many Things may occur in the Course of your Negotiations, that I cannot
foresee, your own good Sense must be your Guide, and I accordingly refer it
entirely to you. The Attorney General brings you the L. 250 you wrote for. I am
greatly disappointed in Wampum, having wrote to Col. Hunter to bring me a
Quantity, but he is not returned; I think you wrote me Col. Eaton would supply
you, he will let you know the Quantity necessary.

ENCLOSED you have Invoice of Goods for a Present, packed up and directed for
each Nation; and I hope, if the Weather permits, to send them from this on
Monday or Tuesday next, for Petersburg. The ten Pieces of Dutch Blanketing from
Mr. Turnbull, are for the Cherokees, and if there be any Thing wanting, have it
from him, and desire him to send me the Account. -- As the Cherokees are by
Report ten to one of the Catawbas, I have proportioned the Powder and Lead
accordingly, which you may alter if you see proper. -- Two Cherokee Boys, who
were taken Prisoners by the Northern-Indians, were retaken by a Company of our
Rangers; I ordered them back to their Nation, pray enquire about them.

SINCE writing the above, I have a Letter from Mr. Dobbs, Governor of
NorthCarolina, he appoints two Commissioners to go to the Catawbas and
Cherokees* he proposes their meeting you at a Place, I think he calls it
Salisbury, which he says is near the Indian-Road, which Rout he supposes you
will take. -- I wrote him, I believed you would set out from this the 4th or
6th of January.

IF I have omitted any Thing as Hints for your Conduct, please send me Word and
I shall answer you. -- That you may have your Health, Success in your
Negotiations, and a safe Return, is the sincere Wish of,

Gentlemen, Your affectionate humble Servant, ROBERT DINWIDDIE.
To the Hon. PETER RANDOLPH and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires.



ROBERT DINWIDDIE, Esquire, His Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in
Chief of the Colony and Dominion of VIRGINIA,
To the Honorable PETER RANDOLPH, Esquire, one of His Majesty's Council,
Lieutenant of the County of Henrico, and SurveyorGeneral of His Majesty's
Customs; and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquire, one of His Majesty's Council, and
Lieutenant of the County of Lunenburg,
BY Virtue of the Power and Authority invested in me, as His Majesty's
Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief of this Dominion, I hereby nominate
and appoint you, the said Peter Randolph and William Byrd, Esquires,
Commissioners to the Catawba and Cherokee Nations of Indians; hereby giving you
full Power and Authority to conclude and settle a firm Treaty of Peace and
Friendship with both those Nations, they being our old Friends and Allies.

GIVEN under my Hand, and caused the Great-Seal of this Colony to be affixed
thereto at Williamsburg, this Twenty Third Day of December, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Fifty Five. ROBERT DINWIDDIE.

INSTRUCTIONS, for PETER RANDOLPH and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires, appointed
Commissioners to treat on Behalf of the Colony and Dominion of Virginia, with
the Catawbas and Cherokees.
I. YOU shall hold yourselves in Readiness to set forward to the Place of
Treaty pursuant to your Commission in order to arrive at the Catawba and
Cherokee Nations of Indians, with all due Speed, and being there arrived, you
shall with all proper Dispatch convene the Chiefs of the said Nations, and
having adjusted the necessary Forms and Ceremonies, you are at the first
general and public Conference to accquaint the Indians that you are come
purposely to assure them of the kind and friendly Dispositions of the
Inhabitants of this Colony toward them, as well as of the Care that has been
taken on their Part, to preserve the most perfect Harmony, and good
Understanding with their ancient Friends of those Nations in particular, and in
general with all others with whom they have ever made Friendship and Alliance.
You are then to compliment them on their steady Adherence, and to desire of
them to concur with you in establishing, and perpetuating for all future Time,
an immovable Friendship with their Brethren whom you represent.

II. YOU are then to present my Speech to them, and proceed to acquaint them
with the Present you are charged with for them, and to enlarge on the Kindness
and Friendship it expresses toward them and this will lead you to magnify the
Grandeur and Munificence of the King, after which you are in the most affecting
Manner to present the Particulars as directed.

III. HAVING thus and by whatever other Means the Time and Circumstances shall
suggest, introduced yourselves to the Favor of the Indians, you are to animate
them against the unjust Disturbances given to the Peace of Mankind by the
restless and insatiate Thirst of Dominion, which is ever actuating the French
to covet and encroach upon the Possessions of not only the English, but all the
Indian Nations in America. To this End you will acquaint them with their Breach
of Faith, and the unprovoked Rapines and Murders committed by them on the
Frontier Inhabitants of the Colonies in Time of Tranquillity and Peace; and let
them know that they have prevailed on the Delawares and Shawnese, to do
Mischief when they pretended to be our Friends. After having duly represented
these Perfidies and Violences, you are to acquaint them that the Six Nations
have joined us against the French, and to desire their Assistance, and to agree
on some Distinction or Signal whereby the Catawbas and Cherokees, may be
distinguished from other Indians, when they come into our Inhabitants, and to
know what Number of Men they will furnish, and when.

IV. YOU are to inform yourselves particularly, what Indian Nations they can
bring into our Alliance, and what Settlements the French* have made in their
Neighborhood, their Extent, Strength, and at what Period of Time they were
made. And you are to endeavor to make yourselves acquainted with the Arts made
Use of by the French to alienate the Affections of Indians from the English.
You are to exhort them not to be drawn away by deceitful empty Speeches, the
peculiar Talent of that cunning People, nor to suffer them on any Pretense
whatsoever, to erect any Fort in their Country. But in every Attempt that shall
be made to shake their Duty to our common Father, let them consider what real
Acts of Friendship have been done them by the English, and what by the French;
let them weigh these Things well in their Minds, and then determine who best
deserves their Esteem and Regard; for it is not by vain unmeaning Words that
true Friendship is to be discovered, but by its Effects.

V. WHATEVER Treaty you shall enter into with either of these Nations, you are
to take special Care to have it signed by all the Sachems or Chiefs who shall
be present at it.

VI. IF any Thing incidentally occur in the Negotiation not particularly taken
Notice of by these Instructions, you are to conduct yourselves in such Manner,
as the Nature and Expediency of the Subject Matter, Time and Place may require,
according to the best of your Discretion.

I WISH you Success in your Negotiations, an agreeable Journey, and a safe
Return -- And I am,

Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, ROBERT DINWIDDIE.

ROBERT DINWIDDIE, Esquire, His Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in
Chief of the Colony and Dominion of Virginia.
To the King, Sachems, and Warriors, of the CATAWBA Nation, Wishing you Health
and Prosperity.
BROTHERS and FRIENDS,
THIS will be delivered you by the Honorable PETER RANDOLPH and WILLIAM BYRD,
Esquires, two of His Majesty's Council of this Dominion, who will shake Hands
with you, and are come this long and tedious Journey to assure you of our real
Friendship and Love for you; they have my Commission to treat with you, and to
brighten and strengthen the Chain of Friendship that has so long subsisted
between you and your Brothers the English; and am in great Hopes the Treaty you
are to make with the above Gentlemen in Behalf of this Dominion in particular,
and all the English Inhabitants on this Continent, will continue as long as the
Sun gives Light.

THE French, by their Emissaries are endeavoring all in their Power to gain
over our friendly Indians to their Interest, I therefore advise you to be on
your Guard against their invidious Insinuations, for their Speeches consist of
Falsehoods and unjust Reports. The Six Nations have taken up the Hatchet
against the French and their Indians, and have joined our Forces to drive the
French from the Lands they have unjustly invaded, and have lately given them a
remarkable Defeat, killed many of their People and taken several of their great
Officers Prisoners; and I hope next Year they will be able to confine them to
the barren Lands of Canada.

LATELY many of the French joined with the Shawnese came into our Country,
robbed and murdered many of our Brethern: Our Friends and Brothers the
Cherokees, knowing the Truth thereof, immediately took up the Hatchet against
the French and Shawnese, and sent into our Country a Number of their Warriors
to protect our Frontiers, and to war against those perfidious People. -- And I
hope Brothers you will also take up the Hatchet, against the French and their
Indians; and as I have great Reason to expect many of the Cherokee Warriors on
any Occasion, to go to War against your Enemies and ours, I therefore hope you
will also assist with a Number of your brave Warriors.

THE Commissioners will also deliver you a Present sent from our Father the
Great King, and this Dominion, to assure you of our Sincerity to continue in
true Friendship with the Catawbas. Whatever the Commissioners tell you, you are
to believe as spoke by myself, and I am in hopes you will conclude with them a
Treaty of Peace and Friendship which may continue as long as the Rivers run and
Trees grow, which will be confirmed by me, and transmitted to our Father the
other Side of the great Water.

MAY you live long, and that we may always act with true Friendship for each
other, is my sincere Wish.

GIVEN at Williamsburg, under my Hand and the Great-Seal of this Colony, this
Twenty-Third Day of December, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty Five. ROBERT
DINWIDDIE.
In Confirmation of the above I give you a Belt of Wampum.



ROBERT DINWIDDIE, Esquire, His Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in
Chief of the Colony and Dominion of Virginia.
To the Emperor OLD-HOP, and the other Sachems, and Warriors, of the Great
Nation of the CHEROKEES, Wishing Health and Prosperty.
THIS will be delivered you by the Honorable PETER RANDOLPH and WILLIAM BYRD,
Esquires, two of His Majesty's Council, who will take you by the Hand; they
have undertaken this long Journey to assure you of the real Love and Friendship
your Brothers of this Dominion have for you; they have my Commission to enter
into a Treaty of Peace with you, to brighten and strengthen the Chain of
Friendship that has so long subsisted between your Brothers the English, and
the brave Cherokees; I desire you will receive what they say to you, as if
spoke to you by myself.

I AM in hopes the Treaty now proposed to be made with the above Gentlemen in
Behalf of this Dominion in particular, and all your Brothers on this Continent,
will continue as long as the Sun and Moon give Light. The French by their
Emissaries, are endeavoring to poison the Minds of our friendly Indians, and
to withdraw them from their Brothers the English; I advise you to be on your
Guard against them, their Speeches are made up of Falsehoods and unjust
Reports, let none of them remain among you, and by no Means allow them to build
any Forts on the River Hogohegee, in the Upper Cherokee Country, for their
Intentions are with evil Design against you and your Brothers the English. --
The Six Nations have taken up the Hatchet against the French and their Indians,
and joined our Forces to the Northward with a great Number of their Warriors*
and in a Battle with the French, we killed a great Number of their Men, and
took several of their chief Officers Prisoners, obtaining a complete Victory
over them; and I hope on Occasion, you will be ready and willing to give us
your Assistance.

THE Treaty now proposed to be made shall be confirmed by me, and transmitted
to our Father the King of Great Britain, etc. the other Side of the great
Water. The Commissioners will deliver you some Powder, Lead, and other Goods,
from your Father and your Brothers of this Dominion, to convince you of our
sincere Friendship to your Nation.

THAT you may remain an happy People, and that true Love may subsist between
you and your Brothers the English, till the End of Time, is my sincere Wish.

GIVEN at Williamsburg, under my Hand and the Great-Seal of this Colony, this
Twenty-Third Day of December, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty Five. ROBERT
DINWIDDIE.
In Confirmation of the above I give you a Belt of Wampum.



A TREATY, etc.
At the Catawba-Town, the 20th of February, 1756. PRESENT. The Honorable PETER
RANDOLPH, and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires, Commissioners for Virginia. THOMAS ADAMS,
Esquire, Secretary. HEIGLER, King of the Catawbas, and all the Sachems and
Warriors of that Nation. WILLIAM GILES, Interpreter.


The Commissioners having first produced their Deputation, and the same being
read and interpreted, they spoke as follows:

Brethren, King, Sachems, and Warriors, of the Great CATAWBA Nation,

"OUR common Father, the Great King of England, has been pleased to direct your
Brother, the Governor of Virginia, to send Commissioners hither, to assure you
of his Affection, and to present you with as many Goods in Token thereof as it
was convenient to send so far, at this Season of the Year. It was his Pleasure
to appoint us to that Charge, and at the same Time, to direct us to deliver you
a Speech in his Name, with a Belt of Wampum, which we are now ready to do, and
hope you will be attentive thereto."

To which King Heigler answered.

"WE shall always listen to every Thing that comes from our Brothers of
Virginia with great Attention, and are now prepared to hear whatever you may be
directed to say to us in the Name of the Governor of that Colony."

The Secretary then proceeded to read the Governor's Speech, which was
interpreted.

( See the GOVERNOR' s SPEECH, Page xi.)

Upon which the Indians gave the YO-HAH.

Then the Commissioners spoke as follows.

Brothers and Friends,

"YOU have heard his Honor the Governor of Virginia's Speech, wherein he has
confirmed what we just now told you, that we are sent here to represent him and
the Colony under his Command, in order to brighten the Chain, and strengthen
the Friendship, which has subsisted between you and them, since a much earlier
Time than our oldest Men can remember. It is not Brethern in Behalf of Virginia
alone, that we have come so far to tell you, how highly we value and commend
your steady Friendship to the great King George, and his Children in Virginia,
but of all his Subjects in America, who have ever held you in high Esteem,
having always found you our faithful Friends, and make no Doubt but that you
will continue such to all future Time. To convince you of our great Dependence
upon your unshaken Love, we present you with this String of Wampum."

"YOU cannot be Strangers, brave CATAWBAS, to the late unjustifiable Steps
taken by the French, that crafty Enemy of all Mankind, to debauch the
Principles and poison the Minds of not only the Indians, but of all other
Nations, who are in Alliance with the great King our Father. They are a People,
Brothers, whose Thirst of Power is so great, that nothing but an entire
Reduction of the whole World to their Subjection, can satisfy their boundless
Ambition. By their dark Measures, and deceitful Practices, they have so far
unhappily succeeded, as to prevail on the Shawnese and Delaware Indians, to
make Incursions on the Frontiers of Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylania, to
murder in the most inhuman Manner, defenseless Husbandmen at their Labor, weak
Women in their Beds, with their tender Infants at their Breasts, resting secure
in their own Innocence in Time of a settled Peace. And thus those Nations
continue still to act in open Violation of a solemn Treaty concluded on at
Loggs-Town, about three Years past, between our Commissioners and their Chiefs.

"OUR Friends the Six Nations concerned for the Misfortunes of their Brethern,
and enraged that the French and their Indians pay so little Regard to their
Engagements, have taken up the Hatchet against them, and joined General Johnson
last Fall, on Lake St. Sacrament, where after a bloody Battle, it pleased the
Great God, to bless our Arms with Victory, and to enable our Men to destroy the
greatest Part of their Enemies, to captivate their General, and slay many of
their commanding Officers. To confirm the Truth of what we have told you, we
give you this String of Wampum.

"WE are desired by the Governor of Virginia, to inform you, That we now stand
in need of your Assistance; and from the many Instances of your Friendship, we
hope you will join our Forces with such a Number of Warriors, as you think you
may with Safety to yourselves spare, whenever there may be Occasion for them,
of which you shall have due Notice.

"YOUR Compliance with this Request will give us an Opportunity of representing
to the King your Father, your Readiness to defend His Dominions, on this Side
the great Water. And that you may be encouraged to march against the Enemy,
with greater Cheerfulness, we promise you that your Men shall be supplied with
Arms, Ammunition, and every Thing necessary for War. To confirm the Truth of
what we have said, and to enforce our Request, we give you this Belt of Wampum."

Upon which the Indians gave the usual Cry of Approbation.

KING Heigler, then repeated the Substance of what had been said, and that
there might be no Mistakes, desired the Interpreter to attend him and his
Chiefs in a Council that Evening, and at the same Time told the Commissioners
that he proposed to give them an Answer in the Morning.

February 21st, 1756.
PRESENT. The Honorable PETER RANDOLPH, and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires,
Commissioners. THOMAS ADAMS, Esquire, Secretary. HEIGLER, King of the Catawbas,
and all the Sachems and Warriors of that Nation. WILLIAM GILES, Interpreter.


King HEIGLER spoke as follows,

Brothers and Friends,

"AT the Request of my Brother the Governor of Virginia, I made him a Visit
last Year. After much Talk with him* which I have treasured up in my Breast,
and hope he has done the same, he told me that he did not then want my
Assistance, but desired that I would hold my Warriors in Readiness, not
doubting, but that he should have Occasion for them soon. It was at the
repeated Requests of the Northern Governors, that we concluded a Peace with
their Indians, which we have hitherto strictly observed. But as the Shawnese
and Delawares, have broke the Chain of Friendship, between them and our
Brethern the English, we think ourselves bound in Gratitude to declare them our
Enemies, and shall immediately take up the Hatchet against them, and you may be
assured, never lay it down 'til we have sufficiently revenged the Blood of our
Friends. We have always been supplied, with Clothes, Guns and Ammunition, by
the Great King, on the other Side of the Water, and have the most grateful
Remembrance of his Kindness to us, which has linked us to his Interest with a
Chain stronger than Iron. Our Warriors delight in War, and our young Men are
equally pleased that they have an Opportunity of going to Battle. It is my
Resolution to lead them on whenever the Governor of Virginia thinks proper.

"WE are in perfect Amity with the Cherokees, Cowetaws and Chickasaws. The
Cherokees have ever been our Friends, and as they are a numerous Nation, we
acknowledge them to be our elder Brother.

"WE hope they will show a good Example by sending a great Number of their
Warriors to join us and our Brethern of Virginia against the French and their
Indian Allies."

Gave a Belt of Wampum.

KING Heigler, then desired his Warriors to speak for themselves, upon which
Prenchee-Uraw, spoke as follows.

Friends and Brothers,

"I AM a young Man, and have not yet distinguished myself in War* but I am not
a little pleased, that I have an Opportunity of doing it. If I should be so
fortunate as to do any Thing that deserves Commendation, I shall have the
Thanks of the Great King George, and my Brethern the English. But whether I am
successful or not, my Endeavors shall be such as to convince them of the
Integrity of my Intentions."

Chippapaw, then rose up and spoke as follows,

Brothers.

"YOU have put a bright Hatchet in our Hands, which we have accepted and hold
fast. You have also directed us where to strike it. I am determined, either to
dye it in the Blood of our Enemies, or to lose my Life in the Attempt."

Hixa-Uraw, then spoke to the following Purpose,

Brothers,

"I HAVE listened attentively to what the King and Warriors have said. Their
Readiness in complying with your Request, has given me great Pleasure, and as I
have Feet as well as they, I shall not stay at Home, if they are able to
support me."

THE other Warriors present said that the King and those who had already
spoken* had expressed their Sentiments, and that they were ready whenever they
were called on* to hazard their Lives in Defense of their Brethern the English.

The Commissioners immediately made the following Reply,

Brethern,

"YOUR Answer has given us great Satisfaction, and we doubt not, but that, by
your future Actions, you will approve yourselves to be that brave People your
Brethern the English, have ever esteemed you.

"WE have Instructions from our Governor, to desire that you will inform us,
what Number of Men you can send to our Assistance* by which Means he will be
the better Judge of our Strength. Our Enemies the French will undoubtedly exert
themselves to carry their Schemes into Execution, and therefore it is the more
necessary we should act with Vigor and Unanimity. That there may be no
Misapprehensions, we have prepared an Instrument of Writing, containing Six
Articles, to be signed by us in Behalf of the Colony we represent, and by your
King and Sachems in Behalf of your Nation. We shall leave them with you for
your Consideration, and when they have been interpreted to you, and you have in
Council consulted your People, we hope they will meet with your Approbation.

"WE have left a Blank for the Number of Men, with which you are to supply us,
which, we flatter ourselves, will be so great, as to be of real Service to us,
and demonstrate your Zeal for our common Defense.

"THE Goods, we have beforementioned to you, are now exposed to your View, and
whenever it is agreeable to you, you may proceed to divide them among you."

THE Commissioners then withdrew, and the King and Sachems after a short
Consultation, desired them to return, and after being again seated, King
He^^ler spoke as follows,

Brethren,

"WE have had the Articles proposed to us under our Consideration, and we
entirely approve of them. A great Number of our Warriors being now in the
Woods, we can only venture to assure you of Forty Men, although it is more than
probable, that we shall send double that Number. But that we may preserve the
Reputation of a steady faithful People, we will engage for nothing more than we
can with the greatest Certainly comply with. We have seen the Goods and accept
them as a Token of your Affection, which we hope you will deservedly continue
to us so long as the World exists."

THE Articles were then again read, and signed by the Commissioners, the King,
and Warriors of the CATAWBA Nation respectively. After which the Indians
expressed great Satisfaction, and the Commissioners calling for Wine and Punch,
drank, Health to the Great King GEORGE and the CATAWBA Nation; which put an End
to the Treaty.

A COPY of the ARTICLES.
BE it KNOWN to all those to whom these Presents shall come, That the Honorable
Robert Dinwiddie, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief of the
Colony and Dominion of VIRGINIA, and Arataswa King, Chupahaw, Prenchee-Uraw,
Hixa-Uraw, Tannasee, Yeaputkee, and Tooksesey, Sachems and Warriors of the
brave Nation of CATAWBA Indians, laying nothing more to Heart, than by new Ties
to strengthen the good Correspondence established between the Subjects of the
King of Great Britain, residing in North America, and their Brothers and
faithful Allies the CATAWBAS, and to prevent, by Measures taken in Time, the
Accidents that may excite a War, or cause a Disunion: The Honorable Peter
Randolph, Esquire, one of His Majesty's Council, Lieutenant of the County of
Henrico, and Surveyor-General of His Majesty's Customs, and the Honorable
William Byrd, Esquire, one of His Majesty's Council, and Lieutenant of the
County of Lunenburg, on the Part and Behalf of the said Robert Dinwiddie,
Esquire, and the said Colony of VIRGINIA, and the said Arataswa King, Chupahaw,
Prenchee-Uraw, Hixa-Uraw, Tannasee, Yeaputkee, and Tooksesey, Sachems and
Warriors on the Part and Behalf of the CATAWBA Nation, having full Power, do
treat, accord, and conclude the following Articles.

I. THAT the ancient Alliance between the English and Catawbas be renewed, and
the old Chain brightened.

II. THAT if the French King shall at any Time wage War against the King of
England, the Catawbas shall wage War with all their Power against the French
King, and all his Indian Allies.

III. THAT the Catawbas shall march into Virginia, Forty or more able Warriors,
within Forty Days from the Date of these Presents, to such Fort or Place as the
Governor of Virginia shall direct.

IV. THAT the Men who shall be employed in the Service of the English, in the
Colony of Virginia, as Warriors, be found and provided with all necessary
Clothes, Victuals, Arms and Ammunition.

V. THAT neither the Catawbas nor Virginians, shall protect the disobedient
Subjects of the other, or entertain Rebels, Traitors or Fugitives, but within
Twenty Days after due Requisition made, shall deliver them up.

VI. THAT if any Subject belonging to the King of Great Britain, residing in
Virginia, or any Indian belonging to the Catawba Nation, shall offend against
this Treaty, they shall be punished, without the Treaty being any Way thereby
infringed.

Done and signed at the CATAWBA-TOWN, the 21st Day of February, 1756. PETER
RANDOLIH. [L. S.] WILLIAM BYRD. [L. S.] ARATASWA, (mark) or HEIGLER. [L. S.]
CHU^AHAW, (mark) [L. S.] PRENCHEE-URAW, (mark) [L. S.] HIXA-URAW, (mark) [L.
S.] TANNASEE, (mark) [L. S.] YEAPUTKEE, (mark) [L. S.] Tooksesey, (mark) [L.
S.]


BROAD-RIVER, March 13th, 1756.
PRESENT. The Honorable PETER RANDOLPH, and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires,
Commissioners for Virginia. THOMAS ADAMS, Esquire, Secretary. The Sachems and
Warriors of the CHEROKEES. RICHARD SMITH, ABRAHAM SMITH, DANIEL CARROL,
Interpreters.


The Little-Carpenter spoke as follows,

Friends and Brothers,

"THE Waters are high, and as we are numerous and there are no Canoes to carry
us over the River, we shall be obliged to you to come over to us. We should not
presume to expect this Favor, but that you may pass the River in one Canoe, and
our People are all desirous of being present at the Treaty. We are impatient to
return Home, and therefore, although we are much fatigued, hope you will join
with us in expediting the Business as fast as possible."

To which the Commissioners replied,

"YOUR Request is very reasonable, and therefore we shall cheerfully comply
with it. We are pleased to find you disposed to enter on Business immediately,
and we shall be ready to speak to you Tomorrow at Twelve o'Clock."

March 14th, 1756.
PRESENT. The Honorable PETER RANDOLPH, and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires,
Commissioners THOMAS ADAMS, Esquire, Secretary. The Sachems and Warriors of the
CHEROKEES. RICHARD SMITH, ABRAHAM SMITH, and DANIEL CARROL Interpreters,


The Commissioners spoke as follows,

Brethren, Sachems, and Warriors of the great and powerful Nation of CHEROKEES,

"THE Governor of Virginia, having by his Commission under the Great-Seal of
that Colony, deputed us to visit you our Brethern, in order to consult you on
some Affairs, in which our Interests are mutually concerned; we heartily bid
you welcome. -- We have waited a long Time for your coming, but we presume,
from the remote Situation of many of your Towns, that your Sachems could not be
convened sooner, and therefore we the more cheerfully acquiesce under the many
Inconveniences we have been subjected to through your Delay. You could not have
given us a greater Evidence of your Esteem, than by your meeting us so much
lower-down than the Place you first appointed* the Badness of the Roads, which
are almost impassable for Wagons, and the Scarcity of Corn, having made our
Journey both tedious and expensive. We are first to deliver you a Speech, in
the Name of our Governor, with a Belt of Wampum, which we hope you will hear with
Attention, and that it will have that Influence on you, which he expects."

The Secretary then read the Governor's Speech, which was interpreted.

( See the GOVERNOR' s SPEECH, Page xii.)

Upon which the Indians gave the YO-HAH.

Then the Commissioners spoke as follows.

"AS you are now acquainted with the Intention of our undertaking this long and
fatiguing Journey, permit us to assure you of our Readiness to concur in
brightening and strengthening the Chain of Friendship which has hitherto
remained unviolated, and which we on our Parts shall endeavor to preserve
unshaken, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure.

Brethern,

"YOUR Fidelity and steady Adherence to the Interest of the English, of which
the sending your Warriors to the Assistance of your Brethern the Virginians is
a recent Instance, have had such an happy Influence upon the King your Father,
that He always disposed to reward his dutiful Children, has ordered a Present
of Goods to be sent to you. And in Obedience to His Majesty's Commands, we were
immediately dispatched with them, and they are now ready for your Acceptance.
We are sorry to tell you* that although your Brother the Governor of Virginia,
spared no Pains in purchasing the most suitable Goods for you, yet he could by
no Means procure a sufficient Number of such fire Arms, as would be acceptable
to you. We have however his Permission to assure you, that you shall be
supplied with them hereafter. -- In Confirmation whereof we give you this
String of Wampum.

Brethern,

"YOU have undoubtedly heard that many skulking Parties of Indians, prompted
thereto by our treacherous and most perfidious Enemies the French, have made
Incursions upon our Frontiers, murdering and captivating all the Men, Women and
Children, who were so unhappy as to fall into their Way. The Indians
principally concerned in this Bloodshed, are the Shawnese and Delawares, who
delighting in Blood, and not observing the most solemn Treaties, at which they
have always had a large Share of the Royal Bounty, have by the Cunning and
Artifice of the French, been withdrawn from their Allegiance to the Great King,
the Father of us all; and prevailed on take up the murdering Hatchet against
his Children. Thus the French, contrary to the Law of Nature and Nations, are
for ever pushing on our own Allies to destroy us, and what may we not all
expect, if we do not vigorously unite to frustrate their wicked Designs. The
Frontier Inhabitants of the Northern Colonies have been as yet the only Victims
of their Fury, but be assured, Brethern, that unless you take the necessary
Steps to prevent it* you will likewise be involved in the same Calamity. That
we may never be again exposed to the Treachery and Deceit of those cruel
Savages, we have resolved to cut them off from the Race of Mankind, and we do
in Behalf of the People we represent, return you our sincere and unfeigned
Thanks for your kind and friendly Assistance, in the Execution of that Design.

Brethren,

"THE French, who have nothing less in View than universal Monarchy, and are
for ever encroaching upon the Lands of not only the English, but of all the
Indian Nations in America, have built Forts upon our Lands: And the better to
support their ambitious Views, they have used every Artifice in their Power to
win the Six Nations to their Interest. But they detesting their perfidious
Practices, and being by dear-bought Experience convinced, how little their
Promises are to be regarded, would not be deluded by their fallacious Speeches,
but taking up the Hatchet against them and their Indians, joined our forces to
the Northward with a great Number of their Warriors, where our Army under the
Command of General Johnson, obtained a complete Victory over them. -- In
Testimony whereof we give you this Belt of Wampum.

Brethren,

"REMEMBER how this cruel People usurped the Land of the Nochees, and chased
them from their Country. Forget not also their Endeavors to destroy the
Chickasaws, who having timely Notice of their evil Intentions, gave them a
brave Repulse. You must have heard of the many Attempts they have made to cut
off the Six Nations, but they diligently pursuing the most prudent Measures for
their Security, have hitherto avoided the fatal Blow. We could enumerate a
thousand Instances of their Cruelty, and defy them to point out a single
Instance of ours: No, Brethern, on the contrary many Nations of Indians reduced
by War, and unable to withstand the Torrent of their Enemies, have fled to us
for Refuge, and have always found a secure Retreat among us.

Brethren,

"THE American Colonies no longer able to bear the Insults of the French, are
resolved to unite in revenging the Injuries they have received from that
perfidious Nation. And we have the most sanguine Hopes, that you, fired with
Indignation at their repeated Acts of Barbarity, and animated with that Spirit,
for which the Cherokees have been ever remarkable, will not suffer the Blood of
your Brothers the English, who are always ready to sacrifice their Lives and
Fortunes in your Defense, to remain unrevenged. Wherefore we invite you to
follow the Example of the Six Nations, by joining not only your own Force with
ours, but likewise by calling on all the Nations either in Alliance with you*
or depending on you, to assist us. By which Means you will manifest your Duty
to the King your Father, and your Love to your Brethren. For that Purpose you
shall be furnished with Arms and Ammunition, Clothing and Provision. -- In
Confirmation whereof, and to enforce our Request, we present you with this Belt
of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Cry of Approbation.

Brethren,

"WE have heard, that the French have been endeavoring by their false Reports
and cunning Insinuations, to alienate your Affections from the English; but we
have too great Confidence in your Integrity, to suspect that you can be
influenced by their deceitful and empty Speeches: And we flatter ourselves,
that you will on all Occasions, give us the best and earliest Intelligence, of
any Designs that may be formed to our Disadvantage. By such generous and candid
Behavior, you will not only establish a Friendship with us upon a lasting and
permanent Foundation, but also merit the Esteem of the King your Father, who
never fails to feed his dutiful Children when they are hungry, and cloth them
when they are naked. -- In Pledge of the Truth of what we have spoken, and of
our Inclination to live and die with you, we give you this Belt of Wampum.

Which was received with the usual Cry of Approbation.

Brethren,

"IT gives us Concern to hear that you should suspect your Friend Richard
Smith, of endeavoring to prevail on us, to leave Part of the Goods designed
for you at the Catawbas, by insinuating that you were not a People worthy of a
large Present. We assure you, that the Report is without the least Foundation,
and that if he had attempted to lessen you in our Esteem, we should have
treated him with the greatest Disdain. Your Brethren* of Virginia, truly
sensible of your inviolable Attachmment to the Interest of the English, have
taken every Opportunity of giving you Demonstrations of their Affection. The
Present indeed is not so large, as we could wish, for the Reason already
mentioned, that the most material Articles, were not to be had in our Colony.
To remove these Jealousies for the future, we would fain have you send some of
your Boys to Virginia, where we have a School erected for their Education. We
promise you that all due Care shall be taken of them, both with Respect to
their Clothes and Learning. When they come to be Men, they will be acquainted
with the Manners and Customs of us both, and our Children will naturally place
such a Confidence in them, as to employ them in settling any Disputes that may
hereafter arise. -- In Token of the Sincerity of our Intentions, and of our
great Desire, that you should accept of our Invitation, we give you this Belt
of Wampum."

Which was received with the usual Cry of Approbation.

CULLOUGHCULLA, repeating to the Interpreter what had been said, desired to
know if he had understood him right; which when the Interpreter answered in the
Affirmative, he addressed himself to the Commissioners, telling them that they
would deliberately consider every Thing that had been said to them, and return
them an Answer Tomorrow.

March 15th, 1756.
PRESENT. The Honorable PETER RANDOLPH, and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires,
Commissioners. THOMAS ADAMS, Esquire, Secretary. The Sachems and Warriors of
the CHEROKEES. RICHARD SMITH, ABRAHAM SMITH, DANIEL CARROL, Interpreters.


CULLOUGHCULLA's Answer to the Commissioners Speech, delivered Yesterday.

Brothers,

"THIS Day is appointed from above, for our Meeting, and I rejoice in seeing
our eldest Brothers the Virginians here; and that we may give you the earliest
Assurance of our Affection for you, I present you with this String of Wampum. I
have been in England, and have seen the Great King, you have so often had
Occasion to mention. He then acknowledged the Cherokees to be his Children, as
well as the English, and desired that we might continue Brethren for ever. I
shall always remember my Father's Commands, and shall whenever I have an
Opportunity, give the strongest Demonstrations of my Readiness to obey them. It
gives me the greatest Concern to hear of the horrid Murders committed by the
Indians on the Frontier Inhabitants of Virginia, and our Endeavors shall not
be wanting, to prevent such Massacres for the future; although I must tell you
that all our People, who, by their Situation, can be most useful on this
Occasion, live in the upper Towns, who are as much exposed to the Incursions of
the French and Indians, as your Frontier Inhabitants; and unless we have a Fort
built for the Protection of our Wives and Children, in the Absence of our
Warriors, it will not be safe for us to leave them. We have had frequent
Promises from the Governor of South Carolina, to build us a Fort; and it was
stipulated, at a Treaty held at Saludy last Summer, when we signed a Release
for our Lands to the Great King George: But we do not find, that that Governor
has yet made the least Preparations toward performing his Engagement.
Wherefore, we are sorry to tell you, that we don't much rely on him. The King
our Father told me, that we should mutually assist each other, and therefore,
as we are unacquainted with the Manner of building Forts, and had not the
necessary Materials, we thought ourselves justifiable in making our Application
to Governor Glen, who, I must again repeat it, has forfeited his Word, I have a
Hatchet ready, but we hope our Friends will not expect us to take it up, 'til
we have a Place of Safety for our Wives and Children. When they are secure, we
will immediately send a great Number of Warriors to be employed by your
Governor, where he shall think proper. I have given a true State of the
Condition of our Country, and desire you will make a true Representation of our
Situation to your Governor, and at the same Time tell him, that if no Steps are
taken for our Security, the French will extinguish the friendly Fire between
us: If he should have any Message to send to us hereafter, or should think it
expedient to send Commissioners again to us, we desire they may come the
Northward Path, it being the nearest. As it is a very dangerous Way, we need
not recommend it to him to send a strong Guard. Our Governor is old and infirm,
and can by no Means cross the Mountains, to meet you on the Southern Path, but
I am instructed to tell you, that he will on any Occasion meet you at
Stalnacker's, and he hopes that the Governor of Virginia, will not refuse him a
Meeting there. To convince you of our Attachment to your Interest, and to
enforce our Request, we give you this String of Wampum.

Brothers,

"IT gives us Concern to find, that for so many Years our Brethren of Virginia,
have declined a Trade with us. The King our Father, when I was in England,
assured me that we should constantly be supplied with Goods; but we have
hitherto found it otherwise. We tell you this, in hopes that when your Governor
knows it, he will give proper Encourgagement to some of his People to open a
Trade with us. You perceive the Nakedness of our People, and are very sensible,
that we are unable to make any Thing but Bows and Arrows for our Defense; they
are but bad Weapons, compared with Guns which kill at a great Distance. The
French supply their Indians with the best of Fire* Arms, and in that they have
the Advantage of us* and therefore we again repeat our Request to you, to begin
a Trade with us, which we hope will be to our mutual Advantage. -- To enforce
our Request we present you with these Skins.

Brethren,

"OUR Governor gave us a particular Charge to let you know our Wants, and at
the same Time to assure you, that the Path shall be cleared for your Traders,
in such a Manner, as that it shall never wear out. He also directed us to
desire that you will transmit this Treaty to the Great King on the other Side
the Water, who, we doubt not, is quite ignorant of our Circumstances, and will
relieve us as soon as he is acquainted with them. To remind you of this Request
we give you these Skins."

Cunnetalogo, then rose up and spoke as follows,

"I am sent a Messenger by the Governor of our Nation, with this Belt of
Wampum, to acquaint you of his Infirmities, and that he could not possibly
cross the Mountains, but that if the Governor of Virginia, should hereafter
think proper to have a Meeting with him, he could very conveniently come to
Stalnaker's. He also desired me to inform you that he thought himself in great
Danger, and that he could not possibly send out any Warriors to your
Assistance, 'til he had a Place of Security, in their Absence, for their Wives
and Children; he therefore hopes that Men will be sent immediately to erect a
Fort. I am also directed to acquaint you, that the Trade we have with Carolina,
is not sufficient to supply us with Necessaries, which you may judge from our
Nakedness. I do in our Governor's Name entreat you, to represent our Condition
to your Governor, who, we make no doubt, when he is informed of our Poverty,
from the Mouths of Men he can rely on, will send Traders to us. We will open
the Path and keep it clear.

Gave a Belt of Wampum.

The Commissioners desired the Interpreter to tell them that they would
consider on what they had severally said, and give them an Answer Tomorrow.

March 16th, 1756.
PRESENT. The Honorable PETER RANDOLPH, and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires,
Commissioners, THOMAS ADAMS, Esquire, Secretary. The Sachems and Warriors of
the CHEROKEES, RICHARD SMITH, ABRAHAM SMITH, DANIEL CARROL, Interpreters.


The Commissioners spoke as follows.

Brethren,

"WE are much pleased at the Satisfaction you expressed Yesterday of seeing and
talking with your Brethren of Virginia. But at the same Time it gave us no
small Concern, to hear from the Mouth of one of your greatest Warriors, who, we
press me, spoke the Sentiments of you all, that you are not in a Condition to
assist us. You reminded us of our mutual Obligation to assist each other in
Case of a War with the French, which we acknowledge. And the Treaties for that
Purpose gave us the strongest Assurance that you would when called upon join
our Forces on the Ohio, with at least Five Hundred of your Warriors, which we
hoped might be well spared, as your Nation is very numerous. You tell us that
your Towns situated on the upper Side of the Mountains, are equally exposed
with our Frontier Inhabitants to the Incursions of the French, but as we have
always heard, that there were only a few Men employed in building the Fort you
mention, and those at a great Distance from you, we had no Reason to apprehend
you to be in immediate Danger. However, as you think otherwise, we must allow,
that Self-Defence ought to be first provided for, and therefore, to remove all
Objections, we, in Behalf of the Colony of Virginia, do engage, that they shall
contribute their Proportion of the Expense of building a strong Fort for your
Protection; provided, that you in Behalf of your Nation, will contract to
supply us with a large Number of your Warriors, when that is completed; to be
marched into any Part of our Colony, upon the first Notice. And in the mean
Time, if you can supply us with only Two Hundred Men, you will have the greater
Pretensions to the Protection of the King your Father. We are the more
solicitous for your Assistance at this Juncture, as there are many Indians in
the French Service, whose Method and Manner of Fighting, you are much better
acquainted with, than our People.

"WE shall faithfully represent every Thing you have said to us to the Governor
of Virginia, who will transmit this Treaty to the King your Father, and not
only use his good Offices with His Majesty in your Behalf, but also his
Influence on the Inhabitants of that Colony, to engage them to be Adventurers
in a Trade with you.

"WE have great Hopes, that another Meeting will be quite unnecessary, as we
are now invested with a full Power of concluding a Treaty with you, and you may
be assured, our Engagements will be punctually performed. If our Proposals meet
with your Approbation, it is necessary that we should enter into an Obligation
to perform our respective Parts, and we shall prepare a Writing for that
Purpose, and send it to you this Evening for your Perusal.

"WHEN you have considered it and consulted your People, you will then acquaint
us with your Thoughts of it, for which Purpose we will attend you early in the
Morning, and shall then hope to finish our Business."

CULLOUGHCULLA answered, that they were very desirous of bringing the Treaty to
a Conclusion, and that they would take the Articles as soon as they were
prepared under their immediate Consideration, and be ready to give a final
Answer in the Morning.

March 17th, 1756.
PRESENT. The Honorable PETER RANDOLPH, and WILLIAM BYRD, Esquires,
Commissioners for Virginia. THOMAS ADAMS, Esquire, Secretary. The Sachems and
Warriors of the CHEROKEES. RICHARD SMITH, ABRAHAM SMITH, DANIEL CARROL,
Interpreters.


CULLOUGHCULLA, spoke as follows,

Brethren,

"THE Writing you sent us last Night has been interpreted to us, and having
duly considered it, we approve of every Thing contained therein, and are now
ready on our Part to sign it. We will engage to assist you with Four Hundred
Men at least, as soon as the Fort is completed, and we are not without Hopes,
but that we shall then be able to send you double that Number."

THE Commissioners immediately signed it in Behalf of Virginia, and the Sachems
in Behalf of their Nation; after which the Sachems by the Invitation of the
Commissioners, dined with them, when the Commissioners drank* ' The KING' s
Health, the Royal Family, and Success to the CHEROKEE Nation,' and the Indians
returning the Compliment, drank, ' His MAJESTY, the Royal Family, and
Prosperity to their Brethren the English.' The Indians then retired to their
Camp, taking first Leave of the Commissioners and those present, and expressing
themselves well pleased with every Thing that had been done.

A COPY of the ARTICLES,
BE it KNOWN to all those to whom these Presents shall come, That the Honorable
Robert Dinwiddie, Esquire, Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief, of the
Colony and Dominion of VIRGINIA, and Ammoscosettee, Emperor,
Otterle-Culloughculla, Counnerculogo, Onconago, Wullonowa, Occonnistoto,
Chuchu, Ukiyourough, Ammoloyouker, Kealkirustkee, Telletchee, Chunoyounkkee,
Sachems and Warriors of the great and powerful Nation of the CHEROKEE Indians,
laying nothing more to Heart, than by new Ties, to strengthen the good
Correspondence established between the Subjects of the King of Great Britain,
residing in North America, and their Brothers and faithful Allies the
CHEROKEES, and to prevent, by Measures taken in Time, the Accidents that may
excite a War* or cause a Disunion: The Honorable Peter Randolph, Esquire, one
of His Majesty's Council, Lieutenant of the County of Henrico, and
SurveyorGeneral of His Majesty's Customs, and the Honorable William Byrd,
Esquire, one of His Majesty's Council, and Lieutenant of the County of
Lunenburg, on the Part and Behalf of the said Robert Dinwiddie, Esquire, and
the said Colony of VIRGINIA, and the said Ammoscosettee, Emperor, and
Otterle-Culloughculla, Counnerculogo, Onconago, Wullonowa, Occonistoto, Chuchu,
Ukiyourough, Ammotoyouker, Kealkirustkee, Telletchee, Chunoyounkkee, Sachems
and Warriors on the Part and Behalf of the CHEROKEE Nation, having full Power,
do treat, accord, and conclude the following Articles.

I. THAT the ancient Alliance be renewed, and the old Chain brightened between
the English and Cherokees.

II. THAT if the French King shall at any Time wage War against the King of
England, the Cherokees shall wage War with all their Power against the French
King, and all his Allies.

III. THAT Virginia shall assist in contributing their Proportion toward the
building a strong Fort, in such Part of the Cherokee Country as the Sachems and
Warriors of that Nation shall direct, for their Protection.

IV. THAT as soon as the said Fort shall be built, the Cherokees shall within
Forty Days Notice, march into Virginia, Four Hundred able Warriors to such Fort
or Place, as the Governor of that Place shall order or appoint, to be employed
in the Service of the said Colony as Soldiers, in defending the Inhabitants
thereof against the Encroachments of the French and Indians in their Alliance.

V. THAT if the French shall at any Time, directly or indirectly make use of
any Means, either by coming into the Nation themselves, or sending their
Indians with Belts of Wampum, or by any other Way whatsoever, endeavor to
prevail on the Cherokees to infringe this Treaty, the Cherokees shall forthwith
dispatch a Messenger, in whom they can confide, to the Governor of Virginia, to
acquaint him with the same, and the particular Measures so taken.

VI. THAT if the Cherokees at any Time shall know, or be informed of, any
Schemes that the French or their Indians may plan, to the Prejudice of the
English, they shall give immediate Intelligence thereof to the Governor of
Virginia.

VII. THAT the Warriors which shall be employed in the Service of the English,
in the Colony of Virginia, be found and provided at the Expense of that Colony,
with all necessary Clothes, Victuals, Arms and Ammunition.

VIII. THAT neither the Cherokees nor Virginians, shall protect the disobedient
Subjects of the other, or entertain Rebels, Traitors or Fugitives, but within
Twenty Days after due Requisition made, shall deliver them up.

IX. THAT the Cherokees shall not suffer or permit the French to build any Fort
or Fortification, on any of their Lands on the Waters of the Missisippi or
elsewhere, that may annoy the English, if in their Power to prevent it.

X. THAT if any Subject belonging to the King of Great Britain, residing in
Virginia, or any Cherokee belonging to the Cherokee Nation, shall offend
against this Treaty, they shall be punished, without the Treaty being any Way
therefore infringed.

Done and signed at BROAD-RIVER, in the Province of North Carolina, this
Seventeenth Day of March, in the XXIXth Year of His Majesty's Reign, Anno Dom.
1756. PETER RANDOLPH. [L. S.] WILLIAM BYRD. [L. S.] AMMO^COSETTE, (mark.) [L.
S.] CHUCHU. (mark.) [L. S.] OTTERLE-CULLOUGHCULLA, (mark.) [L. S.]
COUNNERCULOGO, (mark.) [L. S.] ONCONAGO, (mark.) [L. S.] WULLONOWA, (mark.) [L.
S.] OCCONISTOTO, (mark.) [L. S.] UKIYOUROUGH, (mark.) [L. S.] AMMOTOYOUKER,
(mark.) [L. S.] KEALKI^^^TKE^, (mark.) [L. S.] TELLETCHEE, (mark.) [L. S.]
CHUNOYOUNKKEE, (mark.) [L. S.]


His Honor the GOVERNOR was pleased the 12th of April, 1756, to send the
following Message to the House of Burgesses.
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the House of Burgesses,
"I HAVE thought it proper to communicate to your House, my Commission and
Instructions to Peter Randolph and William Byrd, Esquires, appointed
Commissioners, to treat on Behalf of this Government with the Catawbas and
Cherokees, with my Letter to those Gentlemen, containing some Observations
which I judged might be of Service in their Negociations with those People, and
my two Speeches to the Catawbas and Cherokees. And to give you all the
Satisfaction I am at present capable of, I send you the joint Letter of the
Commissioners to me, dated the 17th of last Month. The Treaty I have not yet
received, nor expect it before their Return."

THE said Letter from the Commissioners signified they had that Day concluded
their Business with the Cherokees, who would by no Means consent to part with
any of their Warriors 'til they had a Fort built, for the Protection of their
Women and Children in their Absence, but engaged as soon as it was completed
to send four Hundred of their Warriors to our Assistance. That their Sachems
would engage for no more, but at the same Time assured them, they might
probably send at least a Thousand which there was little Reason to doubt of, as
they appear to have a particular Regard for Virginia. That it was the Opinion
of Mr. Smith, who is well acquainted with their Situation, that if we should
neglect to build the Fort this Summer, they will be under a Necessity of
joining the French* wherefore, they (the Commissioners) had stipulated and
promised in Behalf of this Colony, that a Fort should be actually erected in
the Cherokee Country with all possible Expedition.

Upon this the House of Burgesses came to the following Resolutions, viz.

Resolved, THAT a Fort be erected in the Country of the Cherokees.

Resolved, THAT an humble Address be made to the Governor to desire that his
Honor will be pleased to pay for erecting the said Fort out of the Money, which
His Majesty was pleased to send to him for the Use of this Colony now remaining
in his Hands.

To which the Governor sent the following Answer.

Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the House of Burgesses.

"IN Answer to your Resolve, I am to acquaint you, That since the Conversation
between your Committee and myself, concerning the Application of the Balance
remaining in my Hands of the Money His Majesty was graciously pleased to send
for the Protection of the Colony, I have disbursed several large Sums in the
Purchase of Beeves, and other Necessaries for the Forces; however, I will
engage to furnish Eight Hundred Pounds toward that necessary Work, the
erecting a Fort you have resolved on in the Cherokee Country. But I should be
glad you would appoint some proper Persons to make an Estimate of the Expense
of the Undertaking, that a suitable Provision may be made to go on with the
Work with Dispatch and Regularity.

The House of Burgesses after that Message, came to the following Resolution,
viz.

Resolved, THAT an humble Address be made to the Governor, to desire that his
Honor will be pleased to appoint Major Andrew Lewis, and Captain Samuel
Overton, to manage and overlook the Building a Fort in the Cherokee Country,
and to assure his Honor that this House will make good any Deficiency that the
Sum his Honor has been pleased to say he would pay toward erecting the said
Fort, shall fall short, so as the same do not exceed Two Thousand Pounds in the
whole.

TO which his Honor answered, "He was well satisfied with the Resolution of
their House, and should appoint Major Lewis, to oversee the Construction of the
said Fort."

AND in Consequence thereof, the Governor was pleased to order Major Lewis, to
march immediately with Sixty Men, Tools, Utensils, and Provisions to Choto, in
the Cherokee Country, for that Service.

FINIS.

