VIRGINIA's Danger and Remedy.

TWO DISCOURSES, Occasioned by The severe Drought in sundry Parts of the
Country; and the Defeat of GENERAL BRADDOCK.

By SAMUEL DAVIES, A. M.

Dii multa neglecti dederunt
Hesperiae [Virginiae] mala luctuosae. --
Foecunda Culpae Saecula, --
Hoc Font derivata Clades
In Patriam Populumque Fluxit.
Hor. Car. L. iii. Od. vi. (...)
(...)
(...)
HOM. Iliad. I. WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by WILLIAM HUNTER, MDCCLVI

THE PREFACE.
THE following Discourses are a hurried Attempt to save a sinking Land. The
Author was on a long Journey, when he received the Confirmation of the
melancholy News from the Ohio; and he had but two Days to prepare for the
Pulpit, after his Return. And as it was judged proper by many immediately to
publish the Sermons, he had no Time to revise and transcribe them for the
Press: For the Country now being in a very uncertain and fluctuating State, a
Discourse adapted to its present Situation, may be improper a few Monthss, or
even a few Weeks hence. To spend Time about Embellishment, at such a Juncture,
would be egregious Trifling.

The Account of the Drought, I know to be true; and Thousands will be sensible
that it is not aggravated. The Account of the fatal Action at the Ohio, is
founded upon the best Intelligences I could get; and if there be a few
circumstantial Mistakes, the Substance is undoubtedly true.

As many of our Countrymen are stupidly ininsensible of their Danger, and
cannot exert themselves for their own Defense, 'til they are alarmed; and as
but few seem disposed to view the present Posture of Affairs in a religious
Light; the Author had impatiently looked for something of this Kind from some
more masterly and leisurely Hand. But being disappointed, and surrounded with
Importunities from various Quarters, he thought himself obliged to undertake
it, though under peculiar Disadvantages.

If it may but contribute to the Safety of his Country, and to the Reformation
of his Fellow Subjects, his End in this Attempt, as well as his Desires and
Prayers, will be answered.

Hanover, August 4, 1755. P. S. Feb. 14, 1756. The following Discourses were
sent to the Press a few Days after the News of the Defeat at Monongahala. But
the Press being necessarily employed about other Things, and other unforeseen
Obstructions happening in the Printers Way, the Publication was unavoidably
delayed. But it is hoped, it is not now impertinent nor unseasonable; as no
very considerable Alteration has happened in our public Affairs, except the
Victory obtained by the brave Sir William Johnson, at Lake-George; which was a
great Encouragement to us, though not a decisive Stroke.



TWO DISCOURSES, etc.
The MORNING SERMON.
AMOS iii. 1 -- 6. Hear this Word that the Lord has spoken against you, O
Children of Israel, against the whole Family which I brought up from the Land
of Egypt, saying, You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth;
therefore I will punish you for all your Iniquities. Can two walk together,
except they be agreed? Will a Lion roar in the Forest, when he has no Prey?
Will a young Lion cry out of his Den, if he have taken nothing? Can a Bird fall
in a Snare upon the Earth, where no Gin is for him? Shall one take up a Snare
from the Earth, and have taken nothing at all? Shall a Trumpet be blown in the
City, and the People not be afraid? Shall there be Evil in a City, and the Lord
has not done it?
IF my late Journey deprived me of Leisure to make proper Preparations for your
Entertainment Today; I must own, it has helped me not a little, in furnishing
me with Materials adapted to this melancholy Season. I have seen the Staff of
Life just broken in most Places; in a Tour of about an hundred Miles Through the
Counties of Hanover, Goochland, Albemarle, etc.
The Fields which were wont to look green and flourishing with our Staple
Commodity Tobacco.
, on which our Trade so entirely depends, I have seen prepared with Labor and
Pain, but unplanted, or the Plants parched and fading, I have seen the Fields,
that in former Seasons promised abundant Support for Man and Beast, and were
rich in stately, blooming Corn, now withering, and hardly promising a few
sapless Leaves for our Cattle, and a few husky Ears for ourselves. I have seen
the Planter, that was once surrounded with Affluence, pointing to his empty
withering Fields, and ready to smite upon his Breast, and say, "Alas! what
shall I do for Corn to support my Family next Year? I would just now sell some
of my Slaves, or any Thing in my Possession, and that at an Under-Rate, to
purchase a sure Supply, if I knew where to get it." This Scarcity is the more
threatening, as Pennsylvania, the Granary of America, has also suffered severely
by the Drought. And as the numerous British Islands in the West Indies depend
upon that Province for a Supply of Wheat, and upon us for Corn; they will also
have a deep Share with the Colonies on the Continent in the Effects of this
unfruitful Season. Indeed there are but few Parts of his Majesty's Dominions,
but will be sensibly affected by it, more or less. It seems to be a
wide-extended circulating Distress; and we should feel it as such.

There is also a general Complaint of the Stagnation of Trade, the Scarcity of
Money, the Weight of the various Taxes, the high Price of Goods, and the low
Price of your Staple Commodities: And some poor Families are already in the
very Jaws of Famine, and the Children crying for Bread, and there is just none
for them. What oppressive, complicated Calamities are these? Your own
Circumstances will teach you Sympathy in this Case; or if any of you are so
happy as to be free from some of them, you have your Share in others of them;
and this must affect you with Concern for yourselves, and Compassion for
others, on whom the whole Burden may fall with greater Oppression.

Were these Calamities single and alone, we could not but feel and lament each
of them. But when they are complicated and united, they are heavy indeed; and
this is the melancholy Case of most Parts of this Colony. -- But Oh VIRGINIA!
Oh my Country! even this Complication of Afflictions is not all thy Burden.
Besides all this, we hear the Sound of the Trumpet, and see Garments rolled in
Blood. We have received the melancholy Confirmation of the News we were so
unwilling to believe, concerning the Fate of a great Part of our Army. Our
brave General is no more; near fifty of our best Officers, and near six hundred
of our Men, are killed or wounded; an Army of one thousand three hundred Men
routed; and all this, (Oh indignant Mortification!) all this by four or five
hundred undisciplined, cowardly, insidious Savages. Who can so much as in
Thought, take a Survey of the bloody Field, without all the tender and mournful
Passions working within him? How are the mighty fallen, and the Weapons of War
perished! Ye Banks of Monongahala, upon you let there be no Dew, neither let
there be Rain upon you, nor Fields of Offerings: For there the the Shield of
the Mighty is vilely cast away 2 Samuel i. 21, 27.
. See there the mighty Dead rolling in their own Blood! some of them scalped by
merciless Indians, left without the Honors of Burial in a howling Wilderness,
to be devoured by the Fowls of Heaven, and Beasts of Prey! See the wounded
writhing with Pain, surrounded with all the Terrors of Death, and groaning out
their Life, in Amazement and Consternation; many dying of Wounds not mortal, if
proper Care could have been taken of them! while the Remnant that escape, shift
for themselves, and fly in the wildest Horror, through a barren Wilderness,
without the Supports of Life! Who can realize such a Scene, without sharing in
the Sufferings of these unhappy Men; especially if we consider, they suffer for
our Sake, i. e. for our own Defense; and whether we may not also add, they
suffer for our Sins, we shall enquire presently. To complete our Loss, our fine
Artillery, Baggage, Horses, Wheel-Carriages, are destroyed, or fallen into the
Hands of our Enemies, to strengthen and enrich them, and to weaken and
impoverish us, The New England Men indeed are pushing their Conquests wherever
they turn, under the Smiles of Heaven, to which they look, and in which they
trust; and this we should acknowledge with Gratitude, as a singular Bluffing,
and greatly tending to the Advantage of the British Colonies in general; but in
another View, methinks it makes us more sensible of our peculiar Misfortunes
and Mortification in this Colony; as though we were singled out to Destruction,
and nothing could prosper in which we are concerned And perhaps the Routing of
the French in their Northern Settlements may cause them to overrun this
Colony, in Order to make Reprisals, and set them on fighting from a stronger
Principle than Ambition, viz. a Care to provide a Place for themselves to go to.

But even this is not all. I have the melancholy News to communicate to you,
that sundry Families in our frontier Counties have been murdered by the
barbarous Indians. They were asleep in their Beds of Rest, without dreaming of
Danger; and the first Thing that awakened them was the deadly Blow of the
bloody Ax, or the dying Shrieks of a murdered Father, a Wife, or a Child. Some
of them were carried Captive, and afterward found in the Woods, mangled and
half-rotten, with all the Marks of Barbarity and leisurely Torture upon them;
scalped or beheaded; their Women ripp'd up, and left in a Posture too monstrous
to be expressed, and even their Blood drank These are the Words of a Letter
from a Gentleman in Au^^^^ (...), who was a Witness of these Scenes of
unnatural Barbarity.
. I also conversed with an Express from Augusta, two or three Days ago, who
told me, that a great Number of poor Families, that were just beginning the
World in the Wilderness, and had made flourishing Plantations there, were
driven from their Houses by the Terror of these Barbarians, and had fled for
Safety, in the wildest Consternation, over a long and tedious Tract of Rocks
and Mountains, near two hundred Miles, into the more thickly inhabited Parts of
the Country. There they now are, Men, Women and Children, without any Covering
but the inclement Sky, exposed to the Dews of the Night, and the scorching Heat
of the Day, without Bread, except what the Charity of others affords them. For
they were obliged to leave their plentiful Harvests behind them unreaped; and
they could carry with them but little of their Household Furniture, their Stock,
or any of their Possessions: They were glad they could 'get their own Lives for
a Prey. As for those Families that live in the populous Parts of that County,
they are obliged to gather together into Forts, where the Women and Children
continue in Crowds Night and Day; and the Men by Day venture out, though in
constant Fear of their Lives, to look after their Farms, and make a little
Provision for their subsistence; and as the Drought there is very severe, it
must be a scanty Provision indeed. In these Forts, which are very numerous in
various Parts, they now meet to worship God: And they dare not go up to the
Sanctuary, without carrying their Arms along with them; and they are always in
trembling Expectation to be surprised by the Enemy.

Our happy Situation, about the Center of the Colony, has kept us hitherto in
Peace and Safety. But it may not be always so with us: The Inroads of the Enemy
may reach even to us. Or if we should be disturbed only by distant Alarms; yet
these unhappy Creatures are proper Objects of our Compassion, and of our
Intercession before God. They are our Brethren, Fellow Christians, and Members
of the same Body politic with us: And it is in the Body politic, as in the
natural Body; when one Member suffers, all the Members suffer with it. To all
this I may add, the poor State of our Militia, which has hitherto been a mere
Farce. -- The Scarcity of Arms and Ammunition in the Country. -- The stupid
Carelessness, or sneaking Cowardice, of not a few of our Inhabitants, -- and
the Danger of Insurrection and Massacre from some of our own gloomy Domestics.
And these are very alarming Circumstances, that may justly excite our Fears;
though they are not desperate; nor should they cause us to despond, and give up
ourselves for lost.

I know I should mingle a great deal of cheerful Light with these gloomy
Shades, to form an exact Picture of the present State of our Country.
Notwithstanding all these Calamities, we still enjoy a rich Variety of
Blessings. Though God is risen up to punish us, yet he does not punish us as
our Iniquities deserve; nor strip us of every Comfort. As yet, we enjoy Food
and Raiment; and the Scarcity of one Part of the Country, is rendered more
tolerable by the Prospect of Plenty in other Parts, which have been refreshed
with Rain from Heaven: And even this threatening and melancholy Year, may yet
compare with the most fruitful and happy Years of some populous Countries on
our Globe. Our Northern Forces have more than made Reprisals for our Loss; and
the Success of our Fleet, under Admiral Boscawen, has given a considerable Blow
to the Power of France by Sea. Our Inhabitants are numerous, and some of them
resolute, and capable of making a good Defense; and a considerable Part of our
Forces have survived the fatal Ninth of July, in which so many of them were
slaughtered. These and sundry other Things have an encouraging Appearance; and
we cannot overlook them without Ingratitude, and excessive Despondence. But
notwithstanding these favorable Circumstances, and notwithstanding such future
Turns of Providence as may make for us, it is beyond all Doubt, this will be
the most melancholy and calamitous Year that Virginia has ever seen; and he is
a stupid Creature indeed, that can flatter himself with better Hopes. To such,
if there be such among you, I may address the Words of Jeremiah (...) v. 12.
, They have belied the Lord, and said, It is not He, neither shall Evil come
upon us, neither shall we see Sword or Famine. And over such I may take up the
Complaint of the Prophet Isaiah Isaiah xxvi. 11.
'Lord when thy Hand is lifted up, they will not see,' nor labor to escape the
falling Blow: 'But they shall see,' to their Cost, 'and be ashamed' of their
foolish Presumption. But I hope you are generally alarmed, and would willingly
improve such afflictive Dispensations to the best Purposes; to which I hope to
lead you in the Exposition of the Words I have read to you.

It would certainly be an Instance of the greatest Stupidity, to groan under
these Calamities, without carrying our Enquiries so far as. -- Who is the
proper original Author of them? -- What is the Reason that God has withheld so
many of his usual Bles^^^^^ from us, and afflicted us with so many Distresses;
and that notwithstanding our past Deliverances, and the many Privileges with
which he has been pleased to distinguish us? -- How long shall these Judgments
be continued? and what is the readiest Way to escape them? These are very
proper Enquiries in the present Situation of our Country; and to each of these
my Text will furnish us with an Answer; as I shall show you, when I have hinted
a Word or two concerning the original Occasion of this Prophecy.

The Prophet Amos was sent to the Israelites, toward the latter End of their
Kingdom, to warn them of the sore Judgments of Famine, War, and Captivity,
which were just coming upon them, for their long Course of sinning from
Generation to Generation. It was to these Israelites that the Words of my Text
were primarily directed; and they are equally suitable to us in our present
Circumstances, which are so like to theirs.

Let us now enquire.

I. Who is the proper original Author or Inflictor of the Calamities under
which our Country groans? Is our Country under no Influence or Power, but what
is visible? Are all our Affairs under the Management of Chance or Fortune? Or
is this World the absolute, independent Kingdom of Men, without any
Subordination to a superior Power? Or do natural Causes operate, and accomplish
Events of themselves, without any Dependence upon the great Creator? Alas! do
we lie at the Mercy of blind Causes, or of the strongest Arm, or the most
politic Head? Are we to look no higher than the Clouds, for the Cause of
Drought? And are we to trace the Origin of the Defeat of our Army, no farther
than the Power or Stratagems of the French or Indians? If this be Case, what a
miserable World is this? what a State of Anarchy and Confusion? Then we have
nothing to trust to, but the Arm of Flesh; we are cut off from the Relief of
Prayer to an allruling God; we are cast off from the Rock of Confidence in his
all-governing Providence: For why should we pray to, or trust in, one, that
does not concern himself in our Affairs? But is this really the Case? Is the
World left thus without a supreme universal Head? Every pious Heart must
answer, "I hope not; or I am undone." And I can assure you, your Hope is well
grounded. The Lord reigns; let the Earth be glad Ps. xcvii. 1.
. He has prepared his Throne in the Heavens; and his Kingdom rules over all
and ciii. 19.
. He does according to his Will in the Armies of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth, None can stay his Hand, or say unto him, what do
thou Isa. xiv. 7.
? Our Country in particular is a little Territory of his Dominion; and the
Calamities we now feel, are the Chastisements, or the Judgments, of his
fatherly, or vindictive, Hand. Is there Evil in a City, or in a Country, and
the Lord has not done it? No; he himself has told us, I form the Light, and
create Darkness; I make Peace, and create Evil: I the Lord do all these Things
Dan. iv. 30.
. See now that I am He, even I am He; and there is no God with me. I kill, and
I make alive; I wound, and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver out of
my Hand Deuteronomy. xxxii. 29.
.

It is indeed but seldom, that he works with his own immediate Hand, without
the Instrumentality of secondary Causes. He has a whole Universe of Servants;
as many Creatures, so many Servants; and he has Work for them all; and keeps
them all busy, to accomplish some grand Design of his, whether they know and
design it, or not. Men and Angels, Beasts, Birds and Infects, the Sun and
Stars, Fire and Water, Winds and Storms; in short, every Creature, rational and
irrational, animate and inanimate, the most furious and ungovernable, as well
as the most gentle and manageable, Tyrants, and Hurricanes, as well as Gabriel
or the Sun; all have their Stations assigned them; all are doing his Work,
either of Goodness or Justice, in the grand Scheme of the Universe. Some of
them know his Will, and delight to do it: Some of them do not know it, or do
not regard it; but follow their own selfish and perverse Will; and some of them
are naturally incapable of all Knowledge and Design; but they are all equally
his Servants, and by them all, he accomplishes his Work with equal Exactness.
Storms and Tempests as punctually obey his Orders, as the Angels in Heaven. It
is the Character of those illustrious Beings that, they hearken unto the Voice
of his Word Psalm ciii. 20. -- 21.
; yet (...) the same Character of the stormy Wind, (...) Lord. -- Fire and
Hail, Snow and Vapor (...) my Wind fulfilling his Word Psalm (...)
.

There are various Causes of Rain and (...) but they are all employed by him,
and (...) him. The treacherous French and (...) have routed our Army; but it
was all ordered by the Providence of God, and all the Causes and Occasions of
it were disposed by him. There is no Evil, i. e. no Calamity, in our Land, but
the Lord bath done it. Secondary Causes indeed produce their proper Effects,
and bring Events to pass as naturally, as if they acted entirely from
themselves. But this is so far from disproving the divine Agency, that it does
display its astonishing Wisdom, and its Agreeableness to the Nature of the
various Ministers of Providence. To rule the World as really, as if he managed
it with his own immediate Hand; and yet to rule it so agreeably to the Nature
of his Creatures, as if he left them to themselves, and did not intermeddle
with it: To rule it effectually and incontroulably; and yet so gently and
secretly, that his Agency is very often not perceived* to do his own Will, and
yet let his Creatures do their own; What amazing Wisdom is this! what a
mysterious, perfect Administration! Such is the Government of the universal
Ruler, under which we live; and we ought not to make the Excellency of it an
Objection against its Reality.

There is not so much Need, I presume, to convince your Reason of this Truth,
as to inculcate it upon you, to make your Hearts sensible of it. Certainly it
is no Extravagance of Faith, it is no superstitious Imagination, to believe,
that God still rules the World he has made, and that he has not cast it off as
a disregarded Orphan. A Man need not be an immoderate or an over-credulous
Believer, to admit this. This is one of the first Principles of natural
Religion, as well as a fundamental Doctrine of Christianity. This is the avowed
Belief of our Country; and sure, there is not one among you, that dare so much
as secretly deny it.

But alas! what little Influence has this common Faith upon the Temper and
Conduct of the Generality? How many with this Profession in their Mouths, and
this Persuasion in their Heads, are Atheists in Heart and Practice? Do they
practically believe that God disposes all Events, who do not take Notice of his
Agency in them; but direct all their Attention to visible Causes. Do you really
believe this, who can lie down at Night, and rise in the Morning, without
commending yourselves to his Protection, and imploring his Blessing? Do you
believe it, who can review the numberless Blessings and Deliverances of your
Life, without falling upon your Knees in affectionate Gratitude before your
gracious Benefactor? Is this your Faith, you who are hardly ever sensible of
the Providence of God in the Success or Disappointments of your Pursuits? You
who can 'eat, and forget God;' you who enjoy the Blessing of the Sun and Rain,
and the Fruits of the Earth; and yet go on thoughtless of your divine
Benefactor, as the Cattle of your Stall, or who look upon these as Things of
Course, or the Fruits of your own Industry; you that can behold withering
Fields, and scanty Harvests, without bowing the Knee to God; imploring his
Mercy, and without mourning for the Sins of our guilty Land, and smiting your
own Breasts, saying, 'What have I done?' you that groan by Reason of
Affliction, and yet do not enquire* Where is God my Maker, that gives Songs in
the Night Job xxxv. 10.
? your that can hear of Preparations for War, and trust in the Number or
Accomplishments of our Army for Success, without humbly looking up to the Lord
of Armies; you that murmur and fret at Disappointments and Afflictions, as though
you would form an Insurrection against the King of Heaven as a Tyrant, instead
of humbling yourselves under his righteous Hand as mourning Penitents; you that
utterly despond at the Prospect of Famine, and the Rumor of War, Invasion and
Blood, as though Jehovah had abdicated his Throne, and renounced the Government
of the World, and you had no God to fly to; you that can see his threatening
Hand, and yet laugh at the falling Blow, as though he were not in Earnest, or you
could easily escape it; you that live in the World, as though it were not a
Territory of his Government; you that make natural Causes your God, by
ascribing all Events to them. -- Do you practically and really believe that God
is the Ruler of the World, and of your Country and your Affairs in Particular?
Do you believe this, while your Conduct and Temper are so contrary to it? No;
you are practical Atheists, greater Monsters than speculative Atheists.
Whatever you profess in Words, you do in Heart and Life renounce and abjure
Jehovah from being the Governor of the World; you virtually say he is not the
Ruler of your Country: Your Country is invaded, or protected, by an Arm of
Flesh; and God has nothing to do with it; your Plenty of Famine depends upon
Clouds and Earth, without a God to manage them. Oh! how many Hearts in our Land
mutter their Treason against the King of Heaven? On how many Practices this
Blasphemy inscribed in legible Characters? How is our Country overrun with
this Kind of Atheism? How many Fools are there that say in their Hearts, there
is no God Job xxii. 13, 14.
? Their Language is, How does God know? Can he judge through the thick Cloud? He
walks at Ease in the Circuit of Heaven Psalm. xiv. 1.
. And is it not Time for God to arise, and assert his Government? Since gentler
Measures will not do, is it not Time for him to make us sensible of it, by
terrible Things in Righteousness? May he not constrain us to look to him for
Help, by leaving us nothing else to look to? O my Country! it will never be
well with thee, 'til thou know that the most high rules in the Kingdoms of
Men, and gives them to whomsoever he will Dan. iv. 17.
. Acknowledge him thy Lord and King: Receive Blessings as from his Hand: Submit
to Calamities as from his Rod: Do this, and it shall be well with thee, and
with thy Children. To teach thee this, O Virginia, thy Land is now languishing
with Drought, and alarmed with the Terrors of War. Therefore learn this Lesson,
left other Nations learn it from thy Destruction. Can Jehovah always bear to be
disowned in his own Dominions; or suffer Disloyalty and Rebellion to pass
unpunished, under an empty complimental Profession of Allegiance? No, he will
extort from his Enemies that Confession, 'Verily there is a God that judges in
the Earth Psalm. lviii. 11.
.' Therefore be ye afraid of the Sword; for Wrath brings the Punishment of
the Sword, That ye may know there is a Judgment Job xix. 29.
.

Let us now proceed to the IId Enquiry:

What is the Reason that God has withheld so many of his usual Blessings from
us? why has he not blessed us, as formerly, with Peace and Plenty? why is he
not with us, and why does he not give us the comfortable Tokens of his gracious
Presence? Alas! my Brethren, the melancholy Reason is too plain, we are not
agreed with him, nor he with us: A great Difference subsists between us and our
God; and if it continue, we must part; we must part forever; for can two walk
together except they be agreed? Can a holy, just and jealous God maintain a
friendly Intercourse with a sinful, impenitent People? No, Sirs; they must
part; and Woe unto them if the depart from them Hos. ix. 12.
. There is a Controversy that subsists between God and Virginia, a Controversy
not about Trifles, but about the Prerogatives of his Crown, and the Rights of
his Government; a Controversy which shall be obeyed, whether his holy and
righteous Will, or the perverse Will and wicked Lusts and Passions of Men;
whether he or his Creatures should be most loved and regarded; whether Holiness
be the only Way to Happiness, and whether his Son Jesus, whom he has sent into
the World, and made known in our Country, shall be owned and loved as a Savior
and Lord. He insists upon it, that the Concerns of Eternity are of infinitely
greater Importance than those of Time; but many of the Inhabitants of our Land
are of another Mind: They pursue the Riches, the Honor, the Pleasures of this
World, as their great Concern, and take but very little Thought or Pains about
their everlasting State. Let God be disobeyed, let Christ be neglected, let
Heaven be lost, let their Souls be damned, They care not; they will have their
Pleasures; they will drink, and game, and swear, and whore: they will pursue
the World with Eagerness and Avarice. God insists upon it, that if a People
professing his Name, would enjoy his favorable Presence with them, they must
abandon their national Vices, and turn to him: Our Countrymen differ from him
in this; they expect the Blessings of his Providence, and yet go on
impenitently in their Sins. He assures them that Sin will destroy them at last:
They will not believe him, but hope for Happiness, though they indulge themselves
in it. He recommends Holiness of Heart and Life, as absolutely necessary to
everlasting Happiness; and as the most pleasant and delightful Course: They
count it a needless or a moping, dull, melancholy Thing, and hope to be saved
without it. He has pronounced Jesus the only Savior; but they are not
solicitous about an Interest in him, nor thoro'ly sensible of their Need of
him; but flatter themselves their own Works will go a great Way toward their
Salvation. They also differ widely in Disposition and Temper. He loves
Holiness; they loath it. He hates all Sin, in its most alluring Forms; they
delight in it, and will indulge it. Thus it has been for a long Time: We 'have
walked contrary to God.' He has waited a long Time to see if we would make up
the Difference; but Men insist they are right, or at best put him off with a
Purpose to repent in some uncertain Hereafter, which he foresees they will
never arrive at, or never improve. He would have them view the present Posture
of their Affairs in a religious Light, and humble themselves before him: He has
commissioned the Drought and the Sword as his Ministers to preach Repentance to
them; but few of them repent of their Wickedness, saying, What have I done?
every one turns to his Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle Jer.
viii. 6.
. The Lord of Hosts calls them to weeping and mourning, and girding with
Sackcloth; but instead of this, behold Joy, and Gladness, slaying Oxen, and
killing Sheep, eating Flesh and drinking Wine. as though they acted upon that
Epicurean Maxim, Let us eat and drink, for Tomorrow we shall die Isai. xxii.
12, ^^
What a wide Difference is here? And can a righteous God walk in Friendship
with thee, O Virginia, while this Disagreement continues? No, he must walk
contrary to thee; his Soul must depart from thee, and he will leave thee to
thyself, or give thee up to thine Enemies, that thou may feel and lament his
Absence, and sue for Peace. Therefore ' agree with thine Adversury quickly,'
lest he bid thee adieu forever. Down upon thy Knees before him; consent to his
Proposals; labor to be holy as he is holy; labor to imbibe his Spirit, and
contract the same Temper: Be instructed, O Virginia, lest his Soul depart from
thee Jer. vi. 8.
, and with him Peace and Plenty take their Flight. Be reconciled to him; give
up the Cause, and stand out against him no longer; so will he yet return, and
walk in thee, and dwell among thy Inhabitants, as his Sons and Daughters.

But why has he inflicted upon our Country such Calamities? We have seen he is
the Author of them, and that there is no Evil in our Land, but the Lord has
done it. And why has he done it? Has he made the Heavens as Brass over the
Heads, and the Earth as Iron under the Feet, of an innocent People? Has he
defeated an Army that was to defend a righteous Country? Has he done all this
without Cause? No; Will a Lion roar in the Forest when he has no Prey? Will he
collect his Rage, and spring out of his Thicket with a hideous Roar, when he
sees nothing that is a fit Prey for him? No; he will not fly at a Rock or a
Tree, but at some Animal which Instinct teaches him to devour. Will a young
Lion cry out of his Den, if he have taken nothing? No; but when he has got his
Prey in his deadly Paw, he roars over it, and tears it to Pieces. And would the
righteous Judge of all the Earth roar against us, in his Judgments, if we were
not a fit Prey for his Vengeance? would he blast the Fruits of the Earth, and
roar against us in the horrid Sound of War, if our Sins had not made us fit to
be devoured by his righteous Judgments? No; Innocence may always be sure of
Protection under his Government; and penitent Sinners may hope for his Mercy;
but impenitent Sinners he will punish in the World to come for their personal
Sins; and impenitent Nations he will visit with his righteous Judgments, for
their national Sins, in this World: I say, in this World; for it is only in
this World that they subsist in a national Capacity; and consequently, this is
the only Place in which they can be punished in that Capacity. The Lord's Voice
therefore cries to our Country; and what does it cry? It proclaims us a guilty,
impenitent People; a fit Prey for divine Justice: And it is high Time for God
to come out against us as a roaring Lion. This dreadful Style is often used by
the Prophets, when they describe the Judgments of an angry God, against a
guilty People; and we may tremble, lest it be verified in our Country. I will
be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion, to the House of Judah: I, even
I will tear, and go away: I will take away, and none shall rescue him Hosea v
14.
. To a People that had abused his Mercies, and ungratefully forgotten him, as
we have done, this is the terrible Language of a provoked God, I will be unto
them, as a Lion, as a Leopard by the Way will I observe them, I will meet them
as a Bear that is bereaved of her Whelps, and will rent the Caul of their
Hearts, and I will devour them like a Lion Hosea xiii. 7, 8.
.

There is another Metaphor used in my Text, to express the same alarming Truth.
Can a Bird fall in a Snare upon the Earth, where no Gin is for him? Can it be
ensnared and taken, where no Snare is laid for it? No, and can a People fall
under Calamities, when God has not spread the Net of his Judgments to take
them? Or would a righteous God seize them with his Judgments, if they had not
deserved it by their Sins? No; it is Sin that laid the Snare in which we are
fallen: It is Sin that has shut the Heavens, and restrained the Clouds from
dropping down Fatness on the parched Earth: It is Sin that waylaid our Army,
and cut them off: It is the Sin of the Country for which they fought, rather
than their own: For we are to consider Soldiers, not as acting for themselves,
but for their Country; and they stand or fall, according to the Designs of God
toward that Country, without any Regard to their personal Character. If God
has a gracious Design toward a People, he will make their Arms victorious, and
defend them against their Enemies, however wicked the Men may be whom they
employ as Soldiers. But if the Iniquities of a People are full, and he intends
to scourge them, then he will defeat even an Army of Saints, and determine the
Event of War against them. And was it the Sins of our Land that cut off our
brave General, and so many of our choice Men? Alas! what a shocking Addition
is this to our Grief for their Loss? This seems to indite us as guilty of their
Blood. O VIRGINIA! what a Mischief have thy Sins done? God would not thus
afflict a righteous or a penitent People: The Justice of his Government is as
obvious a Truth, as any Principle of natural or revealed Religion: And the
Judgments of God upon a Land are infallible Evidences of general Guilt and
Impenitence.

'Your Sins,' O my Countrymen, have withholden good Things from you Jeremiah v.
25.
. Have you not procured these Judgments to yourselves, in that you have
forsaken the Lord your God? It is your own Wickedness that now corrects you,
and your own Backslidings reprove you. Know therefore and see, that it is an
evil Thing and bitter, that you have forsaken the Lord your God, and that his
Fear is not in you Jeremiah ii. 17, 19.
. O that my People had hearkened to the Voice of God, and walked in his Ways!
Then he would soon have subdued their Enemies, and fed them alsowith the finest
of the Wheat Psalm. lxxxi. 13, 16.
But alas! they have rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit; they have despised his
Chastisements, and abused his Mercies, therefore he has turned to be their
Enemy, and fought against them. Isaiah lxiii. 10.


But where do those Enemies of our Country lurk? Where shall we find those Sins
that have brought these Judgments upon our Land? Alas! we can easily find
them, without a critical Search. Some of them brave the Skies with an undaunted
Brow, and do not seek to lie concealed. We meet gigantic Forms of Vice,
wherever we turn. How is our Land polluted with Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying,
Defrauding, Whoredom, Sabbath-breaking, and all the horrid Kinds of Profaneness
and daring Impiety? What Irreverence of God? what Contempt or Neglect of
Religion and public Worship? what Profanation of divine Ordinances? What Swarms
of prayerless Families all over our Land? What a general Neglect of the Souls
of the poor Negroes, and in some Instances, what Barbarities toward them? What
a Spirit of Trifling and Levity? What Extravagance in Gaming, and other foolish
or criminal Diversions, especially among People of high Life, and affluent
Fortunes? What an idle Waste, what a wanton Abuse, of the Blessings of
Providence? What a stupid Disregard of divine Threatenings and Chastisements?
And what a sullen Incorrigibleness, or unbelieving Despondency, under them? God
may complain of our Country, as of the Jews, In vain have I smitten your
Children; they received no Correction Jeremiah ii. 30.
. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more Isaiah i. 5.
. In short, if you form an Idea of a Christian from your Bible, and then take a
View of the Inhabitants of our Land; if you observe their Conduct in their
Retirements, in their Families, in public Company, or in the Worship of God,
alas! how few, how very of them can you call sincere practical Christians? How
are all Evidences of the Fear and Love of God lost among the Generality? They
live as if they had no Concern with him, nor he with them. Their own Interest,
their own Lusts and Passions, are the Rule of their Conduct. Alas! what a
melancholy Survey of our Country is this? My Heart pains me, while I review
it, and forebodes some dreadful Thing coming upon us. Shall I not visit for
these Things, faith the Lord? shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation, as
this? Ah! sinful Nation, a People loaded with Iniquity, a Seed of evil Doers,
Children that are Corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked
the holy one of Israel unto Anger, they are gone away backwards Isaiah i. 4.
. Therefore the Tokens of his Displeasure are now upon them. And who must not
weep for thee, O VIRGINIA! a Country happy in (...) improved by Art, and
hitherto blessed of Heaven but now undermined and tottering by thy own Sins.
Thy Sins proclaim thee obnoxious to the Judgments of God. And the Judgments of
God now hanging over Thee, proclaim thy Sins and Impenitence.

But alas! these visible and open Vices, are not the only Cause of God's
present Controversy with our Land: The original Cause lies deep, even in the
Hearts of the Inhabitants: The most dangerous Enemies lurk in their Breasts:
Look there, and 'you will see yet greater Abominations.' What filthy Lusts,
what mischievous Passions harbor there? How many Hearts among us are cold or
lukewarm toward God, and his Son Jesus Christ, and never felt his Love shed
abroad in them? How many are secretly disaffected to Holiness, and dislike the
Purity of his sacred Law? How many secretry indulge themselves in these Works
of Darkness, which would blush to see the Sun? How many thoughtless, trifling,
worldly Minds, that confine all their Attention to the Things of this Life, and
have little or no Thought about the important Concerns of Eternity? How many
impenitent, flinty Hearts, that never felt the kindly, ingenuous Relentings of
Repentance for all their Sins? How many old, unregenerate Hearts, that have
never been changed by the Almighty Power of God? How many that are wholly
unacquainted with the various Exercises, the Joys and Sorrows, the Hopes and
Fears that are familiar to every true Christian? How many that never embraced
the Lord Jesus as a Savior, and submitted to him as their mediatorial King? On
the other Hand, how few are the Hearts, in which the Graces of the Spirit are
implanted and cherished? how few feel the Workings of Love, Faith, Repentance
toward God and Jesus Christ? Alas! how few Hearts delight in the Service of
God, and hate every false Way,? How few are in Earnest in seeking the Kingdom
of God, and his Righteousness? Alas! my Brethren, must not your Hearts bleed
when you think of these Things? Can a Country overrun with such Rebels, that
have such disaffected Hearts, hope always to escape? Shall I not visit for
these Things, says the Lord? Shall not my Soul be avenged upon such a Nation
as this? Is it any Wonder that the Lion should roar, when he has found so fit
a Prey? or that we should be taken, when our Sins have laid such a Gin, for us?
He will execute Justice upon Sinners as Individuals, in the eternal World: But
now is the Time for him to deal with them as a Society. And will not the
thoughtless Creatures tremble before him, and return to him? Sinners, your
Country is now bleeding and languishing by the Wounds you have given it; and
are your Hearts proof against the Energy of such a Thought? REPENT! O my
Countrymen, REPENT! REPENT! Down upon your Knees before your injured Sovereign;
bewail your Rebellion; confess your Guilt, and implore Forgiveness. If Sin is
the Cause of your present Sufferings, Repentance must be the Cure; and you have
Reason to hope, it will be an effectual Remedy. Yet, you must remember, that
Faith in the Blood of Jesus must be joined along with it. Your Repentance can
make no Atonement for your Sin; that you can expect only in the Sacrifice of
the Lamb of God, that was offered once for all. Therefore away to Jesus, ye
perishing Creatures; accept of his Righteousness, ye guilty Sinners. Look unto
him, and be saved, O VIRGINIA, situated 'in the Ends of the Earth Isaiah xlv. 22
.' Let the Name of Jesus come in Reputation in our guilty Land. But as my Voice
can reach only to you, my Hearers, let me insist, that whatever others do, you
will not be accessory to the Ruin of your Country, but will repent, reform, and
fly to Jesus. And with this Advice, I shall dismiss you for a few Minutes.

An HYMN.
I.
WHILE over our guilty Land, O Lord,
We view the Terrors of thy Sword;
While Heaven her fruitful Showers denies,
And Nature round us fades and dies.
II.
While Clouds of Vengeance over our Head,
Seem thickning, and pronounce us dead;
Oh! whither shall the Helpless fly?
To whom but Thee direct their Cry?
III.
The helpless Sinner's Cries and Tears,
Are grown familiar to thine Ears:
Often has thy Mercy sent Relief,
When all was Fear and hopeless Grief.
IV.
On Thee, our guardian God, we call;
Before thy Throne of Grace we fall:
Oh! is there no Deliverance there?
Or must we perish in Despair?
V.
See we repent, we weep, we mourn;
To our forsaken God we turn;
O spare our guilty Country; spare
Thy Church which thou have (...)
VI.
Revive our withering Fields with Rain:
Let Peace compose our Land again:
Silence the horrid Noise of War:
O spare a guilty People; spare!
VII.
We plead thy Grace, indulgent God:
We plead thy Son's attoning Blood;
We plead thy gracious Promises;
Nor are these unavailing Pleas.
VIII.
These Pleas by Faith urged at thy Throne,
Have brought Ten Thousand Blessings down
On guilty Lands in helpless Woe;
Let them prevail to save us too.
The AFTERNOON SERMON.
AMOS iii. 1 -- 6. Hear this Word that the Lord has spoken against you, O
Children of Israel, against the whole Family which I brought up from the Land
of Egypt, saying, you only have I known of all the Families of the Earth;
therefore I will punish you for all your Iniquities. -- Shall one take up a
Snare from the Earth, and have taken nothing at all? Shall a Trumpet be blown
in the City; and the People not be afraid? --
IN the foregoing Sermon, I left unfinished an Inquiry of great Importance to
us in the present Situation of our COUNTRY, viz. "What is the Reason that God
has withheld so many of his usual Blessings from us?' -- This Part of the
Enquiry I have already answered; and I hope your Hearts are still under the
Impressions of it. If he does not walk amicably with us, it is because we are
not agreed: And if he afflicts us, it is because we have sinned against him.
The Lion has roared against us, because he has found us a proper Prey. But it
remains for us to enquire, "Why he has done this, notwithstanding our past
Blessings and Deliverances, and the many Privileges with which he has been
pleased to distinguish us?" We may gather an Answer to this from his Conduct
toward the Israelites, related in the first and second Verses of my Text.

The Israelites were the Posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, those
favorite Patriarchs, with whom God condescended to enter into Covenant, both
for them and their Seed. They were a Family miraculously delivered from
Egyptian Slavery, conducted through an hideous Wilderness into a Land of Liberty
and Plenty, and protected there by an immediate Providence. But their highest
Privilege was, that God had taken them for his Church and peculiar People,
favored them with a Revelation of his Will, and a Religion from Heaven, and
sent his Prophets to them to instruct and admonish them. -- But that ungrateful
People forgot their Obligations to their divine Benefactor, grew weary of his
Service, rebelled against him, and became debauched in Principles and Morals.
And will it secure them, when thus degenerate, that they were once
distinguished with so many Blessings, and still professed themselves the Church
of God? Could this secure them against his Judgments? No; so far from it, that
these very Circumstances increased their Guilt, and rendered their Punishments
more certain and severe. You only, says the Lord have I known of all the
Families of the Earth: I have chosen you to be my Church and People, while I
suffered other Nations to walk in Darkness, and at a Distance from me: And what
follows from hence? Not, therefore I will grant you greater Indulgence in Sin;
or, I will overlook it in you, though I might punish it in other Nations: but,
therefore I will punish you for all your Iniquities: whoever escape, you shall
not: though I should bear with the Sins of others, I will not bear with yours,
whom I have known and distinguished from them.

There are many good Reasons for this peculiar Severity toward the professing
People of God -- He has a particular Property in such; and therefore he expects
particular Obedience from them. -- He has a special Kindness for them, and laid
them under peculiar Obligations of Gratitude; and consequently their
Undutifulness and Ingratitude must touch him very near. A Man is more affected
with the unkind Treatment of a Friend or a Child, than a Stranger or an Enemy.
-- God is peculiarly related to such a People; and therefore their Wickedness
reflects more Dishonor upon him, than that of those who do not profess his
Name. -- God may also have Designs of special Grace toward some of them, and
he may chastise them for their Amendment, and in order to deliver them from the
more dreadful Punishments of the eternal World. A Father may correct his Child
for a Fault that he would overlook in a Stranger. -- Such a People have
peculiar Helps and Advantages, and are under special Obllgations; and
consequently their Sin is much more aggravated, than that of Heathens, who are
not in such favorable Circumstances for Religion. On all these Accounts it is
just, reasonable, and indeed necessary, that God should punish with peculiar
Severity the Sins of his People, on whom his Name is called; and that they
should not fly to his Altar for Protection, in their Rebellion against him.

Let us now apply these Things to ourselves and our Country. God has
distinguished us with a rich Variety of Blessings, above most People in the
World, and made our Country a favorite Spot of the Globe. The first Planters
of this Colony, passed through surprising Vicissitudes; and were more than once
in Danger of being entirely cut off by their Indian Predecessors. But through the
tender Guardianship of Providence, they survived all these Dangers: And now,
this Wilderness is improved into a fruitful Field; and we have enjoyed as long
an uninterrupted Peace and Plenty, as perhaps any Country upon Earth. Our
Colony has prodigiously increased of late Years in the Number of its
Inhabitants; and in Extent of Ground, it is perhaps equal to our mother
Country. It has been an happy Refuge to the Poor; who swarm the Streets, and
crowd the Workhouses and Hospitals, in other Countries: Here they generally
enjoy a very comfortable Subsistence by moderate Industry; and hardly any of
them are incapable of providing for themselves.

These are great Blessings; but they are not the greatest with which Heaven has
distinguished our Land. He has brought his Gospel, as a Vine from afar, and
planted it in this Wilderness, that was once the Residence of Heathen Savages
and wild Beasts. The BIBLE is, or may be, the common Blessing of our whole
Land; and none who enjoy that Directory to everlasting Life, have Reason to
complain, that they are left wholly destitute of the Means of Salvation, We are
a Christian, a Protestant Country; and how few Parts of the World can say so? I
might add what will not appear incredible to some of you, who have been the
happy Subjects or Witnesses of it, that God has sent his Gospel into sundry
Parts of our Land, and among us in particular, in its Purity, and attended with
his own Almighty Power, to make it effectual to renew many depraved Hearts, and
reform many vicious Lives: And wherever such a Work is going on, I shall
rejoice in it as a WORK OF GOD, whatever Name it bears: Yes, my Brethren, I
shall rejoice to see Christianity, pure, practical Christianity, Christianity
free from the Encumbrance of Party-Names, flourish and increase; and without
this, it is but little Matter what Party is uppermost, or has the sorry
Sanction of a civil Establishment.

With these important Privileges has God favored our Land, and us in
particular. Thus graciously has he known and distinguished us, above most of
the Families of the Earth. But will these Favors indemnify an ungrateful Land,
in the Abuse of them, or warrant them to offend against their peculiar
Benefactor? Will this neglected Bible, will this abused Gospel, will these
profaned Ordinances, shelter you from the Judgments of God, when your Sins cry
aloud for them? Will a slighted Savior deliver you? Will his profaned Name
sanctify your Crimes, and be a Mark of Protection to you? Does the Abuse of
Mercy, promise you farther Mercy? Does the ungrateful Forgetfulness of past
Deliverances, encourage you to hope for future? Do not these Things, on the
other Hand, give you Reason to fear the contrary, that because he has known
you above most of the Nations of the Earth, therefore he will punish you for
all your Iniquities? Our Enemies are perfidious French Papals, and savage
Indian Heathens; they may be as bad, or worse, than we, in all Respects, but
this, that we sin against more Light and Love, and break through more endearing
Obligations. Yet he may justly use them as his Rod to scourge us, because he is
more nearly related to us, and more warmly resents our Provocations, than
theirs. The Babylonians were an Empire of wicked heathen Idolaters; and yet he
employed them to punish the Jews, his peculiar People. Indeed it is very common
for him to employ wicked Men in this Drudgery; hence they are called his Hand,
his Sword Psalm xvii, 13, 14.
, the Rod of his Anger, his Ax, his Saw Isaiah x. 5, 15.
, etc. that is, the Instruments and Executioners of his Vengeance.

Therefore 'trust not,' O VIRGINIA, trust not in lying Words, saying, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these
Jer. vii. 4. 1^
. Go to the Place in Shilob, where God set his Name at the first, and see what
he has done there for the Wickedness of his People Israel. Go to Jerusalem, to
Antioch, to Greece, to Rome, and see what powerful Empires he has demolished,
what flourishing Countries he has laid desolate, what stately Cities he has
buried in Ruins, and what numerous and established Churches he has rooted out;
and all this for their Sins; and particular for their ungrateful Abuse of
Mercies and Privileges, and above all for the Abuse of the Gospel. Be warned by
these dreadful Examples, O my Country; lest thou also share in their Doom.

The IIId Enquiry now remains, How long, we may expect, these Calamities will
continue on our Land? And what is the most promising Method to remove or escape
them?

God has always some wise Design in all his Dispensations, and particularly in
the inflicting of Calamities: And his Design in it, as far as we may venture to
determine, is either to reform, or to punish a People. I know of no national
Calamity, but what is intended for one or the other of these Ends; and
generally, both are intended with regard to different Persons. God may design
to chasten and amend some as a Father; and by the same Stroke to harden and
punish others, who are ripe for his Judgments.

These are his Designs toward thee, O my Country, in the present critical
Juncture; to amend thee, or to destroy thee; to bring some of thy Inhabitants
to Repentance, and to harden the incorrigible, and visit them with his despised
Vengeance. And can we hope he will remove his angry Hand from us, till he has
accomplished his Design one Way or other. Shall one take up a Snare from the
Earth, and have taken Nothing at all? says my Text. No, he will let it lie
there, 'til he has caught his Prey, if possible. And will a wise God scatter
his Judgments for no End at all? or will he remove them, before they have
answered his End? No; they shall accomplish the Thing for which he sent them.

Here then my Country, thou art cast into a Dilemma between Reformation and
Punishment. Thou have no other Alternative, but, REPENT, and LIVE, or, CONTINUE
IMPENITENT, and PERISH. I will not determine in what particular Manner and
Degree God will accomplish either of these Designs; this is only known to
himself. And alas! I can give you no great Encouragement, that his gracious
Design of Reformation is likely to be accomplished on the Generality.
Multitudes rather seem hardened in Impenitence, or sunk in Infidel Distress.
They do not regard the divine Hand in the present Miseries of their Country,
not penitently reflect upon their Sins, as the Cause of them. The Prospect of
Scarcity, and the Alarm of War, only throws them into a Panic, and perhaps
extorts a transient Prayer from them. Lord, in Trouble have they visited thee;
they poured out a Prayer when thy Chastening was upon them Isaiah XXVI. 16.
But alas! I see but few Evidences of their being awakened to be religious in
Earnest, and to turn to the Lord with all their Hearts. And indeed, all the
Punishments they are capable of, will never bring them to this, without the
kindly aluring Influence of divine Grace. Therefore cry earnestly to God for
this Blessing; which can make the Miseries of our Land the happiest Events that
ever you saw. The Conversion and Salvation of Sinners, is a greater Blessing
than Peace, or the Abundance of Corn and Wine. (...) Oh! we cannot but hope,
notwithstanding some discouraging Appearances, that this may be a Season
fruitful of Converts. We humbly hope, that by this shall the Iniquity of
Virginia be purged; and that this will be the Fruit, to take away our Sins Lam.
iii. 40.
. Blessed Fruit indeed! if withering Fields and a ravaged Country can produce
this, it will more than make up our Loss. This is a critical Time with our
Country; the Minds of Men are more awake than usual; and if God's pleased now
to set in with his Grace, we may see (...) extensive Reformation in our sinful
Land. O Pray that such a Season may not pass by in vain: Pray that God would
now work while Men begin to grow a little thoughtful. If this Season pass by,
and leave Sinners as they are, they will indeed have Reason to fear, that the
Harvest is passed, and the Summer ended, and they are not saved. If the
Inhabitants of the World will not learn Righteousness, when the Judgments of
God are in the Earth, there is little Reason to hope they ever will Isai,
xxvii. 9.
.

O Sinners! now make one vigorous, united Effort to enter in at the strait
Gate. Now fall in earnest to Prayer, Reading, Hearing, Meditation,
Selfexamination. Search and try your Ways, and turn again unto the Lord Lam.
iii. 40.
. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call upon him while he is near. Let
the Wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts; and let him
turn to the Lord and he will have Mercy upon him; and to our God, and he will
abundantly pardon Isai. ^^. 6. 7.
, Cleanse your Hands, ye Sinners; purify your Hearts, ye double-minded: Be
afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your Laughter be turned into Mourning, and
your Joy into Heaviness Jam. iv, 8, 9.
O VIRGINIA, wash thy Heart from Wickedness, that thou may be saved: How
long shall thy vain Thoughts lodge within thee Jeremiah iv. 14.
? Therefore says the Lord, turn ye to me with all your Heart, and with
Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning. Rent your Heart, and not your
Garment, and turn unto the Lord your God: For oh! he is GRACIOUS and MERCIFUL;
I proclaim it again with a joyful Repetition, he is GRACIOUS and MERCIFUL, slow
to Anger, and of great Kindness, and repents him of the Evil. Thus repent and
turn to the Lord; and then will the Lord be jealous for our Land, and pity his
People. Yea, the Lord will answer and say, Behold, I will give you Corn, and
Wine, and Cil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith; and I will drive far from
you the Northern Army, that are ravaging your Country. Fear not, O Land, be
glad, and rejoice: For the Lord will do great Things. Be not afraid, ye Beasts
of the Field; God takes Care even of you; and the Pastures of the Wilderness
will yet spring. He will yet give Rain moderately, the former and the latter
Rain; and the Floors shall yet be full of Wheat. And ye shall eat in Plenty,
and be satisfied, and praise the Name of the Lord that has dealt wonderously
with you Joel i^. -- xviii. 26.
This, my Brethern is the Way of Safety; this is the Way to prevent or remove
the Judgments of God from your Country. Or, if the Reformation should not be so
general, as to deliver the Colony from them; yet such of you as repent, will
not lose your Labor: you shall escape the everlasting Punishment of the World
to come, and be received into immortal Happiness and Glory; and this is of
more, Importance than any or all temporal Deliverances.

What Stupidity must it be, to refuse to make this Improvement of the present
Calamities under which our Country groans? Shall a Trumpet be blown in the
City, and the People not be afraid? Says my Text. Shall a public Alarm be given
of the Approach of the Enemy, and shall none be alarmed and prepare to fly, or
to defend themselves? And shall the Lord sound the Trumpet of his Judgments in
VIRGINIA, and the People not be afraid? Will they still sleep on in Security,
and never exert themselves to escape his Vengeance, or defend themselves
against their Enemies? What but Destruction, either in this World or the next,
or both, can be the Consequence of such stupid Security, and hardened
Impenitence?

Therefore Sinners, if you will not hear the Call to Repentance, you may
prepare for Destruction. I do not mean, that an angry God will certainly cut
you off by some temporal Judgment, though it is very likely to be the Doom of
some of you, but I mean, that his Judgments that are now (...) in the Earth,
will have some dreadful Effect upon you. You may groan under the Burden of
them; you will be hardened by them, and revolt more and more; you will be made
ripe for everlasting Destruction; and that shall soon seize and crush you, though
you may escape the Sword of your Enemies. O Sinners, the Account against you is
swelling fast, at such a Time as this; and if you are not converted now, it
will highly aggravate your Sin and Ruin. The Snare shall not be taken up from
the Earth, 'till it has taken something;' and the Judgments of God shall not be
removed, till they have answered his Design, the Design either of Vengeance or
of Grace.

I shall shut up this Discourse with an Advice or two, suited to the present
Situation of our Country.

1. Put yourselves in a Posture of Defense. We do not certainly know the
Designs of our Enemies, whether they intend immediately to improve the
Advantages they have gained, and overrun the Country; or whether they will
content themselves for the present to secure the Acquisitions they have made,
and to ravage and plunder our Families. But we ought to provide against
Contingencies, and prepare for the worst. Therefore furnish yourselves with
Arms and Ammunition, as well as their present Scarcity will allow. You may yet
need them for your own Defense; or if the Enemy should not make Inroads so far
into the Center of the Colony, your Assistance may be necessary for the
Protection of our poor exposed Brethren in the remote Western Counties, that
are liable to their Barbarities: For it is unreasonable that the whole Burden
of defending our Frontiers should lie upon them. If you have a Drop of British
Blood in your Veins, if your have any Thing of the Spirit of Men, or of
Christians, exert yourselves on this Occasion. It now becomes you to be all
Patriots, all Soldiers. Your Liberty, your Property, your Religion, your Life's,
your All, are at Stake: Your Families, your Posterity call upon you to exert
yourselves, and not deliver them up to Slavery, to Cruelty, to Superstition.
Had you ever had the unhappy Experience of a French Government, -- a French
Government over Protestants, -- a French Government over conquered Protestants,
-- over conquered Britons, their natural Enemies; you would be deeply sensible
that all these Blessings are in Danger; and you would rather generously risque
your Lives, or fly to the remotest Parts of the Earth, than suffer such an Iron
Yoke to be rivetted about your Necks. Therefore 'quit yourselves like Men, be
strong.' The Imprecation of the Prophet, will fall upon the mean, sneaking
Coward. Cursed be the Man that keeps back his Sword from Blood. Shall we
tamely resign such a flourishing, wide-extended Country into the merciless
Hands of Barbarity, arbitrary Power, and popish Superstition? Have we enjoyed
the Blessings and Privileges of our Country, while in Peace; and shall we
abandon it, and leave it to shift for itself, when in Danger? Certainly such
sordid, effeminate Souls are unworthy of a Place in any Country. Can you bear
the Thought, that Slavery should clank her Chain in this Land of Liberty? That
the House of God should be made the Temple of Idols? That you should entail
Slavery, and Idolatry upon your miserable Posterity? Can you bear the Thought,
that Indian Savages, and French Papists, infamous all the World over for
Treachery and Tyranny, should rule Protestants and Britons, with a Rod of Iron;
and riot in those Possessions, for which you have sweat and labored? If you
have any manly Resentment within you, let it kindle at the Thought: Passion was
made for such an Object; and you may lawfully indulge it. The Case of our
Country is not yet desperate: In the Name of the Lord, we will yet lift up our
Banners; and hope for Success and Victory. But if a Spirit of Presumption, or
Cowardice, continue to lull asleep, or unman, the Inhabitants, I must give thee
up, O my Country! Such a Set of dastardly Creatures are unworthy of so happy a
Spot on the Globe; and no Wonder if their Dwellings should cast them out.

If any of you are frightened and intimidated from venturing your Lives for your
Country, because you are full of Fears about your everlasting State, and you
would desire to live longer, to make it sure: To such of you I would say, Now
you find the bad Effects of your former Negligence. Had you given all Diligence
to make your Calling and Election sure, in Times of Peace and Safety, you would
not probably be left in such Perplexity, in the Hour of Difficulty. You have no
other Way now, but diligently improve the Time you have: And if, after thorough
Self-examination you can entertain even trembling Hopes of your Preparation for
Eternity, you may courageously venture, and leave the Event to God. Your
cowardly Desertion of the Cause of your Country, and seeking to prolong your
Life by that unlawful Means, will not be a likely Way to remove Doubts and
Fears. You would be always haunted with a Consciousness of Guilt; and that
would damp your Spirits, cast a Gloom over your Minds, and obscure the
Evidences of your Hopes. FOLLOW THE PATH OF DUTY, wherever it leads; for that
will always prove the safest in the Issue.

As for such of you as are really unprepared for your latter End, and justly
conscious of it; I have sundry Things to say to you; and oh! that they may sink
deep into your Hearts. (1.) How may it shock you to think, that you who have
lived so long in the World, should want more Time to turn to God, and prepare
for Eternity? Alas! what have you done with the ten, twenty, thirty, or forty
Years that God has given you for this Purpose? Ah! are they all gone, without
doing any of the great Work you were sent into the World for? Have they all
been wasted upon Sin, the Flesh, and the World, and sacrificed to the Devil?
Have you been destroying yourselves all this Time? Oh! Sirs, have I not told
you of this, but in vain? Have I not often warned you of the Danger of Delays
in turning to God? Will you now at length believe me? Oh! will you now conclude
it high Time for you to return to God? (2.) If the Reason why you desire to
preserve your Lives longer, be, that you may have Time to turn to God, and
prepare for Eternity, then you are carefully improving the Time you now have.
It is a vain Pretense that you want more Time for this, if you do not use the
Time you have. And are you doing so? Are you seeking the Lord in earnest, and
endeavoring to repent and turn to him? If not, you only want Time to sin
longer, to pursue the World and your Pleasures longer. And can you expect, God
will indulge you in such a wicked Desire? (3.) It is not the Want of Time but
the Want of a Heart, that keeps you unconverted. St. Paul was converted in
three Days, the Jailer in a few Hours, and St. Peter's Hearers under one short
Sermon; and why may not you hope for the like Blessing, if you exert yourselves
in earnest? (4.) To excite you to this, let me try an Argument or two from a
new Topic. -- It is you and such Sinners as you, that have brought all these
Calamities upon the Country: Impenitent Sinners are the Bane of Society; and
bring down the Wrath of God upon it. Therefore if you would save your Country,
repent and be converted. What a cutting Thought may it now be to you, I am one
of the guilty Creatures for whom my Country is now suffering? -- Consider also,
if the Things you fear should come upon you, how miserable would you be! An
angry God above you! a withering, ravaged Country, an Aceldama, a Field of
Blood, around you! a guilty Conscience within you! and a burning Hell, just
before you! Then you will borrow the despairing Complaint of Saul, The
Philistians are upon me, and God is departed from me. Then you will see the Use
of Religion, and bitterly lament your Neglect of it. Therefore now make it your
Concern.

2. Let this be a Season of Prayer and Supplication among us. If God be the
supreme King of our Country, let us implore, and depend upon, his Protection.
Should not a People seek unto their God Isaiah viii. 19.
? Prayer is the Language of Nature in Distress; and Men that had no other
Principle to direct them, have fled to this Refuge, upon the Appearance of
Danger. Some put their Trust in Chariots, and some in Horses; and our Country
has no doubt offended in putting their Confidence in a brave General, in
veteran Soldiers, and a fine Train of Artillery; and what is become of them
all? Let us learn for the future to put our Trust in the Lord of Hosts; and if
he be on our Side, we need not fear what Man can do. His Assistance is to be
obtained only in the Way of Prayer: Therefore lift up your Cries to him; keep
your Souls always in a praying Posture. And for your Encouragement, let me
assure you, that 'the fervent Prayer of a righteous Man,' is not useless Breath
poured out in the Air, but 'availeth much.' In this Way the feeble and
timorous, and even the tender Sex, may contribute to the Defense of their
Country, in some retired and peaceful Corner. They may engage the God of Heaven
to become our Ally; and through him we will be able to push down our Enemies;
through his Name will we tread them under, that rise up against us (...)


Finally; Do not indulge excessive Despondency in the present discouraging
Posture of Affairs. What is your Religion good for, if it do not support you in
such a Time as this? Do not disgrace it, by unmanly dastardly Fears. Show the
World that you have a God to go to in your Difficulties, and that you can
cheerfully live or die under his Shelter. I am solicitous for the Behavior of
my Countrymen in general, at this Juncture: But I must tell you, I am
particularly solicitous, that you my Brethren of the Dissenters, should behave
with Honor and Spirit; and show yourselves worthy of these Privileges you
enjoy, and of those you claim. Many of us have taken the Oaths to His Majesty's
Person and Government; and we cannot desert the Cause of our Country, at this
Time, without gross Perjury -- But I shall desist. Your own Hearts, I hope,
supply my Defects, and suggest to you a thousand Considerations adapted to the
present Case and may God make them prevalent with you. Amen.

An HYMN.
I.
WHILE various Rumors spread abroad,
And hold our Souls in dread Suspense,
We fly to Thee, our Country's God;
Our Refuge is thy Providence.
II.
This Wilderness so long untilled,
An hideous Waste of barren Ground,
Thy Care has made a fruitful Field,
With Peace and Plenty richly crowned.
III.
Thy Gospel spreads an heavenly Day,
Throughout this once benighted Land,
A Land once wild with Beasts of Prey,
By impious Heathen Rites profaned.
IV.
Thy Gospel, like a heavenly Vine,
Its Branches did begin to spread;
Refreshed our Souls with sacred Wine,
And screen'd the Fainting with its Shade.
V.
And shall these Blessings now remove?
Shall Peace and Plenty sly away?
The Land thy Care did thus improve,
Will thou give up, a helpless Prey?
VI.
O! must we bid our God adieu?
And must thy Gospel take its Flight?
Oh! shall our Children never view,
The Beamings of that heavenly Light?
VII.
Forbid it Lord! with Arms of Faith,
We'll hold Thee fast, and thou shall stay!
We'll cry while we have Life or Breath,
"Our God, do not depart away!"
VIII.
If broken Hearts and weeping Eyes,
Can find Acceptance at thy Throne;
Lo, here they are; this Sacrifice,
Thou will accept through Christ thy Son.
FINIS.

