Dr. Sewall's and Mr. Prince's SERMONS On the Death of Mr. Secretary Willard.

A tender Heart pleasing to GOD, and profitable to Men.

A SERMON Preached at the South-Church in BOSTON: On the LORD'S DAY after the
Death of The HONORABLE Josiah Willard, Esquire Secretary of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay. Who departed this Life, December 6. 1756. Aet. 76.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D. A Pastor of said Church.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. 1756.

A Funeral-SERMON.
II. KINGS xxii. 19, 20. Because thy Heart was tender, and thou have humbled
thy self before the LORD, when thou heardest what I spoke against this Place,
and against the Inhabitants thereof, that they should become a Desolation and a
Curse, and have rent thy Clothes, and wept before me: I have also heard thee,
says the LORD.

Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, and thou shall be
gathered unto thy Grave in Peace, and thine Eyes shall not see all the Evil
which I will bring upon this Place. And they brought the King word again.


IN this Chapter we have the Beginning of the Reign of that godly King and
eminent Reformer, Josiah, 1 and 2.Verses. In the eighteenth Year, he gave Order
for repairing the House of God; a Care most becoming civil Rulers, who derive
their Power from the most High; that the Worship of that GOD by whom Kings
reign, may not be neglected. And when the Book of the Law was found, and read
before the King, he was deeply affected, "as one ashamed of the Sins of his
People, and afraid of God's Wrath." And accordingly, he sent to inquire of the
Lord for himself, and for the People. ^. 13.

From the 15th ^ to the End, we have the Answer of Huldah the Prophetess by the
Spirit of Prophecy, in the Name of the Lord; Thus says the Lord God of Israel,
Tell the Man that sent you to me, etc. In which, 1. There Is a dreadful
Threatening against Judah and Jerusalem for their abominable Idolatries, y 16,
17. 2. A gracious Promise made to this good King, in the Words of the Text,
Because thine Heart was tender -- or made soft, as Junius and Montanus. His
Heart was as melted Wax to the Seal, suitably impressed with an holy. Fear of
God's Anger, with an abasing Sense of the heinous Iniquities which enkindled
it, and a firm Resolution to engage in the necessary Work of Repentance and
Reformation. Agreably, Chap. 23d. we find him solemnly making a Covenant before
the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandment. -- And
consequent upon this, destroying Idolatry. And the Word of God declares, ^. 25.
And like unto him there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord with
all his Heart, and with all his Soul, and with all his Might, according to all
the Law of Moses; neither after him arose there any like him. This godly King
was hearty in his Grief for the great Dishonor done to God, and as an
Expression of it, rent his Clothes, and wept before the Lord, while he offered
his servent Supplications to God; for it follows, I also have heard thee says
the Lord, ^. 20. I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou shall be gathered
into thy Grave in Peace --. God would stay his Hand, and not instict (...)
Judgments threatened, till his Body should be safely housed in the Grave, and
his Soul be received to Rest in Heaven, above the Reach of the deadly Evils
hastening on that degenerate People. But it may be asked, How could it be said
that Josiah was gathered to his Grave in Peace, when he died before he was
forty Years of Age, by a mortal Wound received in Battle? To this I answer: The
Promise forenamed, does not refer to the outward Circumstances of his Death;
but to the Time of it, and the State of his Kingdom: Agreably it follows; And
thine Eyes shall not see all the Evil I will bring on this Place. This pious
King should be taken away from the Evil to come, die in Peace with God, and be
gathered to his Progenitors in Heaven, Thus the Righteous, when they die, enter
into Peace, and rest in their Graves as in Beds, till God shall awaken their
sleeping Dust by a blessed Resurrection to immortal Life.

From the Words, and as related to the Context, Observe, DOCT. I. It is the
Character of pious Rulers, that their Hearts are tender, and they humble
themselves before the Lord when he threatens to bring destroying Judgments upon
their People. DOCT. II. It is their Privilege that when they die, they are
gathered into their Graves in Peace. DOCT. III. That a sovereign and gracious
God, does sometimes so order the Season of their Departure out of this World,
that they should not see the Evil He is about to bring on their degenerate
People,


DOCT. I. It is the Character of pious Rulers, that their Hearts are tender,
and that they humble themselves before the Lord when he threatens to bring
destroying Judgments upon their People.

1. What is implied in this, Thy Heart was tender -- 2. Show, that this is an
excellent Spirit, with which pious Rulers are endowed, and some in an high
Degree.


1. What is implied in this, Thy Heart was tender --

Answ. Negatively, It is not that natural Tenderness whereby some are more
flexible and ready to receive Impressions than others, and which is increased
by a good Education. Some Persons by their Constitution, are more easily wro't
upon than others; and it is observed, that a good Education softens the Manners,
Emollit, mores,
so that these are not so rough and untractable as others. And this is lovely.
But then, if such continue destitute of the gracious Tenderness of which we now
speak, and get loose from the Restraints of Education, they become as Wax,
ready to receive hurtful Impressions from the Men and Things of the World; and
soon grow hard and inflexible to the Calls and Warnings of God's Word and
Providence.

Nor is it merely that legal Terror by which some fear and tremble when God
threatens to bring destroying Judgments upon them. As when God threatened Ahab
by the Prophet Elijah, that he would bring Evil upon him, and take away his
Posterity; Ahab rent his Clothes, and went softly; so that God took Notice of
it, and said to the Prophet, See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me 1
Kin. 21.
And yet, alas! he went on in his wicked Ways, (...) was hardened to his
Destruction, Chapter 22.
Felix trembled, while Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment
to come; but diverted and stifled his Convictions, and then it seems was given
up to his Heart Lusts: For when he had said, Go thy way for this Time; when I
have a more convenient Season, I will call for thee, it follows, He hoped that
Money should have been given him of Paul, that he might loose him. Act. 24.25,
6.


Nor is this an Heart perplexed with needles's Scruples about indifferent
Things; or cast down with immoderate Fear and Distress, even concerning
spiritual Things. I grant, these Evils sometimes easily beset God's dear
Children; but they are their Infirmities, and have a Tendency to enseeble them
in the great Work of their Salvation.

But to speak more directly: A tender Heart is an Heart delivered from the
Dominion of Sin, through which Men's Hearts are hardened; and renewed by the
Spirit of Grace, in it is Qualities and Dispositions, relating to God and
spiritual Things.

Alas! we are by Nature since the Fall dead in Sins, and so destitute of
spiritual Sense and Feeling, till God give us a new Heart, and put within us a
new Spirit, when we are born from above of the Spirit of God.

More particularly,

1. A tender Heart is an Heart savingly enlightened with the Knowledge of God
and his Will.

The Word Heart, as used in sacred Writ, comprehends all the Faculties and
Powers of the Soul. In particular, the Understanding. Prove. 8.5. -- Ye Fools,
be ye of an understanding Heart. It is said of the Jews, that there was a Vail
on their Hearts; for their Minds were blinded, or as Beza transtates it,
hardened. 1 Cor. 3.14, 15.
They had not the Knowledge of Jesus as the Son of God, and the true (...), and
so rejected him, and his Gospel: Had they known him, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory. And therefore, when the Spirit of God was poured
out to make known this great Mystery of Godliness. God manifest in the Flesh,
they looked to him whom they had pierced, and mourned as for an only Son, and a
first born. When Peter preached to them and charged them home with this most
heinous Crime, they were pricked in their Heart with deep Remorse, and obeyed
the Call given them to repent. Act 2.37, 8.41. Thus when J^b was enlightened
with clear Manifestations of the glorious. Majesty of God, he says, -- Now mine
Eye sees thee. I^ herefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes.
Chap. 42.5, 6. And when the Prophet Isaiah had seen the Lord sitting on a
Throne high and lifted up, he cried out with deep Abasement; (...) is me, for I
am undone, because I am a Man of unclean Lips, and I dwell among a People of
unclean Lips: for mine Eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. Chapter 6.5. A
believing Sight of God, softens the Heart.

2. When the Heart is tender, the Will is renewed, and molded into a
Conformity to the Will of God.

Such whose Hearts are hardened, have their Wills bent to backslide. Jer. 2.25.
-- I have loved Strangers, and after them will I go. And our Savior, who spoke
as never Man spoke, yet had Reason to complain that his Hearers would not come
to him, that they might have Life. But when the Hearts of Men are softened by
the Grace of God, they are made willing in die Day of God's Power. Now they no
longer resist the Spirit of God and the Means he uses to draw them to himself.
They hear and learn of the Father, and go to Christ, weary and heavy laden
under the Burden of their Sins, and open their Hearts to receive him as offered
in the Gospel. Now they choose the Lord as their God, and cleave to him with
Purpose of Heart, as their chief Good, and highest End: They are no longer as
the Way-side, or Stony-ground Hearers: No! they receive due Impressions from
God's Word, and it is written on the fleshly Tables of their Hearts, as with
the Finger of God: and they are ready to say, Lord, (...) will thou have me to
do? And now, they no longer contend with God, when under the correcting Hand of
his Providence; but resign to his sovereign Will, saying with Eli, It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good; or after their great Master, Not as I
will, but as thou will. Thus when the Heart is tender, the Will is inclined to
an obedient Subjection to the divine Will.

3. A tender Heart is an Heart purified from vile Affections, and so set right
with God.

We read of vile Affections, (Romans 1.26.) Such are the Passions, when
inordinately placed on this present evil World, and set on gratifying base
Lusts. Such are they who are Lovers of Pleasures, more than Lovers of God, and
whose Hearts are hardened from God's Fear. Bur now, when the Heart is chane'd
by the Spirit of God, his Love is shed Abroad in it, and the Language of the
Soul is that, Whom have I (...) Heaven but Thee? and there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides Thee. Psalm. 73.25. The Affections, (...) set upon Things
above, and the Heart goes form in earnest Desires after God, to see his Power
and Glory, and enjoy intimate Communion with him. When shall I appear before
God? Such as are of a tender Heart, sanctify the Lord of Host himself; and make
him their Fear and their Dread. Isai. 8.13.
They that are endowed with this gracious Disposition, serve the Lord with
Reverence, and godly Fear; realising it, that their God is a consuming Fire.
Heb. 12.28, 9.
And when God threatens to come forth against them, their Flesh trembles for
fear of him, and they are afraid of his Judgments. Psalm. 119.120.
Yea, when God's Judgments are Abroad in the Earth, they fear before the Lord,
receive Instruction, and learn Righteousness. Being warned of God, and
believing his Word, relating to the Calamities coming on a sinful World, they
fly for Refuge unto Christ, to lay hold on the Hope set before them in Him. And
when they hear the Threatenings denounced against God's Covenant People, their
Hearts tremble for the Ark of God. 1 Samuel 4.13.
They Sigh and Cry for all the Abominations done among God's People, and hate
the Work of them that turn aside from God, and the Way of his Commandments.
Such was the Heart of this good King; when he heard the Threatinings of God's
Word denounced against Judah and Jerusalem for their many and great Iniquities
He rent his Clothes, expressed an holy Dread of God's Wrath, and wept before
him: And also manifested a great Indignation against the gross Idolatries, and
other Crimes, whereby his People had enkindled the jealous Anger of God against
them.

4. A tender Heart is an Heart spirinkled from an evil Conscience.

We have this Phrase used, Heb. 10.22. The Consciences of such are purified in
Virtue of the Blood of Christ, which is the Blood of God, Act. 20.28.
and so of Virtue to purge the Conscience from dead Works to serve the living
God. Conscience is God's Deputy and Vicegerent in the Soul of Man, whereby he
passes Judgment on himself, as he is accountable, and subject to the Judgment
of God. 1 Cor. 11.31. -- If we would judge our selves, (...) should not be
judged. And according as the Conscience is, the Man is said to be. 1 John 3.20,
1. -- If our Heart condemn us, God is greater than our Hearts, and knows all
Things. Beloved, if our Hearts condemn us not, then have we Confidence toward
God. Now the Conscience is defiled by our Sin and Apostasy from God. Tit. 1.15.
It is often bribed, blinded, and rendered partial by the Lusts of Men; yea, we
read of some that have their Conscience feared with a hot Iron. Tim. 4.2.
A dreadful Judgment, which makes a near Approach to Death. But the tender
Heart implies a well-enlightned, faithful and tender Conscience, ready to
reprove for secret Sins, and such as break not forth into overt Acts; yea, to
check us for not avoiding the Appearance of Evil. David's Heart smote him for
outting off Readiness Skirt, 1 Samuel 24.5.
so far was he from stretching forth his Hand against him, to slay the Lord's
Anointed. Thus the tenderhearted groan under the Burden of those Sins which
others make Light of, and their Cry is that, Romans 7.24. O wretched Man that I
am* who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! Beholding the infinite
Majesty of God, they account every Sin, which is the Transgression of the Law,
to be a great Evil, and accordingly judge and condemn themselves for it.

5. A tender Heart is a broken and a contrite Heart.

We read of God's ancient People, Jer. 5.3. They have made their Faces harder
than a Rock, they have refused to return. But the tender Heart flows down at
God's Presence, and is dissolved in penitential Tears. Persons of this
Character exercise that godly Sorrow which works Repentance to Salvation.
Their Hearts are so broken for Sin, that they are broken off from it in inward
Aversion, and an holy Resolution to forsake all Sin, and turn from it to the
Lord. Yea, they endeavor to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance. Thus
Josiah was greatly concerned, and employed his earnest Endeavors to reform
those Evils which exposed his People to the destroying Judgments of an holy
jealous God. 2 Kin. 23d Chap.

I might have said, that a tender Heart inclines Men to sympathize with others
under their Afflictions, and to draw out their Souls to them, in affording them
that needful Relief which their Case calls for. They obey that Word, Romans 12.15
Weep with them that weep. But I proceed,

2. To show, That this is an excellent Spirit with which pious Rulers are
endowed, and some in an high Degree.

1. It is an excellent Spirit. Whatever this vain World may imagine, who call
the Proud happy; it is an Ornament of great Price in the Sight of God, and very
profitable to Men, especially when found in them who by their Office are
obliged to be Fathers to their People. It makes such Men after God's own Heart,
like David; 1 Samuel 13.14.
yea, it resembles the most excellent Spirit of Christ, who bare the Griefs,
and carried the Sorrows of his People, in his tender Compassion and Readiness
to succor them. It Is the Workmanship of God. Ezekiel. 36.26. A new Heart also
will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away
the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. And
God has a gracious Regard to it. Psalm. 51.17. The Sacrifices of God are a
broken Spirit: a broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise.
God's Countenance beholds them with Delight, Isai. 66.2. -- To this Man will I
look, even to him that is poor, and trembles at my Word. Yea, Thus says the
high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the
high and holy Place; with him also that is of a humble and contrite Spirit, to
revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite ones.
Isai 57.15. Our Savior pronouces them blessed, Matthew. 5.3, 4. Blessed are the
poor in Spirit: for there is is the Kingdom of God. Blessed are they that mourn:
for they shall be comforted. Yea, the Son of God is anointed to bind up these
brokenhearted and give them the Oil of Joy for Mourning. Isai. 61.
This Frame of Spirit exalts God; and them that honor him, he will honor.
Such are prepared to receive abundance of Grace here; (God gives Grace to the
humble) and for Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory in the heavenly Zion.

2. Pious Rulers are endowed with this excellent Spirit, and some in an high
Degree. Thus was the meek Moses, who was King in Jesurun. When God threatened
to destroy his People, for their abominable Idolatry relating to the golden
Calf, how earnestly did he plead that God's Anger might not wax hot to consume
them? Yea, so high did his tender Concern for his People rise, that he says,
Exodus 32.32. Yet now, if thou will, forgive their Sin; and if not, blot me, I
pray thee, out of thy Book, which thou have written. He seems to be willing, if
it was possible, to offer up himself a Sacrifice in their Stead, regarding the
Glory of God, and the Salvation of his People, above any Interest of his own.
Vid. Pool in loc.
Such an one was David, who fed God's People according to the Integrity of his
Heart, and guided them by the Skilfulness of his Hands. Under his great Sin,
and God's Threatenings of Judgment on him and his House, he fell down in deep
Abasement before the Lord, crying for Mercy, with a truly contrite Spirit; nor
can he forget the public Weal; Do good in thy good Pleasure unto Zion, Psalm.
51. And after this, when he had numbered the People, his Heart smote him, and he
confessed that he had sinned greatly. And when God gave him his Choice of three
Judgments, he chose to fall into the Hand of the Lord, rather than into the
Hand of Men; and when the Pestilence raged, he says to God, with a truly tender
and public Spirit, 2 Samuel 24.15. -- I have sinned, and I have done wickedly:
but these Sheep, what have they done? Let thine Hand, I pray thee, be against
me, and against, my Fathers House. Such was that excellent Governor Nehemiah.
When they said to him, -- The Remnant that are left of the Captivity there in
the Province, are in great Affliction and Reproach: the Wall of Jerusalem also
is broken down, and the Gates thereof burned with Fire: Neh. 1.3. It follows, v
4. -- When I heard these Words, I sat down and wept, and mourned certain Days,
and fasted, and prayed before the God of Heaven. And then he left an honorable
and profitable Office in the Court of Artaxerxes, that he might serve the
Interests of God's People at Jerusalem. And such was his tender and generous
Concern for them, under their Poverty and Distress, that he was not chargeable
to them as others had been; but, instead of buying Land, and en^ching himself,
he spent largely in Hospitality. Nor was this mere humane Pity: No, when he had
spoken of others that oppressed them, he says, Chap. 5 15. -- So did not I,
because of the Fear of God. The last Instance I shall give is Daniel, the Man
greatly beloved. He was made a great Man, and of high Dignity, under
Nebucbadnezzar and Darius. It is said, An excellent Spirit was in him Dan. 6.3.
And he manifested it, not only in his faithful Administration of the civil
Government, so that his Enemies could find no Occasion against him; but also in
his refusing to cast off the Fear of God, and restrain Prayer before him, though
his Life was threatened by the profane Decree of Darius. And then he stopped the
Mouths of Lions, by Faith in his God. Furthermore, we find him, in the most
humble and penitent Manner confessing his Sins, and the Sins of God's People;
and with the most tender Concern beseeching the Lord to deliver his People, and
cause his Face to shine upon his Sanctuary, which was desolate. And in the 10
th Chapter mourning three full Weeks, while he eat no pleasant Bread; in his tender
Sympathy with God's People under their sore Afflictions. And thus we have
these, and other Worthies, transmitted to us in the sacred Annals more durable
than Brass or Marble, with signal Marks of that Honor which comes from God.
Their Memory is (...) on Earth, while they are reaping the bounti^^^ ^ewards of
free Grace in the Joys of Heaven. And this brings me to the second Head of
Doctrine.

DOCT. II. When pious Rulers die, they are gathered into their Graves in Peace.

Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the End of that Man is
Peace, Psalm. 37.37. Here then we see that They must die as well as others. All
have sinned, and therefore must die. Romans 5.12. -- By one Man Sin entered into
the World, and Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all
have sinned. It is appointed unto Men once to die by the Sratute of Heaven.
Heb. 9.27.
High and low meet together in the House appointed for all the Living, and here
there is no Pre-eminence. Although civil Rulers bear some Image of the divine
Majesty, yet they must die as well as others. It Is God's Prerogative to be the
King eternal, immortal -- Psalm. 82.6, 7. I have said ye are Gods, and all of
you are Children of the most High. But ye shall die like Men, and fall like one
of the Princes. Neither their Piety toward God, nor their Power over Men, can
preserve them from the Str^ke; but then, they, and all the Saints, are
delivered from the Sting of Death, by a crucified Savior, who has abolished
Death, and brought Life and Immortality to Light through the Gospel; so that
although they should die by Violence, as this godly King; or have sharp spiritual
Conflicts in their Encounter with the last Enemy; yet when they die, they enter
into Peace, their Warfare being accomplished, Isai. 57.2. He shall enter into
Peace: They shall rest in their Beds -- Now that good Word is fulfilled in
them, which was spoken to Daniel, Chap. 12.13. -- Go thy Way till the End be:
for thou salt rest --. Their Bodies rest in the Grave, till the bright Morning
of the Resurrection, when they shall arise glorious and immortal. And their
departed Spirits are received by Christ, and go to be with him. which is far
better. The Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and
shall lead them unto living Fountains of Waters: and God shall wipe away all
Tears from their Eyes. Rev. 7.17. They behold the Brightness of the Father's
Glory in the Face of Jesus Christ, and are for ever satisfied with his
Likeness. And now the Light of God's Countenance shines upon them in its full
Strength, and all their Darkness vanishes away, as the Shades of Night before
the springing Day, and rising Sun. And being joined with the Spirits of just
Men made perfect, they wait in a certain Expectation for the Redemption of
their Bodies and reunion with them, Yea, when Christ, who is their Life, shall
appear, they shall also appear with Him in Glory: and so shall they be ever
with the Lord. Agreably the Apostle Johnn heard a Voice from Heaven, saying to
him, -- Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says
the Spirit, thai they may rest from their Labors; and their Works do follow
them, Rev. 14.13.

DOCT. III. A sovereign and merciful God does sometimes so order the Death of
pious Rulers, that they should not see the Evil. He is about to bring upon
their degenerate People.

Thus Josiah must not live to see the Miseries of the Babylonish Captivity:
Such was the Tenderness of his Heart, and his great Love to his People, that
these Calamities would have been almost insupportable to him; and accordingly,
his merciful God removes him to the heavenly World, where he is lifted up above
all painful Impressions, and where all is calm and serene. In like Manner, the
famous Augustine died, while Hippo was besieged by the Vendals, and after taken.
Hist. Dictionary.
And this the Prophet Isaiah mentions as an Event which not seldom comes to
pass in Favor of the godly, when perilous Times are coming on their People. --
The Righteous are taken away from the Evil to come. Chap. 57.1. Thus God
provideth an Hiding Place for them, when the Storm is near.

But I must proceed to the

APPLICATION.
USE I. See the great Evil and Danger of an hard Heart.

Contraries will have contrary Consequences. This deadly Plague of the Heart
inclines Men to disobey and reject the Warnings of God's Word and Providence.
And this is highly provoking to God. Heb. 3.8. Harden not your Hearts, as in
the Provocation. This evil Spirit gives God reason to complain as of his
ancient People, Isai. 1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt
more and more. And therefore, when God's professing People are guilty of this
great and Heaven-daring Sin under inflicted and threatened Judgments, it is a
fearful Presage of approaching Ruin. Ver. 7. Your Country is desolate, your
Cities are burnt with Fire: your Land, Strangers devour it in your Presence,
and it is desolate as overthrown by Strangers. Accordingly Wisdom cries, Prove.
1.23. Turn you at my Reproof. And threatens, v. 24, -- 27. Because I have
called, and ye refused. I have stretched out my Hand, and no Man regarded; But
ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof: I will also
laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes; When your Fear comes
as Desolation, and your Destruction comes as a Whirlwind. O let us then be
deeply humbled for the prevailing Power of this great Evil among us, in this
dark and cloudy Day, and Cry to God to take away the s^^ny Heart out of our
Flesh, lest we should be left after our Hardness, and impenitent Heart, to
treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous
Judgmeat of God.

II. Let us all be exhorted, in the diligent use of Means, to seek of God this
tender Heart.

It is God's Gift. Ezekiel. 36.26. -- I will give you an Heart of Flesh. i.e. a
tender and soft Heart, of quick Sense, and ready to receive due Impressions
from God's Word and Providence, and to yield to his sovereign Will. Let us then
pray to God for this great Blessing. When God had promised it, He adds, Ezekiel.
36.37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by the House
of Israel, to do, it for them. God will do this; but it must be in Answer to
Prayer. He expects that his People do thus show their Value for so great a
Mercy, and their entire Dependence on him for it. Let us then, deeply sensible
how our Hearts have been defiled and hardened by Sin, pour out that Prayer to
the God of all Grace, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean Heart, O God; and renew
a right Spirit within me. Again, we must attend to the Word of God, which is
perfect, converting the Soul. Jer. 23.29. Is not my Word like a Fire? says the
Lord: and like a Hammer that breaks the Rock in Pieces. Yes surely, when the
Almighty is pleased to take it into his Hand, he can break the hardest Heart,
and dissolve it into Tears of godly Sorrow, which works Repentance to
Salvation. Let us then wait at the Posts of Wisdom's Doors, and hearken to the
Voice of God's Word, and pray that we may mix it with Faith; then the Word will
be to us the Power of God to change and soften our Hearts. Again, we should
observe the Providence of God for this End: That his Goodness may lead us to
Repentance; and that under his awful Judgments, we may say with Joh, Chap.
23.16. -- God makes my Heart soft. And that knowing the Terrors of the Lord,
we may look unto Jesus, to whom the Father has committed all Judgment, and
mourn and turn to the Lord, with a broken Heart and contrite Spirit.

III. Then we should lay it to Heart, when Persons of this Character are taken
from us by Death.

Let them be high or low in their outward Circumstances, they are the excellent
in the Earth, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, who help to keep off
Judgments from a People. Had there been ten such righteous Persons in Sodom,
the God who cannot lie, gave his Word to Abraham, Gen 19.32. -- I will not
destroy it for tens sake. Agreeably, God speaks of it as a provoking Sin, Isai.
57.1. The Righteous perishes, and no Man lays it to Heart. And then adds,
None considering that the Righteous are taken away from the Evil to come. May
God avert the Omen!

In a particular Manner is this the Case, when such are removed by Death, as
were of public Character and Influence, and in their Stations Gapmen, who used
their best Endeavors, Humane Frailties excepted, to keep off impending
Judgments from breaking in upon their People.

One of this Character, was that Honorable Person, whose Death we lament
before the Lord this Day: Who having served his Generation by the Will of God,
is fallen asleep, and laid unto his Fathers. As he bare the Name, so he
exhibited much of the Spirit of this pious King: His Heart was tender, humbled
and softened under God's correcting Hand, in public and domestic Calamities. He
was a true Mourner in Zion, for his own, and the Sins of God's People; and
forward to engage in the Work of Repentance and Reformation, that God's Anger
might be turned away.

In his Death this Province is bereaved of One who was a faithful Friend and
tender Father to his Country, in the several Places of public Trust which he
filled: As a Secretary of this Province by the Royal Commission, for about
forty Years, in which Office he continued till his Death; and as he had been
for several Years of the Honorable Council, and Judge of Probate for this
County: He discharged the Duties of these important Offices with a laudable
Capacity, great Diligence and Integrity, as a good and faithful Servant of God,
his King and Country. His solicitous Care was, that the Commonwealth might
receive no Damage. And he was moderate in his Demands from particular Persons;
so far from extorting more than was due, that, as I am informed, he rather
abated of his Right. And there is Reason now to take up that Lamentation, and
say, Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts does take away the Judge, and the
prudent, and the Ancient, the honorable Man, and the Councellor.

In his Death, the College, whom he served as a Tutor for several Years, is
bereaved of a vigilant Oxerseer, whose great Concern was that pure Religion and
the best humane Literature, might flourish in that School of the Prophets,
which may God preserve for a great Blessing to our Land, so long as the Sun and
Moon shall endure.

This Town our Jerusalem is bereaved of an Inhabitant well qualified and
spirited to serve its best Interests; and who might with Propriety adopt the
Words of the Royal Psalmist, Because of the House of the Lord our God, I will
seek thy Good.

This Flock of Christ, of which his excellent FATHER was an able and faithful
Pastor, is bereaved of an exemplary and fruitful Christian, who walked humbly
and closely with God, in a firm Adherence to the Doctrines and Precepts of the
Gospel: One that was zealous for the Day and House of the Lord, and constant in
his Attendance on the public Worship, even when his bodily Infirmities might
urge him to spare himself.

And indeed, my dear Brethren, when we consider how a Sovereign God has of late
been thinning our Glory, by the Death of several pious and useful Members, and
some who had sustin'd public Offices in the civil Government; (...) Lewis, Esquire
and Mr. Edward Br^^field.
we have great Reason to humble our selves before God, and cry to Him, with
whom is the residue of the Sprit, in the Words of David, Help Lord, for the
godly Man cease; for the faithful fail from among the Children of Men. The
Lord revive us again, that we may rejoice in Hi^!

His Family is bereaved of loving faithful Husband, of a tender Father, and
good Master. May God comfort the mournful Relict, with that good Word, Thy
Maker is thy Husband; and graciously reward her unwearied Pains and Labor of
Love, in being so helpful to his Servant, and his Offspring! And may die Father
of Mercies in Heaven, take up the bereaved Children, now that their earthly
Father has forsaken them, and bless them with all the Blessings of the
everlasting and well-ordered Covenant!

Once more, the Poor and Afflicted are bereaved of a merciful Man, whose Heart
and Hands were open to relieve them under their Wants and Distresses.

But I forbear; My Brethren, I have briefly mentioned these Things, that we may
give Glory to the Father of Lights, from whom every good Gift, and every
perfect Gift come down, and trust in him for ever, with whom is no
Variableness, neither Shadow of turning; that we may earnestly seek to this
God, to repair the Breach he has made, and be excited to be Followers of them
who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises.

And now, may the God of all Grace, pour out his Spirit on every Order among
us; that we may remember our first Love, and do our first Works lest an holy
God should be provoked to remove our Candlestick out of its Place, and put out
our Light in obseure Darkness; lest this, and other Bereavements, should prove
Forerunners of desolating Judgments hastening upon us. May God be with us, as he
was with our Fathers and never leave, nor forsake us! May the Lord of Hosts
appear for us in every Mount of Difficulty, and subdue our Antichristian
Enemies; that this his People may abide before him in this good Land, to serve
him till the second Coming of our Lord!

To conclude; Let us not be offended in Christ, when we beheld such exemplary
Christians called to bear heavy Crosses, conflicting with grievous Temptations,
and sometimes walking in Darkness; but rather observe how their Humility and
Patience, Reverence and Submission to the Will of God, were exercised and
improved under their heavy Trials; and then realize the glorious and
everlasting Rest which remains to the People of God in Heaven; that we may
encourage our selves in the Lord, and say with the Apostle Paul, with whose
Words I finish, 2 Cor. 4.16, -- 18. For which Cause we faint not, but though
our outward Man perish, yet the inward Man is renewed Day by Day. For our light
Affliction, which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal Weight of Glory: While we look not at the Things which are seen, but at
the Things which are not seen: for the Things which are seen, are temporal; but
the Things which are not seen, are eternal.

FINIS.
The Character of CALEB.

IN A SERMON Delivered At the South-Church in Boston, On the Lord's Day after
The Funeral of The HONORABLE Josiah Willard, Esquire Secretary of the Province:
Who Deceased December 6. 1756. Aet. 76.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And a Pastor of said Church.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. 1756.

The Character of Caleb.
NUMB. XIV. 24. But my Servant Caleb had another Spirit with him, and has
followed me fully.


THE professing People of GOD are those who profess, either by Ward or Conduct,
that they believe there is a GOD, infinite, unchangeable and eternal in Being,
Excellence and Blessedness; that He is the Creator, Upholder, absolute
Proprietor and Ruler of all Things; that the Scriptures commonly called the
Bible, are given by Inspiration from Him; that they are under indispensable
Obligations to search and live according to them, as a perfect and perpetual
Rule, in the whole of their Conduct; and that this is their Resolution and
Endeavor.

These are the professing People of GOD. But it is highly probable, there
always was and is among them, a Number who disbelieve his Being or Perfections,
and his Works of Creation or Providence; who are commonly called Atheists:
Others, who though they believe these Things, yet disbelieve the Scriptures to
have been given by Inspiration from Him; who are commonly called Deists: Others
who doubt of this Inspiraticn from Him; who are commonly called Skepticks, i.
c. Doubters: Other, though they believe it, yet commonly neglect the plain Duties
therein required; who are the Ung^^r: and others who commonly commit the known
Sins therein forbidden; and these are the Wicked.

Where the pr^fessing People of GOD are the ruling Party; those Atheists,
Deists, Scepticks, Ungodly and Wicked, may for worldly Ends, either in a
greater or less Degree, conceal themselves, or more boldly and openly show
themselves, according to their various Interests, Encouragements or Tempers:
But though they live among the professing People of God; yet those who thus
openly show themselves, are not properly of them, but a People really separate
from them.

Among this professing People of GOD, some are sincere and others hypocritical.
And of those who are sincere, some have a Faith arising from the mere
Impressions of Education: Others a Faith proceeding from the irresistible
Convictions of Reason only, such as even the fallen Agels have: and Others a
Faith produced by the mighty SPIRIT of GOD in the Change of their Hearts; which
they find to be a vital, active, powerful, constant and prevailing Principle,
exciting them to labor after a universal Conformity to the moral Nature of GOD
in Holiness, and to his revealed Will in Submission and Obedience.

Yea of this highest and most exceller Sort of Believers, some are more lively,
(...) victorious in the Power and Exercise of (...) Others. And of this Sort of
Believers was the most excellent CALEB represented, even by GOD Himself in the
Text before us. Yea, GOD was pleased (...) give this high and consummate
Character of him, even in the Sight and Hearing of all the Tribes of Israel.
They were now in die second Year after their leaving Egypt in the Wildeness of
Paran near Kade(...), eleven Days Joursey from Mount Sinai, and Fourteen from
the Red Sea, and not far from the Southern Border of the Land of Canaan. And
the Occasion was --

That at the Motion of the People and the Divine Allowance and Direction, MOSES
had sent thence a Principl Ruler of every Tribe, excepting Levi; The first
(...) came from the (...) as (...) observes from D^^. I. And the Tribe (...)
was excepted, because they were to have no Inherance as a separate Tribe in
(...) xviii.De^^.
the chief Man from Epl^aim being JOSHUA, and for Judah, CALES, to search the
land of Promise: and after forty Days, returning; and all but J^stua and Caleb
magnifying the Cities for their prodigious Strength, and the Inhabitants for
their giantly Stature; and representing to the Tribes, that the Canaanites were
vastly mighter than they, and that the Israelites were utterly unable to go up
against them; -- all is now Confusion in the Camp of Israel. -- First they lift
up their Voice and cry all that Night: then they murmur against Moses and
Aaron, yea against the LORD Himself, for bringing them out of the Land of
Egypt, to fall by the Sword, that their Wives and Children should be a Prey: --
they wise they had died in Egypt or in the Wilderness; and talk of choosing a
Captain to lead them back to Egypt again.

In so astonishing a Manner did their Unbelief prevail, notwithstanding all the
miraculous Displays of the supreme Power and Faithfulness of GOD among them --
yet, their Unbelief of his Ability and Faithfulness to overcome the Obstacles
before them, and put them in Possession of the Land he had so solemnly and so
often promised them. Unbelief most awfully debases the glorious GOD, and
magnifies the Creature.

Then MOSES and AARON fall on their Faces before the Assembly of the
Congregation: and JOSHUA and CALEB rend their Clothes, and venture among and
speak to all the mutinous and raging Multitude, endeavor to pacify their
Spirits, and excite them to Faith, Obedience and Courage, by saying -- The Land
which we passed through to search it, is an exceeding good Land: if the Lord
delight in us, then He will bring us into this Land, and give it us, a Land
which flows with Milk and Honey: Only rebel not ye against the LORD, neither
fear ye the People of the Land; for they are Bread for us; their Defense is
departed from them; and the LORD is with us; fear them not. But all the
Congregation calling out to stone them; the Glory of the LORD appears in [and
over] the Tabernacle before all the Children of Israel; when he expresses his
high Resentment, and denounces their universal Destruction in the Wilderness,
for their Disbelief, Murmuring and Rebellion, excepting Joshua and Caleb: and
of the illustrious Person in our Text, he gives this distinguishing and exalted
Character -- But my Servant CALEB had another Spirit with him, and has
followed me fully etc.

And this I shall endeavor to clear under these two general Heads --

I. The eminent Person here distinguished.

(...) Character the LORD (...) loved me fully.

I. The eminent Person here distinguished.

By 1 Chronicles ii, He appears to be of honorable Extract; being the Son of
He^ron, otherwise called Jep^^ned, the Son of Phare^, the Son of Judah. And in
the Chapter before our Text, he was thus distinguished by GOD Himself, ^ 1 --
6. And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, Send thou Men, that they may search the
Land of Canaan which I give into the Children of Israel: of every Tribe of
their Fathers shall ye send a Man, every one A RULER Heb -- Nashia.
among them. And Moses by the Commandment of the LORD sent them from the
Wilderness of Paran: all these Men were HEADS Hebr -- Rashi.
of the Children of Israel: of the Tribe of Judah, CALEB the Son of Jep^^^ned;
etc.

Though they were not the Princes of their several Tribes, in the highest Place
of Civil Dignity next to Moses, whose twelve Names we have in the viith Chapter
before our Text; yet they are said to be Heads and Rulers among their several
Tribes, or some of the principal Magistrates over them. And it seems highly
probable, they were some of those eminent Men of the several Tribes, who are
styled Able Men, Fearers of GOD, Men of Truth, Haters of Coveteousness, whom
Moses, upon the wise Advice of his Father in Law JETHRO Prince of Midian, with
the Divine Approbation and Direction, chose out of all Israel; and made them
Heads Hebr -- Rasbi^n.
over the People, RULERS Hebr -- Shari.
of Thousands, RULERS Hebr -- Shari.
of Hundreds, RULERS Hebr -- Shari.
of Fifties, and RULERS Hebr -- Shari.
of Tens; i. e. of Families, or those who dwelt in the same Tents; who Judged
the People at all Seasons, referring the border Matters to MOSES -- as we read
in Ex^d. xviii.

Of the same Persons MOSES spoke to all Israel Deuteronomy. i 13 -- 17. Take ye wise
Men and (...) standing, and known among your Tribes, and (...) make them RULERS
I over you; and ye (...) and said, the Thing which thou have (...) good for us
to do: so I took the CHIEF ^ of your Tribes wise Men, and known; and made them
(...) you; CAPTAINS, Shari; translated more accurately -- RULERS in Ex^^. xviii.
[i. e. not military Officer,(...) but Rulers and Judges; in Civil and Criminal
Cases] over Thousands etc. and OFFICERS: [i. e. Men to put the Sentences in
Execution Hebr -- Sh^^ri^. See Pag^^andMo^^, S(...), Rei(...)]
Take ye, -- In the Hebrew it is -- Give ye; i.e. Look out and (...) among you
Those you know to be the most suitable Persons, and then bring and present them
to me that I (...) may choose, and then appoint and give them to you for this
public and important Service. The (...)nation was made by the People, as being
best (...) with them; but the des^^itive Choice and the authorizing Appointment
was made by MOSES, who under GOD was King in Jesh^^^^, when the Heads of the
People and the Tribes of Israel were gathered together; Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 5.

By comparing these Scripture Passages, it seems highly probable, that CALEB
was One of the Judges, Heads and Rulers of the higher Civil Order under MOSES;
i. e. at least of a Thousand Families in the Tribe of Judah; there being then
of that Tribe seventy four Thousand and six Hundred Men from twenty Years old
and upward, that were able to go forth to War besides Women and Children. Numb.
i. 26, 27.

And as no Doubt, the Wisdom of MOSES would lead him to the Choice of those he
judged best qualified for this dangerous and important Business of serveying
the Land; we must conclude, that CALEB was one of those who were most eminently
fitted for this difficult Employment. And his Faith, his Judgment, his In^^^y,
his Courage, Piety and Steadiness, appeared and shone with distinguished Luster
on this great Occasion.

The seventy-two Jewish Rabbis, who translated the OLD Testament out of Hebrew
into Greek, about two Hundred and seventy seven Years before the Birth of
CHRIST, See Usher's Annals.
strangely turn the Hebrew [AUBDI] my Servent into [PAISMOU] my Youth or Child.
But if they meant this Term with respect to his Age, they were undoubtedly
mistaken. For by comparing his History in this Book, of Numbers with the xivth
Chapter of (...), where he says himself, he was then eighty-five Years old: it
appears, that he was thirty-nine or forty Years of Age, when he was made a
principal Ruler, and a few Months after received from GOD this glorious
Character.

But our

II. General Head is now to consider this threefold Character the LORD here
gave him.

1. But MY SERVANT Caleb.

In some Respects indeed, the whole Creation, both Intelligent and
Unintelligent, both animate and inanimate, may be styled his Servants; -- as he
perpetually improves and overrules them, to accomplish his wise Designs, and
show the Glory and advance the Honor of some or other of his Perfections. So
the Scripture represents in Psalm. cxix. 89 -- 91. For ever O Lord thy Word is
settled in Heaven: thy Faithfulness is to all Generations: Thou have
established the Earth, and it abides: They continue this Day according to
thine Ordinances: for ALL are thy SERVENTS. And so the Sovereign GOD is pleased
to call even Nebuchadnezzer King of Babylon, MY SERVANT, three times over in
the same inspired Book, Jer. xxv. 9; xxvii. 6; and xliii. 10. The Word in
Hebrew being the same, as in our Text, in all these Places.

But the Sense of the Term here plainly means, both his intelligent, free,
voluntary, devoted, active, faithful, and approved SERVANT. Such a one in
general as the Apostle Paul writes of in Romans vi. 22. Being now made free from
Sin, and become SERVANTS to GOD, ye have your Fruit unto Holiness, and the End
everlasting Life.

In Particular -- One whose Heart or Nature was sanctfied in some Degree by his
All-mighty Spirit -- whose Principles or Dispositions of Enmity to or Aversion
from the holy Nature, Laws, Will, Sovereignty, Authority and Government of God,
were in some Degree subdued or mortified -- whose Heart or Nature was so
renewed or changed; as to have a sweet, pleasant and predominant Relish for the
Contemplation of his holy Nature, Perfections, Laws, Word of Inspiration, Will,
Designs, Authority, Sovereignty, Government Blessedness, and glory: -- of his
Word of Inspiration, especially the Doctrines, Histories, Promises, and
Prophecies respecting the Work of Redemption by the MESSIAH, the Work of
Sanctification by the HOLY SPIRIT, with all the invisible and wonderful
Realities therein revealed.

One who therefore clearly saw the transcendant Amiableness, Excellence, and
Importance of all these Things: as also the exceeding Suitableness, the
Excellence, the Happiness, the great Desireableness of having his Nature
entirely, perfectly, and perpetually, conformed to the holy Nature of GOD in
all his moral Excellencies; and of having his Heart, his whole Spirit, Soul,
Body and Life, thus conformed also to his Sovereign Will both in Submission,
Patience and Obedience.

Lastly, One who therefore clearly saw the transcendent Honor, Excellence and
Blessedness of serving Him, and of employing all his Opportunities, Powers and
Talents in his faithful Service, and to promote his Glory: -- who entirely
heartily, absolutely and eternally devoted himself and all he had thereto: --
who had habitual and predominant Desires, Longings, Prayers, Resolutions,
Labors, Strivings, and Pressings after all this Honor, Excellence and
Blessedness: -- And who exceedingly rejoiced, and grew in Thankfulness and Love
to GOD, for every Measure of attaining to them.

Such a One was CALEB: and no doubt but that He, as well as his Ancestor
ABRAHAM who lived above three Hundred Years before him, A. Bp. Usher, Bp Lleyd,
etc.
by the same Faith, saw the Day of CHRIST, and rejoiced therein; as our blessed
SAVIOR said to the Jews in Joh. viii 56. Your Father ABRAHAM rejoiced to see
my Day; and he saw it and was glad: Though ABRAHAM died above Eighteen Hundred
Years before CHRIST was born. A. Bp. Usher, Bp Lleyd, etc.


And such a One is every Real Christian; but with this complex and great
Advantage -- That abundantly more of the transcendent Glories and Amiableness
of the blessed GOD are since revealed in the Gospel: -- They are vastly more
displayed in and through CHRIST, in his wondrous Person, Natures, Offices and
Benefits: -- In The Face or Person of CHRIST they surprizingly appear, who is
the Brightness or Effulgence of the Divine Glory: -- The Ways and the higher
Degrees of serving the Blessed GOD, are more clearly shown: -- The Obligations,
the Allurements and the Motives exceedingly increased: -- And the Souls of
those who are savingly renewed and enlightened, are therefore vastly more
engaged, entertained and delighted in his Service than before.

But the

2d Part of his Character, yet more distinguishing, was, that he had another
Spirit with him.

i. e. A Spirit different, not only from what was in die other Spies, excepting
Joshua, but also from what appeared in the Generality of the Congregation of
Israel.

Those learned Men who near the Apostles Days cranslated the Old Testament out
of Hebrew into Syriack, though it, the Meaning of the Hebrew was -- My Spirit was
with him. And indeed they so far rightly though it; that unless the HOLY SPIRIT of
GOD was working with and in him, as a Spirit producing and exciting Holiness;
he would not have differed from the Rest of the unbelieving, murmuring and
rebellious Congregation. See Isai iv. 4. xi. 2. xxviii. 6.
It was the SPIRIT of GOD, as a SPIRIT of communicative Holiness, now in the
Gospel revealed to be also the SPIRIT of CHRIST; which made the Spirit or
active Temper of the Soul of CALEB to be, and at that Time appear exceeding
different from the Spirit of the Rest of the People. And I said the SPIRIT of
CHRIST; -- as all his gracious Workings are Purchased by Him, and are the
Effect both of his gracious, mediatorial Intercession, and then of his conjunct
Authority and Mission with the Divine Father, in the agreed Economy, and Order
of our Salvation.

But then as the Hebrew Words more precisely signify -- Another Spirit with Him
-- as all the other ancient Persons render them; -- it seems plain to me, that
this other Spirit with him, was the actual Temper of the Soul of CALEB: and as
it was in it self, so on that Occasion it remarkably appeared exceeding
different from the unbelieving, murmuring and rebellious Spirit which then
surprizingly wrought and appeared in the tumultuous Congregation.

I cannot tell how to think, that all the Congregation, excepting Moses, Aaron,
Joshua and Caleb, were combined in the Mutiny: For it appears clear to me, that
the whole Tribe of Levi, were distinguished from the Rest in Mutiny; as a late
learned Writer of our own, a curious Searcher of the holy Scriptures, The late
Hon. Chief Justice Dudley.
has, I think, sufficiently made evident: and to me it seems also highly
probable, that they were then, in, around and nearest to the Tabernacle, where
their Tribe was stationed, and with Moses and Aaron distinguished from the Rest
in Company, with some Vacancy between them and the Rest of the Congregation:
but they were only the other twelve Tribes, Ephraim and Manasseh being two of
the twelve, out of whom the twelve Spies were sent, who were the murmuring
Multitude.

Of these other twelve Tribes only, it is said that -- All the Congregation
listed up their Voice and cried -- And all the Children of Israel murmured --
And the whole Congregation said -- Would God we had died in the Land of Egypt
-- And they said one to another, Let us make a Captain, and let us return into
Egypt. Nor were the Children under twenty Years of Age, who were in all
Probability, as Mr. Saurin well computes at least Twelve Hundred Thousand,
involved either in the threatened Destruction in the Wilderness, nor among the
guilty Murmurers.

Nor can I think that all the MEN of this Congregation, excepting Caleb and
Joshua, were (...) destitute of real habitual Holiness; or what is commonly
called special sanctifying, saving Grace. For the Word all, Scripture, often
signifies so many, such a Generality, as to a Spectator the Others made no
Appearance; but the whole Congregation seemed to be agitated by the same
rebellious Spirit No doubt great Numbers among that vast Multitude, composed of
above Six Hundred Thousand Men besides Women and Children, were greatly grieved
with what they heard and saw, all round about them: but the Uproar of the
Multitude was so great, as to overwhelm and cover them.

Yea, I am apt to think that great Numbers even of the Murmurers themselves,
might yet have Principles of Holiness or Grace in the Bottom of their Hearts;
though then dreadfully overwhelmed with sudden Floods of Passion and Corruption:
-- as in the Bottom of the Heart of Peter, when he profanely cursed and swore,
and denied his Divine and dear Master. And if CHRIST had not so soon bestowed
such a melting Look upon Him, he would not have so soon gone out and wept so
bitterly.

It is both grievous and astonishing to think how the habitual and vital
Principles of Grace, may lie deep in the Hearts of the Renewed, or those who
are begun to be sanctified; and yet sometimes by the awful Permission of GOD,
be overwhelmed by Temptations and Corruptions, which overpower and for a while
suppress the predominant Exercise of those vital Principles; and the Renewed
are sadly left to act and look like the Rest of the ungodly and wicked World.
And this I apprehend was the Case of many blended with that tumultuous
Multitude.

But CALEB had in Himself, and on that Occassion showed quite another Spirit:
i. e. a Spirit, not only totally different from those who were habitually
Wicked and Ungodly but also vastly different from those who were Religious at
the Bottom, but in that Season of Temptation murmured with the Rest of the
Congregation.

But in what Respect had lie Another Sprit?

To this I answer --

The active Temper of his Heart or Soul, were not only sanctified with holy
Relishes and Bents, whereby he differed from all the Ungodly; But this
sanctified Temper also ar^se and acted in a predominant and eminent Degree,
whereby he likewise differed from the Rest of the Religious among the murmuring
Multitude.

The several Branches of this sanctified Temper are in the holy Scripture
commonly called Graces, And all these Graces dwelt and acted in him in a
lively, reigning, apparent and steady Manner. Thus we read of the Spirit of
Wisdom, which his Companion Joshua was said to be full of, Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 9. The
Spirit of Meekness, which the Apostle Paul supposed the Christian Galatians
had; Chap. vi 1. And the same Apostle writes in 2 Timothy i. 7 For God has given
us, not the Spirit of Fear [i. e. of cowardly Fear of Men] but of power, Love,
and of a found Mind.

All these and other Graces CALEB had, and lived in the powerful, eminent and
steady Exercise of. And among his other Graces, he had of especially the Spirit
of Faith, as the Apostle Paul said, that he and the other Apostles had in their
Day, in 2 Cor. iv 13. And CALEB had not only the vital Principle of this active
Grace, but also the lively, powerful, and victorious Exercise thereof; in
which he eminently lived continually, and especialy in a distinguishing Degree
displayed in this dreadful Hour of Temptation.

He distinguishingly showed, that he had not only That Faith in GOD and in his
Inspirations which he derived from Education and Rational Conviction; but also
That vastly more vital, active and victorious Faith wrought by the DIVINE
SPIRIT, when he changes or begins to sanctify the Hearts of Sinners. And by
this vital Principle, as the Fundamental Power in him, with the Help of wise
Consideration and those concurring lively Ideas of those most important Objects
and Truths which GOD had then revealed -- I would say. with the Help of those
concurring lively Ideas of them which the HOLY SPIRIT gave him, and which the
Scriptures call his inward Illumination, or shining in the Hearts of Men: -- He
lived in a constant, believing View of those Truths and Objects, as real,
certain, and of the greatest Moment.

In Particular, He lived in the believing and lively Views of GOD, his Being
and Perfections, Sovereignty. Authority, Laws, Predictions, Threatenings.
Promises; his supreme, universal, actual and perpetual Providence; his
continual Omnipresence and Observance; his inviolable Faithfulness, and nis
future Judgment.

And as GOD had promised to bring the Nation of Israel out of Egypt, and put
them in the Possession of Canaan; and CALEB knew this Promise, and had seen the
Beginning of its Fulfillment in a most wond^^^ Manner in Egypt, in the Red Sea,
and in the Wilderness hitherto; He had a believing and certain View of his
Fulfilling all the Remainder, over every Obstacle and Opposition. And by this
believing View excited, he with an amazing Courage, along with Joshua ran among
the mutinous and raging Multitude; to stay them from their mad Design of
turning back to Egypt, and encourage them to trust in GOD to fulfill all his
Promise and put them into the Possession of the Land before them. From his
Faith, his public Zeal and Courage, he ran the most desperate Risk among them:
And in their Rage they had quickly stoned Him and Joshua to Death, had not the
Glory of the LORD at that Moment blazed out and saved them.

But we must come to consider the

III. and last Part of the extraordinary Character the Lord here further gave
him -- And has followed me fully.

And indeed, as this is the final Part; it is so consummate that nothing can be
added consistent with the present State of Humane Imperfection and Infirmity.

The Hebrew literally rendered, is -- He has filled, or fulfilled after me:
So Mosi^^^s; and so (...) the (...) Versions, and Gratius in Pal. Synops.
The Syriack -- He has perfected after me: The Samaritane and Septuagint, --
He has followed me: And the Chaldee -- He has perfectly followed my Fear: But
Tremeillius and our most excellent English Version -- He has followed me
fully: Which no doubt is the plain Sentiment, and which the Apostle Paul seems
to have had in View, when he thus exhorted the Christians at Ephesus, in
Chapter v. 1. Be ye Followers of GOD as dear Children.

But as the Idea of Following the LORD is most clearly implied in the Hebrew
Preposition; so likewise are the complex Ideas of Following him Fully or
I^tirely, in Connection with the Verb.

But what may be the Import of this illustrious and comprehensive Character?

To this I may but briefly Answer --

That in That other sanctified Spirit, with, or in Him, there was an eminently
strong, active, prevailing and steady Bent, Desire, Resolution and Endeavor,
to Follow the LORD in the fullest Manner possible. And from this Spirit in him
(allowing for the remaining Corruptions, Imperfections and Infirmities within,
as well as various Avocations and Temptations from without) there was in the
main a constant Aim and Labor to see and know as much as may be of the Nature,
Excellence, Inspirations, Laws, Will, Works, and Promises of GOD, with the
Fulfillment of them; -- To imitate Him in all his moral Excellencies, and wise,
righteous, holy, gracious and faithful Operations; to grow more and more in
Conformity to the Nature and Excellence of that most perfect Being; resting
nothing short of as perfect a Likeness to Him, as the Humane Nature is capable
of --

As also to view and aim at his declarative Glory, as the most righteous,
worthy, fit and excellent, and therefore the highest End of all; -- To devote
himself and all he had. absolutely to Him, and improve them for Him; -- To
study to know his whole Will concerning Him revealed in his Works of Creation,
and Providence, and yet more clearly and fully in his written Inspirations: And
then humbly looking to Him for his undeserved and kind Assistance; to labor an
entire and continual Conformity thereto; -- To avoid every Sin both of
Commission and Omission, both in Heart and Life; -- Resist all Temptations;
deny and mortify all corrupt Inclinations; wait on every Institution; observe
every Duty, both with Respect more immediately to GOD, his Neighbor and
Himself; and in Particular, to fulfill the Duties of every Office and Relation,
both of a public and private Nature; -- submitively, meekly and patiently to
bare every Affliction, as the wise and kind Correction of his heavenly Father:
Doing and suffering all, not in the least to merit at the Hands of GOD, but in
lively Gratitude and supreme Affection to Him, to perform his Will and promote
his Glory; with an holy Pleasure and Gladness for his gracious Help and
Acceptance, from the free Benignity of his own Nature, as well as his inspired
Declarations; -- and in all retaining an humble Sense of his own utter
Unworthiness of the smallest Mercy.

In fine, Laboring after a Life of delightful and steady Communion with Him in
his Ordinances, Reading and Hearing his Word, Meditating, Praying, confessing
Faults, Thanking, Praising; and in all his Providence both comfortable and
corrective; -- Rising up into believing, lively and delightful Views of GOD;
and by beholding his Glory, receiving its transforming Influence, changing the
viewing Soul into his Image from Glory to Glory; as also raising it above all
Things here below, to the transporting Views of Him in the World above, and the
most ardent Aspirations after the immediate Vision and Enjoyment of Him There
for ever.

And if CALEB had lived in the glorious Light of the Gospel we behold; O how
transported would he have been to see all this Glory of GOD in the Face of
CHRIST, and through CHRIST receiving all these happy Influences and Emanations!
How would his Soul have burned with more glowing Ardours of Gratitude and Love
to the Divine FATHER, SON and SPIRIT, for all their various and united Works of
Grace and Kindness to the sinful vile and wretched Race of Men! And how would
he have exceeded the most of Christians (...), as he did the most of the Saints
then, in that less lightsome Dispersation, in his Service of GOD, in his
exalted Spirit of Faith and Piety, in flaming Zeal for his Glory, and in the
Fullness of his Following after Him!

And thus have we briefly considered the distinguishing Character of this
Public and eminent Person, as given by GOD Himself; and put in the sacred
Records, not only to his own exceeding great and eternal Honor, but also to
excite our Praise to the MOST HIGH for bestowing such great Grace on Man, and
stir us up to the aspiring Imitation.

But have there been no other Persons like the Scripture CALEB in the
succeeding Ages?

As the Residue of the same equal Power and Influence of the HOLY SPIRIT who
thus sanctfied and adorned Him, is eternally the same with the infinite GOD; He
has since in every Age been forming and raising Others like Him, and even
Persons of Public Figure and Influence.

Yea in this happy Land in every Generation from the Arrival of the First of
our New England Colonies in 1620, He has formed a glorious Succesion of such
eminent Persions. The passing Generation of the Ancient Here have happily seeen
many such, to our abundant Joy and Admiration. Nor has the present Assembly
been without the pleasing and recent Sight of such a One among us; who just now
brightly filled and adorned one of the chief Places before our Eyes, and used
to appear with an amiable Luster of Piety and Goodness: but alas for us, is
gone for ever.

One exceeding like to the Scripture CALEB: and while I have been describing
his eminent Graces, yon have lately had the lovely EXAMPLE before your Eyes.

His Father was a Reverend, pious and learned Paster of this Church for near
Thirty Years, and as highly esteemed and beloved both in the Town and Land, for
his eminent Grace, Wisdom, Goodness, and usefulness, I suppose, as any in his
Day. His Grandfather was one of the religious and courageous (...) of the
ancient Massar-^^^etts Colony. Nor may I forget his Mother, because she was a
Gentlewoman of Piety, helped to form his Youth for Public Service; and lived
to see him to her great Joy answering all her Cares, advanced to his Place of
Public Honor, and to receive from him the grateful Returns of his most tender
and filial Affection toward her. She was also a Daughter of another of our
religious Councellor. And if all these had not been noted in their Day for
Piety; I should not have mentioned them. But the Memory of the Just is Blessed:
and it is a greater Privilege to descend from religious Ancestors, and to grow
up under their Nurture, Examples and Prayers, than to derive from the greatest
Emperors and Empresses on Earth.

In this Town he was born in May 1681. And the GOD of Nature was pleased to
give him very valuable natural Powers; a clear and ready Understanding,
faithful Memory, lively Temper, a kind, generous and manly Spirit, a judicious
Taste; with a regular Ambition to excel, and make a useful and ornamental
Figure in the World

To the common Seize of Learning at the Grammar School and College; He
added the diligent Reading of the politest and most useful Authors: And in his
younger Days delighted and greatly improved in the Knowledge of the ancient
Roman History.

When I went to College in 1703, I found him there a worthy and esteemed Tutor;
while his FATHER was our venerable Vice President. And there I remember This
Son of his then shined in the Politenese, Freeness, Openess and Pleasancy of
his Conversation, and in a very generous and manly Sort of Conduct; but in all
religious Exercises with grear Seriousness and Solemnity.

From the College he traveled Abroad both to the West Indies and England;
improved still in genteel Accomplishments; but maintained unsullied his moral
Character; and religious Sentiments and Dispositions. And indeed the more a
serious and judicious New England Youth sees of the depraved World Abroad; the
more will he rise in his Esteem of the solid Religion of his native Land, which
renders it the happiest for good Order and Sobriety, at this Day on the Earth.

In June 1717, King GEORGE I. exceedingly gratified and blessed this Province,
by appointing Him our Secretary. And in this public Post he has ever since
appeared a bright and most amiable Example of Care, Diligence, Integrity,
Public Spirit, Wisdom, Goodness and Generosity; to the great Honor and
Advantage, and to the universal Pleasure of his Country.

In Dec. 1731, He was made Judge of Probates for this County of Suffolk; and in
May 1734, chosen into HIS MAJESTY'S Council for the Province: and held all
these Places at the same Time, till from his great Increase of Busiess in the
Secretary's Office, He of his own Motion laid down the Probacy in 1745; and
from his advanced Age, apprehended it his Duty to give up his Place the last
Year at the Council Board, to the Public Sorrow; and though earnestly follicited
to stay, with Offers of great Indulgence to his growing Infirmities yet he
declared, He could not in Conscience take the Public Moneys as a Councellor,
when he was grown unable to give a constant and due Attendance in that
Capacity, to the Public Business. And in all his Fees, he was exceeding kind;
giving many to the Poor, and to Others being very moderate.

But it was his distinguishing, unaffected and yet shining Piety, which spread
a pleasing Luster on all his other Endowments, and rendered him so exceeding
amiable and delightful to us. And without preferring him to many Others; I may
freely say, that among his Brethren and Fathers in Place of Civil Dignity, I
don't remember that I ever saw any Man, in whom so many Accomplishments, with
the unaffected Gentleman, and the eminent Christian, were more happily united.

There seemed to be a great deal of Sincerity, Openess and Freeness in his
natural Temper; though his Openess and Freeness were agreably tempered with
Innocence and Prudence. And when he courageously opened himself with any
Measure of Anger; it proceeded from Displeasure at the Evil, and not Enmity to
the Person, and from a Conscientious Zeal for the Glory of GOD, and Good of
Men. But his Sincerity, by the humbling and breaking Influences of the SPIRIT
of GOD on his enlightened Heart, became in an eminent Degree a Grace of the Holy
Spirit.

His more eminent Piety began with this humbling and breaking Operation. He had
such lively Views given Him of the Glorious Holiness, and Majesty of GOD, the
Extensiveness and Strictness of his holy Law; his own Vileness, the horrible
Corruptions in him, his utter Inability to suppress them, the horrid Averseness
of hi Heart to holy Meditations on GOD and CHRIST, his utter Inability so to
change his Heart as to think upon them with Delight, together with those base
and carnal Motives which put him on and mixed with, and so defiled all his
Duties; with the perfectly and perpetually holy and all-seeing Eye of GOD upon
him; -- that his Heart was broken to Pieces with the deepest Shame, Abasement,
and Self-Abhorrence: All his Confidence in his own Strength and Righteousness
or Worthiness, was utterly destroyed: He could say with the enlightened Joh in
Chap. xl. 3 -- 5. Then Joh answered the LORD and said, Behold I am vile; what
shall I answer Thee? I will lay my Hand upon my Mouth: once have I spoken, but
I will not Answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no further. And in Chap. xlii.
1. Then JOB answered the LORD and said, I know that thou can do every Thing,
and that no Thought can be withheld from Thee: I have heard of Thee by the
heard of the Ear; but now mine Eye sees Thee: Wherefore I abhor my self, and
repent in Dust and Ashes. And from this Time, deep Humility, Lowliness and
Brokenness of Heart, with a thoro' gracious, eminent Sincerity, became more
apparently the habitual, reigning Principles or Dispositions in Him.

Now he also more clearly saw the absolute Necessity of the Divine SPIRIT to
sanctify, enlighten, help and govern him; of the perfect and most meritorious
Righteousness of CHRIST to justify him; and of the infinite Grace of GOD to
abound through CHRIST and by the HOLY SPIRIT, infinitely to him. CHRIST as GOD
and Man Mediator appeared in his perfect Excellency, All Sufficiency, and
Suitableness, to save and make him happy: And to the glorious GOD in CHRIST he
looked, and on Him trusted, and this continually, to save him from his Sins,
his Sinfulness and Miseries; and by his Holy SPIRIT to give him saving Light
and Grace; spiritual Wisdom, Strength, Victories and Comforts; and prepare him
for, and bring Him for the heavenly Glory.

He was a diligent Searcher of the Holy Scriptures; had a deep Impression on
his Heart of their Divine Inspiration and Authority; even by his own continual
Experience, whereby his Faith in them was abundantly confirmed: He clearly saw
their exceeding Preciousness: and the Truths and Promises therein were his
delightful Contemplation.

He was well acquainted with the Meaning of those Divine Truths revealed in the
Scriptures, which are compatible to the humane Understanding: And for those
above it; He reverentially submitted to the Divine Authority, and as firmly
believed them, because declared by GOD, as any Others.

He believed all the Doctrines of the Churches commonly called Reformed to be
wonderfully agreeable to the HOLY SCRIPTURES. For he could not but account it a
wondrous Thing indeed, that though they differed about the Worship, Form and
Government of Churches; yet all the Martyrs and Reformers in England, Scotland,
Ireland, France, Italy, Switzerland, the Palatinate, and the Netherlands, as
soon as they had the SCRIPTURES translated into their several Languages,
without consulting with each other; yet harmoniously agreed in the very same
Doctrines, by which they lived and died, on which their extraordinary Piety was
founded, and which great Numbers sealed in the glowing Fire: which the most
pious Founders of New England brought over hither, and to which the pious
Ministers and People of our Churches have steadfastly adhered to the present Day.

In Particular, He firmly believed with them, that the unsearchable Doctrine of
the Divine Trinity, is most plainly revealed in SCRIPTURE; and so interwoven
with the entire Frame of the Christian Revelation and Religion, that if this
Divine Doctrine be taken away, the wondrous Fabric of Christianity would fall
to Pieces, and the utmost Confusion introduced in the Minds of its Professors.
And he was so much grieved, that he could fearce enjoy any Rest, at the
pernicious Attempts of some among us to undermine this great and fundamental
Doctrine.

He would never perplex his Mind with Metaphysical or subtle Attempts to
explain it; which he apprehended a vain Intrusion into Things above our Reach,
and not revealed. He clearly saw the inspired Oracles ascribe the same Divine
Perfections, Titles, Works, and Worship to the Divine FATHER, WORD and SPIRIT,
which belong only to the One true GOD: That they absolutely forbid devine
Worship to be paid to any other; that the FATHER is the One GOD, the WORD is
the One GOD, and the SPIRIT is the One GOD; but that there is same Sort of
Distinction which the Scripture represents under the Form of a Personal
Distinction; so that it would be highly improper to say that either the Divine
FATHER, or the Divine SPIRIT were made Flesh or became Incarnate; and yet that
These Three are wondrously united; but what that Distinction is precisely, is
not yet revealed, and without a further Revelation we can never find it.

With the concurring Help of the Divine SPIRIT, He felt the quickening and
sanctifying Power, and relished the Sweetness of the DOCTRINES of the Gospel
preached in our NEW ENGLAND Churches, which he found to be the very same which
were commonly taught in the Church of ENGLAND in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth,
King James I, and King Charles I And as he advanced in Sanctity, the more the
Gospel Doctrines and pious Spirit of those ancient Writers became ageeable to
him. He had a mighty and just Sense of Eternity, and of his eternal Interest;
wisely apprehended all others were Trifles in Companion, and that he could not
be too much concerned or careful to secure it: -- was therefore greatly afraid
least he should be fatally mistaken in a Matter of such infinite Importance: --
most diligently therefore searched his own Heart -- chiefly valued the most
searching Ministers and Writers; those who mostly treat of the Religion of the
Heart; i. e. the Work of the HOLY SPIRIT on the Hearts of Men, with the inward
Workings of their own Spirits, and the Fruit of both; or which is the same, of
vital or experimental Piety!

And though he sometimes walked in Darkness; yet he has told me, He dare not deny
the gracious Influence of the HOLY SPIRIT in him; the hopeful Appearances of a
saving Change; of the Exercise of internal Graces; -- in Particular high and
endearing Apprehensions of GOD, as he appears in CHRIST; earnest Thirstings
after Him, delightful Views of Him, and therein sensible Communion with Him,
But his own Deficiencies in Obedience and Holiness, with the sinful Workings in
him, and the Body of Sin, were his continual Burden: And of these, with his
Imperfections and the Dullness in the Frames and Motions of his Heart toward
the blessed GOD, as displaying himself in CHRIST, he was continually
complaining, and even groaning to be delivered from them.

The Doctrine of Original Sin, he saw plainly described in Scripture, most
clearly evident in the universal Depravation of Mankind, most bitterly
complained of by all the Pious he conversed with: And he knew it to be true
from his own continual Experience. Yea the more he grew in Sanctity, the more
he saw with Grief the odious Fountain in him. For the stronger he grew in his
Aspirations after perfect Holiness; every Inclination, every Frame, and every
Though It of a sinful Nature, grew more grievous to him; and so did every
Indisposition to think on GOD, on CHRIST, on Heaven, on the Word of GOD, with
Engagedness and Pleasure. When he could not Sleep in the Night; O how ardent
were his Thirstings after GOD, as in a dry and parched Land, where is no Water!
How earnest his Desires of having his Heart and Meditation fixed on those
Divine and holy Objects with supreme Delight! How grievous to feel the
miserable Indisposedness of his Heart often Times thereto: And the more he felt
and saw of the wretched Depravation and Corruption of his Nature.

And indeed, for above these fifty Years, I have constantly observed, that the
more any Persons have grown in Piety; the more strong were their Desires after
perfect Holiness, the more sensible they grew of the Corruption of their
Nature, the more burdensome it grew, and they more heavily complained with the
holy Apostle PAUL in Romans vii. 22 -- 24. I find then a Law, that when I would
do Good, Evil is present with me: For I delight in the Law of the GOD after the
inward Man: But I see another Law in my Members warring against the Law of my
Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of Sin which is in my Members:
O wretched Man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death!

Thus have I often heard this pious Person complaining with great Affiction: as
also often repeating the greater Part of the xlii, xliii, and lxiii Psalms,
with the like ardent Thirstings of Soul, as David expressed in his Day. And
when he came into his Final Illness, which held about a Fortnight, the same
grievous Complaints, ardent Longings, and earnest Prayers, continued Day and
Night without Cessation in Him. Yea, they were so deeply fixed in his Heart; as
that when the Power of Reason grew quite broken, yet he constantly repeated,
though without Connection, the same sensible Petitions both for Himself and
Others, and with like Earnestness of Soul as usual, both Day and Night, till he
could speak no more.

Though by his tall and erect Stature till Age began to bow him, the majestic
Appearance of his Countnance, the native and improved Grandeur of his Mind,
vastly raised above mean and little Things, with his Powers, Accomplishments
and exalted Station; He seemed to be formed to spread a Reverence in all about
him; yet the Generosity and Goodness of his natural Tmper, and especially
sanctified by the Grace of GOD, made him exceeding courteous and condeseending
to the meanest Person: And when he smiled upon them, it was with the most
engaging Sweetness, and Air of cordial Amity.

In his House he walked uprightly and with a perfect Heart, catechizing,
instructing, counselling, praying, reading in his Family; and recommending all
his Counsels and Instructions with his amiable Example -- a strict Observer of
the Christian Sabbath -- a reverent Attender on the Public Worship, both in and
out of the Seasons of stated Appointment -- continually appeared at our
Lectures, as well as our Lord's Day Worship, as our Eyes have long seen with
Pleasure; though now with Sorrow shall see no more.

His Heart was not only exceeding tender and humble, like JOSIAH'S; but aiso
exceeding large, liberal, beneficent and bountiful both to the Needy and
Afflicted, both in Body and Soul: And he had a great and extensive View and
Concern for the Good of the Church, the Town, the College, the Land, the
Nation, and all the World.

When he saw or heard of any grievously afflicted, especially with
Soul-Distresses; he could not forbear expressing his tender Pity and Wishes for
them: and where he was acquainted, yea sometimes where he was not, he would
kindly visit and encourage them: And I have heard of some in great Distress of
Soul, who have received more Encouragement and Comfort from Him, than from any
other.

Though Nothing was more disagreeable to him than Ostentation in Religion; yet
his Heart seemed so full of Grace, that from its very efficacious Nature, it
could not but overflow in all Companies wherever it might, with Freedom and
Acceptance: -- Abounding in suitable Observations on the Works or Word of GOD,
or on his Dealings with the Souls of Men; or on the lamentable and abasing
Corruptions, Sins and Miseries of the humane Nature: And he saw so much of Sin
within himself as made him think himself in many Respects to be worse than
Others; increased his Charity for them and his own Humility.

But his Concern for the Truths and Ways of CHRIST, the Advancement of his
Gospel Kingdom in the Hearts and Lives of Men, and for the Public Good, both
Temporal and especially Spiritual, was very great and zealous in him.

He deeply mourned our Public Sins and Declensions: -- He carried the
Apprehensions of them with a heavy Heart: -- was Courageous to bare his
Testimony against them; and to stand up for and promote: the Truths and Ways of
CHRIST, which are the Cause of GOD, as an Overseer of the College, as a
Commissioner for the Propagation of the Gopel among the Indians, and as a
Public Magistrate in the General Assembly. -- For these he prayed, projected,
and joined with Others to promote: and to Him is in a great Measure owing some
of our excellent Laws, wherein we are distinguished above the Rest of the
World, against all Kinds of Profaneness, Immorality and Licenciousness, and for
the Preservation of Religion, Justice, Temperance, and good Order among us.

In short, like the Scripture CALEB -- To the LORD he heartily devoted Himself
entirely, and was his diligent and faithful Servant -- had another and more
excellent Spirit in him, than the Generality of the World, yea, than the
greater Part of Christians -- and Followed the LORD as fully as any among us,
and as is well consistent with the present State of humane Nature. And I
believe all that knew him apprehend that in Him a great Part of the Glory both
of this Congregation, Town and Land is departed from us.

To Conclude, then --

Let us abscribe the Glory of all his Graces, Accomplishments and Services to
GOD the bounteous Giver. And let us thank and praise Him for them, and for
continuing them so long among us.

Let us be deeply humbled under his awful Frown in taking them away; especially
at such a dark and threatening Time as This, when we need his (...) Prayers, his
bright Example, and his Public Influence: Though it is some Comfort, that no
small Part of his dying Hours were employed in most importunate Petitions for
us.

With Pleasure let us ever remember his lovely Example, labor to copy after
it, and represent it in the most agreeable Light to Others.

Lastly, Let us earnestly look up and pray to the GOD of all Grace in CHRIST;
with whom is the eternal Residue of At same Spirit In infinite and everflowing
Fullness; whose Influences he so plentifully showered on This and Others of our
departed Fathers; that he would pour them out in the like Degree and even
greater, both on Us, our Offspring and Others; -- yea universally on this
Congregation, town and Land, the whole British Empire, and even every Nation;
-- that this vile and sinful Earth may be entirely purified; and filled with
Divine Light and Knowledge, Truth and Holiness, Love and Peace; -- the LORD our
GOD may reign gloriously over all Nations, make them happy in Him, receive
their grateful Praises: -- And let every Soul among us earnestly conspire to
say, AMEN! AMEN!

FINIS.
CORRECTIONS.
Page Line For Read 2 -- 4 -- though -- who, thou' 6 -- 14 -- Chose -- choose 19
-- 3 -- lovely -- lively.


