The HAPPINESS of REWARDING the Enemies of our Religion and Liberty,
REPRESENTED, IN A SERMON Preached in Philadelphia, Feb. 17, 1756, to Captain
VANDERSPIEGEL'S Independent Company of Volunteers, at the Request of their
Officers.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. and Minister of the Gospel of CHRIST.

(...) Valor. Flac. (...) The Second Edition, published at the Desire of others.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by James Chattin, at the
Newest-Printing-Office, on the South Side of the Jersey Market. 1756. [ Price
10d.]

The HAPPINESS of REWARDING the Enemies of our Religion and Liberty. A SERMON,
etc.
Psalm 137.8. O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be
that rewards thee, as thou have served us.


THE Penman of this Psalm is uncertain, but the Occasion was doubtless the
Babylonish Captivity, in the Time of which, or soon after, it seems to have
been composed.

The People of Israel in their melancholy Exile by the Rivers of Babylon,
Euphrates and Tygris, lamented the Loss of their religious Solemnities; We
wept, said they, when we remembered Zion; there they endured the Insults of
their Enemies, in demanding Mirth and a Song, of such who were almost
overwhelmed with Sorrow and Sadness! but this unseasonable Demand they justly
refused to comply with, lest they should seem to forget the Miseries of their
Church and Nation, whose Prosperity they preferred to all the other Delights of
Life: If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my Right Hand forget her Cunning: If I
do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, if I prefer
not Jerusalem above my chief Joy!

While they reflect upon the Cruelty of the Children of Edom, their inveterate
Enemies, who in the Day of Jerusalem's Calamity, urged the Babylonians to raze
it to the Foundation, or to ruin it entirely: They are hereby excited, not from
a Principle of private Revenge, but from a generous Regard to God's Glory and
Kingdom, to pray to Jehovah to punish them: Remember, O Lord, the Children of
Edom: From the same pious Principle they are pleased with the Prospect of the
utter Overthrow of their Consederates the Babylonians; O Daughter of Babylon,
who art to be destroyed; and pronounce a Blessing upon such, who should be
Instruments of inflicting this just and righteous Judgment of God upon the
Enemies of his Church and People. Happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou
have served us; i. e. It will be to his great Honor and Advantage, who by
executing Justice and equal Severity upon the unrighteous Enemies of God's
Heritage, is hereby an Instrument in the Hand of God to vindicate his Honor,
execute his Judgments, fulfill his Word, and relieve his People: Thus it was
with Cyrus, as both sacred and profane History witness, and hence he is called
God's Servant, his Shepherd, his Anointed (Is. 44. ult. 45. 1. Is. 13.3.) and
the Soldiers which were employed in recompensing upon the aforesaid Enemies of
Israel, the Deeds which they did to them, are called his sanctified Ones. (Is.
13.3.) From the Words of our Text thus explained, I would observe the following
Proposition, viz.

That such, who in the Course of a lawful War, recompense upon the Enemies of
God's Church and People the Injuries they have done to them, are happy Persons!

In Discoursing upon this Proposition, let us, 1. Enquire what Kind of War is
Lawful? And, 2. Whence its Lawfulness appears? And, 3. What are the Injuries
our Pagan and Papal Enemies have done to us of late in this Province? And, 4.
Wherein consists the Happiness of recompensing them?


I return to consider the

1st proposed, which was, to Enquire what Kind of War is lawful? In answer to
which it may be observed, that there are two Kinds of War, viz. Offensive and
Defensive: The former is an unjust Invasion of another's Property, from
Principles of Ambition and Avarice; the Latter, is an Attempt to preserve or
recover our own from the Hands of Violence, or to punish some public Injury,
which affects the Credit or Interest of a Nation or People; this Kind of War,
viz. Defensive, when entered into by the supreme Magistrate with due Caution,
after pacific Measures have been tried in vain, and is, in the Mean Time,
suitably conducted, cannot but be lawful and right, seeing it has Justice and
Right for its Foundation and Scope, and is the Support, the Execution and
Defense thereof; but Offensive War, being an unjust Invasion of another's
Property, is not only different from, but contrary to this, and therefore
sinful and unjustifiable; a clear View of the Contrariety of these Kinds of
War, is of great Importance in this Controversy, and casts a Light upon the
whole Argument. I proceed to the

2d proposed, which was to show, whence Defensive War appears to be lawful or
right. Now this, I think, appears evidently from the Suffrage both of Reason
and Revolution.

There is nothing that Reason teaches with greater Clearness, or inculcates
with a stronger Paths, than the Excellency and Necessity of commutative
Justice, or giving to every one his own: Now seeing the Design, Nature and
Tendency of Defensive War, is to maintain and distribute this among Mankind, it
must therefore of Consequence be good in itself, when under proper Regulations,
so long as there is any intrinsic Excellency in that Virtue on which it is
founded, to which it is directed, and of which it is an Executor: He that
opposes this, must either say, that Justice itself, in its own Nature, is bad,
or that it is wrong to do or promote what is good; each of which is equally
absurd, and contrary to the Reason and Common Sense of Mankind, as well as
eversive of all Virtue and Religion; those therefore that oppose Defensive War,
will never be able fairly to carry their Point, till they solidly prove, that
Justice itself is sinful and wicked, which, if I am not much mistaken, is a
difficult Task.

I might here observe, that seeing Offensive and Defensive War are Contraries,
it therefore follows, That all the Arguments advanced by any against Offensive
War, do turn virtually and consequentially in Favor of Defensive, and are so
many Proofs of its Excellency and Necessity. E. G. He that opposes the Evil of
Injustice, does at the same Time tacitly recommend its Contrary, whether he
will or not, for Contraries can neither be opposed or defended together with
Reason and Propriety; the more abominable and dangerous the one is, the more
excellent is the other, which is opposed to it. So that all the Opponents of
War, complexly considered, are of Necessity Patrons of one Kind of it, though,
perhaps, without their Knowledge, or against their Wills: Now seeing Deceit
lurks in Genarals, it is but right that the Opposers of War, should heartily
tell us which Kind they are against, to prevent farther Disputes about the
Matter: As for our Part, we declare expressly our Abhorrence of Offensive War,
as a great Iniquity, and are willing to make this evident, not only by Words,
but by Actions, in laboring by main Force to destroy that Monster, if milder
Measures will not answer the noble End, of introducing the desirable Blessing
of Peace.

Charity would incline me to think, that the Opposers of War, must mean
Offensive; for surely they would not knowingly express so much Zeal and
Invective as is sometimes used in this Argument against Justice: Well, if the
Case be so, we have them upon our Side of the Question; they are, in Effect,
warm Advocates for Defensive War, and this indeed is no small Comfort, that our
Opponents are so friendly in this Debate, we with they would either understand
us or themselves, and join with us in proving by Fact, the Reality of their
Hatred against that Abomination that makes desolate, Offensive War: Their
Invectives against it are just and commendable, but insufficient to destroy it;
Words will not kill that Hydra; herein therefore they fail, that they don't join
with us Heart and Hand, by Force and Arms to crush that cruel Cockatrice! May
it not be hoped that in Time-coming they will better bethink themselves, and
act a more consistent Part; that they will not serve so good a Cause as pressed
Men by Constraint, but nobly and openly join as VOLUNTEERS!

But in Addition to the Maxim of Justice now mentioned, the Light of Nature
teaches every one to preserve his Life from unjust Violence, by the Principle
of Self-Love, which is implanted in all, and which, when kept within due
Bounds, is good and necessary, and therefore made by our Lord the Standard of
Love to our Neighbor; this Principle disposes us to desire Life, as well as to
fear and shun the Approaches of Death; when we therefore neglect a necessary
and seasonable Self-defence, we are without natural Affection, Self-haters; a
rare and strange Sort of Monsters in Nature; for no Man ever hated his own
Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it.

Reason likewise teaches the Propriety and Necessity of Self-defence, from the
Capacity given to this Purpose, and Inclination to exercise it; Man is endowed
with Understanding and Ability, which the innocent Resentment common to all,
urges to exert in opposing Violence, and guarding against the Approaches of
Danger: And therefore he that suffers his Life to be taken from him, by one
that has no Authority for that Purpose, when he might preserve it by Defense,
betrays it, and consequently is guilty of Self-Murder, one of the greatest of
Crimes!

Considering the present State of human Nature, to banish Self-defence, though
prosecuted by Force, would be so far from promoting Peace, that it would on the
Contrary contribute to the utter Destruction of Mankind! For Injustice in this
Situation of Things, having no Fear of Punishment to check its Course, would
inundate the World, and introduce universal Anarchy, Confusion and Ruin: a
melancholy Confirmation of which we have lately had in the defenseless
Frontiers of this secure, unhappy Province!

Sirs, If it be not lawful and right, to oppose with Force unjust Invaders,
then the Goods of Providence are given to no valuable Purpose, and the best of
Men are exposed as an easy Prey to the Worst, and that by God's own Order,
which is absurd! Is it rational to suppose, that the Law of Nature, which was
designed to promote Man's Safety in this World, should countenance such a sorry
Sort of Peace, as tends to promote the very Contrary? no surely! For this
would, in Effect, charge Weakness and Folly upon God himself, which to impute
to infinite and unerring Wisdom, is a blasphemous Reflection!

Farther, my Brethren, give me leave to add, that Reason likewise teaches the
Necessity of the Magistrates Office in a Community, to punish Injustice, and to
protect our Persons and Properties; now how can these be done without Force and
Arms, in such a degenerate World as this is? And if either of these be
neglected, what is Government but an empty Name, a mere Cipher, that, instead
of Honor, deserves Contempt! Such a sorry Government is much worse than none a
at all; worse than a State of Nature, because it binds Men's Hands till they are
robbed and murdered, which, otherwise, they might use in their own Defense!

Nothing admits of clearer Demonstration, than that Force and Fighting are
essential to the Being and Preservation of Civil Government, in Man's present
corrupt State; now, if the Case be so, it is the very same (in all Things
material) with Defensive War, the Substance of both is the same, viz. Force and
Fighting, Bloodshed and Death; the Authority enjoining both is the same, viz.
that of the Magistrate, the End of both is the same, viz. the Preservation of
the State; the Occasion the same, viz. that easier Methods will not, at Times,
answer the aforesaid Ends: Certainly the Number of Villains cannot lesson their
Crimes, nor have Rogues of another Nation any Right to rob and murder us with
Impunity more than those of our own: Why then should they not be opposed with
equal Care and Force?

What is Civil Government but the Union of Individuals, for the more effectual
Protection of Person and Property from Injustice and Violence? whereby a
sufficient Measure of Power is, by common Consent, treasured up for the
Security and Benefit of all the Members of that Body, which is to be exerted to
compass the aforesaid important Ends, as the public Officers of the Society
shall direct: And hence it is that Persons who are wronged, or in Danger of
being so, reasonably fly to the Officers of the Community for Justice and
Protection, which if they are absolutely denied, or unreasonably deferred,
beyond the proper Season for Succor, and many Persons are in the mean Time
robbed and murdered, the principal End of Government is contradicted and
destroyed; and the People wronged and robbed of their Right, as Members of
Society; nor will it be easy to clear such public Officers (or those of them
who are accessory to the aforesaid Measures) from the Guilt of Blood!

Now if Magistracy and Defensive War be the same in Substance, as has been
observed, it is strange that any should be ready to accept the one, who scruple
the other, as if it was a wicked Thing to put a foreign Criminal to Death, but
just and good to kill one of our own Country and Nation! Would Not it look more
like Candor, Humility and Consistency, for such as scruple Defensive War, or
deny it, to keep clear of Offices in the Government, which oblige them, if they
will act in Character, to do what is equivalent thereto: Then there would be no
Need of ambiguous, general and artful Terms, possibly to conceal from vulgar
Observance and Prejudice Practices really contradictory to professed
Principles; to reconcile such extraordinary Conduct to common Candor and
Sincerity, is a Task so difficult, that it vastly surpasses the Reach of an
ordinary Understanding.

I must confess I am utterly at a Loss to conceive the Consistency of Persons
who are principled against Defensive War accepting of Offices in the
Government, the chief Design of which is to defend the Community; it is a
Contradiction in Terms as well as Matter, a gross Absurdity; and this is the
more unaccountable, when it is done in a Time of public Danger; for hereby, if
Men's professed Principles may be supposed to have any Influence upon their
Conduct, they will be tempted to take wrong Measures, or over-slowly prosecute
those that are right; and hereby others are kept from the Helm in a Storm,
whose Principles would probably lead them to do what is necessary to the Safety
of the State.

Nor is it easy to clear those from the Charge of Inconsistency, and something
worse, who desire and expect Protection, and perhaps complain if they have it
not, and yet CHOOSE into public Offices those who are principled against it,
whether they are not, by the aforesaid Choice, in some Degree chargeable with
all the unhappy CONSEQUENCES of such a Government, it is but proper they should
soberly enquire?

The Practice of all Nations, not only of the most civilized, but even of the
most rude and barbarous, who all with one Consent have opposed Force to Force
in their own Defense, from the Beginning of the World to this Time, is no
inconsiderable Argument to prove that Defensive War is agreeable to the Reason
and Common Sense of Mankind; the Denial of it is therefore a Contradiction to
Reason, and an Affront to Common Sense.

Yea the very Beasts, by natural Instinct, are disposed to defend themselves,
and are provided with Weapons for that Purpose; it should therefore be queried,
in case we make no Resistance when Necessity urges, whether we do not act with
less Wisdom than Pagans, and with less Discretion than Beasts? Now can it be
with Reason supposed, that the Christian Institution, which was designed to
exalt us above the Angels, should, at the same Time, sink us below Infidels and
Beasts?

Having offered some what respecting the Suffrage of Reason in favor of
Defensive War, I proceed to enquire wether Revelation in the several Periods of
the Church of God, or Dispensations of Heaven toward it, does not coroborate
and confirm the aforesaid Suffrage? Here a large Field opens, but the Time
allows me to mention only a few Hints.

As to the Patriarchal Age, I would only offer one Instance, viz. That of
Abraham, the Friend of God, and Father of the Faithful, he trained up his
Servants, instructed them in the Use of Arms, to prepare them for Action, when
Necessity required; and therefore when he heard that his Brother was taken
captive, he armed his trained Servants, smote the Enemy, and pursued them. It
would have been happy for this poor Province, if such in it who profess
themselves to be the spiritual Children of Abraham, had followed the Example of
the Father of the Fruthful, in hastening to the Relief of their distressed
Protestant Brethern, it would have shown some Brotherly Love, prevented much
Bloodshed, and given some Evidence of their spiritual Claim. Now that the
Almighty approved of this memorable Battle of Abraham, is evident from
Melchizedek's congratulating him on Occasion of his Victory, and likewise by
his blessing him, and blessing God on the same Account, and by his receiving
Part of the Spoils, all which would have been absurd and impious, if the Battle
itself had not been lawful. See Genesis 14 (18, 19, 20. Verses.) And Melchizedek
King of Salem, Priest of the Most high God, blessed him, and said, Blessed be
Abraham of the Most High God, Possessor of Heaven and Earth, and Blessed be the
Most High God, which has delivered thine Enemies into thine Hands. Here
observe, that seeing this Battle of Abraham was fought before the Jewish Policy
and Ceremonies were formed, was likewise an important Action, that concerned
the Goods and Lives of Men, and met with the Divine Approbation, Defensive War
must therefore be morally and unalterably good and lawful.

As to the Mosaic Dispensation, or Jewish Economy, nothing is more evident,
than that diverse Wars, were carried on while that subsisted, by various
Worthies, with the divine Approbation and Direction; thus devout Gideon, a
mighty Man of Valor, was commissioned to fight against the Midianites, and
rescue Israel from their Tyranny* ( Judges 6 14 16.) And the Lord said, Go in
this thy Might, and thou shall save Israel from the Hand of the Midianites,
have I not sent thee! surely I will be with thee, and thou shall slay the
Midianites as one Man.

Pious Joshua was also raised up of God, to conduct Israel in their Wars, for
which he had the divine Prescription. ( Josh. 8. 1, 2.) And the Lord said unto
Joshua, take all the People of War with thee and arise go up to Ai, and thou
shall do unto Ai and her King, as thou did to Jericho and her King.

Farther David, the Man after God's own Heart, was another Instance of the like
Kind, who praises the Almighty that he had taught his Hands to war, and his
Fingers to fight: He conducted his Battles according to the express Order of
God. (1 Samuel 30.8.) Well seeing Defensive War was enjoined by divine Authority
under any Dispensation, at any past Period of Time, it follows necessarily,
either that it is in itself innocent, or that God is the Author of Sin, by
enjoining what is in itself sinful: But the latter is blasphemous, and
therefore the Former is most certainly true; viz. That Defensive War is in
itself innocent and good, and, if so, becomes a Duty, when Providence calls to
it by the Necessity of Affairs, and the Magistrates Order: Why therefore should
an innocent Thing be dressed up in Bears-skins and a Huc-and-Cry raised against
it? Is this fair or reasonable?

As to the Christian or New Testament Dispensation, there are diverse Instances
which sufficiently confirm the Point in View. E. G. When the Soldiers asked
John the Baptist, what they should do? he did not direct them to lay aside
their military Employment, but to be content with their Wages: Which supposes
his Approbation, of the Business they were engaged in, and implies an
Encouragement to continue in it; it cannot be with Reason imagined, that this
inspired Person, would give Instruction how to conduct an Employment obsolutely
sinful; for that would be to give Direction how to commit Iniquity, which is
absurd! No, if he had judged that Manner of Life to be sinful, he would have
said so; for indeed he had not only an Opportunity, but a proper Call to this
Purpose, in Answer to the Question proposed to him; nor was he ever known to
mince the Matter.

Farther, These Words of our Lord, recorded John 18.36. do expressly declare his
Approbation of Defensive War; If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my
Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews. Here the Redeemer
signifies that temporal Kingdoms should be protected by Fighting or by War and
Force.

Of the like Tendency is the following Declaration of Christ expressed by the
Evangelist Matthew, Chap. 24, and 43d Verse, But know this, that if the good
Man of the House had known in what Watch the Thief would come, he would have
watched, and not suffered his House to be broken up.

This our Lord speaks of with Approbation, and therefore hereby teaches the
Lawfulness and Necessity of opposing Robbers by Force, and of preparing for
this Opposition: The good Man would have watched, and would not have suffered.
Well, if we should resist one Robber, much more many, because the Danger is
greater; and if we should resist Robbers, when they only attempt to take away
our Goods, much more when they attack our Lives, which are of more Importance.

Another memorable Passage of our Savior to the same Purpose, is that directed
to the Apostle Peter, Mat. 26.53, 54. Think thou that I cannot pray to my
Father, and he shall presently give me more than 12 Legions of Angels; but how
then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be. The Meaning of
which is plainly this, that Christ must die for the Sins of his People
according to the Scriptures, and therefore the Use of Force to protect his Life
in this extraordinary Situation, was unnecessary and inconsistent; but that if
the Case had been otherwise, he would have used a military Force for his
Protection against unjust Violence. Our Lord speaks of the Angels as military
Troops, and signifies that on Supposition his Case was ordinary, and he
attacked by the Hand of Violence, he would use Means to obtain an armed Force
for his Protection; and did not the great Doctor of the Gentiles who well knew
the Mind of his Master and Lord, actually do this, when a Conspiracy was formed
by the Jews against his Life: (See Acts the 23d Chap.) I hope then there is no
Harm in following our Lord and his chief Apostle.

Here it may be farther observed, respecting the last Instance, that the
Apostle Paul before he applied for a Military Force to protect him, had the
possitive Promise of God that he should preach the Gospel of Christ at Rome,
and consequently be protected from the present Combination against his Life (
Acts 23.11.) in which Promise he doubtless trusted, yet notwithstanding he
though it it necessary to use the proper outward Mean for his Defense, viz. an
armed Force; this plainly shows the Consistency thereof with the Promise of
God, and a Dependence on him.

Nor should these Words of our Savior be overlooked, are ye come out against
me as against a Thief with Swords and with Staffs; here the blessed Jesus
signifies his Approbation of the Use of Arms and Force against a Thief to bring
him to Justice, well if in the Judgment of Christ, this be lawful and necessary
against one; it is much more so against many: Nor is there any good Reason why
we should be more tender of Foreign, than Domestic Thieves.

When the Centurion or Roman Captain addressed our Savior on Account of his
sick Servant, and used his Military Office as an Argument to obtain his
Request, our Lord granted the Petition infere'd by that Argument, and commended
the Faith encouraged by it: which considering the Call the Redeemer then had to
declare his Mind in Relation to Defensive War fairly imply his Aprobation of it.

If Defensive War be sinful, then to what purpose or with what consistency did
our Lord command every one of his Disciples, that had no Sword, to sell his
Garment and buy one, (Luke 22.39.) and why is Cornelius Captain of the Italian
Company so highly honored by Heaven and Earth, and adorned with the most
amiable Character, of being a devout Man, and one that feared God with all his
House, which gave much Alms to the People, and prayed to God always; and in the
mean Time no Censure past upon his military Office by an inspired Apostle, sent
for by divine Direction, to inform him of his Duty, and that under the express
Promise of an Angel, that said Apostle should tell him what he ought to do*
from this Instance therefore, one of two Things necessarily follows, either
that the Angel's Promise failed, or that Cornelius ought not to desert his
military Station, but the former is impossible, and therefore the latter is
true, and thus the laboring Point is gained, that Defensive War is lawful.

The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews, speaks with Honor and
Approbation of the Bravery and martial Exploits of diverse ancient Heroes, who
through Faith subdued Kingdoms, waxed valiant in Fight, and put to Flight the
Armies of Aliens Here observe, that War and Fighting in a good Cause is so far
from being contrary to Faith, that they are Fruit of it. Those therefore who
instead of bringing forth this Fruit condemn such as do, should enquire how
they will prove their Faith to be of the same kind with that of David, Samuel
and the Prophets. Hebrews. 11.32, 33.
: And in diverss other Passages of Scripture, God himself who is the best Judge
of Truth, Excellency and Worth, speaks with Honor of military Bravery, and
hence the Persons possessed of it are called mighty Men of Valor, it is
therefore a sorry Sort of Gospel, that contradicts the Judgment of God himself
and his inspired Servants; that CASHIERS from the Catalogue of Virtues,
Fortitude and military Bravery, which are so noble in themselves and necessary
to the public Weal, and Dubs in their room either sordid Cowardice, or stupid
Negligence, or rather both together, which are as base in themselves, as
pernicious and destructive to Society. Unreasonable and abominable is that
pretended Christianity, which directs us to take more Care for the Support of
our Bodies, than the Protection of our Lives, which our Lord tells us are
better than Food and Raiment. If some have been protected in Dangers
miraculously, so others have been fed in like manner, well, seeing the Cases
are Parallel, why will not such who expect Protection without the Use of Arms,
try whether they can live without Food, a little Trial of this, if we could but
persuade them to it, would soon convince them of the Folly of their Faith, or
rather Presumption, and be of more Service than many Arguments. But to preced,

Give me leave farther to observe, that the Argument before used of the
MAGISTRACY in Favor of Defensive War from Reason, is confirmed by Revelation,
and that not only in the Old Testament, but the New: The Apostle Paul in his
Epistle to the Romans, observes, that the Magistrate is a Minister of God, to
execute Wrath upon him that does Evil, and should not bear the Sword in vain,
and elsewhere Governors are said to be sent for the Punishment of evil Doors,
and Praise of those that do well, that under them we may live peaceable and
quiet Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty; and hence we are told, that he that
sheds Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed; we are likewise enjoined to
give Tribute to Caesar, and to be Subject to the higher Powers, because there is
no Power but of God: Well, if Government be a Divine Institution, and Force and
Fighting are essential to it, as both Reason and Revelation assure us, then
such as oppose Defensive War, if they will be consistent with themselves, must
also oppose all civil Order and Government upon the Earth, which if put in
Practice would soon open such a Scene of Confusion, Desolation and Blood, as
would entirely ruin the whole human Race. It is but right, that all they that
take the Sword (without or against just and lawful Authority) should perish
with the Sword, Matt. 26.52. and that he that leads into Captivity should go
into Captivity. He that kills with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword,
here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints, says the Scriptures, Rev. 13.16.

Once more, if we must without Opposition, tamely and sordidly suffer all that
is dear to us, as Men and Christians, to be made an easy Prey of by our
unrighteous and implacable Enemies, then we are in a worse Condition under the
Gospel than ever Mankind were in before it; then the last, the brightest and
most gracious Dispensation of God toward Men, instead of enlarging our
Priveleges as it professes, has overset them all at one Stroke, and left us in
a State of the most abject Slavery, and dreadful Vassalage to the Lusts of
every Invader, which is contrary to the Truth of the Scriptures, and to the
Wisdom and Goodness of God, as well as entirely eversive of all human Happiness
in this Life I might here add to the Suffrage of Reason and Revelation, that of
the Christian Church, the primitive Fathers of which declared their Sentinents
in Favor of Defensive War, witness Clement, Clemens Alexandrinus, Irenius,
Origin, Tertullian, Minutius Felix, Cyprian, Chrisostom, Nazarius, Basil,
Augustine, Ambrose, Cyril, Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Niss^n, and others, but
not only particular Fathers; but whole Councils have signified various Ways
their Approbation of Defensive War; they therefore made it a positive Rule and
Constitution among them, that Soldiers of a sober Life, should be admitted to
Church Membership their Words are these, Let a Soldier that desires to be
baptized, be exhorted to abstain from Wrongs and Oppressions, and to be content
with his Pay; if he complies with these, let him be admitted. See Constitu.
Clem. Lib. 8. Cap. 32. This is exactly agreeable to John the Baptist's Counsel
to the Soldiers, and to the inspired Apostle Peter's Practice, who without the
least demurr, baptized the worthy Soldier Cornelius, thereby receiving him into
Church Fellowship; and in the mean Time declared, that none could reasonably
deprive such of it; Can any Man (says he) forbid Water that these should not
be baptized, that have received the Holy Ghost as well as we; and he commanded
them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord, Acts 10.47, 48. Any Passages in
the Writings of the Ancients, of a different Appearance at first View, upon
Examination will be found only to signify either their Aversion to the Method
of propagating Religion by Force, or of resisting the lawful Government under
which they lived, or the Unsuitableness of the Clergies bearing Arms, or of
Christians engaging in War when idolatrous or other sinful Terms, were imposed.
The Lawfulness of Defensive War under proper Regulations, was not so much as
disputed, and far less was the Denial of it made a Term of Communion by any (of
Note) or by any Society of Christians for above 1500 Years after Christ; and
therefore the Opinion that every kind of War is in itself a great Evil, and
that such as are for the defensive Kind, should be cast out of religious
Society; is a novel upstart Notion, of very late Date, as contrary to Antiquity
as to Scripture and Reason. See this confirmed and illustrated, in a Treatise
entitled, Defensive War defended; Printed here Anno. 1748.
.

As to the Objections that are made against Resistance and War, seeing I have
not Time at present to offer a particular Reply to them, I would in place
thereof, propose some general Considerations, which rightly understood, and
suitably attended to, through the Course of this Controversy, will serve as a Key
to solve them with Ease. viz.

1. It should be carefully observed, and constantly kept in View, that
Offensive and Defensive War are Contraries. And,

2. That private Offenses, and those which are public and national, are very
different; the First, in Society, we have no Right ourselves to punish, and in
lesser Instances should pass by for the Sake of Peace, but the Latter, the
Magistrate, as God's Vicegerent, is obliged to avenge, for the Glory of God,
and Safety of the Community. And,

3. That whatsoever is grounded upon the Nature and Reason of things is moral
and perpetual. But I proceeded to the

3d. GENERAL HEAD of Discourse proposed, which was to Enquire what are the
Injuries, which our Pagan and Papal Enemies have done to the Inhabitants of
this Province? this, my Brethren, is a melancholy Subject, and deserves to be
lamented with the tenderest Passion! you know, Sirs, they have carried many of
our Brethren into a melancholy Captivity, Captivity big with Danger and Horror,
they have laid waste by Fire and Sword a considerable Part of the back
Settlements of this Province, burnt the Houses, the Barns, the Goods, the Crops
of the Inhabitants, and killed their Creatures, without which they cannot
subsist; by all which, no small Part of a once flourishing Country is covered
with a general Ruin, and reduced even to a Funeral Pile! but what is still
worse, they have murdered, they have murdered, many Hundreds of innocent
Persons, and that with such Circumstances of Inhumanity and Barbarity, as are
too shocking to relate; they have spared neither Age nor Sex, the pregnant
Mother and tender Infant, as well as the boary Head, and sprightly Youth, have
been alike sacrificed to their causeless and cruel Resentment! and indeed, many
who have hitherto survived the Catastrophe, are reduced to the most piteous and
deplorable Circumstances by the Loss of their dear Relations, and of their
worldly Substance; encompassed with frequent Alarms of the Aproach of a
merciless Enemy, and of the Mischiefs they have done in other Places, in hourly
Expectation of a violent Death, not knowing what to do, or where to fly for
Safety; in this awful Perplexity, while there Way is shut up, and their Lives
hang in Doubt, every Moment, they suffer 1000 Deaths before they die. These
Injuries our Enemies have done unprovoked (unless by our defenseless and secure
State) yea after many important Kindnesses, and contrary to the Faith of
Treaties; nor is this dismal Scene come to a Period, we still hear of the Alarm
of War, and of Garments rolled in Blood; we still hear of fresh Incursions, and
of Desolation upon Desolation; alas, for this miserable Province, what will be
the End of these Things?

But has this Train of Miseries, this Complication of Calamities, broke in upon
us suddenly, without any previous Notice? no! we have had repeated Intimations
of the destructive Designs of our Enemies, and of their warlike Preparations in
the Back Parts of this Continent, but have stupidly slighted repeated Warnings
of our approaching Danger and awful Fate; like Leviathan we have laughed at the
shaking of the Spear, as though we were invulnerable; and hence the Report of
Colonel Washington's Defeat was reckoned by many to be fabulous; and that of
General Braddock believed slowly, yea, even after repeated Expresses had
constrained a general Credit, and the Enemy had done considerable Damage in
Verginia; though a Number were seized for a little Time with a Panick, yet the
Province in general remained in a State of Indolence and deep Security, without
any suitable religious Improvement of this awful Providence, without any proper
Preparation made in due Season to protect the back Inhabitants, who where left
defenseless, and exposed as an easy Prey to a bloody Enemy, as Sheep for the
Slaughter! Alas for it! many Self-righteous People among us presumptuosly
expected, that this Province would not share the common Fate of the rest; and
hence they boasted for a Time that no Hurt was done by the Enemy in
Pennsylvania, and therefore, after diverse were murdered in it, the News thereof
were by many too flowly credited, unreasonbly contradicted, or diminutively
represented, and treated with Slight and Indifference: Yea, after the most
pressing Remonstrances of the Distressed for Help and Protection, how little
has been done to any good Purpose to relieve them? and how slowly? how late? It
is indeed shocking to think of the Infatuation and Security that have prevailed
among us, in a Time of such general, great, and growing Danger and Calamity!
Had FORTS been built in the back Parts of the Country in due Season, the
Inhabitants trained up in the Use of Arms, and formed into a regular MILITIA,
by an equitable and impartial ACT of the LEGISLATURE for that Purpose, an ACT
not calculated to serve the Ease and Emolument of a Party, at the Expense of
the the Rest, who, as loyal Subjects to the best of Kings have a Right to equal
Privileges with others of the same Community; if these Things had been done,
and the Warnings we have had credited and improved, our present Distresses
would probably have been either wholly prevented, or much lessened; but Sirs,
if the Truth may be told, ENTHUSIASTIC PRINCIPLES, against Defensive War, have
been in a great Degree the Cause of our present Miseries, and, if closely and
consistently acted up to, are like to be our utter and final Ruin! these have
prevented necessary, proper and seasonable Preparations for War before it came,
and either diverted from, or retarded proper Measures for Defense when it did
come, these have cast Multitudes into a deep Sleep, and prejudiced them against
their Duty, and their Interest so that they will neither do any Thing
themselves to any good Purpose to save a sinking State, nor suffer others to do
it with Impunity. These have bro't us not long since to the Verge of a Civil
War among ourselves, one of the most dreadful Calamities that can besal any
State or Community! In our singularly awful, and melancholy Situation
(especially of late) every Eye not blinded with Prejudice, might see in the
strongest Point of Light, the grand Absurdity and Danger of Enthusiasm, its
absolute Inconsistency with Civil Government and the Safety of any Country;
especially when it has the Direction of the Helm in the Time of a Tempest. It
is ridiculous to talk of Privileges! Privileges! when we are in Danger of being
murdered by the Enemy, for Want of a proper Defense; as if it was a Privilege
to be robbed, and scalp'd! These Things, Gentlemen, I have spoken not from
Prejudice to any Party or People, but from a Principle of Love to God and my
Country, whose Protection and Prosperity I sincerely wish! The

4th General Head of Discourse, comes now to be considered, which was To show
wherein consists the Happiness of Recompensing the Injuries our Enemies have
done to us? Hereby, my Brethren, we conform to the commanding, approving Will
of God; hereby we promote his declarative Glory among Men, even the Glory of
his Justice and Righteousness; hereby we copy after the Example of pious and
prudent Men in all Ages and Periods of the Church and World; hereby we evidence
in Fact the Sincerity of our Love to our Religious and Civil Liberties, as well
as to our King and Country, and manifest the Reality of our Regard to our dear
Relations and Friends, to whom we are bound by the tenderest Ties! hereby we do
our utmost to preserve inviolate the Sacred Depositum, or inexpresibly valuable
Trust of our Religion and Liberty, and to transmit them pure and incorrupt to
future and distant Ages; hereby with manly Bravery, we, to good Purpose, oppose
those Enemies to all that is great and good, French Tyranny, Romish Idolatry
and Superstition; in a Word, we express the Courage of Men, and the Piety of
Christians, in thus nobly contending for our People, and the Cities of our God!
in this Way we may expect Peace in our own Minds, and the Blessing of God upon
all our Enjoyments; in this Way, in Case we repent and believe, we may with
Reason hope for all necessary and desirable Comforts here, and a distinguished
Crown of Blessedness hereafter: For this, my Brethren, the Bosoms of generous
Patriots, and undaunted Heroes, who do Honor to their Species, and are the
Glory and Defense of their Country, beat with the fiercest martial Fires, the
bravest Ardors! for this they abondon inglorious Ease, break through the
strongest Ties and tenderest Endearments of Relation; for this they boldly
tread the high Places of the Field, and nobly court Dangers and Deaths of the
most hideous and formidable Forms! Such, such, will be mentioned with Honor,
in the Records of Time, the Annals of Nations; yea, such Generations unborn
will rise up, and call them blessed; while the Names of sordid Cowards, wild
Enthusiasts, and detestable Gallees, shall be covered with Contempt, and not in
the Dust! if any Thing can yield Comfort to a generous Mind, surely these that
have been mentioned may especially in a complex View.

Brethren, we were born not merely for ourselves, but the Public God! which,
as Members of Society we are obliged (pro virili) to promote! Life without
Liberty, Life under the sordid Shackles of Idolatry, Superstition and Tyranny,
is worse, infinitely worse, than Death! happy therefore, and blessed is the
Man, who rewards our Pagan and Papal Enemies, as they have served us! but, on
the contrary, says the Scripture, cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord
deceitfully (or negligently) and cursed be he that keeps back his Sword from
Blood; here observe, that Shedding the Blood of our Enemies in a lawful War, is
a good Work, it is the Lord's Work, because enjoined and approved of by him,
and likewise that the Man is accursed, who either neglects or refuses this
Work, or does it by Halves; Parallel to the Passage of sacred Scripture but now
mentioned, is that in Judges 5.23, 24. Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the
Lord, curse Ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the
Help of the Lord, to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty; here observe,
that taking up Arms, and actually joining in Battle with God's People, engaged
in a lawful War against their Enemies, is here called a Helping the Lord
against the Mighty, because the Lord requires it, and his Cause is defended by
it, and likewise that such who refuse to assist in Arms, or desert their
Brethren engaged in such a Cause, are under the bitter Curse of God! But
blessed above Women shall Jael the Wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall
she be above Women in the Tent! why? because she smote and slew Sisera the
Enemy of God's Israel; well, if martial Bravery exalted Jael above her Sex,
then certainly by the Rule of Contraries, Cowardice (in Principle and Practice)
degrades Males not only below their own Sex (of whom Courage is expected) but
even below Females; such Persons forfeit the Character of Men, and are weaker
than Women; the same God that severely punishes Cowards, and Deserters of his
Cause and People in a Day of Danger and Difficulty, will amply reward with
Important Blessings and Benefits, brave Soldiers, gallant HEROES and HEROINES!
this famous Instance of FEMALE FORTITUDE is a standing Reproach to Cowards and
Galleos of the hardier and robuster Sex, and may justly cover them with
confounding Blushes, as unworthy of the Name of Men, or of a Place in civil
Society! to play the Man, in Scripture Language, is to be courageous in Battle
2 Samuel 10.12.
. But it is Time to proceed to the Improvement of this Subject, in which I must
be brief.

The Case of Moab, my Brethern, as represented by the Prophet Jeremiah in the
48 Chapter of his Book (the 7, 11 12 Verses) is very much the Case of this
Province; Moah trusted in his Works, was at Ease from his Youth, was settled on
his Lees, had not gone in to Captivity, and therefore his (bad) Scent was not
altered; but now the Scene changed, the righteous God sent Wanderers unto him,
that caused him to wander, that emptied his Vessels, and broke his Bottles!
Moah had no Changes, and therefore he feared not God! but now he is punished
for his Pride, Security and Self-confidence! are our Enemies, my Brethren, let
loose upon us, and have they committed such Barbarities as are before
mentioned? then let us make a suitable Improvement of this melancholy
Providence, by humbling ourselves under the Mighty Hand of God, that in due
Season he may lift us up. If we humble ourselves and pray and seek God's Face,
he will hear from Heaven and forgive our Sin, and heal our Land. Famine and the
Sword are Judgments which a righteous God sends upon guilty Nations and
Communities, to punish them for their Wickedness: now have we not been
threat'ned with the former, by the late scanty Crop, and is not the latter
making our Country desolate? The Sword is at present drawn, and made drunk with
the Blood of our Brethren, and is there not sufficient Cause, why the righteous
God, should frame Evil against us, and devise a Device against us? Yes, Sirs,
there is; for our whole Head is Sick, and our whole Heart faint; do not the
following great Iniquities abound among us, viz.

Drunkenness, Pride, Wheredom, Sabbath-breaking, profane Sevearing, Falsehood,
Oppression of the Poor, Contempt of the Gospel of Christ, and Unfruitfulness
under it, Neglect of Family Religion, SCANDALOUS CONTENTIONS while the Enemy is
at the Door, sordid Security, presumptuous Expectation of Impunity in the Midst
of great and growing Dangers and Mischiefs, without the Use of proper Means;
yea, Balls and Dancings in a Time of general Calamity, and that not only by
Citizens, but by Soldiers, when we should be either girding on our Harness for
Battle against the Ravagers of our Country, or praying between the Porch and
the Altar, that God would spare his Heritage, and not give them up to Reproach!
Here it may be queried, whether such a Conduct is decent and suitable in a Time
of public Mourning and Woe? And whether it does not tend to render Men
effeminate, and unfit them for War and Arms? And therefore, whether it becomes
the Gentlemen of the Sword, the Glory of whose military Character will be more
advanced by leading on their Troops with Skill and Courage to charge the Enemy,
than by leading a Lady in a Dance! Were not the hardy, brave, veteran, and
victorious Troops of Hanibal, the Carthaginian General, much Hurt, and
enervated by such like soft and luxurious Entertainments in Italy, to the great
Prejudice of his after Encounters with the Roman Armies I might add one
Particular, that has a very threatening Aspect upon our Nation at present, and
that is, a great Degeneracy among many, in Respect of the Doctrines of Grace,
or main Principles of the Reformation: While the Disease and Remedy are
overlooked, and nothing but moral Virtue without Christ recommended, what can
be expected but a dead Form of Religion, if so much? If the Foundations are
destroyed, what can the Righteous do? Ps. 11.3.
?

Has not God threatened to punish others for those Impieties I have now
mentioned? See Isa. 28.1.3. Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim, they shall be
troddon under Foot. (Prove. 16.18.) Pride goes before Destruction, and a haughty
Spirit before a Fall. (Jer. 5.8, 9.) They where as fed Horses in the Morning,
every one neighing after his Neighbor's Wife, shall I not visit for these
Things, says the Lord, shall not my Soul he avenged on such a Nation as this.
(Ezekiel. 20.13.) But the House of Israel rebel'd against me, my Sabbaths they
greatly polluted, then I said, I would pour out my Fury upon them to consume
them. (Jer. 23.10.) For because of Swearing the Land mourns, the pleasant
Places of the Wilderness are dried up. (Jer. 9. Chap.) They bend their Tongues
like their Bow for Lies, they be all an Assembly of treacherours Men, for every
Brother will utterly supplant, and every Neighbor (...) with Slanders, shall
not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? (Isa. 3.15, 25, 26.) What mean
ye, that ye beat my People to Pieces, and grind the Faces of the Poor, says
the Lord of Hosts. -- Thy Men shall fall by the Sword, and thy Mighty in the
War, her Gates shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate, shall sit upon
the Ground. (Heb. 6.7, 8.) For the Earth that drinks up the Rain that comes
upon it, and brings forth Herbs, receives Blessing from God, but that which
bears Thorns and Briars is rejected, and nigh unto Cursing, whose End is to
be burn. (Mat. 21, 43.) The Kingdom of God shall be taken from You, and given
to a Nation bringing forth the Fruits thereof. (Jer. 10.25.) Pour out thy Fury
upon the Heathen, that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon
thy Name. (Amos 6 Chap.) Woe to them that are at Ease in Zion, that put far away
the Evil Day, and are not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph, therefore now
shall they go captive with the first that go captive. (Isa. 22.14.) And in that
Day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning, and to girding
with Sackcloth, and behold Joy and Gladness, surely this Iniquity shall not be
purged from you, till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts!

For these Abominations, my Brethren, the God of Truth has actually executed
the Punishments before mentioned upon other Nations and Churches; now seeing
Sin is of the same Nature, the Justice of God invariable; and these Things were
written for our Learning upon whom the Ends of the World are come; and likewise
considering that the Sins of Nations and Communities, as such, can only be
punished in this World, because they expire and terminate with it, have we not
Reason to fear and expect the same Fate, except we repent.

The once famous Monarchies of Assyria, Chaldea, Greece and Rome are now no
more! and is not the Jewish Nation so much celebrated in sacred Story, at this
time reduced for their crimson Impieties to deplorable Ruins, as well as many
Thousands of Christian Churches, in Asia, Greece, Palestine, France, Bohemia,
and other Places? Now if we will not take Warning by the Judgments of God upon
others, we ourselves will be made a Warning and a Terror to others!

Sirs, if when God's Hand is lifted up, we will not see and acknowledge his
Controversy with us, if, when he speaks to us in the Language of Thunder by his
awful Rod, we will not hear his Voice, if, while his Judgments are abroad in
the Earth, we refuse to learn Righteousness, walk contrary to God, and harden
ourselves in our Impieties like Pharaoh, Jehovah will punish us seven Times for
our Iniquities, he will surely break us with Breach upon Breach, and run upon
us like a Giant, he will destroy and devour at once, he will stir up Jealousy
like a Man of War, he shall cry, yea, roar, he shall prevail against his
Enemies! nor will our religious Profession, screen us from the Strokes of his
angry Rod; no, Judgment shall begin first at the House of God, and because
Jehovah has done more for us than many other Nations, therefore will he punish
us for our ungrateful Abuse of his Goodness, if we remain impenitent!

If, while the Lord is forming Evil against us, we will not return from our
evil Ways, and make our Ways and our Doings good, Jehovah will scatter us as
with an East Wind before the Enemy, and show us the Back and not the Face in
the Day of our Calamity! In brief, if we will not mourn over our own Sins, and
the Sins of our Nation and Land, and reform our Ways, no human Measures, how
apt soever, will protect us from the just and terrible Vengeance of an angry
God, we shall sooner or later meet with the Ruin and Destruction our Impieties
deserve It is Matter of Reproach and Lamentation, that since our late Troubles,
there have been in the public Papers, many vain Boastings of our Courage and
Strength, and vain Confidence of Success, merely by the Force of our Fleets and
Armies, without any Regard to God and his Providence; this is as imprudent as
impious; he that girds on his Harness should not boast as he that puts it off
Such Infidel contempt of God, as it is an Argument of the dreadful Degeneracy
of our Nation, so it is a low Imitation of the French Gasconade, an Impiety
sufficient to bring the Blast of angry Heaven upon all our Measures; may God
graciously pardon the bold Affront to his Crown and Dignity, and save our
sinful Nation and Land from the Desolations we deserve for it.
; And, indeed, before this general Reformation takes place, the very Removal of
Judgments for a Time, is, itself, a Judgment, like the abused Reprieve of a
condemned Criminal for a little Moment before his Execution.

But if while the Almighty is threatening to pluck up, pull down and destroy
our Nation, we turn from our Evil, viz. the Evil of Sin, he will repent of the
Evil he thought to do to us, viz. the Evil of Punishment, i. e. he will, by his
Providence, deliver us from the threat'ned Calamity; an affecting Instance of
which we have in the People of Nineveh, who when they heard the divine
Threatening by Jonah, believed God, fasted, prayed, reformed, and were
delivered from Destruction; for God saw their Works, that they turned from
their Evil Way.

But, my Brethren, there is Need of civil as well as spiritual Means in the
present Case; for therein we have not only to do with God, but with Men like
ourselves, who are industriously using both the Methods of Art and Force to
ruin and destroy us, we should therefore prepare for our Defense, and for
Recempensing the Injuries done to us upon our Enemies: I cannot therefore but
highly commend the Measures lately taken in this City by diverse of the
Inhabitants, in voluntarily forming themselves into Companies, in order to
learn the Art of War, that they may be ready upon any Immergency to defend
themselves and others with a Probability of Success.

Gentlemen, In this you conform to the Counsel of the wisest of Men, and the
Example of the best; Solomon observes, That the prudent Man soresees Evil, and
bides himself, but the Simple pass on, and are punished; but how does the
prudent Man hide himself? not by a cowardly Flight from Danger, but by
preparing for Defense! and hence the Father of the Faithful was induced to
train up his numerous Family in the Use of Arms, which his unhappy Brother,
with many others, reduced to a State of Captivity, soon found the Advantage of.

This Undertaking, Gentlemen, is so much the more excellent and worthy of
Commendation, as it is disinterested and voluntary, though attended with Fatigue
and Expense: Hereby you act up to the Reason of Men and the Zeal of Christians,
of Protestants, of Britons! expressing by Action a real Reward to your Religion
and Liberty, to your King and Country, to your Friends and dear Relatives; for
by this Undertaking you declare that you will not tamely and sordidly give them
all up to the Lusts of our inveterate Enemies, without striking a stroke in
their Defense: Go on, Sirs, in the Name of God, and be not discouraged by any
Difficulties or Reflections you may meet with in the Prosecution of your
Design, which is honest and honorable, and of Service to your Country!

Now in order to prosper herein, give me Leave with Humility and Earnestness to
entreat you, to endeavor with Speed and Vehemence to be sincerely religious
yourselves; this is the best Preparative for hazardous Enterprises, the best
Foundation of undisguised Patriotism, and undaunted Courage, as well as the
most probable Mean to obtain Success, to this End therefore bewail your
Offenses against God, accept of the Redeemer, and obey his Laws.

Be clothed with Humility, by this you will adorn your military Character, be
better prepared to serve the Public, and inclined to avoid those unhappy
Contentions which spring from Pride as their Source, and are as scandalous as
prejudicial to Society, not only by marring the Comfort of it, but by rendering
(frequently) the most noble Designs, and promising Appearances, abortive.

Beware, my Brethren, of a narrow, bitter Party-Spirit, slight not each other
because of different Sentiments in Religion or Politics, for such a Diversity
is unavoidable in the present State of Imperfection: However you may differ in
other Matters, yet agree in this common and noble Cause, the Defense of your
Country, and the rather because by its excellent Constitution, it maintains
your Religious Liberty inviolate!

O preserve the Union of Peace and Love among yourselves, without this your
military Associations are neither like to be honorable or comfortable to
yourselves, or serviceable to your Country; and seeing your Companies are not
formed by the Constraint of Authority, but by your own Choice, and have no
Prospect of private Interest to encourage their Continuance; there is of
Consequence the greater Need of the aforesaid Union, without which they are not
like to be of long Duration.

But I proceed to offer a few Words to such of the Inhabitants of this City,
who have not hitherto joined in the late Associations for Defense, or military
Companies: My Friends and Brethren, when any, in a Time of public Danger and
Distress, freely and voluntarily of their own Motion, offer themselves to
defend their Country by Force and Arms, and avenge its Wrongs, it furnishes
sufficient Matter for Thankfulness and Praise to Almighty God, who has stirred
them up thereto, and gives great Pleasure and Delight to such as have their
Country's Good at Heart; but the Enemies of our Religion and Liberty are
grieved at such a Sight. (See Judges 5. 2. 9. And Nehemiah 2.10, 19, 20.)
Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the People, willingly
offered themselves; my Heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered
themselves willingly among the People, bless ye the Lord! When Sanballet the
Horonite, and Tobiah, the Servant, the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them
exceedingly, that there was come a Man to seek the Welfare of the Children of
Israel: Then said I unto them, Ye see the Distress that we are in, how
Jerusalem lies waste, come and let us build up the Wall, that we be no more a
Reproach; but they laughed us to Scorn, and despised us; then answered I them,
and said, the God of Heaven he will prosper us, therefore we his Servants will
arise and build, but you have no Portion, nor right, nor Memorial in Jerusalem!

Sirs, It is exceeding agreeable to devout Minds, and God should be
acknowledged for it, when not only Persons of a lower Order, but those of the
highest, are VOLUNTEERS in the Cause of their God and their Country, and appear
in Arms in Defense thereof, although they might plead Excuse because of their
Dignity; My Heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the People; As if the gallant inspired Heroine Deborah had
said, I highly esteem and heartily love those brave Patriots, who do not insist
upon the little Punctillio's of their Honor, when all their religious and
civil Privileges are at Stake; no, great Souls, in such important Conjunctures,
treat such Trifles with a noble Negligence; surely those Eagles will not meanly
drop their sublime Flight, to catch Flies, nor foolishly lose the Substance by
grasping at a Shadow!

I would therefore entreat you, my Brethren, to encourage these military
Companies, by joining in them, and punctually attending the Times of their
Exercises, as well as by blessing God for them, and imploring his Blessing upon
them!

But I return to offer a brief Address to the military Gentlemen of this City,
and others; Sirs, If it should please Providence to call you to any Engagement
against our Enemies, with Design either to assist or pretect your distressed
Brethren, or avenge the Affronts of your Sovereign, and your Country's Wrongs;
I hope you are determined by divine Help to undertake the important Enterprise
with Readiness, and to prosecute it with Resolution, Bravery and Firmness; for
happy shall he be, that rewards them as they have served us. The Cause is
just and important, if any Thing is or can be so, viz. The Defense of our
Country, and all the Religious and Civil Privileges which that endearing Word
contains! The Reward is great, unspeakably great, in this and a future World;
and the Work to a pious, generous and heroic Mind truly noble, desirable, and
amiable!

My Heart bleeds for this ravaged Country, especially for our poor Brethren in
the back Parts of it, many of whom have been mercilesly sacrificed by the Pagan
Savages, and the Remainder reduced to such Circumstances of Distress and Woe,
as are enough to pierce a Heart of Iron, of Adamant; My Bowels, my Bowels, I am
pained at my very Heart! thou have heard, O my Soul, the Alarm of War,
Destruction upon Destruction is cried! for the whole Land is spoiled! O that my
Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and
Night for the Slain of the Daughter of my People! Can ye endure, Sirs, without
the tenderest Sympathy, the strongest Emotion, to see our Brethren, our
Fellow Subjects, our Fellow-Protestants, massacred by Indian Banditti, under
popish Influence, without any Assistance? No, surely! or where are Patriotism
and British Bravery fled away?

You all know, my Brethren, the dismal Consequences of a French, a Popish
Government, that in such a Situation you must be deprived of your Estates and
civil Liberty, which are no inconsiderable Loss: But, what is infinitely more,
you must either sin, or suffer the most barbarous Severities; witness the
Sufferings of the brave Wildenses, the Torments of the Inquisition, the Fires
of Smithfield in the Reign of Queen Mary, the Parisian Massacre At that
Metropolis, where the leading Persons of the Protestant Body in that Nation
were invited, under the specious Umbrage of a Marriage with a Protestant
Prince) the King of Navarre, after the strongest Professions of Friendship, and
an Oath of Safe conduct, began in the dead of the Night the must horrid and
(...), which so (...) spread into other Parts of the Kingdom, whereby a Hundred
Thousand Persons were cruelly murdered, and among them many of distinguished
Eminence, particularly one of the greatest and bravest Men that ever France
produced, viz. Admiral Coligni. Hereby the Foundation was laid for the total
Overthrow of that great Number of Churches mentioned in the Sermon. By this
crimson, unequaled Perfidy, the Papists showed their inviolable Adherence to
that traitorous Tenet, viz. That Faith is not to be kept with (such as they
falsely call) Heretics: Yet, be astonished O Heavens! this bloody Villainy, at
which an honest Heathen would blush, was applauded by the Romish Conclave.
, by which one and twenty Hundred Protestant Churches were reduced to Ruins,
the Massacre in Ireland, in one Province of which 140 Thousand Protestants were
murdered. Sirs, The Fraud, the Perjury, the Inhumanity, the Barbarity, and
Horrors of the aforesaid Popish Scene, cannot be paralleled in civil Story, and
are too big for the Powers of Language fully to express, or set in a strong
enough Light.

It is a Thousand Times better to be under the Government of Turks than
Papists, for there we might enjoy some Liberty, but here none at all; there are
not such bloody, tyrannical Taskmasters under the whole Heaven as the Papists,
we have therefore Reason to dread their Government more than Death itself;
Death, my Brethren, in the Field of Battle, the Bed of Honor, while nobly
contending for our Religion and Liberty, is infinitely preferable to the sordid
Life of a Slave, or a Hypocrite under the worst of Tyrants; yea, in such a
Death, there is something so sublime, grand, and noble, in preferring the
Safety of the Church and State to our own, to our very Lives, that it cannot
but be agreeable to great, to good, and heroic Minds; such must therefore have
disordered Understandings, or cowardly, little, selfish Souls, who want to
sleep in a whole Skin, or sordidly to spare their Cash, when their Country is
bleeding to Death? Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet increases;
and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to Poverty.
It would be inglorious and base, my Brethren, to survive the Catastrophe of
our Country, to survive the Ruin of our dear religious Liberty! No, it is
better by far, greatly to fall and die with them in the Field of Battle, and be
buried in one Grave! Should we therefore deserve the Character of Men, of
Christians, of Protestants, of Britons, if we sold cheap into the Hands of our
cruel Enemies, those precious Privileges which have been committed to us by our
Ancestors, as a sacred Trust, to be by us conveyed to the succeeding
Generation; Privileges that have been the Price of much Blood in many Ages, and
in many Nations; no, Sirs, we should deserve not only to be unchurch'd, but
drove from the Society of Men to herd with Beasts. But, my Hearers, I am
persuaded ye detest such sneaking Meanness, which manifests those that are
guilty of it, to be Monsters of human Nature, Prodigies of Treachery,
Ingratitude and Meanness. Allow me to add one Consideration more, which shows
that the Opposers of Defense, in the present Case, are without all Umbrage of
Apology, and that is this, that the Indian Tribes who are now distressing this
Province by Fire and Sword, are by Treaties (of Right the Subjects of King
George the Second, which Treaties they have perfidiously broken, and commenced
Rebels again their lawful Prince; now if it be not lawful and necessary to
punish Rebels, then certainly Government itself to unlawful, and Rebellion
against the best of Kings no Crime; which nevertheless the Holy Scriptures
represent to be as the Sin of Witchcraft: Now whether Opposing of or
Indifferency about punishing the Rebel-subjects of our gracious Sovereign be
consistent either with civil Government, or with Loyalty, I leave to others to
determine. Let us all therefore, my dear Brethren, in so clear, so important a
Cause, as one Man arise, and exert ourselves to the utmost, let us think and
speak, and act to one dying Breath, agreeable to the noble Strains of the
Psalmist and Prophet, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my Right Hand forget
her (...), let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, if I prefer not
Jerusalem to my chief Joy: For Jerusalem's sake I will not hold my Peace, and
for Zion's sake I will not be silent, until the Righteousness thereof go forth
as Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns: But the Time
(...), I must not enlarge: In one Word, every Consideration that ought to
Influence a human Soul, conspires to incite you to vindicate your Sovereign's
Honor, to preserve your Religious and Liberty, to relieve your suffering
Brethren, and avenge your Country's Wrong: I conclude with the Words of our
Text, O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be, who
rewards thee, as thou have served us! AMEN and AMEN.

FINIS.

