A LETTER To the Publishers of the Boston Gazette, etc. Containing an Answer to
the Rev. Mr. Prince's Letter, inserted in said Gazette, on the 26th of January
1756.
Messieurs EDES and GILL,
IT is a satisfaction to me to find, by your paper of the 26th instant, that so
reverend and learned a person as Mr. Prince sees no reason to withhold his
approbation of the account which I have given, in my printed Lecture, of the
natural causes of Earthquakes, he himself being of much the same opinion; as
appears by a Sermon of his. And I lay the greater weight on his opinion in this
case, because it seems to have been formed upon mature deliberation: At least,
he has had no want of time for full consideration, having continued in this
opinion above 28 years together. The first paragraph of this paper, which makes
a full quarter part of the whole, is almost wholly taken up in giving a very
handsome character, and therefore no doubt, a very just one, of this Sermon, as
filled with Philosophical and Theological erudition. It lets us know, that the
Rev. Author, having given a brief account of all the same things, which I
afterward said somewhat more particularly, with relation to the causes of
earthquakes, considered in a Philosophical view; did not stop there, but went
on to consider them as a student of Divinity, in a manner which is here
displayed at large. Had I known of this learned Sermon is season, I might have
adorned my discourse with another illustrious name, besides those of NEWTON,
BOIL, etc. I might at the same time have corroborated that particular in it,
which relates to the existence of subterraneous caverns, by the testimony of an
unexceptionable witness, See marginal note, p. 10. of the Sermon referred to.
who* "in accounting for these natural causes," as he by a remarkable
peculiarity of phrase expresses himself, "goes no further than he has seen with
his eyes." In these respects* might this learned sermon have added to my
discourse, both ornament and strength. But alas! so scanty was my knowledge,
that some weeks had passed, after the delivery of my discourse, before I saw,
or so much as heard of this Sermon; though it was printed above 28 years ago. To
prevent the like unhappy accidents for the future, I would humbly propose it to
the consideration of this Rev. Author, who, I doubt not, is very willing that
posterity, as well as the present age, should enjoy the advantage of his
learned labors; whether it may not be advisable for him to deposite a copy of
this Sermon in the public library of Harvard-College, for the benefit of my
Successors and of that whole Society, in all succeeding generations.

But notwithstanding the approbation so graciously not withheld, and amidst a
great deal of unmerited encomium, for which I return this Rev. Divine my most
humble thanks, I have the mortification to meet with some grounds for complaint
in this paper. I might offer it as a matter of complaint, that this Rev.
Gentleman represents me to have considered, agreeable to my academical office,
natural causes MERELY or chiefly in a Philosophical view, as the powers and
operations of material substances: Whereas agreeable to his peculiar office, as
a student of Divinity, he went on [in his Sermon aforesaid] to consider those
material causes as acted upon -- by GOD, etc. The word, MERELY, here used does
not convey a just idea, either of the nature of my academical office, or of my
conduct in it. The consideration of a DEITY is not peculiar to Divinity, but
belongs also to natural Philosophy. And indeed the main business of natural
Philosophy is, to trace the chain of natural causes from one link to another,
till we come to the FIRST CAUSE; who, in Philosophy, is considered as presiding
over, and continually actuating, this whole chain and every link of it; and
accordingly, I have ever been careful to give my discourses this turn. To
consider natural causes merely as the powers and operations of material
substances, would be to consider them, not in a Philosophical, but in an
atheistical, view. I know it will be said, that the force of the word, MERELY,
is qualified by the other word, chiefly, here joined with it. But these words
do not well consist together, the ideas signified by them mutually excluding
each other; so that whenever one of them can be used with propriety and truth,
the other cannot. I might, I say, have offered this as a matter of complaint.
But as I find below, that by several passages in my Lecture, this Rev. Divine
doubts not my full concurrence with him in asserting the agency of GOD, in all
the operations of nature; I shall only say, that the rest of the sentence
without this word, MERELY, would have given a juster representation of the
case; nor would the omission of this word, as I humbly conceive, have at all
weakened this Gentleman's paper. But I proceed to other matters.

I soon find myself charged with mistakes; -- with having mistaken this Rev.
Divine in several places of his late appendix, and in general in the design
thereof. And it is repeated a little lower, that I have unhappily mistaken him
in several parts of his said Appendix. That mistakes, and unhappy ones too,
have been committed in this affair, I make no doubt. Where those mistakes
ought, in justice, to be placed; I shall now, with this Rev. Divine's
indulgence, and with the liberty of "a free inquirer after truth," proceed to
examine.

This charge of mistakes consists of two parts. 1st, That I have mistaken him
in several places of his Appendix. And 2dly, That I have mistaken him in
general, in the main design thereof. Let me consider each of these charges
distinctly.

The first is, That I have mistaken him in several parts of his late Appendix.
As this Rev. Divine has not thought proper to point out any of these several
mistakes, I am forced to guess at them as well as I can. What number of
particulars he usually includes in this indeterminate word several, or what
idea he affixes to it, I am not able to say. But in the present case, I am sure
that he cannot include more than two; because I am sure that I have quoted and
remarked on no more than two passages of that appendix (distinguished from the
P. S. to it, as he himself distinguishes them in this very paper); and I am
sure too, that he will not tax me with having mistaken him in those other parts
of his appendix, concerning which I have said nothing. One of these quotations
is from the upper part of p. 21 of his appendix, concerning the waving about of
the electrical substance in different parties in the earth below, etc. The
other is from the lower part of his p. 20. concerning an equal distribution of
this substance in the earth, not producing any concussions there. The greatest
possible number of mistakes, therefore, that can be supposed, is but two. Now
if the Reader will please to observe, that both these quotations relate
precisely to one and the same thing, namely, whether there be an equal
distribution of this substance in the earth below, or an unequal distribution
of it into different parties; he will immediately see, that this reduces the
two supposed mistakes to one. And if he will farther consider, that the whole
argument of my appendix, except what relates to this Gentleman's Postscript, is
levelled against this single principle, viz. That there is an unequal
distribution of this electrical substance in the earth, in the sense there
explained; and that this Rev. Divine avows this to have been, and still to be,
his principle, by saying in this paper, that he cannot yet see, that I have
clearly proved the contrary conclusion: If the Reader considers this, he will
clearly see the necessity of making a farther reduction, and of bringing the
supposed one mistake, to none. I cannot yet see any way of reconciling this
charge with truth, but by supposing that this learned Divine has mistaken the
usual acceptance of the word, several; and that he here annexes the same idea
to it, as is annexed to the word, none, by other people. I must therefore, till
I am better informed, take the true meaning of these passages to be, that I
have UNHAPPILY not mistaken him at all. So much for the charge of, several
mistakes. Proceed we now to

The Second, -- the charge of mistaking in general the main design of that
appendix. I am in no pain lest this part of the charge should be made out
against me; because I have not said one word, from which it is possible, for
this Rev. Divine, or any body else, to collect what I thought was the main
design of that appendix: And until my opinion in this matter be known, it will
be no easy task, I apprehend, to prove that I have been mistaken in it. But
though I have no where said what I thought the main design of that appendix
was, yet I have said that, from which it may be plainly enough collected what I
though it it was not; namely, that it was not to assert or prove that the
electrical substance must be admitted as the cause of earthquakes. This was
sufficiently discovered by the beginning of my Appendix, which was, that "A
little tract" (meaning Mr. Prince's Appendix and Postscript) -- HINTED at a
different cause of earthquakes. I used this word, HINT, on purpose to guard
against this very mistake of my meaning, into which this Rev. Divine has
unhappily fallen. It is a word that I could never have thought of using, had I
imagined that the main design of his appendix was, to assert and prove that a
different cause of earthquakes must be admitted. To say that the main design of
a book is HINTED at in it, would be such a strange abuse of language, as I hope
I shall never be guilty of. This word, HINT, plainly showed, that I took the
discoursing of the electrical substance as the cause of earthquakes, not to be
the main design of that appendix. My not declaring, what I took it is main
design to be, did not proceed from any backwardness to do it, but purely from
it is being entirely foreign from the design of my appendix. It was not my main
design, nor any part of my design, to write an appendix in opposition to the
main design of Mr. Prince's Appendix, as he seems to think, when he calls my
Appendix an answer to his; but only to rectify the two particulars, mentioned
in the title of my Appendix, in which I apprehended this learned Divine to have
been mistaken. And it was with an express intention to give notice to every
Reader that the main subject of my appendix was different from his, that I gave
my appendix a different title. There could not, therefore, be the least
occasion for me to say* what I thought the main design of his appendix was.
However, since he has drawn this matter into public debate, I will do it now:
And I do it in full security, that I cannot even then be convicted of having
mistaken it; unless he has mistaken it himself: Because in this last paper he
explains it to be the same as I have all along supposed it to be. I did, when I
wrote my appendix, and do still suppose, that the main design of his appendix
was, by the help of those nine particulars, which two unequal clouds, unequally
charged with the electrical substance, and at a proper distance from each
other, will act as if they perfectly knew, to introduce a NEW proof of the
continued agency of GOD. A design this, truly excellent and noble, and every
way worthy of this Gentleman, in his complex character of Philosopher and
Divine! This was a design, which though I think I should not have prosecuted
exactly in the same way as this Rev. Gentleman has thought proper to do, yet I
had no inclination to interfere with, at all; and with which, when conducted in
a manner that appears to me agreeable to truth, I trust I shall never interfere.
But to prove the continued agency of God, there was no necessity of making a
new supposition concerning the causes of earthquakes; since all the phenomenon
of nature afford proofs, and the same kind of proofs too, of that point. For in
every case, without the exception of a single one, where bodies are moved to or
from each other, according to fixed and determinate laws, it may with the same
propriety be said, that the bodies act as if they perfectly know what those
laws are. The sulphurous, nitrous and other substances, with which this Rev.
Divine was satisfied, in accounting for earthquakes, 28 years ago, would
therefore have answered the general design; though perhaps it might be somewhat
difficult to form so surprising an argument from them, or to make out the same
number of particulars, in which these "act like perfectly knowing and
spontaneous agents."

We have at last got through the article of mistakes; and the Reader is by this
time qualified to judge, to whose account the mistakes, which have arisen in
this debate, are to be placed. To his decision, therefore, I cheerfully refer
it.

In explaining what was the main design of his appendix, this Rev. Divine tells
us, that HE only supposed, that from Mr. Franklin's discoveries -- It seems
very likely, that this electrical substance, with the others mentioned [the
sulphurous etc.] "is a principal instrument in producing earthquakes." Between
this passage and the appendix there seems to be a variance. That told us, that
"Mr. FRANKLIN suggested the likelihood" of this hypothesis. For such is the
grammatical connection of the first paragraph of the appendix. -- Mr. Franklin
-- has -- surpised -- the world with his discoveries of the Electrical
Substance: -- and with good reason suggests, that -- it seems very likely that
this Electrical Substance, with the others mentioned, is a principal instrument
in producing earthquakes. Indeed, I am not certain that I can clearly prove
this conclusion, from grammatical connection; because I find by several
instances in this learned Divine's last paper, that he is invested with the
prerogative of dispensing sometimes with grammatical niceties; which perhaps
may have been done in the present case. However, as I know no better way to
come at the meaning, I shall follow this, for the present. Here then I am held
in suspense as to the real Author of this suggestion or supposition, not daring
to follow either the appendix or the last paper, lest I should be charged with
mistaking the other. But I should be very glad to have this matter cleared up;
and to be certainly informed whether it were Mr. PRINCE or Mr. FRANKLIN that
suggested the great likelihood, that the electrical substance is a principal
instrument in producing earthquakes. My reason is, that if it were Mr.
FRANKLIN, I would humbly request to be informed, in which of his books he has
made this suggestion; being extremely curious to know what is said upon this
subject by a Gentleman, not less noted for the solidity of his judgment, than
for the acuteness of his penetration.

The next passage that calls for notice, is, that notwithstanding all my
granted Premises about Electrics and Non-electrics; he cannot yet see, that I
have clearly proved this conclusion, that there can be no unequal distribution
of this electrical substance in the earth or terraqueous globe. What the true
reason should be, why this Rev. Philosopher, whose quicksightedness as to some
things is not to be questioned, does not see the force of my argument, I will
not presume to guess. Upon the most careful review, I can discover no defect in
the argument itself. In the course of that argument, I considered two different
suppositions, which I thought were the only possible ones that could be made,
as to the situation of electrics and non-electrics in the bowels of the earth;
which suppositions were, that a non-electric is entirely surrounded with
electrics; or, that it is not entirely surrounded with them; and in each of
these suppositions showed, from the laws of electricity, and with some
tolerable degree of clearness, as I flattered my self, that there could be no
unequal distribution of the electrical substance in the earth. And that this
argument was not entirely deficient either in clearness or strength, I have the
satisfaction since to find by the effect it has had in convincing some others,
who, were I at liberty to name them, would, I dare say, be universally allowed
to be very competent judges of the goodness of an argument. If this Rev. Divine
can show any third supposition that can be made, different from these two, viz.
that a non-electric is entirely surrounded with electrics, or, not entirely
surrounded with them; I shall make no scruple to confess, that my argument is
not adapted, in any part of it, to reach this third case. But to attempt to
vindicate it, as it relates to the two suppositions on which I founded it,
before I am showed the particular parts in which it is supposed to be
defective, would be but a mispence of time. I shall therefore say nothing upon
it, till I see those Remarks and Questions, which this Rev. Divine gives me
some reason to expect I may be honored with hereafter. As to which, I can only
say at present, that whenever he shall think it a proper season to communicate
them, I shall be ready to attend him; and though he may perhaps ask more
questions than I can answer, I shall endeavor to give, both him and the
public, the best satisfaction I am able. And if it shall then appear, that I
have advanced any thing, either in point of fact or argument, which I am not
able to defend; I will give it up honestly and frankly, without any evasions,
tergiversations, or subterfuges whatsoever.

Though I am very willing to have the present debate brought to a speedy issue,
yet to desire this Rev. Gentleman to write again upon this subject before he
has "considered" it, might carry the appearance of disrespect; -- an
imputation, which I would carefully avoid, as inconsistent with the profound
veneration I have for the united characters of a Philosopher and a Divine.
However, I cannot conceal my astonishment at the reason here given for not
persuing these "inquiries into the natural causes of earthquakes at present."
It is, for fear of diverting the minds of any, in this extraordinary season,
from attending to matters of infinitely greater moment; and from improving
their present, awakened apprehensions and impressions etc. Lest, while for the
gratification of their curiosity, they are busied in enquiring into those
material instruments of earthquakes, their minds should be taken off from their
just concern and labor to secure their eternal interest. Upon which I would
ask, Is it a more "extraordinary season" now, than it was 28 years ago, when
this Philosophical Sermon was printed? or than it was two months ago, when it
was reprinted, with the addition of a curious Appendix and Postscript? Were not
people, as both those times, under as "awakened apprehensions and impressions"
as they are at present? and did not this Rev. Divine know it? If there was no
danger then of diverting the minds of any from attending to matters of
infinitely greater moment, by Inquiries into the natural causes of earthquakes,
whence arises the danger now? Can there be a fitter season for humble inquiry
into the works of GOD, than when the minds of people are under "awakened
apprehensions and impressions" of His greatness, His majesty, His power, His
goodness, as supreme GOVERNOR and continual PRESERVER of universal nature? And
have not such inquiries, when properly conducted, a direct tendency to promote,
and not to obstruct, Religion?

Is it not evident, that this Rev. Divine has, within the two last months,
entirely changed his sentiments with respect to the influence which
Philosophical inquiries have upon matters of religion? Had he been of the
opinion he has newly embraced, before the publication of his Appendix and
Postscript, all this debate had been prevented. Now it is this change that
astonishes me; because some other parts of this paper afford strong evidence,
that he is a Gentleman not much given to change. If any of our Readers should
inquire, whence this sudden change of sentiments can proceed; I am not able to
inform them, and so leave it. Far be it from me to insinuate, that it proceeds
from the present exigency of his affairs.

The last paragraph of this paper relates to the Postscript about the
iron-points; as to which this Rev. Divine is exceeding short. Upon this head,
we hear not a word of, unhappy-mistakes of his meaning, either in several
particulars, or in the main design; not a word of, conclusions not clearly
proved; nor of, remarks and questions, put off for the present, but which may
be proposed as some uncertain time hereafter. As to all these things, there is
a deep silence. The proper conclusion from which, as this Rev. Divine did not
care to speak out plainly, so neither do I. But although appearances are in some
measure saved by saying, "he is yet uncertain about the influence of points in
earthquakes";yet we may be very sure, that he does not retain any real
suspicion of danger from them. Let his own words vouch for this. "As I never",
says he, "was against erecting them" [the points] with a due submission to the
sovereign Will and Power and Government of GOD in nature, in humble Hopes of
greater Safety, and with a becoming Trust in HIM, and not in them; I am of the
same Mind still. Is it possible for any man, who has a suspicion, that
iron-points expose the parts of the earth, where they are erected, to more
earthquakes, and more shocking ones -- is it possible for such a man to be for
erecting these points "in humble hopes of greater safety"? But I forbear to
press the argument any farther.

To conclude, I cannot but esteem it an high felicity to have rescued this
worthy Divine from the panic which had seized him, when he wrote his Postscript
about the iron-points; and by him, consequentially, a great number of others,
especially of the more timorous Sex (so extensive is his influence!) who have
been thrown into unreasonable terrors, by means of a too slender acquaintance
with the laws of electricity. It affords me a singular pleasure, under the
groundless charges which have been laid upon me, to reflect, that I have not
written altogether in vain.

JOHN WINTHROP.
Cambridge, January 28 th, 1756.

