Admiral BYNG's DEFENSE, As presented by him, and read in the Court January 18,
1757, on board his Majesty's Ship St. George, in Portsmouth Harbor.

CONTAINING A very particular Account of the Action on the 20th of May, 1756,
off CAPE MOLA, between the BRITISH and FRENCH Fleets, and the whole Proceedings
of his MAJESTY'S Fleet during the Six Days it was off Minorca.

LONDON: Printed. BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND, Reprinted and Sold by GREEN and
RUSSELL, at the Office in Queen Street, and by R. DRAPER, in Newbu^^ M.DCC.LVII.

Admiral BYNG's DEFENSE; As Presented by Him to the COURT, on board His
MAJESTY's Ship St. George, January 18, 1757.
GENTLEMEN,
WHEN I consider that the Charge exhibited against me is of so criminal a
Nature, so copious in its Circumstances, and depends on such a Multiplicity of
Facts, I cannot but be very sensible of the Inconvenience I labor under, in
being by the Practice of Courts Martial denied the Aid of Council on this
Occasion; and this the rather as I am so little versed in the Method of
Defense; having, during the Course of so long a Service, never yet been reduced
to the Necessity of studying it. -- What I shall, therefore, now lay before
this Court, will have nothing more than plain Truth to support it -- An
Advocate altogether sufficient, where the Candor and Capacity of my Judges
will, I am persuaded, supply any Defects and Omissions which may proceed from
my Inadvertency or Inexperience.

It is my Misfortune, to have labored under the Disadvantage of a popular, and
almost national Prejudice. -- For what Reasons this Spirit has been raised and
by what Means propagated, is not the Business of this Court to determine: but I
have the Satisfaction to find the Time arrived, when I have an Opportunity of
approving my Innocence before Judges, whose Integrity is above Corruption, and
when my Prosecutors are Persons (for such indeed are the present) who desire
nothing more than equal and impartial Justice, and stand indifferent to my
Condemnation or Acquittal. By this means I am at once secured from being borne
down by popular Clamor, or crushed beneath the Weight of an overbearing Power.

It has been said, and indeed very industriously ecchoed through the whole
Kingdom, -- That the Loss of St. Philip's Castle was solely owing to my
Misconduct; and that Minorca might have been relieved, if I had done my Duty.
-- As this national Calamity has been urged in order to excite a national
Reproach against me, I must beg Leave, in the first Place, to refute this
Aspersion; and should this Part of the Accusation be once clearly answered, and
the Prejudice removed, certain I am, the Charge of personal Cowardice, in the
Action will soon vanish; for I am confident, had it not been convenient, nay I
may say necessary, for some Persons to shelter themselves from the former Part
of the Charge, no Man living would ever have thought of calling upon me, for a
Justification with respect to the latter.

It may seem somewhat singular, that being accused of two Offenses, one whereof
is capital, the other not, I should appear more solicitous to acquit myself of
that which is only a Misdemeanour, than of that which directly affects my Life:
but how little Regard soever, I may be represented, to have had for my Honor,
permit me to say, I still retain so just a Sense of it is Value, as to prefer
Death to the Disgrace that ought to attend the Author of so inglorious a
Calamity to his Country. If then, I can acquit myself of this Imputation (which
I am confident I can) I shall with Spirit proceed to my Defense against the
Charge of Cowardice, and treat it with the Contempt it deserves. -- One Favor
I have to beg of the Court, that the two Charges may be kept distinct, and by
no Means blended together, as the Fate of Minorca did not at all depend upon
this Backwardness (as it is called) in Time of Action.

The first, and what I think the principal Part of my Defense, consists in
satisfying this Court, -- That I did the utmost in my Power to relieve Minorca:
-- if in the Course of this, I should happen, from the Necessity of
Self-defence, to glance some blame upon others, I hope to stand excused;
especially as my Innocence, in many Respects, is so intimately connected with
their Neglect, that a Vindication of the one, must necessarily enforce an
Exposition of the other: a hard Necessity, I must confess, and imposed upon me
much against my Inclination; since no Man in my Situation would wish to contend
with such potent Adversaries. I desire not to become an Accuser: but if the
Loss of Minorca must be imputed, either to me, or those who sent me on the
Expedition, they who have so falsely fixed the Imputation on me, in order to
protect themselves, can with little Show of Justice complain of my retorting a
Charge so unjustly applied to me. -- But to proceed.

In order to determine, whether I did my utmost on this Occasion, I apprehend
the Consideration of what I could do, should be previous to any Determination
of what I ought to have done; and give me leave to lay it down as an undeniable
Fact, and which I shall prove, That the French Fleet was superior in the Size
of their Ships, Weight of Metal, and Number of Men, besides their Advantage in
Point of Sailing; which enabled them to fight, or avoid fighting, as best
suited their Purposes. Though this Facts is now so notorious, yet permit me to
observe, that the contrary was with an uncommon, Strain of Industry and
Confidence asserted; nor indeed am I surprised at it is gaining an almost
universal Credit, when the Gazette, a Paper supposed to be published by
Authority, was prostituted to spread a false List of the Strength of both the
Fleets among the People, not only by undervaluing the Enemy's Force, of which
it is possible the Writer might be ignorant, but by over-rating mine, in which
it is impossible he should be innocent.

I do not plead the Superiority of the Enemy as a Reason for not attacking
them, but only why such an Attempt might not only possibly, but most probably
be unsuccessful; since it is evident that notwithstanding my previous
Information of their Strength, I did not hesitate to attack, and do the utmost
in my Power to defeat them. And I have the rather been induced, to
particularize this Circumstance, because you will find, by a Letter to me from
the Admiralty -- That the only Reason pretended for the Dismission from my
Command, was retreating from an inferior Force.

Now instead of my retreating from an inferior Force, that a superior Force
retreated from me, when the Fleet was unable to pursue, I shall manifest beyond
all contradiction, and cannot help observing, that perhaps I am the first
Instance of a Commander in Chief, whose Disgrace proceeded from so unfortunate
a Mistake.

I would ask, with what View or Intention I was sent out on this Expedition? --
If it be answered to protect or relieve Minorca, which is the seeming Language
of my Instructions. -- I would again ask, Did those who sent me, apprehend that
Minorca could be invaded before my Arrival, and the Descent covered by a
superior Squadron, when they sent me out with so inadequate a Force? -- If they
did, their Conduct is unjustifiable, -- if they did not, their Ignorance is
inexcusable.

This I presume is sufficient to unravel the political Secret -- Why the
Enemy's Force has been so industriously lessened, and mine so extravagantly
magnified; when at the same Time it is known to almost every Man in the
Squadron I commanded, that it consisted of several of the worst conditioned
Ships, and mostly the worst manned of any perhaps in his Majesty's Navy.

I think I may venture to affirm, that it was not foreseen or expected that the
Fleet in the Mediterranean would come to Action; since it will appear from my
very Instructions themselves, that no such Service was ever supposed probable,
or that the Enemy could have a Force sufficient to venture an Engagement at Sea
-- In these you will find, I am ordered -- If on my Arrival at Gibralter, the
French Fleet should have passed out of the Mediterranean, to send a Detachment
under the Command of Admiral West after them to North America. Can it be meant
that I was to detach eight Ships out of the ten? as no less would have been
necessary to insure Success, and make the superior Force ordered in my
Instructions. -- Again, I am ordered when arrived at Minorca, to assist the
Garrison with Lord Robert Bertie's Regiment, and as many Gunners and Men as I
could spare out of the Fleet.

Does not this suppose the Sea to be open, and the Fleet unopposed? or the
Order would be absurd; for how could it be expected I should disarm the
Squadron, by sending Part of its proper Complement (which please to observe the
Fuzileers were) on Shore, when the whole was too little to secure Success at
Sea? -- I am further Ordered -- If Minorca was not attacked, to block up Toulon
-- What! block up a superior Fleet with an inferior! -- And all this Service
you will please to observe was expected from a Fleet, which when collected, was
still inferior to the Enemy's: I say collected, because as the Island was
attacked, it is indisputable the Ships, then at Mahon, might have been blocked
up, and taken or destroyed by the Enemy, as they did not quit the Harbor until
two Days after the French had arrived off the Island, and part of their Troops
were landed, and in the Neighborhood of Mahon.

Does not all this evince, that fighting was the least intentional Part of my
Instructions? And if the Admiralty had expected an Engagement, is it not to be
supposed they would have sent more Ships, as so many fine Ships manned, or
nearly so, then lay at Spithead, and would have afforded me the usual and
necessary Supply of Fireships, Tenders, Hospital and Store-Ships, instead of
avoiding any Answer to my Request, that a Frigate might be added to my
Squadron, to repeat Signals in case of meeting with the Enemy before I joined
the Ships then in the Mediterranean? -- But indeed I was positively assured
before my Departure, from the highest Naval Authority, that the Enemy could not
fit out more than six or seven Ships of the Line at most.

Under these unfavourable Circumstances, without such Intelligence of the
Enemy's Force as could enable me to judge of it, determined to do my Duty, I
took the Command of the Squadron, such as it was; many Ships foul, and one in
particular, viz. the Intrepid, reported unfit for the Voyage. With these I
proceeded as expeditiously as possible; and though it has been maliciously
given out (yet not even pretended in my Charge) that I loitered at Portsmouth,
I shall produce several Letters and Orders, which will incontestably prove that
I departed thence the very first Moment I was enabled to sail. -- Why the
Admiralty postponed this Service to others, made me wait, and manned my Ships
the last, I must leave them to account for.

When arrived at Gibralter, I received certain Intelligence that a Descent was
actually made on the Island of Minorca, that the Harbor and whole Island was
in the Enemy's Possession, excepting the Castle of St. Philip, which was then
besieged by a very considerable Force at Land, and the Siege covered by a
strong Squadron at Sea, superior to mine. Every Person there concluded the
Place lost, and all Relief impracticable; and the Engineers were of Opinion,
that is was absolutely impossible to land Men, even if the Sea had been open,
and the Enemy had erected Batteries on the two Shores near the Entrance of the
Harbor.

I must own there appeared to me no great Probability of preserving Minorca at
this Time; but, however, have the Satisfaction to find that the Ministers at
home, for once at least, agreed in Opinion with me, since the Moment
Intelligence came that the Toulon Fleet was sailed, and the Troops landed upon
the Island, there was not a Man who did not despair of Minorca.

Hence I dispatched an Express with this Account, which was at first hushed up
in Silence, afterward represented (without, producing it) as the desponding
Letter of a Man who would not fight. -- What Authority these Gentlemen had for
this invidious Prophecy, I am yet at a Loss to account for, unless a declared
Resolution in its Contents to meet the French Fleet may be deemed a justifiable
Foundation for it; -- but the Letter has been laid before the Court.

It has also been given out, no Doubt with the same uniform malicious
Intention, to defame every Circumstance of my Conduct; that I made unnecessary
Delays at Gibralter and this supposed to be solely on the account of watering.
-- I presume the Propriety, and indeed the Necessity will readily appear of
furnishing the Fleet with a Sufficiency of Water and Provisions, which was
proceeding upon an Expedition where the only Port capable of supplying it is
Wants was known to be in the Enemy's Possession, and who by Intelligence
appeared to be well supplied with all Kinds of Necessaries: this was not the
Cause, but Effect of my Stay at this Place, and transacted during the Execution
of other Affairs directed by my Instructions. -- I arrived at Gibralter the
second of May Afternoon, and sailed thence the eighth in the Morning, a space
of five Days only; in which Time I communicated my Orders to the Governor
relating to a Detachment from the Garrison, waited the Result of a Council of
War held the 4th, then solicited a Reinforcement to supply the Deficiency of
Men in Mr. Edgecumbe's Squadron, occasioned by the Loss of those who had been
disembarked for the Succor of St. Philip's. A List of this Reinforcement I
received the 6th, and shipped them the 7th, which Day the Experiment arrived,
the Portland and Dolphin two Days before: these with the rest of Mr.
Edgecumbe's Squadron, were manned and equipped in the best Manner I was able;
and without waiting to fully water the Ships, I sailed in the Morning of the
8th, though the Wind was Easterly, and arrived off Minorca the 19th.

Thus far, I will presume upon my Innocence; but why (it may be asked) was not
Minorca at this Time relieved? I answer, because I was not sent Time enough to
prevent the Enemy's landing, and that when I was sent, I was not strong enough
to beat the Enemy's Fleet, and raise the Siege. Let others answer why I came so
late, and why I came so weak, with a Force not calculated for such an
Expedition. -- But after the Engagement, it may be said, I might have
reattacked the Enemy, and landed the Succors: I might, indeed, have done the
first, with a Certainty almost of being defeated; I could not have done the
last, though I had been victorious. Had I been defeated, what Refuge would have
been left for the shattered Fleet? -- what Security for Gibralter; which must
have been exposed to the hazard of a sudden Siege, without a single Ship to
defend it? and which Place was equally recommended to my Protection.

But it seems (such is the Fatality attending my Conduct) that I am even held
blameable for calling a Council of War in so critical a Conjuncture; yet when
is Advice so necessary as on such an Occasion? I admit where Orders are
positive to fight at all Events, and at all Hazards whatever, it is criminal to
deliberate: but was I under any such Orders? -- let my Instructions speak for
me. -- Is a Commander expected to fight in all Situations, and under all
Disadvantages? surely all Extremes are culpable; and where nothing is to be
gained, and all may be lost, Fighting becomes Presumptousness, Rashness or
Phrenzy. -- I therefore, beg Leave to recommend to your particular
Consideration, the different Situation of the two Fleets at this Time; and
shall refer you to the Minutes of a Council of War, held on board the Ramillies
the 24th of May, already laid before the Court; and when you shall have duly
weighed the Opinion of this Council, the Unanimity of its Members, and their
Characters, what Apprehensions can I have of my Behavior, on this Occasion,
falling under your Censure, since it would necessarily imply their Guilt.

What I have now offered, being verified by the Testimony of the Witnesses,
will, I flatter myself, be abundantly sufficient to exculpate me from the first
general Charge; and that the Court will be of Opinion, -- That I never retarded
from the Island 'till it was impracticable to make any further Attempt; and, --
that the Place was not lost by me, who was too weak to save it; but by those
who might have sent double the Force two Months earlier, and neglected it.

Yet permit me to complain, that in order to render me criminal in the Eyes of
the People, the same authorized Paper beforementioned, was likewise
prostituted to mangle and curtail my Letter to the Admiralty on this Occasion,
and subscribed my Name to my own Defamation.

I shall now proceed to the second Part of the Charge against me -- that of
Cowardice. -- And though I have already taken up so much of your Time, shall make
no Apology for your further Patience, as I am convinced, Gentlemen, your
Impartiality will think no Indulgence too much, where the Life, and, what is
still much more, the Honor of an Officer of my Rank in the Service is at
Stake: I shall forbear to point out the Consequences to the Service in general,
not to furnish even my Enemies with an Opportunity of construing it an
Endeavor to bespeak a Partiality.

The 12th Article of War, is that, which provides a proper Punishment for
Cowardice, and runs in the following Words. -- Every Person in the Fleet, who
through Cowardice, Negligence or Disaffection, shall in Time of Action withdraw,
or keep back, or not come into the Fight or Engagement, or shall not do his
utmost to take or destroy every Ship which it shall be his Duty to engage; and
to assist and relieve all and every of his Majesty's Ships, or those of his
Allies, which it shall be his Duty to assist and relieve, every such Person so
offending and being convicted thereof by the Sentence of a Court Martial, shall
suffer Death.

I would first beg leave to observe, that in order to bring any Person within
the Peril of this Article, he must be convicted of Cowardice, Negligence or
Disaffection; for though he should fail to engage or assist, etc. unless this
failure apparently proceeds from one of these Causes, He is not Guilty. --
Negligence cannot be taken in so large a Sense, as to mean every sort of
Neglect and Omission, but such gross Negligence only, as evidently indicates
Cowardice or Disaffection, such and such only can be Penal, and was intended to
be made Capital, any other Construction might expose the bravest Man that ever
commanded to the severest Penalties, since a single Error in Judgment might
render him liable to the most capital Punishment.

By this Rule, I must desire, my Conduct may be judged; and if my Intentions
appear to be good, and my Courage clear, I ought to stand Acquitted by all good
Men, even though my Abilities should be deemed Deficient.

And I must beg leave to observe, that this Article of my Charge can only
relate to my Personal Courage and Conduct during the Action, and therefore any
Disposition (admitting it could be corrected) can only be accounted an Error of
Judgment. -- I do not mention this to avoid entering into that part of my
Conduct, since I flatter myself that I shall be able to show, considering the
Circumstances, several Dispositions of the two Fleets, and unavoidable
Accidents, that the whole as far as could depend upon me, was conducted with
that Propriety and Naval Military Skill which is requisite in a Commander in
Chief -- But the Court will please to remember, this is no part of the Charge
against me.

Before I proceed to an Account of the Action, I must beg Leave to offer two
Observations, and desire the Court never to lose Sight of them.

First, That Success must depend upon Execution as well as Disposition; and
that no Commander of a particular Ship has a right to deviate from the
established Discipline and Rules of the Navy, contained in the fighting
Instructions, and founded on Experience and just Observation; because if
inferior Officers may judge for themselves, there is an End of all Discipline,
and any Deviation from Orders, must tend to disturb and disconcert the
Admiral's Plan, and throw the whole Fleet into Confusion.

Secondly, That as the French Fleet, superior in Force, waited the Attack,
there was no Reason to apprehend they would avoid the Engagement; and therefore
no Occasion to hazard a Disorder by crowding too much Sail, and making the
Attack with Precipitation, contrary to the invariable Practice of every
prudent, good or great Officer heretofore in similar Cases.

I shall now proceed, in as concise a Manner as I possibly can, to lay before
the Court a faithful Narrative of the material Transactions of his Majesty's
Fleet under my Command off the Island of Minorca, from the 19th of May 1756, to
the 24th, both Days inclusive.

In the Morning at Daylight, on Wednesday the 19th of May, I arrived with the
Fleet off the Island of Minorca; and was then about three or four Leagues
distant from the Shore, the Wind fresh northerly.

Several Ships being at that Time considerably astern, in particular the
Defiance, that had been separated from the Fleet, on Monday Evening before, by
not being able to weather the Island of Cabrera, when the rest of the Fleet
did; I made the Signals for the Captains of the Phoenix, Chesterfield and
Dolphin; and sent these three Frigates ahead of the Fleet, under the Direction
of Capt. Hervey of the Phoenix; to whom at the same Time I gave a Letter for
General Blakeney; which Letter, though it could not be delivered, I shall beg
Leave to read, together with a Copy of my Orders to Captain Hervey.

Ramilies off Minorca, 19th May, 1756. SIR,
I SEND you this by Capt. Hervey, of his Majesty's Ship Phoenix, who has my
Orders to convey it to you, if possible, together with the enclosed Packet,
which he received at Leghorn.

I am extremely concerned to find that Capt. Edgecumbe has been obliged to
retire to Gibraltar with the Ships under his command, and that the French are
landed, and St. Philip's Castle is invested. As I flatter myself, had I
fortunately been more timely in the Mediterranean, that I should have been able
to have prevented the Enemy's getting a Footing on the Island of Minorca.

I am to acquaint you, that General Stuart, Lord Effingham, and Colonel
Cornwallis, with about thirty Officers, and some Recruits belonging to the
different Regiments now in Garrison with you, are on board the Ships of the
Squadron; and shall be glad to know, by the return of the Officer, what Place
you will think proper to have them landed at.

The Royal Regiment of English Fuzilliers, commanded by Lord Robert Bertie, is
likewise on board the Squadron, destined, agreeable to my Orders, to serve on
board the Fleet in the Mediterranean, unless it should be thought necessary,
upon Consultation with you, to land the Regiment for the Defense of Minorca:
But I must also inform you, should the Fuzilliers be landed, as they are Part
of the Ship's Complements, the Marines having been ordered by the Lord's
Commissioners of the Admiralty on board of other Ships at Portsmouth, to make
room for them, that it will disable the Squadron from acting against that of
the Enemy, which I am informed is cruizing off the Island. However, I shall
gladly embrace every Opportunity of promoting his Majesty's Service in the most
effectual Manner; and shall assist you, distress the Enemy, and defeat their
Designs to the utmost of my Power.

Please to favor me with Information how I can be most effectually of Service
to you and the Garrison; and believe me to be, with great Truth and Esteem,

SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant, J. BYNG.

Lieut. General Blakeney. By the Hon. John Byng, Esquire Admiral of the Blue
Squadron, and Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Ships and Vessels employed in
the Mediterranean.

YOU are hereby required and directed to proceed with his Majesty's Ship under
your Command, together with the Chesterfield and Dolphin, (whose Captains have
my Orders to put themselves under your Direction) off the Harbour's Mouth of
Mahon, taking Care to make the Signals to me according to those you will
receive herewith, and to use your utmost Endeavors to land the Packet for
General Blakeney that accompanies this; as also to bring or send me his Answer
thereto; you are to range the Coast along as near as possibly you can with
Safety to his Majesty's Ships, from the Laire of Mahon to Cape Mola, and
endeavor to make what Observations you can, of any Batteries or Posts the
Enemy may be possessed of along the Shore, that may intercept the Communication
between the Castle of St. Philip and his Majesty's Fleet; and you are also to
employ the Ships with you, as you shall see most necessary to answer these
Purposes, as well as to be very diligent in endeavoring to intercept any of
the small Craft of the Island, which you are immediately to send to me,
together with all the People that shall be taken in them, for my having the
earliest Intelligence of the Enemy's Situation on the Island; for which this
shall be your Order.

Dated on board his Majesty's Ship Ramilies, off Minorca, this l9th May, 1756.
J. BYNG.

To The Hon. Augustus John Hervey, Commander of his Majesty's Ship Phoenix. By
Command of the Admiral, George Lawrence.
For all the Purposes contained in this Order, and some others, I appointed
Signals for the Captains of these Frigates to inform me of their Observations,
without the Trouble and Delay of sending Boats.

About half an Hour after Nine, the Frigates having sailed ahead of the Fleet
with a fresh Gale, and doubled the Laire of Mahon, fell into light Airs of Wind
and Calms, under the Land.

About half an Hour after Ten,

The Fleet having also got round the Laire of Mahon with a fresh Gale, fell
into light Airs of Wind and Calms; and with the Frigates about a Mile ahead,
continued to stand on toward St. Philip's Castle, and the Harbour's Mouth,
with what Airs of Wind offered, until within the Distance of about three or
four Miles.

At this Time we could see there was a frequent Exchange of Shot and Shells
between the Garrison and the Enemy, who were firing upon the Castle, from
several Batteries to the westward of the Castle, and to the eastward toward
Cape Mola.

While the Fleet was standing on toward the Castle, Captain Hervey agreeable
to my Directions made a private Signal to Captain Scrope of the Dolphin, who
was left with the Garrison, and had kept the Dolphin's Barge with him, in hopes
that Captain Scrope would come off to the Fleet, if it was possible.

It may be proper to explain, that each Ship in Mr. Edgecumbe's Squadron had a
distinguishing Signal to give Notice on her, Approach, that it was such a Ship
arrived; Capt. Hervey made the distinguishing Signal for the Phoenix, to give
Notice that it was the Phoenix approaching; and at the same Time threw out a
white Pendant at his Mizen Top Mast Head, the Signal to speak with Capt.
Scrope, agreeable to the Signals given out by Mr. Edgecumbe.

The Frigates had made the Signal for seeing Ships in the south-east Quarter;
but between eleven and twelve, they were plainly discovered to be the Enemy's
Fleet, of which we counted sixteen Sail, at the Distance of about four or five
Leagues, standing toward us.

The Enemy at this Time were undoubtedly Masters of the Harbor; the light Airs
of Wind off the Land, and Calms, made it very uncertain what Time any of the
Frigates could get near enough to the Castle to make proper Observations; and I
apprehend it needless to explain to my Judges the Consequence of a Frigate's
approaching Batteries, or rather as many Guns as the Enemy are pleased to bring
to bear, without Wind to keep her under Command. A Swell made the Phoenix on
this Occasion in danger of being on Shore upon the Laire, and obliged Capt.
Hervey to get his own, and other Ship's Boats ahead, to tow him off.

No Boat coming off from the Garrison, made it probable that no Boat could come
off.

As the Enemy appeared to have Batteries on both Sides of the Castle, it was
very improbable that the Frigates could not be able to cover the Passage of a
Boat, with a Letter to the Sally-Port, much less the Passage of Boats carrying
Troops.

Yet, supposing the Frigates had been sufficient, the Nearness of the Enemy's
Fleet standing toward us, rendered it, as I conceive, improper, upon the Brink
of an Action, to deprive the Fleet of the Use and Assistance of any of the
Frigates; but more especially of their Men, who were necessary to strengthen
such Ships of the Line, as were most sickly, or badly manned.

Lord Robert Bertie's Regiment, and the Detachment of about two Hundred and
seventy Men from the Garrison of Gibraltar, made up the Ship's Complements, and
served in the Room of Marines.

Lord Robert Bertie's Regiment was intended to serve as Marines, as evidently
appears by the Order to me from the Board of Admiralty, directing the Fuziliers
to serve in the Fleet, unless upon Consultation with the Governor, it should be
thought necessary to land them: And likewise by their Lordship's Order to put
the Marines on board other Ships at Spithead; therefore, landing them at this
Juncture, had it been practicable, would, as I apprehend, have rendered the
Fleet entirely unfit for Action.

All the Reinforcement then for the Garrison, that could possibly be spared
from the Fleet, was about one hundred Officers and Recruits, which was, as it
appeared to me, a very inconsiderable Reinforcement, and an insufficient reason
for losing Time, and delaying to attack the Enemy's Fleet when in sight; more
especially as there was very little, or rather no Probability of Success, from
the Attempt to land them; and as those very Recruits, were in a great Measure
necessary to a Fleet entering into Action, badly manned in general, and with
three hundred and seventy one Men sick on board the Line of Battle Ships, as
may be seen by their weekly Accounts dated the 17th of May, which has been laid
before the Court.

Thus Circumstanced, I conceive, no prudent Officer would have hesitated to
conclude, that it was improper in every respect, to weaken his Majesty's Fleet,
by landing Men before the Action, had it been practicable; and that the most
immediately necessary Step was to attack the Enemy's Fleet, and try the Fortune
of a Battle.

At half an Hour past Eleven;

I therefore made the Signal for calling in the Frigates, bore away for the
Enemy, and made the general Signal to chase, continuing to stand toward the
Enemy the remaining Part of that Day, with light Airs of Wind and Calms.

As Boats could easily pass from Ship to Ship, I made a Distribution of the
Seamen from the Frigates, to strengthen the Line of Battle Ships, viz.

From the Phoenix 30 Men to the Revenge. 20 to the Deptford. From the
Experiment 40 to the Captain. 20 to the Lancaster. From the Dolphin 20 to the
Intrepid. 20 to the Defiance. 17 to the Portland.

And Captain Hervey acquainting me that the Phoenix long before had been
reported at home unfit for Service; that he had sufficient Materials on board
to fit her as well as the Time and Situation would permit as a Fireship, and
could do it without prejudicing her as a Frigate afterward, if not made Use
of; I gave him Orders to do it, and ordered the Schooner to attend and take out
her Men, in case of her being ordered on Service as a Fireship.

About Six in the Afternoon,

A Breeze of Wind sprung up about South-west and by South, and both Fleets then
about four Leagues distant continued to stand toward each other in the order
of Battle.

About Seven,

The two Fleets were distant about two Leagues from each other when the Enemy
tacked; the British Fleet at that Time stemming nearly for the Enemy's Van, who
of course must have weathered us if both had stood on; I also hauled down the
Signal for the Line, made the Signal to tack, and tacked nearly about the same
Time.

The Enemy's Reasons for tacking were probably an Endeavor to preserve the
Weather-gage, and as Night was near at hand, to avoid the Confusion of a Night
Action, which no doubt would have ensued if both Fleets had continued to stand
on.

It appeared to me also proper to avoid a Night Action, as from many
Circumstances there was no Probability that the Enemy would decline coming to
Action in the Day: and considering the Weather-gage of Consequence, if an Enemy
has Fireships, which may occasion Disorder in a Fleet to leeward, even if they
should fail in doing Execution, and having no Reason to believe that the Enemy
had not Fireships, I judged it most proper to stand in shore that Night, and
take the Advantage of the Wind, usually off the Land in the Summer Season, the
latter Part of the Nights and Mornings, to gain the Wind of the Enemy against
the next Day, and therefore stood in shore until about half an Hour after
Eleven, or near Twelve, and off the remaining Part of the Night.

Thursday the 20th,

In the Morning, the Wind about South West by South, a thick Haze prevented our
seeing the Enemy's Fleet, and made it uncertain in what Quarter it was; but
perceiving two Tartans with each a blue Flag at his Mast-head, in Appearance
endeavoring to join the Fleet, as if they had mistook us for the Enemy, I made
the Signal for the Princess Louisa to chase one in Hopes of procuring
Intelligence, and made the Signal for the Rear Admiral to send Ships to chase
the other, who sent the Captain and Defiance.

Chasing drew these Ships at a considerable Distance from the Fleet, the
Captain and Defiance two or three Miles to leeward, and the Princess Louisa
four or five Miles upon the lee Quarter, or rather a-stern; wherefore I was
apprehensive of their being separated from the Fleet, and to prevent such a
Separation, thought it necessary to tack about a quarter after Six, and stand
toward them under an easy sail. About this Time the Princess Louisa made the
Signal for seeing ten Sail in the North West Quarter, which for some Time I was
inclined to believe was the Enemy's Fleet, that might have tacked to the North
Westward again some Time in the Beginning of the Night.

The Defiance took the Tartan she chased, which had upwards of a hundred
Soldiers on board with their Officers, part of six hundred embarked the Day
before from the Enemy's Camp at St. Philip's, to reinforce their Fleet.

At Seven,

Or near about Seven, a Fleet was discovered in the South East Quarter, which
proved to be the Enemy, and I made the Signal for calling in all the chasing
Ships, which the Princess Louisa did not immediately observe, but continued to
chase; I fired several Guns from Time to Time, until she did observe the
Signal, and made the Defiance's Signal, who continued to lay by the Tartan
Prize, taking out the Prisoners.

At Ten,

The chasing Ships appearing to be in a fair Way to rejoin the Fleet, I made
the Signal to tack, and tacked to the South Eastward toward the Enemy.

At a Quarter after Ten,

I made the Signal for the Line of Battle ahead, at the Distance of two Cables
Length asunder, and about half an Hour past Ten squared my Main Top Sail, that
the Ships stationed ahead of me might the sooner get into their Stations.

About Ten Minutes after Eleven,

I made the Signal for the Line of Battle ahead, at the Distance of half a
Cables Length asunder; and immediately after the Ships stationed ahead of me
having got into their Stations, I made the Signal to fill, and stand on, set
Topgallant Sails, and crowded Sail to gain the Wind of the Enemy, who at this
Time were standing to the North Westward in a Line of Battle ahead, and also
crowding Sail.

At half an Hour past Twelve,

The Wind then favoring us a Point or more, the Enemy took in their
Topgallant-Sails, and their Van bore away, and formed their Line to leeward;
probably because their whole Line not being able to weather us, they otherwise
would have run the Risque of being separated, and their Line cut by our Line.

About three Quarters after Twelve,

Our Van headed the Enemy about the Distance of two Miles to windward, and as
soon as I headed them I kept away, the Wind nearly upon the Beam. The Enemy
were twelve Ships in a strait Line of Battle ahead, and five Frigates to
leeward, at this Time laying with their Main Top Sails Square from the Wind
also, and under Steerage Way.

At One,

Or a little after, the chasing Ships got into their Stations, and our Line
appeared to be regularly close, and well formed, the Enemy's Line more extended
than ours.

Just before tacking I hauled up the Main Sail, and took in Topgallant Sails,
apprehending a Crowd of Sail inconvenient, and improper to preserve Order, or
to engage with, and unnecessary because the Enemy appeared to be waiting for us
under Topsails, their Main Topsails square.

At half an Hour after One,

Our Van then stretched a little beyond the Enemy's Rear, to give room for
leading down upon them, who having their Main Topsails Square, could not have
fresh Way; I made the Signal for the Fleet to tack altogether; and soon after
we tacked in that Manner, and kept in a Line on the other Tack.

At Two,

I made the Signal to lead to Starboard, with one Gun, and soon after another
Gun, to put the leading Captain in mind of his Instructions, who I perceived
did not steer away with the Enemy's leading Ship, agreeable to the 19th Article
of the fighting Instructions, which directs. If the Admiral and his Fleet have
the Wind of the Enemy, and they have stretched themselves in a Line of Battle,
the Van of the Admiral's Fleet is to steer with the Van of the Enemy's, and
there to engage them.

About ten Minutes after Two,

Observing that the leading Ship did not steer away sufficiently, I bore away
about two Points more than the Ships ahead of me; the Ships next ahead of me,
bore down soon after into their Stations ahead.

Capt. Hervey of the Phoenix, appointed to repeat my Signals, observing that
the Defiance, the leading Ship, did not comply properly with the Signal to lead
to Starboard, repeated it several Times, in obedience to an Article in his
additional fighting Instructions.

(Viz.) If the Captains of the Frigates, which are appointed to repeat Signals,
find the Signal not observed, they are to fire Guns until it is taken notice
of.

About Twenty Minutes after Two,

It appeared to me, that the leading Ship did not steer down sufficiently, and
by that Means, was drawing the Van abreast of the Enemy's Van, and altering
the Disposition which I had made for attacking the Enemy, by steering down a
slanting Course to avoid being raked; I therefore thought it necessary, to make
the Signal to engage, to bring on the Action, and to empower the Ships to fire
respectively as they got within a proper Distance.

Upon the Signal to engage, the leading Ship bore down more, as did the Van; in
general; the Intrepid appeared to bear right down before the Wind, by which
means she was exposed to be raked, and was disabled by the Time she could begin
to fire or very soon after; I also steered away more, continuing the Signal for
the Line of Battle ahead up, and with the Ships next ahead of me preserved a
Line, and steered a proper slanting Course as the Circumstances appeared to me,
to fall in with and engage the Enemy, who I observed had head-way.

The whole Van appeared to bear down more than the Rear Division, which I
imagine must have been owing to some Ships in the Van being extended at greater
Distances from each other than in the Rear, and of consequence being farther
ahead with regard to the Enemy's Line, which laid them under a Necessity of
taking that Method to get into Action with the Enemy.

At half an hour after Two,

The Enemy began to fire, all but the two sternmost Ships, who reserved their
Fire some little Time longer, but their Shot in general fell short throughout
their Line.

About this Time I made the Signal for the Deptford to quit the Line,
apprehending as she was one of the weakest Ships, that she would be of the most
effectual Service as directed by that Signal. The first Article of the
additional fighting Instructions, as given out to the Fleet by me at the
Beginning of the Expedition. (Viz.) In Case of meeting with a Squadron of the
Enemy's Ships, that may be less in Number than the Squadron under my Command;
if I would have any of the smallest Ships quit the Line, that those of the
greatest Force may be opposed to the Enemy; I will put abroad the Signal for
speaking with the Captain of any such Ship or Ships, as I would have leave the
Line, and hoist a Flag striped yellow and white on the Flag-staff at the Fore
Top Mast Head: Then the next Ships are to close up the Line; and those that
have quitted the Line are to hold themselves in readiness to assist any Ship
that may be disabled or hard pressed, or to take her Station if she is obliged
to go out of the Line: In which Case the strongest Ship that is withdrawn from
the Line, is strictly enjoined to supply the Place, and fill up the Vacancy.

Soon after the Enemy began to fire, their Shot reached the Ramillies, and
passed through her Sails and Rigging; but I continued going down and reserving
my Fire until I could get close to the Enemy, and I believe declared such my
Intention at that Time.

About ten Minutes before three,

When the Enemy's Shot passed over the Ramillies, and through her Sails and
Rigging, and several hulled her, some of the Seamen, as I have been informed
since, out of impatience at receiving the Enemy's Fire without returning it,
began to fire without Orders, as the Guns were kept pointed forwards on the
Enemy in going down; others followed the Example, on a Supposition that Orders
were given.

I was displeased at firing so soon, contrary to my Intention, and I think
expressed my Dissatisfaction; but being then within about half a Mile of the
Enemy, with a fine Breeze; and apprehending that a very little Time would bring
us down, and that it might prevent the Enemy from deliberately taking aim, and
disabling the Ship before coming to close Action, I permitted the Fire to
continue.

In the Time of firing, I think it was Lord Robert Bertie, who first observed
it through the Smoke, and acquainted me, that one of our own Ships was close
upon the Lee Bow, and that there was danger of firing into her, I immediately
gave orders not to fire without seeing the Enemy's Colors, and to hale up the
Fore Sail; and finding one Ship upon the Lee Bow, and another right ahead,
both so close to us, with one or both Topsails a-back; I was under a Necessity
without Hesitation of luffing the Ship up so as to back the Topsails and avoid
being immediately on Board of them.

And apprehending the Ships a-stern, might run on Board of us as we lay in a
Cluster, partly hid by the Smoke; I also immediately made the Signal for the
Fleet to brace to, the Rear to brace to first, and braced the Fore Top Sail
sharp a-back, to back the Ramillies a-stern, and cast her Head to Leeward of
the Princess Louisa and Trident, in order for the more immediately making Sail
ahead again.

On Account of the Danger of firing upon our own Ships, all firing ceased at
this Time, on Board the Ramillies, after about four or five Broadsides.

No Signal being appointed for the Rear only to brace to, laid me under a
Necessity, on this Emergency of making the general Signal to brace to, the
Ships in the Rear to brace to first; but this Signal was up so short a Time,
that the Rear Admiral who according to the established Practice of the Navy,
repeated all other Signals, could not if he saw it, have time to repeat this,
before it was haled down again, nor had Capt. Hervey in the Phoenix, who was
appointed to repeat my Signals, time to repeat it; neither did any Ships ahead
of me not brought to before, bring to in obedience to it; because, apprehensive
that the Ships ahead of me might bring to in Consequence of this Signal, and
intending that the Ships might fill which by bringing to had obliged me to lay
a-back, I was very solicitios to have the Signal made as soon as possible for
the Fleet to fill and stand on, the Ships in the Van to fill first: And
therefore,

About fiften or twenty Minutes after Three,

The Signal to brace to was haled down, while the Ramilies's Top Sails were
a-back, and the Signal made for the Fleet to fill and stand on, the Ships in
the Van to fill first. This was as soon as it could possibly be made after the
Signal to brace to, and did not exceed six or eight Minutes.

And having discovered that the Stop was occasioned by the Revenge, and the
Ships next ahead of me, bringing to or backing, instead of passing the
Intrepide; who at this Time appeared unable to carry Sail, having lost her Fore
Top Mast, and her Fore Sail a-back; and that by this Means there was a
Separation between the Rear Admiral's Division and mine, I made the Signal for
the Rear to make more Sail, and close the Line, almost at the same Time with
the Signal to fill that these Ships might make Sail again and pass the
Intrepide.

The Smoke occasioned by the Fire from the Ships upon the Lee Bow, as well as
what had proceeded from the Ramillies, obstructed my seeing the Enemy's Conduct
and Situation, about the Time of laying the Top Sails a-back. But the Smoke
being cleared away, I observed that the Enemy were then under Sail, Fore Sail
and Top Sails edging down from the Wind, three or four Ships of their Van going
large, and the second Ship from the Rear, which the Fire from the Ramillies was
principally directed at, going quartering with her Fore Sail, Fore Top Sail and
Fore Top Gallant Sail set, and her Main Top Sail Yard shot down upon the Cap.

At half an Hour after Three,

When the Ramillies was backed a-stern, and her Head cast to Leeward of the
Trident and Princess Louisa, I filled the Top Sails and set the Fore Sail; and
observing that the sternmost Ship of the Enemy was separated from their Line,
by the Ship ahead of her having bore away, I sent Lieutenant: Hamilton to
Capt. Ward of the Culloden with Orders to make what Sail he could out of the
Line, and endeavor to cut her off.

Soon after this, shooting ahead to Leeward of the Trident and Princess
Louisa, who were under their Top Sails, I ordered them to be hailed one after
the other, as I shot up with them to make more Sail, which they did; and I
immediately set my Main Sail, Jibb and Stay Sails.

About the same Time the Princess Louisa's Boat dropped on Board with a Letter
from Captain Noel, acquainting me that he had lost a Leg, and desiring that an
Officer might be sent to command the Ship. I immediately sent Captain Gough,
then my first Lieutenant, with Directions, in his Way, to carry my Orders to
Captain Amherst of the Deptford, who was attending the Intrepide to take her
Place in the Line; and I made the Chesterfield's Signal to attend and assist
the Intrepid then fallen a-stern out of her Station in the Line.

About Four,

Observing that the sternmost Ship of the Enemy, had shot up and joined their
Line, the Culloden then abaft the lee Beam of the Ramillies, at the Distance of
about two Cables Length with Topgallant Sails set; I ordered Captain Ward to be
hailed to get into his Station again, judging it improper, then, to continue my
Order for him to pursue the sternmost Ship of the Enemy, after she had rejoined.

The Enemy's Center and Rear continued stretching ahead in a regular Line, and
edging down to rejoin the Ships that had bore away, some of which the French
Admiral fired several Shot at; and they some Time afterward haled up and
joined him; and I observed that the French under Fore-sail and Topsails very
much outsailed us, who had also Main-sail, Jibb, and Stay-sails set. On this
Occasion I could not help expressing my Concern to Capt. Gardener, that I had
not a few more Ships to enable me to make the general Signal to chase.

None of the Enemy's Ships appeared unfit for Action, or had any visible Damage
in their Masts or Yards, but the Ship that had her Main Top-sail Yard shot down
by the Fire from the Ramillies.

As they stretched ahead and edged down to rejoin the Ships that had bore
away, they exchanged Fire with our Van, but at a very considerable Distance,
and their Shot seemed to fall short.

The Rear Admiral had lost his Main Top-sail Yard; and several Ships of the Van
appeared too much shattered to be able to pursue the Enemy; besides, the
Intrepid totally disabled and dropped at a considerable Distance a-stern and to
windward of the Fleet, with the Chesterfield attending her.

After the Enemy bore away and made sail, as they so much outsailed us, and a
considerable Part of the Fleet was unable to pursue, I judged it improper to
pursue with Part of the Fleet an Enemy superior at first, and still all of them
fit for Action according to all Appearances.

And there appeared to me no further Possibility of bringing the Enemy to
Action again as they declined it, without I had a sufficient Force and
Superiority to enable me to make the general Signal to chase; therefore I stood
on with my Division under Courses, Topsails, Jibb and Stay Sails, until we
rejoined the Van Division.

And at half an Hour after Five I made the Signal to bring to, and brought to
in order to repair the Damages of such Ships as had suffered in the Action.

The Enemy were then upon the lee Bow, distant about six or seven Miles,
continuing to stand on to the northward, the Body of them still preserving
their Order; and being rejoined by the Ships that had bore away, they seemed to
be new forming their Line.

About Six,

Apprehending that the Enemy having observed the Situation of our disabled
Ships, might take the Advantage, and tacking make an Attack in their Turn; I
made the Signal for the Fleet to fill, and soon after the Signal to tack, and
the Ships appointed to lead on the larboard Tack to continue to lead on the
starboard Tack, in order to cover the disabled Ships, by placing my own
Division that had suffered least in the Action in the Rear, and first opposed
to the Enemy if they should make such an Attempt, and likewise prevent a
farther Separation from the Intrepid and Chesterfield, at this Time about two
Leagues upon the Weather Quarter of the Fleet.

About Seven,

Observing that few of the headmost Ships were as yet tacked, and that tacking
in the Order of Battle would take up much Time, as Night was coming on, and
there was no Night Signal provided for Ships that led on the Larboard Tack to
continue to lead on the Starboard Tack, I ordered the Signal for the Line to be
hauled down, continuing the Signal to tack up, that the whole Fleet might be
able to tack before dark.

At the Close of Day the Enemy were at the Distance of three or four Leagues to
the northward, continuing to stand on.

Soon after the Fleet was on the other Tack, I made the Night Signal to bring
to, and the Fleet continued to lay to all Night in the Place of Action.

The 21st,

Moderate Weather, the latter Part light Airs of Wind and Calms, the Wind in
the S. W. Quarter. -- In the Morning the Enemy were seen in the N. W. Quarter
from the Mast Heads of some of the Weathermost Ships. -- The Fleet continued to
lay to, the Ships which had received Damages in the Action employed in
refitting. -- The Intrepid and Chesterfield having carried Sail all Night, and
being out of Sight I ordered the Phoenix, Dolphin and Experiment to make Sail
in different Quarters to look for them. -- At Noon Cape Mola was by our
Reckoning N. W. half N. Distance about nine Leagues.

The 22d,

Light Airs of Wind, easterly and hazey Weather, the Fleet continuing to lay
to, the Ships that had received Damages employed in refitting. -- I appointed
Capt. Hervey to command the Defiance in the room of Capt. Andrews killed in the
Action.

About Seven in the Morning,

Observing a Boat to the Windward of the Fleet, I sent the Schooner to tow her
down, which proved to be the Lancaster's long Boat cut adrift during the Action.

About the same Time I gave out a new Line of Battle, having changed the
Stations of some of the crippled Ships, and put two of them, viz. the Captain,
and Defiance in my own Division, and the Revenge and Kingston in the Rear
Admiral's Division in their Places.

About Nine,

The Dolphin having made a Stretch to the Southward to fetch, into the Fleet,
made the Signal for seeing the Intrepid and Chesterfield, and stood toward
them in the S. W. Quarter.

At Eleven,

I made sail with the Fleet toward them.

In the Afternoon, upon Capt. Hervey's Representation that the Defiance was
very weakly manned, and but few Seamen, I sent a Mate from on board the
Ramillies with thirty Seamen to assist in refitting her.

At Eight in the Evening,

Having joined the Intrepid and Chesterfield, I brought to with the Fleet,
their Heads to the Northward.

The 23d,

The first Part of the Day, fresh Gales from the eastward and hazey, the middle
and latter Part moderate, sometimes little Wind and Calms.

The Fleet laying to, the Ships that had received Damage in the Action
refitting.

In the Morning I ordered the Officer of the Watch to view the Situation of the
crippled Ships as they appeared to him, and minute down the Particulars, and to
give me a Copy of it, which he did as follows.

The Captain with her Fore-Yard and Fore-Topmast down, no Main-Top-Gallant Mast
up, and Main-topsail Yard unrigged, laying across upon the Cap, and the Sail
unbent,

The Defiance, with her Main-Yard, and Fore-top-gallant Mast down, Main-top
sail furled, and Fore-top sail double reefed.

The Portland with her Fore Yard down, and Fore and Main-top sails down upon
the Cap.

The Intrepid with jury-top Masts.

I ordered Surveys on the Damages received by the crippled Ships in the late
Action, and on their Stores; and gave Capt. Lloyd an Order to command the
Princess Louisa during Capt. Noel's Illness, who had lost a Leg in the late
Action; and Lieut. Gough an Order to command the Chesterfield during Capt.
Lloyd's Absence.

About Six in the Evening;

Eight or Nine Sail of the Enemy were seen in the N. E. Ouarter; the Haze
prevented our seeing the whole, or discerning clearly how they stood.

I ordered the Officer of the Watch to view the Situation of the lame Ships,
and at the same Time to minute down the Particulars, and give me a Copy of it
signed, which he did as follows:

The Defiance with her Main and Fore Yards down, her Fore Top Mast struck, and
Main Top Sail furled.

The Captain with her Fore Yard and Top Mast down, and no Main Top-gallant
Mast; her Main Top-sail Yard unrigged, and lying across upon the Cap, and the
Sail unbent.

The Portland with her Fore Yard down, and Fore and Main Topsails upon the Cap.

The Intrepid with Jury Top Masts.

The Ships of the Fleet in this Situation, did not appear to me as yet in a
Condition fit to attack or receive the Enemy; and, therefore, after having
consulted with the Rear Admiral upon that Head, about half an Hour after Seven
I wore with the Fleet, and stood under as easy Sail to the Southward for about
four or five Miles.

The remaining Part of the Night, and next Morning it was calm.

On the 24th,

The Condition of the Fleet, and other Circumstances, making it appear to me
necessary, and as it was agreeable to the Rear-Admiral's Opinion, I called a
Council of War, the Subject of which, together with the Resolutions, have been
already laid before this Court.

What I have now laid before you, to the best of my Knowledge, Observation and
Judgment, is a true Account of the Disposition and Proceedings of his Majesty's
Fleet during the six Days off Minorca, without any Exaggeration, false
coloring, or Concealment, of the smallest Circumstance that can tend to give
the Court any Information with Regard to the Proceedings of his Majesty's
Fleet, or my own personal Conduct; nor am I conscious of having in a single
Instance sacrificed Truth to Safety.

The greatest Part of this Narrative, if not the whole, has been proved, I
hope, to the Satisfaction of this Court already; and, I presume, will appear
consistent with, and a proper Execution of my Duty, conformable to the Rules of
Prudence, the Art of War, and the established Discipline of the Navy. But I
must here beg Leave to remark again, that should any other Disposition for
attacking the Enemy be thought more advantageous than that I made, yet it
cannot come within the Limits of my Charge. For should a Charge, depending upon
Judgment in making the Disposition, be brought against a Commander in Chief --
I believe I may venture to affirm, that should such Discipline be once
established, no Officer can be safe in taking upon him the Command of a Fleet.
-- It is evident, next to a Demonstration, there never yet was a Disposition
for a Battle, either by Sea of Land, made by any Commanding Officer, whether
successful or unsuccessful, which being minutely canvassed and examined, would
not admit of some Amendment.

As the Evidence may seem defective, since there are no Witnesses to produce
from the Captain or Princess Louisa, and but few from several other Ships in
the Fleet, many of them that will appear to be necessary, and no Doubt are so
to my more full Justification; I beg Leave to lay before the Court my Letters
to Mr. Clevland, Secretary of the Admiralty, earnestly requesting such
Witnesses, together with his Answers: which Letters will serve to give the
Court a Specimen of the unprecedented Oppression and Restriction of Privileges
I have had to struggle with.

Greenwich Hospital, September 6, 1756. SIR,
IN my Letter of Date the 4th of Aug. with a List of Evidence, I sent you the
Names of all that occurred to my Memory then; but as I presume their Lordships
will think it requisite that the Evidence ought not to be confined to any
particular Number on so important an Occasion, where a strict and impartial
Enquiry to come at the Truth is of the utmost Consequence; but ought to include
as many Captains and other Officers as by their Situation on the Day of the
late Action in the Mediterranean, are able to give the necessary Information.
As I hear some Captains are going out to the Mediterranean, by whom I hope
their Lordships will send Orders, I send you another List of Witnesses that to
me appear extremely necessary, presuming that their Lordships do not desire to
restrain me in what may appear necessary for the Illustration of Truth, and for
my Justification, in a Case where my Honor, my All is at Stake. I am sorry for
want of knowing the Names, that I am obliged to distinguish many by their
Offices, and the Spheres they acted in, the Day of the late Action; and am
sensible of the Disadvantage of sending for Witnesses at random at such a
Distance, without a Probability of knowing the Depth of their Knowledge, or
their Observations, owing to my Consciousness of having duly discharged my
Duty, and not knowing sooner what an Odious Light my Conduct was placed in here
in England, by the Industry of some as yet invisible Persons who are
indefatigable in propagating Falsehoods to my Dishonor. I hope their Lordships
will think my Request a very reasonable one, and though such the Inconveniences
and Difficulties I am obliged to struggle with, yet my Conscience tells me I
shall do well,

I am Sir, Your most humble Servant, J. BYNG.

John Clevland, Esquire
A further List of Witnesses requested from the Mediterranean.
Lieut. Tailor, Lieut. Peighin, Lieut. Cunningham, The Master Of the Captain,
at the Time of Action. Lieut. Baker, late of the Defiance, now of the Hampton
Court, Captain Durell, The Lieutenants and Master Of the Trident, at the Time
of Action. Captain Cornwall, The Lieutenants and Master Of the Revenge, at the
Time of Action. The Lieutenants and Master Of the Princess Louisa, at the Time
of Action. The Master and Gunner Of the Culloden, at the Time of Action. Mr.
John Mercer, Lieutenant, Mr. John Scott, Master Of the Deptford. Mr. William
Hemmings, Mr. Daniel Pickering, Mr. William Babb, Mr. William Holland, Mr.
James Cummins, Midshipmen of the Ramillies. Mr. John Irwin, Master of the
Experiment.
Admiralty-Office, Sept, 9th, 1756. SIR,
I HAVE received and communicated to my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty
your Letter of the 6th Instant, enclosing a further List of Witnesses which you
desire may be sent for from the Mediterranean, being Officers in his Majesty's
Fleet there; and in return thereto am commanded by their Lordships to acquaint
you, that as you lie under an Imputation of Misbehaviour, by means whereof the
Honor and Interest of this Kingdom has suffered in the most essential Manner,
and stand committed to the Marshal of the High Court of Admiralty to answer for
the same; their Lordships were desirous, in Justice to the Public as well as
Tenderness to yourself, to give you the earliest Opportunity of acquitting
yourself, if possible, from so heavy a Charge; and therefore directed me, as
appears by my Letter of the 31st of July last, to give you an Intimation of
their Intention to bring you to your Trial; their Lordships hoped, as there
were then in England no fewer than twenty Officers who had served on board the
Fleet under your Command; not one of whom had come or been sent for, upon the
least Intimation or Knowledge of what Evidence he could give upon the Occasion;
and as amongst them were several who must be presumed under a particular Bias
(as far as Truth will permit) in your Favor, their Lordships thought you would
have considered this Number of Officers of all Ranks, from different Parts of
the Fleet, who from various Accidents had happened to come over, sufficient to
clear up the Matter according to the Truth and Justice of the Case; and have
desired an immediate Trial upon the Evidence now in England; but by your Letter
of the 4th of August, you sent a List of thirty seven Witnesses as necessary to
your Defense, twenty three of whom were then in the Mediterranean, their
Lordships, though greatly surprised at the Number required, and well satisfied
that they could not all be necessary; yet notwithstanding the Detriment which
must arise to the public Service, by calling so many Persons home from the
Fleet at this Time, and the long Delay of your Trial occasioned thereby, they
ordered me to acquaint you, by my Letter of the 12th of August, that all the
Sea-Officers you had desired might be sent for, were ordered to be brought home
in his Majesty's Ship Colchester; and that their Lordships had applied to the
King for Leave for all the Land-Officers you had desired, to come at the same
Time.

Under these Circumstances they cannot help expressing their Astonishment at
your Application of the 6th Instant, with a new List of no fewer than 31
Officers to be sent for, without the least Fact, Proof, or even Allegation to
support this Request, or to excuse it is not being made before; their Lordships
look upon it merely as a Scheme sugguested to you to delay your being brought
to a Trial, which must be the necessary Consequence, if your Application should
be complied with; by the same Means you may put off your Trial for ever; it is
but applying for a new List every Month or six Weeks, and at last concluding
with a Desire that the whole Fleet may be brought home. Justice to a Person
accused who may be innocent, requires that he should have a reasonable
Opportunity of making and proving his Defense; this you have already had to the
utmost of your own Desire, and been indulged to so great an Extent as may make
an Example very dangerous to the Service and Discipline of the Navy; but
Justice to the Public requires that a Person accused, who certainly may be
guilty, should not under the bare Pretense of desiring Means of Defense make
his Trial absolutely impracticable.

I am therefore commanded by their Lordships to acquaint you, that so soon as
the Witnesses already sent for shall come over, they intend to bring on your
Trial, which they see no Reason to postpone any longer, barely on Account of
the new Application made by your aforesaid Letter of the 6th Instant, and that
you have laid no Grounds before their Lordships sufficient to induce them to
give the least Countenance to so extraordinary an Attempt.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, J. Clevland.

To the Hon. Admiral Byng.
Greenwich-Hospital, September 14, 1756. SIR,
I Have received your Letter of the 9th Instant, in which your Manner of
reasoning seems very extraordinary. I shall not comment upon that prejudging
Expression of yours, an Opportunity of acquitting myself, if possible, it seems
sufficiently to explain itself; but I cannot pass by unnoticed your presuming
several of the Witnesses now in England having a particular Biass, as far as
Truth will permit in my Favor. Whence should that Biass arise? If from the
Hopes of Reward, or Fear of Punishment: Rewards and Punishments are certainly
in other Hands than mine.

And how great is my Astonishment at your mentioning their Lordships Tenderness
to me, and their Indulgence! Phrases I did not expect to meet with. Can being
kept moving backward and forward from one Place of Confinement to another, for
near three Weeks after my Arrival in England, so as to make it impossible for
me to prepare any Thing relating to my Defense, be called by either of these
Names? Or can my close Confinement at Greenwich, without suffering even my
menial Servants to remain in the House after Dark, be called so? And I think I
have a Right to complain of that Cruel Countenance and Belief, which seems to
be given to a groundless Report, of my having attempted to make my Escape, and
the rigid Orders given in Consequence of it, as if intented to confirm it; a
Report so injurious to me, and so absolutely without Foundation; from which the
Marshal and Officers who have commanded the Guards here, as well as every
private Centinal can fully vindicate me -- And I cannot here avoid observing,
that all Charge of keeping me in Custody seems to be taken from the Marshal,
and committed to the Governor of the Hospital, by the Orders given in his Name,
who seems diligent in distinguishing himself in the Service of his Country, by
imposing upon me all the Indignities and Inconveniences that Power can enable
him to do.

Had their Lordships, as you are pleased to say, intended me the earliest
Opportunity of acquitting myself, it is very difficult to conceive why they
were not pleased to communicate their Intentions of bringing me to a Trial, at
the same Time, that I received their Orders to strike my Flag, and resign the
Command of the Fleet in the Mediterranean to Sir Edward Hawke; that would have
been doing me Justice, in giving me an Opportunity of considering my Conduct,
and the Proof necessary to be given in support of it, at a Time when no
conscious Guilt or Misconduct suggested to me, that I was to be arrested upon
my Arrival in England, closely confined, and then brought to Trial; for surely
no Person was to suppose that I was to look upon an Extract of an Enemy's
Letter, and that Extract (if from a genuine Letter) a mere Gasconade and
absolute Falsehood, as sufficient to ground a Charge against me.

I must observe again, that in my Letter of the 4th of August, I mentioned
particularly the Names of all that occurred to me then; nor is it Matter of
Wonder that I could not at once think of all the Witnesses necessary for my
Defense. It would rather be Matter of Wonder, restrained and distressed by all
the Methods Power can impose, and personally disturbed Day and Night, if I had
Immediately thought of all the Witnesses, or a sufficient Number capable of
giving Testimony in my Behalf. But surely it can be no Cause of Astonishment,
that accused of Crimes of the highest Nature, and conscious of my own
Innocence, I should be desirous of producing all such Witnesses as appear to me
necessary.

I must also observe, that I could not possibly know for what Purpose any of
the Officers now in England came home; and therefore could have no Idea, that
they were considered as the Witnesses necessary for my Defense. But if it was
known to their Lordships, that these Gentlemen came to England in order to
prove me guilty of Misconduct, certainly I should have had the earliest
Opportunity of bringing home my Witnesses. And if I had desired an immediate
Trial upon my Arrival in England, as your Letter seems to intimate, I must have
desired it before I knew of any Charge, and without Witnesses to produce in my
Defense.

What Fact, Proof, or Allegation their Lordships expected from me in support of
my Request, is not easy to conceive; can any stronger be requisite, than that
they are necessary Witnesses, and a List given within a reasonable Time, all
Circumstances considered, and at a Time when there is proper Opportunity of
sending for them, and of sending other Officers to supply their Places. --
Giving in an additional List of Witnesses is not unprecedented, and the greater
the Number examined, the more conspicuous must Guilt or Innocence appear. The
Reason of their not being requested, or occurring to me as necessary sooner, is
easily deduced from the unparalled Treatment and unprecedented Hardships, and
Inconveniences that I have had to struggle with.

Far from delaying or attempting to render my Trial impracticable, I do assure
you their Lordships cannot be more eager and sollicitous to have me brought to
Trial than I am; but a Trial without the necessary Witnesses cannot be
considered as any Trial at all; rather an Act of Power than an Act of Justice;
and must be a Precedent much more dangerous than that hinted at in your Letter;
and I cannot resign my just and legal Claim to call upon Witnesses that are
necessary to vindicate my Conduct, and make the Truth evident.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, J. BYNG.

To the Hon. J. Clevland.
Justice to myself demands, and I hope will be thought a sufficient Apology,
for that Freedom and Plainness becoming a Man in my Circumstances. -- It is far
from my Purpose to endeavor fixing any Blame or Imputation, even on my
greatest Enemies, without Reason. But the Indignation and Resentment of an
incensed Nation, is a Load much too heavy for me to bear, though it has been my
Misfortune to struggle under it so long. And therefore I must entreat the Court
to forgive my taking up some Part of their Time, in proving what may at first
View seem unnecessary by the Nature of my Charge: That I may vindicate my
Conduct to an incensed and deluded Nation, taught hitherto to look upon me as a
principal Cause of the Publick's Misfortune, and as a Man guilty of the most
odious of all military, and most contemptible of all civil Crimes.

No Symptom of Cowardice, that odious and capital Part of my Charge has
hitherto appeared to the Court; and my Innocence, and conscious Discharge of my
Duty, makes me confident that none will appear. Yet have I already suffered the
severest Penalties that can be inflicted on it, being hung up in Effigy,
traduced by Libels, tortured by Misrepresentations and Calumny, disgraced and
superseded, upon no better Authority than the Gasconade of the French Admiral,
arrested and confined beyond the Example of former Times, treated like a Felon
with every Indignity, and my Life pursued with the most inveterate Malice. But
all this I have had Fortitude enough to despise, and treat with the Contempt it
deserves, the Result of a Conscience clear of all Crimes.

I must now beg Leave to lay before the Court the Orders for discharging the
Marines, and for embarking Ld. Robert Bertie's Regiment, which last points out
the Destination and Service intended for his Lordship's Regiment; and also some
Letters of Intelligence relating to the Enemy's Embarkation, Force of their
Fleet, Reinforcement expected, and other Particulars.

I shall not trespass any longer on the Patience of the Court, having nothing
farther to add, besides some Observations hereafter on the Evidence, if the
remaining Time will admit of it. But I fear it will require a much longer Time
then I shall have to do it in, and a much abler hand than mine to discuss and
digest Minutes of such a Nature, and of so great a Length: Therefore relying on
the Candor and Ability of my Judges, as my only and proper Council, I must beg
that they will be pleased to allow for my Defects and Omissions, and supply my
want of more proper Talents to explain and support my Innocence.

Wednesday, January 26, 1757.

THE Court having now heard the Evidence on both Sides, together with the
Prisoner's Defense, and very maturely and thoroughly considered the same, they
unanimously came to the following Thirty six Resolutions, viz.

1. Unanimously. It does not appear, that any unnecessary Delay was made by
Admiral Byng, in the Proceedings of the Squadron under his Command, from the
Time of their Sailing, from St. Holens, on the 6th of April, to the Time of
their Arrival off Minorca on the 19th of May.

2. Unanimously. It appears, That upon the Fleet's getting Sight of Minorca, on
the Morning of the 19th of May; the Admiral detached three Frigates, (the
Phoenix, Chesterfield, and Dolphin) ahead, with Orders to Capt. Hervey of the
Phoenix, to endeavor to land a Letter from the Admiral to Lieutenant General
Blakeney, and to make Observations of what Batteries or Forts the Enemy might
be possessed of along the Shore.

3. Unanimously. It appears, That those Frigates got ahead of the Fleet, and
in Shore, and the Phoenix close to the Lair of Mahan, and were endeavoring to
execute those Orders till they were called off between Eleven and Twelve
o'Clock, by Signal from the Admiral, upon Discovery of the French Fleet in the
South-East Quarter.

4. Unanimously. It appears, That the Fleet stood toward the Enemy the
remaining Part of the Day, with Calms and little Winds, till they tackt in the
Evening.

5. Unanimously. The Court are of opinion, That the Admiral proceeded properly,
upon Discovery of the French Fleet, to stand toward them.

6. Unanimously. It appears, That Major General Stuart, Lord Effingham, and
Col. Cornwallis, with about Thirty Officers, and some Recruits, amounting in
the Whole to about One Hundred, belonging to the different Regiments in
Garrison at St. Philip's, were on board Ships of the Squadron.

7. 12 Yeas, for all the Officers, I, for the General and Field Officers only.

The Court are of Opinion, That as so great a Number, of Officers were on board
the Fleet, belonging to the Garrison of St. Philip's, where they must
necessarily be much wanted, the Admiral ought to have put them on board one of
the Frigates he sent ahead, in order to have been landed, if found
practicable; and if not landed before he saw the French Fleet, he ought to have
left the Frigate to have endeavored to land them, notwithstanding he did see
the Enemy's Fleet.

8. Unanimously. It appears, That from the Time of first seeing the French
Fleet in the Morning of the 19th of May, till our Fleet weathered the French,
about Noon of the 20th, the Admiral took proper Measures to gain and keep the
Wind of the Enemy, and to form and close the Line of Battle.

9. Unanimously. It appears, That the Van of our Fleet upon the Starboard Tack,
stretched beyond the Rear of the Enemy's Fleet, and that our whole Fleet then
tackt all together, by Signal; the Enemy's Fleet lying at the same Time to
Leeward, in a Line of Battle ahead, on the Laboard Tack, under their Topsails,
with their Main-top sails square.

10. Unanimously. It appears, That immediately after our Fleet was about upon
the Larboard Tack, our Rear was considerably farther to Windward of the Enemy's
Rear, than our Van was of their Van.

11. Unanimously. The Court are of Opinion, That when the British Fleet, on the
Starboard Tack were stretched abreast, or about the Beam of the Enemy's Line,
the Admiral should have tacked all together, and immediately have conducted it
on a direct Course for the Enemy; the Van steering for the Enemy's Van, the
Rear for their Rear, each Ship for her opposite Ship in the Enemy's Line, and
under such a Sail as might have enabled the worst sailing Ship, under all her
plain Sail, to preserve her Station.

12. Unanimously. It appears, That soon after the Fleet were upon the
Larboard-Tack, the Admiral made Signals for leading two Points to Starboard,
which brought the Wind upon or abaft the Beam; and the Ships continued that
Course, nearly ahead of each other, till the Admiral made the Signal for Battle.

13. Unanimously. It appears, that the Admiral made the Signal for, Battle,
about Twenty Minutes after Two o'Clock.

14. Unanimously. It appears, That at the Time the Signal was made for Battle,
the French Fleet were still lying to Leeward, with their Main-top-sails square,
as beforementioned, and that our Van was considerably nearer to their Van,
than our Rear was to their Rear.

15. Unanimously. It appears, That upon the Signal being made for Battle, the
Ships of our Van Division; bore down properly, for the Ships opposed to them in
the Enemy's Line, and engaged them, till the five headmost Ships of the Enemy,
went away to Leeward, out of Gun Shot.

16. Unanimously. It appears, That the sternmost Ship of our Van Division, the
Intrepid, having hauled up, and engaged about ten Minutes, or a Quarter of an
Hour, lost her Fore-top-mast, a little before Three o'Clock.

17. Unanimously. It appears, That the Revenge, the headmost Ship of the Rear
Division, bore down for the Ship opposed to her in the Enemy's Line, and that
she brought up upon the Weather-Quarter of the Intripid, upon the Intripid's
Foretop-mast going away; and that she quickly afterward, upon the Intripid's
setting her Fore-sail, bore down under the Intripid's Lee-Quarter, and brought
up there.

18. Unanimously. It appears, That upon the Signal being made for Battle, and
the Van putting before the Wind, the Admiral in the Ramilies, edged away some
Points, and the Trident and Princess Louisa thereby becoming to Windward of
him, the Admiral thereupon hauled up his Fore-sail, backed his Mizen-top-sails
and endeavored to back his Main-top-sail, to allow of their getting into their
Stations, and continued in that Situation for five, six, or seven Minutes.

19. Unanimously. It is the Opinion of the Court, that the Admiral, after the
Signal was made for Battle, separated the Rear from the Van Division, and
retarded the Rear Division of the British Fleet from closing with, and engaging
the Enemy, by his shortening Sail, by hauling up his Fore-sail, backing his
Mizen-top-sail, and backing, or attempting to back his Main-top-sail, in order
that the Trident and Princess Louisa, might get ahead again of the Ramilies.

20. Unanimously. It is the Opinion of the Court, That instead of shortening
Sail, the Admiral ought to have m^^^ the Trident's and Princess Louisa's
Signals to make more Sail; a^^ that he ought also to have set so much Sail
himself, as would have enabled the Culloden (the worst sailing Ship in his
Division) to have kept her Station with all her Plain Sail set, in order to
have got down with as much Expedition as possible, to the Enemy; and thereby,
have properly supported the Van Division.

21. Unanimously. It appears, That the Admiral, after shortening Sail, as
beforementioned, again set his Fore-sail, and filled his Topsails, and steered
with the Wind abaft the Beam, a slanting Course toward the Enemy, under that
Sail, 'till about Three o'Clock; when the People in the Ramilies, began to fire
without Orders, at too great a Distance for engageing; but the Firing was
continued by the Admiral's Directions.

22. Unanimously. It appears, That some little Time before this Firing began in
the Ramillies, the Princess Louisa was seen from the Ramillies, flung up in the
Wind, with her Top-sail's shaking, and the Trident passing her to Leeward, the
Trident being then a little upon the Weather-Bow of the Ramillies; and that the
Revenge had been also seen to bring to, under the Intrepid's Lee-Quarter.

23. Unanimously. It appears, That when the Firing had been continued a little
while in the Ramillies, an Alarm was given, of a Ship being close under her
Lee-Bow, imagined to be one of our Ships, and which proved to be the Trident:
That upon this Alarm, the Admiral immediately ordered the Helm to be put a Lee,
the Fore-sail hauled up, and the Topsails to be backed, and Firing to cease
till the Men should see French Colors, and made the Signal for the Fleet to
brace to, the Rear to brace to first, in order that the Ships astern, might not
run on board him; but to prevent this Signal taking Effect upon the Ships
ahead, he ordered it to be hauled down in a very few Minutes, and caused the
Signal to be hoisted for the Fleet to fill and stand on, the Van to fill first.

24. Unanimously. It appears, That the Princess Louisa was also seen, about the
same Time, with her Main-top-sail shivering, or aback, upon the Weather-Bow of
the Ramillies.

25. Unanimously. The Court are of Opinion, That while the Ramillies was
firing, in going-down, the Trident, and Ships immediately or ahead of the
Ramillies, proved an Impediment to the Ramillies continuing to go down.

26. Unanimously. The Court are of Opinion, That the Admiral acted wrong, in
directing the Firing of the Ramillies to be continued, before he had placed her
at a proper Distance from the Enemy; as he thereby not only threw away Shot
uselesly but occasioned a Smoke, which prevented his seeing the Motions of the
Enemy, and the Position of the Ships immediately ahead of the Ramillies.

27. Unanimously. It appears, That shortly after the hauling up the Fore-Sail,
and backing the Topsails, all Firing ceased on board the Ramillies.

28. Unanimously. It appears, That when the Smoke cleared up upon the Ramillies
ceasing to fire, the Center and Rear of the French Fleet had filled their
Main-top-sails and set the Fore-sails.

29. Unanimously. It appears That the French Center and Rear stood on, and as
they came near the three then sternmost Ships of our Van, gave them their Fire;
that some of their Shot fell short, and some did the Defiance Damage; and then
the French edged away to join their own Van, to Leeward.

30. Unanimously. It appears, That from the Time the Admiral first hauled up
his Fore-sail, and backed his Topsails to get clear of the Trident, to the
Time of his filling, his Topsails, and setting his Fore-sail again, was about
Twenty Minutes.

31. Unanimously. It appears, That about the Time of the Admiral's filling, he
made the Signal for the Rear of the Fleet to make more Sail and close the Line,
caused the Princess Louisa and Trident to be hailed, to make Sail into their
Stations, and then setting his Main-sail, Jib, and Stay-sails, passed to the
Leeward of the Intrepid; ordered the Depford to take the Intrepid's Place in
the Line, and the Chesterfield to take Care of the Intrepid, and standing on
toward our Van, joined them a little after Five o'Clock in the Evening.

32. Unanimously. The Court are of Opinion, That after the Ships which had
received Damage in the Action, were as much refitted as Circumstances would
permit, the Admiral ought to have returned with the Squadron, off St. Philip's,
and have endeavored to open a Communication with that Castle, and to have used
every Means in his Power for its Relief, before he returned to Gibralter.

33. Unanimously. The Court are of Opinion, That Admiral Byng did not do his
Utmost to relieve St. Philip's Castle, in the Island of Minorca, then besieged
by the Forces of the French King.

34. Unanimously. The Court are of Opinion, That Admiral Byng, during the
Engagement between his Majesty's Fleet under his Command, and the Fleet of the
French King, on the 20th of May last; did not do his Utmost to take, seize and
destroy, the Ships of the French King, which it was his Duty to have engaged,
and to assist such, of His Majesty's Ships as were engaged in Fight with the
French Ships, which it was his Duty to have assisted.

35. Unanimously. It appears, the Evidence of Lord Robert Bertie, Lieutenant
Colonel Smith, Captain Gardener, and by other Officers of the Ship, who were
near the Person of the Admiral, that they did not perceive any Backwardness in
the Admiral, during the Action, or any Marks of Fear or Confusion, either from
his Countenance or Behavior, but that he seemed to give his Orders coolly and
distinctly, and did not seem wanting in personal Courage.

36. Unanimously. Resolved, That the Admiral appears, to fall under the
following Part of the 12th Article of the Articles of War, TO WIT, -- or shall
not do his utmost to take or destroy every Ship which it shall be his Duty to
engage; and to assist and relieve all and every of His Majesty's Ships which it
shall be his Duty to assist and relieve.

On the Thursday following, being the 27th of January, the Court met again, and
came to another Resolution, That, as the aforementioned Article positively
prescribed Death, without any Alternative left to the Discretion of the Court,
under any Variation of Circumstances; he the said John Byng, be adjudged to be
shot to Death, at such Time, and on board such Ship, as the Lords Commissioners
of the Admiralty should direct.

After which the Prisoner was sent for; and being brought into Court by the
Marshal, the Sentence was pronounced.

But it appearing by the Evidence of the aforesaid Bertie, Smith, Gardner, and
other Officers of the Admiral's Ship, that they saw no Backwardness in the
Admiral during the Action: The Court did not believe his Misconduct arose
either from Cowardice or Disaffection; and did therefore earnestly recommend
him as a proper Object of Mercy.

Notwithstanding which, and the many Petitions presented in Behalf of the
Admiral, by his Nephew George Lord Viscount Torrington, and others, a Warrant
was issued the 16th Day of February, for his Execution to be on the 28th: But
inasmuch as his Majesty was informed, that a Member of the House of Commons,
who was a Member of the Court Martial, which tried the said Admiral, had, in
his Place, applied to the House, in Behalf of himself, and several other
Members of the said Court, praying the Aid of Parliament to be released from
the Oath of Secrecy imposod on Courts-Martial, in order to disclose the Grounds
whereon Sentence of Death passed on the said Admiral, the Result of which
Discovery, might show the Sentence to be improper; -- His Majesty had thought
fit to respite the Execution of the same, until the 14th of March, in order
that there might be an Opportunity of knowing by the separate Examination of
the Members of the said Court, upon Oath, what Ground there was for the
Suggestion of his Sentence being improper.

During this Respite, on the 2d Day of March, a Message was sent by the House
of Commons to the Lords of the Admiralty, with a Bill, desiring their
Concurrence, that the Members of the Court Martial that sit upon Admiral Byng,
might be released from their Oath of Secrecy.

In Consequence of which, the said Court Martial were ordered to attend the
House of Lords, and were examined separately; and as there was but three out of
the Thirteen that desired the Act to pass, the other Ten being satisfied that
the Verdict they had given, did not proceed from any Influence, but was from
the Integrity of their Hearts, the only Verdict they could give; the Bill was
unanimously thrown out of that Illustrious House. And,

We are assured, That one of the Officers of the Court Martial, being asked by
a noble Lord, Whether, if he was discharged from his Oath of Secrecy by an Act,
if what he had then to say, could have any Tendency to the Service of the
Public, or induce His Majesty to show Mercy? To which he answered in the
Negative: At the same Time, a brave Admiral said, That he had voted for his
being shot, and would if he had been his Brother.

Being willing to clear up every Difficulty that may occur in the whole Extent
of Mr. Byng's Case, and as he and his Friends have complained, that Justice has
been denied him, by being refused the Liberty of sending for a second List of
Witnesses, about a Month after he had applied for and obtained the first; it
may be proper to show the Nature of his Request in his own Words, in his Letter
to the Secretary of the Admiralty; together with some Remarks that have been
made upon it.

GREENWICH-HOSPITAL, Oct. 17. 1756. SIR,
I Have received your Letter of the 14th Instant, informing me that his
Majesty's Ship Colchester, is on her Return Home with the Witnesses desired by
my Letter of the 4th of August last, and cannot help expressing Surprise at
their Lordships not having thought proper, sooner, nor even now to take Notice
of my Letter, dated the 14th of September, wherein, in Answer to yours of the
9th, I gave farther explanatory Reasons for requesting and claiming necessary
Evidences, a List of whom I sent with my Letter of the 6th of the same Month.

My Case is very sufficiently hard, if indulged with every legal Advantage; for
I have too much Reason to believe my Prosecution is carried on by Persons, too
powerful for me to contend against, whose Influence must add great Weight to
their Accusasions against me. In such a Situation their Lordships will forgive
my insisting upon the Right of every common Subject, and that I may not be
deprived of the Assistance of a single Witness that I think necessary for my
Defense. It may perhaps be attended with Inconveniences (as is alleged to put
off my Trial;) but no Inconvenience can equal the Cruelty and Injustice in
bringing a Man to his Trial upon Life and Death, who is denied the common Means
of Defense; nor should their Lordships be much surprised that I made this
Request no earlier than the 6th of September, for if they consider my
Situation, when I gave in my first List under close Confinement, without the
Opportunity of consulting Friends or Council, and almost ignorant of the Charge
against me, they will rather wonder I was able at that Juncture, to do so much,
than that I did no more.

If their Lordships had thought proper to curtail the List of Evidence, for any
Reasons whatsoever, which I presume they have no Right to do; yet if my Charge
regards my personal Conduct, surely they cannot with any Appearance of Justice
or Impartiality deny me those Witnesses from the Ramillies, who were so near
Eyewitnesses to my Conduct: I cannot withdraw my Claim to them; and therefore
again send you annexed to this, the List of Witnesses wherein those who were on
Board the Ramillies are particularly distinguished.

I must also repeat again, that a Trial without the necessary Witnesses, cannot
be deemed an Act of Justice, but an Act of over-bearing Power, and, as such,
protest against it.

It cannot be supposed, that a Person confined, oppressed and calumniated, as I
am, can possibly be desirous of postponing his Trial; but I must continue to
desire to insist upon what I have a natural and legal Right to, JUSTICE, and as
an Essential to it, the Witnesses necessary to my Defense.

I must desire your Answer, signifying their Lordships Intentions, and am,

Sir, Your humble Servant, J. B.


Upon which Letter, a Writer to the Gentleman's Magazine makes this
Observation, too material, he says, to be omitted, as it is a sufficient Answer
to the principal Grievance complained of by, Mr. Byng and his Advocates, I
mean, the Denial of the second List of, Evidence, especially those Witnesses
from the Ramillies, who were so near Eyewitnesses to his Conduct, which be
declared could not be denied him with any Appearance of Justice or
Impartiality, and to which he could not withdraw his Claim. If after this, on
the Arrival of the Ramillies at Portsmouth, during Mr. Byng's Trial, when
the-President of the Court Martial acquainted him, that he might call any
Witnesses on board her, it appears, as I am assured, that he declined doing it,
with what View can one imagine this Application was made, and what becomes of
the Invectives founded on the Refusal?

Various are the Arguments that have been offered to vindicate the Admiral's
Conduct on this memorable Occasion; and it must be allowed, they are very
plausible. The Witnesses in general acquitted him of Delay, from his Departure
from St. Helen's till he came before Mahon. His Precautions in sending three
Frigates ahead to reconnoitre the Harbor, and his calling them off on the
Appearance of the Enemy, seems founded on Reason. It must likewise be allowed,
that his disembarking his Soldiers for the Reinforcement of the Garrison,
before the Battle, would have been impolitick, as it would have weakened his
Fleet, and made him less capable of encountering the Enemy. Nor is it less
certain, that the sew Land Forces he had on Board were insufficient to save the
Citadel, much less the Island. All this is granted: But let it be observed too,
that the Admiral will never be made to suffer for that which was not in his
Power to perform; and indeed his Advocates have not so much as touched upon the
principal Part of the Charge against him, and of which be was found Guilty;
namely, that he did not do his utmost to relieve St. Philip's Castle; that
during the Engagement, he did not do his utmost to take, seize, and destroy the
Enemy's Ships; nor did assist his Majesty's Ships in the Action, as he ought to
have done.

Now, though it might be prudent in the Admiral not to weaken his Fleet, by
sending away his Soldiers and Marines, for Relief of the Garrison, before the
Engagement, yet what hindered him afterward, when the French fled, and did not
return to renew the Fight in four Days that he staid there. That a Descent was
practicable, was sufficiently proved by Lord Blakeney and Mr. Boyd. But not a
Word of this in his Defense.

That he did not do his utmost to take, seize, and destroy the Enemy's Ships,
is proved by the concurring Evidence of most of the Captains in the Fleet, who
unanimously agree, that if he had set up more Sail, he might as easily have
gone down to the Enemy as did the Van. Why then did he not? Why did he throw
his Sails a-back, and thereby stop his going down? Because, say his Advocates,
he was then engaged with some French Ships, Yet Capt. Young, Capt. Cornwall,
Capt. Ward, and others were of Opinions, that had the Admiral gone down with
his Division, he would not only have prevented the Damage that was done the Van
by the superior Fire of the Enemy, but in all Probability would have gained a
complete Victory.

Nor did he assist his Majesty's Ships in Distress, as it was his Duty to have
done. This was the Case of the Intrepid, who, had she not been relieved by
Capt. Cornwall, must, in all Likelihood, have gone to the Bottom, or been taken
by the Enemy; for no Signal was made by the Admiral, for removing her out of
the Line, or for any other Ship to go to her Assistance.

From hence it appears, that the Condemnation of the Admiral was founded upon
good Proof and sufficient Reasons. And though the Court acquitted him of
Cowardice and Disaffection, yet his Neglects were such a notorious Breach of
the 12th Article of War, that it seemed not in their Power, unless they would
shut their Eyes against the clearest Evidence, to pass any other Sentence upon
him than what they did.

When the Admiral was ordered into Court to receive his Sentence, he went with
his Friend Mr. B -- n, and in such full Expectation of being acquitted, that
they had agreed to dine together. When they came on Board the St. George, one
of the Court Martial beckoned the Gentleman aside, and told him, That as he
believed the Admiral expected to be acquitted, he thought it might shock him
less, to be acquainted before he went in, that his Sentence would be Death. On
his Friend's coming back to him, and looking disordered, the Admiral asked him,
with some Warmth, What is the Matter? Have they thrown a Slur upon me? Sir,
said his Friend, it is worse; your Sentence will be Death! After a short Pause,
he answered, Well, if my Death will appease the Clamours of the People, in
God's Name let them have it.

The Admiral heard his Sentence pronounced with great Composure; and as soon as
it was finished, retired, without Reply, to his Confinement on Shore, where a
double Guard was set over him; but he was soon after removed on Board the
Monarque, where he was confined under a Captain's Guard.

Thus ended the Affairs of his Trial, while the Admiral was preparing for his
Dissolution; and the following Letter from Portsmouth, shows the Manner of his
Execution.

Extract of a Letter from Portsmouth, March 15, 1757.
ORDERS being given for all the Men of War at Spithead, to send their Boats on
Monday Morning, the 14th of March, with the Captain, and all the Officers of
each Ship, accompanied by a Party of Marines in each Boat, under Arms, to
attend the Execution of Mr, Byng; they, in Pursuance of that Order, rowed from
Spithead, and made the Harbor a little after Eleven o'Clock, with the utmost
Difficulty and Danger, it blowing a prodigious hard Gale, the Wind at W. N. W.
and ebbing Water, it was the more difficult to get up so high as the Monarque
lay, on board which Ship the Admiral suffered. Notwithstanding it blew so hard,
and the Sea ran very high, and with great Violence, there was a prodigious
Number of Boats round the Ships on the Outside of the Men of Wars Boats, which
kept off all others. Not a Soul was suffered to be on Board except those
belonging to the Ship. But those Ships that lay any Way near her were greatly
crowded with Spectators, all their Shrouds and Tops being full, although it was
then difficult to see any Thing on board the Monarque. Mr. Byng walked out of
the Great Cabin to the Quarter Deck, where he suffered on the Larboard Side, a
few Minutes before 12 o'Clock accompanied by a Clergyman, who attended him
during his Confinement, and two Gentlemen his Relations. He was dressed in a
light gray Coat, white Waistcoat, and white Stockings, and a large white Wig,
and had in each Hand a white Handkerchief. He threw his Hat on the Deck,
kneeled on it, tied one Handkerchief over his Eyes, and dropped the other as a
Signal, on which a Volley from six Marines was fired, five of whose Bullets
went through him, and he was, in an Instant no more. He insisted on not having
any Thing before his Face, but was greatly pressed to it, being persuaded it
was not otherwise decent, and that the Marines might be intimidated from taking
proper Aim. His coming out of the the Cabin, which I particularly observed,
from die Stillness and Attention of all on board, could not be two Minutes to
his Death. In short, he died with great Resolution and Composure, without the
least Sign of Timidity, and the Moment the Muskets went off, there was a blue
Pendant thrown out at the Foretopmast-head, which continued flying about five
Minutes, and was then struck; on which all the Men of Wars Boats went off to
repair on board their respective Ships.

The Ramillies, the Ship the Admiral had in the Mediterranean, was riding at
her Moorings in the Harbor, and about Half an Hour before he suffered she
broke her Mooring-Chain and only held by the Bridle, which is looked on as a
wonderful Incident by People who do not consider the high Wind at that Time.

Enclosed you have a Copy of the Paper delivered by the Admiral just before his
Death, which has been printed and given away here.

A Copy of a Paper, delivered by the Honorable Admiral Byng, to William
Brough, Esquire Marshal of the High Court of Admiralty; immediately before his
Death, having first spoke as follows.
SIR,
These are my Thoughts on this Occasion; I give them to you, that you may
authenticate them, and prevent any Thing spurious being published that might
tend to defame me; I have given a Copy to one of my Relations.

A few Moments will now deliver me from the virulent Persecution, and frustrate
the farther Malice of my Enemies. Nor need I envy them a Life subject to the
Sensations my Injuries, and the Injustice done me, must create. I am persuaded
Justice will be done to my Reputation hereafter. The Manner and Cause of
raising and keeping up the popular Clamor and Prejudice against me, will be
seen through I shall be considered (as I perceive myself) a Victim, destined to
divert the Indignation and Resentment of an injured and deluded People, from
the proper Objects: My Enemies themselves, must even now, think me innocent.
Happy for me, at this my last Moment, that I know my own Innocence; and am
conscious, that no Part of my Country's Misfortunes, can be owing to me. I
heartily wish, that the shedding of my Blood, may contribute to the Happiness
and Service of my Country; but cannot resign my just Claim to a faithful
Discharge of my Duty, according to the best of my Judgment, and the utmost
Exertion of my Ability, for his Majesty's Honor, and my Country's. Service. I
am sorry that my Endeavors were not attended with more Success, and the
Armament under my Command proved too weak to succeed in an Expedition of such
Moment.

Truth has prevailed over Calumny and Falsehood, and Justice has wiped off the
ignominious Stain of my supposed Want of personal Courage, or Disaffection. My
Heart acquits me of these Crimes. But who can be presumptously sure of his own
Judgment? If my Crime is an Error in Judgment, or differing in Opinion from my
Judge -- and if yet, the Error of Judgment should be on their Side, God forgive
them, as I do; and may the Distress of their Minds, and Uneasiness of their
Consciences, which, in Justice to me, they have represented, be relieved, and
subside, as my Resentment has done.

The supreme Judge sees all Hearts, and Motives, and to him I must submit the
Justice of my Cause.

On board His Majesty's Ship Monarque, in Portsmouth Harbor, March 14, 1757.
J. Byng.


Portsmouth, March 22.

TO satisfy your Enquiry, as to the Ceremony used in the Execution of the late
Admiral Byng, I am to acquaint you, that the Place where Offenders generally
did by shooting is on the Forecastle; but he was so far indulged as to suffer
on the Quarter Deck.

Twelve o'Clock being the Time fixed for his Death, Capt. Montague looking at
his Watch, acquainted him the Time was come. The Admiral returned for Answer,
it wanted some Minutes, and he would stay to the last; however he soon come up
with a becoming Steadiness, though there was a visible Trembling, as the
Struggles of Nature cannot be hid from an observing Eye. A white Neckcloth he
tied over his Eyes. A Canvas Cushion being laid, and upon that a green Velvet
one, on which he kneeled, he gave the Signal for firing, by dropping a red and
white Handkerchief. Nine Marines were appointed, six, to fire first, three
kneeling and three standing; five Shot went through his Body into the Ship's
Side, and so far, that they could not be bored out with a Gimblet, and one lay
in his Body. -- The Reason assigned for no Blood issuing is, that his Body was
wrapped round with Cotton in such a curious Manner, as that not one Drop
appeared.

He fell on his left Side, and made but one Shudder in the Agonies of Death,
upon which a Cloak was thrown over him till the Coffin was ready to receive
him, into which he was put, with all the Clothes he had on except his Coat.

The Inscription on the Coffin is, The Hon. JOHN BYNG died March 14, 1757. aged
52.

The END.

