Mr. Prince's SERMON, On the Case of Heman, Occasioned by the Death of Mr.
Edward Bromfield.

The Case of Heman considered.

A SERMON ON PSALM. LXXXVIII. 15.

I am afflicted and ready to die, from my Youth up: while I suffer thy Terrors,
I am distracted. Occasioned By the Death of Mr. Edward Bromfield, Merchant of
Boston, in New England. April 10. 1756. Aet. 61.

By THOMAS PRINCE, A. M. And a Pastor of the South Church.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. 1756.

The Case of Heman considered.
PSALM. LXXXVIII. 15. I am afflicted and ready to die, from my Youth up: while I
suffer thy Terrors, I am distracted.


WE are now on a peculiar and awful Subject, which requires your strict
Attention.

For as the learned, Ainsworth well observes, This is the most doleful Psalm in
all the Bible: full of Lamentation, Mourning and Woe, from the Beginning to the
End; without the least Gleam of Hope or Comfort, unless it be in the 1st. 2d,
and 13th Verses; where the Psalmist seems to signify -- He apprehended, that
all his Salvation must come from God, and that it was at least possible that
God might hear and save him: but higher than a bare Possibility thereof, in his
Distress and Darkness, he does not seem to rise

But to clear the Text and help us to improve it; I propose, with the divine
Assistance, to consider these four General Heads --

1. The Person here speaking. 2. His distressed Condition here described. 3.
The Causes of it in the Hands of God. 4. and lastly. What might be the Reasons
of this divine and mysterious Dispensation.
I. The Person here speaking.

This has been indeed contested among the Learned. But it being of Moment in
the Case before us, we must endeavor to clear this Matter.

For in the Title of this Psalm, the Composure seems to be ascribed to Heman
the Ezrahite, as the following Psalm to Ethan the Ezrahite: And as there were a
Heman and Ethan two famous Brethren for Wisdom of the Tribe of Judah, and
another Heman and Ethan chief and contemporary Masters of the sacred Music, of
the Tribe of Levi; some learned Men ascribe these two Psalms respectively to
the two former, and others to the two latter. For,

1. The two first were the Sons of Zerah, the Son of Judah, 1 Chronicles. ii. 3, --
6. And as Zerah when a Youth about seventeen Years of Age, Chronological
Tables, added to Saurin's Disserations.
went with his Father Judah, and Grandfather Jacob into Egypt; it seems his
Sons Heman and Ethan were born and lived and died There within the Compass of
the two Hundred and fifteen Years of the Israelites Continuance in Egypt; and
were there so famous for their Wisdom, that even King Solomon was afterward
compared to them; 1 King. iv. 31. But

2. As Levi had three Sons, viz. Gershom, Kohath and Merari; there was another
Heman who was the Son of Joel, the Son of Samuel the Prophet, of the Family of
Kohath; which Heman lived in David's Reign, and is called a Singer, or the
chief of the Musicians, 1 Chronicles. vi. 33. i. e. chosen by the Levites and
approved of by David, Chap. xv, after his reigning at Hebron seven Years and an
half from the Death of Saul, and upon the Death of Ishbosheth ascending to the
Throne of all Israel, taking Mount Zion, and there building his Palace, placing
the Ark and Tabernacle, and setting the Priests and Levites in their several
Orders for the beauteous carrying on of the public Worship: Asaph of the Family
of Gershom standing at Heman's Right Hand, and Ethan, sometimes called Jeduthun
of the Family of Merari, on his Left, when they led the sacred Songs with
Instruments of Music before the Ark and in the Tabernacle.

And it seems surprising, that so many learned Men should suggest the former
Heman, and Ethan of the Tribe of Judah while in Egypt, were the Authors of
these two Psalms respectively. For, (1) It seems by no Means likely that Poetry
and Psalmody were advanced to such Perfection among the Israelites in those
early Times before the Days of Moses, and near a Hundred Years before their
coming out of Egypt: and according to such a Supposition, the 88th and 89th
Psalms should in the Order of Time have been placed so many Years before the
Song in the 15th Chapter of Exodus; which being composed by that most learned
and admirable Writer Moses, is generally accounted to be the first divine Song
extant in this lower World* (2) The only Reason why any learned Men imagine the
Composers of these two Psalms respectively were Heman and Ethan the Sons of
Zerah, is because the Titles call them Heman the Ezrahite and Ethan the
Ezrahite: But whoever reads the following Psalm ascribed to Ethan, will find
such precise Accounts of God's having raised up, anointed and established David
on the Throne of Israel, with the solemn Oath which God had made him of the
Continuance of his Offspring on it, and as having cast off and abhorred his
anointed, seemingly made void his Covenant, and profaned his Crown, by casting
it to the Ground etc; as is utterly inconsistent with the Time of Ethan and
Heman, the Sons of Zerah, who lived above four Hundred Years before David had a
Being. But (3) What entirely decides the Matter is, that in the very Title of
this 88th Psalm, it is said to be for the SONS of KORAH, to the chief Musician
Maschil of HEMAN the Ezrahite. For Korah was the Grandson of Kohath, as Moses
was, and went out of Egypt with him: and from Korah descended Heman, appointed
the chief Master of the sacred Music in the Reign of David; as in 1 Chronicles. vi,
xv, and xxv.

But why both Heman in the Title of this Psalm, and Ethan of the next, are
distinguished by the Name Ezrahite, seems at present utterly uncertain.

This Heman is also called the King's [i.e. King David's] SEER in the Words of
God, 1 Chronicles. xxv. 5. which seems a Character yet higher and more
distinguishing: For it seems to signify, that he was an inspired Prophet, as
his Grandfather Samuel had been, and as Gad then was: who were both called
Seers; and in 1 Samuel ix. 9. we read -- Before time in Israel, when a Man went
to enquire of God, thus he spoke, "Come and let us go to the Seer:" for he that
is now called a PROPHET, was before time called a SEER; -- as well as that this
Heman was chosen and appointed to preside over that prophetical and sacred Work
of setting forth the Praises of God, by Psalms, Trumpets and high sounding
Cymbals etc.

By all these Things it appears, that Heman was a Man of eminent Descent and
Piety, high in the Esteem of the Levites, and high in the Esteem of King David,
and by them exalted to a high Place of Dignity and Influence.

And yet all his inward Qualifications joined with all these outward Respects
and Honors did not secure him from a constant Series of Affliction, even from
his Youth all along to his advanced Age. For at the Time of his being raised to
his sacred Dignity, which seems to be at the Translation of the Ark and
Tabernacle to Mount Zion, and before the penning of this Psalm, we read in the
same Verse, viz. 1 Chronicles. xxv. 5; God gave to Heman fourteen Sons and three
Daughters: And if they were all born at the Time of his Exaltation, He was now
come to hoary Hairs of Piety, and it is likely even to Threescore Years of Age,
when he composed this Psalm, even to be sung in Public at the Tabernacle in
such sorrowful Strains as these -- I am afflicted and ready to die from my
Youth up; while I suffer thy Terrors I am distracted.

And it seems highly probable, that he knew some, if not many others in the
Assembly, his Companion Asaph it seems was one as we may show hereafter, in the
same distressed Condition, and could readily join with him in singing this most
mournful Ditty. Yea others also, and even those who were then rejoicing in the
Light of the Face of God shining on them, might yet affectionately join in
singing this Song with Heman and others. For Love to good People is a
wondrously uniting Principle: it makes us one with them: it makes us feel as
they, rejoiced as they, distressed as they, and with them to Pray and Praise as
they.

Yea, Heman in this very Psalm before us, in the very Darkness of his
Dispondency; -- yet cannot help giving several plain Intimations of his
excelling Piety. -- As for Instance --

In ver. 1, O Lord God of my Salvation, I have cried Day and Night before Thee!
He believed in the only true, living and supreme God Jehovah -- the same God
who had revealed himself to all the ancient Prophets inspired before him, and
in all his Inspirations by them. He apprehended and in Faith looked up to Him,
as the God of his Salvation: and in Faith and Prayer he had continually cried
before Him, as in his Eye and Presence.

In ver. 2, Let my Prayer come before Thee: incline thine Ear unto my Cry! Though
the Lord had so long, so many Years denied him; yet he gives not over; but
retains such an high Esteem of God, as after all to apprehend there might yet
be Room for Mercy, and therefore prays and cries unto Him still.

In ver. 5, He represents it as an Aggravation of his Affliction, that he was
as one lying in the Grave, whom God remembers no more. The though it of being
remembered by God no more, was very grievous to him -- a plain Hint of his
inward Piety, as apprehending God's remembering him to be the only Scource of
Happiness and Comfort to him.

In ver. 6, Thou have laid me in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, in the Deeps.
Wherein he piously expresses his Faith in the special Providence of God, and
ascribes his Misery and Darkness to his Hand and Will.

In ver. 7, Thy Wrath lies hard upon me; and thou have afflicted me with all
thy Waves. It was not merely his Affliction, but his Apprehension of the Wrath
of God as the most pressing Weight or Sting of his Affliction, which chiefly
grieved him, as it does the truly pious: He feels his Troubles as the
overwhelming Waves of God's Displeasure, as the Pious in such Cases do: And his
Apprehension of the Wrath of God, implies a deep Sense of the greatness of his
Sins, for which alone the Wrath of God could be excited.

In ver. 8, Thou have put away mine Acquaintance from me: Thou have made me an
Abomination to them. Where his Faith in the special Hand and Providence of God,
is again expressed.

In ver. 9, Lord I have called upon Thee: I have stretched out my Hand unto
Thee! His past Faith in God, with his importunate Applications to him, and his
present eying Him are again repeated.

In ver. 10. 11. 12. He represents his Case to be so deplorable, that his
Salvation seemed exceeding difficult and unlikely. -- Will thou show Wonders to
the Dead? Shall the Dead arise and praise Thee? Shall thy Loving Kindness be
declared in the Grave; or thy Faithfulness in Destruction? Shall thy Wonders be
known in the Dark; and thy Righteousness in the Land of Forgetfulness? And yet
in ver. 13, But unto Thee have I cried, O Lord; and in the Morning shall my
Prayer prevent [or come before] Thee! Though he had a long while, even from his
Youth, it is likely for fifty Years, and Times innumerable, cried to God, and
had not to his Apprehension at least, succeeded; yet he would not give up
entirely; but resolves he will proceed, and early, every Day, and earnestly
implore Him still for Mercy.

Yea, in ver. 14, Lord, why castest thou off my Soul? Why hidest thou thy Face
from me? It is God's casts off his precious Soul, that he is chiefly
concerned for; and it is the Hiding of God's Face from him, that greatly grieves
him. These are vastly more distressing to him, as they are to gracious Souls,
than any bodily or earthly Troubles. His great Concern, excites his solicitous
Enquiries to know of God the special Reasons why a God of such unbounded Grace
and Mercy, should cast him off, and hide his Face, notwithstanding all his
long, earnest and innumerable Cries: and he plainly intimates, that he
apprehended, if God would not cast him off nor hide his Face, but accept him
and shine upon him; O, this is That, and nothing short of This would give him
Joy and Satisfaction.

All these, even in the Midst and Depth of his greatest Darkness, are the plain
Outbreakings of that inward Faith and Piety, which lay at the Bottom of his
Heart, and were the very Scource of his most bitter Complaints and Cries.

And indeed* though I have heard many a Child of God, representing their
miserably dark, blind, deserted, lost, undone, and perishing Condition; yet
they cannot possibly express it, without expressing something of that inward
Faith and Piety lying deep in their Hearts, which they cannot see, and yet are
the very Springs of their Distress and Cries.

To hear afflicted Souls complaining of Blindness of Mind, of Hardness of
Heart, of Stupidity, of Unbelief, of Unfaithfulness, Perfidiousness,
Ingratitude, Vileness, Folly, Madness, the Hidings of God's Face, or his
forsaking them; yea crying out -- O these cursed Hearts of ours! etc. -- It is
indeed grievous to the tender Sympathizer: But O methinks I cannot help being
inwardly pleased and glad, on some Accounts, to hear such Complaints as these:
For methinks I plainly see some hopeful Symptoms of the special Grace of Christ
therein: Methinks I see that Sin, even in its Fountain, Power, and corrupting
Influence, is burdensome -- Alienation from God is grievous -- that Conformity
to him in Holiness, Obedience and Submission, is desirable to them -- that they
have right Apprehensions of God and Christ, and the World, as a Portion or
Happiness -- and that they cannot be easy without the Image of God, without the
Favor of God in Christ, without the Manifestation of it, without their being
agreeable to Him in their Hearts and Lives through Christ, without their
glorifying Him in every Thing, and enjoying Communion with Him.

And such a One was Heman in all his Darkness and Perplexities.

We now go on to consider,

II. His distressed Condition here described,

I am afflicted and ready to die from my Youth up: while I suffer thy Terrors,
I am distracted.

He began to bear the Yoke of Discipline from God, even in his Youthful Days;
and his Troubles were not transient with him, as with many others, but habitual
and continual. They seem to be constant on him, and to a very great Degree; so
that he had been afflicted and ready to die continually even from his Youth,
through his riper Years, with but little Intermissions, to his advanced Age.

What Sort of Affliction it was in particular, he does not mention; and
therefore we are left at Liberty to conjecture almost every Kind, consistent
with his unblemished Character; and in them all he had such a Sense of God, his
Greatness, Majesty, Holiness and Anger, as exceedingly exercised his Mind with
Terror, and even to such a Degree as in a Measure to distract him.

But his Troubles may be reduced to these two General Heads; (1) Afflictions of
an Earthly, and (2) of a Spiritual Nature; but especially the latter.

1. Afflictions of an Earthly Nature.

He might be afflicted from his Youth with a constant Series of very grievous
bodily Weaknesses, Disorders, Sicknesses and Pains of innumerable Kinds; which
might render his Life very uneasy to him, hinder him exceedingly from doing
Good, glorifying God in an active Way, as well as from enjoying Earthly
Comforts; and might be always ready to bow him down and overcome him.

He might meet with almost continual Successions of very grievous Unkindnesses
and Injuries from Men, both in his Name, Estate, Interest, Influence and
Comfort.

He might be exercised with many merely Providential Crosses, Disappointments,
Losses and Embarrassments in his worldly Affairs; -- a great Variety of Straits
and Difficulties, sinking him into great Discouragement, and very hard to bear
up under.

He might be very greatly and frequently afflicted with the grievous Death of
very amiable, useful, needful, or hopeful Relatives; more dear to him than the
Limbs and Eyes of his own Body, and than all the Riches, Honors and other
Delights this World could give him -- such as he could wish to have died for;
as David when he was so greatly moved with the Death of Absalom, 2 Samuel xviii.
33. He went up to the Chamber over the Gate, and wept; and as he went, thus he
cried; O my Son ABSALOM, my Son, my Son ABSALOM! would God I had died for Thee,
O ABSALOM, my Son, my Son!

Or he might be greatly grieved with the sore Calamities of his living
Relatives; their Abuses, Losses, Difficulties, Infirmities, Sicknesses, Wounds,
Maims, Pains, Distractions, Dangers. etc.

Or he might be very deeply affected with the Ignorance and Errors,
Superstitions and Idolatries, Profaneness, and Corruption of Manners,
Debaucheries, Emnities, Contentions, Oppressions, Devastations, Murders,
Cruelties, and all Kinds of Distresses in the World about him.

And some or other of all these Evils might come on him in as constant a
Succession as the Waves of the Sea: -- while one is breaking, another rising
and rolling over him, and innumerable others following; that he could see no
End in his most extended Prospect; but rather as his Age advanced, they might
yet come higher, thicker and heavier on him.

2. Afflictions of a Spiritual Nature.

For to be sure, he was all his Lifetime troubled with the vile Corruptions in
his own Heart; the vain, foolish, base and odious Imaginations in his Mind; his
Indispositions to holy Thoughts and Exercises; his wandering Thoughts in
religious Duties; his Unsubmissiveness to the Will of God in purgent Trials;
his Murmurings. Uneasiness and Dissatisfactions with some of his afflictive
Dispensations; his unworthy Tho'ts of God himself; the great Deficiencies and
Interruptions of his Graces and Obedience; his Unthankfulness, spiritual
Indolence and Unfruitfulness; his Blindness, Hardness, Stupidity, Unbelief,
Impenitence; his inordinate Affections to the Pleasures, Riches, Honors and
beloved Persons of this lower World; his Carnality, Pride, Envy, evil
Dispositions toward some of his injurious Neighbors; and in short,
innumerable daily Sins and Vanities in his Frames, Tho'ts, Views, Inclinations,
Wishes, Words, Behaviors, Actions.

He was no doubt also grievously and constantly afflicted with the grosser Sins
and Follies of Others; and especially of those who were nearest to him, or were
or had been Professors of Religion.

Yea, he might be dreadfully in the Dark with Respect to the Work and State of
Grace within himself -- dreadfully uncertain about his Faith, Repentance, and
genuine Obedience; about his being pardoned, reconciled to God, and about his
Interest in the Promises -- dreadfully perplexed with torturing Uncertainties
about Sins and Duties -- dreadfully worried with Fears of his having committed
unpardonable Iniquities, of the Day of Grace being over, of his being given up
to his own Heart's Lusts, and of God's abandoning him for ever -- Yea
dreadfully tormented with horrible Suggestions concerning God, and with
shocking Solicitations to deny, renounce, oppose and curse him.

And to be worried constantly with such horrible Suggestions and Temptations,
without being able to fly from or keep them off; especially when attended, as
usual, with cruciating Fears, either of having yielded to them, or being in
great Danger of yielding, must needs exceedingly distress him: and we can
scarce conceive of any Thing more insufferable or distracting, when long
continued.

But then, the chief, the Height and the Pungency of Heman's Troubles were what
he styles the Terrors of GOD Himself, which at Times he was suffering under,
and at the penning of this Psalm especially, and in such a Degree as in a
Manner to distract him.

Of the glorious God, the inspired Moses had justly given that awful Character
in Deuteronomy. 7.^1; Jehovah thy God is among you, a mighty God and a terrible: And
in Chap. x. 17; For Jehovah your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great
God, a mighty and terrible, who regards not Persons, nor takes Rewards.

In another Psalm directed to the CHIEF MUSICIAN, for the Sons of Korah, and
it is likely HEMAN is designed, viz. Psalm. xlvii. 2, we read -- The Lord most
High is Terrible. And in Psalm. lxvi, which by the Title seems to be also
inscribed to HEMAN, but composed by his Companion ASAPH; with such an holy Awe
he thus speaks of GOD, ver. 6.12; Thou even Thou art to be feared: and who may
stand in thy Sight when once Thou art Angry? -- He is terrible to the King's of
the Earth.

And that which renders him so Terrible, is -- His infinite Highness.
Excellence, Dignity and Majesty above the whole Creation; -- his most absolute
Purity and Holiness, and Abhorrence of all Iniquity, Folly and Vanity; his
infinite Offense and Displeasure with them; his infinite Resentment of them; --
that Sin is not only infinitely contrary to his most holy Nature, Will, and
Law; but also a most horrible Violation of all his Rights and Honors; a
trampling them all under the Feet of his infinitely diminutive Creature, in the
open View of his ever all-seeing Eye and perpetual Presence -- together with
the eternal Rights of his glorious Justice; the eternal Glory due to Him, in
testifying his infinite Displeasure with his insolent Creature by a suitable
Recompense -- His Almighty Power every Moment to do full Justice to Himself on
the horrible and daring Sinner. -- And lastly, His terrible Declarations, Laws,
Threatenings and Doings among the Children of Men.

And Heman, in his deep and clear Sight of the amazing Vileness of his own
Heart, and extensive Views of his numberless Iniquities and Follies, in their
multiplied Aggravations, might have such terrible Apprehensions of the glorious
Holiness, Purity, Majesty, all-seeing Eye, and Resentment of God against him --
as that by Reason of his infinite Highness, he might not be able to endure: and
the Terrors of the Almighty, with the Sense of his own horrible Corruptions,
might so fill and agitate his Soul, as to overbear his feeble Powers, and hurry
them on into great Confusion and Distraction. And when he came to this, there
could be no regular Exercise either of Reason or of Gr^^^ and no Wonder then he
goes on to those despairing Words in the Verse after the Text -- Thy fierce
Wrath goes over me! thy Terrors have cut me off.

And thus have we in brief considered the distressed Condition here described:
and this may be the Case of other pious Persons as well as Heman; and has
doubtless been so with great Numbers in all Ages.

I shall only at present mention the similar Case of JOB, that upright and
perfect Man, who feared God and eschewed Evil, above all others on the Earth in
his Day, as God himself bears Witness, Chap. i. 8 -- So eminent for Faith and
Patience, that when he met with a most surprising Succession of increasing
Calamities, he was enabled to express himself with such wonderful Submission,
as in ver. 20, 21; Then JOB fell down upon the Ground and worshipped, and said,
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

But when after seven Days, the TERRORS of GOD came on him, he could bear no
longer. Yea, they were so exceeding great, and so distressed his Mind, that he
brake out, and spoke like one distracted with them -- Chap. iii. After this Job
opened his Mouth and cursed his Day: and Job spoke and said; Let the Day perish
wherein I was born, and the Night in which it was said, There is a Man-child [
brought forth]: Let that Day be Darkness; let not God regard it from above,
neither let the Light shine upon it: Let Darkness and the Shadow of Death stain
it, let a Cloud dwell upon it, let the Blackness of the Day terrify it: As for
that Night, let Darkness seize upon it, let it not be joined to the Days of the
Year, let it not come into the Number of the Months: Lo, let that Night be
solitary, let no joyful Voice come therein: Let them curse it who curse the
Day, [ when they are ready to be destroyed by the Leviathan: The Words in
Hebrew being Hauthidim aurer Leviathan; I propose to the Learned, whether this
is not most likely to be the meaning. See Avenarius, Schindler etc.
] Let the Stars of the Twilight thereof be dark; let it look for Light, but
have none; neither let it see the Dawning of the Day: Because it shut not up
the Doors of my Mother's Womb, nor hid Sorrow from mine Eyes! Why died I not
from the Womb? Why did I not give up the Ghost when I came out of the Belly?
Why did the Knees prevent me? Or why the Breasts that I should suck? --
Wherefore is Light given to him that is in Misery, and Life unto the bitter in
Soul? -- Why is Light given to a Man whose Way is hid, and whom God has hedged
in? And Chap. vi. -- O that my Grief were thoroughly weighed, and my Calamity
laid in the Balances together! For now it would be heavier than the Sand of the
Sea; therefore my Words are swallowed up: For THE ARROWS of THE ALMIGHTY are
WITHIN ME, the Poison whereof drinks up my Spirit: THE TERRORS of GOD do set
themselves in array against me! -- O that I might have my Request, and that God
would grant me the Thing that I long for! even that it would please God to
destroy me; that he would let loose his Hand and cut me off! -- Let him not
spare! etc.

Are not these the awful Words of an eminently pious Man, even distracted with
the TERRORS of GOD? No wonder then he says in Chap. xxxi. 23; Destruction from
GOD was a TERROR to me: and by Reason of HIS HIGHNESS, I could not endure. O!
with the infinite GOD, is most terrible Majesty indeed, as Elibu represents in
Chap. xxxvii. 22. And one Beam of angry Majesty, flashing with full Power from
Him, is enough to terrify, distract and even destroy the strongest Man, yea the
mightiest Angel.

Such Words as those of Job, were they uttered in the undisturbed Exercise of
his Understanding, would be dreadfully vain, profane, shocking, and highly
dishonorable to the glorious Holiness of God. But the gracious God seeing the
Anguish of his Heart, the Tumult of his Spirits, and the great Disorder of his
Mind, indulgently overlooks them as if they were never uttered. For when Job
had confessed his Fault to God, had abhorred himself, and repented in Dust and
Ashes, in Chap. xlii. 1, -- 6, we read in the two following Verses -- The Lord
said to ELIPHAZ -- My Wrath is kindled against Thee, and against thy two
Friends: for ye have not spoken of me the Thing that is right as my Servant JOB
has: therefore take to you now seven Bullocks, and seven Rams, and go to my
Servant JOB, and offer up for your selves a Burnt-offering; and my Servant JOB
shall pray for you, for Him will I accept: lest I deal with you after your
Folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the Thing that was right, as my Servant
Job has.

Behold the awful Strictness and tender Mercies of God together! -- His awful
Strictness, in resenting the wrong Assertions of Job's three Friends -- and his
tender Mercies, in kindly passing over all Job's distempered Speeches, saying
nothing about them; and only observing the Doctrines wherein his Servant JOB
(whom he delights to call my Servant JOB, four Times over) had rightly spoke of
GOD in his Times of Trouble.

But to return to the distressed Condition of Heman -- We are now in the

IIId Place, To consider the Causes thereof in the Hands of GOD.

I said -- the Causes thereof in the Hands of GOD. For as there must be Causes
of this deplorable Condition; whatever they were, He created them for their
terrible Effects, He gave them their Efficacy, supported and overruled them;
He acted in and ordered them, either by Influence or Permission, for this awful
Purpose. And though they are to us innumerable, yet may be ranked under the
following Heads; wherein I shall chiefly consider the Causes of his spiritual
Troubles and distressing Terrors. --

1. Some of them may be called moral Causes; and were such as these --

This pious Person had not only a rational Soul, and was an intellectual and
moral Agent, and by the Remains of the Light of Nature, might discover
something of GOD and his Perfections, Will, Providence and future Judgment; but
he was also born, bro't up, and lived in the Light of Revelation. He was
informed of all contained in the holy Scriptures from the Creation of the Earth
to the Reign of David, which was near Three Thousand Years. He had sufficient
and convictive Evidence of this Revelation, and both understood and believed it.

He viewed God as the Creator, Upholder, absolute Proprietor and Lord of Heaven
and Earth, and every Thing therein: He viewed Him in his absolute and perpetual
Omnipresence, Omniscience, Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Goodness, Truth, Power
and Providence: He viewed Him in his wise, righteous, good and holy Laws and
Declarations; in his sacred Covenants, Promises and Threatenings; in his perfect
and perpetual Observation of us now, in his future Judgment, and eternal
Rewards and Punishments: He viewed Him in all his terrible Dealings -- Dooming
all Nations in all Ages to innumerable and dreadful Miseries and Death for the
first Transgression, with the awful and continual Executions of this dreadful
Sentence on them both Elder and Younger in all Ages ever since: He viewed Him
in his drowning innumerable Millions of Men, Women and Children in the
universal Deluge; destroying Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, with all
their Children by tempestuous Showers of Fire and Brimstone; and Multitudes of
others by Wars, Famines, Plagues, Inundations, Earthquakes, etc.

In short, He viewed the Extensiveness, the Spirituality and the Strictness of
the Law of God: He knew that dreadful Sentence in Deuteronomy. xxvii. 26, which he
doubtless understood as the Apostle since explained it in Gal. iii: 10; Cursed
is every one that continues not in all Things which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them: He viewed and compared himself with this perfect Law: and
from all these Views was led to see the Glory of God and his own exceeding
Vileness, Guiltiness and awful Danger; -- to see the Agency, the glorious
Holiness and Dreadfulness of God in all the Expressions of his Indignation, in
all his Threatenings and in all his Judgments; and thence to be greatly
troubled. So Heman's pious Companion Asaph said, Psalm. lxxvii. 3; I remembered
GOD, and was troubled, I complained, and my Spirit was overwhelmed.

And these seem to be the chief moral Causes of those Terrors he endured of a
spiritual Nature.

2. Some of the Causes of his Distress might in the Hands of God be even
material. And they might be such as these --

Besides the various and disordered Elements without him, the various hurtful
Substances received in him, and their various troublesome Impressions on him;
some unhappy Constitution of the nervous System or other Parts of his frail
Body, either in its primary Formation, or by some after Incident, under the
divine Direction, might occasion a great Variety of Disorders, first of the
Body and then thereby of the Mind.

The mutual Influence between these two very different Parts of the human
Composition, is too mysterious for our present Understanding: But that they
have such a mutual Influence on each other, we most certainly know by universal
and perpetual Experience. Disturbed Ideas in the Mind surprizingly disturb the
Body; and Disorders in the Body as strangely affect and disturb the Mind: though
the immediate Cause of this I can resolve into nothing else but the continual
Agency of God within us, according to particular Rules his consummate Wisdom
has prescribed.

But the System of the Nerves, all deriving from the Brain, seem to be the
immediate Seat of the Soul, and its immediate Instruments both of Motion and
Sensation in us. And the Configuration, Habit, or Tenor of the nervous Strings
or Vessels might put all the Fluids into great Disorders; render some too slow,
and others too precipitate in their Motions; and those nervous Strings or
Vessels, whose Office it is to quicken the Former, might in their Constitution
or Habit be too weak to quicken them; and those nervous Strings or Vessels
whose Office it is to restrain the Latter, might in their Constitution or Habit
be too weak to restrain them: the Consequence of which would be great
Disorders, first of the Body, and then thereby of the Mind; which all the Skill
of Man might be utterly unable to remove or moderate, or even his Penetration
to understand.

There are also innumerable outward Things, which in the Hand of God, have a
natural Tendency to strike and trouble, to worry and perplex the Mind; and
thereby produce great Disorders in the Body; which reverberate on the Mind
again with greater Force and Violence. The very Powers of Reasoning, judging or
thinking regularly, may be much impaired and interrupted, the Imagination wild
and in great Confusion: and none but GOD, or at least his mighty Angels by his
Order, may be able to reduce or govern them.

3. Some of the Causes of his Distress, in the Hand of God and by his holy
Permission, might be even Diabolical.

The inspired Scriptures plainly represent Multitudes of fallen Angels, Enemies
to the Glory of God, and to the Good of Men, as going about continually seeking
and endeavoring, by all Sorts of Temptations, alluring, flattering,
misrepresenting, frightning, to mislead, worry, vex and utterly destroy us.
They are full of perpetual Malice, exceeding knowing, subtle, powerful, active,
unwearied, and never resting. When they are by God permitted, they have
Multitudes of subtle Suggestions, to lead us into wrong, hurtful and desturbing
Views both of God, our Selves and Others; to raise our Passions and
Perplexities, prevent our regular Ways of thinking, hinder us from exercising
present Graces, and from attending present Duties; and so lead us into Error,
Folly, Sin, and so to dreadful Darkness and Confusion, yea Distraction.

And these wicked Spirits are so numerous, that (...) Time of Christ on Earth,
when there were such a Multitude of Nations, they could spare a Legion, which
was then among the Romans at least Twelve Hundred, to worry one poor Man, Mark
^. and Luke viii.

But then all these subtle and mighty Agents are perpetually in the Hands of
GOD, yea in the Hands of the SON of GOD. He sustains their very Substances and
Powers in Being: and in the very Nature of Things, they must therefore be ever
absolutely subject to his Control and Government: He has them ever therefore
in his mighty Chain, and lets them go no further than he pleases. And yet it is
terrible to see and think how far the sovereign God permits them to tempt,
mislead and worry, even his dearest Children.

They tempted and deceived Eve in her State of Innocence, and dreadfully
succeeded. They grieviously afflicted the upright Job. They tempted and
prevailed on David. They were lying Spirits in the Prophets of Israel. They
stood at the Right Hand of Joshua, the high Priest, to resist him. They
earnestly desired to sift, or toss and shake by Temptations, the Apostle Peter,
as Wheat is tossed and shaken in a Sieve. Whitby*
They like Thorns in the Flesh most pungently buffeted the Apostle Paul. They
encountered the Saints at Ephesus with their Wiles and fiery Darts. Yea for
forty Days and Nights together, they were permitted in a dreadful Manner to
tempt and worry the Man CHRIST JESUS in a solitary Wilderness, on the Top of a
Pinnacle of the Temple, and of an exceeding high Mountain, without any humane
Help or Company.

And it is highly probable, that in the mysterious Depths of Wisdom, they were
permitted to worry Heman, even from his Youthful Days to his advanced Age. They
might worry him both by horrible Temptations and Suggestions, and then by
setting the Terrors of God before his Mind, even to Distraction. They might
pervert every Scripture which otherwise would minister Encouragement and
Comfort; represent Sin as Duty, and Duty as Sin; and give such horrible and
shocking Ideas of God and of himself; and then such terrible Ideas of the
Holiness and Majesty of God again, as he could not tell how to bear, and yet
hold him under them, till they in a great Degree distracted him.

4. and lastly. Even GOD himself might by his immediate as well as mediate
Influence, be the Cause of his extraordinary Distress and Terrors.

For GOD himself is represented as striking, smiling and afflicting both the
Body and Soul of the Man CHRIST JESUS, yea putting him to Grief and bruising
him to Death when he stood in the Room of Sinners, Isai. liii. And all the
Saints in Scripture rightly ascribe their Afflictions, either in an immediate
or mediate Manner, to Him.

So Job seems to ascribe his chief Affliction to his immediate Influence, Chap.
vii. Thou set a Watch over me? -- Thou scarest me with Dreams, and
terrifiest me with Visions; so that my Soul chooses Strangling and Death rather
than Life. -- How long will thou not depart from me, nor let me alone [even for
so short a Time] till I swallow down my Spittle. -- Why have thou set me as a
Mark against Thee? so that I am a Burden to myself? Chap. ix. He breaks me
with a Tempest, and multiplieth my Wounds without Cause: He will not suffer me
to take my Breath, but fills me with Bitterness. And Chap. x. I am full of
Confusion -- My Affliction increases: Thou huntest me as a fierce Lion; and
again, Thou show thy self mavelous upon me: Thou renewest thy Witnesses
against me, and increasest thine Indignation upon me.

So Moses -- Psalm. xc. 7, 8; We are consumed by thine Anger, and by thy Wrath
are we troubled: Thou have set our Iniquities before Thee, our secret Sins in
the Light of thy Countenance. So David -- Psalm. xxxviii. 2; Thine Arrows stick
fast in me, and thy Hand presses me sore. So Asaph, again -- Psalm. lxxvii. 4;
Thou hold mine Eyes waking: I am so troubled, that I cannot speak. So Heman
again -- ver. 7, before our Text; Thy Wrath lies hard upon me, and Thou have
afflicted me with all thy Waves. And so Jeremiah -- Lam. iii. 1, -- 18. I am
the Man that has seen Affliction by the Rod of thy Wrath: He has led me and
brought me into Darkness etc.

But our

IV. and last General Head, is briefly to suggest some of the Reasons of this
divine and mysterious Dispensation.

The pious Asaph, who stood at Heman's Right Hand, as Ethan at his Left, when
singing before the Ark, and in the Tabernacle, was not only well acquainted
with the afflicted Case of his Companion Heman; but was also much in the same
Condition, and for a while much perplexed with this mysterious Dispensation:
'till at length he went into the Sanctuary; and There he saw some of the
Reasons to his entire Satisfaction; as he plainly tells us in the seventy third
PSALM.

And I shall here briefly hint not only Those, but by the Light of Revelation
some others also.

The First might be to give to him, and by him to others, more reverential
Apprehensions of the Being and Nature of GOD; of his glorious Perfections,
Providence and Word; of his Authority and Laws; of his Promises and
Threatenings, of his faithful Fulfillment of them; and of his adorable
Sovereignty and Majesty; to make them more afraid of Hypocrisy, Formality and
trifling with him; and to excite and keep alive their more solemn and constant
Awe of his continual Presence and the future Judgment.

Another Reason may be to show the exceeding evil Nature and mischievous
Influence and Consequence of Sin, the fruitful Scource of all Darkness, Horror,
Affliction and Distress, with the terrible Resentment of GOD against it: that
he is infinitely displeased with it, even in his dearest People; yea, when it
lay on the Body and Soul of the Man CHRIST JESUS by Imputation, or by
Substitution only.

Another Reason may be to show, that though he pardons and dearly loves, yet in
the present State, he grievously chastises; that all deserve the like
Affliction, are alike exposed to it, and are entirely obliged to the sovereign
Will of God, that they are not constantly enduring the same Distresses; and so
excite their greater Thankfulness to their divine Preserver.

Another Reason might be, to excite in Heman and others, a greater Hatred of
Sin, Alienation from it, Enmity to it; Solicitude for Purification, Pardon, the
Favor of God in Christ, with the holy, senbsile and happy Manifestation and
Influence thereof.

Another Reason might be to make the Body of Sin more burdensome to Heman and
other Saints; and excite their earnest Groanings, Longings, Prayers and
Endeavors after progressive and complete Deliverance.

Another Reason may be, to damp and weaken their carnal Appetites, and the
alluring Influence of the World about them; which otherwise might have a vastly
more powerful, dangerous, prevailing and unhappy Efficacy on them.

Another Reason may be, to lead them into clearer, stronger and higher Views,
both of the Amiableness and Happiness of Holiness, of complete Conformity to
God, of his special Favor in Christ, and of the certain Manifestation of it.

Another Reason may be to make them more experimentally sensible of their own
Weakness and Inability, both to keep off, to bear, or carry aright under and
improve Affliction, resist Temptation, and rule their Hearts and Thoughts; to
convince them of their absolute Dependence on the Grace and Power of God in
Christ; and lead them out to look and seek to Him, and trust in Him for
Protection, Light, Conduct, Comfort, Strength, Victory and Safety.

Another Reason may be to break and mortify their Pride; to give them a deeper
Sense of their own Baseness, Unworthiness, and Guiltiness; to make and keep
them more low and humble; to give them more enlarged Views of their Necessity
of the infinitely free Grace of God, and absolutely perfect Righteousness of
Christ as their Mediator and Representative; and lead their Souls to a higher
Value for them, a more hearty Acceptance of them, a more earnest laying hold on
them, and a more entire trusting in them.

Another Reason may be to make Others more afraid of Sin; to excite the
Impenitent to speedy and true Repentance; to excite the Penitent to a greater
Caution as well as clearer Evidence of their own Sincerity.

Or where impenitent Sinners, being often reproved and warned, continue set on
the Gratification of their sensual and worldly Appetites; one awful Reason may
be, in the righteous Resentment and Judgment of God, to let them see such awful
Instances as these, that they may stumble and fall, renounce all Thoughts of
being seriously religious; the Devil telling them, and they believing him, that
to be seriously religious is the Was to Trouble and Distraction -- and so
indulge themselves in their pleasing Dreams, and give a greater Swing to their
licencious Appetites, to the greater Glory of the Justice, Holiness and Power
of God, in their aggravated Punishment.

But to be sure, the Final Reasons are -- that Earth may lower and lessen, and
Heaven rise and greaten in the believing Eyes of these afflicted Souls; -- that
they may have higher Views of the Blessedness and Glory of the World above; --
that their Affections may more frequently and strongly rise up toward them; --
that they may be much more quickened in their Labors to secure them and
prepare for them; -- that their Surprise and Joy may be so much the greater
upon their sudden Entrance; and that their own exulting Admirations and
Praises, with the joyful Praises of all the Saints and Angels There, to God the
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, may be so much the higher and more transporting:
yea by their justifying the holy God in their Darkness and Distress, and the
exercise of other Graces, though in the present State they see nothing of it,
they may yield so much the greater Glory to Him; and their most grievous Trials
may work out after all a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory to
themselves hereafter, as well as a greater Glory to his own Perfections,

And whatever other Reasons there may be of this mysterious Dispensation, they
and others shall clearly see in the Light of Heaven; where the SON of GOD who
opens the Books of the divine Contrivances, will show successively to all the
happy Multitudes about Him, the consummate Wisdom of all his Works, to their
perfect Satisfaction, and their highest Wonder and Joy for ever.

And thus have we taken a transient View of the distressed Case of Heman, and
of many other pious Persons in the like Condition.

We now come to some IMPROVEMENT.

And,

1. Here we see in Heman a remarkable Instance of the adorable Sovereignty of
GOD in his mysterious Dispensations toward a Person of Piety, yea of eminent
Piety.

By Sovereignty I do not mean such a Sovereignty as is against the Glory either
of his Wisdom, Justice, Honess, Truth, Goodness, or any of the Divine
Perfections in the winding up of all his Dispensations: For this is utterly
inconsistent and impossible: but such a Sovereignty as does not make our
proportionable Deservings the Rule of his Dispensations toward us in the
present State; (which was the grand Mistake of JOB'S Three Friends) but may
order more grievous Trials for holy Persons than for Others; yea for Persons of
higher Degrees of Holiness than lower; though not more grievous than they all
deserve: for in the midst of all, the whole World must own, He in the present
State afflicts them inconceivably less than their Sins deserve.

2. Here we see that Piety is no Security from a constant Series of Affliction
in the present State, nor from the terrible Apprehensions of GOD, even to
Distraction: and they may in the Depths of the divine Wisdom be made
subservient both to his greater Glory, and their greater Benefit hereafter.

3. Then we may by no Means suppose that such as have been thus afflicted and
distressed, were not truly pious, or less pious than others, or were guilty of
greater Sins than others, or deserved thus to be treated more than others.

4. Then there is no just Reason for any to be stumbled or discouraged from
being seriously Religious, on the Account of such mysterious Dispensations in
the present State toward some particular Persons who are accounted Pious. For
we must always take both the present and the future State into our extensive
Prospect: And the absolutely good, wise and faithful God has their eternal
Interest in his universal View; and in his most grievous Dispensations to them
here, (as when he calls his Martyrs to the glowing Fire) he orders all in
Faithfulness and Kindness for their greater Glory and Blessedness for ever. In
Heaven He Will give an over-full Reward for all: and, as his most beloved SON, so
with Him, they shall also see of the Travail of their Souls, to their eternal
Joy and Satisfaction.

5. Let those who are concerned for Others in the like Distress with Heman,
yet, for their Consolation, observe the like Sparklings out of Grace;
especially their high Value for the Favor of God in Christ, and Conformity to
Him, their earnest Wishes for the Light of his Countenance, their preferring it
above all the World, their being burdened with the Body and Power of Sin
within them, their groaning for Deliverance, their crying out of their
monstrous Vileness, their condemning Sense of their own utter Unworthiness and
Guiltiness, their being greatly shocked with the horrible Suggestions and
Temptations rising in them, imagining that none were ever in their deplorable
Case etc. -- which are the Sparklings out of Grace in the midst of all their
Darkness and Distresses.

6. Let those who are in the like Condition, endeavor to consider themselves
as in the Case of Heman, and do as He toward their Deliverance. Under all
their long Afflictions, Prayers, Denials, Temptations, and the Terrors of God
distracting them: Let them behold him still as the God of their Salvation, and
persevere in looking to him, crying before him, and waiting on him, till he
comes and saves them -- till he rescues them from this Body and World of
Darkness, Sin and Trouble; and ushers their departing Spirits into a State and
World of surprising Light and Glory, and of perfect Holiness and Blessedness.

7. and lastly, Let us all endeavor to make a due Improvement of all the like
Instances among us; and in particular of that worthy Person of our Communion,
whose Remains, with Mixtures both of Grief and Consolation, we the last Week
attended to the Grave.

You know, He was born of godly Parents. Born at Boston, in Nov. 1695.
His Father one of the most amiable Men, for Sweetness, Innocence and Pleasancy
of Temper and Conversation; Sincerity, and Openess of Heart; Beneficence, a
Public Spirit, Activity and Delight in doing Good, as I ever saw. His pious
Mother being elder Daughter to the Reverend and excellent Mr. Danforth of
Roxbury, by a Daughter of the Reverend and famous Mr. (...), the first Minister
of Boston. So that by the Mother he descended from two Families eminent for
Piety in our New-English Israel.

By the lively Instructions and Examples of his Father, Mother, and Mother's
extraordinary pious Mother, who all happily lived together, He from his
Childhood received strong Impressions of Religion; and by our elderly People,
has been observed to have feared the Lord, like Obadiah, from his Youth.

When Young, he was uncommonly tho'tful and concerned about the Affairs of his
Soul and Eternity: His Concern has been deep and constant, and often so great,
that he was ready to sink into Discouragement; and through the afflicting Sense
of the Corruption of his Nature, could enjoy but little Comfort.

He was greatly afraid of being deceived about the State of his immortal Soul;
as he justly apprehended that agreeable to our kind Savior's Warning, the Gate
is strait, and the Way narrow that leads to eternal Life, that there are very
few who find and enter them, that the most of those who live in the Light of
the Gospel, are going on in an easy Way, and deceive themselves to their
eternal Ruin. And he has chiefly followed the Lord in the Dark, but persevered
to follow Him.

His Conscience seemed exceeding tender: and from its great Tenderness, and
Fear of offending God, was inclined to be more than ordinary scrupulous. Though a
Disposition to be afraid of judging and doing Wrong and so to hesitate about
Matters of apprehended Moment in his natural Temper, might much promote this
Scrupulosity: and when he justly came to apprehend that all Matters of Sin and
Duty were Matters of Moment, his scrupulous Temper would naturally operate in
his gracious Fear of sinning, And this scrupulous Fear of his a long while
hindered him from coming to the Lords Table; till at length he came to be so
irresistibly impressed with a Sense of his indispensable Duty, that he
determined to come, and there cast himself at the Feet of Christ, striving to
yield Obedience to him, though there he should perish. He though it it was better
perishing in a Way of striving to obey him, than in neglecting it; and that in
a way of striving he was more likely to be accepted, helped and saved.

He dearly loved the ancient People, Principles and Ways of New England: though
he was grieved to find some of our Forefathers so severe on the Quakers in
ancient Times, especially in two of the five New England Governments. Excepting
these grievous Severities, through mistaken Zeal in that Particular; he admired
the Fathers of this Country as some of the most Pious and excellent Set of Men
that were ever formed into a Body Politic: and he greatly lamented the
Degeneracy of their Successors, in the Power and Practice Godliness.

He early joined to a Society of Youths in a Private Meeting to promote vital
Piety among them. The Eyes of good People were turned to him; and as he grew in
Years, he increased in their Esteem, and answered their Expectations.

In his Commercial Dealings, he was fair and upright: In his Conversation,
free, pleasant, open, innocent and friendly; forward to confess his own Faults;
and when in a free Manner he mentioned the Misconduct of others, it was clearly
without Ill Will or Gaul, but with Fullness of Candor to their Persons and
Intentions.

As he was of a Public Spirit, and loved the Town, they greatly affected Him
-- Chose him one of their Select-Men to take Care of their Interests, in 1731,
and so for four Years running -- then in 1735, an Overseer of their Poor, for
four Years more -- and then in 1739, their Representative in the General Court
of the Province for four Years more -- and would fain have continued to choose
him in that important Trust: But he found the weighty Care of his Country in so
Public a Place too heavy for his tender Heart and Constitution, entreated them
not to choose him again, and could not be persuaded to bear it longer; though in
the happy Company of his most agreeable Brother-in-Law the late Hon. Thomas
Cushing, Esquire a Fellow-Member with him, for whom He as well as many others had a
very high Esteem and very dear Affection; and though in the fairest Way of the
highest Honors his Country could raise him to. But prefering the quieter
Office of taking Care of the Poor, the Town continued him therein from his
first Election, for twenty one Years successively, to the Day of his Death. And
in every Office approval himself with Uprightness and Faithfulness.

He greatly loved the most zealous, searching and awakning Ministers: and they
were always heartily welcome to his House and Table.

He steadily kept up Religion and good Order in his Family, both on the sacred
Sabbaths and other Days: In perfect Harmony with his virtuous Consort, trained
up his Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Among the Rest --
That most hopeful Youth his eldest Son of his own Name, whom he had bro't up to
Learning for Public Service, and proved one of the most ingenious and pious
Youths this Country ever bred: but on Aug. 18. 1746, was, to the exceeding
Grief of his Parents, and the great Loss and Sorrow of Others, snatched from us
by a violent Fever, in the 23d Year of his Age. Whose Death fell so much the
heavier on his distressed Father by Reason of his tender Constitution, and the
grievous Loss of his dear Brother Cushing on April 11, preceding: And both
these Losses made his Wounds of Grief so deep, that he never seemed to recover
wholly from them.

But all who intimately knew him, could not but apprehend he maintained a close
Walk with God continually. And yet he saw so much Deficiency and Corruption in
himself, and was so dreadfully worried with horrible Suggestions and
Temptations; that though he feared the Lord, yet he almost always walked in
Darkness and could see no Light -- was like Heman much afflicted with
Soul-Perplexities, even from his Youth; and as he advanced in Age they seemed,
especially of late, to grow, till the Terrors of GOD at Times in some Degree
distracted him.

O how often have I heard him cry out in a most dolorous Manner, through horrible
Suggestions and Temptations concerning The Holy God, as with Solemnity he would
always call him. As David he might say to GOD, and it is likely many Times has
said as in Psalm. xxxii. 3, 4. My Bones wax old through my Roaring all the Day
long: For Day and Night thy Hand is heavy upon me: My Moisture is turned into
the Drought of Summer. Or as in Psalm. xxxviii. 8. I am feeble and sore broken:
I have reared by Reason of the Disquietness of my Heart.

Yet in all his distracting Darkness he ever justified the HOLY GOD: He
continually expressed his reverential Apprehensions of him: and even while his
intellectual Powers were so greatly clouded and disordered, we could hear no
Murmurings against him, but earnest Cryings to him through Christ for Mercy,
while he condemned himself as utterly unworthy of it. His Complaints were only
of the horrible Suggestions of Satan against the blessed GOD, and the vile
Corruptions of his own Heart, with distressing Fears of yielding to those
Suggestions, and of sinning even in the smallest Matters.

A few Days before he died, he seemed in a great Measure to be relieved of
them, and to grow more composed and quiet. But as Death approached, his
Intellectuals failed, and hindered us from knowing his final Sentiments. Yet we
cannot but be fully persuaded, that his departing Spirit, with Amazement on a
sudden opened into glorious Light and Holiness, and Liberty, and Joy and
Blessedness.

O let the bereaved Widow repair to her REDEEMER, as her All-sufficient and
ever-living Husband. Let the Children ever remember his Prayers, his Graces,
his Instructions, and Advices; and choose his God for theirs, for the Guide of
their Youth and their everlasting Father, as he earnestly exhorted them, and
always serve him, and never forsake him. May they rise up in the Room of their
Earthly Father, and strive to make good his Ground, make their Mother's Heart
rejoice, and stand by the People and Cause of Christ in their Day. And now this
earthen Cistern of Creature Comforts is broken to Pieces; let the surviving
Sister live more than ever on the ever-full and overflowing Fountain of living
Waters.

And to Conclude --

Let us all constantly remember we are hastily passing after Him: We shall soon
get into Eternity; and all these earthly Shows will be quickly over, and vanish
from our Sight for ever: While we view them they are changing, and we are
hastily changing with them. Yes in a little while many among you will see your
decaying Ministers, your worthy Deacons, your honorable Magistrates, and other
aged Persons, both Men and Women, gone from the Places where you view them: Yea
many of the middle aged and younger will be vanished also; and the Appearance
of this Assembly, will soon be greatly changed.

O! that we may live in the constant Views of That vast ETERNITY, we are
designed for and hastening to! and then the Gayeties of Life will be Trifles,
like the Toys of Children, in our Eyes; and Time will be chiefly valued as a
most precious Opportunity for making sure of a happy ETERNITY. O that This may
be our chiefest Care! Let us never rest till our Judgments, our Taste, our
Natures are renewed; till we clearly see the World is not our Happiness; and
that the glorious GOD as he appears in CHRIST, is the only suitable and
satisfying Portion for us; till we have heartily embraced the SAVIOR in all
his Offices and for all his Benefits: And let us labor constantly to live upon
Him, and live unto Him -- deny ourselves, take up our Cross and follow Him --
yea seek him, though in the Dark, and never give over, till we on a sudden find
our selves wondrously changed into his exalted Likeness, and transported to his
Presence in the World above; where, in the blessed Company of all our departed,
dear, believing Friends, now waiting for us, there are glorious Purity, Light
and Visions, and Fullness of Joys for ever. AMEN.

From the Boston-Gazette, Of April 19. 1756.
By another Hand.
Boston, April 15th 1756.
AFter several Weeks Languishment died on the 10th, and this Day was decently
interred, Mr. EDWARD BROMFIELD, an eminent Merchant in this Place. -- His
Ancestors, were among the distinguished Worthies of NEW ENGLAND, whose Names
will appear in Characters of Honor, in the Annals of our Church and State. --
The Grace of God took early Possession of his Heart, and under its happy
Influence, he devoted those Years to the Service of Heaven, which are too
generally spent in the Vanities of Life. -- The Town of BOSTON, his native
Place, observed his Accomplishments, and called him to fill some of their most
important Places of Trust: All which he discharged, with great Honor to
himself, and Advantage to the Public. -- In the House of Representatives, he
appeared the firm, uncorrupted Patriot; careful to assert the just Prerogative
of the Crown, and to defend the invaluable Liberties of the People. He has been
constantly chosen, for many Years, one of the Select-Men of the Town, and an
Oververseer of the Poor: which honorable Offices he executed with great
Fidelity -- to universal Approbation. Attentive to the Complaints of the
indigent, -- diligent to maintain the good Order and public Virtue of the
Inhabitants. -- Firmly attached to the RELIGION OF JESUS, he received its
sublimest Mysteries, with the humblest Reverence -- obeyed its Precepts with
uniform Exactness -- cherished its Ministers with affectionate tenderness --
and sought its Advancement with unremitting Assiduity. -- Though zealous for the
Doctrine and Constitution of the Churches of NEW ENGLAND; yet with a truly
catholic Charity he embraced good Men of every Denomination; Though strict to
the highest Degree in his own Conduct; he made the most charitable Allowance
for the Infirmities of others -- In his Domestic Relations, he was a shining
Example of every Christian Virtue. An affectionate Husband -- a tender Father
-- an indulgent Master. His House was a little CHURCH, where every Thing that
had the Appearance of Vice was resolutely banished; the Exercises of Devotion
were regularly performed; the Religion of the Sabbath strictly observed: He
took a conscientious Care to promote the temporal, as well as spiritual
Welfare, of all committed to his Charge. -- His Constitution was naturally
tender; the Infirmities of his Body, sometimes clouded the Serenity of his
Mind, and indisposed him for those spiritual Joys, which many Christians of
lower Seize happily experience. But under his growing Disorders, he
always maintained a devout and reverential Subjection to the Father of Spirits
-- an entire Dependence on the Merits of our divine Redeemer -- and was above
all Things sollicitous, that he might glorify God in LIFE and DEATH. -- His
Removal is a great Loss to his Friends -- his Family -- and the Public. But to
him, we have the highest Reason to believe -- The Day of his Death was better
than the Day of his Birth.

CORRECTIONS.
Page. Paragraph. Line. For Read 7 2 3-4 casts Casting 23 4 4 senbsile
sensible 26 2 2-3 Honess Holiness


