A Short ACCOUNT Of the LIFE, of John ************ Alias Owen Syllavan,

Alias John Living ston, alias John Brown, by which Names he stood indicted by
the Grand Jury, and was found Guilty by the Supreme Sessions for the City and
County of NEW YORK, for Counterfeiting and passing the current Bills of that
Colony emitted in the Year 1737: And was Executed on Monday the 10th Day of May
1756. Showing what Manner of Life he led from his Infancy. Taken from his own
Mouth.

To which is added, HIS Dying Speech At the Place of Execution.

NEW YORK: Printed.

BOSTON: Reprinted and Sold by Green and Russell. at their Printing-Office
near the Custom-House, and next to the Writing School in Queen Street. 1756.



THE LIFE of John, -- Alias Owen Syllavan, etc.
IWAS bred and born in the County of Waxford in Ireland, of English Parents
near the Town of Fedard, and from my youth I was always in all kind of
Mischief; so that I never minded Father nor Mother, Sister nor Brother; but
went on in all Manner of Vice, till I came to the Age of eleven Years, or
there-abouts; I was confined by my Parents in a Room, and fed upon Bread and
Water for a considerable Time, and then I seemed to humble myself; till I again
obtained my Liberty, and after that I was ten Times, worse than I was before;
so that my Parents was obliged to send me to another Place, some Distance from
home to a Schoolmaster, who my Parents gave strict charge to keep me from
Vice, and keep to my Learning.

And the first Night that I lodged there, I was called by an evil Spirit by my
Christian Name; John, John, John, John, and that for several Minutes together,
to the Surpise of myself, and all the Family: and so continued for three or
four Nights together, before there was any Notice taken of it; but the fourth
Night my Master set up, and Read by me till Eleven o'Clock; and then the Spirit
began to call again, John, John, John, and that every Minute, for sixty Times
together by my Master's Watch; and that lasted so for three Months together.
The Ministers from sundry Parishes came to set with me; as also sundry Persons,
who always prayed by me, and giving me all good Advice in their Power, begging
and praying of me, to Repent. Then I began to fear GOD; and finding so many
Hundreds of People that came to see me from far and near, who took pity upon
me. At last some of them concluded to take me to one of their Houses, which
they did; as soon as it was eleven o'Clock, the Spirit began to call again, why
John! why John! why John! it called so loud that the Windows shook, and every
one in the House trembled for Fear, except myself. I was taken Sick about five
or six Days, before the Spirit had done calling, and during my Sickness it
called louder then before; and as I laid in Bed, there was something that
seemed to press me between my Shoulders with a Hand, but saw nothing.

So this continued till I was Removed to my Parents, who then took Campassion
upon me; and to the best of my Knowledge I lay Sick, for about the same Time as
the Spirit had called to me before, but not troubled with any more of that evil
Spirit. So it pleased GOD to restore me to my former Health, and I went to
School again; but fell from Good to Evil, by provoking my Parents and giving
ill Advice to others, such as my Playmates, etc. And when my Parents chastised
me for my Faults, I looked upon it as Tyranny, and told them several Times to
exercise their Tyranny upon me. And when I was about thirteen Years of Age I
deserted from my Parents, and stroll'd away to a Place called Bellaback, near
the Passage of Waterford, so coming down to the Water Side, there was a small
Boat ready to push off, and I desired of them to take me aboard, which they
refused and told me they was not going over the Ferry; but told me they was
going to Waterford, I asked of them to give me a Passage there, for I wanted to
see my Aunt; so they asked my Name, and I told my Name was Owen Syllevan which
was a Lie, for it was there I changed my Name, and so they gave me my Passage
to Waterford, and I strol'd from Place to Place, till I came to the County of
Limerick. There was a Gentleman Riding along, asked me whose Son I was, I made
answer I was born in Dublin and of poor Parentage, and that they were Dead, and
I told him I was going to Cork, expecting to find some Relations, and told him
my Name was Owen Syllavan.

The Gentleman told me if I would go and live with him, he would be my Friend
and Relation too, with that I consented and went with him to his Country-Seat,
his Lady looking out of the Window, he with a smiling Countenance said, I have
brought you a pretty Boy to wait upon you, the Lady seemed to like me very
well, and I gave them an Indsnture to serve for seven Years, and so become my
Lady's running Foot-Page. And was trained up to running, and served them almost
six Years, which pleased me better than Schooling; and in the sixth Year of my
Servitude, I seemed to be home sick; and set a Resolution if I should be sent
of an Errand that way, I would make the best of my Way Home, which was about
one 100 Miles: And soon after my Master wanted me to carry a Letter to a
Gentleman, about twenty Miles distance. I embraced that Opportunity, delivered
my Letter, but did not wait for any Answer; but went direct for Waterford,
where I arrived the same Day, about four o'Clock in the Afternoon, which was
seventy Miles. When I came to Waterford, I drank a Tumbler full of Wine, and
being very Hot, I was taken with a Pluratick Pain, and lay Sick there for some
Time; although I was then about thirty Miles from my Father's House, I would
not let myself be known; but told the People, that my Errand was as far as
Waxford Town. After I got well I went down to the Wharf, where I saw several
Passengers going on Board of a Vessel bound for Boston, in New England; so I
goes up to the Captain, and agrees with him for my Passage; and Bound my self
for four Years, and in a few Days set Sail for Boston; where we arrived in
about nine Weeks: but having many Souls on Board, we was very scant of
Provision. I agreed with the Captain to serve him three Years more, for as many
Biscuit as I could Eat, during the ru(...) of three Glasses, which caused the
Captain to (...) into a Laughter, and so consented to it: but (...) have no
Water during the Time. After our (...) at Boston, I told the Captain I had as
(...) for seven Years, as for a Day; since I must be Sold, and to get for me as
much as he could. And he Sold me to one Captain Gillmore, living about
twentyfour Hours Sail to the Eastward of Boston, to a Place called St.
George's- River. I served that Gentleman two Years and an half, in chopping of
Wood and clearing of Land; and hearing of a French War, my Master and all the
Family Removed to Boston, except my self; my Master Sold the Remainder of my
Time to Captain Bradbery, who I served two Years, as a Soldier, and proved
faithful to my King and Country.

And after that, contrary to my Master's Will, I listed under Captain Waldo, in
General Shirley's Regiment of Foot, for Cape-Breton, and after that* I was
Drafted into Captain Gordon's Company of Grenadiers, and took great Delight in
the Discipline, which pleased my Officers exceedingly, and they was pleased to
put me chief Armourer of the Regiment; and some Time after, they thought proper
that I should Number and Engrave the Arms of the Regiment belonging to Governor
Shirley, as also Sir William Pepperrell's Regiment's Arms, and so continued as
Armourer for two Years; then I unhappily Married a Wife, which proved a Torment
to me, and made my Life uncomfortable; and she was given to take a Cup too
much, and I for my Part took to the same; and through her aggravating Tongue,
neglecting my Business, I was turned out, and was obliged to do private duty
again as a common Soldier. And after I was off Duty, I took and set myself up
as a Silversmith, and followed Engraving and Seal-Cutting; and as I was
Moulding, I cast a Spanish Dollar amongst the rest of my Work and laid it down
on the Work-Bench, so that I did not care who saw it; and by an ill-minded Man
who made it his Business to inform against me, I was taken up for the same and
Tried by a General Court-Marshal; I pleaded Guilty, and by the Dollar's being
good Silver was acquitted, and some Time after, I quarreled with a brother
Soldier, and he complained to his Officer about it, and for that Crime I
received Fifty Stripes; and in a short Time after the Regiment was broke, I
came to Boston, and sat up to Engraving; and in that Time there came two Men
who persuaded me to Engrave them a Plate for New Hampshire Money, which I did,
and they Rewarded me well for it. I thought it was an easy Way of getting
Money, so I Counterfeited the Boston Bills of Credit; but never made none above
Forty Shillings. Soon after, my Wife and I having diftered together, she cried
out Hey, you Forty Thousand Money-Maker, which was heard by some of the
Neighbors, who made a complaint against me; for which I was Apprehended, and
stood Trial, and was acquitted, by Reason they had no Law for that Money: The
Attorney General desired that I should be continued in Custody till next Court,
or give Bail for my Appearance; the next Sessions they found a Bill against me
for Forgery, and was found Guilty, for which I stood two Hours in the Pillory
and received Twenty Lashes at the public Whipping-Post; during my Confinement,
I engraved three sorts of Plates, two of New Hampshire Money, and one for
Boston Currency, and for want of a Rolling Press, struck it off by Hand, signed
it in Goal and gave it out by Quantities to my Accomplices, and some Time
afterward, being in low Circumstances, two Gentlemen came and paid my Bill of
Costs, and took me out of Goal; soon after I came out of Confinement, the
New Hampshire Money was found out to be false, (that is the first Money that I
Engraved for the Gentlemen,) one of them turned King's Evidence and swore
against me for engraving the Plate, and against his Confederate; but both got
clear by Swearing it upon me; for my Part I made my Escape and got into
Rhode Island Government, where I met with a Man who I had known in Cape-Breton,
where I laid concealed for some Time; he and sundry more came to me, and
desired of me, and entreated of me to cut them a Plate, which I did and struck
off Twelve Thousand Pounds, and divided the Money amongst them, as I thought
proper; and in one Day I changed and past about Sixteen Hundred Pounds, and got
good Money for it; and coming through the Town of Providence one of my
Accomplices Wives was taken up for Counterfeiting Money. I told her before she
should Swear, that she might say she had the Money from me; and she would never
have been taken up, if she had not taken a Bill clandestinely and Signed it
herself.

My Partner Nicholas Stephens and I, rid about three Miles out of Town, and
divided the good Money we had by us, and then parted; he Rid in Town and there
gave himself up as an Evidence, in behalf of King and Country, and they
confined him to Goal; and he brought in seven or eight more, who all pleaded
not Guilty and swore they had the Money of me, and received it for good Money
in Trading; and in about a Week after, I was taken and confined to Goal: I was
brought to Examination and pleaded Guilty, and said that those People that was
in Goal I had Cheated in Trading. I had hid about Four Thousand Pounds, which
the Authority demanded of me; I told them that I would not deliver the Money
till they would deliver, and Discharge the Innocent now Confined; and after
they were Discharged, I was brought out under a Guard and delivered up the
Money; soon after that, I was brought to Trial and found Guilty; and was
Branded in both Cheeks with the Letter R. and Cropped in both my Ears, so I was
returned to Custody again. I broke out of Goal and saw Nicholas Stephens Cropped
and Branded, the High Sheriff of Providence came to me, and desired of me to
return to Prison, for he said he should loose his Place; with that I went very
quietly, and soon after, on a Monday I broke out of Goal and went to a Husking
Frolic about three Miles out of Town, and differed with the Company, and got
almost Killed, and the next Morning returned to my old Prison again, then I was
put in strong Irons and confined very close; but I soon found Means to break
out again; although they pursued me very close, sent Post haste after me, and
did all they could to Apprehend me; but all in vain, till I came to Duchess
County, in the Province of New York; and going from House to House, there was a
Person that knew me, and asked if my Name was not Syllavan? No, said I, you are
mistaken in the Person my Friend; and so I went off for fean he would betray
me; which he did, by describing my Visage and Apparel, and said, he was sure it
was Syllavan the Money-Maker.

Then I provided my self with a secret retreating Place, at the Side of a
Swamp; in a large unfrequented Wood: but hearing that some of my Accomplices
were taken, and expecting they would betray me, or discover my Habitation. I
therefore abandoned it, and fled to the Mountains, where I concealed my self
seven Days; till being compelled by Hunger, I ventured to a House of my
Acquaintance, hoping they would favor my Concealment; and having cut a Plank
in the Floor of the House, I dig'd a Cavity under the Hearth, and had a
Fireplace, the Smoke of which issued by a Vent into the Chimney above; I had
not been long concealed there, before the House was surrounded by several Men:
so I suffered myself to be taken, and surrendered to them. First I was carried
to New Haven Goal, and afterward removed to New York.

During my stay in Duchess County, I made large Sums of Rhode Island Money, of
six Assortments, and of the New Hampshire Currency ten or twelve Thousand
Pounds, and left the Plates with my Accomplices; of Connecticut Money, I made
three Sorts, and printed off about three Thousand Pounds, and lef the Plates
with my Accomplicies; of New York Currency four Sorts, and had four different
Set of Accomplices; and there was four Sorts Counterfeited by my Accomplices,
which I had no Hand in at all; and all of the new Currency, with the following
Signers Names to it, viz. De Lancey, Depuyster, and Living(...) All my
Accomplices deserved the Gallows, as (...) as myself; but I will not betray
them, or be ^uilty of shedding their Blood.

And then turning to the Spectators, said, well Gentlemen, You may all take
Warning by me, and look out for the King of Terrors; and told the Sheriff that
he must needs confess, that he was not willing to die* Then looking about him,
said, I see none of my Accomplices here; but I hope they will burn and destroy
all the Money, Plates and Accoutrements, that they have by them, and that they
may not die on a Tree as I do. Then called to the Executioner and said, don't
pull the Rope so tight, it is hard for a Man to die in cold Blood: after which
he cried out O good GOD! O good GOD! have Mercy on my Soul I then said the
Lord's Prayer. Just as he was turned off the Cart, he cried, LORD have Mercy on
my Soul.

FINIS.

