Mr. Pemberton's Artillery-ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON Preached to the Ancient and Honorable ARTILLERY-COMPANY IN Boston,
NEW ENGLAND; June 7, 1756. Being the Anniversary of their Election of Officers.

By EBENEZER PEMBERTON, M. A. Pastor of a Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, next to the Prison, in
Queen Street, M,DCC,LVI.

To the HONORABLE Sir William Pepperrell, Baronet; Major General, IN HIS
MAJESTY's Army; This SERMON is dedicated, With all Humility and Respect, By His
Faithful and Obedient Servant, E. PEMBERTON.

AN Artillery-ELECTION SERMON.
HEB. XI.34. -- -- Waxed valiant in Fight, turned to Flight the Armies of the
Aliens.


TO teach the Art of War, is not the Office of the Ministers of the PRINCE OF
PEACE: The Gospel breathes the most extensive Benevolence to Mankind; and has
the highest Tendency to unite all Nations of the Earth, in inviolable
Friendship.

IT is our Departure from God, that renders us Enemies to one another: The
extravagant Lusts of Men enkindle those Fires of Contention, which consume the
Beauty of this lower Creation, and transform the Globe we inhabit into a Valley
of Tears. -- Did the Spirit of Jesus universally prevail, it would subdue that
Ambition and Avarice, which are the Source of so many Miseries to a guilty
World. -- It would inspire the Breasts of Princes with that disinterested
Goodness, which would soon diffuse Order and Harmony, among the different
Cantons of Mankind. -- Then the Arts of Peace would triumph over the Policies
of War; the Fields of Death, smile in all the unrifled Charms of Nature; and
this disordered Earth, become a Paradise of Beauty and Pleasure.

BUT since the happy Day is not yet come, when the Nations shall beat their
Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks. -- Since, in the
Dispensations of Providence, we hear the Sound of the Trumpet, and the Alarm of
War; and are called to gird on the Sword, and prepare the Instruments of
Battle. -- It is becoming the Character of a Minister of the Gospel, to show
what Direction, Encouragement, and Assistance, the Book of God affords us, on
these melancholy Occasions.

I am persuaded, none of my present Audience will question, whether the
Profession of a Soldier is consistent with the Character of a Christian: We
know, that many of the Military Order, have, in all Ages, appeared the shining
Ornaments of the Church of Christ, as well as the strongest Bulwarks of civil
Society: MANY of the first Fathers of New England, justly deserved this
Character; -- they were noble Instances of sublime Piety, and martial
Accomplishments. -- they were equally qualified to adorn the Church by their
exemplary Virtue, and defend it by their Valor.

PERHAPS the present Age has not produced a more truly Christian Hero, than the
late Col. GARDENER, who maintained uninterrupted Communion with Heaven, amidst
the Tumults and Disorders of a Camp -- and after a Life spent in perpetual
Toils and Dangers, in the Service of his Country, -- died in the Bed of Honor,
fighting against the Enemies, of the civil and religious Liberties of
Great Britain. -- I wish the Life of this devout Warrior, wrote by the late
celebrated Dr. Doddridge, was in the Hands of all the Gentlemen of a Military
Character. I am persuaded, it would afford them an agreeable Entertainment, and
the best Instruction.


They have merited the public Esteem, as much by the Charms of their Virtue, as
by the Splendour of their Conquests.

THE Great God, condescends to wear the Title of a MAN OF WAR; and Princes, His
Vicegerents here below, are commanded, not to bear the Sword in vain. -- When
the Faith of Treaties is violated, the Rights of a Community invaded, all
Proposals of Accommodation obstinately rejected, -- it becomes the immediate
Duty of the supreme Magistrate, to have Recourse to Arms; that he may establish
Peace, protect Innocence, humble the Proud Oppressors of the Earth, and put a
Stop to the Progress of Tyranny and Usurpation.

THE only Question is, -- How we shall behave, when called to War, so as not to
violate the Obligation of our Christian Profession, or injure the Rights of our
fellow Creatures, -- but maintain the Character of good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, and successful Servants of the Commonwealth? -- In this the Word of
God is profitable to direct.

THE Apostle causes the illustrious Heroes of the Jewish Church, to pass in
Review before us; and proposes their noble Example, for the Imitation of the
People of God in all Ages. By Faith, they passed through the severest Trials,
surmounted the most terrifying Dangers, waxed valiant in Fight, put to Flight
the Armies of the Aliens.

THE Apostle, in this Chapter, speaks of Faith in the most extensive
Signification of the Word. -- He intends that divine Principle, which inclines
us to adore the Perfections of the infinite Deity, to resign ourselves to the
Government of His Providence, to believe the Revelations of His Word, to depend
on the Promises of his Grace, to obey his sovereign Orders, -- in Times of the
greatest Difficulty and Danger, -- notwithstanding the Terrors and Allurements
of this present evil World. -- This is that Faith which animated these ancient
Worthies* and enabled them to perform these mighty Exploits, which were the
Glory of the past, and will be the Admiration of future Ages. The same Faith
should animate the Breasts of the military Gentlemen of the present Day, if
they would receive the Honors* and enjoy the Success of their illustrious
Predecessors. To show

HOW admirably this Faith is calculated to produce this happy Effect, is the
Design of my present Discourse. Faith teaches us to engage in War upon the
noblest Principles, -- it inclines us to prosecute it with intrepid Valor, --
It secures us the most powerful Assistance, -- It promises us the most glorious
Reward. -- This is the Plan of my Discourse, the Subject of your serious
Attention. --

FIRST, Faith teaches us, to engage in War upon the noblest Principles.

WHAT was the Spirit, that animated the Pompey's* and Caesar's, and other
celebrated Warriors of the Heathen World? -- What is the Spirit, that animates
many of our Modern Heroes? -- Their Characters are surrounded with a false
Blaze of Glory; their Names are trasmitted to Posterity, in flattering Titles
of Honor; they are profanely styled invincible Conquerors, Arbiters of Peace
and War, Disposers of the Fate of Kingdoms. -- Thus the Truth is disguised by
their servile Dependants; and their secret Designs concealed, by all the
Refinements of Art and Eloquence. -- But if we examine their Conduct, with an
unprejudiced Mind, we shall immediately find, the fatal Influence of insatiable
Avarice, -- insolent Pride, -- unbounded Ambition.

FAITH inspires its Heroes with nobler Motives, agreeable to the Dignity of
human Nature, and the Sanctity of our Christian Profession. -- A supreme Regard
to the Glory of God, a sincere Desire to establish Peace among Mankind, a
disinterested Zeal for the public Welfare* influence their Conduct. -- The
Call of God* and their Country* brings them into the Field of Battle. -- The
Enemies they oppose* are Pride, Perfidy, and Violence: -- These they fight
against without Revenge, conquer without Haughtiness, triumph over without
Insolence. -- Undissembled Love reigns in their Breasts* when engaged* in the
most terrible Acts of public Vengeance: Their Bowels melt, with the tenderest
Compassion* when their Hands are stained with Blood: They devoutly adore the
Creator, when obliged by sad Necessity to destroy His Creatures.

THE Religion of JESUS teaches its faithful Disciples, to do no Violence* to
advance their private Interest* to commit no Injury* to increase the Luster of
their Reputation* to shed not a Drop of Blood, but what may be serviceable to
the Cause of Truth and Justice -- It requires us* to endeavor to subdue our
Enemies* without destroying them* to resist their hostile Attempts without
violating the sacred Obligations of Charity* to reduce them to Reason, by
Methods the least severe and angry -- This is to act (...) OF JESUS CHRIST* to
obey the benevolent Precepts of the GREAT CAPTAIN OF OUR SALVATION. When we
engage in War, in this Disposition of Mind.

SECONDLY* Faith enables us to prosecute it with intrepid Valor.

TRUE Valor. My Brethren* is not an indiscreet Impetuosity, which hurries us
into the greatest Dangers, without Though It; and ventures upon immediate Death*
without any Prospect of Advantage. -- But a noble Greatness of Mind* which
inclines a Person to obey the Voice of God and His People, though it calls him to
the most dangerous Enterprises: Its Ardor is increased at the View of an Enemy*
It rises superior to every Difficulty, that is found in the Path of Duty; and
is ready to sacrifice Life itself, rather than endanger the public Safety.

THIS generous Fortitude never resides in the Breasts of the Wicked; the
accustomed Practice of Vice destroys the Health of the Body, relaxes the Vigor
of the Mind, makes Men capable only of mean and mercenary Designs.

OF this, we have numberless Examples, in ancient and modern History. While the
Romans continued uncorrupted, their Empire was strong as Iron, according to the
significant Representation of the Prophet Daniel. -- The Severity of their
Manners was the great Occasion of the Rapidity of their Conquests -- The
Grandeur of their Commonwealth was the Reward of their national Justice and
Temperence. But when their ancient Discipline was weakened; and the Vices of the
conquered, corrupted the Hearts of the Conquerors -- their Iron became,
immediately mingled with Clay -- the Foundations of their Government were soon
overthrown, and their once victorious Legions, were easily put to Flight, by
Troops of undisciplined Barbarians.

NOW, the Principles of the Christian Faith preserve us from those Vices, which
deprave the sound Constitution both of Body and Mind; and transform valiant
Heroes, into effeminate Cowards. -- It establishes that strict Government of
the Passions, which is Health to the Navel, and Marrow to the Bones; and
naturally forms us to every great and good Design.

UNDER the Influence of this Faith, the Christian Soldier begins his Days with
Prayer -- exercises his Authority to suppress the Prevalence of Vice -- employs
his Power to protect the Liberties of Mankind. He invocates in every Danger the
God of Armies; and sanctifies the Violence of War, by the Purity of his
Intentions, and the Desire to procure an happy Peace.

ANIMATED by these sublime Motives, he enters the Field of Battle with holy
Magnanimity, encounters all Difficulties with a firm and undaunted Resolution:
He possesses his Soul in Peace, though surrounded with Enemies, and is not
intimidated by their Power or Policy. -- He adopts the grateful Language of the
Psalmist. Some trust in Chariots and some in Horses; Psalm. 20.7.
but we will remember the Name of the LORD our GOD. The Providence of God,
which governs the Affairs of this lower World in unerring Wisdom, renders him
secure in every Event. -- The Promises of His Word, that no Evil shall happen
to the Just, keep him undismayed in the most hazardous Situation. -- What has
that Man to fear? Who has infinite Wisdom for his Guide -- Almighty Power for
his Defense -- and an Assurance from the God of Truth, that all Things shall
work together for his Good. This gave David that noble Fortitude in Seasons of
the highest Extremity and Distress. The LORD is on my Side. I will not fear:
Psalm. 118.6.
What can Man do unto me? Though an Host should encamp against me, Psalm. 27.3*
my Heart shall not fear: Though War should rise against me, in this will I be
confident. This brings to say,

THIRDLY, Faith secures us the most powerful Assistance.

IT is the Wisdom of all Nations, to form a potent Alliance when engaging in
War. Well cemented Confederacies, have a natural Influence to secure Success to
our Enterprises. When different Nations join in Concert for their mutual
Defense, and act with united Vigor; it makes the proud Oppressors of the Earth
to tremble, and their royal Diadems totter on their Heads.

BUT after all, it must be acknowleded the Events of War are uncertain: the
most wise and valiant Captains are not always crowned with Victory, nor the
most numerous and best disciplined Troops favored with Success. The Race is
not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong. No King is saved by the
Multitude of an Host, (...) it a mighty Man delivered by much Strength. The
supreme Monarch of the Universe, directs the Fate of War according to His
sovereign and irresistible Pleasure. -- It is equally easy with Him, to save by
many or by few.

IT is, therefore, the highest Wisdom to engage the Lord of Hosts on our Side,
and the Extremity of Folly to provoke Him to undertake the Cause of our
Enemies. Now nothing is more acceptable to Him, than a firm Dependence on his
Power -- Providence -- and Grace. -- This is the Practice of the Christian
Warrior, and the sure Way to Prosperity.

THE Wicked bid Defiance to Heaven* even when they stand in the greatest Need
of its Assistance -- they affront the God of Battles* when surrounded with the
dreadful Artillery of His Wrath. -- They depend on the Number of their Forces,
the Valor of their Troops, the Depth of their Stratagems* to secure them the
Fortune of the Day. -- If they conquer, it is ascribed to their superior
Strength and Wisdom. They erect Altars to their own Glory, and burn Incense to
their Ambition and Vanity.

BUT, Faith teaches the Followers of Christ to renounce all Self-dependance: to
fix their Expectations upon the supreme Disposer of all Things, and to give the
Glory of all their Success to Him, to whom it justly belongs. -- If they march,
they look to God their Director and Guide. -- If they encamp* they know except
God be their Protector, the Watchmen wake in vain. -- If they fight, they are
sensible from whence they derive all their military Strength. If they Conquer,
they acknowledge that divine Hand, which alone crowns them with Victory and
Triumph.

IN this devout Disposition, we may form great Designs, and hope to execute
them with happy Success. For God is the Confederate of His People, He pleads
their Cause against their haughty Oppressors* appoints shining Guards of Angels
to incircle their Tents, and will finally enable them to tread upon the Necks
of their Enemies -- Their Enemies may indeed for a Time prevail -- But the
triumphing of the Wicked is (...) the Prosperity of Fools accelerates their
Ruin; while the God of (...) rides upon the Heavens for their Help* and in his
Excellency on the Sky, for the Salvation of his People.

THIS divine Assistance* was the Source of all those Successes* (...) attended
God's ancient People the Posterity of faithful* Abraham. When they were
delivered from the Bondage of Pharaoh* the insulting Tyrant of Egypt* they did
not levy Armies, besiege Cities, nor fight Battles: But God employed the Arm of
Omnipotence in their Favor, commissioned Angels to be the Executioners of his
Vengeance, and by an invisible Hand* destroyed the firstborn of that populous
Nation: This made Way for the triumphant Departure of Israel* from the Land of
their Oppressors. -- When they were to pass the Red Sea, they had neither Boats
nor Bridges, to facilitate their Passage; but God by a Miracle of Goodness,
divided the Arabian Gulf, and conducted their numerous Tribes through the Bosom
of the Sea. -- When they conquered the City of Jerico, which opposed their
Entrance into the promised Canaan, it was not, by the Valor of their Captains,
nor the Swords of their common Soldiers; but the Lord of Hosts, who resided in
the Ark, the Symbol of His majestic Presence, overthrew its lofty Towers, and
levelled its Walls with the Dust. -- Therefore the inspired Psalmist tells
them, they got the Land in Possession, not by their own Swords, but by the Arm
of the Lord.

THESE, it may justly be said, were the Days of Miracles, but have we not seen?
-- have not heard of the extraordinary Interpositions of Heaven, in Behalf of
his People, in these latter Ages? -- To keep near Home -- Was it not God that
conducted the Siege of LOUISBOURG, through numberless Difficulties and Dangers,
and opened the Gates of that City, to a few unexperienced NEW-ENGLAND-Men.
Under the Command of Sir WILLIAM PEPPERBELL.
This gave a mighty Shock to the ambitious Designs of the French King, fired
his Breast with Resentment, determined him to take a severe Revenge.

TO this End, he soon collected a formidable Force, designed not only to
recover his Loss, but scatter Destruction through the Coasts of NORTH AMERICA. We
all remember, how greatly we were surprised when we heard their Fleet had
actually sailed to execute this fatal Scheme -- No wonder every Face gathered
Paleness, every Heart was seized with Terror. We had every Thing to fear, which
the Bigotry of Rome -- the Tyranny of France, -- the Rage of provoked Enemies,
could contrive or inflict. Had they succeeded, we had nothing to expect, but to
see our Cities in Flames -- our Habitations demolished -- our Virgins defloured
-- our Street deluged with Blood, -- and the Temples of our God prostituted to
Superstition and Idolatry.

BUT, though destitute of human Assistance, our Help was in the Name of the
Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. -- God sent a contagious Sickness among them,
which dispirited their Generals, and exceedingly diminished the Number of their
Forces: -- Unwilling to return, without executing some Part of their intended
Mischief, they summoned all their Strength, and determined to make a resolute
Attack on some of our Eastern Settlements, -- God sent forth his Commission to
the Winds, they heard his Voice, and immediately gathered into a mighty Storm;
and scattered their floating Castles, upon the Face of the great Deep. -- This
dissipated all their Hopes; -- a small Remnant only returned to their native
Country, to tell the melancholy Story of their Losses and Disappointments.

THUS, in the Day of our Extremity, the Name of the Lord alone was exalted. His
right Hand obtained for us an easy Victory over our Enemies. Our Lives were
preserved -- Our Liberties maintained -- our valuable Enjoyments secured -- Not
by our own Swords and Bows, but by the signal Interpositions of Heaven. This
should engage us still to place our Dependence, upon the same all-powerful
Assistance. His Arm is not shortened that He cannot save, nor is his Ear heavy
that he cannot hear. In his Name then, Let us set up our Banner, and play the
Men, for our People and the ^^ties of our God. For our Encouragement, I shall
further add,

FOURTHLY, Faith assures us of a glorious Reward.

MANY of the Pagan Heroes fired with a Love of Fame, performed astonishing
Exploits, for the Glory and Greatness of their Country. It is to be feared,
that many of the most successful Captains in modern Times, have been influenced
by no higher Motives in their military Achievements. -- When this is the Case,
we erect Monuments to perpetuate the Remembrance of their Victories, but cannot
enroll them among the Favorites of Heaven. While we celebrate their martial
Honors, we shed Tears to think, that those who have so nobly served the
Purposes of divine Providence, must remain the eternal Objects of His Justice.
--

WHAT is this Fame! so ardently desired, so impatiently pursued, -- amidst a
Thousand Deaths -- through ten Thousand Dangers! -- An airy Dream -- A gilded
Phantom -- destitute of Truth and Reality.

BUT the Christian Soldier, animated with the Spirit of Faith and Charity,
fights not for a Crown of fading Laurels, but uncorruptible Glory; He receives
the Applauses, not of false and flattering Mortals, but of God the true
Fountain of Honor.

ASCEND, O Christian! above these Objects of Sense which surround you; fix your
Thoughts on the ETERNAL DIVINITY: Behold him seated on a Throne of Light,
encircled with Angels, Archangels, and the whole HIERARCHY OF HEAVEN -- Hark,
-- how loud do their Triumphant Voices sound! -- with what transports of Joy do
they ascribe. Rev. 7.12.
Blessing and Glory, and Honor and Power to our God forever and ever!

YET* a little while, O Christian Soldier! and you shall be united to this
shining Assembly, partake of their Joys, and join in their unceasing
HALLELUJAHS. After you have fought under the Banners OF THE CROSS, your
appointed Time; Death shall give the final Discharge: Whether you fall by the
Stroke of Violence in the Field of Battle; or descend to the Grave, in the
common Course of Nature; your immortal Spirit, shall be safely conveyed to the
Paradise of God.

THERE -- the great CAPTAIN OF OUR SALVATION, shall address you in the Language
of ineffable Grace, Well done thou good and faithful Servant. -- There -- He
will fulfill that Promise, which he now makes to all his loyal and obedient
Subjects. To him that overcomes, Rev. 3.21.
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in His Throne.

WHAT is there, my Brethren, in the loud Applauses of the Age -- in the
magnificent Trophies of human Vanity -- in the sparkling Diadems of Princes;
that can be compared to the solid Honors, which are appointed for the Christian
Hero, and the Crowns of Glory which are prepared for them in a future World.

IT remains, that I apply this Discourse to the Gentlemen in Arms, at whose
Invitation we are now assembled in the House of God.

GENTLEMEN OF THE ARTILLERY,

YOU appear, in the united Characters of Christians and Soldiers -- Characters
of Honor and Usefulness, which render you in an high Degree the Glory and
Safety of the Community. The Design of the Institution of your ancient and
honorable Company, was not barely to qualify you to make an handsome Figure
upon the Parade, and handle your Arms with Dexterity and Address in a Review:
But that you might be distinguished Proficients in the military Art, and fit to
lead on the Armies of Israel to Battle, when the Defense of your Country shall
summon you to Action.

IF ever this Land stood in Need of wise and valiant Commanders, it is in the
present Day. -- Was there ever a Time, when we were encompassed on all Sides,
with such Numbers of Enemies? -- Was there ever a Time, when such shocking
Cruelties were committed on the Frontiers of this, and the neighboring
Colonies? The Sound of War is continually heard in our Streets, and our chosen
Troops, are daily marching forth to jeopard their Lives in the high Places of
the Field. God's Voice to us is, Joel 3.9, 10.
Prepare War; wake the mighty Man; let all the Men of War draw near; let them
come up; beat your Plow-shares into Swords; and your Pruning Hooks into Spears.

NO sooner was Peace proclaimed, but France immediately prepared for the
Commencement of a new War, the first favorable Opportunity; and fixed upon
North America to be the Scene of its earliest Triumphs. To accomplish their
perfidious Schemes, they invaded our Lands, surrounded our English Settlements,
with Forts from North to South: They artfully debauched our Indian Allies from
their Allegiance to the CROWN OF GREAT BRITAIN, and insinuated themselves into
their Affections, by the most villainous Falsehoods. In Consequence of this --
We now see numerous Tribes of different Languages, entering our unwalled
Villages, committing those Barbarities which are the Disgrace of human Nature
-- the Abhorrence of the civilized Word. These are the Policies of France --
the Triumphs of a Prince, who absurdly styles himself, The MOST CHRISTIAN KING.

YET, O Enemies of GREAT BRITAIN! you live to this Day, you keep Possession of
those Places you have usurped, in Violation of the most solemn Treaties.
Christian Charity forbids me to form a Wish for your Destruction. -- May you
only be bro't to acknowledge the Perfidy of your Conduct, the Injustice of your
Usurpations, and by the Tears of unfeigned Repentance, extinguish that War you
have unhappily enkindled.

TILL God shall produce this happy Event, it becoms us. MY BRETHREN, to assert
our Rights in every lawful Method; and with unshaken Fortitude resist the
Injustice of our Enemies. When every Thing dear to us, as MEN, -- ENGLISHMEN
-- and CHRISTIANS, is in Danger, not to come out to the Help of the Lord
against the Mighty* would be the most infamous Cowardice, and a melancholy
Symptom of approaching Ruin.

WITH what Spirit you are to enter on this Work, I have represented in the
preceding Discourse. -- Let it be your first Care to commit yourselves to the
Protection of the blessed JESUS, whom God had given to be a Commander and
Leader to the People. Adore His Grace -- confide in His Merits -- obey his
sovereign Orders -- Then with cheerful Serenity, march wherever His Providence
calls -- Fear not the Power of (...) -- nor the confederate Legions of the
Prince of Darkness.

THE Cause of Truth and Righteousness shall finally prevail, notwithstanding
all the Oppositions of Earth and Hell. -- They that fall in the Combat, shall
rise to a glorious Immortality. Faith in the Name of Christ, forbids your Fears
amidst all the gloomy Horrors of War, and assures you the Victory in a future
World.

This BLESSED Hope encouraged the happy Conquerors in my Text, cheerfully to
endure the Difficulties and Trials of their militant State; and kept them
steady to the Cause of God and His People, in Times of the greatest Temptation.
-- They had Respect to the Recompense of Reward, and looked for a better
Country, even an heavenly one.

LIFT up your Eyes, behold them seated upon radiant Thrones -- crowned with
unfading Honor -- clothed with darling Robes -- shining like Stars in the
Firmament of Glory. Lo! they look down upon you, who are still encompassed with
Enemies, and fighting the good Fight of Faith. They encourage you to go on,
with invinsible Courage and Resolution. By their Example they assure you, that
if you are faithful unto the Death, you also shall receive a CROWN OF LIFE. --

To which, etc.

AMEN.

