THE Supreme DEITY OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, maintained.

In a LETTER to The Dedicator of Mr. EMLYN'S Inquiry into the Scripture-Account
of JESUS CHRIST: Inscribed to the Reverend the Clergy of all Denominations in
NEW ENGLAND.

WHEREIN Mr. EMLYN'S Objections are fairly answered, and shown to have no
Validity.

Joh. I. 1. In the Beginning was the WORD; and the WORD was GOD.

Joh. XX. 28. And Thomas -- said to HIM, My LORD and my GOD!

1 John III. 16. Hereby we perceive the Love of GOD, because HE laid down HIS
LIFE for us.

1 John V. 20. JESUS CHRIST; THIS is THE TRUE GOD and ETERNAL LIFE.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Printed by J. DRAPER; and Sold at his Shop in Cornhill,
and Printing-Office in Newbury-Street. 1757.

A LETTER to the DEDICATOR of Mr. Emlyn's Inquiry, etc.
SIR,
IT may perhaps be accounted a bold Dissent from Custom, if not a Breach of
good Manners, to begin an Epistle of this Nature without a formal Apology,
representing my own Inability, my want of Time for Accuracy, or, that I
undertook it with great Reluctance; and therefore, that all Faults and
Imperfections must be imputed to those who urged me, rather than to my self.
But as these fashionable Prologues (though they commonly discover a greater
Penetration and Accuracy than the Pieces themselves, to which they are annexed)
are seldom much regarded, and perhaps rarely sincere; you will excuse me if I
ease you of the Trouble of reading One, before you come to the real Matter and
Design of this Letter. --

THE main End of Speaking and Writing (especially when any Thing of a religious
Nature and Importance is the Subject) should be, to be thoroughly understood --
And this End (I am bold to affirm) is what I have aimed at, how far soever I
have missed it in what follows. -- I have but one Favor to beg, before I
acquaint you with my general Design; and that is, that you would not look upon
it as any designed Reflection upon your own Genius, Penetration or Learning,
that I have carefully avoided those labored Distinctions, Criticisms and
Niceties, which tend to bewilder and confound, rather than in the least to
instruct, by far the greater Part of Mankind; who are Strangers to scholastic
Niceties, and the various Methods and Arts of Sophistry; and are often easily
puzzled and imposed upon by the mere Charm of Words, which either have no
Meaning at all, or the true Sense of which they never come at. -- What I have
principally consulted is, to discover Truth; and express it in a Manner plain
and intelligible, even to the lowest and most vulgar Capacity; the Subject
being such as equally concerns the High and Low, the Wise and Simple, the
Learned and Illiterate, to understand: -- And should this End be answered, I
shall be entirely easy, though you and the World should judge that here is
nothing either learned or new -- In a Word, I am far from thinking, and as far
from desiring you should think, that I here present you with any Thing worthy
of Praise and Admiration: An honest Meaning is the only Commendation it
pretends to; which will more effectually recommend it to every honest Man, than
the greatest Appearance of Learning and Penetration, without this. -- Not
doubting therefore but that I am writing to a Gentleman highly deserving of
this Character, to one who with an honest Heart seeks to know the Truth as it
is in JESUS; and is not knowingly and willingly under the Influence of any
Prejudice or partial Inclination; I proceed without further Ceremony to
acquaint you, That I have with the utmost Application, Seriousness and Candor I
am capable of, read and considered, the Rev. Mr. Emlyn's Inquiry into the
Scripture Account of JESUS CHRIST; which you have been pleased to dedicate, To
the Reverend the Clergy of all Denominations in New England. -- I forbear all
Remarks upon your Dedication, and the grand Motive which induced you to procure
a New-Impression of this Inquiry in New England, 'till I have laid before you
my Observations upon the Inquiry itself, which I shall confine to as small a
Compass as I possibly can; and be so particular as to omit nothing of your
Author's Reasonings that can be though it to have any Weight in it; and then
perhaps such Remarks will appear more just and reasonable than they might do
here.

I BEGIN with your Author's first Chapter, where he proposes two Things in
order to maintain the Subordination of Jesus Christ, or his Inequality to God
the Father.

I. "THAT the Term God is used in Scripture in different "Senses, supreme and
subordinate.

II. THAT our Lord Jesus speaks of another as God, distinct from himself, and
owns this God to be above or ever him.

UPON the First of these I would only observe, what I suppose your Author
intends by it; which is, that Jesus Christ may be called a God in Scripture,
and yet not be the supreme God: A Point never yet denied by any who have read
the Scriptures. -- But it is inquired, whether Jesus Christ is not styled God
in such a Manner, and under such Circumstances, as plainly denote him to be God
supreme? He is in Scripture styled, The Mighty God, Isai. ix. 6.
-- Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us. chap. vii. 14. Matthew. i.
23.
-- It is affirmed by St. John, that the Word, i. e. Jesus Christ, was God.
John i. 1.
-- And the Apostle says, God was manifest in the Flesh, 1 Timothy iii. 16.
meaning Jesus Christ. -- St. Paul tells us, He is over all, God blessed for
evermore. Romans ix. 5.
-- And St. John, that Jesus Christ is the true God and eternal Life, 1 John v.
20.
etc. -- Now it is inquired, Whether Jesus Christ is not here styled God in
such a Manner, and under such Circumstances, as plainly denote him to be God
supreme? -- Your Author allows him to be Lord of Lords (indefinitely) but
imagines, that notes an inferior Character, compared with that of God of Gods
-- and refers us to 1 Cor. 8.5. for a Proof of it: -- But how it appears from
hence that Jesus Christ is not God, I must confess is more than I can see;
since we may with equal Propriety thence infer, that the one God is no Lord, as
that the one Lord is not God. -- If it be said that the Term God implies Lord
also, but not the contrary; I answer, it by no means follows that Lord of
Lords, does not imply God also, but that it does; since God is a Lord of Lords,
i. e. Lord of all Lords, indefinitely, must therefore be God of all Gods; and
if there be no Lord above Him, there is no God above Him, since every God is a
Lord. -- And in this Light the Words of Sir Isaac Newton, which your Author
refers to, appear against him, (if fairly cited.) That great Man defines God
from his Dominion; and observes, that considered as the Object of our Worship,
he is a Lord in the most eminent Sense; and therefore should rather be defined
from his Dominion than from his Perfections. -- Whenever then we speak of God
we consider him as Lord also. -- Lord of Lords indefinitely must therefore
imply God. -- Though every Lord is not God, yet the Lord of Lords is God; this
implies the most extensive Dominion; and if, according to Sir Isaac, we are to
define God from his Dominion, what more concise and proper Definition can be
given of Him than that of Lord of Lords? -- If God is to be defined from his
Dominion, what more noble or just Description can be given of Him than the
Apostle gives of Jesus Christ, that he is the blessed and only Potentate; the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, etc.? I might add, that Sir Isaac was of
Opinion, that from true Dominion, it follows that God is living, intelligent
and powerful; and therefore as the Apostle attributes the most extensive
Dominion to Jesus Christ, so we may thence infer that he is living, intelligent
and powerful in the most eminent Sense, i. e. that he is God of Gods, or God
supreme: -- But perhaps some Men will rather choose to consider Sir Isaac, when
he talks at this rate, as a Philosopher than a Divine; for were this allowed it
would be of itself a complete Answer to your Author as he finally states the
Question, Has Jesus Christ any God over him, who has greater Authority and
greater Ability than himself or not? certainly not; for the Apostle evidently
attributes the most extensive Authority or Dominion to him; he styles him the
only Potentate -- the Lord of Lords; and Power or Ability (according to Sir
Isaac) follow from true Dominion: None therefore has greater Ability than he,
who has the greatest and most extensive Dominion.

BUT not to pursue this too far -- I proceed to observe upon Sect. II. -- Your
Author having stated the Question, Has Jesus Christ any God over him, who has
greater Authority and greater Ability than himself or not? proposes hence to
demonstrate the Affirmative, by showing, First, that Jesus Christ expressly
speaks of another God than himself. -- Secondly, That he acknowledges this God
to be above or over himself; -- And lastly, That he wants those supereminent
and infinite Perfections which belong only to the Lord God of Gods. --

FOR the first of these, he refers us to Mat. 27.46, where our Savior cried
out upon the Cross, My God, my God, etc.; and to John 20.17, where after his
Resurrection he sent to his Disciples, (by the Women who first saw him,)
saying, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God --
Here I would observe, That those who oppose your Author, consider Jesus Christ
as Man when thus praying to and speaking of God; that though the divine and
humane Natures were united in his Person, yet that the humane only prayed and
complained to God, etc. and therefore that such Passages are no Evidence that
he is not truly God supreme. -- And it must be confessed that if there be any
just Grounds for such an Interpretation, it entirely destroys the Force of such
Passages to prove any thing in Favor of your Author's Opinion: -- And the
plain intelligible Reason to be assigned for this Interpretation is, that he is
frequently styled God in such a Manner, and under such Circumstances, and such
Things are predicated of him, and attributed to him, as more plainly denote him
to be the supreme God, than the Texts your Author refers to denote the
contrary. Some of these I have already mentioned, as, that he is styled the
mighty God, Emmanuel, God blessed forevermore, the true God, etc. without any
Limitation or Restriction, and in like Manner infinite, unlimited Knowledge is
attributed to him: John xxi. 17.
-- And the Knowledge of Men's Hearts: Rev. ii. 23.
-- And he tells us, That he is Alpha and Omega; the beginning and the ending;
-- HE, which is, which was, and which is to come; the Almighty chap. i. 8.
-- that He and the Father are One -- that what things soever the Father does,
those does the Son likewise -- that as the Father raises up the Dead and
quickneth them, even so the Son quickens whom he will. John v. 19. and onward.
-- And many other things are predicated of him, which can belong only to God
almighty: -- Not only Men, but Angels, are commanded to worship him: Heb. i. 6.
-- And his Dominion and Authority are established forever, chap. i. 8. etc.
etc. Now we must either suppose these Representations and Descriptions of
Jesus Christ to be false and groundless; or that those Texts which (if
literally understood of his Person) represent him inferior to God, are to be
interpreted in the Manner mentioned, viz. of his human Nature only, and not of
his Person, which is divine: -- For it is agreed on all Sides, that those Texts
(which if literally understood of his Person) represent Jesus Christ as God,
and those which represent him as inferior to God, equally belong to the Canon
of holy Scripture -- The Question is, Which we are to understand in their
literal and most obvious Sense; those which represent him as God and equal to
the Father, or those which represent him as subordinate and inferior? for both
these cannot be understood literally, or of his Person: -- But either those
which represent him as inferior to God, must be understood of his human Nature
only, or those which represent him as God, must be understood of his Office. --
The former of these I humbly think the most reasonable, viz. that those Texts
which represent Jesus Christ as inferior to God, are to be understood of his
human Nature only, and not of his Person, which is divine; and that those which
represent him as God, are to be literally understood of his Person, that he is
the true God, God blessed, etc. My Reasons for which are these,

1st THAT there is no Propriety in describing Christ as to his Office by
calling him God, according to the common and ordinary use of that Term in
Scripture, and the general Acceptance of it among Men. The Term God is used
and generally understood to denote that infinite, eternal, self-existent Being
who created and preserves all Things; and if, with Sir Isaac Newton, we define
God from his Dominion, still the Term (when accompanied by no Restriction or
Limitation) denotes one that has true, universal, underived and everlasting
Dominion; such as is attributed to Christ, Thy Throne, O God, is forever: And
which can belong only to God supreme -- So that it amounts to just the same,
whether we define God from his Perfections or from his Dominion; still its a
very improper and uncommon Use of Language to describe Jesus Christ as to his
Office by the Term God, without any Restriction or Limitation; and much more so
still to describe him as to his Office, by attributing that to him which
belongs only to the supreme God. But

2dly THERE is not the least Intimation where Jesus Christ is styled God,
either in the Texts themselves, or in what preceeds or follows, that this is to
be understood of his Office, and not of his Person. -- Where Magistrates are
styled Gods, the very next Words explain it, and tell us what we are to
understand by it: And in like manner, where Moses and Angels are called Gods,
no one, who attends to the whole Discourse, could easily mistake the Meaning,
or not see that the Term God was there used in an inferior and metaphorical
Sense. But there is no Foundation for this where Christ is styled the true God
-- God blessed forevermore -- God whose Throne is established forever, etc.
Here is no Room to suspect that the Term God is used in an uncommon or improper
Sense, or that it denotes any other than that Jesus Christ is actually that
true God, God blessed, etc. he is said to be. Much less is there Room for any
such Construction where that is attributed to Christ which belongs to the
supreme God alone: I mean infinite Knowledge, eternal Self-existence, religious
Worship and Homage, etc. which I shall show to be distinctly attributed to him,
in another Place. --

I proceed to observe,

3dly That from what has been said, it appears there is the utmost Danger, that
such Descriptions (if they are to be understood of the Office of Christ only)
will give Men wrong Conceptions of him: They naturally lead us to look upon him
as the true God, and to adore and worship him as such. -- And surely that God
who is jealous of his own Honor, and will not give his Glory to another, i. e.
will suffer none to receive the Homage and Worship which is due to him, nor
give his Creatures any just Occasion to look upon any other as God besides
himself; HE, I say, would never have represented Jesus Christ as God, if he was
not truly such: He never would have laid such a Snare for us, such a Temptation
before us, to esteem and honor one as God, who is no God. -- If it be said,
That this Plea holds equally good on the other side of the Question, and that
there is as great Danger of our contracting too low an Opinion of the Lord
Jesus (if he is truly God) from those Scriptures which represent him inferior
to God, as the contrary. I answer, That the manifest Danger of Deception here
is by no means equal;

First, BECAUSE the Design of our Savior's coming into the World, and the
Miracles which he wrought while manifest in the Flesh, were such as naturally
tended to give Mankind (I mean such as believed him to be the Christ) high and
adoring Thoughts of him, and such as would lead them to Reverence and Worship
him as God, and to give that Honor and Glory to him which is due to God alone;
and indeed this Disposition appeared in those who knew Jesus to be the Christ
as soon as he was born. Matthew. ii. 11.
-- And while he was manifest in the Flesh he frequently received Worship and
Homage from those who were convinced that he was the Christ -- From the Woman
of Samaria, John iv.
from the Leper, Matthew. viii. 2.
from a certain Ruler, who was a God by Office, Chap. ix. 18.
from the whole Ship's Crew, Chap. xiv. 33.
etc. -- Those who saw his Miracles, and believed on him as the Christ, were
ever disposed to worship, reverence and exalt him. If it be said, that they
worshipped him because they thought him more than a mere Man, even a God -- this
will favor the Interpretation I maintain, that he is truly God; since he never
forbid them or told them to worship God and not him; that he was their
Fellow Servants, and the like; as the Apostles constantly did, when such Worship
was offered to them Acts x. 26, and xiv. 15.
: This I think truly observable, that our Lord Jesus never in the lest
suppressed or discouraged this Disposition in People to reverence and worship
him: And if he is not God supreme, it is to me something unaccountable; since I
have ever thought Him to be the only proper Object of religious Worship; and
that to attribute it to any Creature was Blasphemy, a robbing God of his Honor.
-- But if it should be said, that this was not properly religious Worship
(which I shall hereafter show in other Instances is plainly attributed to
Christ) but a Reverence and Respect they paid him as a superior dignified
Creature; yet this is sufficient for my present Purpose, to show that those who
believed him to be the Christ, knew the Design of his Coming, and saw his
Miracles, had very high and adoring Thoughts of him; which led them to pay him,
at least, the greatest Reverence and Respect that can be due to a mere
Creature: This your Author observes Page 52. (though with a different Design) is
the Case with Mankind since the Apostle's Days, and the shutting up of
Prophesy: Those who esteem Jesus Christ as the Savior of Sinners, are disposed
to think and speak very highly of him; and consequently will much more readily
embrace, and easily believe, the Description which represents Him as the true
God, God blessed forever, etc. than that which represents him as a mere Man,
inferior and subordinate to God, provided these Descriptions are founded upon
equal Authority, as is the present Case: -- So that for this Reason it is plain
there is greater Danger of our being deceived by those Texts which represent
Christ as the true God, etc, if he is not God; than by those which represent
him as inferior to God, if he is God: This is on Supposition that he is as
expressly, as clearly, and in as unlimited a Manner represented to be inferior
to God, by one Part of sacred Writ, as he is to be God by another Part; which I
humbly think is not the Case; for

Secondly, To put the two Descriptions or Representations of Jesus Christ upon
an exact parallel, the Question must be, Whether he is God or Man? But this is
not the Question in debate; it being agreed on both Sides, that he is truly
Man; at least, that he was so far a Man when manifest in the Flesh, as to be
subject to all our common Wants, Pains and sinless Infirmities: -- But the
Question which arises is, Whether he was a mere Man, or God-man? Whether he was
a mere human Person? or, Whether the divine and human Natures were both united
in his Person? and, Whether he is more plainly represented in Scripture as
God-Man than as a mere Man? And in this View of the Question, I think there is
scarce Room to doubt but that Description of Christ, which represents him as
God, is most obvious and clear, and has vastly the Advantage of the other,
which represents him as Man and inferior to God: This will appear plain if we
consider that those Texts which represent him as Man, and inferior to God, may
be literally understood of his Manhood, or human Nature, and not contradict
those which represent him as God: But the contrary will not hold true, that
those which represent him as God, may be literally understood, if we understand
the other of his whole Person: And it is an established Maxim, never to put a
figurative Interpretation upon Scripture, where the most obvious literal
Interpretation is true and consistent; and if this be true, if this be the
surest and most natural Way of interpreting Scripture, it follows that we
should understand those Texts, which represent Christ as the true God,
literally of his Person; and those which represent him as Man and inferior to
God, literally of his human Nature, or Manhood only. Upon the whole then; I
think it appears that was a Man, destitute of all Prejudice and Prepossession,
who esteemed Jesus Christ as the Savior of lost Sinners, to read the Bible,
and consider those Scriptures which represent him to be truly God, and those
which your Author thinks represent him as inferior to God; he would be most
likely to understand the former literally of his Person, and the other of his
human Nature only; and consequently the Danger of Deception from those Texts,
which represent Jesus Christ as God, is greater, if he be not God, than the
contrary: We must therefore, to vindicate the Goodness of that God of Truth, by
whose Inspiration the Scriptures were given, in not laying a Snare for us, or a
Temptation before us, to give that Honor and Worship to another which is due
to Himself alone; I say, in order to this, we must suppose that Jesus Christ is
truly God, and that it is his holy Will that all Men should honor the Son even
as they honor the Father: He gave us the Scriptures to profit us, and not to
puzzle, ensnare and confound us: -- They are for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17, -- and not
for Riddles, for Deceptions, or Sophisms, that the Man of Sin may be furnished
with Ways and Methods to evade the Truth, and maintain Falsehood and
Unrighteousness. We must therefore, if we consult the Nature and Design of the
Scriptures, conclude, that the most obvious and literal Interpretation, when
consistent with Reason and common Sense, and the Scriptures in general, is to
be preferred to any forced or figurative one whatever: And if so, then the
Interpretation which we put upon those Scriptures, which represent Christ as
inferior to God, viz. that they are to be understood of his Manhood, or human
Nature only, is to be preferred to your Author's Interpretation, which supposes
the most explicit, unlimited Assertions of the supreme Deity of Jesus Christ,
and his Equality to God, even the Father, are to be understood of his Office,
and not of his Person: That he is the mighty God, the true God, God blessed
forevermore, God, whose Throne is established forever, by Office only; that Men
and Angels are commanded to worship him; that eternal Existence, infinite
Knowledge, immense Presence, etc. are attributed to him, only on Account of his
Office, and not for any personal inherent Perfections he is possessed of
essentially and independently. Your Author indeed attempts very largely to show
the Absurdity of this Interpretation; and that there is no such Foundation for
it as I here suppose; and his Reasoning upon this Head I shall distinctly
consider: -- I would only observe, at present, that in Case I show the Vanity
and Sophistry of his Objections, and maintain my Interpretation against them;
the Consequence will be, that his Arguments to prove the Inferiority, or
Subordination, of Jesus Christ to God the Father, or that he is not truly God,
are of no Force: If my Interpretation be just, it is an easy, plain Solution of
all those Texts of Scripture which seem to represent Christ as inferior to the
Father: -- Thus when he cries, My God, my God; and I ascend to my God; it is
the human Nature that speaks, and is spoken of; it is the human Nature that is
distinguished from, and opposed to the Father, or to God, including the whole
Godhead; so he is inferior to the Father, or the Father is greater than he, i.
e. than he, considered as Man, and as Mediator; it being an Act of the greatest
Condescension in him to become such; but not as to his Person and Essence, with
regard to which, the Son is true God, God blessed for evermore; -- so, the
Father has put all Things under him, as Man or Mediator, himself being
excepted; for as God, he could receive no such Dominion and Authority; and when
all Things are subdued to him, as Man or Mediator, then, as such, he shall be
subject to God, who has put all Things under him, that God may be all in all,
that God may be the Head of the Mediator, the Mediator the Head of the Church,
and the Church by him victorious over the last Enemy DEATH, and triumphant in
Glory; so that, as God, his Throne is established forever, and his Kingdom
shall have no end. This is a plain and easy Solution of your Author's
irresistible Text 1 Cor. 15. 24, to 29. And had he took in the two preceding
Verses, it would have carried its own Confutation with it; it being very
evident from thence that the Apostle is speaking of Christ as Man: he tells us,
Verse 22d, that as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive,
i. e. all Men shall be made alive in Christ; all the Dead shall attain to the
Resurrection by him: Some shall arise to everlasting Life, and some to Shame
and everlasting Contempt: He then proceeds to tell us, Verse 23, in what Order
they shall rise, -- But every Man in his own Order, Christ the first Fruits --
certainly he means the Man Christ; and in this Character he discourses of him
in the following Verses, as the First Fruits from the Dead; but I think it
renders the Apostle very unintelligible, to suppose that he speaks of Christ
exactly in this Light, in Ver. 22, where he says, All shall be made alive in
him: All who? All Men: -- In what Order? The Man Christ the first: -- What!
Christ be made alive in Christ? -- Surely, the Christ that is the First Fruits,
that is made alive from the Dead, is not exactly the Christ, in all Respects,
by or in whom all are made alive: If it be said, that Christ is not the Agent,
but the Cause of the Resurrection; the Difficulty is no Ways removed, since his
own Resurrection is included with that of other Men: And of this Man Christ,
that is the First Fruits from the Dead, the Apostle discourses in the following
Verses, tells us, that he must reign till all Enemies are put under his Feet;
that the last Enemy is Death; that God is excepted out of those Things which
are put under him; that when all Things are subdued to him, then he himself,
this Man Christ, the first Fruits from the Dead, shall be subject to God, who
put all Things under him, that God may be all in all. -- So that if we take the
Apostle's whole Discourse, there is evidently just Ground to understand the
Words your Author refers to, of the human Nature of Christ that was made alive,
Verse 23, and not of his Person, in or by whom, that, and all other Men shall
he made alive, Verse 22. -- As Man, or considered as the first Fruits from the
Dead, he shall be subject to God, who put all Things under him; and as such he
is dependent upon God; but considered Personally, he is God, whose Throne is
for ever and ever, Hebrews 1.8. But, says your Author, the very next Verse
explains this a different Way; where it is said, therefore God, thy God, has
anointed thee above thy Fellows; intimating, that when considered as God, whose
Throne is for ever and ever, he had a God over him, and is himself a God only
by Delegation or Exaltation: But how can we understand the Words in this Sense,
if his Exaltation is so soon to end as your Author supposes? Thy Throne, O God,
is forever and ever -- But, Thy Throne, O God, shall be overthrown at the End
of the World; Nay, tho thou art he, (as in Verses 10, 11.) who in the Beginning
have laid the Foundation of the Earth; tho the Heavens are the Works of thine
Hands; yea, tho thou shall remain when they are perished, tho thou art the same
when they are changed; -- yet, they shall no sooner perish, be folded up, and
changed, than thy Authority and Dominion shall cease, and thy Exaltation be at
an end: This is evidently the Language your Author makes the Apostle speak,
when he considers him as speaking personally of Christ in Verse 9, therefore
God, thy God, has anointed thee above thy Fellows; and as this is chargeable
with the last Degree of Absurdity, I humbly think we are to understand them of
his human Nature: That God has anointed the Man Christ with the Oil of
Gladness above his Fellows, his Fellow Creatures, as a Reward for his Love to
Righteousness and hatred of Iniquity; but that Christ, considered Personally,
is God, whose Throne is for ever and ever; who laid the Foundation of the
Earth, and built the Heavens; and who shall remain, and be the same when they
are perished and changed.

AND the same easy and natural Interpretation of Scripture which has hitherto
shown the Fallacy of your Author's Reasoning, entirely destroys the Force of
his Arguments in Chap. II. Thus when our Lord Jesus says, Of myself I can do
nothing, John 5.30; if he spoke this with Regard to his Power of Doing or
Acting, it is to be understood of his Manhood, or human Nature only, the Power
of which (as of all other created Beings) was derived from and dependent upon
God -- But I rather choose to think our Savior spoke this with regard to his
Will; intending by it, that he had no private Will opposite to, or separate
from the Father's Will -- My Reason for this is, that he declares Verse 19,
that what Things soever the Father does, those also does the Son likewise; and
Ver. 21, that as the Father raises up the Dead, and quickens them; even so
the SON quickens whom HE will. Here seems to be no want of Power in the Son;
he has as great Power as the Father, but their Will is one, he can do nothing
of his own Will separate from the Father's; for whatever the Father does, that
also does the Son likewise -- They are one in Essence and one in Will, as
appears beyond all Contradiction from Ver. 23. He that honors not the Son,
honors not the Father; and how can this be true, unless the Father and Son
are essentially one? And this his Oneness with the Father he again represents
in the plainest Manner, Chap. 14.9, 10. He that has seen me, has seen the
Father: I am in the Father; and the Father in me -- and intimates Ver. 11, that
his Works were enough to convince Men that he was one in Essence with the
Father, they being such as none but the great God could atchieve -- Believe me
for the very Works sake -- believe what? Certainly what he had just asserted --
He that has seen me, has seen the Father -- I am in the Father, and the
Father in me. And your Author's Supposition, that our Lord considers himself
(personally) in Opposition to the Father, Chap. V, is certainly groundless; at
least there is no Weight in the Reason he assigns for it, viz. Because he says
the Father had given him all Power or Authority to execute Judgment; -- for our
Lord tells us in what Character the Father gave him this Authority, and what
Capacity he received it, viz, as the Son of Man. -- He had asserted in Ver. 21,
that as the Father, so He quickened whom he pleased; and Ver. 23. that he that
honors not the Son, honors not the Father; and Ver. 26, that as the
Father had Life in himself, so he had given to the Son to have Life in himself;
(independent Life, surely, or else he had given him no more than he has the
whole animal, yea the vegetable Creation:) -- After our Lord had asserted these
Things, He proceeds to tell us, that the Father had given him Authority to
execute Judgment also; he adds (least any should think there was a
Contradiction or Inconsistency in his Discourse, in his having equal Power with
the Father to raise the Dead, etc. and receiving Power from the Father to
execute Judgment; I say, that there might be no Room for this, he adds) why,
and in what Capacity he received this Authority from the Father, viz. because
he was the Son of Man -- therefore the Father gave, and he received Authority
to execute Judgment. -- But in some other Nature or Capacity, he had equal
Power with the Father, to quicken whomsoever he would -- had Life in himself --
was One with the Father -- And what could this be, but the divine? what but
true God? -- It is surprising to me, that your Author could read these Chapters
of St. John's Gospel, and pick out those Scraps which he brings to support his
Cause, without being convicted and confounded by the surrounding Context, which
asserts our Savior's supreme Deity and Godhead in almost every Verse.

I proceed to your Author's

2d Instance; wherein he thinks our Lord Jesus disclaimed a Perfection which
belongs only to the supreme God, viz. That of absolute Goodness -- which he
grounds upon Matthew. 19.17. Why call thou me good? There is none good but
one, that is God. -- Your Author affirms it to be evident, that Christ here
distinguishes himself from God, and denies of himself what he affirms of God.
-- And even were this the Case, the Interpretation I have hitherto maintained
is a natural and easy Solution, viz. That he distinguishes his human Nature
from God, and denies of that only what he affirms of God. -- But for my Part, I
can see no Grounds for your Author's Method of interpreting this Text. -- I
think all must allow that the Truth of his Interpretation entirely depends upon
the Opinion which the young Man had of Christ, who received this Answer from
him. -- And this I am ready to think very difficult exactly to determine:
However there is evidently the greatest Probability, that he did not look upon
him to be God: And if so, then the Answer he received from Christ, may be very
fairly understood as a Check or Reproof upon him, for attributing that to
Christ, while he thought him a mere Man, which belongs to God only; -- for as a
Man thinks in his Heart, so is he; -- and therefore the young Man was
reproveable for attributing that to him, which belonged not to him in the
Character or Capacity he viewed him in; though it justly belonged to him in his
real personal Character: -- This is undeniable. -- And now I humbly think, it
most probable, that the young Man did not look upon our Savior to be God,

First, Because the prevailing Opinion among the Pharisees and Jews in general
at that Day, concerning the Messiah was, not that he should be God manifest in
the Flesh, but a mere Son of David, a temporal Prince and Savior; and if the
young Man though it him to be the Messiah, yet that his Opinion of him, was
agreeable to the common Pharisaical Notion of the Messiah, is altogether
probable; since he was one from among the Multitude; and there is not the least
Intimation that he thought differently of Christ, from what the Rest though it of
the Messiah in general. Nothing can be inferred concerning his Opinion of him,
from the Question he asks him, more than this, That he thought him, as
Nicodemus did, A Teacher come from God; or one able to instruct him.

And,

Secondly. WHAT very much confirms it, that he did not take our Savior to be
God, is his Conduct after he had received Instructions from him, -- He went
away sorrowful. -- What! That he had been instructed Immediately from the Mouth
of God? -- No; That the Instructions were so opposite to his darling Lust: But
would any Man who had Reason and sober Thought enough to frame an Opinion any
Way, if he verily believed that the great God immediately enjoined a Thing upon
him, dare to neglect it? Or, would a Man thus believingly taught from God's own
Mouth, go away sorrowful, that he must deny himself one Thing to please this
God? No verily; a Man that would act at this Rate, must be abandoned to the
greatest Degree of Hardness and Stupidity: But the Character of this young Man
is very differently represented: He had kept, at least externally, the second
Table of the moral Law from his Youth; was inquisitive what he should do to be
saved; yea, he was a Youth of so much Innocence and Virtue, that our Savior
loved him: In short, He lacked but one Thing to make him a good and perfect Man
in the Sense of Scripture; and surely he would not have lacked this one Thing,
had he verily believed the great God from his own Mouth recommended it to him.

Besides,

Thirdly, IF our Savior knew the young Man though it him to be God, and was
conscious to himself at the same Time that he was not God, (as your Author
supposes) I say, if this be the Case, it is difficult to assign a Reason for his
answering him in this Manner; Why do thou call me good? there is none good
but One, that is God. -- This implies only an Inquiry why he called him Good;
i. e. upon what Account; and not a Denial that he was Good: He affirms that
none is good but God; but this is not denying himself to be God. -- Had he
designed such a Thing, if his Manner of Expression is not altogether
unintelligible, it is evidently very liable to be misunderstood, and but little
favors such a Design. -- Had he designed to have cured the young Man of a
Mistake, in thinking him God when he was not, would he not rather have plainly
told him, I am not God; or you are wrong in calling me Good? -- But on the
other Side, It is easy to assign a Reason why our Savior did not more fully
declare his Godhead to this young Man. -- The captious designing Pharisees
were about him, seeking Occasion and Opportunity to accuse him; but as His Time
was not yet come, he was careful to give them none, that their Ignorance,
Ill Nature and Prejudice could possibly improve against him at that Time. But
what Improvement they would have made of it, had he asserted himself to be God,
we may learn from the Account given of his Accusation and Trial, Matthew. 26. and
Luke 22. When he intimated before the Sanhedrim, that he was the Son of God,
the general Cry was, What need we any further Witnesses? for we our selves have
heard of his own Mouth. And, John 5.18. The Jews sought the more to kill him,
because he said, that God was his Father; making himself equal with God, as
they interpreted it: And our Savior is so far from denying absolutely that
their Interpretation was right, that he immediately asserts his Oneness with
the Father; though in such a Manner as to prevent their making an immediate
Improvement of it against him: -- He says, What Things soever the Father does,
these also does the Son likewise. From hence it appears, that our Savior
carefully avoided such Expressions as that even the Pharisees themselves could
judge sufficient to accuse and condemn him by, till his Time or Hour was come;
and therefore thought not proper to assert his Divinity, or Godhead, in plain,
explicit Terms to the World; not even till He was declared to be the Son of God
with Power, by a Resurrection from the Dead. -- And this, if I mistake not,
lets us into the Foundation and Design of that Charge our Savior gave his
Disciples, Matthew, 16.16. and Luke 9.22. When Peter, (speaking the Sentiments of
the other Disciples,) declared him to be Christ the Son of God; i. e. God by
Nature, and not merely by Office and Delegation: He strictly charged and
commanded them, that they should tell no Man that Thing: But why? What is the
Reason of this Charge? HE adds, Because the Son of Man, (not the Son of God
most properly and by Way of Eminence so called,) must suffer many Things, and
be rejected of the Elders and chief Priests and Scribes: -- Intending
certainly, that it was inconsistent with the Purposes of infinite Wisdom, and
his then present State of Humiliation and approaching Sufferings, that HE
should be publicly preached and proclaimed to be what He really was, and what
his own Disciples thought Him to be: -- And no wonder; when he gave his
Disciples such a Charge not to proclaim the Dignity of his Person, and his real
Character, till after his Sufferings, that he should decline doing it himself.

UPON the whole then; From what has been said, it appears (if not very plain
yet) most probable, that the young Man did not look upon Christ to be God: --
That our Savior's Answer, Why do thou call me Good? etc, is to be understood
as a Check, or Reproof, upon the young Man, not for his Words simply
considered; but for his applying them to Christ, while he entertained his then
present Opinion of him: I say, that his Answer is to be understood in this
Light; and not as a Denial of his own Goodness or Deity, since the Words do not
plainly express any such Denial: And no Reason can be offered why our Savior
should not plainly express it, if this was his Design: But on the other Hand,
that there is good Reason why he did not absolutely assert and publicly
declare his Divinity at that Time; such a Declaration being inconsistent with
the Purposes of infinite Wisdom, the State of Humiliation he was in, and the
Scene of Sufferings he had to pass through. -- So that if we are to judge
according to the greatest Degree of Evidence and probable Testimony, we must
judge that there is no sufficient Ground for your Author's Interpretation of
our Savior's Answer to the young Man. --

I proceed to the

3d and last Instance, wherein your Author supposes our Lord disclaimed a
Perfection which belongs to the supreme God, viz. Mark 13.32. Of that Day knows
no Man; no, not the Angels of Heaven; nor the Son; but the Father. -- This I
look upon to be the most plausible Argument in favor of your Author's Opinion.
As to the other Instances he produces, if we consider their obvious
Circumstances, and the general Current of Scripture, they are no Ways to his
Purpose; -- and even this is fairly over-balanced by other Scriptures, which
affirm in the most positive, unlimited Manner, that He knows all Things; --
that He searches the Reins and the Hearts, etc. -- For this is not a positive
Assertion that he did not, personally considered, know the Day and Hour; --
but, of that Day and Hour knows no Man; no not the Angels; nor the Son, i. e.
the Son of Man, or the human Nature: He did not then know it, considered as the
Prophet and Teacher of Mankind: It was what he could not then reveal in this
Character; it being kept as an invioble Secret from all created Beings; what no
ways concerned them to know; yea, the Knowledge of which would be dangerous and
hurtful, for the Reason assigned: For this bring kept such a Secret is, that
All might Watch: A Duty that would in a great Measure be superseded by a
Revelation of that Day and Hour: Therefore, of that Day and Hour must no Man
know; no, not the Angels; -- nor the Son, considered as Man; or the Prophet and
Teacher of Mankind: This I think a plain and natural Solution of these Words,
in consideration of the Circumstances attending them, and those other
Scriptures, which positively affirm, that our Lord Jesus knows All Things; that
He searches the Heart, etc. -- That they are to be understood of Him
considered as Man, or the Prophet and Teacher of Mankind, and not Personally.
-- I have therefore nothing to do now in order to maintain my Cause, but to
remove your Author's Objections against this Interpretation, and the Arguments
I have brought to support it. And this I shall attempt to do in a brief and
familiar Manner, though your Author has dwelt very largely upon it; conscious,
that his whole Hypothesis was depending, and must inevitably fall if he failed
in this Point.

HE therefore obejects;

Obj. 1st, THAT our blessed Lord Jesus, if himself was the supreme God in any
Nature of his own, could not have said such Things in any Consistency with
Truth and Sincerity: -- He could not say Himself could not do, and did not
know, the Things, which, if he were God supreme, he could do, and did know,
etc. -- As to the first of these, viz. "Our Savior's saying, that He could do
nothing of himself," I have already shown it evident from the Context, that
it is to be understood of his Will; that he had no private Will of his own,
separate from the Father's; and not of his Power: For, What Things soever the
Father does, those does the Son; and, as the Father quickens whom He will, so
does the Son. -- And, as to the second, He does not positively deny his knowing
the Day, etc, Personally considered; but considered as Man; or in the Character
of our Prophet and Teacher. -- So that the Question is plainly this, viz.
Whether our Lord Jesus, if the divine and human Natures were united in his
Person, could not affirm, that he did not know that as Man, or considered as
our Teacher, which he did know, as GOD, consistent with Truth; and this,
without any express Limitation or Reserve? -- In order to determine this; the
Time, Manner and Circumstances of his speaking, must be considered: For it must
be allowed, That at one Time, and under certain Circumstances, a Reserve or
Limitation may be necessary to render a Speech consistent with Truth; when at
another Time, and under different Circumstances, the same Speech may be equally
true, without any such Reserve or Limitation's being expressed. -- This might
be illustrated, were it necessary, by various Examples. -- The Truth and
Consistency of a particular Speech or Sentence often depends upon the
Circumstances of the Time; the Knowledge of the Hearers; or the preceding or
following Discourse of the Speaker: For it is no Argument, that a Man speaks
inconsistent with Truth, because we misunderstand him; or because what he says
is not true in the Light we consider it: If so, every Man must be a Liar that
has the Misfortune to be misunderstood; and at this Rate, perhaps, some would
make our blessed Savior as great a Liar as the Father of Lies himself. -- Now
to apply this to the present Case in the most familiar Manner: -- If the
Disciples understood him to speak of his human Nature, or of himself considered
as the Prophet and Teacher of Mankind, and not of himself personally, when he
said, that the Son did not know the Day and the Hour; then with regard to them,
his Speech or Saying was consistent with Truth: He did not deceive them; but
what he said in the Sense he intended it, and in the Sense they understood it,
might be strictly true, though the Son in another Nature, or Character, did
actually know, what is here said he did not know. -- And if from what is
revealed to us concerning our blessed Savior, we have sufficient Reason to
conclude, that this of his not knowing the Day, is to be understood of him
considered as Man, or as our Prophet and Teacher, and not Personally; then we
have no Reason to complain or object, that what he says is inconsistent with
Truth and Sincerity: And that we have no sufficient Reason to suppose this,
your Author has not yet proved; and to infer it from the Speech or Sentence
itself, singly considered, is absurd; since it is being consistent or
inconsistent with Truth and Sincerity depends upon the Circumstances of the
Time at which it was delivered; upon our Savior's whole Discourse with his
Disciples; and upon their Knowledge or Notion of what he said: I say, it
depended upon all these with regard to them: And with regard to us, it depends
upon the whole Record God has given of his Son. If he has not sufficiently
revealed to us, that this is to be understood of his human Nature only; but of
him Personally considered; then it is true, that supposing him to be GOD, is
making him speak inconsistent with Truth. But while he has revealed to us, that
it is to be understood of him considered as Man, or our Teacher only, and not
of him Personally, the above Supposition implies no Contradiction or
Inconsistency, with the strictest Truth and Sincerity. -- He that has told us,
the Son did not know, etc, has also told us, what we are to understand by the
Son, when this Knowledge is denied of him, viz. That we are to consider him as
Man, as our Prophet and Teacher, and not in his divine Nature, as truly God;
though He is to be thus considered, when it is said, He knows All Things; the
Hearts of Men, etc. -- This indeed is not delivered to us in the same Words and
Terms I have used; but it is plainly taught in that Record God has given of
his Son; at least your Author has not shown, that this is not revealed to us by
the same Scriptures that tell us, The Son knows not the Day, etc. So that though
our Savior did not make an immediate express Reserve when he said, The Son did
not know the Day; yet it amounts to just the same, if the Disciples understood
him with this Limitation; and if the Scriptures, which give us an Account of
him, teach us to understand those Words in this limited Sense, it is the same
Case: We have as little Reason to complain and object, that his saying, The Son
did not know, etc. is inconsistent with Truth, if he be GOD, as if he had
immediately added, You are to understand this of me as Man; I speak it of the
Son considered as the Prophet and Teacher of Mankind, or the like. -- Would it
not be a very unreasonable Criticism, for any one to take a single Sentence of
a Discourse delivered from the Pulpit, or at the Bar, a Sentence that depended
upon what preceeded or followed for its true Sense, or for the Meaning which
the Speaker intended, being explained and limited to certain Bounds; I say,
would it not be barbarous and unreasonable to select such a Sentence; and
declare, that because when understood in it is utmost possible Latitude, in a
Sense very different from what the Speaker intended, it was inconsistent with
Truth, therefore it was really so in every Sense, and cannot be reconciled with
the Truth and Sincerity of the Speaker; but is to be declared an absolute
Falsehood? Just so barbarous and unreasonable is it for your Author to select
this single Sentence of our blessed Savior and declare, That it is not true of
the Son, considered in the Light or Character in which he spoke of him; in
which his Disciples understood him; and in which the holy Scriptures teach us
to understand him; because it is not true of the SON considered in his utmost
Latitude, if he be GOD. -- This may be further illustrated by the very
Instances your Author brings to support his Objection: Though there is a wide
Difference between two Arms, or two Eyes, belonging to one Man, and two
infinite distant Natures being united in one Person; the Cases are too unlike
and unparrallel to prove any Thing of each other, and therefore are not to your
Author's Purpose, in the Light he considers them; but may serve to illustrate
what I have said. -- Thus, supposing a Man to have two Eyes, the one vivid and
piercing, by which he could discern minute Atoms and Objects at a great
Distance; the other dull and short-sighted, affected only by near and shining
Objects: Supposing this Man discoursing with me concerning the Sight of his
poorest Eye; or, being asked by me, how far, and what Objects he could see;
should answer, "I can see no farther than such a particular Object, and there
are only such and such large and shining Objects that I can discern;" would
this be inconsistent with Truth and Sincerity, because he could and did see
farther and other Objects with his best Eye? -- Or, if without any previous
Discourse of the Matter, he should say, "I don't see such and such Things;
there are certain Objects I don't discern:" But should add, that he meant by
his dull short-sighted Eye; for with the other he could discern minute Atoms
and Objects at a Distance: Could his first Assertion in this Case be justly
deemed inconsistent with Truth, if the latter were true? Surely no; he intended
no Falsehood; and I am not deceived: If I take and consider his whole Discourse
together, it appears every Way consistent; and in short, it would argue great
Ignorance, Prejudice or Ill Nature in me to object, that it was not true and
consistent. -- And now to apply this to the present Case. -- Supposing our Lord
Jesus to have two distinct Natures united in his Person, viz. the divine and
human; the divine knows all Things, the human does not: The Disciples who are
previously informed of this double Character, apply to him in the Character of
Man; or inquire of him as their Prophet and Teacher; not as a divine Person,
When the Day should be? He tells them, that he (or the Son) did not know; while
the divine Nature or He, the Son, in a different Character, did know: Or
without their previous Knowledge of his two Natures, and double Character, (if
you choose to have it so) he tells them, Of that Day the Son knows not: but
adds, that he intended by Son, the Son of Man; or the Son considered as the
Prophet and Teacher of Mankind; for that the Son, as God, or a divine Person,
did know it. The first of these Assertions cannot be justly deemed inconsistent
with Truth, because the latter is true. -- And that the Disciples either thus
understood our Lord at the very Time, or were thus instructed by him soon
after, is evident; because they soon after attributed infinite unlimited
Knowledge to Him: Lord, Thou know all Things. -- And they are Examples for
us; and we are to consider the whole Scriptures as one continued Discourse.
When we judge of the Person, Offices or Religion of our blessed Savior, we are
to explain and interpret one Part with another, by the Exercise of the best
Reason, without Prejudice or Partiality. -- Thus it renewedly appears, that
your Author's Objection is groundless; till he first shows, that the Record God
has given of his Son no where affords us sufficient Grounds to conclude that
the particular Sentence or Sentences in debate, are to be understood agreeable
to the above Interpretation. -- I have dwelt the longer upon this Point,
because your Author lays great Stress upon it; and indeed founds his other
Objections in great Measure upon the Supposition that this is just, true and
unanswerable. Thus largely showing the Vanity of this, will therefore open the
Way, and vastly facilitate the Removal of the Rest. -- I beg leave however to
add, that your Author has laid aside the Subtilty or good Sense he seems in
some other Places to be possessed of, when he makes such a horrid and obvious
Abuse and Misapplication of Dr. Stillingfleet's Words, to prove his own
Reasoning fair; and insinuates, "that some on the other Side own it, just when
out of the Heat of this Controversy, and contending with the Papists." Was I a
Friend to your Author's Opinion, or verily believed it reasonable and true, I
should be truly grieved to see it vindicated by such a Quibble. -- Is there any
Room to compare a Popish Priest who falsely pretends to personate God, to JESUS
CHRIST, if he is really God? Or does it follow by any Parity of Reason, that
because then Pretense is vain, that they know some Things as God, which they
know not as Men; therefore our blessed Savior, if the divine and human Nature
were actually united in his Person, could not know any Thing as GOD, which he
did not know as Man? Surely there is a wide Difference between falsely
pretending to be God, and being really GOD; or else we may make God almighty
himself an Impostor: And if here be a Difference, then your Author's Reasoning
upon this Head, and Application of the Doctor's Words in his Favor is unjust
and unreasonable. But I proceed to,

Obj. 2. viz. That Jesus Christ intended no such Distinction of two Natures,
because he puts not the Distinction or Opposition between the Son of Man, and
the eternal Word, (as some speak,) but between the Son and his Father; not the
Son knows, but only the Father. -- Which is as much as to say, None knows but
the Father, and the Son is in no Nature the Father; therefore the Son could not
know in any Nature, etc. -- I have not here used exactly your Author's Words,
but taken the whole of his Meaning. -- In answer to which, I would observe,
That though the Distinction or Opposition is not expressly put between the Son of
Man and the eternal Word in the very same Verse, or the next following; yet
that the Disciples understood it then, or were taught to understand it, with
the Distinction thus put between the human Nature and the divine, or the
eternal Word, is evident from their afterward attributing to the eternal Word,
or Christ personally considered, infinite, unlimited Knowledge: And that we are
to understand the Distinction or Opposition thus, is evident from the Current
of Scripture; which declares our blessed Savior to be God manifest in the
Flesh; proclaims his Divinity and Equality with God the Father. -- And this I
have shown, vindicates our Savior's Assertion, if he was really GOD, from the
Imputation of Falsehood or Inconsistency with Truth, equally as if he had made
an immediate express Reserve; and by Parity of Reason, and plain Consequence,
this vindicates him in not putting the Distinction or Opposition immediately
and in express Terms, if he did know as GOD, between the Son of Man and the
eternal Word; or between his Humanity and Divinity -- So that it by no means
follows, that our Savior did not intend this Distinction of two Natures,
because he does not immediately and in express Terms put the Distinction or
Opposition between the Son of Man and the eternal Word: There was either no
Occasion of expressing this Distinction then, they knowing it before, or he
taught it there presently after, and has sufficiently revealed it to us by his
Word; if divested of Prejudice, we with good and honest Hearts read and
consider it. -- But then, Are not all excepted from this Knowledge, but the
Father only? How then can the Son have it in any Nature? Answ. The general Term
of Father here comprehends the whole Godhead; so that the Son and Holy Ghost
are included under it, as well as the Father. -- But how, What Proof or Ground
is there to suppose that by the Term Father, we are to understand three
distinct Persons here; and that the Son of Man stands opposed to all these
included under the Term or Appellation of Father? -- Answ. Because the holy
Scriptures tell us, There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One. -- That the Father and Son
are One. -- That He that has seen the Son has seen the Father. -- That He
that honors not the Son, honors not the Father. -- That the Son is the
true God, -- God blessed forever. That He knows all Things. -- That He
searches the Reins and the Hearts, etc. i. e. in short, The Godhead, or
Deity, is plainly represented as subsisting in three distinct Persons, who
equally partake of the divine Essence, and of all natural and moral
Perfections; and consequently of Knowledge. Hence we conclude, That as all but
the Father are excepted from the Knowledge of that Day; so by the Father, is
intended the Deity, or Godhead, or all the three Persons in which it subsists:
And this Reason remains good, till it be shown, that no such Things as the
abovementioned are contained in the holy Scriptures, that Jesus Christ is not
represented as GOD equal with the Father; that infinite, unlimited Knowledge is
not attributed to Him, etc, -- which your Author has not done, unless his
Reason and Grounds for supposing that by the Term or Appellation of FATHER,
cannot be intended three distinct Persons, or the whole Godhead, if it
subsists in three Persons, is an over-balance, for Reasons I have mentioned, to
conclude the contrary: For certainly the most substantial Reason, the greatest
Degree of Evidence and Probability, ought to be followed. Let us therefore view
your Author's Reason, and see what Proportion it bears to the other. -- His
Reason then (if I mistake not) is this, That if the above Method of
Interpretation be good and just, he should despair of ever understanding the
Scriptures above all Books that ever were written. -- It is indeed a Question
with me, whether any Book of human Invention is so difficult to understand, as
the holy Scriptures, in many Parts: The Reason why is plain; because they treat
of the most sublime Truths; -- Truths above the Comprehension of our Reason;
and deal much in Parables, Metaphors and Figures of Speech: Besides, the Style
and Manner of Expression in those Idioms or Languages in which they were
originally delivered, is very different from ours at present: We are also very
much unacquainted with the Situation, Manners, Customs, Habits, etc, of the
Countries and Nations of which they treat: -- All which Things contribute to
render many Parts of them abstruse, and hard to understand: And for these and
other Reasons, many who are either unlearned, or unstable, wrest them to their
own Destruction. So that their being more difficult or hard to understand, than
any other Book in general, is no Argument that the above Interpretation is
wrong. -- And to apply this Reason to the particular Case before us, it amounts
to no more than this, That if the above Interpretation be allowed, this
particular Sentence, -- of that Day knows no Man, etc, is hard to understand,
when considered singly by itself, without any regard to the other Scriptures;
for if we take, and impartially consider, the whole Scriptures, they evidently
direct us to this Interpretation; as I have shown to be the Case,
notwithstanding all your Author has yet offered to the contrary. -- And is it a
good or sufficient Reason to reject an Interpretation grounded upon a Variety
of plain Scriptures, merely because the Text it self, to which the
Interpretation is applied, if considered singly by it self, is hard to
understand, according to this Interpretation? Surely it is not; and therefore
the Prop of this second Objection is weak and insignificant: And not much
unlike it is the third; which I proceed to consider:

Object. 3d. THE Interpretation must needs be unjust, which, if admitted, will
make all, even the most plain Speech, uncertain, and utterly insignificant; as
this Interpretation of Christ's Words would do. -- In answer to this, it might
be sufficient to say, that like those already considered, it is entirely founded
on the Supposition that the holy Scriptures afford no Grounds for such an
Interpretation (which yet remains to be proved) -- For if Scripture explains it
self, there is certainly no just Cause to complain or object, that it is
unintelligible: -- Or if it interprets some particular Texts or Sentences, in a
Manner different from the most common and ordinary Use of Speech; it cannot
therefore be justly objected, that all Speech is hereby rendered uncertain and
utterly insignificant. -- This is to suppose that no Text or Sentence of
Scripture whatever can possibly need any explaining -- That every Text in the
Bible is to be literally understood in it is utmost Latitude, and ought not to
have any limited or figurative Interpretation put upon it; but be understood
precisely according to it is Letters and Syllables: Which any one who has ever
read the Bibles must see would make horrible Work indeed with Scripture, fill
it with the most palpable Falsehoods, and gros, Contradictions; -- In short, it
would render every figurative Expression, (in which the Scriptures abound)
entirely useless. -- We must either understand them literally, or render them
obnoxious to this Objection. -- For every Interpretation that fixes a limited
or figurative Sense upon Scripture, must, at least in Measure, have the same
Tendency with this your Author objects against, to render plain Speech
uncertain and unintelligible. I would inquire how we are to understand the
Psalmist, when he calls the Lord his Rock? -- The Prophet, when he affirms of
the Jews They have made their Faces harder than a Rock; -- And our Savior,
when he says, I am the Vine, ye are the Branches. -- I am the Door. -- This
Bread is my Body: This Wine is my Blood, etc.? I am persuaded your Author never
thought that these Expressions were to be literally understood; but explained
them by his Senses, Reason and other Parts of Scripture, which give them a
figurative Interpretation, different from the literal and common Meaning of
these very Words and Syllables: -- And why may not we complain, that plain
Speech is hereby rendered uncertain and utterly insignificant? -- And still
further, if possible, to show the Vanity of this Objection; and that your
Author can with no Propriety urge it against the above Interpretation; I would
observe, that he must continually swallow it himself in its fullest Force, or
renounce his own Opinion: For what will he tell us when we ask the Apostle's
Meaning where he declares Christ to be God blessed forevermore -- the true God
-- God, whose Throne is established forever, etc.? Will he tell us, these
Expressions are to be understood of his Office, and not of his Person?
Astonishing! How uncertain and insignificant then is the most plain and
positive Speech! -- I might also urge our Savior's own Expressions, such as, I
and the Father are ONE; what Things soever the Father does, those also does the
Son likewise: He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father, etc. --
All which, and many more, to become consistent with your Author's Opinion, must
undergo an Interpretation no less tending to render plain Speech uncertain and
insignificant, than this he objects to: So that when your Author inquires, in
what Words Jesus Christ could in brief have denied himself to be God more plain
and full than this or that, the same Method of Interpretation would not evade?
The Question may be returned, at least with equal Force and Propriety, -- In
what Words could he or his Apostles have affirmed him to be truly God, more
plain and full than they have done in a Variety of Instances, and which your
Author's Interpretation would not have evaded? -- But I would not be thought by
this to put the two Interpretations upon a level in point of Reason and
Scripture-Evidence: That which your Author opposes has vastly the Advantage;
not only for Reasons I have already mentioned, but as having the general
Current of Scripture in its Favor; vastly beyond what your Author's can
pretend to, which seems principally to depend upon the single Text now in
debate. -- And further, what I look upon much in Favor of the Interpretation I
am pleading for is, that it is founded upon Expressions which either Christ
himself uttered when professedly and designedly discoursing of himself; or were
uttered by the Apostles, when designedly speaking of him and describing of him
to Mankind. -- Whereas this Text, which your Author lays the greatest Stress
upon, (and indeed many of the others) may be termed accidental (if any thing
that came from the blessed Jesus may be so termed) i. e. He was not professedly
and designedly speaking or discoursing of himself; he was not describing
himself, telling who and what he was, or the like; but engaged upon a different
Subject; and these Words seem to be more properly an Episode, or Circumstance,
of the Discourse, than a proper Part of the Discourse itself: And this I humbly
think, gives no small Advantage to the Interpretation your Author opposes. -- I
should have looked upon the Words your Author builds his Hypothesis upon, in a
very different Light, and I am persuaded some others would have urged them with
greater Warmth and Resolution, if possible, had they been a Part of a Discourse
wherein our Savior himself, or his Apostles were designedly speaking
concerning him, or giving a Description of him, to others who desired or wanted
Information. -- But not to enlarge further here, --

I proceed to,,

Object. 4. viz. THAT this Interpretation does plainly overthrow the Cause that
is designedly maintained by it, and may be turned against it: For if it be just
and true to deny of Christ absolutely what belongs to him in one Nature,
because there is another Nature in which it belongs not to him; then, since to
be the CHIEF GOD belongs to him (according to the above Method of
Interpretation) only in one Nature, and not in respect of the other, or human
Nature; it follows, that it may as justly be said Jesus Christ is not GOD, nor
to be worshipped or trusted as such; nay, that he was not before the Virgin
Mary, -- and the like; and this without adding any Limitation or Restriction,
any more than our Lord does in the Place mentioned.

Answ. THIS also is founded upon the old Supposition, That Scriptures afford no
reasonable Grounds for the above Interpretation; nor describe or represent our
Lord Jesus in any other Light than your Author does: -- For if we are to
believe our Lord Jesus to be such as the general Current of plain Scripture
represents him to be; and this represents him to be GOD as well as Man; then
the Objection ceases, and your Author's Conclusion is false: -- But that we are
to believe on, and speak of, our Lord Jesus as being such as the general
Current of plain Scripture represents him, cannot be denied by those who hold
the Scriptures to be a perfect Rule for our Faith and Practice; and that the
Scriptures represent our Lord Jesus to be GOD as well as Man, has not yet been
refuted: And to urge the present Objection for this End, will appear
unreasonable, if we consider more distinctly what every one must allow, viz.

1st, THAT our blessed Savior was at Liberty, by his own Mouth, or that of his
Apostles, to reveal Himself, the Design of his coming into the World, and the
Nature of his Religion and Doctrine, in just what Form, and at what Time he
pleased: And accordingly, while manifest in the Flesh, He revealed these Things
to his own Disciples in a gradual Manner; and kept many Things, relating to the
Nature and Design of his Kingdom, and Doctrine, secret, even from them, till
after his Resurrection and Ascension: For it was the Holy Ghost sent by the
Father, in his Name, that was to teach them all Things; and bring all Things to
their Remembrance.

2dly, IT cannot be denied, That after our Savior had fully revealed Himself,
the Design of his Coming into World, the Nature of his Religion, etc; his
Disciples, and all who enjoyed this Revelation, were obliged to believe on Him,
and speak of Him, according to this whole Revelation taken together; one Part
being compared with and explained by another; and not according to particular
Texts or Sentences, while the Revelation was in its Infancy or imperfect State.
-- And if this be allowed (as I think it must be) then it follows, that it
would be unreasonable in us, who enjoy this whole Revelation, to believe or
speak of our blessed Savior, and his Religion, the grand Subject of it,
exactly according to particular Sentences and Phrases delivered while in its
Infancy, and that are explained and interpreted by others of equal Authority:
i. e. in short, Since the Scriptures represent JESUS CHRIST to be GOD as well
as Man, it would be absurd and unreasonable in us to speak of HIM absolutely,
and without any Limitation or Reserve, either as GOD or Man -- We may
consistently and safely say, that JESUS CHRIST considered as Man, or with
regard to his human Nature, is not GOD, nor to be worshipped; that he was not
before the Virgin Mary, etc. But to speak of him absolutely and without any
Limitation in this Form, would be absurd; because the Record God has given of
him, represents him to be truly GOD, attributes Worship to him, declares him to
be eternal, etc. -- So should any one preach that the human Nature of Christ
was not GOD; -- or should one say, I believe that JESUS CHRIST considered as
GOD, was not conceived by the Holy Ghost, nor born of the Virgin Mary, nor
crucified under Pontius Pilate, nor dead nor buried, etc. this would be just;
for his divine Nature, which the Scriptures affirm he had, was not capable of
these Things: -- But should any one speak thus of him in absolute Terms,
without any Limitation or Reserve, he might justly be accused of Falsehood (if
nothing worse) because the Scriptures represent JESUS CHRIST to be both GOD and
Man; to be incapable of suffering in his divine Nature, and to have actually
suffered, etc. in his human. -- And, (as has been observed) we are to consider
the Scriptures as one continued Discourse or Record, which God has given of
his Son; of whom it is our Duty to believe and speak (when we use absolute
Terms) according to the complex Description or Representation here given of
Him. -- Your Author thinks it strange if any Thing is to be believed relating
to the supreme Deity of Christ, that this is not taken Notice of in the
Apostle's Creed, since this must be most important. -- Is it not strange, that
he could not see the Divinity, or Godhead of Christ, asserted in this brief
Summary of the Christian Religion, when He is styled, THE ONLY SON of God? How
is he, his only Son? By Creation? No; Angels and Men were created by God
likewise; -- By a special Adoption? No; good Men are entitled to this; -- By
the Office of a Messenger, or Ambassador? No, he cannot be alone in his Sonship
if this be it; for Angels are dignified with this Office; and even the despised
Ministers of the Gospel: -- Where then shall we go to find Christ alone in his
Sonship, but to the Fountain of the Deity; where neither our Senses nor our
Reason can extend; and say, He is the ONLY SON OF GOD; which is the same as to
say, He is TRUE GOD, equal with the FATHER?

Obj. 5. IT remains to consider your Author's fifth and last Objection, against
the above Method of Interpretation, viz. That it weighs something with him,
that the Evangelists never take any Occasion (when, as he says, they had so
many) to subjoin any Caution against taking Christ's Words in their obvious
Sense ( i. e. in the Sense he interprets them) when he says, of that Hour knows
not the Son, etc.

Answ. AS this is not offered as a proper Objection, but only what weighed
something with your Author, who (we may suppose) was easily attracted to this
Way of thinking, and required no great Weight to move him down the Declivity,
it would be a Waste of Time to consider it particularly and largely: -- It will
be sufficient to inquire, why the Evangelists did not subjoin a Caution when
they penned these Expressions of our blessed Savior, Matthew. 16.18. On this
Rock, I will build my Church -- and Chapter 26. 26, 27. Take, eat, this is my
Body -- Drink ye all of it, for this is my Blood, etc.? -- A Caution here, was
certainly as necessary as in the Instance or Instances referred to; -- and the
Evangelists had as many Occasions to subjoin a Caution to the one as to the
other. -- The most obvious Reason why they did not, in either of them, appears
to me to be this; -- That the Evangelists spoke and wrote as they were inspired
or moved by the holy Ghost; who did not suggest to them the Necessity of such a
Caution. -- The Evangelists (as I imagine) never thought, that the Pope's Chair
would be founded on One; the Doctrine of Transubstantiation on another; and the
Doctrine of Arius on the third, of these Instances: -- But infinite Wisdom has
seen fit (for wise and holy Ends no doubt) to permit them all; -- Though I am far
from thinking that the Want of such Cautions, as your Author requires, will be
any Excuse either for Papists or Arians.

THUS I have considered your Author's Hypothesis, -- the Scriptures upon which
he grounds it, -- and shown how entirely it is overthrown by a fair and natural
Interpretation of other Scriptures; -- That his Objections against this, are
vain; such as either have no Foundation at all, or may be retorted upon him in
their full Force. His next Attempt is to show, That there is no just Foundation
in Scripture for this Interpretation; before which his Opinion must fall; that
the Scriptures urged against him are capable of a different Turn, etc. This
therefore deserves to be particularly considered; it being now the only Thing
that can shelter the Opinion, I am opposing, from certain Ruin. -- And upon an
impartial Inquiry, I doubt not but this will also appear a Refuge of Lies. --

PART II. OBSERVATIONS upon CHAP. 3d of Mr. Emlyn's Inquiry into the Scripture
Account of JESUS CHRIST.
HERE your Author proposes, first; to Answer the Objections against his
Hypothesis; or refute the Arguments, usually brought from Scripture, to prove
JESUS CHRIST to be really GOD, equal with the Father: -- And he tells us, That
because Omniscience is that infinite Perfection, which is with the greatest
Show of Reason, or plausible Testimony alleged to belong to Christ; therefore
he chooses to single out This in particular. -- But I am much mistaken, if he
had not another and a truer Reason in his own Breast for this Conduct, viz.
That his Reasoning upon This Topic has a greater Appearance of Truth, and is
better adapted to deceive the Inconsiderate and Unstable, than it could be upon
some others, which are alleged in Vindication of the supreme Deity of Jesus
Christ: -- That this is actually the Case, I doubt not, will be made to appear
hereafter. --

I shall, in a few Words, expose the Fallacy of his Reasoning, upon the very
Topic he has singled out; whatever End he proposed in choosing This, rather
than another.

IT is alleged, in Vindication of the supreme Deity of Jesus Christ, That the
Disciples attribute to Him, infinite, unlimited Knowledge; John 16.30. Now are
we sure, that thou know all Things, etc. And, Chap, 21. 17. Lord, Thou
know all Things, etc. -- Now, infinite, unlimited Knowledge, is an
incommunicable Perfection, and can belong only to the supreme God; and
therefore, if the Disciples Testimony be true, CHRIST is the supreme GOD; since
they expressly attribute such Knowledge to Him. -- There is no Way to evade this
Argument, but by proving the Disciples Testimony to be false; which is what
your Author attempts. -- He tells us, These Expressions are Words of Admiration
from the Disciples not yet inspired; and are intended only to express a very
great and comprehensive Knowledge, far from infinite, divine Omniscience:

His Reasons for this are,

1st, That Christ himself says, Of that Day and Hour knows not the Son.

THIS I have already shown, is to be understood of his human Nature, and not of
Him Personally considered; and that your Author's Objections against this
Interpretation are groundless; so that it but poorly supplies the Place of an
Argument here, to prove the Disciples Testimony false; or that they intended
any Thing less by these Expressions than, infinite, divine Omniscience. -- And,

2dly. I MUST confess my Inability, to see the least Force in Argument second.
-- What! Does it follow that these Expressions of the Disciples are to be
understood with a Limitation, as intending no more than a great or
extraordinary Degree of Knowledge; because the Woman of Tekoah told King David,
2 Samuel 14.20, that He was wise according to the Wisdom of an Angel to know all
Things on Earth? -- Or does the Expression of St. John, 1 John 2.20, Ye know
all Things (which he expressly limits to the Matters or Truths concerning which
he was writing,) does this prove, that the Disciples are to be understood in a
confined or limited Sense; when without any Limitation or Reserve, they
attribute the Knowledge of all Things to Christ? -- Or, Is the high Opinion the
Jews had of their Prophets, an Argument that we should have a lower Opinion of
our blessed Savior? Or, Because they assigned an almost universal Knowledge to
them, must we assign a limited Knowsedge to Him? -- The most that can be
inferred from these Passages is, That under certain Circumstances, the Disciples
might possibly express themselves pretty much in this Manner; and yet intend no
more by it, than a very great and comprehensive Knowledge; because there are
Examples in Scripture of Expressions, somewhat similar, which did not intend
infinite, divine Omniscience: I say, somewhat similar; because I challenge a
single Instance to be produced from Scripture, where an Expression of the like
Nature was uttered with that Air of Assurance, which is manifest in this of the
Disciples; Now we are sure, etc. Or, where the Expression it self, or what
immediately preceeds or follows, does not plainly confine it to certain Bounds;
or show that it is to be understood in a limited Sense. -- But this is not the
Case here: The Expression is uttered with an Air of Assurance: The Terms are
strong and explicit; and neither what preceeds or follows so much as
intimates, that they are to be understood, or were intended, with any
Limitation.

For,

3dly, IT IS to the last Degree absurd, to conclude, that the Disciples did not
intend infinite, divine Omniscience; because they infer from our Savior's
Knowledge, that He came forth from God. -- This is the very Thing I would infer
from it, -- That HE proceeded from the Father; and Equally partakes of the
Divine Essence, and all possible Perfections: -- Or, If we understand his
coming forth from the Father, of his Mission into the World; the inferring this
from his Knowledge, is no Argument that the Disciples did not look upon Him to
be Omniscient, and intentionally attribute this Perfection to Him. -- But I am
much mistaken, if the Disciples were not thoroughly convinced and assured of
his divine Mission long before this; and therefore think it most probable, that
by coming forth from God, they intended his supreme Deity, and Equallity with
the Father; which they inferred from his infinite Knowledge. -- They surely
believed Him to be at least, a Prophet sent of God, long before this: His
Miracles were a most convincing Proof of this: Even some of the Pharisees
declared, that no Man could do such Miracles, except God was with Him. -- But
here the Disciples are convinced of something New: -- Now we are sure that thou
know all Things; and hence, We believe that thou came forth from God: i.
e. That Thou art a divine Person; a Partaker of the divine Essence, and all
divine Perfections. -- Besides, Had the Disciples ascribed that, in such strong
and explicit Terms, to our blessed Savior, which belonged not to Him, is it
not strange that he gives them no Reproof or Caution? Was He such a Lover of
hyperbolical Encomiums and fulsome Adulations, as to allow his own Disciples,
without the least Rebuke, to attribute that to Him, a Creature, which belongs
only to the Creator? I add, That if our Savior had not infinite, divine
Omniscience, or such a Knowledge as belongs only to GOD supreme; St. Peter's
Argument, That He knew his Love to Him, is groundless. -- For, from what, short
of an unlimited Knowledge of the Hearts of all Men, could he infer his
Knowledge of his Heart, or Love to Him? St. Peter must have argued very
foolishly, as well as falsely, to have inferred, That Christ knew his Heart; or,
(which is the same,) his Love to Him, merely because he knew many Things; or
had a great and comprehensive Knowledge; or indeed any Knowledge short of
infinite, divine Omniscience; or that of the Hearts of all Men, which belongs
only to GOD supreme.

BUT that our Lord Jesus had infinite, divine Omniscience, and the Knowledge of
Men's Hearts in particular, appears not only from these and other Expressions
of the like Nature; -- But

Secondly, FROM his own Words, Rev. 2.23: Where he claims it as his sole
Prerogative to search the Reins and the Hearts; and, all the Churches shall
know, that I am HE which search the Reins and the Hearts: -- Now Solomon
declares, 1 Kings 8.39, Thou (i. e. God) even thou only, know the Hearts of
all the Children of Men; and Jerem. 17.10, God declares by the Prophet, I the
Lord search the Heart; I try the Reins, etc. Here the great God is, as plainly
as Words can express, distinguished from all others, by his knowing and
searching the Hearts and trying the Reins of all Men. -- It belongs to Him
only, to search the Hearts; and to give to every Man according to his Ways, and
the Fruit of his Doings. -- And therefore, since our Lord Jesus declares
himself to be, HE who searches the Reins and the Hearts, and gives to every
one according to their Works, HE must be the great and supreme GOD: -- He
expressly claims that as his sole Prerogative, by which the great God is
distinguished from all others. -- He does not say, the Churches shall know that
I search the Reins and the Hearts; but, that I am HE; -- Which, if Words have
any Force in them; yea, if the Expression is not altogether unintelligible,
implies, I am HE who is distinguished by this Character; or the Churches shall
know that I am THE GOD, who searches the Reins and the Hearts, to give to
every one according to their Works.

LET us now inquire what your Author has said to invalidate this, which he
promises a serious Consideration; and, with an Air of Seriousness, insinuates
that, It Is no wonder that Solomon should not know of any other to whom that
Excellency, viz. the Knowledge of the Hearts of all Men, was communicated, than
God only. If I understand him, he means that it is no wonder if Solomon was
ignorant that this Excellency was, or could be communicated from God to any
one: -- If so, this is a Point I shall not even attempt to dispute; it being
the very Thing I would infer from the Words of Solomon, that he thought the
Knowledge of the Hearts of all Men peculiar to God; that He only, has an
underived, independent and unlimited Knowledge of the Hearts of Men; which is
an incommunicable Perfection or Excellency; a distinguishing Character of the
supreme God; though in some low Degree and at some particular Times, one Man may
have the Knowledge of another's Heart by Revelation from God; i. e. in short,
God may reveal to his Creatures, Things which they could not know or discover
by any other Means: But does it hence follow, that Christ's Knowledge of Men's
Hearts is communicated to Him? or, that it is derived from and dependent upon
any one? Does it follow by any Rules of Reasoning, excepting those your Author
has invented, that our Savior's Knowledge of the Hearts of Men was derived
from another, because that of the Prophets and Apostles was; who at certain
Times and in some Degree had this Knowledge? Surely no; an Appeal to the Reason
and sober Thought of every Person is a sufficient Answer to such forced and
unnatural Conclusions. -- But,

DOES not Christ himself own, that he knew what he reveals in the seven
Epistles to the seven Churches by Revelation from God? It was the Revelation
which God gave to Jesus Christ,etc. --

Answer; To give this any Weight at present, the Truth and Justness of your
Author's Objections, in Chap. 2d, must be granted; but the Vanity of these has
been already shown, and therefore the Method of Interpretation I have
maintained against them, is a plain and natural Solution of this, viz. That God
gave this Revelation to Christ, as Man, or as our Mediator, and therewith a
Commission to show it to his Servants; so that this Revelation's being given to
him in this Character, is no Argument against his Divinity, or his infinite,
divine Omniscience.

IT would be trifling to take Notice of his quibbling Answer to those who say,
that Christ's searching the Heart imports it to be his own Act. --

He argues Secondly, THAT there is no Absurdity in attributing this Knowledge
of the Heart to Jesus Christ, though he be not the most high GOD. That he knows
Things with some Limitation as to the Degree, and in Dependence on his Father
as to the Manner, he thinks appears from what he has already said; and
therefore concludes that the Knowledge of the Heart attributed to him, must be
such as is consistent with his subordination to the Father's greater Knowledge.

BUT as I have already shown, that those Texts from which Christ's inferiority
or subordination to the Father has been argued, are to be understood of his
human Nature, or of him as Mediator, and not of him Personally; and removed the
Objections against this Interpretation; so the Conclusion your Author makes is
invalid: There is no Necessity, nor any sufficient Reason yet produced, that
the Knowledge of Christ must be such as is consistent with any subordination to
the Father's Knowledge.

IT has not yet been shown, that the Father has greater Knowledge than He; and
therefore it can with no Propriety be concluded, that his Knowledge must be
subordinate to the Father's: This is begging the Question.

AND now, should the Point be granted, which your Author labors so long upon,
viz. That it can never be demonstrated, that it exceeds a finite Capacity to
know the Concerns of all on this Earth, when the enlarged Understanding is
assisted in the highest Manner by divine Influence and Revelation. -- Yet this
can no Ways militate against the infinite, divine Omniscience of Jesus Christ:
At least, it will be as difficult to show, that whatever cannot be demonstrated
to be absurd or impossible is true of Him, as that a finite Being cannot
possibly know all the Concerns of this Earth.

YOUR Author's Argument stands thus: -- "It cannot be demonstrated impossible,
that a finite Being should by any Means know the Concerns of all on this Earth;
and therefore though Christ knows the Concerns of all on this Earth, yet he is a
finite Being, and has not infinite, divine Omniscience." -- This is plainly
your Author's Sense; tho not exactly his Words; or else I cannot see to what
Purpose he asserts, that it cannot be demonstrated impossible for a finite
Being to know the Concerns of all on this Earth. -- But there needs no Words to
show his Conclusion to be arbitrary and groundless thus far. -- And should it
be further granted, that Christ as Mediator, or Man, knows, from Time to Time,
the various Miseries, Cases and Necessities of his Servants; which is the most
that your Author pretends to; yet it does not follow, that he is not
Omniscient; or that he did not intend to represent Himself as the OMNISCIENT
GOD, when he says, All the Churches shall know, that I am He which searches
the Reins and the Hearts. -- Tho I think it highly necessary, that the Judge of
Men and Angels should be Omniscient; and therefore that none is qualified for
this, but the MOST HIGH GOD; who is declared to be Judge himself, Psalm. 50.6,
compared with Heb. 12.23. -- Yet to shorten the Work, and refute your Author's
Reasoning in his own Way, I give him the Point he contends for, viz. That Jesus
Christ, as Man, may from Time to Time be acquainted with the Wants and Miseries
of his Servants; yet I argue, that he intended to represent Himself as the
Omniscient God, from the Manner of the Expression; and indeed the whole Force
of the Argument lies in this: For if it be demonstrated absolutely necessary,
that our Mediator and Judge, should be the omniscient God any other Way, there
would be no need of this, or any other Text, to prove it: -- Your Author
therefore evidently flies from the Question, and quits himself of the Argument
which he pretends to Answer. -- Instead of showing, that our Savior does not
represent himself to be Omniscient; he challenges a Demonstration, that it is
absolutely necessary that he should be, and utterly impossible that he should
know the Miseries and Wants of his Servants without this: i. e. in short, he
requires some other Proof or Demonstration of Christ's Omniscience, before he
admits his own Words as a Proof of it: -- A Method of Reasoning I must confess
entirely new to me, till I read your Author! -- I always thought that one, or
at least two unanswerable Arguments were sufficient to prove any Point, whether
Civil or Theological: -- And upon this Footing our Savior's Omniscience is
clear and undeniable: For (as I have already shown) his Disciples ascribed
infinite, unlimited Knowledge to Him: -- And here He himself claims a
distinguishing, Character of Almighty GOD; that by which his infinite, divine
Omniscience is frequently represented; Thou, even thou only know the Hearts
of all the Children of Men -- I the Lord search the Heart; I try the Reins,
even to give every Man according to his Ways, and the Fruit of his Doings: --
And, Thus says the Lord God, Behold I, even I will both search my Sheep, and
seek them out. -- These are Expressions by which GOD Almighty dustinguishes
Himself; the Characters of his Omniscience, by which his universal, underived
and independent Knowledge of the Hearts of Men, is most emphatically
represented: -- This is one of the Characters by which he is known: See Psalm.
7.9, For the righteous God tries the Heart and Reins, etc. -- Jer. 11.20, But
O Lord of Hosts, that judge righteously, that triest the Reins and the Heart,
etc. -- and many other Texts to the same Purpose might be produced, were it
necessary, where GOD Almighty is expressly distinguished and characterized by
his searching, trying, and knowing the Reins and Hearts: -- The Conclusion
therefore is plain and undeniable, that CHRIST is the Almighty, Omniscient GOD;
since he expressly declares himself to be, HE which searches the Reins and the
Hearts, to give to every one according to their Works: -- Nor does any Thing
your Author has said, in the least militate against this Conclusion; but
granting all he contends for, it remains good, viz. That Solomon did not know
of any other to whom this Excellency was communicated -- That it cannot be
demonstrated absurd and impossible, that a finite Capacity should know the
Concerns of all on this Earth, etc. -- And, that Jesus Christ, as Man, may by
the Assistance of God, know from Time to Time the Miseries and Wants of his
Servants. -- Though all this be granted as true; yet it no Ways militates against
the Truth of the Conclusion, that CHRIST is the omniscient GOD: -- Which does
not depend upon a Demonstration that these Things are false, as your Author
insinuates; -- for these may all be true, and yet the Premises from which I
draw my Conclusion be strictly true likewise: -- Thus, GOD Almighty is
frequently characterized and distinguished in Scripture by his searching,
trying and knowing the Hearts and Reins of Men. -- But JESUS CHRIST is thus
characterized and distinguished; nay, what is more, he expressly asserts
Himself, without any Limitation, and in the strongest Terms, to be HE which
searches the Reins and the Hearts; -- therefore He must be the Almighty GOD.
Now which of these Propositions do the Points your Author contends for,
militate against? -- Does it follow, that GOD Almighty is not thus
characterized and distinguished, because Solomon thought that He, and He only,
was? Or, because its not demonstrably absurd and impossible that a finite
Capacity should, by the Assistance of God, know the Concerns of all on this
Earth? Or, that Jesus Christ, as Man, should by this Means know the Miseries
and Wants of his Servants? Surely no: For if GOD is any where emphatically and
plainly distinguished and characterized in Scripture, it is by his searching,
trying and knowing the Hearts of Men: -- I challenge an Instance to the
contrary of this; -- or where GOD Almighty is more plainly and emphatically
distinguished from all others, by any Character whatever, than He is by this of
searching, trying and knowing Men's Hearts; and if so, then allowing your
Author's Reasoning just. He is no where distinguished by any Perfection or
Excellency; nor is there any Thing by which we can know him from some of his
Creatures. If the same Expressions which are brot to distinguish and
characterize the great GOD, are applicable to his Creatures, they do not
distinguish him at all: Thus; e. g. to say that if searching the Heart, etc.
when applied immediately to God, means, that none knows the Heart as God does,
so universally, so immediately and independently, (as your Author owns;) and
yet that, when applied to Christ in the very same Words, it means no more than
that he has a derived, limited Power of searching the Hearts, is very absurd:
It Is as much as to say, The very same Expressions which denote the universal,
immediate and independent Knowledge of the supreme GOD, and distinguish Him
from all created Beings; denote no more than the limited, derived and dependent
Knowledge of CHRIST; and distinguish him only from some ignorant, short-sighted
Mortals.

AGAIN, Secondly, It cannot be alleged, that any Thing your Author has said,
militates against the second of the Propositions, from which the Conclusion is
deduced, that CHRIST is GOD omniscient, viz. That HE is characterized and
distinguished in the same Manner that the supreme GOD is, by searching the
Reins and the Hearts, to give to every one according to their Works: This is a
plain Fact, which admits of no Dispute, That Jesus Christ actually in the
strongest Terms, and most explicit Manner, declares himself to be HE which
searches the Reins and the Hearts. -- And therefore it follows, that CHRIST
himself is the supreme, omniscient GOD, who only knows the Hearts of the
Children of Men; and who is distinguished from all others, by searching and
trying the Reins and the Hearts. -- I add, That the Expression I am He, as it
is here spoken of CHRIST, seems to be peculiarly appropriated to the supreme
GOD in Scripture: Thus, Isaiah 41.4. I the Lord, the first, and with the last,
I am He; Chap. 46.4. I am He, etc. 51.12. I, even I, am He that comfort you.
The great GOD here distinguishes himself from all others, by saying I am He;
this evidently denotes his great Power, Might and Supremacy: And this
Expression, if I mistake not, is no where in Scripture used in the same Manner
by any but God Himself. Our Savior's using it in this Manner is therefore a
probable Argument that he intended to represent Himself as the supreme GOD; and
to distinguish Himself from all, that by Revelation, or a derived Power obtain
a Knowledge of the Hearts of Men; as God distinguishes Himself from all
subordinate Comforters, when he says, I am He which comfort you. -- But what
confirms it, that our Savior intends here to represent Himself as the supreme,
omniscient GOD, is his expressly claiming another distinguishing Character of
God Almighty, in the proceeding Chapter, Ver. 8 and 11. -- See, Isa. 44.6. Thus
says the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts, I am
the First, and I am the Last; -- And, Chap. 41.4.48.12. In all which Places,
the supreme GOD distinguishes and characterizes Himself in this Manner, I AM
THE FIRST AND THE LAST. And in the same Manner our Savior distinguishes and
characterizes Himself. -- I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending,
says the Lord; which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. --
I AM -- THE FIRST AND THE LAST. -- And what can be the Import of these
Expressions, but that HE is the Eternal, Self-Existent, Almighty GOD? -- Or,
What could our Savior intend to represent Himself to be, unless what the
Prophet Isaiah declares of Him, (no doubt by divine Inspiration,) that He is,
Wonderful, -- Councellor, -- the MIGHTY GOD, -- the everlasting Father, -- the
Prince of Peace, Chap. 9.6. Or could He in any stronger or more emphatical
Terms, have declared Himself to be, in the most eminent Sense, Eternal,
Immortal and Omnipotent? -- Besides creating Power, which necessarily implies
Omnipotency, is expressly attributed to Him; Joh. 1.3, All Things were made by
Him; and without Him was not any Thing made that was made. Heb. 1.10, 11, 12,
And, Thou Lord, in the Beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the Works of thine Hands, etc. -- And since these other
distinguishing Characters of the supreme GOD, are expressly claimed by, and
attributed to our Lord Jesus, there is no Room to doubt, but that he intended
to represent Himself as the omniscient GOD, by saying, All the Churches shall
know, that I am HE which searches the Reins and the Hearts: And considering
how plainly, frequently and emphatically these distinguishing Characters of the
supreme GOD are claimed by and attributed to CHRIST; it is absurd and arbitrary
to require Arguments for his supreme DEITY from any other Topics than these,
which as plainly assert and prove it, as Words can do. -- Thus it appears that
this Argument for the supreme DEITY of CHRIST, remains good notwithstanding all
your Author's Labor to refute and overthrow it: And indeed all that he himself
pretends to, is, to have shown it possible for Christ, by Revelation from God,
to know the Miseries and Wants of his Servants, though himself be not God; which
is far from showing that Christ is not God, or that he did not intend to
represent himself as God; and no ways affects or weakens the Arguments I have
used to show that he intentionedly claims a distinguishing Character of the
supreme GOD. -- To conclude this Head; should any one be disposed to make the
Trial, and apply our Author's reasoning against the Omniscience of CHRIST,
against his eternal Existence, or almighty creating Power, as asserted in
Scripture; I am much mistaken if they would not have the Mortification to be
disappointed, and find themselves unable to dress Falsehood with so great an
Appearance of Truth; as your Author has done upon this Topic: And this will
easily account for his prefering this to any other; and likewise prove him
mistaken when he insinuates, that the same Reasoning he has used here will hold
equally true when applied to any other divine Perfection attributed to Christ:
If he means thus, there is as good a Foundation for this way of Reasoning
against any other Perfection as that of Omniscience, I readily join with Him:
But if he intends by it, that the same Way of Reasoning (or indeed any other)
would have the like semblance of Truth, when applied to those other Perfections
I have mentioned, as when applied to this of Omniscience, it is what I very
much scruple: -- It must be confessed, his Reasoning here has a very specious
Appearance of Truth; and may overset the Ignorant and Unstable; for which
Reason I have dwelt the longer upon it; and more distinctly and particularly
exposed its Fallacy, than I should otherwise have done; and more largely
vindicated this Point of Christ's Omniscience; because some of my Reasoning in
the former Part of this Letter is grounded upon it; and as I have maintained
this, so whatever depends upon the Truth of it, remains good.

Secondly. I proceed to argue the supreme Deity of JESUS CHRIST from that
Worship and Homage we are commanded to pay Him; and consider your Author's
Objections against it.

THE supreme Deity of CHRIST is argued from the Worship and Homage we are
commanded to pay to him. -- Thus, the supreme GOD only is the proper Object of
the religious Worship and Homage of his Creatures, Math. 4.10. It is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God; and him only shall thou serve. The
Disciples of our Savior, yea Angels have refused to receive Homage from Men,
they being all equally Servants to their common Creator: -- And indeed, Reason
teaches us, that all our religious Homage and Praise, should be ultimately to
the supreme GOD -- That whatever Homage we pay to any created Being, it should
be subordinate to that which we pay to GOD, who is the Fountain of all Being;
and from whom Men and Angels derive all their Happiness. -- "This is a Point
never disputed, that I know of, by Arian or Socinian Doctors." And now that
religious Worship is to be paid to Christ, as the ultimate Object of it,
appears,

1st. FROM John 5.23. That All Men should honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father: -- That is, says your Author, as truly, not as greatly; because
the Father has committed or given all Judgment to him. If I understand him
here, he supposes that Christ's having all Judgment committed to him, is the
sole Ground and Foundation of that Honor which we are commanded to pay to him;
and therefore, that this Honor must be inferior to that which we owe the
Father: Or, that though we are truly to honor Christ, yet we are not to honor
him as we honor the Father, or with the same Honor: -- But this Conclusion is
entirely overthrown by what follows in the very same Verse -- He that honors
not the Son, honors not the Father: -- But if the Son's having all Judgment
committed to him, is the sole Ground of his claiming Honor and Homage from us,
it will be difficult to show how and why his Honor is so inseparably connected
with the Father's. -- If it be said, that he who neglects to honor the King's
Officer or Ambassador, neglects to honor the King himself. -- I answer, that
though such an one would neglect to honor the King in this particular Instance;
yet he might honor him in other Instances; he might respect and honor his
Person and Government in general, though he neglected to honor even the highest
Officer in his Kingdom: But here it is indefinitely declared, that he that
honors not the Son, honors not the Father; i. e. He does not duly honor
or glorify the Father, who refuses to honor and glorify the Son, as he does
the Father. -- Honor must therefore be due to the Son upon some other Grounds,
than that of his having all Judgment committed to him; even because he is true
God, equal with the Father; and therefore as great and true Honor is due to
Him as to the Father; as great Faith, Love, Fear, Worship and Obedience is due
to the Son as to the Father. -- It Is absurd to suppose, that the Honor of
Almighty GOD, as due from us, is inseparably connected with the Honor of any
mere Creature; and therefore since His Honor is thus connected with the Honor
of Christ, to suppose Christ a mere Creature, is absurd. Again,

2dly. THAT the same Honor, Homage or Worship, is due to the Father and Son,
and upon the same Grounds, appears from Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the FATHER, and of the SON,
and of the HOLY GHOST. -- Now, that Baptism is an Act of religious Worship, can
admit of no reasonable Dispute: It is represented in the New Testament, as an
essential Branch of Christianity: It was constantly required of all who came
into the Church, or made a Profession of Christ's Religion in the Apostle's
Time: And our Savior himself makes it ordinarily necessary to Salvation under
the Gospel, Mark 16.16. -- Moreover, if we consider the Thing signified, or
represented by this Sacrament; -- the Temper with which it should be received;
whether personally or for others; and the End that should be aimed at, and
answered by it; it must appear to be a most important and solemn Act of
religious Worship and Homage: -- And that it is so, as properly and
immediately, with respect to the Son and Holy Ghost, as it is with respect to
the Father, admits of no Controversy. We are as truly and properly baptized in
the Name of the Son and Holy Ghost, as of the Father; and therefore this is an
Act of Worship paid as immediately and as properly to the Son and Holy Ghost,
as to the Father: -- But, says your Author, We are baptized in the Name of the
Son, because, All Power in Heaven and Earth was given to Him: Which he gathers
from the preceding Verse, -- All Power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth,
-- therefore, go and baptize, etc. Now it is plain, beyond all Contradiction,
that if Christ's having all Power given him, is asserted here as the only
proper Grounds of our being baptized in his Name; the very same is the Grounds
of our being baptized in the Father's Name; for the same Reason (if any at all)
is assigned for the one as the other: And we may with the same Propriety infer,
that we are baptized in the Father's Name, because all Power is given to the
Son, as that we are baptized in the Son's Name for this Reason; and therefore,
it cannot be hence inferred that this is the proper and only Ground of our
being baptized in the Name of the Son: -- It is plain, that Christ's having all
Power given him, is mentioned here only as the Ground of his sending or
commissioning his Disciples (as the Mediator between GOD and Man,) to teach and
baptize all Nations; and not as the Reason of their being baptized in the Name
of the Son. And thus it renewedly appears, that we are commanded to pay
religious Worship and Homage to CHRIST, as the proper and ultimate Object of
it: And that, as easy as your Author insinuates it to be, he has not shown nor
offered any Thing of Reason to the contrary. I might produce other Instances to
the same Purpose, were it necessary, -- As Philippians 2.10. Hebrews 1.6.
Where, All the Angels of God are commanded to worship HIM. -- But it will
sufficiently confirm what has been said (if there be need of further Testimony)
to produce Instances from Scripture, where religious Worship is evidently given
to CHRIST, as the proper and ultimate Object of it.

I FORBEAR mentioning the many Instances of his receiving Worship from his own
Disciples and others, before his Crucifixion and Ascension; because it may be
said, perhaps, that this was not religious Worship; nor any Thing more than
what was common to pay to Persons of Distinction among the Jews: Though I must
confess I see no Reason to suppose it any other than such Worship as the
Disciples refused to receive, because they were Men; and such as the Angel
refused to receive from St. John, because he was his Fellow Servants. -- The
very same Word is used in the Original, for that Worship which Christ received
without any Hesitation, as for that which the Apostles and the Angel refused,
because they were Men and Fellow Servants. -- From whence I might argue, That
this was such Worship as no Dignity of Office or Nature, short of the DIVINE,
was entitled to.

BUT there are also various Instances where religious Worship and Homage was
paid our Lord JESUS by the Apostles after his Ascension.

1. THERE is no more immediate Act of Worship and Homage paid to Almighty GOD,
than that of adoring Him, as the Creator and unchangeable Upholder of the
Universe: And this Homage the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 1.10,
11, 12, expressly attributes to our Lord JESUS; -- And, Thou Lord, in the
Beginning, have laid the Foundation of the Earth; and the Heavens are the Works
of thy Hands; they shall perish, but thou remainest, etc. Thou art the same,
and thy Years shall not fail. -- Now in what more solemn and immediate Manner
can we address the great GOD, and acknowledge and adore Him, as the Creator of
Heaven and Earth; not to say, as an eternal, unchangeable Being? It Is most
immediately applied to Him; -- And, Thou Lord, etc; and terminates in Him,
without any Reserve or Limitation. The Lord JESUS therefore, who is thus
addressed, is the proper immediate and ultimate Object of this solemn,
religious Adoration. --

Again,

2. THE Apostles, in almost all their Epistles, Bless the Churches or Persons
to whom they wrote, in the Name of the Lord JESUS: -- The Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you, is the common Conclusion: -- Which plainly implies an
immediate Supplication or Prayer to CHRIST for Grace. And how Arian and
Socinian Doctors can use this Apostolical Form of Blessing the Church, and
acquit themselves of Idolatry, or worshipping a mere Creature, while they look
upon the Lord Jesus as such, I must Confess is a Mystery to me.

3. ST. Peter attributes everlasting Praise and Dominion to CHRIST; See 1
Epist. 4.11, To whom be Praise and Dominion forever and ever, Amen. And, 2
Epist. Chap. 3. ult, To Him be Glory both now and forever, AMEN. -- Strange
Language this, to a mere Creature! -- To One whose Praise, Dominion and Glory
must cease at the End of this World! -- But not to multiply Arguments in so
clear a Case, I shall only mention those Instances of religious Worship and
Homage paid to CHRIST, Rev. 5.12, 13, 14, Saying, with a loud Voice, Worthy is
the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and
Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing: And every Creature, which is in
Heaven, and the Earth, and under the Earth, etc, -- heard I, saying, Blessing,
and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto Him that sits upon the Throne, and
unto the Lamb forever and ever: And the four Beasts, or living Creatures said,
Amen: And the four and twenty Elders fell down, and worshipped Him that lives
forever and ever.

TO conclude this Head; St. John tells us, Rev. 21.22, in his Description of
the New-Jerusalem, that he saw no Temple therein; for the Lord God Almighty,
and the Lamb are the Temple of it; and Ver. 23, The Lamb is the Light thereof:
-- Whence it plainly appears, that JESUS CHRIST, or the LAMB, shall be the
Object of our Worship and Praise, after your Author divests Him of his Power,
Dominion and Dignity. -- When we shall no longer need a Temple made with Hands;
when all external Ordinances, Means and Instruments of Worship shall cease;
then the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, shall be our Temple and our Sun; the
Place and Object of our Worship and Praise shall be One, through an endless
Eternity. -- Thus it appears that JESUS CHRIST is, and forever shall be, the
immediate, proper and ultimate Object of the Worship and Homage of all created
Beings.

BUT your Author attempts to answer all that has been said, or can be said, to
support the Doctrine of CHRIST' S Divinity, at once, by offering it as his
Judgment, that this subverts the Gospel Doctrine of his Mediation.

BEFORE I particularly examine and answer his Reasons for this, I beg Leave to
premise a few Things, viz. (1.) That a Consideration of the plain Proofs and
Arguments which have been offered for the supreme Deity of JESUS CHRIST, will
make a wise Man exceeding cautious how he yields his Faith to the contrary,
without plain and intelligible Arguments, or an over-balance of Evidence and
Proof either from Scripture or Reason, or from both. (2.) In Consideration of
what has been said in Vindication of the supreme Deity of CHRIST, it would be
foolish to deny and disbelieve it, merely because there is something in it
mysterious, hard to understand, and above or beyond the Comprehension of our
Reason. -- To believe Things which are contrary to Reason or common Sense; or
to invent and forge Mysteries without any Foundation, and recommend them for
Doctrines of Truth, which ought to be believed, is absurd and foolish: -- But
to believe there is no Truth above, or beyond the Comprehension of our Reason,
is equally so; especially if they be such as respect the divine Nature,
Perfections and Attributes, which are incomprehensible; and which none by
searching can find out. -- Thus the ingenious and learned Doctor Leng observes,
That if a Revelation from GOD is necessary to teach us any Thing concerning the
divine Nature, and his Designs toward Mankind, and in Relation to a future
State, more than what we could naturally know before; it must of Necessity be
something which our Reason could not discover: And as far as the Nature of an
infinite Being is concerned in it, it must exceed our finite Capacities by the
very Nature of Things; and yet the Belief of it, when so revealed, may be very
reasonable, so long as it implies no Contradiction. -- He adds, And indeed it
would be a much greater Prejudice against a Revelation's being from God, if it
had no Marks in it of any Thing but what human Reason could have discovered
without it. See Leng's Sermon. at Boyle's Lect. Page 503. (3.) Before I
distinctly consider your Author's Opinion, I would observe in general, what the
common Notion of Trinitarians is; and that which I imagine he intends to
oppose, concerning Jesus Christ as our Mediator -- It is briefly this, that in
the one Godhead or Divine Essence there are three real Differences, or distinct
Persons, represented and distinguished in Scripture by the Names of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: -- That these Three equally partake of the One Godhead,
or divine Essence: -- That the Second of these divine Persons, ( viz. the SON,)
in order to the Redemption of Mankind from moral Evil and Depravity, and
eternal Death and Misery, (the just and necessary Consequence of their
Rebellion and Apostasy from God,) freely and voluntarily engaged to be our
Mediator and Advocate, to vindicate the Honor and Authority of the divine Law,
by assuming the human Nature into a personal Union with the divine; which in
due Time he actually did, and has forever vindicated and established the
Honor and Authority of the divine Law by his perfect Obedience and Sufferings:
-- That after his Obedience and Sufferings were completed, He, (the Man Christ
Jesus, personally united to the DIVINE NATURE) ascended into Heaven, to the
Place of GOD'S most immediate Presence and Glory; where He continues to offer
and plead the Worth and Merit of his Obedience and Sufferings, in the behalf of
Sinners; by virtue of which, divine Grace and Goodness, I mean moral and mental
Excellencies, such as are necessary to qualify us for a glorious Immortality,
as well as natural Enjoyments, are freely dispensed to Mankind; and in
particular to his true and sincere Disciples, who have this Confidence above
others, that if they ask any Thing in his Name, and agreeable to his Will, they
are heard; and that, of his Fullness they shall receive, and Grace for Grace. --
This in general is the common Notion those have of JESUS CHRIST, as Mediator,
who oppose your Author.

LET us now inquire, Whether any Thing he has said shows this Notion of JESUS
CHRIST, as Mediator, to be false or inconsistent: And, Whether it is not
perfectly agreeable to the Scripture Account of this Matter.

1st then, IT is objected, If we must have one who is supreme God and Man, for
our Mediator with God; then, when we address to Jesus Christ as the supreme
God, where is the God-Man that must be our Mediator with Him? To say, He
mediates with Himself, is the same as to say, we must go to Him without a
Mediator, etc.

Answer, IT is not pretended, that GOD, or the Deity of Jesus Christ, simply
considered, is our Mediator with GOD; -- nor yet, that Christ as mere Man is to
be worshipped: -- But, agreeable to what has been premised, that the human
Nature, or the Man Christ Jesus, though as united to the divine, acts as
Mediator. -- So that when we address to JESUS CHRIST as the supreme GOD, our
Mediator is the Man Christ Jesus united to the GOD, or divine Nature. -- Where
then is there any want of a Mediator? -- Here is One, as truly and properly, as
when we address to GOD the Father, the Man Christ Jesus, or the human Nature as
united to the divine, is our Mediator, whether we address, adore or worship the
Deity of the Father, Son or Holy Ghost. -- But,

2dly, IT is objected, That this is still to make Christ Mediator with Himself;
-- the Man Christ mediates with the God Christ: -- Besides, the Man is not
God-Man.

Answ. IT IS true, This is supposing that Christ, as Man, but united to the
divine Nature, mediates with Himself as GOD: But this by no means subverts the
Doctrine of his Mediation, when we address to Him as GOD: Nor yet does it make
the Deity, which we address to, or adore, a Mediator with Himself. -- The
Man-Christ, as united to the divine Nature, is our Mediator with GOD the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost: -- And this Man-Christ, it is not pretended, is to
be addressed to, adored, or worshipped, as a divine Person; or the ultimate
Object of our religious Homage; which would be gross Idolatry. So that we
neither include the Mediator, by whom we worship, and the Object of our Worship
in One, nor confound them together. -- We address to JESUS CHRIST, as being the
Brightness of the Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person; Heb.
1.3. i. e. We adore and worship HIM as GOD, exclusive of any personal Union
with our Nature; but we esteem Him as Man united to the divine Nature, to be
our Mediator; and as such we go to GOD by Him. -- Thus, When I pray to JESUS
CHRIST, it is as GOD; and I humbly hope to be heard and answered through the
Mediation of the Man Christ Jesus, who is every Way qualified for this Office,
by virtue of his Union to the divine Nature.

BUT it will perhaps be objected; -- Is not this supposing Mankind destitute of
a Mediator till the Incarnation of the SON of GOD? -- If it be the Man Christ
Jesus that is the Mediator, -- Who was Mediator before there was such a Man? --
And, Did not the DIVINE WORD (or LOGOS) immediately interpose and act as
Mediator upon the Fall of our First Parents, and so for 4000 Years before he
was made Flesh, or assumed the human Nature, and while the human Nature was a
Child, etc.?

Answ. TO remove these Difficulties, let it be observed, -- First, THAT the
Mediation of Christ consists of two Parts, the Intercessory and Expiatory. Heb.
11.25, He ever lives to make Intercession for them. 1 Pet. 3.18, For Christ
also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust. And, Heb. 10.14, By
one Offering he has perfected forever them that are sanctified, etc. --

Secondly, THE expiatory Part of Christ's Mediation is the Ground and Basis of
the Intercessory. -- To suppose an Advocate or Intercessor who has nothing to
plead or represent in Favor of those he interceeds for, is absurd: -- And to
suppose that our Intercessor represents or pleads any personal Accomplishments
or Qualifications of Mankind in their Favor, is no less so. For would our
personal Accomplishments and Qualifications recommend us to GOD, we should no
longer need a Mediator or Intercessor: Such an Office would be quite
superfluous. -- We must therefore conclude, that our Intercessor has something
of his own to plead and represent in Favor of Mankind, in order to their
obtaining the divine Favor and Forgiveness. -- And if so, if this is the
Condition of our Acceptance with God, that some One represent an adequate Merit
of his own in our Favor, we must conclude that the Mediator between God and
Man, did actually plead and present an adequate Merit of his own in Favor of
Man immediately upon his Fall; or as soon as he fell under such Circumstances
as to need a Mediator, (which all agree was soon after his Creation and at the
Time of his eating the forbidden Fruit,) otherwise his Mediation would be
insufficient; i. e. The DIVINE WORD did actually interceed for Man, and plead
an adequate Merit in his Favor, immediately upon his Fall or first
Transgression. -- But then,

Thirdly, LET it be observed, That the expiatory Part of this Mediation which
is carrying on between God and Man, consists in yielding perfect Obedience to,
and suffering the Penalty annexed to, the broken Law; and as the DIVINE WORD
(or LOGOS) was incapable of either of these, so he could never plead in Man's
Favor the actual Performance and Execution of this fundamental Part of the
Mediation: He therefore (as has been premised) engaged to vindicate the Honor
and Authority of the divine Law, by assuming the human Nature into a personal
Union with Himself; which, in these Circumstances, was capable of performing
this Part of the Mediation, of bringing in an everlasting Righteousness, or a
Merit adequate to the Offenses of all Mankind: -- And this Engagement the
DIVINE WORD, (or LOGOS) pleaded and represented in Favor of Mankind, till such
Time as the Engagement was fulfilled and executed by the Obedience and
Sufferings of the Man Christ Jesus, personally united to the LOGOS: -- Hence He
is styled, The Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World. -- But since he
has performed the expiatory Part of the Mediation, He, the Man Christ Jesus,
as united to the DIVINE WORD (or LOGOS) ever-liveth to plead the actual
Performance and Execution; and represent the Worth and Value of it in Favor of
Mankind. -- And, as the Man Christ Jesus is personally united to the DIVINE
WORD (or LOGOS,) so the same Person pleads and represents his perfect
Righteousness and bitter Death in our Favor, who pleaded and represented his
Engagement to obey and suffer in Favor of Mankind immediately after their
Fall. -- The DIVINE WORD (or the LOGOS) and the Man Christ Jesus are one
Person: -- Hence there seems to be a special Propriety in stiling our Mediator
(when we consider him merely as such) The Man Christ Jesus; or the Man Christ
Jesus our Mediator. HE, as united to the DIVINE NATURE, actually performed the
expiatory Part of the Mediation between GOD and Man; and though the Merit and
Value of this was pleaded and represented in Favor of Mankind long before
there was such a Man; yet now He (the Man Christ Jesus, as united to the DIVINE
NATURE) ever lives to perform this; HE is our merciful and faithful High Priest
in Things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People;
for in that HE himself has suffered, being tempted, HE is able to succor them
that are tempted.

IN short, the Man Christ Jesus, as united to the LOGOS, was in effect the
Mediator between God and Men from the Fall of our first Parents. He was such by
Engagement and Promise from the LOGOS; and the Merit and Value of his future
Righteousness and Sufferings, were represented in Favor of Man as soon as his
fallen Circumstances required any such Recommendation. -- If it be inquired,
How this Promise and Engagement could be a sufficient Ground of Man's
Acceptance with GOD, and what Right the LOGOS had to enter into a Promise and
Engagement, in which a Man to be born 4000 Years after, was so directly and
immediately concerned? -- I answer, That I see no way to solve this, if we
allow the LOGOS to be no more than a mere Creature: But if we allow him to be
TRUE GOD, the Answer is obvious and easy; for as GOD is unchangeable, and has
all Power, Wisdom and Perfection, so his Promise and Engagement is as safe a
Ground to act, believe and hope upon, as actual Performance and Execution: And
as to his Right of making such a Promise and Engagement; He had the same Right
to do this, that he had to create Man or any other Being. -- Besides, as the
Man who was so directly and immediately concerned in the Fulfillment of this
Promise, was to be personally united to the LOGOS who made it; so the Promise
itself was Personal: -- The Person that promised, was the Person that should,
and has, fulfilled this Promise; which effectually removes the supposed
Difficulty.

BUT it is objected,

3dly, THAT the human Nature of Christ can never be an effectual Mediator,
(according to those your Author opposes,) No, not though it were personally
united to the divine, -- because they deny this human Nature, so united, to
have the Knowledge of the secret, mental Prayers, the inward Desires and
Distresses of all Christians; or to know any one's Heart: And how then can He
be a compassionate Intercessor in Cases he knows nothing of? etc.

Answer. It is indeed denied, that the human Nature of Christ, though personally
united to the divine, has an inherent Knowledge of the Cases and Desires of
Christians, or the Hearts of Men, i. e. that Jesus Christ knows all Things
merely by virtue of his human Nature: -- But it is acknowledged, that the
divine Nature knows all Things; and that by virtue of the Union of the human
Nature to it, all needed Knowledge is communicated or imparted from the GOD to
the Man, to render the latter an effectual Mediator, a compassionate
Intercessor, a merciful High Priest and Advocate for us. -- No Man in his
Senses ever yet pretended, that the Man Christ, who is our Mediator, could not
and did not know the Cases and Desires, etc. of Mankind: But then it is denied,
that he has an inherent Knowledge of these Things. -- The Man Christ, who is
our Mediator, knows our Cases, Wants, Desires, etc. by virtue of its Union to
the divine Nature: And surely your Author could not think his Mediation
ineffectual on this Account, viz. because his Knowledge of our Cases, Desires,
etc. is not inherent in the human Nature, exclusive of the divine, to which it
is united; since, for the very same Reason, he must renounce his own Account of
the Mediator: For he supposes that his Knowledge comes by Revelation from GOD;
if not universally and at all Times, yet in some Degree, and at some Times, and
in particular the Knowledge he had of the Churches of Asia -- "If any should
ask (says he, Page 30.) How Jesus Christ comes to know all that he reveals in
the seven Epistles to the seven Churches, etc. the very first Words of the Book
of the Revelations may be an Answer -- It was the Revelation which God gave to
Jesus Christ, etc. -- He adds, No wonder then, that he says, He knows their
Works, -- their Hearts, -- and their approaching Judgments, when his own vast
Abilities are assisted by God's Revelation. --

AND now let me inquire, How can Christ be an effectual Mediator, if he does
not know the Cases, Wants and Desires of his Servants, but by Revelation from
another, even the GOD he mediates with? -- Nay further, your Author supposes
our Mediator to be inhabited by and related to GOD, in order to this Office: By
which Expressions, if he means any Thing, I think it must be this, viz. That He
is immediately under the divine Influence and Direction; is qualified for and
assisted in this Office by GOD himself: -- And what Comfort or Hope can we have
from this Mediation? The same GOD we address to, must influence, direct and
assist the Mediator, by whom we address Him, and through whom we hope for
Acceptance; and Almighty GOD influences, directs and assists one Creature to
mediate with Him in the Behalf of another: And does not this make the Mediation
of Christ all mere Form and Ceremony? It Is GOD influences, assists and directs
in the Mediation; -- it is His Wisdom, Power and Goodness that is employed in
the Mediation; and therefore the Mediation is in Effect his own: -- It is GOD
that mediates with Himself, by Jesus Christ; and no longer Christ that mediates
with GOD: -- And in this View of the Thing, will it not be proper, when we
address to Almighty GOD, to beseech Him in the first Place to influence, direct
and assist the Man Christ Jesus to mediate with Him in our Behalf? And yet a
Question remains, By whom, or through whose Mediation shall we make this
necessary Request? -- We must go directly and immediately to GOD, and pray Him
to direct, assist and reveal our Wants to our Mediator; or enable him to
mediate for us: And what is this better than to have no Mediator? Thus full and
plain does your Author's Objection stand against his own Account of the
Mediator; and has no Force at all against that which he opposes; because it is
not pretended that the Man Christ Jesus is not acquainted with our Cases, Wants
and Desires by virtue of its Union to the divine Nature, so far as to render
him an effectual Mediator and Advocate for us: But that the Man Christ has not
this Knowledge inherently, or exclusively of the Union of the human to the
divine Nature. -- The Knowledge of the Man Christ, or Mediator, is communicated
or imparted to him from the divine Nature, or DEITY, by virtue of this Union,
in a Manner different from what is commonly called divine Revelation, or
Inspiration, such as the Prophets and Apostles had: -- But what the particular
Modes and Properties of this Union are, or in what Manner and Degree the human
partakes of the Powers and Properties of the divine Nature, by virtue of it, I
shall not pretend to determine; it being vastly above the Reach and
Comprehension of my weak, shallow Reason: It is sufficient for my present
Purpose, that nothing your Author has offered in the least militates against
this Account of Christ's Mediation, or at least nothing but what equally
militates against his own.

I SHALL now inquire, whether it be not every way agreeable to Scripture as
well as Reason; --

1st. IT is not pretended, that the Scriptures any where tell us in express
Terms, or in just so many Words and Syllables, that there are THREE Persons in
the Godhead, or ONE divine Essence. -- But that the Godhead, or divine Nature,
is spoken of under the Notion of three real Differences, or Distinctions; I
think beyond all Contradiction. St John tells us, 1 Epist. 5.7, There are three
that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost; and these
three are one; -- And these three, the Father, the Word, (or Son) and the
Holy Ghost, are frequently spoken of as really distinct from each other. -- St.
John wishes to the elect Lady, Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father; and
from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father: -- And our Savior tells his
Disciples, John 14.26, But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my Name, etc. -- And we are baptized in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and blessed in their Names
distinctly, at the same Time, and separately at different Times: Which both
evidence that these Distinctions are real; or, that they actually subsist in
the divine Nature; and that they equally partake of all divine Perfections and
Attributes: The same Perfections are attributed to, and the same Worship and
Homage paid, to each of these Distinctions or Differences. -- The Father is
represented and worshipped as GOD supreme; and so is the Son, as has been
largely shown; and the same might be made to appear of the Holy Ghost. Ananias
is charged with lying to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.3. It follows in the next
Verse, Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto GOD; So the Holy Ghost is said to
have dictated the Scriptures, 2 Peter, 1.21. But it is needless to multiply
Texts of this Nature. -- There is the same Evidence in Scripture, that there is
a Son, and an Holy Ghost as that there is a Father; and there is likewise the
same Evidence that the Son is GOD, and that the Holy Ghost is GOD, as that the
Father is GOD: The same Perfections are attributed, the same Worship is paid to
each, distinctly and separately, as to them all, jointly considered, as one
divine Essence or Nature. -- And now, What shall we call these Distinctions in
the one divine Nature or Godhead? They are described as real, as plainly as
Words can express: Nothing is more expressly or plainly taught in Scripture,
than that these three Distinctions, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, do actually
subsist in the one Godhead or divine Nature. That there is but one God we are
sure of, both from Reason and Scripture: That there is a Father, a Son, and an
Holy Ghost, the Scriptures likewise assure us: That these Distinctions are not
imaginary, but real, is likewise certain: They are represented as real as
Peter, John and Paul; for the Father sends the Holy Ghost in the Name of the
Son: And it is moreover evident, that the same divine Perfections and Honors
are given to each of these Distinctions; and therefore, since there is but one
Godhead or Deity, they must all subsist in that. -- And since we cannot convey
our Ideas without Words, especially in speculative Points; by what Term, Word
or Sound, can we convey our Ideas of these Distinctions better, than by calling
them Persons? -- However, I shall not contend about this particular Word, or
Sound: If another can be found by which we can convey our Ideas of these
Distinctions better, I shall readily embrace it: And if not, I am content to
call them, real Distinctions or Differences; and to say, that in the Godhead or
Deity there are three real Distinctions or Differences; the Father, the Son and
the Holy Ghost; and, to distinguish the Father from the other two, to call Him
the first Difference in the Godhead, or Deity; the Son, the second Difference,
and the Holy Ghost the third; instead of saying, there are three Persons in the
Godhead, that the Father is the first Person, the Son the second, and the
Holy Ghost the third. -- Words are arbitrary, and often change and lose their
Use and Meaning: Men may therefore call these Distinctions by what Names they
please; -- but the Nature and Truth of Things is not so variable; and
therefore, by whatever Names we call, or by whatever Sounds we convey, our
Ideas of these Distinctions; it does not, and cannot, destroy their Truth and
Reality. -- Peter and John will be two Men, tho we should call them Paul and
Barnabas; or compound and confound their Names together, in one single Word or
Term: And there is a Father, a Son and an Holy Ghost; or three real
Distinctions or Differences, in the one divine Nature or Deity, which the
Scripture represents by these Terms. -- Nor will our giving these new Names, or
comprehending them all in one single Word or Term, destroy or alter the Truth
and Reality of them: There will still be a Father, a Son and an Holy Ghost: The
Father will still be GOD, the Son will be GOD, and the Holy Ghost will be GOD:
That is, these three will still subsist in the one Godhead, or Deity; and
equally partake of all divine and incommunicable Perfections and Attributes:
The Father will be infinitely Wise, Powerful, Holy, Just, etc. and so will the
Son, and the Holy Ghost: The Father will be the proper and ultimate Object of
our religious Worship and Homage; and so will the Son and the Holy Ghost; and
yet there is but one Deity or divine Nature, in which these Perfections dwell,
and in whom this Worship and Homage must terminate.

IF it be inquired, How can these Things be? Or objected, That this is talking
without Ideas. -- I answer, That the particular Nature and Manner of these
Distinctions or Differences, subsisting in the Godhead or Deity, is a Secret
which infinite Wisdom has not discovered to us: -- But to disbelieve the Truth
and Reality of these Distinctions, when plainly asserted in the Scriptures of
Truth, merely on this Account, because the Nature and Manner of them is
inscrutable, would be foolish and presumptuous. -- When we speak of these, we
indeed talk without Ideas so far as the Subject is above our Comprehension; i.
e. We have no just Ideas of the Nature and Manner of these Distinctions or
Differences subsisting in the Godhead; but we have very clear and distinct
Ideas of their Truth and Reality, which the Scripture plainly asserts: -- In
like Manner, When we speak of the GREAT GOD, we talk without any adequate Ideas
of His Nature and Perfections, or Manner of Existence; the Subject is vastly
above the Reach and Comprehension of our Reason: But we may have very clear and
distinct Ideas, and a rational firm Belief of his Being, Power, Wisdom, etc,
and with the utmost Propriety discourse of them. -- So that our not being able
to explain the particular Nature and Manner of these Distinctions or
Differences subsisting in the divine Nature, is no reasonable Prejudice against
their Truth and Reality: And our not having clear and distinct Ideas of their
Nature and Manner of subsisting, is no Argument that we have not clear and
distinct Ideas of their Truth and Reality; or that we cannot discourse of them
with the utmost Propriety, and believe them upon the Principles of the
strictest Reason. -- What I intend is this, That the Nature and Manner of a
Thing's existing, being above our Reason, is no Argument that the Thing does
not really exist; and our not being able to frame just and adequate Ideas of
its Nature and Manner of Existence, is no Obstacle to our having clear and
distinct Ideas, that it does exist; and consequently, this is no reasonable
Prejudice against the Truth and Reality of it; or against our believing it, if
there be sufficient Evidence to ground our Faith upon, such as the WORD of GOD
is generally allowed to be, by professing Christians. -- And if this be
allowed, as I think it must be, then it can be no unreasonable Thing for us to
believe what is commonly called, The Doctrine of the TRINITY in Unity, or that
there are three real Distinctions in the Godhead; since the Scripture very
plainly represents the Deity under this Notion, or teaches us, that there is a
Father, a Son and an Holy Ghost, who seperately, and jointly, have divine
incommunicable Perfections attributed to them, and religious Worship and Homage
paid them; unless some other Reason can be offered why we should not, besides
this, that the Nature and Manner of these three Distinctions subsisting in the
one Godhead or Deity, is above our Comprehension, and what we can frame no
just and adequate Ideas of. But I proceed to say,

2dly, IT is not pretended that the Scriptures any where expressly assert, that
the SON of GOD, the divine LOGOS, or the SECOND Distinction or Difference in
the Deity, assumed a human Soul and Body into a personal Union with Him: But
thus much the Scriptures plainly and expressly teach us, that JESUS CHRIST had
a Body, and a Soul; and that he is truly GOD, or a divine Person. That Jesus
Christ had a true and real Body is indisputable: That he had a Soul or Spirit,
such an intelligent, active Principle as is common to all Men, I think none can
doubt who read the New Testament: We find that his Reason, Understanding and
Judgment, were gradual or progressive; as is the Case with all Men, however
superior and extensive they might be: Luke 2.40.52, And the Child grew, and
waxed strong in Spirit, or, by the Spirit, filled with Wisdom: -- And Jesus
increased in Wisdom and Stature, and in Favor with God and Man. -- And the
same Passions and Affections are found in Him, that are common to all Men; and
are the Appendages of human Nature in its Original; such as Love, Joy, Sorrow,
Compassion, etc. -- He wept over the City of Jerusalem, at a View of their
Stupidity, Hardness of Heart and approaching Judgments, Luke 19.41. -- He
loved, and groaned and wept over Lazarus, John 11.33. -- And how exceeding
sorrowful, grieved and dejected was he at the Prospect of his own Sufferings,
Matthew. 26, My Soul is exceeding Sorrowful, even unto Death. -- John 12.27, Now
is my Soul troubled, and what shall I say? -- Thus it appears beyond all
reasonable Contradiction, that JESUS CHRIST had a true Body and a reasonable
Soul; or such an intelligent, active Principle as is common to all Men: -- And
(as has been largely shown) the Scripture no less plainly, expressly and
distinctly represents Him as true GOD, or a divine Person; as the second
Distinction or Difference in the Deity, called by Way of Eminence the SON of
GOD: -- It attributes such Perfections and Excellencies to Him, and commands,
both by Precept and Example, such Worship and Homage to be paid to Him, as we
are sure can belong to no Creature, however dignified by Office and Station. --
We must therefore conclude, that Jesus Christ has something more than a true
Body and a reasonable Soul, or mere Humanity; -- something more than common
divine Inspiration and Influence, such as the Prophets and Apostles had; -- and
something more than a dignified Office and Character in the Universe; since
none nor all of these, though possessed in the highest Degree, could entitle Him
to these divine Perfections and Attributes; or this religious Worship and
Homage: -- In order to these He must be true GOD, a divine Person, eternally
and essentially possessed of these Perfections and Excellencies: And if so,
JESUS CHRIST has a true human Body, and such an intelligent, active Principle,
or Soul, as is common to all Men; and is true GOD, possessed of infinite,
divine Perfections; and entitled to religious Worship and Homage: How can we
better express our Notion or Idea of this, than by saying, that the SON of GOD,
the second Person of the Trinity, or the second Distinction or Difference in
the Deity, is personally united to the human Nature; or the human Nature is
personally united to that? The same JESUS CHRIST, who is expressly described,
and called Man, is also represented as true GOD, the mighty GOD, the omniscient
GOD, the Heart-searching GOD, etc. -- Nay, further, the GOD and the Man are so
far One, that, in some Instances, the Act of the GOD, or Divinity, is
attributed to the Humanity; and on the contrary, that of the Humanity, to the
Divinity; and of both, to JESUS CHRIST: -- See, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6, The Man Christ
Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom for all. -- Acts 20.28, Take heed, -- to feed
the Church of GOD, which He has purchased with his own Blood. -- Here we see,
that the GOD and the Man both claim the same Act, that of Ransoming or
Purchasing the Church: The Man gave himself, or shed his Blood, and GOD
purchased it with his own Blood. -- And, Rev. 5.9, we are told, that CHRIST
has redeemed us by his own Blood. -- Now it is difficult for us to express our
Notion or Idea of the GOD and Man's being one in JESUS CHRIST, so far as to lay
a positive and personal Claim to his Act of shedding his Blood, or giving
Himself to suffer for the Redemption of Sinners, better, than by saying, that
there is a personal Union of the two Natures, the divine and human in JESUS
CHRIST: -- Nor will any reasonable Man contend with this Manner of expressing
it, till he finds a better. -- I know that our not being able to explain the
Nature and Manner of this Union, is frequently urged as an Argument against the
Truth and Reality of it: -- But I have already shown this to be absurd and
foolish: -- It may as well be urged against the Being of a GOD; yea, and of any
Thing else, as against the Truth and Reality of this Doctrine or Proposition,
"That JESUS CHRIST is truly Man, and truly GOD;" or, that He has a true Body, a
reasonable Soul, (such as is common to all Men, as to it is Nature and Essence,
however it may differ in it is extensive Powers and Capacities,) and a divine
Nature or Substance; since they are so clearly, distinctly and expressly
revealed in the Scriptures of Truth. We are not more fully assured of any Thing
which the Scripture reveals, and is discoverable no other Way, than we are of
this, viz. That JESUS CHRIST is true GOD and Man; for, In Him dwells all the
Fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. GOD did not barely inspire, influence
and direct Him, (which I suppose is what your Author intends by his being
inhabited by GOD;) but the Divinity dwelt in Him Bodily, i. e. Personally and
Substantially; so as to make HIM true GOD, possessed of all infinite, divine
Perfections, and worthy of all religious Homage and Worship. -- And this is
exactly agreeable to the Apostle Paul's Account of the Mediator, 1 Timothy 2;
which your Author pretends is in Favor of his Opinion, and seems desirous to
build his Faith upon it. -- Indeed if we take only the single Text, which your
Author mentions, Ver. 5, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and
Men, the Man Christ Jesus: This seems to make our Mediator a mere Man: -- But
how unreasonable is it, to take single Texts and Scraps of Scripture, and draw
Conclusions from them repugnant to the general Tenor of Scripture, the Current
of the Discourse, from which they are taken, and the true Design of the Texts
themselves! -- A Conduct which your Author cannot easily be acquitted of in
this Instance. -- If we take the Apostle's whole Discourse, or first Epistle to
Timothy, it will very plainly appear, that he did not design to represent our
Mediator as a mere Man: He begins the Epistle with this Account of his
Apostleship, that it was by the Commandment of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ:
-- He next prays to God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, for Mercy and
Peace upon his Son Timothy: -- In Ver. 11, he styles the Gospel of Christ, The
glorious Gospel of the blessed God; and thanks Christ Jesus, who had counted
him Faithful, putting him into the Ministry; and who had enabled him to preach
His Gospel: -- Verse 16, he tells us, That for this Cause he obtained Mercy,
that in him first, JESUS CHRIST (not GOD the Father) might show forth all
Long-suffering, etc: -- And Chap. 3d. 16, he tells us. That without
Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness, GOD was manifest in the Flesh:
He adds, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the World, received up into Glory: -- Which shows, that he
designed by this to describe our Lord JESUS CHRIST; and his first
Characteristic is, That He was GOD manifest in the Flesh: -- And Chapr. 6.15,
he styles Him, The blessed and only Potentate; the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; who only has Immortality, etc. -- And one would think, after all this,
that neither Timothy, nor any other, who read this Epistle, could be in the
least Danger of taking JESUS CHRIST for a mere Man, or that St. Paul intended
to represent Him as such.

MOREOVER, If our Mediator be a mere Man, or Creature, as your Author supposes,
it will be difficult to show what End his Mediation answers; or what Hope or
Comfort we can possibly derive from it, however He be dignified and exalted by
his natural Endowments, and appointed Character or Office. -- JESUS CHRIST is
represented as our Atonement before the injured DEITY; and as our Sacrifice; as
being made a Curse for us; as bearing the Chastisement of our Peace: He has
appeared to take away Sin, by the Sacrifice of Himself; -- and has by once
offering up Himself, forever perfected those that believe: He came to reconcile
the World of Sinners to the offended DEITY, by offering Himself without Spot;
-- and as by the Transgression of one, many were made Sinners; so by the
Obedience of one, shall many be made righteous: -- But how can these Things be
effected, any more by the Sufferings and Obedience of CHRIST (if a mere Man, or
created Being) than by those of any other Man? His great Endowments, his
dignified Office, or any derived Excellency cannot qualify Him for it: These
will not enable Him to do or suffer any Thing on our Account, by Way of
Atonement; because, from him, to whom much is given, shall much be required: --
GOD Almighty justly expects a Return from every Creature in Proportion to the
Powers and Abilities they are endowed with, and the Office and Character they
sustain in the Universe: This is evident from natural Reason, and the famous
Parable of the Talents: -- And therefore, if JESUS CHRIST be a mere Creature,
he can do nothing for us, by Way of Atonement with the offended DEITY. --
Again, JESUS CHRIST is represented as our Intercessor and Advocate in Heaven;
as Him by whom only we can have Access to GOD: -- But if a mere Man, of what
Service can He be to us there? -- What has he to plead that can gain us
Audience and Acceptance, to recommend our imperfect Prayers and Services to the
DEITY, more than another Man? -- His knowing our Cases, Wants and Desires, and
pitying them, can be to no Purpose, in Point of our being heard, accepted and
answered by the divine Majesty; for He cannot be a Means of informing HIM who
knows all Things: And he has nothing to represent, or plead in our Behalf, if a
mere Creature; he has done no more than was his Duty, and is the Duty of every
created Being, viz. to be submissive, resigned and obedient to the Will and
Pleasure of the Creator, whether it be to do or suffer. To conclude this Head:
-- According to your Author's Account of the Mediator, we have no rational
Grounds to hope for the divine Mercy and Forgiveness, through his Mediation or
Intercession: GOD'S being reconcilable to us, by or through CHRIST JESUS, is
mere Sound: -- We may no longer with any Propriety plead the Merits, the
Atonement, the Obedience and Sufferings of CHRIST, before Him, under a Notion
or Hope of being heard and answered on their Account: -- And, in one Word, We
may no longer ask any Thing of Him, in CHRIST'S Name or for his Sake, intending
by it, that He would be graciously pleased, in Consideration of what CHRIST
has done and suffered for Sinners, to hear, forgive, and answer us; for Christ
is a Creature, as well as we; and at most has done no more than improve and
employ the Powers and Faculties, Gifts and Accomplishments bestowed upon him,
agreeable to the Will and Pleasure of his Creator. -- Thus entirely does your
Author subvert the Doctrine and Worth of CHRIST'S Mediation: -- Thus does it
overthrow the Hope of Christians; -- necessitating us to despair of the divine
Mercy and Forgiveness; or seek it some other Way, than by and through the Merits
and Mediation, or Obedience and Sufferings of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

YOUR Author complains, that as there are two principal distinguishing
Doctrines of Christianity, relating to the Unity of the supreme GOD, and the
one Mediator with Him, so the Trinitarians have lost them both, among their
several Parties, etc. -- They who leave Room for a Mediator, destroy the Unity
of GOD: -- On the other Hand, They who hold true to the divine Unity, or One
infinite Being, under three Modes, or Properties, or Relations, have no Room
for a Mediator, etc. -- But surely, it cannot be though it, that because two
different Opinions of the one GOD and one Mediator, are repugnant to your
Author's Account of this Matter, therefore both of them are false: -- Besides,
What could be said, if I should rank the latter of the Parties, your Author
mentions, with himself; or call them a Party of Unitarians; and urge how they
are divided in their Sentiments of the one GOD and Mediator? They certainly
approach as near to your Author's Opinion, as to that of Trinitarians, properly
so called; who, though they hold that there are three distinct Persons, or real
Differences, in the Godhead; yet they firmly believe with St. John, That these
THREE are ONE; one DEITY, or divine Nature; and therefore, they do not destroy
the Unity of GOD, while they leave Room for an able Mediator: -- And though this
should be styled, Babbling without Ideas; saying what we do not understand, or
affirming Nonsense and Contradictions; yet the Faith of a wise Man will stand
unshaken, while it has so rational and solid a Basis as that of GOD'S WORD. --
And if the Pride and Vanity of some Men carries them into such a wild Extreme,
as to make their own Understanding the Standard of all Truth and Possibility;
and turn all into Ridicule that soars above the Reach and Comprehension of
their Reason, we should be exceeding cautious how we follow them, least it be
at the Expense of Truth; and least, by avoiding what their Pride and
Ostentation, their imaginary Wit and Penetration, styles Nonsense and
Contradiction, we should fall into that which is truly such; as all Doctrines
that are repugnant to the Word of GOD, are.

THE next Thing your Author flies to is, St. Peter's Description of the Lord
JESUS, Acts 2.22, and 36, Ye Men of Israel, hear these Words, Jesus of
Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you, etc. -- And let all the House of
Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have
crucified, both Lord and Christ. -- It Is true in these Words the Apostle is
aiming at such a Description of CHRIST, as might strike his Murderers with
Horror, and bring them to a true Repentance of their Crime; and therefore he
describes Him as to his Humanity; which alone was capable of suffering and
being murdered: -- To have told his Audience, that they had killed the infinite
GOD himself, would have been to the last Degree absurd and foolish; and instead
of bringing them to a Sense and Repentance of their Crime, would have exposed
him to their Ridicule and Scorn: -- He therefore tells them, that the Man they
had crucified was approved of God among them, by Miracles, Signs and Wonders,
which God did by him; and that now God had made the same Man both Lord and
Christ; which is not denied: -- But in this same Speech he gives plain
Intimations, that JESUS CHRIST was not a mere Man, when he refers to the Words
of David, concerning Him, The Lord said unto my Lord, etc. Ver. 34. With these
Words our Savior confounds the Pharisees, who answered, that Christ was the
Son of David, meaning that he was a mere Man, Mat. 22.42: But, says our
Savior, David called him Lord in Spirit, or by divine Inspiration; and if
David call him Lord, how is he his Son? Our Savior no doubt intended, that
this represented Christ, or the Messiah, to be something more than a mere Son
of David, or merely a Man; or else it will be difficult to make Sense of what
he says, or apply his Words to any wise and rational Purpose: And therefore
since St. Peter applies these to CHRIST, in his Description of Him, before his
Murderers, he might with the utmost Safety direct those of them that were
convinced, and inquired, What they should do to be saved? to believe in this
Christ, such as he had described Him, and be baptized in his Name; which is
both an Evidence and an Acknowledgment of his Divinity; it being a most solemn
Act of religious Worship, paid to CHRIST personally and immediately, as has
been already shown.

I SHALL take but a very brief and cursory View of your Author's SECT. III.
with which he concludes his Argument; as it cannot possibly be thought to have
much Weight in it to support his Cause; and as I have already drawn out this
Letter vastly beyond what I at first intended.

1. First then, IT is acknowledged, That GOD and CHRIST, if we hold to the
strict Etymology of the Word CHRIST, cannot be properly predicated one of the
other; the Name CHRIST, in its primary and most proper Sense, signifies one
anointed, and raised by Authority and Honor conferred; as we acknowledge the
Man Christ Jesus, or the Humanity of our Savior to be, Heb. 1.9, God, even his
God, has anointed him with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows: -- But we
must remember his Name is JESUS, as well as CHRIST; the Import of which we may
see, Matthew. 1.23, it is Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, GOD with us: So
that if we may not with the strictest Propriety, or agreeable to the Etymology
of the Name, call Christ GOD, because it signifies one anointed, etc. yet we
may thus style JESUS CHRIST; for his being called JESUS, imports Him to be
Emmanuel, or GOD with us. -- But if the Business can be salved here, by
supposing a personal Union between GOD and CHRIST, or JESUS, and the Anointed;
Why may not the Papists set up another such Union between CHRIST'S Body, and
the Bread, in the Eucharist; and stoutly defend, that it is the Body of Christ
properly?

Answer (1st) BECAUSE there is no such Foundation in Scripture for supposing
that the Bread in the Eucharist is the Body of Christ substantially, as that
GOD and CHRIST, or the divine and human Natures, are united to each other
Personally. -- And, (2dly.) Because the Romish Doctrine of Transubstantiation
is of a very different Nature from that in dispute: It supposes a real Change
of the Substance, contrary to the united Judgment and Testimony of our Reason
and Senses; but this cannot be objected in the present Case: There are
therefore good Reasons why the Papists cannot maintain or defend the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation with the same Justice and Propriety, that we can the
Divinity of our Savior; or the Union of the divine and human Natures in the
Person of JESUS CHRIST.

Secondly. I SHALL not pretend to determine what Use some may have made of the
baffled Arguments of Papists, when they wrote against the Unitarians, in
Vindication of the Divinity of Christ: -- But this I am bold to affirm, that
they have no need to do it in one single Instance; -- and that they have not
done it in the Instances your Author mentions, 1. No one surely at this Day
pretends, that the Novelty of Arian Principles is much of an Objection against
them, (as the Papists hold that the Novelty of Protestantism is against that:)
Alas! They are antique enough to claim our Veneration, if that alone was
sufficient, having been extant at Times for almost 1500 Years; passed through
various Changes and fancied Emendations; been once and again suppressed and
revived in Europe, Asia and Africa; obtaining sometimes in a very surprising
Manner, through that Love of Novelty, which is rooted in our Nature; but have
never obtained long at once, to any considerable Degree, in either of those
Parts of the World: Allow me to guess the Reason, -- That when they become
common, and their Novelty ceased to recommend them; when Men come to calm and
serious Consideration, they easily see their Fallacy and dangerous Tendency,
and quickly rejected them. This is the Novelty objected perhaps by some against
your Author's Opinion, which certainly is no Commendation to it; and I humbly
trust, (if nothing else will do it) that this will prevent its obtaining long,
and to any great Degree in New England. -- 2. It is judged, That our Savior's
being styled, the Image of God, is no Argument that He is not GOD; and yet it is
thought at the same Time a probable Argument, That the Fathers did not look
upon the Elements to be changed into the real Substance of CHRIST'S Body and
Blood, in the Sense which Papists hold, because they often call them the Images
thereof. There is too manifest a Difference between these Propositions, to need
any Illustration: It is not supposed, That CHRIST is called the Image of GOD
with respect to his Humanity; for that can bear but a faint Resemblance to the
DEITY, to which nothing may be likened or compared; but that He is the Image of
GOD, i. e. of the Father, in respect of His Divinity: The second Distinction or
Difference in the DEITY is the express Image of the first. On the other Hand,
The Papists suppose the Elements to be transubstantiated or changed into the
real Substance of CHRIST'S Body and Blood; but had the Fathers thought so, they
could with no Propriety have called them the Images thereof. CHRIST is called
the Image of GOD in opposition to GOD the Father; but the Papists leave nothing
to oppose the Image to.

3. Thirdly, In Opposition to the Papists, it is though it evident, That St. Peter
was inferior to the Church, and the rest of the Apostles (though not singly to
each,) because he was sent up and down by them: -- And yet it is no Argument
that the Son is inferior to the Father, in Opposition to Trinitarians, because
he was sent by Him. -- Here again, is a manifest Difference in the Position and
Circumstances of the Arguments: -- It is not the Nature and Essence, but the
Office and Authority of St. Peter, that is in dispute: It Is argued, that in
Office and Authority he was inferior to the Church, and the rest of the
Apostles, because they sent him up and down authoritatively: -- On the other
Hand, the Nature and Essence of the SON, is in dispute; and it is humbly though it,
that it can be argued with no Propriety that the SON was inferior to the FATHER
in these, merely because He was sent by Him: e. g. A Son may be as truly a Man
as the Father, and yet be sent by him; or two, that equally partake of human
Nature and all it is Properties, may send each other by mutual Agreement.

4. Fourthly, THERE can be no just Grounds for your Author's Complaint, "That
Trinitarians join with the Papists in hood-winking People in Ignorance;
forbidding them to enquire into and examine your Author's Principles." -- I
cannot think that any Protestant will inveigh against the closest Examination
and Enquiry into any of the Principles and Doctrines of our holy Religion; and
especially the more important and fundamental Points of it. -- For my own Part,
I heartily wish your Author's Opinion may meet with this Treatment wherever it
goes; as I humbly think it will prove a most effectual Means of securing Men
against it. -- I therefore entreat all Men, closely to examine, and seriously
to consider it, in all it is Parts, before they embrace it. --

5. Fifthly, How just your Author's Claim is to primitive Antiquity, is what I
cannot determine; nor what poor Apologies have been made for those Fathers who
seem to have favored his Principles: -- This can be no ways material; since
our Faith is not, and ought not, to be built upon the Opinion of the Fathers,
or, Tradition of the Elders; but, upon that surer Word of Prophesy, and
Inspiration, the HOLY SCRIPTURES: -- Upon the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, JESUS CHRIST Himself being the Chief Cornerstone. -- However, It is
generally allowed, that Arius a Presbyter of the Church of Alexandria, about
Anno Domini 320, was the first who reduced your Author's Principles to a
regular System; or set them up in Opposition to those who hold to the supreme
DEITY of JESUS CHRIST: -- His Principles were immediately condemned for Heresy,
by a Council under Alexander Bishop of Alexandria; and afterward, Anno 325, by
three Hundred and eighty Fathers in the General-Council of Nice. -- After
which, the Disciples of Arius divided into several Parties: -- Some held, That
the Son was made ex non entibus; and that He was in all Respects unlike the
Father: Others held, That the Son was like the Father, and begot of his
Substance; though not Coeternal with Him, etc. In the sixth Century it was
carried into Africa, under the Vandals; and into Asia, under the Goths; Italy,
the Gauls, and Spain, were also deeply infected with it: -- But having reigned
thirty Years with great Splendour, it sunk almost all at once. -- After which it
made no great Noise in the World, till Anno 1531, Servetus, a Spaniard, wrote a
small Treatise against the Mystery of the Trinity; which gave Occasion, after
his Death, to the forming a new System of Arianism in Geneva; the Admirers of
which presently degenerated into Socinians, who are likewise divided into
several Parties; some leaving Socinus, as to what regards the Worship to be
offered to Jesus Christ; not being able with all their Penetration, added to
the subtle Reasoning of their Master, and all that have since appeared to
support his Cause, to see how divine Worship should be given a mere Man. See
Chamb. Dict. Art. Arianism and Socinianism.

FROM this general View, it appears, your Author will not gain much by
appealing to Antiquity, the Fathers, and the genuine History of his Principles.

HE thinks, The Fathers were more likely to attribute too much, than too
little, to Jesus Christ, as he was, and is deservedly a beloved Object, etc.

Answer. THEY were at most but fallible, imperfect Men: -- Besides, we must
consider them either as Wise and Honest, or Ignorant and Deceitful: If they
were Ignorant or Deceitful, either not understanding the Nature and Truth of
the Cause they were engaged in; or disposed to betray it; their Testimony, one
Way or the other, is not to be regarded: And if they were Wise and Honest,
understanding the Cause and Truth of Christianity, and were real, sincere
Friends to it; they would have endeavored to represent Things in their true
Light; to preach and recommend the naked unadulterated Truth, and have
carefully guarded against Error on every Side; and especially in fundamental
important Points; such as the present confessedly is: When they come to
describe our Lord JESUS, the Author of this Religion, one would think they
should have studied for the exactest Truth; and have been as careful not to
attribute too much, as too little, to Him; and to be sure not to attribute that
to Him, which belongs to GOD only, if he is not GOD; since it is no less
dishonoring and affronting to Almighty GOD, to raise a mere Creature to an
equality with Him, than it is to debase the Lord JESUS, by esteeming and
representing Him as a mere Creature, if He be GOD supreme. -- The Truth of the
Case (I am ready to think) is, That it was much with the Fathers, as with their
Sons of the present Day; they generally professed to build their Faith or
religious Principles upon divine Revelation; in order to which, some wisely
examined the whole Current and Tenor of Scripture, before they drew up an
absolute determinate Conclusion; others, of a more sudden Resolution and hasty
Genius, considered only particular Texts and Phrases; such perhaps as favored
some darling Prepossession, and formed their Opinion with less Thought and
Deliberation: And though the former were by much the fairest Candidates for
Truth, and to be depended upon with the most Safety; yet they were all
fallible; their Writings are not the Standard of Truth, nor the Rule and
Measure of our Faith, while we have the Words of Inspiration; which are
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness; that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good Works: And which we are, or ought to be, as capable of examining and
understanding as our Fathers have been; and have as good a Right to judge and
determine for ourselves, as they had. --

THUS I have gone through with my intended Observations upon your Author's
Inquiry into the Scripture Account of JESUS CHRIST; and designedly omitted no
Part of his Reasoning, that can possibly be though it material: I am, however, far
from thinking that I have offered all the Arguments which can be produced
against his Opinion; or set off those I have offered to the best Advantage: But
I humbly imagine, they carry so much of Truth in them, as entirely to overthrow
and confute whatever your Author has opposed to them; and effectually secure
every honest, considerate, unprejudiced Person, who reads them, even in their
present Dress, against his Opinion. I cannot but hope, these Hints, imperfect as
they are, contain proper Grounds of Conviction; and that having these laid
before you, agreeable to your Promise in the Dedication, you will readily alter
your Opinion: -- If this should be the Case, I am tar from desiring a public
Confession, or Declaration of Gratitude; -- The Thought of having been the
Means of turning one from the Error of his Way, will be a sufficient Reward to
me. -- If you should answer this by a profound Silence, judging it to be
superficial, and to carry its own Confutation with it; and to be utterly
unworthy either of public or private Notice, one Way or another, -- I have the
Satisfaction of reflecting on my own good Design; and of thinking that such a
sullen, ill-natured Silence, but poorly supplies the Place of solid Reason and
Argument; and that at least some others are of the same Opinion. -- If, on the
other Hand, you should think this deserving of an Answer, and capable of a
Refutation, I shall endeavor, with the utmost Candor and Impartiallity, to
read and consider it; -- lay myself open to Conviction; and yield the Point
with Joy and Gratitude, whenever I see an over-balance of fair Reasoning,
against my present Opinion. -- If you should not choose to dispute the Point,
(as I pray may be the Case, for Disputes of this Nature rarely tend much to
promote the Cause of Religion) but should find some Things unsatisfactory to
you in Point of Argument, I shall endeavor, upon Information, to remove your
Difficulties and Objections with the utmost Pleasure and Satisfaction. -- After
all, I cannot but apprehend that your procuring a new Impression of your
Author's Inquiry, will fail of that good Effect, which you profess to hope for
from it; and declare to be the great Inducement which moved you: -- Granting
that it should be universally embraced and believed; -- Where is the great
Service done to the Cause of Christianity? -- Will any Person by this, be made
a better Subject to his King; a more useful Member of Society; or more pious
and devout toward his GOD? Indeed if it be the Truth, Men ought to know it,
and believe it; and Truth can never injure that Religion which is founded upon
it; and which is, or ought to be, supported by it: -- But we should be well
assured, that we have Truth on our Side, before we attempt to bring about such
Revolutions and Changes in Religion, as this Tract must make, if universally
embraced in New England. -- We should also be assured, that this Truth more or
less affects the Essentials of Religion; that the eternal Salvation of Mankind
is affected by it, before we can be excused in such an Attempt: But surely true
Unitarian Charity, which extends to all Men, at least to all Denominations of
Christians, would not suffer you to judge thus of the Point before us, that it
is a sine qua non; or absolutely necessary to eternal Life, that Men believe
with your Author: -- And therefore the Importance of the Subject, in the Light
which Unitarians commonly consider it in, will but poorly excuse you in so
glaring and dangerous an Attempt, as a Revival of this old Controversy, in this
new World, evidently is. -- In short, if you closely adhere to the Principles,
which you have so generously taken under your Patronage, I see no Way that you
can excuse yourself for diffusing them abroad, with such a profuse Liberality,
and Air of Challenge, any more than a serious Atheist could excuse himself for
publicly calling in Question the Being of a GOD; and pleading with great Zeal
and Earnestness, that there is no supreme, wise and intelligent Being, who made
and governs the World, and to whom we are accountable for our Behavior: --
Such an one might plead that he had Truth of his Side; but he could not justly
plead the least Prospect that this Truth would be of any Service to Mankind,
though vindicated by ever so specious an Appearance of Demonstration: -- The same
holds good with Regard to true Unitarians: -- They cannot, consistent with their
own Principles, pretend that the denying or not believing the Divinity of JESUS
CHRIST, will be of any great Service to Mankind, or to the Cause of
Christianity; because they hold that all Christians are agreed in the essential
Points. -- I cannot therefore but suspect, either that you are not well
acquainted with the Principles you espouse; or that some other Motive, than a
true Love to the Cause of Christianity; and a sincere Desire to promote it,
induced you to such an Attempt: -- Charity obliges me to hope that the former
of these is the Case; and that when you come to a more calm and serious
Consideration of your Principles, if you do not renounce them, yet, that you
will think it of less Importance to the Cause of Christianity, that all Men
embrace them. -- Not that I at present fear that your utmost Efforts to
maintain and diffuse them, will be attended with a general Success: But it is
my sincere Desire, that this Controversy may stop here; as it is of such a
Nature as to admit of no determinate Decision, beyond all Possibility of
Contradiction on either Side: -- For in Disputes of this Kind, an ambitious,
subtle Wit will never want nice Distinctions to evade the Truth, and cover over
Falsehood with the Appearance of it.

IT may perhaps be thought by some, That I have contributed to the Revival of
this Dispute: -- That a profound Silence would have been the most prudent
Answer to your Author, and your own Challenge: -- That the former has been
repeatedly answered already: -- That the Dispute is endless, etc. -- But I
humbly beg Leave to dissent from such; (1.) Because Silence would undoubtedly
bring the Cause I maintain under Suspicion, with many of the unlearned and
unstable Multitude. (2.) Whatever Answers may have been made to this Tract
already, they are not common as this now is among us; and therefore though vastly
superior to what I have offered, can be of no immediate Service to this Part of
the World. (3.) Though this Dispute is in a Sense endless, as it cannot at
present be determined beyond all Possibility of Contradiction; yet when a Point
so important, as that of our blessed SAVIOR'S DIVINITY is generally esteemed
to be, comes to be called in Question, denied, and laughed at; I think it
becomes those who sincerely believe it, to lend their seasonable Assistance to
support and maintain it, in Proportion to their Ability and Sphere in Life; and
though it be not capable of absolute Demonstration; yet a rational Vindication of
it, especially at such a Time, cannot but be of Service to the Cause of
Religion, by the divine Blessing: The Lord JESUS grant these imperfect Hints
may have this happy Effect, though offered by one of the least of those who adore
His DEITY. In short, I humbly imagine that, in Consideration of the Manner and
Circumstances of the Dedication and Tract itself, should it pass un-noticed in
this public Manner, the vulgar Opinion will be, that it is unanswerable, at
least as to our Teachers and spiritual Guides. -- These Considerations induced
me to an Attempt, which more properly belongs to my Superiors in Ability: --
And an earnest Desire, and secret Hope, that some one, more equal to the Task,
would have engaged in it; has delayed this Epistle for some Weeks: And should
any one be engaged, or disposed to engage, I am far from desiring to monopolize
the Dispute; but shall be heartily glad of their kind Assistance, whether it
ceases here, or is carried on further.

TO conclude; THIS is not wrote for Dispute sake; but with a sincere Love to,
and honest Desire of, promoting and vindicating Truth, and the Cause of
Christianity: -- And should the Dispute be prolonged; I heartily join with your
Author, in wishing, That it may be carried on with Moderation and Christian
Charity: That all Wrath, Malice, Envyings and Revilings, may be laid aside; and
that Truth, sacred Truth, may be every Man's Aim. -- I pray GOD to deliver both
Parties from that ostentatious Strife of Words, those ill-natured Censures,
bitter Reflections and uncharitable Railings, which are truly a Reproach to our
Nature, a Scandal to our christian Profession, an Injury to pure and undefiled
Religion, and a Grief and Offense to all good Men: --

SHOULD any one attempt, a further Vindication of your Author's Principles, in
a fair and rational Manner, I hope there are none among us, but will give it a
candid and impartial Consideration: -- But should any one, in order to this,
supply the Place of solid Arguments, with barbarous Criticisms, and pert witty
Reflections upon his Opposers; studying to turn their Opinion and Arguments
into Ridicule and Banter, instead of giving them a fair Confutation;
insinuating, That there is as good a Foundation for affirming, that there are
Four as Three Persons in the Godhead; That we may, with as much Propriety,
style the Virgin Mary, God, or Goddess the Mother, as Jesus Christ, God the
Son; reflecting upon all his Opposers as Babblers of Nonsense and
Contradiction, and the like; such an one, I say, whether a Layman, or D. D.
though he might shine and blaze a while like the Son of the Morning, would
quickly draw upon himself the Contempt of the bad, and the Pity of the good:
All Men of Reason and sober Thought would despise him, for studying to render
that ridiculous, which, however false, foolish and groundless some may think it
to be, ought to be treated in the most serious Manner, 'till it is shown to be
so: But I hope, and pray, that nothing of this Nature will ever appear. Good
Sense and sound Reason I desire to attend to, wherever I see it; and whoever it
comes from: -- But Cant and Banter should be abhorred by all Men, especially in
Things of a religious Nature and Importance. --

THE Lord prepare us all for that State and World, where Paul and Barnabas
shall eternally agree: Where all Strife and Controversy shall cease; and, where
we shall no more dispute who and what our glory us MEDIATOR is; but shall see
Him as He is: To HIM be Glory both now and evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

