AN ACCOUNT OF THE Great Dangers and Distresses, AND The remarkable Deliverance
OF Capt. Nathanael Pierce, Who sailed from Portsmouth, in New Hampshire, bound
for Louisbourg; AND Being taken up at Sea, was carried to Oporto.

Written by Himself.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street, 1756.

INTRODUCTION.
By Another Hand.
THE Author, and principal Subject of the following Story, is a Gentleman well
known to many in New England, particularly at Portsmouth, the Capital of the
Province of New Hampshire, the Place of his Nativity, and where he now resides.
And such is the Character of Capt. Pierce, that no one, who is acquainted with
it, will call in Question the Fidelity with which he has related these
surprising Adventures. He was desired by his Friends, soon after he returned to
them as one risen from the Dead, to commit to Writing the very remarkable
Occurrences of his Voyage, while they were fresh in his Memory. And now he has
consented to the Printing of this Account, as a public Acknowledgement of his
Obligations to Almighty God, whose kind Hand conducted him safely through such a
Variety of extreme Dangers; and as an Encouragement to others, in every Article
of Distress and Hazard to confide in His Providence which determines the Fall
of a Sparrow, which numbers even the Hairs of our Heads; and which often
affords us Deliverance in a Way contrary to all human Expectation.

The Reader, in perusing the ensuing Relation, will naturally call to Mind that
devout and animated Passage of Holy Writ: They that go down to the Sea in
Ships, that do Business in great Waters; these see the Works of God, and his
Wonders in the Deep. For he commands, and raises the stormy Wind, which
lifts up the Waves thereof. They mount up to the Heaven, they go down again
to the Depth, their Soul is melted because of Trouble. They reel to and fro,
and stagger like a drunken Man, and are at their Wits End. Then they cry unto
the Lord in their Trouble, and he brings them out of their Distresses. Oh
that Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works to
the Children of Men!

An ACCOUNT of the great Dangers and Distresses, and the remarkable
Deliverance, of Captain NATHANAEL PIERCE.
THE Brigantine called the Portsmouth, NATHANAEL PIERCE, Master, belonging to
Mr. Robert Odiorne, and others, of Portsmouth in New England, sailed from
thence the 22d Day of November 1752, bound to Louisbourg; with a Cargo chiefly
of Lumber. The Crew, besides the Master, consisting of the following Persons,
viz. Nathaniel Barns Mate, 'David Brown Cooper, William Langdon, Timothy
Cotton, Longford a Negro Man, all Residents of Portsmouth aforesaid; William
Williams of Liverpool, and Thomas Chambers of some Part of the North of
England, and John Olson a Dutchman; in all Nine in Number.

They proceeded for some Days on their intended Voyage, without any uncommon
Accident. December the first, the Wind having been for three or four Days so
much to the Northward, with Snow Squals and exceeding cold, and the Brigantne
being deep loaded, and at best a heavy Sailor, they could not get in with the
Land; saw it at a Distance, and supposed it to be the Land between Island
Harbor and White-Head. The Night before the Wind came to North West by West,
by the Favor of which they made the Land at Daylight, and judged it to be
about 10 Leagues to the Westward of Louisbourg, and stood close in with it. At
Noon, the Wind veering to the Eastward, and no Harbor near that they could get
into, and a Storm at Ea* North East coming on, thick with Snow, and very cold;
they tacked and stood off Shore till four in the Afternoon, and then lay by
under the Foresail, with the Head to the Southward. The three last mentioned of
the Crew, were very much discouraged at the Severity of the Season, being but
just arrived from Jamaica, and badly clothed. They and all the Rest at
different Times, were confined to their Cabbins by some slight Indisposition,
and often begged the Master to go off the Coast, which he was very loath to do,
as his Vessel and Cargo were disposed of at Louisbourg to good Advantage, if he
could get in there. But the Weather continuing very cold, the People still
soliciting, and considering that the Cargo on board would suit the West India
Market, He at last consented to go off the Coast; and at Eight in the Morning,
the second Day of December, ordered the Helm a Weather, and bore away,
designing to go for the Island of Antigua, and stopped a Course accordingly.

They sailed off the Coast under the Foresail till Noon; the Weather being
moderate, they made more Sail; making the best of their Way to the Westward of
the Island of Sables, and then going to the Southward as the Winds and Weather
would permit. It continued moderate till December the fourth at Night, when a
Storm arose at West North West. They continued before the Wind the remaining
Part of the Night, the next Day being the 5th of December, the Storm not
abating, about 4 o'clock in the Afternoon the Pump was sucked. About five, the
Master and Crew found She had sprung a Leak, and required both Pumps, which
were set to work accordingly; but notwithstanding all they could do, the Water
gained upon them so fast, that about eight in the Evening the Water was above
the lower Deck; upon the Discovery of which they ceased Pumping, as finding
that of no Manner of Service. The Master then went into the Cabin which was
very full, to endeavor to get some of his Papers and Things of Value out of
his Chest (if happily he might be saved) but before he had Time to open it, the
Things in the Cabin began to fleet, and shifted forward, and pressed too the
Door, that it was with very great Difficulty that he got out. They were now in
the utmost Consternation imaginable, expecting the Vessel would be soon full of
Water and then over-set.

They had no Sail set since the Gale began, but the Fore-sail: As soon as they
could resolve what to do, the Ax was secured; the fore Jears were cut, and the
Fore-Yard got close down. At the same Time some were employed in getting some
Salt Pork and Beef upon Deck; which at first, as fast as they threw upon Deck
was washed overboard, till it was proposed that some of it should be strung,
which was done accordingly, and made fast to the aftermost Stantion of the
quarter Deck and the Horse-piece. The Master took a Spell to cut away the
Mainmast, but for want of Strength, and some one to second him, did not
accomplish it. The Rest of the Crew were employed in clearing the Decks of
Hoops, Hen-coops, and Lumber, which the Sea in a great Measure facilitated, as
by that Time the Vessel was full of Water, and the Sea continually running over
them, which washed away the Boats, Caboose and Windless; so that before Morning
they had nothing remaining upon Deck, save the Main-top-sail, Yard and Sail,
bent and furled to the Yard, which had not been dry enough to put down, although
unrig'd some Days before; and now happened to be so jamm'd between the Mainmast
and Pumps, that the Sea could not wash it away.

They attempted at first to steer the Vessel before the Wind, but she soon
broached too, with her Head to the Northward, which though bad on one Account,
was good on another. As they reckoned themselves between the Latitude of 4 1
and 4 2 North Latitude (having had no Observation for several Days) and about
South from the Island Sables, her Head being to the Northward she would
naturally gain more to the Northward: if so, they thought that they should be
more out of the Way of Vessels meeting with them, at that Season of the Year.
But then on the other Hand, the Vessel having a Lift to Starboard, the other
being the Weather Side (as the Winds for the most Part at that Season of the
Year are to the Westward) she was for that Reason the higher out of Water; and
this was the only Position to lay in for Safety, as will hereafter appear.

They past this Night in great Distress, and horrible Apprehensions of every
Moments being their last, and their State fixed to all Eternity. And having so
sudden a Call, what must be the Consternation of such miserable unthinking
Wretches as the generality of Seamen are?

When the Day came on, there was a new Scene of Terror; the Negro Man Langford
was missing; supposed to be washed overboard in the Night; and enquiring for
the Ax to cut the Mainmast away, it was not to be found, being lost in the
Night; and no one could be blamed, as it was with very great Difficulty that
they kept themselves on the Wreck, the Sea continually breaking over them.
Every Thing in the Cabin and Steerage, such as Casks, Chests, Scrutores, and
likewise the Lumber, was by the violent Surges of the Sea stove in Pieces; so
that the ruinous State to which these Things were reduced, is almost incredible.

The Crew attended at the Companion, to catch what should come in Sight, that
might be of Service. They recovered some Apples, and Part of three Cheeses; but
to their great Mortification, could not meet with any of their Clothes or
Bedding. They began now to consider of some Way to obtain Rest; and the first
Thing to be done, was to unbend the Main-top-sail, and get it aft on the Poop,
(which was a Rise of about six Inches from the Quarter Deck, and about eight
from the Taffril, and being short Plank, did not blow up, as did most Part of
the Quarter Deck afterward, when she overset.) This they effected; and then
fastening the Robins to the Rail, from the Crutch aft to the after Stantion,
(which was the only Place free from Water) they laid down Side by Side, and
hauling the other Part of the Sail over them, they obtained some Rest; although
the Sea would much disturb them by breaking over them; and when it did so,
which was very often, they got up to wring their Clothes, and laid down again.
In this Posture they continued as long as any one remained on the Wreck, save
when employed on necessary Occasions.

December the 7th, proved a moderate and fine clear Day, with but little Wind.
Perceiving the Lee Waterway Plank, and that next to it, of the foremast Part of
the Quarter Deck was blown up, and some small Things washing out, they attended
to get what they could there; but could meet with nothing that was of any
Service to them, excepting one of the Captain's Sheets, and a large Part of the
Ensign, which proved of great Service, as will appear hereafter. Every Thing
was stove to Pieces in the Steerage and Cabin, as above; but observing the
Bulk of Boards that was stowed before the Mainmast, between Deck, to remain
fast, they concluded if they could get Water any where, it must be in the
Fore-castle, which was stowed full; upon which Account the Water-Casks and
other Things there, were more likely to be preserved. --

They went to work, and broke open the Fore-castle, and hawling out the spare
Rigging, Wood, Staves, and Shingles, etc. as it came to the Scuttle, which was
for the most Part under Water; they at last obtained what they aimed at, which
was one Barrel, and another half full of Apples, and a French Hogshead of Fresh
Water; all which they got aft on the Quarter Deck, and secured them in the best
Manner they possibly could. The Water stunk very much, being in Rum Casks, but
they though it it a great Relief in their present Necessity. When they were at Work
getting these Things out of the Fore-castle, as large a Shark as they had ever
seen, attempted to come in upon Deck to them; but the Master perceiving it,
beat him off with a Hogshead Stave; however, he attended about the Wreck for
several Days, as a horrible Sepulcher for them that should fall into his Power.
They now though it themselves in a Condition to subsist for some Days; and had some
Hope that God, would of his infinite Mercy, grant them Relief, by sending some
Vessel in their Way, to take them off; of which there was but a bare
Possibility; however, it was earnestly desired of the Almighty.

The Water, Cheese, and Apples they used with Discretion; every one taking a
little at certain Times: But they were deprived of every Thing commonly used to
drink out of, and so were obliged to make Use of one of their Shoes.

It continued moderate 'till the Ninth Day of December, but blowing hard all
that Day, about the Dusk of the Evening, in a very severe Squall, the Vessel
fell on her starboard Broadside, with her Masts in the Water. The Crew got on
the Broadside to Windward, in the best Manner they could, and some of them
crawled forward on the Outside, and cut away the Lanyards of the Weather-Main
and Fore-Shrouds, in Hopes the Masts would go away by the Board, and the Vessel
right on her Bottom as before. But the Masts proved too good to be got rid of
so easily, and the Vessel remained on her Broadside, the Sea continually
running over them, and the Weather very cold; and one large Sea in particular,
washed the Master from the main Chains of the Wreck to Leeward, but by a kind
Providence, he happened to fall on the Mainmast, where the Sea left him: by
the Help of which and the Barricado, he got again on the Windward Side, and was
securing himself to the main Chains when the Squall abated, and the Vessel
righted on her Bottom as before.

They then got within Board, and mustering their Number, William Langdon and
John Olson the Dutchman were lost, and all the Fresh Water* Apples and Cheese
gone; the Companion and most Part of the Quarter Deck blown up; and the
greatest Part of the loose Stuff in the Steerage and Cabin floated out; and
nothing left them to subsist upon, but the raw Salt Pork secured as above. From
this Time they had never a drop of Water, but what the Heavens, at Times,
afforded them. It was now that the Sheet and Piece of the Ensign, mentioned
above, became serviceable; first, by dividing to each a Piece, to catch Rain
Water with; and to some to wrap their sore Legs in, of which some were very
bad; and to others, to bind round their Head that had no Cap or Wigg. The
Manner they got Water was, by standing up when it rained, and spreading out
their Cloth with their Arms, leaning on the Rail for Safety, and facing the
Rain 'till the Squall was over, or the Cloth full of Water; then each, to make
the most of what he had got, laid down, and wringing the Cloth between his
Teeth, sucked out what Water he could. But at first using the Cloth, they were
obliged to wring out the Water several Times to wash it, for it was so
impregnated with Salt, having been soaked so long in Salt Water, that they
could not drink it. And often, to their great Mortification, when they thought
they had a Mouth-full of Water in their Cloth, the Spray of the Sea would fly
on it, and render the Water unfit for Use; so that it would take two or three
Showers to freshen them again. But what will not a Man attempt to save Life?
and no Man knows what Hardship he can bear, 'till he is bro't to the Test. --

Either the 12th or 13th Day, David Brown, the Cooper, proved delirious; which
was first discovered by his asking idle and ridiculous Questions, for which he
was reproved at first; but it had no other Effect on him, than to make him
whisper instead of calling aloud for Beer, Cider, and other Liquors, and
contriving how he would go and get them. And the next Morning he was missing,
and they supposed that he went overboard in the Night.

About this Time, i. e. the 13th Day of December, Thomas Chambers, the ablest
and best Seaman on board, went up and cut the Fore-top-sail-Yard away, Sail and
all, to prevent the Vessel's oversetting, of which they were very much afraid,
it blowing hard, and looking likely for a bad Storm, of which they had several.
During this Time, to the 15th, they had several light Showers of Hail, but
could save only a very small Quantity, which each as soon as they got it,
eagerly devoured, though it gave but small Relief.

The 16th, Nathaniel Barns the Mate, by his Behavior, showed that he was
delirious; talking and behaving much as Brown had done; and for Fear that he
should steal from them in the Night, as Brown had done, they with a Reef Plat
took a Turn round his Body, under his Arms, and made the Ends fast to the
Crutch, which was between the Master's Birth and Timothy Cotton; and before
Night they though it he was struck with Death by some Signs in his Countenance, and
Motion of his Body; but when Night came on, he lay still and soon died, without
any Struggle, that they could perceive; and the next Day in the Afternoon they
threw him into the Sea.

From the 9th to this Day, being the 17th, they endeavored all they could, to
get some loose Boards and Plank that were washing about the Steerage and Cabin
overboard, which this Day they accomplished; when it was hoped that some of the
Tools, that were in the Mate's Cabin in the Steerage, might be found to
Leeward, which was considerably under Water.

The Crew was now reduced to the Master, Timothy Cotton* Thomas Chambers, and
William Williams. It was asked, Who could swim, and venture to dive down to the
Lee-side in the Steerage, and search for some of the Tools, to cut the
Mainmast away? The three last could not swim, and when they knew the Master
could they let him have no Rest 'till he complied with their Request. But first
he made them promise that they would take Spell and Spell with such Tools as he
should find, 'till the Mast should fall. He then stripped off his Clothes, and
soon recovered a new Cooper's Ax, that was never ground, an Iron Crow, and Part
of a Bar of Lead. He then split a Stave, and with his Knife made a Handle for
the Ax, with which, and the Iron Crow, they took Spell and Spell, according to
their Promise, and in about three or four Hours, they got the Mast to fall,
when they though it the Vessel in no Danger of being overset by any Storm. The Bar
of Lead they cut to chew and roll about in their Mouths, which they though it in
some Measure allayed their Thirst, which was at Times very great* and
especially about this Time, when they were tempted to drink their own Urine,
which one of them had often done before. In this great Distress, the Master not
standing upon Niceties, borrowed one of the Men's Shoes, urin'd in it, and
drank it off, which, as he though it, soon purged him; for which Reason he never
repeated it, and endeavored to diswade others from doing it, as well as from
chewing Tobacco, which they would do, although wet with Salt Water: Which Advice
he had Reason to think was too much slighted. The Reason he borrowed one of the
Men's Shoes to drink out of was, because he saw them drink in the same Manner;
and had none of his own, since the second Day after the Vessel filled with
Water, when his Feet swelled and were so painful, that he was obliged to pull
them off, and there being no Place of Safety, they were soon washed overboard.

In the Evening of this Day Timothy Cotton showed great Signs of a Delirium, by
insisting on the Master's giving him some Drink; and when reasoned with upon
the Impossibility of complying with his Request* he insisted on going ashore,
and nothing should persuade him out of it: for he said he could easily get
ashore, but would not go without Leave from the Master. But upon the Master's
telling him, if he would stay till next Day, if he liked the Opportunity he
would go with him; he sat down in his Birth* and seemed to be in the full
Exercise of his Reason in a Moment; and asked the Master if he thought there
was any Likelihood of a Vessels meeting with them. This he had encouraged them
before to hope for, but now told them that there was only a Possibility of such
a Thing's happening; all Things being possible to the Almighty, and that it
might so happen in the Course of his Providence. But at the same Time he
advised them not to think much of this, or any Thing in the present Life, but
to endeavor to secure their eternal Happiness in the next, by looking unto
Jesus Christ their merciful Redeemer for sincere Repentance of all their Sins,
and Salvation through his Blood, and to let that take up all their Thoughts, as
they had nothing before their Eyes, but Death, and an Eternity of Joy or
Misery. They then earnestly supplicated God to wash away all their Sins, and to
receive them into his Favor for the Sake of Jesus Christ; and begged for the
Continuance of their Reason till their appointed Time should come; and that
they might not be left to destroy themselves, or be any Way accessory to their
own End; and so humbly submitted themselves to his Will and Pleasure.

Timothy Cotton continued very calm and rational till toward the next Evening,
which was the eighteenth Day of December, when he fell into a more violent Fit
than the Day before; and after insisting on having some Drink* in hasher Terms
then he had done; and the Master refusing to go with him, as he desired, he in
a sudden, and violent Manner threw himself into the Sea, and they saw no more
of him.

The Master and two Men that remained with him, were in great Distress for want
of Water till this Night, when it pleased God to send a very plentiful Rain, of
which by the Use of their Cloths, they got as much as they desired, and drank
rather more than did them good. The nineteenth was moderate, but unsettled
Weather, and at Night it began to blow hard, and the Sea to run high. Some Time
in the Night, the two Men that were left with the Master, while he was asleep,
shifted the Helm, which occasioned the Vessel to ware round on the other Tack,
which they had often done before, being very much afraid she would overset.
And while they had the Forestay-sail, and Strength* they hoisted it, and so
wore her round again. But now that Sail was rendered useless; and if it were
not, they had no Strength to hoist it. -- Laying on the Starboard Tack* as was
observed before, was much the best both for Safety and Ease; whenever the
Vessel was about on the other Tack, then every Sea would run over her as it
would over a Rock that is but just above Water. At this Time, no sooner was She
about, then the Sea came over them with the utmost Violence. The first Sea very
narrowly mist washing the Master overboard, and of Course thoroughly awakened
him. When he perceived what was the Matter, he crawled out of the Sail to the
Tiller, unlash'd it from the Place where the Men had fastened it, and lashed it
to the Place where it was before, which was then the Weather Side, and returned
as soon as possible to his Birth in the Sail, in hopes that the Vessel would
ware round on the other Tack. But all he could say to the two Lads could not
persuade them to get into their Births in the Sail for Safety. They were weak,
and discovered some Signs of a Delirium; and the Sea having free Passage over
them, they were washed away, and the Master saw no more of them, and expected
every Moment to follow them.

But it pleased God in about a quarter of an Hour, that the Wreck wore round on
the other Tack, when the Difference was so great, that I thought it very
comfortable Lodging to what it was before, although exposed to the Winds and
Weather as much as if I had been in the open Field. The Weather was cold, but
not enough to freeze. I was now sensible of a general Decay or Weakness in all
my Faculties: my Eyes weak and dazzling; my Limbs hardly enabled me to get on
my Feet; at the same Time, I had bad Sores on my Ancles, Knees, Hips, Elbows
and Sholders and Joints of my Fingers. But nevertheless I was obliged to get up
when it rained, or I could get no Water, which proved to be very scarce, seldom
being able to get a mouthful for the last four Days; and was so reduced, that I
could not have held out above twenty-four Hours longer, having had no Bread
from the beginning, and no other Provisions, than as mentioned above: and
indeed the Cry of Thirst was so great, that we had very little Desire for
Eating in Comparison for that of Drink, of which we had so scanty a Supply,
that we never but once had, as we thought, enough.

I was alone from the Nineteenth to Christmas Eve, expecting to starve to
Death, and at the same Time earnestly begging God's Mercy in the Forgiveness of
my Sins, and a Preservation of my Senses until my Time should come, trusting in
the Merits and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ for Acceptance unto Salvation; at
the same Time praying for a sincere Submission to the divine Will. But it
pleased God that I should continue longer in this World (than I expected) a
Monument of his Mercy; and to grant me a wonderful Deliverance, by sending
Capt. Thomas Martin, in the Snow Elizabeth from Hallifax, loaded with Fish
bound to Oporto in Portugal, to take me off the Wreck, the 24th Day of December
1752, at Noon, when they were in 41 15 North Latitude, and 113 Leagues to the
Eastward of Halifax.

It had blown hard, according to the Account they gave me, the Night before,
and they had reef'd their Topsails; and in the Morning it growing moderate,
they went up to let their Reefs out; and while they were about it, as it is
common, they looked round to see what they could see; and spied as they thought
a Sloop lying a Hull. But they soon altered their Opinion, and believed it to
be a Top-sail Vessel with but one Mast standing. They immediately altered their
Course, and came close to Windward. And seeing the Water run in and out at the
Cabin Windows, and the Hatches and Deck blown up, they concluded that there
could be no Body alive on the Wreck; so made what Observations and Remarks on
the Vessel they could, and then made Sail and shot ahead. But as they fell
under the Lee-bow, they saw a Sailor's Jacket hanging on one of the Crotches,
and a Sail fastened as above, and thought some Body was in it, but doubted if
alive. However, they resolved to take their Speaking-trumpet and hail; which
they did accordingly; and I think they told me they repeated it three Times.
But being asleep, I heard them but once, and they said they heard me answer
them. As soon as I opened my Eyes I saw a Vessel close by me, under the
Lee-bow, I immediately took the Piece of the Ensign I had in my Bosom (which I
kept there to preserve free from Salt Water, being what I caught fresh Water
with) and lifted up my Arm as high as I could, and swung it to them; which they
answered with their Hats; telling me they would send their Boat immediately,
which they did as soon as possible. I lay still all the While in my Birth, and
saw them hoist out their Boat, and perceived her advancing toward me. All this
While I was ruminating in my Mind, whether what I saw was* real. I thought I
could not be deceived with false Appearances, as I was thoroughly sensible of
my Condition; and how I came into this Situation; and so resolved to trust to
the Reality of it.

As soon as the Boat came near, they called to me, and asked me, if I could
help myself; I told them I could; and as the Boat advanced, I got myself down
to the Lee-quarter, ready to throw myself into her; and when a smooth Time
offered, they backed the Boat to the Side, when with the Help of the Man that
was in the Stern of her, I tumbled myself into the Bottom of the Boat, where I
had not above two or three Feet to fall; and so was rowed along Side the
Hospitable Snow that received me. The Sea was very rough, and I thought there
was Danger in getting out the Boat, especially for one so weak as I was, so
desired them to throw me a Rope, which they did, and I fastened it round under
my Arms, by the Help of which I got safe upon Deck. As soon as I had fallen on
my Face, and thanked Almighty God for so merciful a Deliverance, I was helped
down into the Cabin* where they had prepared a little hot Wine, of which they
gave me a Glass to drink, which I thought very comfortable, and a Bit of white
Bisquet, but I could not eat it, by Reason a I my Teeth were very loose. The
Wine soon coming out of my Stomach, I took a little more with a Bit of Bisquet
soaked in it, which stayed by me. They stripped me of all my Clothes, which were
dirty and ragged; my Shirt being rotten in some Places; and what was left of
it, as stiff as Buckrum, by being frequently wet with Salt Water; and put me on
a new clean checked Shirt, Drawers, and Stockings. They got me also the biggest
Pair of Shoes they could find, but my Feet were so swelled, I could not put my
Toes into them. I committed myself to the Care of the Captain, and begged he
would be careful of what was given me to Eat and to Drink; for that I was
reduced to the Weakness of a Child. They then put me to Bed, or Cabin in the
Steerage; for as the Vessel was small, and several Passengers in the great
Cabin, there was no Room for me there.

I no sooner was laid in the Bed assigned me, than I was in a Delirium, which
was so constant, that I know not what I did, or what they gave me to Eat or
Drink for some Days. But when I recovered my Reason, I was sensible that Capt.
Martin must have taken a great Deal of Care of me, and that I must have* been
no small Trouble to him; and what I* had Occasion for of his Stores, was at my
Service: And till I have it in my Power to make him another Return, can only
say, I am greatly obliged to him.

He proceeded on his intended Voyage for Oporto, without any uncommon Accident,
till we made the Coast of Portugal. We were about a Week before we could get in
with the Bar, which was occasioned by little Winds and Calms, and was more
tedious than all the Passage besides. The Nights I thought were very sharp and
cold; and the scorbutic Habit that I had contracted on the Wreck was now
purging off by* Urin, which obliged me to go upon Deck* three or four Times a
Night, for Want of a Convenience below* This exposed me to the Weather very
much; and as I have been told by able Physicians, it was a very extraordinary
Providence that I should recover from so low and starved a Condition; for I was
so weak that I was often ready to faint before I could get to my Cabin again.
And once in particular, just as I got down to the Foot of the Ladder in the
Steerage, I fainted away, and fell with my Face to the Ladder; and as I was
coming to myself again, I heard one of the Sailors say, what is the Matter with
the old Man? I answered, that I had fainted away, and then got to my Cabin. As
I had a long Beard, and was so much ematiated, their distinguishing me by that
Name, is not to be wondered at.

About the twentieth Day of January we got in with the Bar of Oporto. It being
a proper Time of Tide and smooth Water, we sailed directly in, tho poop'd by
three Seas: And that Night and the next Day, warpt the Snow up to Merigiah, and
had Protick; though on my Account the Visit-Boat made much Difficulty. But at
last the Captain obtained it, and then he went ashore with the Passengers. I
desired them to procure me a Lodging, which they endeavored, as they told me
when they came on Board, without Success.

Had I not been delivered from such Extremity of Distress, I should now have
though it myself very unhappy; in a strange Country, without any Habitation;
without Friends or Money; with little or no Clothes to my Back, and them very
dirty and lousy; and hardly able to stand on my Feet, having several loathsome
Sores about me, and no Dressing for them. I desired Capt. Martin, when he went
ashore the next Day, that he would make my Case know on Change, and acquaint
the Consul with it, that I might get Relief like other Beggars -- By Change
Time we got up to the Key, but outside another Fish Vessel that was then
discharging.

Captain Martin was telling my Story on Change, when it came to the Ears of my
good Friend Captain William Morris, whose Humanity led him to come directly to
see me. When I was called, and told that Capt. Morris wanted to see me, I had
no Notion of its being any Man that I had ever seen; but when I came upon Deck,
and saw my old Acquaintance, I had Hopes of Relief. But his seeing me in that
Condition, gave him so much Concern, that he could not help showing it in his
Countenance; and I being sensible of this at the same Time, could not refrain
from Tears, and turned about to wipe them away with my Sleeve; and turning
again, found he was gone. I was sorry that he went away so abruptly, though I did
not doubt but it was for my good.

I was such a miserable Object to look at, I thought it best to go to my
Cabin, which I did; but was no sooner there, than Capt. Morris came down the
Steerage, and his Steward, with a Bag of Clothes, with which he desired me to
dress myself. I soon shifted from Head to Foot, and threw all my dirty, lousey
Clothes into the Cabin I had so long slept in, and went ashore with Capt.
Morris, and Mr. Welkinson, Merchant there to his House and drank Tea; and he
was so good as to send for Dr. Henry Nickols, Physician to the English Factory
at Oporto, who kindly came, and gave me his best Advice and Assistance. It was
then agreed that I should go on board the Julius Caesar, Capt. William Morris's
Ship, till he had acquitted the Consul, Mr. Jackson, with my Misfortune, and
could provide a Lodging for me ashore.

The Consul, who is a most human Gentleman, and very much beloved by the
Factory, when he heard my Story (as I was informed) said he would have a
Lodging for me near his own House, that he might often hear from me; and had
provided one accordingly in a Portugee's House. But at my Friend Morris's
Desire, I was lodged at Mr. Nicholas Webber's at Villa-Nova, where I met with
all the kind Treatment I could expect, or a Person in my weak* Circumstances
desire -- Here, by Order of the Consul and Factory, I was attended by a Tailor,
Perriwig-maker, Shoemaker, etc. who furnished me with a Suit of Clothes from
Head to Foot, as also with Shirts, Crevats, Handkerchiefs, Stockings, etc. --
And when I was able to take my Passage for England, they procured a Passage for
me, in the Mary Capt. Francis Smith, for London, and laid in all Manner of
Stores necessary for a Gentleman, and five Moidores in my Pocket, all at their
own Cost and Charge. Nor must I forget the Kindness of Dr. Bromley, who was so
good as to attend me every Day that I was at Oporto, to dress my sore Ancles,
and gave me proper Dressing for them, to use in the Passage to England. Nor can
I omit to mention the Present made me by the Masters of the Ships then at
Oporto; in which kind Affair, Capt. Knowler, and my Friend Morris, were
exceeding active.

We sailed over the Bar of Oporto the 3d of March 1753, and arrived at Dover
the 13th of the same Month.

By the Assistance of some Friends in London, and the Owners of the Britania
Capt. George Spender in particular, in which I took Passage from London, I have
had an Opportunity of seeing once more my native Place Portsmouth in
New England.

On the 15th Day of July* 1753, I arrived at Boston, in New England, an
affecting Instance, more especially to my Friends, of the Goodness of that
Being, who is the Confidence of the Ends of the Earth; and of them that are
after off upon the Sea.

Nathanael Pierce.


