THE Free Grace of GOD DISPLAYED, IN THE Salvation of Men. BEING TWO ESSAYS,
THE ONE On the State and Condition of Men, by CREATION and the FALL; THE OTHER
Upon the DOCTRINE of MERIT, Exemplified in the Justification of a Sinner.

By THOMAS BURCH.

LONDON: Printed. BOSTON; Reprinted and Sold by GREEN and RUSSELL in
Queen Street, and by P. FREEMAN in Union-street. M.DCC.LVII.

TO THE READER.
AT the request of the worthy author of the following essays, I have perused
them; and observe nothing in them, but what is agreeable to the sacred
scripture, to the form of sound words, to the analogy of faith, and the
doctrine of the gospel; and cannot but be of opinion, that they may be useful
to illustrate and confirm the doctrines of grace, to resolve the doubts and
remove the difficulties which may attend many with respect to some things
herein handled; being wrote with clearness of thought, soundness of judgment,
and strength of argument: And as such I heartily recommend them to the perusal
of every enquirer after truth; and that they may be of use to instruct the
ignorant, to ease the minds of doubting Christians, to strengthen the weak and
establish the wavering in the truth of the gospel, is the hearty desire of him,
that wishes well to the souls of men, and to the interest of the Redeemer.

JOHN GILL.

CONTENTS.
ESSAY I. CHAP. I OF the Creation of Man, and God the Creator, Page 5. CHAP.
II. Of the Fall of Man as a voluntary Transgression, and of himself, being his
own fault; and of the Liberty of Man's Will, and the Decrees of God being
consistent. Page 17. CHAP. III. Contains an answer to the following query,
(viz.) Whether any mere creature will stand in the state in which it is
created, upon the foot of creation-powers and abilities, without supernatural
aids, or confirming grace? Page 25. CHAP. IV. Containing two very evident
conclusions, drawn from the foregoing subject. Page 37. ESSAY II. On the
Doctrine of Merit. Page 58.
AN ESSAY ON THE STATE of MAN, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Creation of Man, and God the Creator.
WHEN God had created the heavens with all their hosts, and the earth with the
various creatures in it, the sea and all that therein is, last of all he made
man. And God said, let us make man -- And the Lord God formed man out of the
dust of the earth, etc. Genesis i. 26. ii. 28.

Man is the crown and glory of this lower creation. Thou have made man a little
lower than the angels and have crowned him with glory and honor, etc. Psalm.
viii. 5. The description holy David gives of the ^^^mation of man, is very
exact and beautiful. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully
made; mavelous are thy works, and that my (...) knows right well, Psalm.
cxxxix. 14.

Query, -- If God be the creator and maker of man, and man is born into the
world a corrupt creature, both filthy and guilty in his sight, is not he the
author of this corruption and depravity? Are not all men, when born into the
world, as God made them? Answer: I believe God is the creator of man, both body
and soul; every person that comes into the world receives his breath and being
from him: I also believe that every son and daughter of Adam is born into the
world a corrupt, depraved creature, and guilty in the sight of God, being
shapen in iniquity, and conceived in sin. And by the offense of one, Judgment
came upon all men to condemnation, Psalm. li. 5. Romans v. 18. But God is not the
author of that corruption; nor is he unjust in passing the sentence of
condemnation upon all mankind, for that first sin of Adam. In some respects it
may be said, God is the remote cause of every thing; for in him all live, move,
and have their being, Acts xvii. 28. No person can move, or act, but as he is
supported and uphold by God, who gives him strength to move and act.

But, the doing an action wrong, is not from God, but the creature, and
proceeds from the corruption of human nature. We must distinguish between an
action, and the evil of the action; for the same action may be good or bad;
good, if done according to the rule, and as God has commanded; bad, or evil,
if done contrary to it.

For instance, speech, or speaking, is an action which may be good or bad; to
speak the truth, is a good action; but to speak a falsehood, or tell a lie, is
an evil one: therefore, though the act may, in some respect, be ascribed to
God, yet the evil of the action cannot.

The sun, when it shines upon a dunghill, will exhale, or draw from thence, a
disagreable smell; now, though the sun be the remote cause of the dunghill's
sending forth such a nauseous steam, yet it is not the immediate cause of it;
none can justly blame the sun, but the dunghill, which is the chief and
immediate cause, being made up of such matter as contains in itself that
disagreable smell; the sun only discovers what is in the dunghill, it puts
nothing into it.

But, to answer more directly; man's body and soul, as to the essence of both,
are from God, and we ought to bless him for all our natural powers and
faculties, of body and mind; but should take care we do not exalt human nature
so as to make a Savior unnecessary. We must observe, that the corruption of
human nature is no part of it; it is what cleaves fast to it, but is no part of
it; it is conveyed by generation, but does not constitute our being, nor any
part of it; it is no part either of the soul, or of the body: Man, before he
sinned and fell, had the same members of body, and faculties of soul, that he
has now. Therefore, God may be and is, the creator of man, both body and soul,
and yet not the author of that corruption which cleaves to him, but is no part
of him. But, suppose there be a mystery in it, shall we, therefore, deny it?
and, because we cannot fully comprehend it, shall we not believe it? Should we
take this liberty in some other matters, we must cast away some of the
fundamental doctrines of Christianity; and, in things natural, must reject some
that we know to be true, such as we cannot fully explain the manner of. For
instance, is there not a mystery in the union of the soul and body? One might
ask, how are the soul and body united? By what secret ties and bands are they
knit together? When the time, and what the mode of this union, who can conceive
or fully explain? And yet who dares deny that so it is?

And is it not equally as evident, that the nature of man is corrupted? or how
shall we account for those irregular passions in little children? whence those
early buddings of sin, those youthful follies? And are not pain, sickness, and
death, the lot of many in their infancy, before they have committed actual sin?
Would these things be thus, if the nature of man was pure when born into the
world? and is it not speaking philosophically, when we say, like begets like?
and is it not also speaking scripturally, when we ask, Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? not one, Job xiv. 4.

As God made man, so he made him an upright and perfect creature; God never
made any thing otherwise than pure and perfect. In the account Moses gives us
of the creation in general, he tells us, that God saw it was good, Genesis i. 10,
12. But when God had finished his works, and took a view of them, he pronounced
All very good, Genesis i. 31. Never any thing came out of God's hand with the
least stain or blemish upon it: He is a rock, his work is perfect, Deuteronomy. xxxii.
4. God is the author of all rectitude and holiness, that is or ever was in
angels or men; all the indowments Adam had in his innocence, was the bestowment
of heaven; the purity and rectitude wherewith he was adorned, was a transcript
of the divine image. God is the source and fountain of all holiness; and if any
of the fallen and sinful race of Adam, have on them the glorious and blessed
image of God, it is the Lords work and free donation, Ephesians. iv. 24. Col. iii.
10. Holiness is in God essentially, but in the creature it is derived; and a
rational being may exist without it, as the apostate angels do, and fallen man
till he is restored: it is what God puts into the creature, a resemblance to
his glorious self; and, it may be truly affirmed, that God cannot make a
reasonable being, without making it in his own image. It is no ways mavelous
that God, when he makes a rational being, should make it in his own image; but,
it is very stupendous, that when the creature man had lost the image of God, he
should put it on him again. God was at liberty to make man or not, but not at
liberty to make him holy or unholy; this were to suppose God capable of erring,
and so doing what he hates in others, which were blasphemy once to think: but
when man had lost the image of God, he was at liberty whether he would imprint
it on him again; and the imprinting it on any, is an act of his mere sovereign
grace and unmerited love.

God made man upright. And God said, let us make man in our own image, after
our likeness, etc. Genesis i. 26. It does not seem consistent with the perfections
of God, that he should make any order or rank of beings, without imprinting on
them his image, a resemblance of his moral perfections; endowing them with such
powers and abilities, which, if rightly improved, are sufficient to such a
creature's standing. And it must be maintained, that Adam had sufficient powers
and abilities to stand; it was not for want of power that he fell, but for want
of exercising the power he had aright; the same my be affirmed of the fallen
angels.

To suppose a creature punished for apostatizing from its maker, it is
necessary to suppose also, that that creature had power to stand in the state
in which it was made; or otherwise the punishment would not be just; for to
punish the creature for a fault it could not avoid, is acting against all
reason and justice. But if the creature's apostatizing from the Creator, be the
effect of an abuse of the power which the creature had; this being the fault of
the creature, may very justly be punished.

Query, -- If it be so, that it is unjust to punish a creature for a fault, or
faults, it cannot avoid; how then can God in justice punish mankind for their
disobedience to his law, if man in this present fallen state has lost the power
to obey or keep the law, and it does not please God to restore this power, to
man again?

Answer: That man has lost the power he once had to keep the law of God, and is
now become weak, yea quite void of spiritual strength, is an undeniable truth,
if the scriptures are to be taken as a rule of our faith; for thus it is
written, For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly. And the carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to
the law of God, neither, indeed, can be. So then they that are in the flesh
cannot please God, Romans v. 6. and viii. 7, 8. And that God will punish the
finally disobedient, is as true as the former: For as many as have sinned in
the law, shall be judged by the law. God will certainly revenge all
disobedience, -- And the wrath of God will come on the children of
disobedience. Romans ii. 10. 2 Cor. x. 6. Col. iii. 6, And that God is just in
punishing the finally disobedient, is also true; for, Shall not the judge of
the whole earth do right? Yea, He shall judge the world with (or in)
righteousness, and the people with his truth. Is God unrighteous who takes
vengeance? -- God forbid, for then how should God judge the world? Genesis xviii.
25. Psalm. xcvi. 13. Acts xvii. 31. Romans iii. 5, 6.

But then we must observe, that the punishment which will be inflicted on the
finally disobedient on the judgment day, will not be for unavoidable faults;
they will not be condemned for not doing what they could not do; but for not
doing the good they might have done, and for wilful sins committed. Those we
have an account of in St. Matt. xxv. 41, to 46. that were sent away into
everlasting punishment, it was for not doing the good they might have done; for
they could have visited the sick and relieved them, but they would not. For
though the moral liberty of the will be lost, the natural liberty remains;
persons have power to read the word of God, to speak the truth, attend divine
worship, give alms, etc. And where the gospel is preached, man has power, and
ability to believe, or give his assent to it; and unbelief is the condemning
sin. He that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed
in the name of the only begotton Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that
light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light, because
their deeds were evil, Joh. iii. 18, 19.

But then, persons will not be condemned for not believing in Christ in a right
gospel-manner, or for being destitute of true faith, the faith of God's elect;
but for not believing in such a way and manner, and so far as they might,
according to the revelation made unto them; their faith will be found to come
short, far short of what it might have attained unto; had they been diligent in
reading and searching the word of God, and not have pinned that small degree of
historical faith which they had, on other men's sleeeves; and so indulging
themselves in idleness, giving more credit to men than to the Lord, and what he
has told them in his holy word. Man has power to reform from open vice, to be
morally sober and just, and to do many things morally good, which he does not;
and, upon this footing, conscience itself will condemn, and very justly too.
But as to true evangelical faith in the Son of God, called precious faith, and
the faith of God's elect, 2 Pet. i. 1. Tit. i. 2. being given to them, and not
to others; this is what none have by nature, nor can it be acquired, (though it
comes by hearing) neither can any man have this faith except God give it unto
him, Ephesians. ii. 8. Phil. i. 29. Neither will any person be condemned for the want
of such a faith; it is unreasonable and unjust to think, or affirm this: there
will be enough as matter of condemnation without this, as the wilful omission
of known duties, and wilful commission of known sins, opposition to Christ and
his gospel; for he that knowneth his Lord's will, and does it not, will be very
justly punished; for when the Lord shall be revealed from heaven, with his
mighty angels, in flaming fire; (it will be) to take vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, (so far as
they might have obeyed it) such shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 These. i. 7,
8, 9.

Furthermore, Though it would be unjust to punish a creature fallen from a
state of innocence, if the creature had not been endowed with sufficient power
to have stood in that state of innocence, and to have kept the law it was
placed under; yet, we may very well justify the equity of God's proceeding
against fallen man, in punishing him for his disobedience to the law, though he
has not power to keep it perfectly in his fallen state. For, as perfect
obedience is God's right and due from the creature, so it must be the
creature's duty to give it; for though man has lost the power to obey, and is
become unable to give God his just due, God has not lost his right and
authority over the creature, to command and require it.

The fallen angels have lost the power which once they had to love and obey
God; yet, no person, I presume, will affirm, that God has not authority to
command them, or that it is not their duty to love and serve him. If the power
of the creature (man) was the measure of the creature's obedience, and God
required no more of man than he in his fallen state can, or is able to give,
then the creature's works would not be great, and God's demands must be but
small.

We should consider, that all mankind were included in Adam as their public
head and representative, and fell in him, and his loss was their loss. But,
perhaps, some may say, what is it to me what Adam did? I never knew him, nor
gave my consent to what he did; therefore, what concern have I with Adam? To
which I answer; every one that knows himself, has some knowledge of his father
Adam, and sensibly (to his grief and sorrow) feels what concern he had in his
first transgression, and consequently in his transactions in the garden,
antecedent to his sinning.

I might ask these persons in like manner, what it is to you what Christ did,
the second Adam? you never knew him, nor gave your consent to what he did;
therefore, what concern have you with him? For, if it be a just and conclusive
way of arguing, to exclude ourselves from having any concern in what Adam did,
because we never knew him in person, or gave our explicit consent to what he
did; why should not the argument be as just and conclusive when applied to
Christ the second Adam, whom we never knew personally, nor gave our consent to
what he did? And it is a question whether those who deny the headship of the
first Adam, believe, or care much about, the headship of the second.

Denying the headship of the first Adam, is the way (in my humble opinion) to
bring us into greater difficulties in accounting for, and clearing the justice
of God in his proceedings toward mankind, than owning it. For, do not all
mankind suffer upon the account of the first sin, sickness pain and death? Now,
I ask, where does the justice of God appear, in inflicting these things on
mankind, if they are innocent? these things come upon many, before they have
committed actual sin; for how much do infants, many times undergo, and suffer?
and where is the justice of all this, if they are innocent? it cannot be for
their own actual sins, for they have none; if it is not for the sin of another,
then it is for no sin at all; and whether it is unjust or not to punish an
innocent creature, let any man judge. What a contradiction is it, and how
shocking does it appear, to see thousands of poor creatures brought into the
world, under those deplorable circumstances, with the marks of God's anger upon
them, and yet innocent? strange! Far be it from the righteous God, that loves
righteousness, to punish the innocent as he does the guilty!

Again, I ask, is not the curse which was inflicted on our first parents for
their first sin, what their posterity share in also? Genesis iii. 16, 17, 18, 19.
And unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy
conception, in sorrow thou shall bring forth children, etc. Now, I ask, did Eve
alone share in this punishment? do not her daughters also bring forth children
in sorrow? And unto Adam he said because thou have hearkened unto the voice of
thy wife, and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee, saying, thou
shall not eat of it, cursed is the ground for thy sake -- thorns and thistles
shall it bring forth to thee, etc. Observe, the earth was cursed for Adam's
sake, it was cursed for his first sin; and does not the earth still bring forth
thorns and thistles? these things were not only a trouble to Adam, but they are
so to his children also. In sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy
life, -- in the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread -- till thou return unto
the ground, etc. Here I ask again, did Adam alone take his part in these evils?
do not all mankind share in them likewise? are not all subject to labor and
sorrow? Now, where is the justice of inflicting all these evils upon mankind,
on account of Adam's first sin, if that sin is not imputed unto them? And all
those moral evils that affect the soul, (viz.) ignorance and dakrness of mind,
impotency and weakness in spiritual things, an aversion to good, a proneness to
evil, etc, are likewise the fruits and consequences of the first transgression;
Adam's strength was our strength till he lost it.

The death spoken of in Romans v. 17. as the consequence of the first sin, is set
in opposition to eternal life. Death (is said) to reign by one man's offense. i
e. Adam's first transgression. For, as the life spoken of in the other part of
the verse, is a life of glory in heaven, Reigning in life by one Christ Jesus;
the antithesis requires death should intend a spiritual and eternal one.

But to conclude this head, from what has been said, we may see, that those who
deny the headship of Christ, are unavoidably led into the same error, they fix
on those that own it, (viz.) charging God with injustice. If any will say, it
is unjust to punish one man for another man's sin, viz. all mankind for the
sake of Adam's sin, and think likewise that it is not right in God to punish
man for his disobedience to his holy law, because man has lost the power he
once had; let such persons consider, that though it would have been unjust to
have punished man for his apostasy, in case he had not been endowed with
sufficient power to have kept the law he was under; yet the case is different
with respect to fallen man: for though man in his present fallen state has not
power to keep the law of God, yet he has ability to do more moral good than he
does, and to abstain from many moral evils which he does not; and therefore,
upon his own account, may be very justly punished for his disobedience to the
law, and his opposition to the gospel. And also the justice of God is evident
in punishing mankind with natural and moral evils upon Adam's account; as they
were considered in him as their head and representative; and the justice of God
shines forth with brighter rays in this scheme than in the other. For, if
Adam's sin is not imputed to us, then all we suffer before we commit actual
sin, we undergo and suffer as innocent. But acknowledging the headship of Adam,
the justice of God is cleared with reference to all we suffer, as the
consequence of the first transgression: we being included in him, and as a part
of him, it is but just and reasonable we should share the same fate he did; and
as to justice and equity of this constitution, none can doubt, that considers
it was the righteous God that had the settling and ordering of the whole affair.

CHAP. II. Of the Fall of Man as a voluntary Transgression, and of himself,
being his own fault; and of the Liberty of Man's Will, and the Decrees of God
being consistent.
THE fall of man was of himself; it was a wilful transgression, that might have
been avoided; that Adam fell therefore was entirely his own fault; he was made
upright, but he turned aside. Man being in honor did not abide long; how long
is uncertain: it was long enough to know what he enjoyed, that when he fell he
was sensible what he had lost. Some men have affirmed, that God ordained the
fall of man; but others have denied it, and find fault with such an assertion
as being too harsh, and as making God the immediate cause of the fall, and
author of sin.

But though to say God ordained the fall of man, may sound harsh in the ears of
such as perhaps understand but little about the decrees of God, and the way and
manner in which they are executed; yet I ask where lies the evil, or harshness
of this proposition, (God ordained the fall?) some persons may be so ignorant
as to think, that what God ordains shall be, he is the agent to effect, and the
immediate cause thereof; but it is not always so, for wicked men, when they are
doing their own work, and the will and work of the devil; they are at the same
time fulfilling the righteous decrees of God. This is undeniable in the Jews
putting to death our blessed Lord. None will affirm that God was the immediate
cause of perpetrating that wicked act; it would be blasphemy so to say: and yet
none can deny (who believes the word of God) that the death of Christ was
foreordained of God; for thus it is written, -- Him being delivered by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have crucified and slain --
For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were
gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel, determined
(before) to be done, Acts ii. 23. iv. 27, 28.

I might ask, is there any thing comes to pass without God's ordination? If
so, then it must be what he has no concern with; for whatsoever God does
either immediately by himself alone, or mediately, i. e. what he permits to be
done by means and instruments, is what he first purposes shall be done. For,
whatsoever God permits to be, he first ordains shall be, having ordained, he
permits; if it were not so, it would follow, that God permits some things to
be, which he never purposed or ordained should be, which must be false and
absurd. Besides, it should be observed, that as permission includes the ways,
means, and instruments, which effect and bring to pass what is permitted, these
cannot exist, much less operate and move, without the will and pleasure of God
they should. If any person should ask, where then is the difference between
God's ordaining and permitting? I answer, the difference is not so great
perhaps as some may imagine; the word permit, or permission, is proper enough;
but as it stands in such near connection with the word ordain, we must take
care not to admit wrong ideas.

That permission conveys a different idea from the word ordain, is evident.
For, the word permit, or permission, refers to the execution of God's decrees,
and what he is not the immediate cause of; for what he has decreed to be done,
that is, effected by himself, without means and instruments, cannot come under
the notion of permission; but when he accomplisheth his decrees by means and
instruments, he is said to permit; he permits it to be done.

Thus it may be truly said, God permitted the death of Christ; for, every
circumstance relating thereunto was permitted; he permitted Pilate to condemn
him, and the Jews to crucify him: but this does not suppose the death of Christ
was not foreordained, but rather implies it was. Permission seems to me to
include in it a purpose of mind to permit. When Agrippa said unto Paul thou art
permitted to speak for thyself, Acts xxvi. 1. must we not suppose that Agrippa
first came to a determination in his own mind, that Paul should have liberty to
speak and make his defense; and having determined, he permits? We should
consider God may ordain a thing to be done, and not be a doer of it himself;
but it is effected by means and instruments as they fall out in their common
way of working.

And though God is not the auther of sin, neither does he approve it as a thing
agreeable to his nature; yet we must grant (except we deny the universal
providence of God) that all means and second causes are under his direction,
and that the whole course of nature moves on in a direct line, as it was at
first fixed, according to the original laws of nature; or, as it was the good
will and pleasure of God it should; and his will is the same as at the
beginning: otherwise he could alter the course of nature, or put a stop to the
whole in a moment. And one would think, if the purpose, or decree of God may
(as we know it may) be extended to the crucifying of the son of God; so unjust,
barbarous, inhuman, and bloody an act (for by wicked hands he was crucified and
slain;) I say, if it be granted (and who dares deny it?) that his was
foreordained by God, surely there can be no danger in extending his decrees to
any thing else. For, nothing can be so horribly impious as the crucifying of
the only begotten son of God, the prince of life slain and hanged on a tree!
And yet, all that Herod, Pilate, the Gentiles, and the Jews did, was what the
hand and counsel of God had before determined should be done, Acts iv. 27, 28.

We must also consider, that the decrees of God, in the Execution of them, no
ways infringe the liberty of the creature's will: this is evident in the case
of Joseph's being sold (by his brethren) into Egypt; his brethren acted as free
agents; it was a wicked act in them, proceeding from hatred and envy; and yet
it was what God had appointed, or determined should be, in order to bring about
and accomplish many and great things, both in providence and grace. God sent me
( says Joseph) before you to preserve lifeandAnd God sent me before you to
preserve a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great
deliverance. So now, it was not you that sent me hither, but God, Genesis xlv. 5,
7, 8.

This thing is no less evident, in the revolt of the ten tribes, which was a
voluntary transgression in them; and yet, when Rehoboam was going to fight
against Israel, That he might bring the Kingdom again to Rehoboam, the Lord
forbid him, and sent Shemaiah, the man of God, saying, thus says the Lord, ye
shall not go up, to fight against your brethren, return every man to his house,
for this thing is done of me, 2 Chronicles. xi. 1, 2, 3, 4.

The same thing is equally plain in the death of Christ. And these are but a
few of the many instances which might be produced out of the word of God,
proving these two things. First, that what God permits, he first ordains.
Secondly, that neither the decrees of God, nor the execution of them, infringe
the liberty of man's will.

Sometimes God himself is the immediate agent to effect his own purposes, and
in the execution of them makes use of no means or instruments, as in the
creation of the world, the resurrection of the dead, etc. And whenever his
purposes are executed by good and lawful means, he is the chief cause, though
instruments be employed; but, when the purposes of God are executed by means
which in themselves are not good, God is not the chief cause; he permits it so
to be.

And things which are in themselves sinful, are permitted to be done; the doing
of which is an accomplishment of God's decrees, as the instances before named
manifest; (viz) the selling Joseph into Egypt; the revolt of the ten tribes;
and the crucifying of Christ: all which were in themselves sinful; and yet the
doing of them was the executing, or fulfilling of God's eternal counsel,
particularly the crucifying of Christ; which was not only the accomplishment of
God's eternal counsel, concerning the death of Christ in particular, but led on
toward the effecting all those things which God had purposed concerning the
salvation of his chosen people; looking backward or forward, all center in the
death of Christ.

That God foreknew from eternity, all creatures and actions, even the most
contingent, will, I presume, be granted by all that believe divine revelation.
And from the foreknowledge of God may be argued the certain future existence of
whatsoever was foreknown. For whatsoever is foreknown by God, or viewed as
existing, which yet is future, must exist in time, according as it was
foreknown, or viewed before time; or, the foreknowledge of God would not be
certain: for as nothing can exist that is future, without being first viewed,
or foreknown by God, must necessarily exist in time; or God would be liable to
be deceived, and which must be the case, if any thing was foreknown by God as
what would be in time, and yet did not exist.

But this necessity of existence, puts nothing into the creature, when it
existeth; it is not thereby impelled, or forced to act in the manner it does:
neither does the foreknowledge of God alter the nature of any creature or
action, whether good or bad; but considers things barely in the mode and manner
in which they exist in time: and whatsoever is foreknown by God as what would
exist in a certain way, it is his will and pleasure to permit it so to exist;
and this permission must include in it, a purpose to permit. For what God
foreknows before time, that comes to pass in time; he either determines within
himself to permit the same to come pass, or he does not; if the latter, (viz)
if he does not determine to permit it to come to pass, then his foreknowledge
and his decrees are at odds; but if the former, i. e. if he did determine to
permit, then it will follow, that permission includes in it, or stands in close
connection with, a purpose as antecedent to permission.

As every thing, i.e. very creature, circumstance, and action, which exist in
time, were before time taken up in the great Jehovah's all-comprehending mind;
and as nothing of all that was foreknown could take place, without his will and
pleasure it should; therefore, to suppose any thing falls out contrary to his
intention, or what was his secret will should not be, is to deny his
omnipotency; although at the same time it may be prohibited in his revealed
will; which is no contradiction: for when God wills to permit things that are
in themselves sinful, it is not as approving of them considered in their nature
as sinful, for God does not absolutely will evil considered in itself as a
thing repugnant to his holy nature; but he wills it with reference to other
views and ends; so that what God prohibits in his revealed will, as things
contrary to his holy and pure nature, he in his secret will determines to
permit for wise and good ends, which he can, and will, accomplish thereby.

Thus with respect to the sin and fall of man, and the crucifying of Christ;
things that are sinful, and forbidden in God's revealed will, being contrary to
his holy nature, and what he could not approve of; yet we see it was his secret
will these things should so come to pass; and had so purposed within himself
before the foundation of the world; and that his ends and views in all this
were wise and good, none can question that understands and believes what he
reads in the word of God. Therefore to say it was the will and pleasure of God
to permit Adam to fall, and that it is his will and pleasure to permit (or
suffer, which is the same) whatsoever falls out and comes to pass in the world,
is expressing fully my meaning, and what I intend.

Therefore, if any man like not this way of expression, (viz.) God ordained the
fall, he may have it in the following terms, (viz.) It was the good will and
pleasure of God to permit Adam to fall. -- And which is the softest and best
way of expression; but then it must be observed, that the good will and
pleasure of God cannot be separated from his eternal purpose, but is the very
same thing in other words, as may be seen in Ephesians. i. 5, 9.

Thus we see God permitted man to sin and fall; he suffered the Devil to tempt
him, to seduce and overcome him. But the sin and fall of Adam, and the
wickedness committed in the world since, must be considered with this
difference; namely, there is in fallen man a deficiency, a want of strength to
stand against Satan and his temptations, which was not the case with reference
to Adam; he had power to resist and overcome the temptation: God permitted
innocent man to fall into sin, and he permits sinful man to go on in sin.

It was not a precarious thing with God whether Adam would stand or fall; as is
evident from the early provision he made for man's recovery, laying the plan of
man's salvation in the death of his own Son. This scheme of man's redemption
from sin, supposed his falling into it; and the model of this was drawn, and
the whole affair settled before man was made. The Mediator was set up from
everlasting -- and a people chosen in him before the foundation of the world;
and grace treasured up in the Mediator's hand for all the elect, before the
world began, Prove. viii. 22, to 32. Ephesians. 1. 4. 2 Timothy 1. 9.

From what has been said, I hope it is evident, that the fall of man was from
himself; it was a wilful transgression; he could not justly blame any but
himself. And yet, previous to this, we may say, it was the good will and
pleasure of God to permit or suffer it so to be; but this no ways affected the
will of Adam, no not in the least, so as to lay any necessity upon it; neither
does it ever affect the will of any creature in this sense.

CHAP. III. Contains an answer to the following query, (viz.) Whether any mere
creature will stand in the state in which it is created, upon the foot of
creation-powers and abilities, without supernatural aids, or confirming grace?
THE subject of this chapter will be to enquire into the nature of all created
beings, and consequently that of man in the state of innocence.

The question before us is not, whether an innocent creature can stand, but
whether it will? I shall take the liberty to search into this query, not to
satisfy curiosity, but to find out, as far as I can, the truth; it will help us
to see the nature of all created beings; and if we find the answer in the
negative; if it be no more than strongly probable, that no creature will stand
upon the foot of creation-abilities, then it will lead our thoughts to the
special love of God, securing, by a righteous and gracious decree, the
happiness of elect men and angels. The state of the question, is (not whether
an innocent creature can stand, for that is out of all question, but) whether
any mere creature will stand, in that state in which it is created, upon the
foot of cretion-powers and abilities, without supernatural aids, or confirming
grace? I shall lay it down for a truth that none will, or, that it is at least
exceeding probable, that no mere creature will stand and persevere long,
without being confirmed by the special grace of God. For the proof of this, I
shall produce the following arguments.

I. The first argument shall be taken from matter of fact; the fall of man and
angels. These we know did not stand in the state in which they were made; they
had power to stand, but did not: as to those angels which did not fall, their
standing is not owing to creation-powers and abilities, but electing grace:
they are called the elect angels, I Tim. v. 21.

Perhaps some men may think, they were elected after they had given sufficient
proof of their fidelity, and had the rest done the same, they would also have
been elected. To which I answer, this is not so much as probable, for two
reasons; for, First, this would make election according to works, which would
have given room for boasting, and is contrary to God's proceedings in other
cases, namely, the election of men, Romans xi. 5. which is, according to grace.
Secondly, then they must have stood the time of their trial, which it is evident
they had not; for, as we must conclude, the angels were all created at once,
were all of one species or nature, so the time of their probation must be the
same; and those that fell had not stood the full time of their trial, for then
they would not have fallen: but they fell short of the limits set them, that
is, of persevering to the end. And why did not the others fall? I answer,
because they were elected, antecedent to, or before the others fell; or, why
are they called elect? Those that fell are not so or, what can this term,
(elect) mean if it mean not that these were secured by election from falling?
Besides, it should be observed, that election refers to a part; had the angels
all stood the full time of their trial, they might have been confirmed -- but
not elected: it would not have been proper to have called them the elect
angels; election being a taking a part out of the whole, Deuteronomy. vii. 6, 7. Romans
xi. 5. We may therefore conclude, that had it not been for electing grace, the
now holy and happy angels had fell as their fellows did; and I make no question
but they know this, and are deeply affected with it; angels as well as men will
bless God for electing grace! Perhaps it may be said, that man, if he had not
had a tempter, might have stood. I answer, it cannot be proved that he would
have stood, supposing he had no external temper; the contrary is much more
probable, as the angels (except the elect) did fall, who had not (at least, not
all of them) any external temper, and what angels did, man might have done.
However, as angels and man did not stand, and we know not that God has made
any other order, or rank of rational and intellectual beings which have stood
upon the foot of creation-powers and abilities, the conclusion from hence, that
no creature will stand must carry in it at least a strong probability.

II. The second argument is taken from the necessary dependence of the creature
on the Creator, for the continuation of it is happiness, and the liableness
there is of the creature's getting off from that dependence, and so losing its
happiness.

As all creatures must be dependant on their creator, for the whole of their
happiness, both as to the thing itself, and the continuance of it; there may
be, for any thing I can see, a very great liableness of getting off from their
dependence; the consequence of which must be the loss of their happiness. In
which case there is nothing withheld (by God) from the creature, but it is the
creature withdraws and gets off from its creator, the consequence of which must
be apostasy. This was Adam's case, so long as his dependence was firm he stood;
but no sooner did he hearken to the tempter but it affected his dependence:
every inch of ground the devil Though I speak of Adam as being tempted by the
Devil, I do not suppose he was tempted by him in the serpent as Eve was; yet I
judge it proper to say, Adam was tempted by him; for though it was Eve which
tempted Adam, yet she was, at that time, the Devil's instrument, and might as
well be called Satan, as Peter was upon another account, when the Devil made
use of him to tempt Christ, Mat. xvi. 23. For as the woman was tempted by the
Devil in the serpent; so Adam was tempted by the Devil in the woman; or, at
least, by his making use of the woman, Genesis iii. 17.
got here, was of the greatest prejudice to Adam; his dependence upon God being
gradually weakened, till he gave more heed to what the tempter said, than to
what God said, and this was the fatal blow; no sooner had Satan gained this
point, but his work was done.

Had Adam been upon his guard in the exercise of those powers he was endowed
with, and cleaved fast to God's word, the enemy had not prevailed.

Now, what Adam did, another creature might do, and angels did. Therefore, as
all creatures must be dependent upon their creator for their happiness, and
their continuance of it; and can stand and enjoy it no longer than they cleave
fast to God and his holy word; I see not why a mere creature may not be
exceeding liable to fall; and it is at least very probable, a creature without
supernatural aids will fall.

III. The third argument shall be drawn from the nature of all created
essences, and mere creature-abilities, as being liable to change.

No being is, or can be, by creation, unchangeable; no created essence has
this property belonging to it, by virtue of its creation: God alone (who is an
uncreated essence) is unchangeable. I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. iii. 6.

All creatures are mutable and liable to change, though they be the most
excellent; for, if you suppose a creature of the highest rank, blessed with
created powers and abilities to the highest degree possible, yet it is but a
creature, and no more* could we suppose a mere creature unchangeable by nature,
it would no longer be a creature, but God. It is true, God can put a creature
into a fixed state, as the elect angels are and as saints will be in heaven:
but this will be owing to the special grace of God confirming them in that
blessed state; and not to any natural powers and abilities in themselves: it is
an act of sovereign grace, and must be resolved into that glorious and
irreversible decree which he has past, that so it shall be. Therefore from the
nature of all created beings, arises a strong presumption that no mere creature
will stand long upon the foot of creation-abilities, without super-added
strength, or confirming grace.

IV. The fourth argument shall be grounded on the liableness there is in all
created beings to err.

It is a question; whether any mere creature from its creation-powers and
abilities can be exempted from a liableness to err, and that for two reasons,
(1.) One reason of this is, the creature's knowledge must be bounded; for that
knowledge which is not infinite must have bounds; but a creature's knowledge is
not infinite, therefore has bounds. From hence arises a liableness to err, not
knowing (always) certainly, what may be the event of such or such a course if
taken by the creature. A creature may be perfect in knowledge, i. e. be as
perfect in knowledge as the nature of the creature will admit of, but its
knowledge cannot reach to all that is future. I do not say, a creature cannot
be exempted from erring; for it is evident elect angels are, and the saints
will be in heaven; but this is not to be ascribed to creature-abilities, but to
the grace of God confirming them in that state where it is impossible they
should err. God alone is the only wise, -- infinite in knowledge; and one
reason why God cannot err, is, because he knows all things; whatsoever is
future, he sees from the beginning to the end; his knowledge has no bounds.

Adam was as knowing as such a creature could be; but it is a question whether
he certainly knew what would be the consequence of eating the forbidden fruit:
suppose he knew that death would follow (which he might know from the
threatening) did he know what death was? or was he capable of knowing to the
full extent the evil and misery would follow? or did he believe (when he took
and eat) what was contained in the prohibition, Thou shall surely die? (May we
not conclude, that not only Eve's faith, but Adam's also, was weakened, if not
quite destroyed, with reference to God's word, and when credit was given to
what the serpent said, Ye shall not surely die. And it should be considered,
whether sin be not always pursued under the notion of some good. In Genesis iii. 7
it is said, after they had eat, the eyes of them both were opened, etc. Not only
the woman's eyes, but the man's also; therefore Adam's eyes were not opened
before he eat the forbidden fruit: for what can be meant by the opening of the
eyes, but seeing and knowing what he did not before (viz.) to discern between
good and evil; seeing the difference, and experimentally feeling the sad
consequences of eating the forbidden fruit; They knew that they avere naked.
Not only that their bodies wanted clothing, but they knew that their souls
were naked, stripped of those excellencies which they had before, i. e. the image
of God. Had Adam known certainly what would have followed upon eating -- then
it might be said his eyes were open before he eat; which is contrary to the
express words of the text -- She took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and
gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat. And the eyes of them were
opened, and they knew that they were naked etc. Genesis iii. 6, 7.

Thus we see there is a liableness to err, arising from the creature's
knowledge being bounded.

II. This liableness to err, arises also from innocent nature being capable of
seduction. Though there was nothing, in the innocent nature of man, nor angels,
that naturally led on toward apostasy, yet that, that upright principle which
was in innocent nature was liable to be corrupted, or, take a wrong and sinful
bias, is evident, in that it did so, both in man and angels: and when that
innate principle, which is the governing principle in the soul, is corrupted,
then the creature can no longer stand, but must fall, nay is fallen. And may we
not conclude, that this innate principle in man and angels included in it a
very peculiar taste of true greatness and honor. This principle lay in the
soul, till the temptation came which drew it out; but then there must be such a
principle in nature, or it could not have been drawn out. And is not this very
apparent from this consideration, (viz.) that it was honor and preferment the
devil made use of as the lure or bait; that which seemed to prevail was this,
Ye shall be as Gods.

It Is true, this is what the Devil in the serpent says to Eve; but then, as
the woman was the Devil's instrument to tempt Adam, is it not very reasonable
to think that she made use of the same way in tempting her husband as the
serpent had done in tempting of her? That she used some arguments with him is
very plain from Genesis iii. 17. where Adam is charged by the Lord with hearkening
to the voice of his wife. And it is observable, that the honor and preferment
proposed by the serpent, was under the color of true greatness and honor; as
there can be no greater honor than to be a God, Ye shall be as Gods. Now had
there been no such principle in innocent nature, it may be enquired, whether
this temptation would have had any hold. And what further confirms this to me
is, the account we have of the woman before she eat, Genesis iii. 6. And when the
woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took, etc. Observe, she
saw the tree was good -- a tree to be desired to make one wise, etc. Or, as it
is in some versions, A pleasant tree to give understanding -- or, a tree to be
desired to get knowledge, etc.

I do not suppose this principle was corrupt, or sinful, but pure and holy,
'till it took a wrong bias, and was indulged beyond its proper bounds. And it
is exceeding probable to me, that Satan knew there was such a principle in
innocent man which might be drawn forth to aspire after greatness, etc.

I do not suppose but Adam was perfectly well satisfied in the state in which
he was placed; he had no uneasy propensities, or longings after more knowledge:
but what I say is, that it appears to me very plain, that there was such a
principle in innocent nature, which being touched, would immediately catch
fire, if a strict watch and guard were not kept over it. And the sparks of
temptation being by the Devil cast upon this tender and delicate part of the
soul, presently took fire; and thus man inwardly burned with restless and
sinful desires after forbidden knowledge: but this was after the temptation had
taken hold of him, and that innate principle was corrupted, which before was a
main part of the glory of human nature. And it is very reasonable to think,
that Satan knew, or at least, might imagine there was such a principle in
innocent man; as there was, I make no question, such an innate principle in the
angels, which they that fell abused to their ruin: and they might very
reasonably conclude upon the seduction of man in the same way; accordingly the
Devil tries the experiment, and finds his account in it.

That there was a likeness between the fall of man and angels, is evident
enough, in that pride was the cause of both; as may be seen in comparing, Genesis
iii. 5. with 1 Timothy iii. 6. There is this difference, as some may think, (viz.)
that Adam had a tempter, but the angels had none. That Adam had a Tempter is
undeniable, but that the fallen angels had none is not so evident. I do not
suppose they (at least not all of them) had any other tempter, but as they
might be their own tempters; so that though they had no external tempter, as
man had, they might have an internal one; or one, or a few might fall first,
and tempt and seduce the rest; as Eve was first seduced by the serpent, and
then the means of drawing the man into rebellion: so one of the chief of those
spirits might rebel first, and then seduce the rest, and so the most had a
tempter, if not tempters: (viz.) Beelzebub the chief of the Devils, Luke xi.
15. Or possibly they might be their own tempters, by raising in their minds
forbidden ideas, which being raised, and indulged, became a snare to them. And
had not Adam indulged something of this kind, the external temptation had not
hurt him, Between the fall of man and angels, it may be thought, there is on
man's side this favorable circumstance (viz) the external temptation, this
might be a means of exciting in him those forbidden ideas: But if he had not
had an external temptation, he might have erred as the angels did. Some persons
may call this mere conjecture, things that are not revealed. To which I answer,
the fall of man and angels is revealed, Genesis iii. John viii. 44. Jude 6. And I
think it must be lawful, and in some respects commendable, to draw from things
revealed the most evident and rational conclusions, guarded against positive
assertions: whether these conclusions I have drawn, and laid down, are the most
evident and rational, is left to serious and pious consideration.

But to conclude this subject, Adam stood as a probationer, and there must be
something as the test of his obedience; this we are told was a tree bearing
fruit standing in the midst of the garden, called, the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, Genesis ii. 9, 17. Now there being such an innate principle in
innocent nature, which on the first notice, or hint, was liable to be drawn
forth in aspiring after honor and preferment, or being more knowing and wise;
this tree was a test of Adam's obedience; prohibiting him from any new and
curious enquiries after hidden things. And here it was Adam should have been
perpetually upon his guard, and not have suffered that innate principle to
rebel, but kept within its prescribed limits. For the ultimate end of this
innate principle was to glorify God, in showing man's just subjection to his
makers righteous commands. This was Adam's paradise, this his bounds; and
within these sacred limits he was to dwell; contemplating the perfections of
his creator, and those excellent endowments wherewith he himself was blessed. As
it must afford a very peculiar joy, yea, give the most refined and exalted
pleasures to innocent man, beholding himself adorned with the bright image of
his maker; and the purest joys must sweetly flow into his soul, when turning
his eyes from himself to view the grand original, the fountain from whence he
had received his being, and all the embelishments of nature: and this could not
fail of producing in him the most unfeigned thanks and gratitude to his great
and liberal benefactor. And here it was Adam should have rested himself
contented, in this delightful, clear, and assimilating sight of the great
Jehovah. But, giving way of aspiring thoughts, seeking after a false greatness
was his ruin; suffering that innate, and powerful principle, to take a wrong
turn. If he had sought after honor, it should have been in the exercise of the
powers of nature, in such a way as was consistent with his dependence upon, and
rightful obedience to his great creator.

Had any thing been proposed by God as a motive to honor and preferment, may
we not conclude that, that innate principle in innocent nature, would
immediately have taken the hint, and been as quick and powerful in its
operation in seeking after true greatness. For, the preferment sought after was
under the color of true greatness, Ye shall be as gods. Had they certainly
known, that instead of being as Gods, they should be like Devils; is it so much
as probable they would have taken and eat? for as the woman, so the man also
affected Deity See Dr. GILL'S annot. on Phil. ii. 6.
. And I think, of all expedients that could be found out, to turn man into a
Devil, none more proper than to tempt him to aspire to be a God.

And as it may be a question, whether Satan could have prevailed (so well) any
other way; so, it may be enquired, whether he could have done it this way, if
the nature of man, in the state of innocence, had not been endowed with a very
peculiar and delicate taste of true greatness.

But here lay the mischief, in mistaking a false greatness for a true one; it
was very unlikely, nay, impossible to obtain this end, in going contrary to the
express word of God: and this they soon saw; and by sorrowful experience found
they were deceived, and instead of rising to honor and prefrement, they sunk
down into poverty, disgrace, and shame. Now, from the liableness there is of
this innate principle of rectitude in innocent nature being corrupted, arises a
very great improbability of any mere creature's standing on the foot of
creation-powers and abilities, without super-added strength, etc.

In all that I have said in answer to this query (viz.) whether any mere
creature will stand the time allotted for trial, on the foot of
creation-abilitiesandwithout super-added strength, or confirming grace; I have
not positively affirmed, none will stand upon such a footing, but that there is
a very great probability none would, and to this opinion my mind strongly
inclines.

Since man did not stand upon the foot of creation-abilities, nor the angels,
and as we know not of any other creatures that God has made that have stood;
for all created beings must be dependant upon their creator for their
happiness, and are not exempted by their creation from a very great liability
of getting off from their dependence, and so losing their happiness; and as all
created essences, and mere creature-abilities are liable to change, and the
highest rank of creatures may err, as their knowledge must be bounded, and
innocent nature itself is capable of seduction. But the creature's fall is from
itself; both angels and man had sufficient power to stand: it was altogether
man's fault; he was made upright, but they sought out many inventions. That
proved their ruin, and brought sin, and sorrow; and death upon themselves and
their posterity. And, was this but thoroughly considered, (viz.) the
consequence of the creatures having their happiness in their own hands, and at
their own dispose, to keep or lose; one would think no man would desire such a
jewel in his own keeping.

CHAP. IV. Containing two very evident conclusions, drawn from the foregoing
subject.
TWO very evident conclusions drawn from what has been said in the foregoing
chapters, shall conclude this discourse.

(1.) Conlusion -- If the continuance of the creature's happiness, when it
depends upon the creature itself, be so very uncertain, as we see it is; then
we may conclude, that the happiness of fallen, sinful man, cannot be certain
upon any other foot, or foundation, than that of God's eternal and immutable
counsel, securing the same by covenant in his own dear Son.

For, if man and angels (except the elect) lost their creation-happiness; if
when they were in possession of it, they did not keep it; how very unlikely
(might I not say impossible) is it for man himself to obtain everlasting
happiness? The salvation of any of the fallen race of Adam cannot certainly be
concluded upon from the supposed free agency of man. If the whole, as to the
event and final issue, be left to turn upon the will of the creature; and if it
be entirely in man's power to win or lose heaven; then what certainty can there
be, that any will possess eternal life? The creature's will is changeable; and
what the creature-abilities, and common assistances, when set in opposition to
the difficulties and enemies that obstruct and hinder persons in their seeking
after happiness in a future state? But on this foundation (viz.) that God has
taken this great affair into his own hands, and laid up, or deposited our
happiness in the hands of the faithful mediator; from hence it is certain, that
some of the fallen race of Adam will possess and enjoy it; for God said, A seed
shall serve him (i. e. the mediator) it shall be accounted to the Lord for a
generation. And he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands. He shall see the travail of
his soul, and shall be satisfied, and by his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities, Psalm. xxii. 30. Isa.
liii. 10, 11. It is not an uncertain thing whether God's elect, true believers,
shall enjoy eternal life. For God that cannot lie, promised them eternal life
in Christ Jesus, before the world began. And he is faithful that has promised,
who also will do it, Tit. i. 2. Heb. x. 23. 1 These. v. 23, 24.

Heaven is prepared for true believers, and they are preserved unto it. Christ
as their forerunner is gone to prepare mansions for them. And the kingdom of
glory shall be given to them for whom it is prepared. And Christ will come
again, and receive his own unto himself, that where he is, they may be also,
Matt. xxv. 34. Jud. i. 2 Timothy iv. 8. Heb. vi. 20. John xiv. 2, 3. Matt. xx. 23.

O! what a blessed foundation is here to rest eternal life and happiness upon!
But on the foot of works, or the free will of the creature, all must be at a
great uncertainty: suppose it was in the power of man, with that divine, or
super-added assistance which is common to all where the gospel comes, to rise
up and stand upon his feet, yet even then how very unlikely is it that he
should stand, and persevere long, if his standing depended upon himself, and
what he could do? And was I to put it upon this foot (viz.) that man is pure by
nature, and that Christ has done enough for all men to answer the
disadvantages they receive by the fall; even then it is very uncertain whether
any would obtain eternal life; for if Adam lost his happiness, why may not man,
fallen man, lose his? Nay, were we to suppose the present state of man every
way as good as Adam's was in innocence, even then also it would be uncertain,
whether any would continue long in such a state: for why may not mankind fall
as well as Adam? He lost his paradise, and it is at least exceeding probable,
the children will tread in their fathers steps, and lose their paradise too. I
think none can imagine that mankind in their fallen state have any thing
superior to what Adam had, or enjoyed in innocence; and we see that putting
things upon a level, the happiness of man must be very uncertain, and
precarious; for Adam lost his happiness, (I mean his creation-happiness) and we
know that mankind may lose theirs, except man or his present state be better
than Adam's was. But the truth is, the present state of man is far worse than
that before the fall; the powers of man are not only weakened, but man in his
natural state is dead in trespasses and sins; destitute of spiritual strength,
averse to good, and prone to evil, etc. An universal recovery, is no recovery
at all; for it being conditional, the performance of these conditions, (viz.)
faith, repentance, and sincere obedience, are out of the power of man; and if
we suppose them within the power of man, still it is very uncertain whether they
will be performed. But by God's taking this great and important affair into his
own hand, the happiness of man is thereby put upon such a foot as cannot
miscarry: and thus the happiness of true believers depends entirely on the
sovereign free grace of God in Christ Jesus: which was one main thing I had in
view, in enquiring into the nature of all created beings; and which is so noble
a subject, so full of the most solid peace, and lasting joy, as cannot fail of
raising up our admiring thoughts, and fixing our delightful contemplations on
the everlasting love of God in Christ Jesus! the source and fountain of all our
happiness. Thus we see the happiness of fallen man is not certain, or cannot
certainly be concluded on, upon any other foot, or foundation, than that of
God's eternal purpose, securing the same by covenant in his own dear Son.

And, which must imply also, that eternal life and happiness cannot be obtained
by works, or any thing the creature can do. For, this seems a clear
consequence, (viz.) If our happiness be secured in the covenant made with
Christ (according to the conclusion above) then it cannot rest upon works. For,
as Adam when he had his creation-happiness in his own hand, to keep or lose*
did not keep, but lose it; it is very unlikely that God should put it upon the
same footing again, (viz.) works. Adam's happiness, as to the circumstances of
it, was conditional; the covenant was, do this and live; or, if not, die.

But the happiness we are to seek after, as it is not in our keeping, nor are we
in the actual possession of it; so neither is it promised unto us on condition
of any thing done by us in order to purchase it; but it is laid up in the free
promise of God; and this promise (of eternal life) as all others are, is in
Christ Jesus, yea and amen, to the glory of God by us.

A condition and a free promise are contrary one to the other, as may be seen
in Gal. iii. 18. For if the inheritance be of the law (or works) it is no more
of promise but God gave it to Abraham by promise. And that the promise of
eternal life is a free promise, who can question? For was it not an act of
God's, sovereign good will and pleasure to make such a promise to sinful
creatures, who deserve eternal wrath? And it is beneath God to promise eternal
life (the greatest thing he could promise) on such a mean condition as a poor
imperfect obedience of the creature, thus to hang so glorious a prize on so
mean a condition, and so expose heaven to sale. No, eternal life is the gift of
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Not by works of righteousness which we (who
are true believers) have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. It Is, they which
receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in
life by one Jesus Christ, Romans vi. 23. Tit. iii. 5. Romans v. 17.

Works and grace, law and promise, cannot agree together; it is either by the
one, or else by the other; they cannot be blended together: heaven is either
the free gift of God, what he has promised to man for the sake of what Christ
has done, without the consideration of any thing done by man as a condition to
obtain it; or, it is promised to man upon condition of doing what is enjoined
him as a duty: if the former, then works are excluded; but if the latter, then
grace is excluded. A thing cannot be said to be freely given, if it be given on
conditions; if the person to whom it is given be tied up to the performance of
something to be done, the doing of which work or service being the condition of
his enjoying what was promised, cuts off the freeness of the promise: it is not
a free promise, but a conditional one. And this is what people in common
understand; for if you offer to give a person any thing, and at the same time
insist upon his doing you a little piece of service, he will plainly see,
though it was in some respects a gift, yet in no respect a free gift. Therefore
to make heaven a free gift, it is necessary to cut off all conditions. To say
heaven is free gift, because there is no proportion between what we do, and
what we receive, is saying nothing to the purpose: for, if I promise a man
double wages for his work when he has done it the wages is due, and doing the
work is what procures the reward: it becomes due when the work is done, and not
before.

It Is true, there must be something wrought in, and done by those that inherit
eternal life; those that enter into the kingdom of glory are such as are born
of God, having true faith wrought in them, that faith which is of the operation
of God; precious faith; the faith of God's elect; that works by love, and
purifieth the heart, Col. ii. 12. Tit. i. 2. Gal. v. 5.

But then, these works, or fruits, that proceed from faith, and as done by the
believer, are not conditions of life: the believer does not obey God expecting
upon that account to enter into glory. The obedience which springs from faith,
follows after a person in some sense enjoys eternal life, not after he is put
in actual possession of it; but after he has had the foretastes of it. For, he
that believes on Christ has everlasting life, John iii. 36. He has it in the
promise, and in hope; he has it in his expectation and experience; he has the
earnest of everlasting life. For faith is the substance of things hoped for,
the evidence of things not seen, Heb. xi. 1. As to faith, that is the gift of
God, therefore cannot be a condition; and the acting of faith, and the fruits
thereof, are no conditions, being the works of God; I mean that he is not only
the author, but the finisher of faith. And good works are what follow after a
person has received the deed of conveyance, whereby the crown and kingdom are
made sure to the believer; Christ being in him the hope of glory. Suppose you
bestow a great favor on an enemy, and he having received it, is convinced of
his evil in behaving in such a manner toward you as he has done in time past;
your kindness melts his heart, and his hatred is now turned into love, and he
is ready to do you all the service he can. Now what he does is not a condition
to obtain your favor, having no reason to think you are his enemy; and as when
you first bestowed your favor upon him he was your enemy, his obedience goes
not before, but follows after he received the favor; and therefore cannot be a
condition of his obtaining it, but a fruit and consequent of his receiving it.
So in the case before us; the elect, as well as others, are by nature enemies
to God, and he finds them so when he comes to bestow this great favor (eternal
life) upon them, in giving them the earnest thereof, Ephesians. ii. 1, 8. Col. i. 21.
When salvation is made known, and applied to the soul, there is a thorough
conviction of sin, the heart is melted down into holy contrition, it is won over
to the Lord, it is made willing in the day of his power, Psa. cx. 3. The man
that before was an enemy to God, is now his friend, and filled with love to
him; and the language of such an one is, Lord, what will thou have me do? Acts
ix. 6. But here is no doing as a condition, it is all the fruit and effect of
that faith whereby the soul has laid hold on Christ as his savior; such a
person has no view to what he does as a condition to purchase any thing
thereby; he has a kingdom in hope, and is firmly persuaded he shall actually
enjoy it in due time, according to Col. iii. 3, 4. For ye are dead, and your
life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear,
then shall we also appear with him in glory.

Therefore, what a true believer does is not a condition, but the fruit, and
effect of God's love, manifested in bestowing such a favor, as eternal life
upon him, and follows after the favor is received. When any thing is offered
by way of condition, the thing offered cannot be enjoyed, in any sense, 'till
the condition be performed; but this we see is not the case before us with
reference to true believers; such an one has a well-grounded hope, having the
first, or foretastes of heaven; this he has before he has gone through a
course of obedience; for this for the most part is given in when he is
converted to God. Heaven is no surer at the end of a Christian's journey, than
at the beginning, with reference to the purpose and promise of God. But if
heaven was promised on conditions to be performed by man, it could not be so;
for then there could be no assurance of enjoying the happiness promised 'till
the conditions are performed; and no person could be sure that he should enter
into the kingdom of glory 'till he comes there: for as entering into glory
would then depend on persevering in a course of sincere obedience to the end of
a man's life, and persevering in holiness depending on the will of the
creature, no person could be certain he should endure to the end and so be
saved; the will being fickle and liable to change; and thus a man must be all
his lifetime subject to bondage. But blessed be God, the promise of eternal
life hangs not upon such a feeble string. It Is true, those persons which enter
into glory, are such, and such only, as do persevere unto the end, and are
faithful unto death; but their entering into glory does not depend upon this as
a condition. I grant, they cannot enter into glory without persevering to the
end, but then that is not condition of it. I ask, cannot a thing be necessary
as a qualification, and yet not be a condition?

What is a condition? Answer, A condition implies a stipulation or covenant
between two persons, the one promising, the other performing. Or, a condition
is the doing some work, or service, which has a promise (but not a free one)
annexed to the doing of the work; the condition (as to the fulfilling of it)
lies on the doer, and giving the reward on the promiser; so that a condition
is the doing some work or service, in order to obtain some good, which reward
becomes due when the work is done, and not before. Therefore a condition does
not suppose a proportion between the works and the reward, but always supposes,
that receiving the reward promised, depends upon doing; or performing the
condition, whatsoever it be, more or less, according to the agreement; and is
given upon that account, though the full value be not paid down. Therefore, the
performing the condition is not only the way and means to come at the reward,
but it is the purchasing of it: and to say eternal life is promised on
conditions to be performed by man, is the way to bring man under the covenant
of works, God stipulating with man, do this and live; I promise thee life upon
these conditions.

It may be thought perhaps by some that the following proposition is true
(viz.) eternal life is obtained by Christ, and promised to man on conditions of
faith, repentance, and sincere obedience.

But, in my opinion, this is not true; for as it throws part of the work on the
creature, it thereby lessens, if it does not quite invalidate the performance
of Christ. For if Christ obtained eternal life for all that believe in him,
what occasion is there to hang it upon conditions to be performed by the
creature? If the reward be promised to man upon conditions of something done to
procure it, this must suppose that Christ has done but a part, and that the
other part belongs to man to do, and upon his doing it the reward is given.
Nay, it follows, that what Christ has done is insufficient, and of no avail,
without man's part; and how contrary this is to the gospel, every one I should
think must see, that understands what gospel is.

Eternal life is promised to all that believe in the Son of God, the only
mediator and savior of sinners, and shall certainly be given to all such,
according to the express word of God.

But then eternal life is both promised and given alone for the sake of Christ,
and what he has done. For, this is the record, God has given us eternal life,
and this life is in his Son. Therefore he that has the Son, has life; and he
that has not the son, has not life. The promise of life is in Christ Jesus, 1
John v. 11, 12. 2 Timothy i. 1.

God will give what he has promised, and at the time, and in the way which he
has promised: but where has God promised, that if thou believe, he will
give thee eternal life for thy believing? The promise is made to believers, but
not to believing. Therefore if thou believe on the Son of God, he will give
thee eternal life for Christ's sake.

If any should ask, where is the difference between promising eternal life to
the person, and to the work, or to the person for his work's sake? I answer,
there is a great, and very necessary difference. For promising eternal life to
persons of such characters as believers, upon the consideration of what another
has done, is very agreeable to, and consistent with a free promise, or promise
of grace: for, though the promise be made to the believer, the ground of it
lies in Christ, and what he has done. But if the promise was to run
conditional, and so to rest upon what the person does himself, it could not be
of free grace, but of works. For if the inheritance be of the law (or works) it
is no more of promise, (i. e. it is not of free promise) but God gave it to
Abraham by promise. If faith, repentance, and sincere obedience be the terms
and conditions of man's entering into glory, then heaven must be given (in part
at least) upon that account: for, if I promise a person such a reward for doing
such a work, I give him the reward for doing the work; neither do I see any way
to avoid this, for, if faith, repentance, and sincere obedience, be the
conditions of life, then heaven is given for the sake of faith, repentance, and
sincere obedience, and so Christ is shut out; for, it is absurd, as well as
impertinent to say, eternal life is given to man for the sake of Christ, and
for the sake of what man does too. It Is written, The gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans vi. 23. Now when it is said, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, is there any occasion to add this supplement, through
faith, repentance, and sincere obedience? To say that faith, repentance, and
sincere obedience, are required as necessary qualifications in the subjects of
salvation, is speaking the truth; but to say they are included in the above
passage as conditions, is false: and whatever any person may think, it is plain
enough to me, that there is a manifest distinction between these terms,
qualification and condition, and that the former only has place in the matter
we are upon. It may be truly said, that faith, and true gospel-repentance and
salvation, cannot be separated; and yet, faith and repentance are not
conditions of salvation. Strange! very strange! that faith and repentance cannot
be brought in as qualifications, without making them conditions. These are ways
and means which God has appointed to sit and prepare persons for eternal life
to such as are possessed with those qualifications abovenamed; and they should
be put upon seeking after faith and repentance, which are the gifts of God,
Acts v. 31. xi. 18. Ephesians. ii. 8. Phil. i. 29. 2 Timothy ii. 25.

And they should not be put upon doing, no, nor believing neither as a
condition of life, for, the difference is not great, between do and live, and,
believe and live. For, believing is an act of the creature (though under the
influence of the spirit of God) and as such a work.

The common way of stating the case is thus -- God does not now require perfect
and sinless obedience of man in order to his entering into life; for Christ
having by his obedience and death, or, at least by what he has done, removed
the law in its covenant-form, and thereby made way for man's acceptance upon
gospel-sincerity; life is promised not to perfect, but sincere doing; or,
faith, repentance and sincere obedience, are now the conditions of life, and
terms of acceptance.

But as this way of stating the case makes eternal life to be of works, and not
of grace, it must be false. Not of works, lest any man should boast. Not by
works of righteousness which we have done, -- by grace we are saved. -- For
this reason therefore it must be false, being contrary to express testimony of
holy scripture, Rom iii. 19, to 29. Ephesians. ii. 9. Tit. iii. 5. The distinction of
perfect and imperfect, or, perfect and sincere obedience as a condition of
life, I find not in the word of God; it cannot be gospel to say eternal life is
put upon, not perfect, but sincere doing, as the condition whereby it must be
obtained; for where do we find eternal life promised to sincere doings? it is
promised to no doings at all. ' It Is God's free gift, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Romans vi. 23. Good works are not the way to eternal life; Christ is the
way, the way of acceptance with God, and the way of admission into heaven; good
works are found in and done by all that walk in this way (Christ) neither is,
nor can true faith be without them, when and where there is opportunity to do
them, Jam. ii. 17, 18, 20. And yet good works will never be the cause of
bringing any person to the kingdom of glory; no, nor are they so much as the
condition of persons entering in there.

Thus it appears, that the hope of eternal life rests on the free promise of
God in Christ Jesus; whereas, was it conditional, then the whole would rest
upon the performance of those conditions from whence it must be very uncertain
whether any would enjoy it. But when our hope rests on the free promise of
God, nothing more is necessary to give a believer a comfortable assurance of
entering into glory, but a steady and firm reliance on the power and
faithfulness of the promiser, neither of which can ever fail. He is the
Almighty, and the faithful God -- In hope of eternal life, which God that
cannot lie, promised before the world began. Therefore it is by faith, that it
might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, Tit.
i. 2. Romans iv. 16. Behold the foundation eternal life rests upon, God's
unchangeable and immutable purpose! in which respect it was prepared, as well
as promised, before the world began, Tit. i. 2. Matt. xxv. 34. His absolute
promise in Christ Jesus; in which respect there is nothing to be done by the
creature in order to procure it. And this is a notable ground to rest upon for
strong consolation; and gives the greatest encouragement to sensible sinners:
for why may not I hope for eternal life, if God has convinced me of sin, and
the need of a Savior, and kindled in my soul sincere desires and longing after
Christ, and eternal life and happiness in and through him? and if I am willing
to accept of it as his free gift, though I am unworthy of the least of his
favors, yet Christ is worthy, and upon his account, I, a poor miserable
sinner, may expect the greatest favor, eternal life.

Once more: That eternal life is not conditional, but a free gift, is further
evident, if we consider when the promise was made, and to whom it was made
personally: we are told, that the promise of eternal life was made before the
world began, Tit i. 2. Now, to whom could this promise be made so early? to
whom but the Son of God in the capacity of a mediator; and who did actually
stipulate with the father in behalf of his elect people; and to him was the
promise made, and to him it was conditional. The thing promised was eternal
life, and it was the elect, true believers that were to enjoy it: but the
promise being made to the Son of God, as the surety of his people, there were
certain conditions injoined him, upon the performance of which, eternal life
was to be given to the elect, that is, all that believe in him for life and
salvation.

For though heaven be the free gift of God, yet the elect are not put into the
actual possession of the Kingdom without the consideration of what Christ has
done in their behalf; it is by, and through Christ, his perfect obedience, and
complete satisfaction, which gives the saints a right and title to eternal
life. He came that we might have life -- John x. 10. And it is those that
receive abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness that shall reign in
life by one Christ Jesus. -- The dear redeemer bled and died upon the cross, he
was made sin and a curse for his people, that thereby he might deliver them
from sin, the curse, and wrath of God; and thus has he obtained eternal
redemption for all them that obey him. And thus does God, by making this
captain of salvation perfect through suffering, bring many sons to glory: and
herein he has acted as became himself; as a holy and just, as well as merciful
God, Heb. ii. 10. and ix. 12.

We should carefully observe the connection there is between the end and the
means; for the though nothing is to be done by man as a condition to obtain
life, yet there are ways and means appointed by God, for all those to walk in,
which travel to eternal glory: and those ways and means leading on to the end,
are included in the fundamental decree of election, as may be seen in many
places of scripture, Romans viii, 29. 30. Ephesians. i. 4. 2 These. ii. 13. So that
those things which are requisite to be found in, and done, by the heirs of
salvation, are what they are chosen to, and are the fruits and effects of God's
everlasting love, the foundation of all. -- And in this righteous and gracious
decree of election. God has shown a strict regard to the holiness of his
people, as well as to their happiness; these things, (viz.) holiness and
happiness, he has joined together, and no man shall ever be able to put them
asunder. How lovely, and how beautiful, does this connection appear in that
famous place of Saint Paul -- Romans viii. 29. 30, For whom he did foreknow, he
also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be
the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he
also called: and whom he he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. To this I shall only add that well known and
very excellent passage, Ephesians. i. 4. According as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world, (observe) that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love.

We must also distinguish between what is the ground and foundation, or chief
cause of giving the kingdom to the elect; and the way and means which bring
them to the possession of it. The ground o giving the kingdom, is God's
sovereign good will and pleasure, and thus it is absolutely a free gift. It is
your father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom, Luke xii. 32. But then, in
a secondary sense, what Christ has done is the meritorious cause of the
elect's enjoying the kingdom; and then in the next place come in all the ways
and means, as preparatory, or, as fitting and preparing them for the actual
enjoyment thereof; these ways and means are all included in what is called an
habitual and actual meetness for death and glory. But then those ways, means,
and qualifications, are no causes nor conditions of entering into the kingdom;
they are things necessary and beautiful in their place. And here are two
dangerous rocks to be avoided, (1) We must be careful not to make the ways and
means conditions of salvation. (2) We must take care no to be regardless of, or
lightly esteem the ways and means which God has appointed for us to be found in
the use of; and so presumptuously expect to enter into glory, while we are in
the direct road to hell. For it is written, Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. And without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Except a man
be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, Luke iii. 3, 5. Heb. xii. 14.
John iii. 3.

There is not only an expediency, or fitness, but an inimitable beauty, in this
connection of ways and means with the end. For, as on the one hand, it would
mar the grace of God, to give heaven for the sake of works; so, on the other
hand, it would reflect on the purity and holiness of God, to admit (could such
a thing be) persons into heaven without holiness, or his glorious image
delineated in their hearts. As I would therefore caution all to take heed, not
to build their hopes and expectations for eternal life on their works, or any
thing in them, or done by them; so I would likewise exhort all persons to
search their hearts, and see whether they are possessed with those
qualifications which are inseparable from the heirs of salvation. And according
to the advice of an inspired apostle, Examine your selves whether ye be in the
faith, prove your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates, 2. Cor. xiii. 5. Look into the bible, see and observe what was the
temper, and what the conduct of those which are gone before to inherit the
promises. Heaven is a crown, and kingdom; and none will possess it but such as
are obedient subjects to Christ the king: as to those that will not have him to
reign over them, he will command them to be slain before him. Know ye not that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, (such as bear these, or any of these characters, so
living and dying) shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. But, let
the righteous rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great will be their reward in
heaven. Matt. v. 12. Which brings me to the

(2.) Conclusion, viz. That as the happiness of the saints is secured in such
safe hands, in the covenant made with God's own dear Son, and rests not on
such a precarious foundation as the happiness of man in a state of innocence
did; from hence we may conclude, that the people of God have the highest reason
to rejoice and triumph.

With the greatest pleasure I congratulate you, O ye saints of God, ye redeemed
ones, who are working the work of God, laboring in your Lord's vineyard. I
know you don't expect to enter into glory without holiness of heart and life,
and yet expect eternal life as the free gift of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Well, though you have lost that happiness which was put into the hands of the
first Adam, you have found a better, a far better happiness, laid up in the
hands of the second Adam. O! stupendous wisdom! to order matters in such a way,
that our greatest loss, proves our greatest gain. Glory was never put into the
first Adam's hands; but into the hands of the mediator, the second Adam. -- It
was well for us that Adam was not entrusted with this jewel; for if this had
been lost, then we had lost all; but this never was, nor ever shall be lost.

O believer, live by faith, and under the influence of this blessed hope of the
glorious gospel; and so live above the world, yea, above frames and duties, on
the free and absolute promise of God in Christ Jesus. This jewel, this crown of
glory, will not, cannot be lost; But it shall be given to them, for whom it is
prepared of the Father, Matt. xx. 23. This glorius prize will be forth coming;
the promise that was made before the world began, shall be made good when the
world is no more, Tit. i. 2.

This is the principal thing, the most material of all, to have eternal
happiness insured; without this what would health, or wealth, or life signify?
nay, what would the gospel and all the blessings of it avail, while the crown
and kingdom lies at stake? To suppose man to stand as a probationer for
eternal life, is to put him into a far worse state than Adam was in, and yet he
fell -- The free agency of the creature, or what is commonly called free will,
is such a state and condition, that if rightly understood cannot (one would
think) fail of exciting compassion in every breast, the consequence of which
must be strong desires, and earnest prayer to God to be delivered from such a
state, a state that exposes mankind to the most eminent danger every moment. I
desire to be found in all God's ways, and appointments, to be holy as the Lord
is holy, and to walk even as Christ walked. But I desire not to be my own
keeper, or to have eternal life in my own hand; for this would fill me with
such a fear as would intimidate me in my course, and subject me to a life of
bondage; knowing there is still sin dwelling within and Satan standing without:
amidst so many snares and enemies, what a sweet relief is it to know that we
are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation!

What wise man would desire his richest jewel with him while traveling in a
strange land among thieves and enemies. No, good Lord, I beseech thee, keep my
jewel, my life, my heaven and all in thy cabinet; I tremble at the thoughts of
being entrusted with this treasure!

Hay we not a precedent before our eyes, in the fall of man, and angels,
enough to fill all the saints upon earth with tremendous horror, in case they
stood upon no better footing? No, it is our great and unspeakable mercy, that
we are not our own, but are bought with a price. Christ has the keeping of us
(if we are his) and ours; our persons, our graces, our heaven, and all are in
his hand; and there they are safe, and would be safe no where else, Luk xxii
32. Col. iii. 3. Joh. X. 27, 28, 29.

Not only salvation itself, but the security thereof deserves our particular
notice. O, Sirs, consider what a sure footing it is put upon: the happiness of
God's dear people is put upon a better foot and foundation than the happiness
of man was in a state of innocence, or that of angels. O wonderful contrivance!
from hence it is the believer derives strong consolation.

A child of God has many things in this life to distress and trouble him, but
in this he may rejoice always; that he is built upon a Rock, and the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against him, Mat. xvi. 18. My sheep hear my voice (says
Christ) and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them eternal life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand: my
father that gave them me, is greater than all, and none is able to pluck them
out of my father's hand, John x. 27, 28, 29. Here the child of God rests as
in a sweet calm. What ever falls out in the course of a kind providence, though
in appearance dark -- yet nothing can shake the foundation, nor touch his
inheritance. The foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows them that
are his. I cannot say I never have no clouds over my mind, which produce an
humble fear in me, and beget an holy suspicion in my heart; and there may
follow, a calling in question the state of my soul; am I a child of God, an
heir of glory? But when the spirit of God is graciously pleased to witness with
my spirit, that I am a child of God, an heir of God, and a joint hear with
Christ; then I have no scruple upon my mind about enjoying the kingdom, but
enter into full consolation. And this is so far from weakening the nerves of my
obedience, or making me idle in my Lord's vineyard; that it is the strongest
incentive to obedience: and I leave it upon record, as a testimony to the
divine goodness and grace of God, that I am never so cheerful, lively, and
fervent in spirit, as when I attain the greatest degree of assurance; then, O
then I rejoice and triumph! when faith looks of those everlasting settlements
of the crown and kingdom! And then with what cheerfulness and alacrity do I run
the way of God's commandments! And I am persuaded I might call in thousands of
living witnesses on this head, who are triumphing, and blessing God for
settling their inheritance on such a sure foundation; that it rests not on
the poor tottering foundation of creature-abilities -- but on the unchangeable
purpose, and free promise of God in Christ Jesus! And where is the believer
that will not heartily join in this sweet doxology? Now unto him that is able
to keep you from falling, and to present you faultness before the presence of
his glory with exceeding joy. To the only wise God our Savior be glory and
majesty, dominion and power, both now and for ever, AMEN.

AN ESSAY ON THE DOCTRINE OF MERIT.
THE Doctrine of Merit makes but little noise in the world, being generally
denied by Christians, or such as live under that name, except those called
Papists; and every one thinks he can see there is no merit in the creature,
that sinful man can merit no good thing at the hand of God. But, it is a
question, whether many that disclaim merit in words, do not own it in fact,
though they may not be sensible of it themselves. It may, therefore, be of some
service to have this matter cleared up, that so it may appear to every serious
thinking person, that the everlasting salvation of a sinner is not owing to the
merit of the creature, but to the grace of God in his dear son. Free grace is
generally talked of, but too little understood; and there is, I am afraid, as
much ignorance among people about good works; what they are, and what is their
proper place.

The doctrine that I shall fix upon, to try this matter by, will be that of
justification; I mean, the justification of a sinner in the sight of God. And
my business will be, to consider, whether this be owing to the merit of man,
or, to the grace of God.

And, as nothing is authentic that is not built upon the word of God, I shall
therefore ground my discourse upon that divine passage of St. Paul, Romans iv. 4,
5. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.
But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly;
his faith is counted for righteousness.

From these words I shall raise two observations:

(I.) That whosoever works, with a view to be justified thereby in the sight
of God, seeks justification by merit, or desert; and not according to the pure
grace of God: Now to him that works, is the reward reckoned not of grace, but
of debt.

(II.) That whosoever works not with such a view, or expectation, to be
accepted, or justified, in the sight of God thereby, but by faith depends on
God, and expects to be justified by and through what Christ has done for him;
such an one is justified by, and according to the free grace of God. But to him
that works not, but believes, etc.

These observations are fully contained in the words:

-- And that the subject, the apostle treats of, is justification, is evident
from the chapter in general, and particularly from verse the second. For if
Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God.

The first thing to be considered is, that whosoever works with a view to be
justified thereby, in the sight of God, seeks justification by merit, and not
according to the true grace of God. Perhaps it may be thought strange by some,
that I should use the word merit, seeing all disclaim every kind and degree of
it, except Papists. But to this I answer, I apprehend the word merit, to be of
the same signification with the term debt, or desert; and, that this matter may
be set in a clear light, I shall endeavor to show, what that merit is, that
may be ascribed to man, or to any rational being and how far a mere creature
may be said to merit: and, I hope, if it can fairly be made to appear, that, to
seek justification by works of our own performing, is seeking it by our own
merits, persons will be sensible of the folly of such a conduct. Now if any
thing be done, by way of condition, as the terms of our acceptance with God,
then it is of merit, or desert. Conditional salvation, or, conditional
justification, cannot exclude merit.

What is merit? Answer; There are two kinds of merit; proper, and improper:
proper merit, is called merit of condignity; that is, strict and real merit.
Improper merit is called merit of paction, that is by covenant, or agreement.
Now, as to the first, merit of condignity, or strict and real merit; this
cannot be ascribed to any mere creature, man, or angel; this would be to
suppose the creature not beholden to it is creator; for merit of condignity, or
proper merit, supposes such worth or desert, or such dignity and real
excellency in the person and his work, as the reward may be justly claimed upon
it; and that the person is not at all beholden to him who gives the reward,
because it is merited.

This is proper merit, which may take place between one man and another, but
not between man and his maker: mankind, being equal by nature, may oblige one
another; that is, one man may lay another under an obligation to reward him;
for, when one man merits a reward of another, he is not at all obliged to him
for the reward; he that gives the reward is as much obliged to him that
receives it, for his work, or service, as he that receives the reward is to him
that gives it; for he that receives, has merited what he receives; and he that
gives, gives but what is the other's due: but this cannot take place between
God and a mere creature; the creature being dependent upon the creator, must be
beholding to him for all it receives, and be under the greatest obligations to
the giver; it is impossible for the creature to lay the creator under any
obligations: -- all the creature receives must be of mere favor. -- We see
therefore, merit, strictly speaking, cannot be ascribed (not only to man, but
not) to any mere creature. None but the Son of God could merit, in a strict and
proper sense; neither did he absolutely merit in that sense, as I shall show
anon.

Secondly, Merit of paction, or by covenant-agreement. In this sense, the word
merit is often used, though it be improper, at least it is not strictly merit;
but it will bear the term: in this sense it may take place between God and a
mere creature; and there can be no other merit ascribed to a mere creature; for
whatsoever God bestows on a mere creature, is in a way of favor; and this kind
of merit is consistent with the goodness and beneficence of God to his
creatures, but takes place only with perfect beings; it being not consistent
with the perfections of God thus to covenant with a sinful creature, except it
be for blessings of a much lower nature, than those that relate to the eternal
happiness of sinful man; ( viz. such as relate to this present life) for what
the creature merits by compact, or agreement, it does not strictly deserve; but
yet, it is due, by virtue of the covenant-agreement. And hence it is clear, as
the sun at noonday, that justification, by our own works, is justification
according to merit; it is a debt, it is a due, according to agreement. For, if
God promise to justify man, on his sincere obedience, then when he has
performed that obedience, his justification follows as a debt, or merit; for no
creature can merit any other way: therefore, if you would disclaim all merit,
you must disclaim conditional justification; for, to pretend to disclaim any
other merit is impertinent, because no other merit can be ascribed to men or
angels. To say we can merit nothing, that is, strictly deserve, is nothing to
the purpose: this is no ways peculiar to us as fallen creatures, but may as
well be affirmed of an innocent creature. For Adam, in innocence, could merit
no other way, but by paction, i. e. by covenant-agreement; all that was
bestowed on him, and promised to him, was of the mere favor of God. I very
much question, whether it be not here that many persons make the mistake: they
say, they do not pretend to merit; they know they deserve no favor from the
hand of God; but then by merit they mean strict and proper merit; which is out
of the question in the present case; because merit, in this strict and proper
sense, is excluded from all kind of beings; i. e. rational and intelligent
creatures, perfect as well as imperfect; whereas, if, at the same time that we
disclaim all merit, we are contending for justification by works, or
conditional salvation, we are contending for all the merit that can belong to
any creature. Adam could merit no otherwise; God made a covenant with him;
promised him life upon conditions of perfect obedience: it was the mere favor
of God thus to stipulate with man; and had he persevered in perfect obedience,
the time allotted for his probation, he would have merited life; it would have
been a debt according to agreement and promise. -- And, to suppose God has now
established such a covenant with fallen man, that, on his sincere obedience, he
will receive him into favor, and that his own works shall be the terms of his
acceptance, is, to suppose man placed on the same footing he was before he
fell; the difference is this; innocent man was to merit by a perfect obedience,
but fallen man by an imperfect sincere one. Therefore, if we are contending for
justification by our own works, we are so far from excluding merit, that we are
contending for all the merit that can be ascribed to any mere creature.

For, if God has stipulated with man, promising to justify, and accept him
upon certain conditions performed; then, when these conditions are performed,
the reward is due; that is, God is under obligation, according to his promise,
to justify and accept him, upon the terms proposed. And this is the very thing
intended in these words, Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of
grace, but of debt; i. e. the reward is given him not of mere favor, but of
merit, as what is due according to agreement.

Therefore, if we would be clear in this matter of justification (and which
doubtless, is of the greatest importance) we must carefully distinguish between
proper and improper merit; and, consider, that no real merit can be ascribed to
any creature; not only fallen man cannot merit in this sense, but that must be
the case with respect to perfect creatures; and that improper merit cannot be
ascribed to fallen man, without bringing him under a covenant of works; God
stipulating and promising, and man performing certain conditions as the terms
of his acceptance; which entirely shuts out free grace, according to that
divine oracle, Romans xi. 6. But if it be of works, then is it no more of grace;
otherwise work is no more work. And, furthermore, that no mere creature can
properly merit, is evident; because no mere creature can do more than is its
indispensible duty to do; and, in order to merit, the creature must do more
than is it is bounden duty to do: hence it is, that none pretend to merit, being
sensible they cannot do more than it is their duty to do: but this regards real
merit, which, strictly speaking, we have nothing to do with, as no mere
creature can merit in this sense. Adam did not, elect angels cannot, and all
professed Christians disclaim it, except the Papists; who, to establish the
doctrine of merit, crowd in their supposed works of supererogation, which is
giving, or doing, more than is required; doing more good works than a man is
bound by the law of God to do. And, could any mere man do this, he might merit;
but this is a mere fiction of the brain.

Therefore, seeing no merit can be ascribed to man, but that of paction, how
plain is it that justification, by works, is establishing the doctrine of
merit; not real and proper merit, but all the merit that can belong to man;
whether he be considered as innocent and free from sin, or, as a fallen sinful
creature: for, as all the desert that can be ascribed to perfect obedience,
must take its rise from the mere favor of God, stipulating with the creature,
and promising such a reward upon such an obedience; so all the desert that can
be ascribed to a sincere imperfect obedience, must also arise from the mere
favor of God, thus stipulating with man, and promising him such a reward upon
his perorming such obedience.

If any should from hence argue, that if it is owing to the mere favor of God,
that a sinner is justified by his own sincere obedience, then what hurt can
merit do? I answer; The favor of God, in the case first mentioned, is easy to
conceive of. -- And the second is only a supposed case, at least it appears so
to me. I do not believe God has made such a covenant with man, as that upon his
faith, repentance, and sincere obedience, he will justify and receive him into
favor. However, if some will maintain that so it is, -- and that though it be
of works, this cuts not off the favor of God, -- I cannot, perhaps, tell what
they may mean by the favor of God. -- However, in that way of stating the
case, it appears to be very different from the love of God, that is so highly
celebrated in the gospel; and which I apprehend is absolutely free and
unconditional.

However, let it be observed, and which I am certain must be the case, that
though it be owing to the mere favor of God to make such a conditional
covenant as before observed, yet the conferring the reward on man, when he has
performed the conditions of that covenant, cannot be ascribed to the mere
favor of God, but to the merits of man. And as this merit, or desert, turns
entirely on what the creature does, so man has a right to plead with God on
the foot of his own works: for, if God has promised to accept sincere
obedience, as the terms of the sinners acceptance, then it is strictly just to
plead upon this footing; though there be a very disproportion between the
works, and the reward, yet when the work is done, the wages is due. Suppose you
promise or agree to give me five shillings, upon condition I will go with you
one mile, and I agree to the terms and go; are the five shillings due to me, or
not? Every one will grant it is due, because it is a fair bargain; it might be a
favor in you to make the promise, but it is a piece of justice in you to pay
the money; and the plea for it must be grounded, not upon your favor, but upon
the contract.

The case appears to be plainly this: -- If God has made such a covenant with
man, that his faith, repentance, and sincere obedience, be the terms of his
acceptance, then it must be of debt, or merit; and, if the favor of God, in
making such a conditional grant, is all that is intended by the grace of God in
the gospel, I think it is hardly worth while to keep up the distinction any
longer between works and grace, seeing the whole centers at last in works; and
the grace, that is talked of, is so metamorphosed, that there is great danger
of mistaking it for works. Every thing we enjoy is owing to the grace of God,
as grace stands in opposition to real merit. But the grace of God in the
gospel, is something peculiar, and is to be seen or discerned no where else,
but in the person of Jesus Christ, who is the sum of the gospel. God's
justifying a sinner or the foot of works, and on the foot of grace, are as far
asunder as the east and the west.

It is plain, by the apostle, in the words under consideration, that debt and
grace are two distinct things; and, it is no less evident, that his design is to
throw out one, and establish the other; and which way can this be done, in case
we are justified by our own works? it must then be reckoned not of grace, but
of debt. If my own obedience be the matter of my acceptance with God, I ask
again, where is free grace? admitting it was grace to make such a conditional
grant, to make such a favorable covenant, of such mild terms, yet I am bold to
affirm, there is not a mite of free grace, in giving forth the blessing of the
covenant. And, upon this footing, what little occasion is there for a mediator
between God and man; I suppose it is some way owing to him, that God has made
such a conditional covenant of such easy terms; and this is making as little
use of him as can be, if any use is made of him: this is not to make him the
alpha and omega, the beginning and the end, all and in all; which, to do, is to
bring in salvation by grace.

To make Christ the sole meritorious cause of our justification and acceptance
with God, and good works the fruits and effects of true faith, is speaking the
language peculiar to the covenant of grace; which shuts all manner of works out
as causes, conditions, or means of our justification in the sight of God.

For, for the reward to be reckoned of grace, is for it to be reckoned without
the consideration of any thing done by the creature: To him that works not,
but believes on him that justifies -- i. e. To him that performs nothing as a
condition of his justification, but is willing to receive all as the free gift
of God, -- his faith is counted for righteousness. Faith, itself, is not the
righteousness; for faith, or believing, stands in direct opposition to working;
whereas believing, as it is an act of man, is a work: and then where is the
antithesis? The apostle is not distinguishing between works perfect and
imperfect: works, as to their nature, kind, or degree, are not the thing in
debate; but works and grace are the things in dispute, and to which of these
our justification is to be ascribed; and it is plain that believing is set in
opposition to working, therefore it cannot be faith itself, but what faith was
fixed upon; which was a righteousness distinct from faith, called a
righteousness imputed without works, i. e. without any works done by the person
to whom it is imputed; I say, without any works done by the person himself as
the ground of his justification. This righteousness is plain enough
distinguished from faith, called the righteousness of the faith, Romans iv. 6, --
11. called also, the righteousness which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all,
and upon all them that believe. Note, it is not inherent in them, but it is unto
and upon; observe also, it is a righteousness which comes by believing, It Is by
faith of Jesus Christ, Romans iii. 22. thus it is a froe gift of mere favor, or
pure grace.

(II.) The second observation is, Whosoever works with no such view, or
expectation, to be accepted and justified thereby in the sight of God, but by
faith depends on God, expecting to be justified by and through what Christ has
done for him, such an one is justified by, and according to, the free grace of
God. But to him that works not, but believes, etc. To him that works not,
that makes not his works a condition of his justification, -- for the apostle
is speaking of the end and view which persons have in working; he does not
condemn works, but is enquiring after the principle they proceed from, -- but
believes, his faith receives a righteousness, whereby he is justified in the
sight of God; such an one is justified as Abraham was, by the same
righteousness. -- Now, it was not written for his sake alone, that it was
imputed to him; but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on
him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; who was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our justification, Romans iv. 23, 24. There is
no merit but the merit of Christ, who may be said to merit for us; for as it
has been observed, that a person may merit, he must do more than is his bounden
duty to do. Now, Christ certainly did more than the law could insist upon, more
than the law could require of man; his obedience being the obedience of God as
well as man, For the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily; And he is the
true God; -- God over all, blessed for ever; the dignity of his person, being
the only begotten Son of God, together with the perfection of his work, made it
an exalted merit; he may be said to deserve at the hand of God. But then this
was also by paction; by a compact, or covenant-agreement, between the Father
and him, and he is called the surety of that covenant, Heb. vii, 22. and viii.
6.

Could we consider what Christ did as separate from the covenant, would there
have been any merit in it? at least, it could not have been available for us;
for Christ could not thereby have laid God under any obligation; he was at
liberty whether he would accept of a surety, and what he should do for sinners.

So that here the very strictness of merit seems to be cut off; though, I
think, it must be granted, there was an inifinite merit of condignity in what
Christ did; yet we cannot argue the justification of a sinner in the sight of
God barely from thence, without a consideration of the covenant. What he did
became available for our justification, because it was so agreed upon between
them both, that his fulfilling or giving the law its full demands, should
answer for the justification and eternal salvation of those for whom it was
done.

And this is a way of justification becoming God, as his honor is no ways
impaired; -- The law is magnified and made honorable; justice is fully
satisfied, -- Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace have
kissed each other, Psalm, lxxxv. 10.

And thus the freedom and sovereignty of God, are secured, in dispensing his
grace to sinners; for that he is laid under no obligation by what Christ has
done, but what he by covenant brought himself under. Had Christ, by whad he
did, laid God under an obligation to justify sinners, had he done this, I say,
without any consideration of a covenant between then, then God could not (in
the affair of justifying sinners) act as a sovereign; for he, being obliged by
Christ, must necessarily have conferred the grace of justification upon
sinners. But the great and blessed God is above being obliged; and though what
he does, in justifying the ungodly, is infinitely, worthy of himself, yet he
does it freely; it was a voluntary, yea sovereign act, in him, to enter into
covenant with his own Son, and justify sinners upon his account.

Thus, God has established justification in a way becoming himself; and it is
such a way as is highly honorable to him, and exceeding delightful to men --
For he is just, and the justifier of every one that believes in Christ, Romans
iii. 26.

Such honor is done to the divine law, as could never have been done by the
obedience of men, no, nor by all the men upon earth, and angels in heaven. So
that there is in Christ a double merit; a merit of condignity, i. e. of real
worth, and a merit of paction, i. e. by covenant-agreement; which, both
considered together, is the highest of perfection of merit, and far above any
mere creature to do. And the justification of a sinner, being in and through
the merit of Christ, is entirely of free grace, according to the holy
scriptures, -- Being justified freely by his grace, Romans iii. 24.

And it must be observed, that the justification of a sinner, in the sight of
God, (for I speak not of declarative justification, which is the privilege made
known to a believer) is alone by and through what Christ has done; there is
nothing that man does is brought into the account; and thus it is purely of
free grace; there being nothing considered in the creature, or done by the
creature, as the cause, condition, or mean thereof; For, if by grace, then is
it more of works, Romans xi. 6. Whereas, if any thing done by man was brought
into the account of justification in the sight of God, it could not be alone by
Christ, and of free grace; but, being justified from all things by Christ
(exclusive of any thing, and every thing, in, or done by, man) it is entirely
of mere favor, owing to the free, rich, and sovereign grace of God in Christ
Jesus.

Free sovereign grace, reigning grace is the foundation of a poor sinner's
justification in the sight of God. It was pure grace in God to enter into
covenant with his own Son; and it was equally the same grace in the Son to
become the meritorious cause of our justification. To consent To be delivered
for our offenses, and raised again for our justification. To become the Lord
our righteousness, And, the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans iv, 25, and, x. 4. Jer. xxiii. 6. Thus is the mouth of man
stopped for ever, as to any boasting in himself; but faith receiving a
righteousness can boast and glory in the Lord, according to that very excellent
passage of the blessed Paul. 1 Cor. i. 30, 31. As it is written, He that
glories, let him glory in the Lord.

From what has been said on this subject, it is very plain, that to exclude
the doctrine of merit, and yet contend for justification by works, is only
casting away the name, while the thing itself remains: Men are, it may be,
ashamed to contend for the doctrine of merit, but at the same time will boldly
contend for justification by their own obedience; which is the doctrine of
merit; for there can be no other merit ascribed to man, than that of paction,
or, covenant-agreement. The question then may be, what shall we do? shall we
own and contend for the doctrine of merit, or, shall we not? would a creed
formed after the following manner merit esteem among such as are called
protestants; (viz) "I believe in God the Father, who has made a conditional
covenant with fallen man, in which is required sincere obedience as the terms
of his acceptance. I believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God, who by his death
has rendered God propitious to sinners on such easy terms as sincere
obedience. Also, I believe that notwithstanding all that Christ has done, the
whole, as to the issue, is left to rest on the will of man, to make it
effectual, or ineffectual. Finally, I believe that good works are meritorious,
or, that by them, according to the gospel covenant, the sinner merits heaven."
How shocking soever this may appear to any man, I am not as yet convinced that
it is any way inconsistent with justification by a man's own work. Indeed good
works are not to be cast out of practical divinity: Good works must be done;
there is a strict and inseparable conjunction between justification by grace
and the performance of good works, as is abundantly evident from that famous
place, Tit. iii. 5, 6, 7, 8. Not by works of righteousness, which we have done,
but according to his mercy be saved us by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost: which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior. That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs,
according to the hope of eternal life. This is a faithful saying, and these
things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in
God, might be careful to maintain good works: these things are good and
profitable to men. But what I say is, good works have no place in the
justification of a sinner before God. And, it deserves to be considered,
whether justification by Christ be not speaking more honorably of God, and
proposing a way much safer for men than the contrary? I think it is more
honorable -- it brings more honor unto God; for in what an amiable light does
justification by grace, represent the blessed God. As infinitely ready, or,
propense in himself to justify the ungodly; for we are not to suppose that what
Christ did brought God into a disposition to acquit a guilty creature; No
external motives moved him hereunto: but what Christ did made it consistent
with all other perfections of Deity to justify sinners. The love of God to his
chosen people is an everlasting free love: God was, I say, ready enough to
justify; but could not in any other way but this, consistent with his justice,
holiness, and truth. But now, he is just, and the justifier, of him which
believes in Jesus, Romans iii. 26.

And this way of justification is much safer for men; is it not a surer
foundation to rest upon, to trust in a perfect righteousness, which is an
absolute security from condemnation for ever? Whereas, if it depends upon our
own performances, then every time a person relapses into sin he is brought
under condemnation: but this is not the case with reference to such as are
justified by Christ; though when such an one falls into sin he has cause
enough to mourn, and be deeply humbled before God; but this don't affect his
state as to justification; the sentence being passed in heaven will never be
recalled -- Justification is an abiding thing. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my words,
and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. -- I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish. -- Romans viii. 1. Joh. v. 24. and x.
28. And I must affirm, (whatever any person may think to the contrary) that
this doctrine of justification by Christ alone, I mean as before observed,
justification in the sight of God, I treat of no other now; therefore as to
what hand the grace of faith may have in the application of this blessing, and
how far works, as fruits of faith may evidence our justification before men, I
determine not now to consider. This doctrine, I say, of free justification by
Christ alone is a doctrine of godliness; and, in my opinion, will never fail of
influencing those that heartily embrace it, to practical godliness. Corrupting
and denying this doctrine of justification, is one chief cause of the so great
abounding of sin amongst us; corruption of doctrine produces corruption of
manners; communion and close walking with God are the effects of receiving the
truth in the love of it.

The clearer views I have of this doctrine, and the stronger my faith is, the
more humble I am, and the more abundantly is my heart drawn forth in unfeigned
thankfulness, and lively and cheerful obedience. The love of Christ
constrains us. -- O what returns shall I make for love so vastly great. I am
nothing -- Christ is all and in all. In him I am complete. -- And how exceeding
lovely and engaging does he appear, as the Lord our righteousness.

And though justification, by an imputed righteousness, be a riddle that many
cannot unfold, yet certainly -- out of the strong comes forth sweetness. -- No
doctrine so sweet, so full of the most solid joy. Free grace! O delightful
theme! with how much pleasure could I dwell upon the harmonious sound! my soul
is almost ready to melt within me, in the delightful views of justification by
free grace! And how am I transported at the thoughts of what many of the dear
children of God have suffered for this precious doctrine. Hark! from the
dungeon, how the poor prisoners sing for joy of heart! -- And what their notes?
-- O it is grace! Rich grace! Free grace! Christ, none but Christ and his
righteousness! -- Salvation alone by Christ -- O how did the prisons, in
persecuting times, ring with this doctrine! -- Look yonder! methinks I see a
pile of wood lighted up, and close by it stand, in appearance, a poor object
condemned to the flames! see how he smiles, while death in all its dreadful
forms stares him in the face, yet heaven is in his countenance; Behold the
executioners, full of rage and fury, stand astonished to see with what heroic
courage and divine pleasure the poor sufferer embraces the flames, -- counting
it all joy. Why so? Because Christ is in him the hope of glory. With a heart,
overflowing with joy, he cries, O sweet Jesus! Lamb of God! my hope, my life,
my all! in thy blessed garment I shall appear without spot soon -- and I shall
shine in paradise in the spotless robes of Christ's righteousness.

Therefore this doctrine I must abide by, 'till I can find another that will
produce better effects, -- closer walking with God, and more joy and peace in
the Holy Ghost. And as I do not expect, so neither can I desire, a sweeter
doctrine than this is, a doctrine that abases the creature to the lowest, and
exalts the Redeemer to the highest. The chief thing I want, is, to enter
further into the knowledge of it, and by faith live more upon it. And I am
confidently persuaded the heavens will sweetly ring of free justification by
Christ alone; every saint, being a miracle of grace, will labor to raise his
notes to the highest key, 'till the glorious mansions resound with loud
hosannas, all shouting, grace, grace unto it.

FINIS.

