MINUTES OF CONFERENCES,

HELD WITH THE INDIANS, at EASTON, In the Months of July and November, 1756;

TOGETHER WITH Two MESSAGES sent by the GOVERNMENT to the Indians residing on
Sasquehannah; and the REPORT of the COMMITTEE appointed by the ASSEMBLY to
attend the GOVERNOR at the last of the said Conferences.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
New-Printing-Office, near the Market. MDCCLVII.

MINUTES OF ^ONFERENCES, and c. PHILADELPHIA.
after the Ending of the Conferences between Scarroyady and some of the People
called Quakers, the three Indians, Newcastle, Jagrea, and William Locquies,
being prepared to set out for Wioming, the Governor (who, during these
Conferences, received Messages from the Governor of New York) delivered them
the following Message to the Delaware and Shawanese Indians, living on
Sasquehannah, viz.

April 26, 1756.
BRETHREN,

William Johnson, sent me by Sir Charles Hardy, Governor of New York, that,
immediately after the Council held at Fort Johnson, Deputies were dispatched by
the Six Nations to Atsaningo, and that they convened the Delawares, Shawanese,
and other Indians, from the several Towns on the Sasquehannah, to the Number of
Three Hundred, to whom they delivered Messages from that Council, blaming them
for taking up the Hatchet against their Brethren the English, and commanding
them to lay it down immediately; and that they had hearkened to this Message,
and agreed to strike no more. -- What I tell you is in this Letter. [ Here the
Governor gave Mr. Welser Sir Charles Hardy's Letter of the 16th of April, to
interpret to them. And when he had made them understand what Sir Charles Hardy
had wrote, the Governor took a Belt in his Hand, and proceeded.]

Brethren,

I think it necessary that the Indians at Wioming, as well Enemies as Friends,
should know, that Sir Charles Hardy has sent this Account to me from Sir
William Johnson; and as two of you are of the Six Nations, and one a Delaware,
I think it proper that you should undertake to notify this to them; and at the
same Time to let them know, as from yourselves, that if they are sincerely
disposed to Peace, and will deliver up the English Prisoners to the Six
Nations, and hearken to their Advice in laying down the Hatchet, and abide by
such Terms as shall be agreed on, you can venture to assure them, that though
much Blood has been spilt, and that the English, in Resentment of this, are
well prepared to avenge themselves, yet they have so great Regard for the Six
Nations, that it will be in their Power to persuade the English not to
prosecute the War, but to accept fair, just and honorable Terms; and I provide
you with this Belt, to deliver it to them with such a Speech.

Brethren,

I speak my own sincere Inclinations, when I say I am for Peace; and not only
my own, but the Sentiments of others, and particularly the earnest Desire of a
Number of People, who are the Descendants of those that came over with the
first Proprietor; all those are extremely desirous to interpose with the
Government, to receive the Submission of the Delawares, and to overlook what is
past, and establish for the future a firm and lasting Agreement, Peace and
Affection between us, and have repeatedly applied to me for this Purpose.

Brethren,

As many Stories have been told to the Indians to our Prejudice, I desire you
will undeceive them; and particularly I do charge William Locquies to acquaint
the Delawares, that those of their Tribe who live among us, have not had any
Mischief done them, but are treated with our usual Kindness, and are at
Liberty, and live in Peace and Plenty among us. -- I charge you William
Locquies, to declare the Truth to the Indians, and to assure them that they
have been imposed on; and relate the Care that has been taken, as well by the
Government of New Jersey, as this, of all the Indians who have staid with us,
and that they enjoy our Protection, and live as happily as ever.

A String.

Brethren,

Paxinosa, and some other Shawanese, and other Indians, have not broke Faith
with us, but endeavored to dissuade the Delawares from striking us. -- When
they could not succeed, they separated from them, and now live together in some
Place near Wioming; I would have you go to them, and let them likewise know
this Account from Sir William Johson, and assure them from me, that if they are
inclined to come within the Inhabitants, you have my Orders to conduct them; or
if they do not incline to come now, but at any other Time, they will, on
sending me a Message, be provided with a safe Conduct, and meet with an hearty
Welcome. -- Let them know that Scarroyady related to me what had pasied between
him and them; and that Aroas and David have likewise made me acquainted with
what was said by them when they were last at Wioming.

Then the Governor gave them a String to give to Paxinosa.

Newcastle, Jagrea, and William Locquies, returned the Governor an Answer, viz.

That the Messages were very good, and what they approved mightily, and would
undertake the Journey, and deliver them faithfully; but then they must desire
the Governor would make their Apology to Colonel Clapham, and tell him, that
nothing but the Governor's Commands would have induced them to delay their
coming to him.

The Governor promised he would; and then told them, that Mr. Spangenberg was
desired to be present, having some Delaware Indians under his Care, that he
might hear what was delivered to them. -- He desired they would go by Way of
Bethlehem, and take with them one or more of the Indians there, and that Mr.
Spangenberg would prepare those Indians for their Visit, and persuade some of
them to accompany them to Wioming.

The Messengers returned, and on the 31st of May, 1756, made the following
Report, viz. That on their Arrival at Wioming, they found the Indians had left
the Town, and gone up the River; they therefore proceeded to Teaogon, where
they met with a great Number of Indians, and informed them they had brought a
Message from the Governor of Pennsylvania, and desired a Meeting of all their
People in that Town and near it; which being obtained in two Days, they then
delivered their Message. -- After which, Paxinosa, as Speaker of their Council,
returned the following Answer, viz.

Brethren, The Governor, and People of Pennsylvania,

THE dark Clouds overspread our Country so suddenly, that we have been all at
once separated, and that dark Cloud got in between us; and as it has pleased
the most High to dispel it a little, so that we can just see one another again,
our Eyes are now running with Tears, because of the melancholy Sight of seeing
our Country covered with our own Blood (we mean yours and ours.) Give me Leave
to wipe off the Tears from your Eyes, though at the same Time my own Eyes run
with Tears in Abundance for what has passed.

Gave a String.

Brethren,

As you came a great Way, and through dangerous Places, where evil Spirits
reign, who might have put several Things in your Way to obstruct your Business,
this String serves to clear your Mind, and the Passage from your Heart to your
Mouth, that you may speak freely to us.

Gave a String.

Teedyuscung, a Delaware Chief, spoke next.

Brother Onas, and the People of Pennsylvania,

We rejoice to hear from you, and that you are willing to renew the old good
Understanding, and that you call to Mind the first Treaties of Friendship made
by Onas, our great Friend, deceased, with our Forefathers, when himself and
his People first came over here. We take hold of these Treaties with both our
Hands, and desire you will do the same, that a good Understanding and true
Friendship may be re-established. Let us both take hold of these Treaties with
all our Strength, we beseech you; we on our Side will certainly do it.

Gave a Belt.

Brother Onas,

What you said to us we took to Heart, and it entered into our Heart; and we
speak to you from our Heart; and we will deal honestly with you in every
Respect.

Gave a String.

Brother Onas,

We desire you will look upon us with Eyes of Mercy. We are a very poor People;
our Wives and Children are almost naked. We are void of Understanding, and
destitute of the Necessaries of Life. Pity us.

Gave a String.

The Delawares, Memskies, and Mohickons, to Onas, and the People of
Pennsylvania.

Brethren,

There is a great Number of our People among you, and in a Manner confined; we
desire you will set them at Liberty, or rather give them a safe Conduct to
Wioming, where we intend to settle as on your Fire Side; there we will jointly
with you kindle a Council-Fire, which shall always burn, and we will be one
People with you.

Gave two Belts.

Brother Onas, and all the People of Pennsylvania,

We had the Misfortune that a great and dark Cloud overspread our Country; but
by our Prudence, and that of our Uncles, the Six Nations, it is now almost
dispelled, and we see the clear Heavens again. We the Delawares, the Shawanese,
the Mohickons, and Memskies, give you this String Wampum, and desire you, that
the Bitterness which might have gathered in this dark and unhappy Time may be
removed, and that you may by this Means spit it out; take or accept this as a
certain Cure for that Purpose, and pass by all that is past, and think on your
poor foolish Brethren with Mercy, and forget all the Evil done to you by them.

Gave several Strings of Wampum.

Brother Onas,

What our Uncles the Six Nations required of us, in your and their Behalf, by
their Delegates, at Otsaningo, we that live on the River Sasquehannah have
agreed to. We have laid aside our Hatchet, and will never make use of it any
more against you or your Brethren, the English: All our young Men have been
consulted about this, and all earnestly agree to it, and we now speak in their
Presence.

We must give you this Caution, not to charge them with any Thing that may be
done by the Ohio Indians, who are under the Influence of the French against
you. We assure you, our young Men will do no more Mischief to your People.

Gave a String.

At a COUNCIL held at Philadelphia, on Tuesday, the 8 th of June, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable ROBERT HUNTER MORRIS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor.
Esquires.
BENJAMIN SHOEMAKER, RICHARD PETER'S, JOSEPH TURNER, JOHN MIFFLIN,
Indians of the Six Nations.
Captain NEWCASTLE, JAGREA, or SATAGAROWYES,
CONRAD WEISER, Esquire Interpreter.


The Grovernor and the People of Pennsylvania, to the Indians on Sasquehannah,
gathered at Teaogon.

Brethren,

I RETURN you the Thanks of this Government for the kind Reception you gave to
my Messengers: This I look upon as an Act of Friendship, and a Token of your
good Intentions.

A String of four Rows.

Brethren,

I am glad to find a good Spirit at last prevailing amongst you, and that you
hearkened to my Message, and laid it to Heart; you will ever find us, your
Brethren, sincerely disposed to consult and act for your truest Interest, and
in the several Matters which were or shall now be particularly promised on our
Part, you may rest assured we mean punctually to perfrom them, and expect the
same Disposition in you.

A String of four Rows.

Brethren, the Shawanese, Delawares, Memskies, and Mohickons,

As you on your Parts have confirmed the Treaties and Leagues of Amity
subsisting between you and this Government, and given a Belt in Confirmation
thereof, and desire the same be done on our Part; I do now, by this Belt,
ratify and confirm all former Treaties and Engagements, and assure, that they
shall be most inviolably observed as long as the Sun shines.

Here a large Belt was given.

Brethren,

As Your Confirmation of former Treaties was accompanied with Professions of
Sincerity, so I make you the strongest Assurances of Truth in the Confirmation
this Government has now made.

A String of four Rows.

Brethren,

That you and I may have an Opportunity of making these mutual Declarations at
a public Convention, I now kindle a Council-Fire at the House of Conrad
Weiser, who is one of the Council of the Six Nations, and the public
Interpreter of the Province.

A large Belt of fourteen Rows.

N. B. Mr. Weifer said it was necessary to name a particular Place; but the
Indians were, not with standing this, always at Liberty to name another; and he
believed, from something Captain Newcastle had dropped, the Indians would choose
the Forks-of-Delaware.

Brethren,

Having appointed a Place for us to meet in Council, I now clear the Roads to
this Place, and remove the Logs and other Obstructions out of it, so that it
may be perfectly safe for every one desirous to use it to travel to their
Brethren when met in Council.

A Belt of eight Rows, and eight Strings tied to it.

Brethren,

It is offensive to see Blood spilt upon the Road used by People who have lived
in Friendship together, I therefore remove all Blood out of the Road that leads
to the Council-Fire.

A Belt of nine Rows.

Brethren,

Your Indians who live among us go where they please; they live as we do; and
enjoy their Liberty. We only hinder them from going to the Frontiers, where
they might be mistaken for Enemies, and hurt or killed; and that the Indians
may know the Truth of this, we send some of them along with our Messengers to
Teaogon, who will declare what Treatment they have had from us. What few we
have in Confinement shall be set at Liberty when the Council meets, and be
brought there.

A String.

Brethren,

This last is a very important Article, and what we absolutely depend upon,
That all Prisoners taken on both Sides shall be delivered up, as there can be
no Sincerity on either Side where this is not done, and that in the most
faithful and ample Manner, without keeping back a single Prisoner; this Belt
assures you that it shall be punctually performed by us, and we expect the same
punctually on your Side.

Two Belts, the one of seven, the other of eight Rows.

Brethren,

You have mentioned to us the Distresses you have been, and are, in, for Want
of Necessaries; these are owing to your having given Way to the Influences of
an evil Spirit, and struc^ us your Brethren without any Cause; and as you have
brought it on yourselves, you have the less Reason to complain: But now that a
good Spirit begins to show itself in you, and you desire to meet us in Council,
I shall bring with me a Sufficiency of Clothes and Provisions to relieve those
Distresses.

A String.

Brethren,

As you have laid down the Hatchet, and desire the same may be done by us, our
Messenger carries with him our Proclamation for Suspension of Hostilities
within the Limits there in specified, of which we have informed the Six Nations.

Brethren,

Agreeable to the repeated Advice and Request of Scarroyady, and other Indians
of the Six Nations, then residing in this Province, I engaged to build a Fort
at Shamokin, for the Protection of our Friendly Indians, their Wives and
Children; and I now acquaint you with the March of the Forces, in order to
effect this useful Work, that it may give no Umbrage the Commander having my
Orders not to act offensively.

Brethren,

You are to take Notice, that nothing proposed by me is to interfere with any
Invitation you may have received from Sir William Johnson, or your Uncles, the
Six Nations; they have acquainted me, that a great Council is to be held in the
Country of the Six Nations; and those Indians at Teaogon are invited to it: I
would have them by all Means give their Attendance there. You may go to either
Place as you incline, for we are both in the Service of one King, and act by
his Direction.

Brother Newcastle,

I have now finished what I would have you say in the Name of this Province to
the Indians gathered at Teaogon. You will adapt the several Articles to Indian
Customs, retaining the Spirit and Substance of them.

At a CONFERENCE held at Easton, on Wednesday the 28th of July, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable ROBERT HUNTER MORRIS, Esquire Lieutenant Governor.
Esquires, of the Council.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, BENJAMIN CHEW, JOHN MIFFLIN,
Commissioners.
JOSEPH FOX, JOHN HUGHES, WILLIAM EDMONDS,
TEEDYJSCUNG, the Delaware Chief, and 14 other Chiefs, CONRAD WEISER, Esquire
Interpreter for the Six Nations. Interpreters for the Delawares.
JOHN PUMPSHIRE, JOSEPH PEEPY, BEN,
A large Company, consisting of Officers of the Royal American Regiment, and of
the Provincial Forces; Magistrates and Freeholders, of this and the
neighboring Province; and about forty Citizens of the City of Philadelphia,
chiefly of the People called Quakers.


The Governor acquainted the Indians be was going to speak, and desired them to
be attentive.

Brethren,

BY a Belt which I sent by Newcastle, and the other Indian Messengers, to
Diahogo, I informed the Indians there, that I had kindled a Council Fire; by
another String I invited them to it; and by a String of Wampum I cleared the
Road, that they might come in Safety to us. I assured you of an hearty Welcome
as soon as I came here, and of my Protection; and I now, in the Name of this
Government, again bid you welcome. As Captain Newcastle brought me no Answer to
some Part of the Messages I sent last by him, I expect to receive them by you.
I hope you come prepared to speak to us freely, sincerely, and openly, and
desire you may do so.

A String.

To which Teedyuscung immediately answered.

Last Spring you sent me a String; and as soon as I heard the good Words you
sent, I was glad; and as you told us, we believe it came from your Hearts, so
we felt it in our Hearts, and received what you said with Joy.

Brethren,

The first Messages you sent me, came in the Spring; they touched my Heart;
they gave me Abundance of Joy. I returned an Answer to them, and waited for
your second Messages, which came after some Time, and were likewise very
agreeable. By the last you acquainted me that you had kindled a Council Fire,
and invited me and my People to it. We accepted the Invitation; and I came
accordingly, and have staid several Days, smoking my Pipe with Patience,
expecting to meet you here. We are ready to hear what you have to say, and not
only we, but five other Nations, in all ten Nations, are now turning their Eyes
this Way, and wait what will be said and done at this Meeting.

Brother,

I solemnly, and with the utmost Sincerity, declare, that though you may think I
am a^on^ here, yet it will not be long before you will be convinced that I am
here by the Appointment of ten Nations, among which are my Uncles the Six
Nations, authorizing me to treat with you, and what I do they will all confirm.
The Truth of this you will soon have made evident to you.

Brother,

Hearken to what I am going to say: I declare, in the most solemn Manner, that
what I now relate is the Truth. Abundance of Confusion, Disorder and
Distraction has arisen among the Indians, from People taking upon them to be
Kings, and Persons of Authority. In every Tribe of Indians there have been such
Pretenders, who have held Treaties, sometimes public, and sometimes in the
Bushes; sometimes what these People did came to be known, but frequently it
remained in Darkness, or at least no more was imparted to the Public than they
were pleased to publish. To some they held up their Belts, but others never saw
them; this bred among the Indians great Heart-burnings and Quarrels, and I can
assure you, that the present Clouds do, in a great Measure, owe their Rise to
this wild and irregular Way of doing Business. -- The Indians, sensible of this
Mistake of our Ancestors, are now determined to put an End to this Multitude of
Kings, and to this dark Way of proceeding; they have agreed to put the
Management of their Affairs into the Hands of a very few, and these shall no
longer have it in their Power to huddle up and give partial Representations of
what is done. I assure you, that there are only two Kings appointed to transact
public Business, of which I am one. For the future, Matters will go better on
both Sides; you as well as we will know who we are to deal with. We must
beseech the most High to scatter the Clouds which have arisen between us, that
we may settle Peace as heretofore.

A String.

Brethren, the English, and particularly the Governor of Pennsylvania,

You know you have invited me here; I came therefore; my Uncles, the Six
Nations, will confirm what I say. In your Messages to the Indians at Dialago
you signified to us, that you heard we were in Want and Distress, which to be
sure we are, and pitied us and our poor Wives and Children. We took it kindly,
and as a Word that came from your Heart. Now is the Time for you to look about,
and act the Part of a charitable and wise Man. -- Be therefore strong -- be
assured that, though I am poor, I will do my Share. Whatever Kindness you do to
me, or my People, shall be publicshed to ten Indian Nations. We will not hide
any Presents you shall give us; every Body shall know that we have heard your
good Words. We will not do as others, and some of our Uncles, the Six Nations,
have done, sneak away, and hide your Words and Presents in the Bushes, but
shall publish far and near, that all may join with us. Exert yourselves now in
the best Manner you can, and you will obtain your End.

Brother,

The Conclusion of my Words is no more than this; the Matter in Hand is of too
great Moment for one Man. I am but a Messenger from the United Nations, though
I act as a Chief Man for the Delawares. I must now hear what you have to say to
my People at this Council-Fire. If it be good, I shall lay hold of it, and
carry it to the United Nations, who will smile and be pleased to hear good
News. If what you will say be disagreeable, I will, notwithstanding, keep it
close ( here be closed his Fist) and deliver it faithfully to the United
Nations, and let them, as they are my Superiors, do as they see Cause.

Being asked if he had done, he said he had for the present; the main Thing, he
added is yet in my Breast, laying his Hand to his Heart, but this will depend
on what Words the Governor will speak to us. Then he repeated the Delaware
Word, Whish-shicksy, the same in Mohock Language as Jago, with great
Earnestness, and in a very pathetick Tone. Mr. Weiser who knew the Word to have
a very extensive and forcible Sense, desired the Interpreter t^ ask him what he
meant by Whish-shicksy on this particular Occasion, and explained himself i^
the following Manner. Suppose you want to remove a large Log of Wood, that
require many Hands, you must take Pains to get as many together as will do the
Business; if y^ fall short but one, though never so weak an one, all the rest
are to no Purpose. Thoug^ this be in itself nothing, yet, if you cannot move
the Log without it, you must spare no Pai^ to get it. Whish-shicksy; be strong;
look round you; enable us to engage every Indian Nation we can; put the Means
into our Hands; be sure perform every Promise you have made to us; in
particular do not pinch Matters neither with us or other Indians; we will help
you but we are poor, and you are rich; make us strong, and we will use our
Strength for you and, besides this, what you do, do quickly; the Times are
dangerous; they will not adm^ of Delay. -- Whish-shicksy; do it effectually,
and do it with all possible Dispatch.

The Governor then spoke.

Brother,

I have heard with Attention all you have said. I thank you for the Openness
with which you have declared your Sentiments; the Matters mentioned are of
Importance; I have laid them to Heart; I will consider them with my Council;
when I am prepared to speak, I will let you know; I will use Dispatch, the
Times being, as you justly observe, very dangerous.

At a CONFERENCE held at Easton, on Thursday the 29th of July, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable the GOVERNOR. The Gentlemen of the Council. The
Commissioners. The same Indians. The same Interpreters. The same Audience.


Brethren,

I AM going to speak to you on the Affair we are met about; my Speech will
contain Matters of great Moment: By this String of Wampum therefore I open your
Ears, that you may give a proper Attention.

A String.

Brethren,

The Inhabitants of this Province have ever been a peaceable People, and
remarkable for their Love and constant Friendship to the Six Nations, and other
Indians in Alliance with them.

When our Back Inhabitants were attacked last Fall, we at first were at a Loss
to know from whence the Blow came; and were much surprised when we were
informed that it was given by our old Friends and Neighbors the Cousins of our
Brethren the Six Nations; we wondered at it; and the more so, as we had not, to
our Knowledge, given them any just Cause of Offense. -- As soon as we knew
this, we sent to the Six Nations, and informed them of it, and desired to know,
whether this Blow had been struck by their Direction, or with their Privity or
Consent: And on receiving Assurances from them, that it was not done with their
Consent, and that they greatly disapproved such Conduct, we made ready to
revenge the Injury we had received, and we wanted neither Men or Arms,
Ammunition, nor Strength to do it, and to take Vengeance for the Injury done
us; yet, when we had the Hatchet in our Hands, and were prepared not only to
defend ourselves, but to carry the War into the Country of those who had struck
us, we sent again to the Six Nations, agreeable to the Treaties subsisting
between us, to acquaint them of our Intentions. They let us know they had held
a Grand Council, at Fort Johnson, on this Matter, and that Deputies from thence
were sent to summon a Meeting of Delawares and Shawanese at Otsaningo, who were
returned with an Account, That their Nephews had, at their Interposition, laid
down the Hatchet, and would strike the English no more. The Six Nations having
received these Assurances from the Delawares and Shawanese, requested us not to
execute our hostile Purposes, but to suspend Hostilities; declaring, that they
would fully accommodate this Breach, and bring about a Peace. At this Request
of the Six Nations, we kept our Warriors at Home, for guarding and protecting
our Frontiers. I then sent Newcastle, and other Indian Messengers to you, to
notify the Advices of the Six Nations, with respect to what had been determined
at Otsaningo, instructing him, in case he found you sincerely disposed for
Peace, and inclined to return to your Alliance with us, to assure you, on the
Behalf of this Government, that we were willing to it, on just and honorable
Terms. Newcastle, and the other Messengers, returned with your Answers; in
which you acknowledged, you had been under the Influence of an Evil Spirit, but
were well disposed to return to your old Amity and Friendship; at the same Time
letting us know, that you was sorry for what had passed; that you was in
Distress, and desired we would pity your Distresses. To show our Readiness to
enter into a Treaty, and our Sincerity in what was said by Newcastle, I sent
him back again to you, to let you know, on the Behalf of this Government, that
I had kindled a Council-Fire, invited all your People to it, cleared the Road,
washed off the Blood, and promised, if your People would come to Council, and
renew former Leagues, and do what is further necessary on the Occasion, I would
bring something with me to relieve your Distresses. -- I thought it right to go
through this Account in this particular Manner, that you might know from myself
what was the Subject of the Messages sent by Newcastle, and what was the
Substance of the Answers I received by him. And now, I suppose (as I do not see
the Body of your Indians here) your People, in general, did not believe
Newcastle, but sent you to know if he had my Authority for the several Matters
he delivered to you, and to hear them from my own Mouth. I do not blame you for
this Caution, it bespeaks your Care. The Matters he was charged with being of
the last Concern, for the Satisfaction of all your People, how wide soever they
are dispersed, I do in this public Assembly, in the Name of the Government,
and People of this Province, assure you, that Captain Newcastle acted by my
Authority; and in Confirmation of what I have said, and that what he delivered,
was by Authority from me, I give you this Belt.

A Belt.

Brethren,

Being now convinced out of my Mouth, of the Sincerity of my Professions made
to you by Captain Newcastle, and of the Dispositions of the People of this
Province, to renew the ancient Friendship that subsisted between William Penn
and the Indians. I desire you will report this to the Indians at Diahogo, and
to the Six Nations, and to all the Indians far and near, as my Words, spoken to
them in the Name, and on the Behalf of the Government of Pennsylvania. I invite
them all to this Council-Fire; the greater the Number that shall come, the more
acceptable it will be to me. I invite, and desire you will bring with you, your
whole People; but then you must bring here with you also all the Prisoners you
have taken during these Disturbances; I must insist on this, as an Evidence of
your Sincerity to make a lasting Peace, for, without it, though Peace may be
made from the Teeth outward, yet while you retain our Flesh and Blood in
Slavery, it cannot be expected we can be Friends with you, or that a Peace can
come from our Hearts. I repeat this Article of the Prisoners as a necessary
Condition of Peace, and desire you will consider it as such: If in this you
deal with us sincerely, we shall esteem you sincere in every Thing else, and
proceed to renew our former Leagues and Covenants, and become again one Flesh
as before. And I must remind you (as we are acting in Consort with the Six
Nations) to bring some of your Uncles along with you, that they may see all
that passes, and be Witnesses of the good Effects of their and our Messages to
you.

A Belt.

Brethren,

In Testimony of the Satisfaction you have given all our People by your coming
to this Council-Fire, they have put into my Hands a small Present for you and
your young Men, which will be given you at any Time you shall think proper. I
have likewise given Orders to the Captains of the Forts, on the Frontiers, to
furnish you with as much Provisions as you can carry, for the Use of the People
you have left behind you.

Brethren,

Only a few of you are now come down; this Present of Goods therefore is but
small; when the Body of your Nation comes here, which I expect they will, and
the Prisoners are delivered up, and a firm Peace made, larger Presents will be
given, and your Distresses relieved in a more ample Manner.

Brother,

Great Works require strong Hands and many; this is a good and a great one, the
Work of Peace; it requires strong Heads, and found Hearts; we desire many such
may be joined together: I therefore desire your Assistance for Pennsylvania in
this Matter; having great Influence with many who live far distant from us, you
are esteemed, and will be heard; we therefore choose you as Agent and Counselor
for this Province; engage in it heartily. You ought to do it; you owe it to the
Country in which you was born; you owe it to your Brethren the English; you owe
it to your Uncles the Six Nations; you owe it to your own People over which you
preside: We desire you will heartily undertake it, and use your utmost
Endeavors to bring about this great and good Work we have now begun.

A large Belt.

Teedyuscung answered, that he had received the Governor's Words kindly, and
would, in a few Words, answer him. Then taking a large Belt in his Hand, he
proceeded.

Brother,

At the very Time Newcastle came with your last Messages, I was in Treaty with
the Six Nations, and then received this Authority from them. [ Listing up the
Belt.] This Belt denotes, that the Six Nations, by their Chiefs, have lately
renewed their Covenant Chain with us; formerly we were accounted Women, and
employed only in Women's Business; but now they have made Men of us, and as such
we are now come to this Treaty. Having this Authority as a Man to make Peace, I
have it in my Hand, but have not opened it; but will soon declare it to the
other Nations. This Belt holds together ten Nations; we are in the Middle,
between the French and English; look at it. There are but two Chiefs of the ten
Nations; they are now looking on, and their Attention is sixed, to see who are
disposed really for Peace. -- This Belt further denotes, that whoever will not
comply with the Terms of Peace, the ten Nations will join against him and
strike him; see the dangerous Circumcumstances I am in; strong Men on both
Sides; Hatchets on both Sides; whoever does incline to Peace, him will I join.

Brother,

This is a good Day; whoever will make Peace, let him lay hold of this Belt,
and the Nations around shall see and know it. I desire to conduct myself
according to your Words, which I will perform to the utmost of my Power. I wish
the same good Spirit that possessed the good old Man William Penn, who was a
Friend to the Indians, may inspire the People of this Province at this Time.

Then delivered the Belt.

The Governor received it, and said, I take hold of the Belt, and am pleased
with what has been said; it is all very good.

Teedyuscung then explained the Belt, saying, it was sent him by the Six Nation
(...) accepted of it: You see, says he, a Square in the Middle, meaning the
(...) dians, and at one End the Figure of a Man, indicating the English; and at
the (...) another, meaning the French; our Uncles told us, that both these
coveted (...) let us join together to desend our Lands against both, you shall
be Partakers with us of our Lands.

Teedyuscung and his Son came and dined with the Governor; and after Dinner,
some more of the Indians coming in, the Governor acquainted Teedyuscung that he
had something of Importance to communicate to him. The Governor then informed
him, That as he was going to Council this Morning, he received a Letter from
the Northern Frontiers, with very bad News, that gave him a great deal of
Concern: By this Letter he received Advice, that some Indians had killed four
of our White People at the Minisinks; this occasioned our Forces to be upon
their Guard, and a Party of them fell in with three Indians, and judging them
to be Enemy Indiens, one of them was killed in endeavoring to make his Escape;
and then the Governor entered into the Particulars related in Van Etten's
Letter. The Governor said, he did not know what Indians had done this Mischief.
If the Indian who was killed was our Friend, he was sorry for it; but if our
Enemy, he was glad of it.

Teedyuscung said, that when he came here to Council, all the Indians there
abouts knew of it; and therefore he believed it must be the French Indians that
killed our People; but that if his People were so foolish as to come on our
Borders at this Time, and were killed any how, they must take the Reward of
their Folly. None of these private Deaths ought to affect a public Measure;
nor would this make any Alterations in his Councils.

At a CONFERENCE held at Easton, on Friday, the 30th of July, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable the GOVERNOR, The Gentlemen of the Council. The
Commissioners. The same Indians. The same Interprerers. The same Audience.


The Goods were brought, and placed on the Council Table, and were delivered to
the Indians, the Governor speaking as follows.

Brethren,

I ACQUAINTED you Yesterday, that the People of Pennsylvania had put into my
Hands a small Present to relieve you, and your Wives and Children, from their
present Distresses. I think it further necessary to inform you, That a Part of
this Present was given by the People called Quakers (who are the Descendants of
those who first came over to this Country with your old Friend William Penn) as
a particular Testimony of their Regard and Affection for the Indians, and their
earnest Desire to promote the good Work of Peace in which we are now engaged.

Brethren,

Brethren,

This is not only their Sentiments but my own, and those of the People of this
Province; who will all rejoice to see this good Work of Peace perfected; and
therefore, as you have now received from us this substantial Proof of our
Disposition to relieve your Distresses, you will be the better enabled to
encourage others to return to their former Friendship with us. I say, Brother,
by this we give you a clear Testimony of our Readiness and good Dispositions
for Peace. Show you the same Readiness, and comply with the Terms I have
proposed to you.

A String.

Teedyuscung returned Thanks; and repeated his Assurances of doing all in his
Power to perfect a general Peace with the Indians. -- From the Council, the
Governor proceeded to an Entertainment that was provided for the Indians, the
Officers, and all the Company then i^ Town, accompanying him.

Teedyuscung, whilst at Dinner, was so well pleased with his kind Reception and
generous Entertainment, that he declared, in the warmest Manner, no Endeavors
of his should be wanting to bring over to the Peace, all the Indians far and
near, that he could speak or send to; and repeatedly desired the Governor would
publish what was done, through his and the neighboring Provinces, and he would
do the same at Home. -- The Philadelphia Quakers going after Dinner to take
their Leave of him, he parted with them in a very affectionate Manner; but the
other Part of the Company staying, he entered into a free Conversation with the
Governor; wherein he related many entertaining Particulars respecting his
Journey to Niagara, and afterward made a Council Speech with a String of
Wampum, saying:

Brother,

You are so good, and received us so kindly, I will also give you some of that
good Tobacco that the Six Nations have put into my Pipe; you shall smoke of it
yourselves; you will find it is good, and I will give of the same Tobacco
wherever I go (meaning the Message from the Six Nations to them, to be at Peace
with the English) The same Thing that I have offered to you I will offer to all
the Indians, and at the same time tell them, that you have smoaked of this
Tobacco; but to do this requires me to be rich, and yet I am poor. -- It will
take up a long Time, as there are many Nations to send the Pipe to; but in two
Months I hope to go my Rounds, and be here again with a large Number, of
different Nations; I say it may be in two Months, but it may be longer, as the
People live at a great Distance from one another. I assure you I will execute
every Thing you have desired of me, and let the Six Nations know all that has
passed between us; and that I am your Agent and Counselor in the Delaware
Nation.

A String.

Brethren,

I would not have you mistake me, as if I meant that I could prevail on the
Ohio Indians: I cannot tell that they will leave off doing Mischief. -- I hope
you will strengthen yourselves against them; pray make yourselves as strong as
possible on that Side. I must warn you likewise of another Thing; perhaps on
the East Side of Sasquehannah there may be Mischief done by Indians in my
Absence; but be assured it will not be by any of my People; it will be by the
French Indians from Ohio, who can easily pass over Sasquehannah, and do what
Mischief they please: Against these, you must be sure to arm yourselves in the
best Manner you can; remember I give you this Warning.

A String.

At a COUNCIL held at Easton, on Friday, the 30th of July, 1756, P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable the GOVERNOR. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, BENJAMIN CHEW, JOHN MIFFLIN.
CONRAD WEISER, Esquire.


MR. WEISER was asked, Whether it was intended the Governor should keep the
Belt Teedyuscung gave, or return it? Mr. Weiser answered, That having some
Doubts about it, he put the same Question to Newcastle, who said the Belt was
sent by the Six Nations to the Delawares, and as it was given by them to the
Governor, it ought to be preserved among the Council Wampum, being a Belt of
great Consequence; and it would be well to return another of a Fathom long, and
at the Delivery of it, which must be in Council Tomorrow, to make a proper
Address to Teedyuscung, that he would be diligent, and carry it to all the
Nations within his Influence. Newcastle said further, That Teedyuscung would
want Abundance of Wampum, and if he had it not, the Cause would suffer
exceedingly. He hoped the Council Bag was full, and desired it might be emptied
into the Lap of Teedyuscung. Mr. Weiser concurring in Opinion, and saying, that
the French gave great Quantities of Wampum to their Indians, and on Matters of
Consequence their Belts were several Fathom long, and very wide, the Secretary
was ordered to bring what Wampum he had into Council, viz. Fifteen Strings, and
seven Belts, a Parcel of new black Wampum, amounting to seven Thousand; and
having no new white Wampum, nor any proper Belts to give in Return for
Teedyuscung's Peace Belt, a Messenger was sent to Bethlehem, and he returned
with five Thousand; upon which the Indian Women were employed to make a Belt of
a Fathom long, and sixteen Beads wide; in the Center of which was to be the
Figure of a Man, meaning the Governor of Pennsylvania, and on each Side five
other Figures, meaning the ten Nations mentioned by Teedyuscung.

The King, who was very irregular in his Visits, as well as in his Discourses,
bolted all of a sudden into the Room, and with a high Tone of Voice spoke as
follows, viz.

Brother,

I desire all that I have said, and you have said to one another, may be taken
down aright; some speak in the Dark; do not let us do so; let all be clear and
known. What is the Reason the Governor holds Councils so close in his Hands,
and by Candle Light? The Five Nations used to make him sit out of Doors like a
Woman. -- If the Five Nations still make him a Woman, they must; but what is
the Reason the Governor makes him a Woman, meaning, Why does he confer with
Indians without sending for him, to be present and hear what was said?

The Governor answered, That he holds Councils on a Hill; has no Secrets; never
sits in Swamps, but speaks his Mind openly to the World; what happens here he
has a Right to hear: The Women were sent for to make a Belt, not to Council.
The Six Nations may be wrong, they are not under his Direction; and therefore
(...) is not answerable for their Conduct, if they have not treated the
Delawares as Men.

The Chief thanked the Governor, seemed well pleased, and said, Tomorrow he
would speak more, and what he had to say was from the Six Nations: -- He that
will not make Peace must die.

A String.

It was agreed in the Morning the Governor should deliver the new Belt, then in
making, to Teedyuscung, with a proper Speech; that by two Belts tied together,
Newcastle and Teedyuscung should be made joint Agents for this Government, and
they be desired to consult together, to love one another, and to act for the
best; that the new black Wampum, and all the Belts and Strings, should be given
to Teedyuscung, and a private Present made to him and his Interpreter, Ben.

At a COUNCIL held at Easton, on Saturday, the 31st of July, 1756
PRESENT, The Honorable the GOVERNOR. The same Members as before. CONRAD
WEISER, Esquire TEEDYUSCUNG, NEWCASTLE.


The Names of the Indians Present at the Treaty were taken down by Mr. Edmonds,
and ordered to be entered.

Mr. Weiser having enquired of Newcastle what Messages had been received by the
Delawares, at Diahogo, from the Six Nations, received the following
Information, which he took down in Words that are the literal Interpretation of
what Newcastle said, viz. "The large Belt, given by Teedyuscung, was sent to
the Delawares by the Council of the Six United Nations, with a Message to the
following Purport.

Cousins, the Delaware Indians,

YOU will remember that you are our Women; our Forefathers made you so, and
put a Petticoat on you, and charged you to be true to us, and lie with no other
Man but of late you have suffered the String that tied your Petticoat to be cut
loose by the French, and you lay with them, and so became a common Bawd, in
which you acted very wrong and deserve Chastisement; but notwithstanding this,
we have still an Esteem for you, and a^ you have thrown off the Cover of your
Modesty, and become stark naked, which is (...) Shame for a Woman, you must be
made a Man; and we now give you a little Power, but it will be some Time till
you shall be a complete Man; we advise you not to act as a Man yet, but be
first instructed by us, and do as we bid you, and you will become a noted Man^

Cousins,

The English and French fight for our Lands; let us be strong, and lay our
Hands to it^ and defend it; in the mean time turn your Eyes and Ears to us, and
the English, our Bre^ thren, and you will live as well as we do.

Then the Governor sent to Newcastle and Teedyuscung the new Belt; not being
finished, h^ explained the proposed Figure to them, and desired the Women might
finish it on rainy Days^ or resting on their Journey, which was promised.

Then the Governor spoke as follows:

Brother Newcastle, and Teedyuscung,

I set an high Value upon this Belt; it is the Peace Belt which Teedyuscung
delivered in Council; I very cheerfully lay hold of it; I will lay it up with
the Council Belts, and declare to you, I am most heartily disposed to effect
the Meaning of this Belt, a speedy and honorable Peace, and a Return of the
Offices of Love and Friendship between the Indians and their Brethren the
English. -- In Return, I give you the Belt now making, which you will conside^
as finished; and when done, show it every where, and make our Dispositions and
the Treatment you have met with known to your own People, the Six Nations, and
all your Allies. -- [ Here the Governor gave the new Belt, so far as it was
made, and all the Wampum prepared for^ it, desiring, if it was not enough to
complete it, that they would add more.] Then taking up the two Belts, joined
together, in his Hands, and addressing Newcastle and Teedyuscung, h^ delared
them Agents for the Province, and gave them Authority to do the public
Busines^ together. He recommended to them a mutual Confidence, Esteem and
Intimacy, and wished them Success in their Negotiations.

To which they answered, That they would be mutual good Friends, and lay their
Head^ together, and do every Thing in their Power to promote the weighty
Matters entrusted to^ them.

Teedyuscung added, If his Memory should not serve him in every Thing committed
to hi^ Charge, or Things should be crooked, he would return to us, and make
them straight. What he says comes from his Heart, and not from his Lips; his
Heart and ours should be one, and be true to one another; for if different
Liquors are put in a Calk, and thaked, they will mix^ and come out one.

The Governor said, that he had written down what Teedyuscung said on the Belt
delivered by him, and will keep it in his Heart. It is very agreeable to him
and the People of Pennsylvania. He will lay up the Belt in the Council Chamger
as a Mark of his Friendship. As he is appointed Agent for Pennsylvania, with
Captain Newcastle, he puts into his Hands all the Belts and Wampum he has here,
to be made use of by him in the Course of his Negotiations, as he may judge
most proper, and most for the Interest of the People of this Province.

Teedyuscung answered, That he might meet with Difficulties in transacting the
important Business committed to his Charge; but as he is now one of the Council
of the Province of Pennsylvania, he assures his Brethren, that he will exert
himself faithfully, and to the utmost of his Abilities, in the Service; and if
he meets with crooked Paths, he will endeavor to make them straight.

The Governor thanked Teedyuscung and Newcastle for their undertaking to be
Agents for Pennsylvania on this Occasion, desired that they might unite and
cooperate one with another, and consult together on the proper Measures to be
entered into by them, and delivered them two Belts tied together, as a Sign or
Symbol of that Harmony and Unanimity that ought to subsist between them.

Teedyuscung said, That he was pleased with being joined with Newcastle in the
public Business; that he hoped Matters would be brought to a happy Issue; that
he wished there might be a firm Friendship and lasting Union between the Six
Nations, the other Five Nations, and the People of Pennsylvania, and that they
might be as one Man. He further said, that he had a large Family, and having a
great Way to go, he had no Means of carrying any more Provisions than would
serve him on the Road; he therefore desired that he might be furnished with a
Horse, that he might be enabled to carry Necessaries for his Family. --
Whereupon the Governor promised to let him have a Horse, and he promised to
return him again the next Time he came down.

The Governor then taking into his Hands all the Belts, Strings, and Bundles of
new black Wampum, gave them to Teedyuscung, and desired he would use them to
the best Advantage among the Nations he should apply to.

The private Presents were then given, and the Governor and Council took their
Leave, the Council returning to Philadelphia, and the Governor going to
New York, on an Express received from General Shirley.

A List of the Indians present at a TREATY held at Easton, on the 26th of July,
1756.
Captain Newcastle, one of the Counselors of the Six Nations, Teedyuscung,
alias Gideon, King of the Delawares, Tapascawen, Counselor, Amos,
Teedyuscung's three Sons, Kesmitas, Teedyuscung's three Sons, John Jacobs,
Teedyuscung's three Sons, Matchmetawchunk, his Son-in-Law, John Smalling, his
Grandson, Christian, William, Josiah, Baronet Rewman, an Onondago Indian,
We^mochwet, Mongeest, Hachchaon, Ben, that speaks English, John Pumpshire,
Joseph Michty, Thomas Storer, Joseph Peepy, Nicodemus, Zacharias, Christian,
Machawehelly, And sundry Women and Children.
I have carefully perused the foregoing Minutes, and do find them to give a
true Account of what passed between the Governor and the Indians, in my
Presence, at Easton. Philadelphia, September 11, 1756. CONRAD WEISER.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, held at Easton, on Monday, the 8th of
November, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,
Commissioners.
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, JOSEPH FOX, WILLIAM MASTERS, JOHN HUGHES,
TEEDYUSCUNG, the Delaware King, Speaker of the Six Nations, Delaware Indians,
Shawanese, Mohiccons, PUMPSHIRE, a Jersey Delaware Indian, Interpreter.
Officers of the Provincial Forces.
Colonel WEISER, Major PARSONS, Capt. WEATHERHOLT, Capt. VAN ETTEN, Capt.
REYNOLDS,
Lieutenant M'ALPIN, and Ensign JEFFRYS, Recruiting Officers, of the Royal
(...) A Number of Gentlemen and Freeholders, from the several Counties, and
from the (...) Philadelphia.


Conference at Easton.
ON Saturday Morning the Governor, whilst at Samuel Dean's, received
Intelligence from Mr. Horsfield, that a Party of Indians, who came with
Teedyuscung from Diahogo, staid'd behind at a little Distance from Fort Allen,
and had some bad Designs in doing so; whereupon the Moravian Brother who
brought the Intelligence, was immediately dispatched to Easton, and the next
Morning the Governor received a Letter from Colonel Weiser, informing him, that
the Matter communicated to him by Mr. Horsfield, had been examined into along
with Teedyuscung and was without Foundation; on which the Governor proceeded on
his Journey, and came to Town in the Afternoon, and as soon as he alighted, the
Delaware King, and two of the Six Nation Indians, came to wait on him, by whom
he was told, that Colonel Weiser, and two other of the Six Nations, were gone
to meet him, but had taken a different Road.

Mr. Weiser, and the two Indians came afterward, and expressed their Concern
at missing the Governor.

This Morning the Governor sent Mr. Weiser with his Compliments to the Indian
Chief, and desired to know whether he intended to speak first, and when; and
the King saying it was his Duty to speak first, withed it might be this
Forenoon; on which the Governor appointed Eleven a Clock; at which Time the
Governor marched from his Lodging to the Place of Conference, guarded by a
Party of the Royal Americans in the Front, and on the Flanks, and a Detachment
of Colonel Weiser's Provincials, in Sub-divisions, in the Rear, with Colors
flying, Drums beating, and Music playing; which Order was always observed in
going to the Place of Conference.

Teedyuscung opened the Conferences with the following Speech.

Brother the Governor,

May it please your Excellency to hear a few Words; I will put the Governor and
Gentlemen in mind, that Conferences were held here in the Summer, and what
passed there is well known.

I have taken all the Pains possible to execute what I then undertook, and have
brought with me several of different Tribes, as well Delawares as Six Nation
Indians.

I held up the Encouragements I received from the English, and spread them far
and near to all the Tribes I promised to go to, as well among the Delawares as
Six Nations; and I assure you, I have been true and faithful to my Promises,
and used all the Diligence in my Power; in Testimony whereof I give these

Four Strings.

In Confirmation that I have faithfully published what was committed to my
Care, several Indians of different Places, as well Six Nation Indians as
Delawares, are come along with me, and being now present, will put their Hands
and Seals to the Truth of what I say; they have acted upon what I delivered in
Behalf of this Government, and their Minds are intent on the good Work that is
going on; some of them were here before.

In Conformity to an ancient and good Custom established among our Ancestors, I
now proceed to open your Eyes and Ears, and remove all Obstructions out of your
Throats, that nothing may impede the Attention necessary to be used in a Matter
of such Importance as is now going on.

Some bad Reports have lately been spread, which deserve to be no more minded
than the Whistling of Birds; these I would remove by this Belt, and take away
all bad Impressions that may have been made by them.

Gave a Belt of eight Rows.

Brother,

I have done for the present, and another Time, if God spares Life, I will
begin the main Matter I came to do.

The Governor replied.

Brother,

I return you Thanks for your kind Speech, and likewise for the Regard you
showed me in sending two of the Six Nation Indians along with Mr. Weiser to
meet me. I unfortunately took a different Road, and so we missed of one
another; but it gave me great Satisfaction to hear by Mr. Weiser, that he and
those Indians were desirous to meet me, and conduct me to Town.

Brother,

Many idle Reports are spread by foolish and busy People; I agree with you,
that on both Sides they ought to be no more regarded than the Chirping of Birds
in the Woods.

A String.

Brother,

By this Belt I open your Eyes and Ears, and particularly the Passage from your
Heart to your Mouth, that in what you have to say to this Government they may
both concur, nor the Mouth utter any Thing but what is first conceived in the
Heart: And I promise you Openness and Sincerity in every Thing I shall speak.

A Belt.

The Governor said, he would be ready to hear what Teedyuscung had further to
say at Eleven o'Clock Tomorrow Morning.

At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, on Tuesday, the 9th Day of November, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,
The Commissioners, Gentlemen, Mr. WEISER, Officers. Indians as before.


The Governor ordered the Interpreter to acquaint Teedyuscung that he was ready
to bear him, and be delivered himself as follows.

Brother,

THIS is to notify to you, that at the Treaty held here in the Summer, I
promised to publish what was then delivered to me to all the Nations I could
have any Influence on; and that I have performed all I promised, and done my
Duty faithfully, with Respect to all these Nations, I can evidence by some of
them who are come with me, and are now here, a^ your Pleasure, ready to hear
what you have to say to us, and disposed to do every Thing in^ their Power, in
Confirmation of what has been, or will be, transacted.

A String.

Brethren,

This Belt signifies that I took Notice of, and paid a due Regard to, every
Thing sent by the Messengers you sent to me at Diahogo, whom I received kindly.
You may in particular^ remember, that you took hold of my Hand, and thereupon I
came to this Place, where the^ Council-Fire was appointed to be kindled: When I
came here, I found every Thing said by your Messengers true; which, on my
Return, I made known, as well as every Thing else that was then delivered to
me, to ten different Nations, Delawares and Six Nations; and as many of them as
I have prevailed upon to come with me, can evidence the Truth of this.

We are all put in mind of the ancient Leagues and Covenants made by our
Forefathers, and of the former Union and mutual kind Actions of our and their
Ancestors; what was proposed here renewed the Remembrance of these former happy
Times.

Though we are but Children in Comparison of them, and of little Ability, as
you well know, yet we have picked up a few Chips, and will add them to the
Fire, and hope it will grow a great Fire, and blaze high, and be seen by all
the different Indian Nations, Spectators of what we are now doing.

A Belt of ten Rows.

Brethren,

I remember what has passed in Discourse and Conversation among our old ancient
People, especially about Governor Penn; what he s^d to the Indians is fresh in
our Minds and Memory, and I believe it is in yours. The Indians and Governor
Penn agreed well together; this we all remember, and it was not a small Matter
that would then have separated us: And now, as you fill the same Station he did
in this Province, it is in your Power to act the same Part.

I am now before you just what you see me; I represent myself only to be a Boy;
I am really no more. Now as Misfortunes have happened by the bad Spirit, by our
Enemy, and by some of our foolish young People, I declare unto you the Truth,
that I have ever been sorry to see it thus, and, as far as I know myself, if it
costs me my Life, I would make it otherwise. -- As I have already proceeded a
great Way, and prevailed on those who have stepped out of the Way, and on many of
whom I had little or no Expectation, to enter into peaceable Measures, I now
call upon you to use your Ability, which is much greater than ours, to assist
this good Work, to encourage it, and to confirm it to good Advantage.

A Belt of seven Rows.

Taking the Belt up again, he added, What you have said I have truly imparted
to all, and what you shall now say I shall likewise hold up; I shall not put it
into my Bosom, but declare it, and distribute it to all, that it may have a
good Effect.

At a COUNCIL held at Easton, on Wednesday, the 10th Day of November, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,



CONRAD WEISER, from Teedyuscung, acquainted the Governor, That last Night an
Indian, named Zacc^eus, brought an Account from Fort Allen, that about Forty
Indian Warriors were come to Nishamekatchton, a Creek about three Miles beyond
that Fort, from Diabogo, where they were informed by some Indians, who first
set out with Teedyuscung to accompany him to the Treaty at Easton, that he and
all his Company were cut off, and they were come to revenge his Death, in case
they should have found it true; but hearing Teedyuseung was safe, and kindly
received by the English, they were glad, and would remain there. Teedyuscung
being asked by Mr. Weiser, if it would not be proper to send an Invitation to
them to come to the Treaty, he said it would, and desired the Governor might
join with him in it; which being approved by the Governor, Moses Tattamy, and
Lieutenant Holler, were dispatched with the Message.

The Minutes of Yesterday's Conference were read, and the Answer considered and
agreed to, but referred till the Return of the Messengers from the Indians
beyond F^rt Allen.

Conrad Weiser was ordered to inform the Indians by Moses Tattamy, that Parties
of the Enemy Indians had lately committed Murders on the Borders of this
County, even since Teedyuseung's coming amongst us, but were retreated, and
that the Inhabitants were determined to pursue the Murderers, and to desire the
Indians not to straggle, but keep together, left they should be mistaken for
Enemy Indians.

At a Meeting of the Governor (...) Commissioners, it was mentioned, that the
Indians had surmized as if Injustice had been done them in Land Affairs, the
Governor therefore added to his Answer a Paragraph, putting the Question in
plain Terms.

At a COUNCIL held at Easton, on Friday, the 12th of November, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM ^ENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,



THE Messenger, Moses Tattamy, returned this Morning from the Indians, and
reported, That in his Jo^ney, near Hayes's, about Halfway to Fort-Allen, he
met two Indians and a Soldier coming down to see their Friends, and know what
they were doing, and how received; but as he told the Indians he was going up
with a Message from the Governor and Teedyuseung, they were satisfied, and
returned to hear it: That he came to the Indians at Nine o'Clock Yesterday
Forenoon, and delivered his Message; after which they were in Council till
Three in the Afternoon, and then gave him an Answer to the following Effect. --
"That they thanked the Governor for the kind Notice he had taken of them, and
for his Invitation to come to the Treaty, but as it was agreed between
Teedyuscung and them that they should come no farther than the Place where they
were, and that the Goods, in case of Success, were to be brought and divided at
Fort-Allen, they intended to stay whilst the Treaty continued; they were glad
to hear the Indians were treated as Friends, and that a Peace was likely to be
made, and if it should be so, they should all heartily rejoice, and would agree
to, and confirm, every Thing Teedyuscung should do." -- Tattamy told the
Governor, that he had likewise informed them of the Murders lately committed,
desiring them to be cautions of straggling, or going at a great Distance; for
which Notice they were thankful, and promised to keep their Indians together;
and if they saw any Tracts of Indians going toward this province, to give
immediate Notice of it to the Governor.

The Messenger being asked if those Indians had empowered Teedyuscung to
transact Business for them at the Treaty, he answered, that they said, in
express Terms, they had given him their Authority, and if any Good should be
done (meaning if a firm Peace should be concluded) not only they, but all the
Indians at Diabogo, and many more different Tribes, or Towns, would be
exceedingly pleased with it, and would confirm it.

The Draught of the Governor's Answer to the Indians as settled at the last
Council, w^ read, and some Alterations made; then the Indians had Notice that
the Governor would speak to them this Afternoon.

1756. At a CONFERENCE with the Indians, on Friday, the 12th of November, 1756,
P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,
The same Commissioners, Gentlemen, Officers, Indians, as before.


The Governor spoke as follows.

Brother,

I AM going to give you an Answer to what was said by you at our last Meeting,
and would have done it sooner, if I had not expected to have seen more of our
Indian Brethren here; I shall use the utmost Sincerity on my Part, and desire
you will hearken attentively.

A String.

Brother,

I observe what you have said, in regard to your faithful Performance of all
the Matters given you in Charge by this Government when you were last here, and
do heartily thank you for the diligent Care you have taken to make known to all
the Indian Nations our good Dispositions for Peace, and for inviting them to
come to this Council-Fire, and for the further Assurances you make in Behalf of
those present, and of many more who are absent, even some of whom you had
little Expectations of, that all will be done in their and your Dower to bring
the same to a happy Issue.

A Belt.

Brother,

You have done well to consider the ancient Leagues subsisiting between you and
this Government from its very first Beginning. I am pleased to hear you express
yourself so affectionately in Favor of the first Proprietor; he very well
deserves it at the Hands of all the Indians; he was always just and kind to
them, and he gave it in Charge to his Governors, and to his Children the
present Proprietaries, to treat them, as he did, with the utmost Affection, and
to do them all Manner of good Offices, which has always been done by them, as
far as is come to my Knowledge.

As to myself, after the present Proprietaries had appointed me to this
Government, they recommended the Care of the Indians to me in a very particular
Manner; and I assure you, I shall be ready on all Occasions to do the Indians
every Service in my Power, and most heartily assist in bringing about a lasting
and durable Peace. -- I throw a large Log into the Council-Fire, that it may
blaze up to the Heavens, and spread the Blessings of Peace far and wide; this
Belt confirms my Words.

A Belt.

Brother Teedyuscung,

What I am now going to say to you should have been mentioned some Time ago: I
now desire your strict Attention to it.

You was pleased to tell me the other Day, that the League of Friendship made
by your Forefathers was as yet fresh in your Memory; you said that it was made
so strong that a small Thing would not easily break it. As we are now met
together, at a Council-Fire, kindled by us both, and have promised on both
Sides to be free and open to one another, I must ask you, how that League of
Friendship came to be broken? Have we, the Governor or People of Pennsylvania,
done you any Kind of Injury? If you think we have, you should (...), and tell
us your Hearts: You should have made Complaints before you struck us, (...) so
it was agreed, in our ancient League: However, now the great Spirit has thus
happily brought us once more together, speak your Mind plainly on this Head,
and tell us if you have any just Cause of Complaint, what it is; that I may
obtain a full Answer to this Point, I give this Belt.

A Belt.

Teedyuscung thanked the Governor, and desired Time to consider till Tomorrow,
and he would give an Answer at such Time as the Governor would be pleased to
appoint.

The Governor desired he would take full Time to consider it, as it was a
Matter of Consequence, and let him know when he was ready; and desired at the
same Time he would offer what he had further to say on any other Matter.

At a CONFERENCE held on Saturday, November, 13, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,
The same Commissioners, Officers, Gentlemen, Indians, as before.


Teedyuseung spoke as follows, laying before him the several Strings and Belts
given him Yesterday by the Governor.

Brother,

I REMEMBER Yesterday by these Strings that you would have had a Conference
sooner, had you not expected that the Indians who were invited would have come
to this Council. -- I thank you for the kind Things you have spoke, and for
reminding me of what passed in former Times; I will endeavor to tell you the
Truth from the Bottom of my Heart, and hope you will have Patience to hear me;
all I shall deliver shall be according to the Authority I have received, as
those who are now with me will witness.

Gave three Strings of black and white Wampum.

Brother,

The Times are not now as they were in the Days of our Grandfathers; then it
was Peace, but now War and Distress; I am sorry for what has happened, and I
now take and wipe the Tears from your Eyes, as there is great Reason for
Mourning. This I not only do on my own Part, but on the Part of the Six
Nations, who will put their Seal to it. -- I take away the Blood from your
Bodies, with which they are sprinkled: I clear the Ground, and the Leaves, that
you may fit down with Quietness: I clear your Eyes, that when you see the
Daylight you may enjoy it. -- I declare this not only for the Indians I
represent, but for the Six Nations, who, with them, make up Ten in all, which
have with us put their Hands to these Words.

Gave a Belt of nine Rows.

Brother,

Now I have done wiping your Eyes and Bodies, and cleaning the Ground where you
fit; I will also heal your Wounds, not only at the Top, but at the Bottom; I
will apply to them the good Plaster which the Great Creator has made for these
Purposes. I say I will heal the Wound, so as it may never break out more, but
be completely cured; in this the Six Nations also join with me.

Gave a Belt of eight of Rows.

Brother,

Now as I have healed the Wound, our Case is like that of two Brothers; when
one has been sick, and has recovered his Health, it is usual for the other to
be glad; just so it is with me now: Your Wound is cured; -- I am glad to see
you Face to Face, as it has pleased the good Spirit to bring us together. I
also remember every thing you have said; and as to what I have said, or still
have to say, the other Nations will confirm.

Gave a Belt of eleven Rows.

Brother,

I am now going to tell you something in a few Words, in Answer to your Request
last Night, that I should give you a true Account how I came to strike you.

In the Beginning of the Confusion and War that happened the Fall before this,
I lived in the Middle of the Road leading from the Six Nations to Philadelphia,
where I was ordered, by my Uncles to sit down; and there I sat in profound
Peace, under no Apprehension of Danger; and when I looked toward Philadelphia,
I saw my Brother the Governor, and nothing but Peace and Friendship; and when I
looked the other Way toward my Uncles the Six Nations, every thing was also
Peace there; so it was with me until all at once a Man, whose Name is called
Charles Broadhead, an Inhabitant of this Province, came to me at Wioming, and
told me, as if he had such a Message from the Governor, that I had struck my
Brethren the English, which I denied over and over; and when I could not
prevail with him to believe me, I took two Handfuls of Wampum, and desired him
to go down with them to the Governor, and assure him that it was not I who
struck the English. I also desired the Governor to let me know what further
Measures I should take, to satisfy him and my Brethren the English of the Truth
of this. -- I also desired, by the same Messenger, that the Governor would take
all the prudent Methods he could to relate this to Colonel Johnson and to my
Uncles the Six Nations, as I was under a good deal of Concern that this Charge
was laid against me. -- There were two Kings present besides me, who joined
with me in the Message; and I likewise desired the Governor to send me Word
what to do, for which I waited till I was out of Patience, and obliged to flee,
and leave my Inheritance on that Account.

Gave a String.

Brother,

According to your other Question or Request last Night, to know of me why I
struck you without first giving you a Reason for it; I will tell you the Truth
why I have unfortunately struck you. I say, Brother, I will tell you the very
Truth, in Answer to your Question. I never knew any of our ancient Kings ever
to have this in their Minds, I now tell you that it came from a great King, at
least I think so: The King of England, and of France, have settled or wrought
this Land, so as to coop us up as if in a Pen. Our foolish and ignorant young
Men, when they saw the Proceeding of this Enemy, and the Things that were told
them, believed them, and were persuaded by this false-hearted King to strike
our Brethren the English. -- According to your Desire I will now tell you the
Truth with an honest Heart, as far as is in my Power: After this unfortunate
Management once prevailed, it is easy for all you English, if you look into
your Hearts, to find the Cause why this Blow came harden upon you than it would
have otherwise done -- but this is not the principal Cause; some Things, that
have passed in former Times, both in this and other Governments were not well
pleasing to the Indians; indeed they thought them wrong; but as I said before,
they were not the principal Cause. Being asked in what other Governments, he
answered, in the Province of New Jersey. Now, Brother, I have told you the
Truth, as you desired me, and also the Uneasiness of my Mind, because I verily
believe it was our Duty to go to the very Bottom, be it as bad as it will, and
that it is necessary we should both open our whole Minds to one another, that
we may agree to heal the Wound.

Gave a Belt of twelve Rows.

Brother,

When I was here at the last Treaty, I did according to what I promised. I took
the Belt I received from this Government, and held it up to all the Nations I
undertook to go to, and I took them all by the Hand (meaning, I invited them
all to come to the Council-Fire.) One of the Delaware Nations, meaning the
Minisink Indians, now about Fort Ailon, gave me this Belt, saying, he was glad
to hear what I said, and laid hold of the same Hand, meaning he accepted the
Invitation; but said he would only go Part of the Way, no further than to a
certain Place, and there he would stay, but that I might proceed, for he would
agree to whatever I did, being led by the same Hand, and giving me Authority to
act for him, at this Council.

Then delivered the Belt, of ten Rows, given him by those Indians, who be said
were Minisinks

Brother,

By this String I also let you know, that I would not have you think I have
finished every Thing at this Meeting, though what I have now done is of great
Moment; if we are spared till another Day, that is, until next Spring, I will
let you know something further in anoth^^ Meeting, for you must be sensible we
cannot at one Time finish a Thing of so great M^ment. In the mean time, I will
use my faithful Endeavors to accomplish every Thing to the Good of both of us.

Gave a String.

Then, pausing a while, he said he had forgot something, and taking up the
String again, he proceeded.

I will let you know fully and freely my Mind, and what is my Determination to
do. -- When I return into my Country, I will look about me, I will see and hear
for you. -- If I hear of any Enemy, going toward you, I will send a suitable
Messenger to give you Notice though it thould be at Midnight. I will also take
every prudent Measure to prevent any Danger that may befall you; perhaps, if the
Enemy be but few, I ^ay not come to know of it but if the Number be great, I
shall be the liklier to know it: However, be they more o^ less, I will let you
know it.

Then laid down the String again.

Then the Governor desired of Teedyuscung, as he had mentioned Grievances
received by the Indians from this and other Governments, to let him know what
they were, and to speak his Mind freely and fully without any reserve; upon
which Teedyuscung spoke as follows.

Brother,

You have not so much Knowledge of Things done in this Country as others who
have lived longer in it, being but lately come among us. -- I have not far to
go for an Instance: This very Ground that is under me (striking it with his
Foot) was my Land and Inheritance, and is taken from me by Fraud; when I say
this Ground, I mean all the Land lying between Tohiccon Creek and Wioming, on
the River Sasquehannah. I have not only been served so in this Government, but
the same Thing has been done to me as to several Tracts in New Jersey, over the
River. When I have sold Lands fairly, I look upon them to be really sold. -- A
Bargain is a Bargain. -- Though I have sometimes had nothing for the Lands I
have sold but broken Pipes, or such Trifles, yet when I have sold them, though
for such Trifles, I look upon the Bargain to be good: Yet I think I should not
be ill used on this Account by those very People who have had such an Advantage
in their Purchases, nor be called a Fool for it. Indians are not such Fools as
to bear this in their Minds. -- The Proprietaries, who have purchased their
Lands from us cheap, have sold them too dear to poor People, and the Indians
have suffered for it. It would have been more prudent in the Proprietaries, to
have sold the Lands cheaper, and have given it in Charge to those who bought
from them, to use the Indians with Kindness on that Account.

Now, Brother, hear me; supposing you had a Pipe in your Mouth, smoking, of
little Value; I come and take it from you; by and by, when you see me again,
you remember it, and take a Revenge: I had forgot, and wonder at the Cause, and
ask you, Brother, Why you have done so? This makes me remember the Injury I did
you, and more careful for the future. Now, although you have purchased our
Lands from our Forefathers on so reasonable Terms, yet now at length you will
not allow us to cut a little Wood to make a Fire; nay, hinder us from Hunting,
the only Means left us of getting our Livelihood.

Now, Brother, I am pleased you asked me this Question, having thereby given me
an Opportunity of speaking my Mind freely as to any Uneasiness I was under. --
You are wise enough to see these Things, and to provide a Remedy for them.

Then Teedyuscung produced a Receipt, from William Parsons, for a Bundle of
Deer-skins he had sent from Fort Allen as a Present to Governor Morris, and
desired Mr. Peter's to let him know if he had received them for the Governor;
which he said he had.

He then asked Mr. Peter's what was done with the Memorandum he gave to Governor
Morris when he was in Philadelphia in April, 1755, containing a Claim to a
small Pine Tract in New Jersey; to which Mr. Peter's said, that Governor Morris
had promised to enquire into the Matter, and the Memorandum would be returned
to him at any Time, with Governor Morris's Report on it.

The Governor then asked him, what he meant by Fraud; having said his Lands
were taken from him by Fraud, what it meant?

To which Teedyuscung replied. -- When one Man had formerly Liberty to purchase
Lands, and he took the Deed from the Indians for it, and then dies; after his
Death the Children forge a Deed like the true One, with the same Indian Names
to it, and thereby take Lands from the Indians which they never sold -- this is
Fraud. Also, when one King has Land beyond the River, and another King has Land
on this Side, both bounded by Rivers, Mountains and Springs, which cannot be
moved, and the Proprietaries, greedy to purchase Lands, buy of one King what
belongs to the other -- this likewise is Fraud.

The Governor then asked Teedyuscung, Whether he had ever been used in that
Manner?

He answered, Yes; -- I have been served so in this Province: All the Land
extending from Tohiccon, over the Great-Mountain, to Wioming, has been taken
from me by Fraud; for when I had agreed to sell the Land to the old
Proprietary, by the Course of the River, the young Proprietaries came and got
it run by a straight Course by the Compass, and by that Means took in double
the Quantity intended to be sold.

Brother,

As you have desired me to be very particular, I have told you the Truth, and
have opened my Mind fully. I did not intend to speak thus, but I have done it
at this Time, at your Request; not that I desire you should now purchase these
Lands, but that you should look in^^ your own Hearts, and consider what is
right, and that do.

The Governor thanked him for the Freedom and Openness he had used with him,
an^ told him, when he was ready to speak to him, he would let him know it.

At a COUNCIL held at Easton, November 14, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,



MR. WEISER, by the Governor's Order, attended the Council. The Minutes o^
Yesterday's Conference were read over, and then each Paragraph by itself. Mr.
Weiser said, he apprehended Teedyuscung's Relation, of what passed between him
and Char^^ Broadhead, in a Light something different from what was set down in
the Minutes, viz.. Th^^ Charles Broadhead had, in the Name of the Governor,
charged on Teedyuscung the Murde^ committed on the Inhabitants of this
Province, and demanded Satisfaction for them; tha^ the King denied the Charge,
and sent a Message by him, with a Bundle of Wampum, to the Governor of
Pennsylvania, to assure him of his not having committed Hostilities. And
further, desired he might receive Orders from the Governor what to do,
^^^mising to execut^ them faithfully; and if it should be judged necessary, he
would even go to Colonel Johnson and the Six Nation Country, with any Message
the Governor would please to send there b^ him, but desired it might be sent in
a certain Number of Days, after which, if it did no^ come, he would take it for
granted the Governor believed the Stories told of him.

The Governor enquired of Mr. Weiser into the Foundation of the Complaint made
by the Indians, as to the Frauds said to be committed in Purchases of Land made
of them by the Proprietaries; and he told the Governor, That few or none of the
Delawares present, as h^ could recollect, originally owned any of these Lands,
or any Land in this Province; that (...) any Injury was done, it was done to
others, who were either dead or gone, some to the Ohi^ and some to other
Places. -- That as to the Lands particularly instanced by Teedyuscung, h^ heard
that they were sold to, and the Consideration Money paid by, the first
Proprietary, William Penn. -- That when Mr. John Penn and Mr. Thomas Penn were
here, a Meeting wa^ then had with the principal Indians living on these Lands,
and the former Agreement renewed, and the Limits again settled between the
Proprietaries and those Chiefs of the Delawares and accordingly a Line was soon
after run by Indians and Surveyors. That the Delaware^ complaining afterward,
their Complaint was heard in a great Council of the Six Nations held at
Philadelphia, in the Year 1743, in which several Deeds, executed by the
Delaware to the Proprietaries, were read, and interpreted, and the Signers
Names and Marks examined and, after a long Hearing, the Six Nations declared
the Complaints of their Cousins, the Delawares, to be unreasonable, and were
very angry with them for complaining without Cause.

Mr. Peter's, being asked by the Governor, said, he had likewise heard Things to
the sam^ Effect, and was present at the Council when the Delawares Complaints
were heard and settled by the Six Nations; that it was a very large Council,
consisting of the principal Chiefs o^ the Delawares. -- And added, he believed
when the Matter should come to be well examine^ into, the Proprietaries would
not be found to have done Injustice to the Delawares, or to hol^ any of their
Lands, for which those Indians had not given Deeds truly interpreted to them
and received a Consideration.

But as neither Mr. Weiser, nor he, was concerned in this Transaction, and the
Papers t^ prove it were at Philadelphia, this Matter might, on the Governor's
Return, be thorougly enquired into, and if it should appear that Injustice had
been done the Delawares in this, o^ any other of their Sales, they ought to
receive Satisfaction. -- After which the Governor proposed to let the Indians
know, that as to the particular Grievances they had mentioned, the^ should be
thorougly examined into, well considered, and, if justly founded, amply
redresse^ as quickly as the Nature of the Business would admit.

But upon conferring with the Commissioners, he was told by them, that such
Promises had been frequently made the Indians by Governors of other Provinces,
and not performed, and these People might consider them as now made with a
Design to evade giving them Redress.

The Commissioners said further, as more Goods were brought than were proper at
this Time to be given to the small Number of Indians come down, it would be
better, whether the Claim was just or unjust, to offer them immediate
Satisfaction, which they, on the Part of the Public, with the Governor's
Approbation, were willing to do, judging this would effectually remove all
their Uneasiness. The Governor concurring with them in Sentiments, an Answer to
their Complaints was framed accordingly.

At a CONFERENCE held on Monday, November 15, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,
The Commissioners, Gentlemen, Officers, Indians, as before.


The Governor spoke as follows.

Brother,

YOU expressed your Concern for what had happened, wiped the Tears from our
Eyes, and the Blood from our Bodies, and having made clean the Council Seat, I
heartily thank you for it. I do likewise wipe the Tears from your Eyes; I wash
away the Blood from your Bodies, and from the Council Seat, that there may not
remain the lest Defilement,

A Belt.

Brother,

I make you my Acknowledgments for your having searched our Wounds to the
Bottom, and the good Remedies you have applied for their Cure, and I pray the
Great Creator may bless our mutual Endeavors, that they may be so effectually
healed as not to leave behind them the least Scar, or ever break out again,
whilst the Rivers run, or the Sun and Moon give Light to the Earth.

A Belt.

Brother,

As to what you say of the Message delivered to you at Wioming, by Charles
Broadhead, the Governor did send him, and I could have wished you had sent some
of your own People to me on so weighty an Occasion; and for the future, I must
caution you not to hearken to any Messages as from this Government, unless the
Persons charged with them are known to be public Officers, usually employed
for such Purposes, and the Papers they produce are sealed with the Seal of the
Government.

A String.

Brother,

I thank you for the Openness with which you have expressed yourselves as to
the Causes why you struck us. The French practice every Artifice they are
Masters of to deceive the Indians, and I am sorry your young Men should have
been so foolish as to have hearkened to them. I hope they have sufficiently
seen their Errors, and will not hereafter suffer themselves to be so deluded by
that deceitful People.

A String.

The Governor taking the Belt given by the Minisink Indians, repeated what
Teedyuscung said on it, and then answered it.

Brother,

As I conceive this Belt to be your Authority for acting at this Council-Fire,
in Behalf of the Minisink Indians, who only came Part of the Way, I will keep
it, and put it into the Council Bag, being glad to hear they have put their
Hand to the Belt I sent, though I should have been better pleased to have seen
them here.

56. Brother,

You give me Hopes of another Visit. Assure yourself it will always give me
Pleasure to receive you, and any other of our Indian Friends with you. Your
kind Offer of giving me timely Notice of the Approach of an Enemy, is an
incontestable Proof of the Warmth of your Heart for me; and as you have so
freely offered it, I shall ever have an entire Dependence upon you; and
whatever Persons are sent with Intelligence of this Sort, shall be handsomely
rewarded. I expect and desire you will give the same Intelligence to any other
Governor whose Country you apprehend to be in Danger, as all the English are of
the same Flesh and Blood, and Subjects of the same King.

Gave a large String.

Brother,

I am very glad you have been as good as your Word in coming down to the
Council-Fire which was kindled on this particular Occasion. I believe you have
used your best Endeavors, with great faithfulness, to effect every Thing you
undertook. I heartily agree to the Peace as you have proposed it, provided all
the English Colonies be included in it. But we cannot agree to make Peace for
this Government alone, and leave you at Liberty to continue the War with our
Brethren of the neighboring Colonies; for we, the English, are all Subjects of
one great King, and must, for the future, be all at Peace, or all at War, with
other Nations at the same Time.

A Belt.

Brother,

You may remember it was stipulated, in the Conferences held last Summer, that
all the Prisoners you had taken should be brought to this Council-Fire, and
there delivered up; and as you have only delivered up five Prisoners, and I am
sure many more have been taken, I desire to know why they have not been
brought; they are our own Flesh and Blood, and we cannot be easy whilst they
are kept in Captivity.

A String.

Brother,

You have opened your Heart, and shown us the Reasons you thought you had for
differin^ with us: You have done well in speaking so plainly on that Head; but
you should have made your Complaint to us before you lifted your Hand to
strike, and that might have prevented the Mischief. When the Great Creator made
Man, he gave him a Tongue to complain of Wrongs, two Ears to hear a Brother's
Complaints, and two Hands to do him Justice, by removing the Cause. -- All
these were made before the Hatchet, and should be first used. Had the Man, in
your Comparison, whose Pipe was taken from him, said, Brother, you took my Pipe
from me at such a Time, and I must have Satisfaction; his Brother might have
answered, I did not think you valued a Pipe so much, do not let us differ about
a small Matter, here, Brother, take two of mine. That this Method, agreeable to
our antien^ Treaties, may be remembered, and Complaints always made by you to
us, or by us to you, in a public Manner, and Justice demanded before we
strike, I give you this

String.

Brother,

I am but lately come among you; the Grievances you mention are of old Date. If
former Indian Kings have, as you say, sometimes sold more Land than they had a
Right to sell, in so doing they injured us, and we, as well as you, have Cause
to complain of them. -- But sometimes, though they sold no more than their own,
they sold it fairly, and it was honestly paid for by the English; yet when the
Indian Chi^en grow up, they may forget that their Fathers sold the Lands, and
divided the Goods; and some evil Spirit, or bad Man, that loves to make
Mischief, may tell them, the Land is still yours; your Fathers never sold it;
the Writings are false. Morever, many People, both English and Indians,
concerned in the former Purchases of Lands, are now dead; and as you do not
understand Writings and Records, it may be hard for me to satisfy you of the
Truth, though my Predecessors dealt even so uprightly; therefore, to show our
sincere Desire to heal the present Differences, and live in eternal Peace, with
you our Brethren, tell me what will satisfy you for the Injustice you suppose
has been done you in the Purchase of Lands in this Province; and if it be in my
Power, you shall have immediate Satisfaction, whether it be justly due to you
or not. The good People of this Province are ready and willing to open their
Hands, and help me, by contributing freely to this good Work. -- Or if you are
not empowered to receive such Satisfaction at this Time, or have not
Convenience to carry away the Goods that may be given you on that Account, then
I will lodge the Goods in such Hands as you shall appoint, till you bring to
our next Meeting your old Men of the several Nations, who may have a Right to a
Share in the Division of those Goods, where they shall be ready to be delivered
to them and you. This may be done at a Council-Fire, to be rekindled at
Philadelphia for you and us, or here, as you shall choose, when we expect, and
insist, that you bring down all the Captives that still remain in your Country.

And as you mention Grievances from the Neighboring Governments, I make no
Doubt, but on proper Application, you will have the utmost Justice done you;
and if I can be of any Service to you in making the Application, it will give
me great Pleasure; in Testimony whereof, I give you this

Belt.

Brother,

You told us last Summer, that formerly there were many Indian Chiefs who made
Treaties, some in one Place, and some in another, from whence Misunderstandings
had often arose. -- It was so formerly with the English Governments, each made
War or Peace with the Indians for itself: They were not united in these great
Affairs as Subjects of the same King ought to be, and so were much weaker. --
Our wise King has now ordered Things better, and put all Indian Affairs under
one general Direction. -- I shall send a full Account of all that has passed
between this Government and the Indians, on this present Occasion, to Sir
William Johnson, to whom His Majesty has been pleased to commit the general
Management of Indian Affairs, for his Approbation and Ratification; and as this
Gentleman, in Quality of being the King's general Agent in this Part of
America, has, in Conjunction with your Uncles the Six Nations, and all the
Allies, kindled a general Council-Fire at his House, on the Mohocks River, I
must insist upon it, that Teedyuscung, and a Deputation of your Chief Men,
shall go to this Council-Fire, and there communicate every Thing to obtain
Confirmation, and take Advice as to your future Conduct, that there may be a
perfect Union both of Council and Measures, as well on the Part of all the
Indians, as others his Majesty's Subjects, without which this great Work of
Peace will never be brought to its just Perfection.

A Belt.

Brother,

The good People of this Province, affected with the Distresses which their
Brethren the Indians must needs suffer in this severe Season, for want of
Clothes and other Necessaries, have furnished me with a Quantity of Goods, to
the Value of Four Hundred Pounds, to supply their Wants; a large Part of them
is given by the People called Quakers, who are the Descendants of those who
came over with William Penn, a^ a particular Testimony of their Regard and
Affection for the Indians, and their earnest ^^^ire to promote this good Work
of Peace.

GOODS given at the Expense of the Province.
3 Pieces of Blankets, 1 Piece of Matchcoat, 1 Piece of plain white Halfthicks.
1 Piece of napt Ditto, 1 Piece of purple Ditto, 1 Piece of Stroud, 1 Piece of
Calicoe, 1 Gross of Scarlet Garters, 3 Pieces of Ribbons, 3 Dozen of Tailors
Shears, 6 Dozen of Cutto^ Knives, 6 lb. of white and black Beads, 1 Gross of
Women's Thimbles, 1 Gross of Men's Ditto, 1000 Fish-hooks, 100 Large Ditto, 100
Large Fish-hooks, 6 Dozen of Tobacco Tongs, 6 Gross of Morris Bells, 5 lb. of
Vermillion, 18 Tin Kettles, 20 Shirts, 6 Hats, 6 Coats, 2 Gross of Awl-blades,
100 lb. of Powder, 200 lb. of Lead, 1 Piece of black Stroud, 2 Pieces of
Bandanoe Handkerchiefs. 1 Piece of blue Stroud, was also given among the five
Mohocks and two Shawanese, and one Shirt to each.
GOODS given at the Expense of the People called Quakers.
2 Pieces of striped Blankets, 5 Pieces of Matchcoat, 2 Pieces of Strouds, 1
Piece of purple Halfthicks, 2 Pieces of printed Calicoe, 1 Piece of striped
Calimancoe, 4 Pieces of flowered Silk Handkerchiefs, 2 Dozen of Worsted Caps,
40 Pairs of Yarn Mittens, 1 Gross of Thimbles, 5 Parcels, about 6 lb. of
Thread. 3000 Needles, 2 Pieces of Ribbon, 24 Small Brass Kettles, 8 Tin
Kettles, 20 White Shirts, 10 Green Frize Coats, 10 Hats, 2 Gross of Bed-lacing,
1 Gross of Gartering, 200 lb. of Tobacco, 3 Gross of Pipes, 48 Weeding-hoes,
for Indian-Corn, 6 lb. of small Beads, 6 lb. of Barley-corn Ditto, 3 Dozen of
small Looking-glasses, 12 Silver Medals of King GEORGE, 6000 Black and White
Wampum. A Horse, Bridle and Saddle.
At a CONFERENCE held on Easton, November 16, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,
The same Commissioners, Officers, Gentlemen, Indians as before.


The Governor acquainted Teedyuscung that be was ready to hear him.

Then Teedyuscung, taking a String of Wampum, spoke in these Words.

Brother,

I DESIRE you will hear me a few a Words with Patience. You may remember I
often desired you to endeavor to apprehend me aright, when I am speaking of
Matters of Importance.

Brother,

Hear me with Patience; I am going to use a Comparison, in order to represent
to you the better what we ought to do.

When you choose a Spot of Ground for Planting, you first prepare the Ground,
the^ you put the Seed into the Earth; but if you don't take Pains afterward,
you will not obtain Fruit. -- To Instance, in the Indian Corn, which is mine
(meaning a native Plant of thi^ Country) I, as is customary, put seven Grains
in one Hill, yet, without further Care, it will come to nothing, though the
Ground be good; though at the Beginning I take prudent Steps, ye^ if I neglect it
afterward, though it may grow up to Stalks and Leaves, and there may be the
Appearance of Ears, there will only be Leaves and Cobs. -- In like Manner, in
the present Business, though we have begun well, yet if we hereafter use not
prudent Means, w^ shall not have Success answerable to our Expectations. --
God, that is above, has furnishe^ us both with Powers and Abilities. -- As for
my own Part, I must confess, to my Shame, ^ have not made such Improvements of
the Power given me as I ought; but as I look on you^ to be more highly favored
from above than I am, I would desire you, that we would join ou^ Endeavors to
promote the good Work; and that the Cause of our Uneasiness, begun in the Times
of our Forefathers, may be removed; and if you look into your Hearts, and act
according to the Abilities given you, you will know the Grounds of our
Uneasiness i^ some Measure from what I said before, in the Comparison of the
Fire, that though I was but a Boy, yet I would according to my Abilities bring a
few Chips; so with Regard to the Corn, I can do but little, you may a great
deal; therefore let all of us, Men, Women and Children, assist in pulling up
the Weeds, that nothing may hinder the Corn from growing to Perfection. When
this is done, though we may not live to enjoy the Fruit ourselves, ye^ we should
remember, our Children may live and enjoy the Blessings of this good Fruit, and
it is our Duty to act for their Good.

A String.

Brother,

I desire you will attend to these few Words, and I will, with all Diligence,
endeavor t^ tell you the Truth; the great Log you mentioned, when kindled,
will make a great Flame but it will not kindle of itself, nor continue flaming,
unless there be Air and Leaves, as wel^ as Coals to make it kindle. I desire we
may use our utmost Endeavors to make it kindle^ though what I have told you
may relate to Matters disagreeable to you, yet if we exert ourselves, and act
according to the Abilities given from above, the Event will be agreeable, and
pleasing to ourselves, and of Service to our Children.

Brother,

Take Pains therefore, and though you are a Governor, do not put off these
Things from Time to Time, as our Forefathers did.

The Interpreter was desired to tell, in other Words, what was the Meaning of
what wa^ said in the two last Articles; and having requested Leave of
Teedyuscung, he said, he alluded to the Beginning of the War; the Quarrels
between the King of France, and the King o^ England, and their People on both
Sides, and that their young Men were deluded by the French; this was the first
and principal Cause, though other Things helped to make the Blo^ sall quicker and
heavier.

A. String.

Brother,

I will now in a few Words, according to my Abilities, give you an Answer. You
desired me to acquaint you what the Grounds of my Uneasiness were, and I
complied, though it was not the main Thing which I came about. But when you put
me in mind, I was pleased, for before I thought it not proper to mention it in
these difficult Times; it was not the Cause of the Stroke, though it was the
Foundation of our Uneasiness. Now, Brother, in Answer to your Question, What
will satisfy us? It is not usual, nor reasonable, nor can I tell you what the
Damage is, and adjust, as in a Balance, the true Value at that Time and these
Times; formerly it might be lighter, but being delayed, it is now the heavier;
the Interest is to be added. Besides, there are many more concerned in this
Matter, not now present; and though many who have suffered are now in the Grave,
yet their Descendants feel the Weight, and the more now for the Time they have
waited.

Also, Brother, I require you would throw down the Fence that confines some of
my Brethren and Relations in the Jerseys, that they may, if they see Cause,
come and see their Relations. I do not want to compel any of them to come, or
to stay against their Will. If they are inclined to stay and live among the
English, I am quite willing they should come back again; but I want they should
come and see me, that thereby I may convince their Relations, and the other
Nations afar off, that I am now treating with, that they are not Servants, but
a free People.

I do not request that all Men, Women and Children should come; but some, or as
many as may be sufficient to convince other Nations that they are not confined,
but have Liberty as well as we: In particular, one called Philip, he has a
Wife, and Relations among us; to my Grief I heard he was carried to Goal, and
there confined with some others, and put to Death; but I understand the Account
of his Death was false. I desire he may have Liberty to come and see his
Relations. I also request that you would apply to the Governor on the other
Side the River ( viz. of the Jerseys) and to use your utmost Endeavors with
him, that he would give them Leave to come, and that they may come under your
Protection, be they more or less, in the great Road to us opened by this
Province.

But though you should not do this, yet I will use my utmost Endeavors to
bring you down your Prisoners, there are only two in my Power. You may hear
otherwise, but I declare I have no more than two in my Power: There are more in
the Possession of others, and these, with your Assistance, I may be able to
bring down; and I will endeavor to gather and scoop in as many as I can, but I
shall want your Help to do it.

Brother,

I have to request you, that you would give Liberty to all Persons and Friends
to search into these Matters; as we are all Children of the Most High, we
should endeavor to assist and make use of one another, and not only so, but
from what I have heard, I believe there is a future State besides this Flesh;
now I endeavor to act on both these Principles, and will, according to what I
have promised, if the Great Spirit spare my Life, come next Spring, with as
great a Force of Indians as I can get, to your Satisfaction.

A String.

Brother,

By this String now delivered, and lying before you, I assure you I have spoken
on all Matters the best I could, according to my mean Capacity and Abilities. I
shall depend on my Interpreter, who I believe is an honest Man, but I think it
prudent, in order to prevent Misunderstandings, that I should be furnished with
a Copy of what is done, as well in the Conferences held here last Summer as at
this Time; for though I am not able to read, yet others may; it will be a great
Satisfaction to have it in my Power to show to others what has passed between
this Government and me: What is committed to Writing will not easily be lost,
and will be of great Use to all, and better regarded; and I would have the
Names and Seals of all that have been concerned in transacting this Business
put to it: I do not desire a Copy now, but that it may be ready for me when I
come again. -- The Interpreter, Pumpshire, informed the Governor, that what
Teedyuscung was going to say was not material, or of much Importance, as it
related to himself; adding, though he might be considered as a simple Man, yet
throughout all this Affair he had acted uprightly and honestly.

Brother,

I will speak in Favor of the Interpreter; he acted as such in Governor
Morris's Time as well as yours; and I am pleased with his Conduct on both
Occasions. -- If we should have any further Business to transact, I desire he
may be employed. -- You know he lives in another Province, and is on that
Account at some Expense; reward him well for his Services; and do it well for
my Sake; but I shall leave it to you.

Brother,

I have something, though of no great Consequence, yet to mention. I am in low
Circumstances, and have not Things suitable; I wish I had -- however, I have
fifteen Deer Skins, which, as I see you love to have your Hands covered, I
present you, to make Gloves of, or for any other Use you shall think proper.
Eighty fine large Ones were brought at first, but on our Journey from Diabogo
to Wioming, some of the Indians with me were so discouraged by Alarms, that
they returned home, and took with them all but the Fifteen, which, I desire
your Acceptance of.

The Governor returned him Thanks, and told him, he accepted of them as a Mark
of his Affection, without regard to the Value of the Skins. -- He then reminded
Teedyuscung, that it was intended the Goods should have been delivered
Yesterday, but as it grew late, and the Room in which they sat at Dinner was so
small, it was agreed they should be brought here, and delivered, which was
done, the Lists read, and the Indians left to divide the Goods.

At a COUNCIL held at Easton, November 17, 1756.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor. Esquires.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,



THE Commissioners advising the Governor to fix at this Meeting the Sum to be
given in full Satisfaction of all Injuries done to the Indians, and to offer it
to them now, Mr. Weiser was sent to consult with Teedyuscung, if this would be
agreeable; and Mr. Weiser having done so, reported, That the King declared
against it, saying, he had no Power to take any Sum, though the Governor should
offer him never so much, the People to whom the Land belonged being absent; but
he would endeavor to bring as many of them down as he could find to the next
Meeting, when it might be further considered.

Several Matters remaining to be mentioned to the Indians, the Governor sent
for Teedyuscung, the four Six Nation Indians, the two Shawanese, and one or two
Delawares, and in the Presence of the Commissioners, and some other Gentlemen,
he spoke as follows.

Brother,

Only one Thing of what was said Yesterday requires an Answer, which I am now
going to give you.

By this String, you desired me to make Application to the Governor of Jersey,
that the Fence might be broke down which confined the Indians, and that they,
or some of them, might have Liberty to go into the Indian Country, and
correspond with their Relations and Friends as formerly, and particularly to
obtain this Liberty for one Philip.

The Province of Jersey, you know, is a different Government from this; I will
use my best Endeavors with the Governor to grant your Request, but I apprehend
I shall meet with this Difficulty, that as you have some of their People
Prisoners with you, before they grant your Request, they will expect these
shall be returned, which I think would be advisable for you to do;
particularly you have with you a Boy, whose Name is Hunt, taken near Paulin's
Kiln, in that Province, whose Mother is now here, and requests he may be sent
down among the first.

A String.

Brother,

I consider you as the Counselor and Agent of this Province, and as such
obliged to assist us all you can. By this String, I confirm your Appointment.

A String.

Brother,

As our Prisoners may suffer for Want of Clothes and other Necessaries in this
severe Season, we would wish to have them as soon possible, and to that End
propose to send with you two Messengers, who may collect them together, and
bring them down; and I desire you will give them your Assistance, which will be
a further Proof of your Sincerity.

A String.

N. B. Two of the Six Nation Indians were employed in this Service.

Brother,

If any of our Indians shall incline to come into the Province, and live among
their Brethren, the English, I do now assure you, that they shall be kindly
received and supported, and live together in one Place, the most convenient
that can be got for the Purpose.

Or as there is now a strong Fort at Shamokin, built at the Request of your
Uncles, the Six Nations, for the Protection of the Friendly Indians, I propose
to have a Store of Goods in it, the Direction and Management of which will be
given to an honest Man, who shall not be suffered to impose upon the Indians;
and I shall be glad all our Friendly Indians, who are scattered and distressed
in these troublesome Tim^, will come and live near it; there they will be
protected from the French; there they will have a large uninhabited Country to
hunt in; and there they may be furnished with Clothes, and all other
Necessaries of Life, at the casiest Rates.

A String.

Brother,

You know that at the last Treaty the Road was opened for us to go to each
other; I now give you this Belt to preserve the Communication free and clear of
all Obstructions, let there be nothing in it that can hurt the Feet, or wound
the Body of either.

A Belt.

Brother,

Since I set out, I have heard of the Death of several of our Indian Friends by
the Smallpox at l'hiladelphia, and particularly Captain Newcastle, is dead, who
was very instrumental, and joined with you as Agent, in carrying on this good
Work of Peace. I wipe away your Tears; I take the Grief from your Hearts; I
cover the Graves; eternal Rest be with their Spirits.

A String of Wampum, eleven black Strouds with some Handkerchiefs.

Brother,

Peace is now settled between us by the Assistance of the Most High; but the
Indians in the French Interest still commit Murders on our Frontiers, and our
Soldiers are in Pursuit of them. I desire you will order your young Men not to
straggle about, but keep in the straight Path to your Towns, so that they may
not be mistaken by our Soldiers for French Indians.

Teedyuscung thanked the Governor for his kind Speeches, and said, he was very
glad that the Governor had thought of sending two Messengers with him for the
Prisoners, and promised to assist them.

After the Condolance made on Captain Newcastle's Death, the King made an
Address as is usual to the other Indians on this mou^nful Occasion: They
continued silent for some Time, and then one of the oldest of them spoke an
Exhortation, (...) the Nature of a Funeral Oration; after which Teedyuscung
expressed to the Governor the great Satisfaction given to him at his condoling
the Death of Captain Newcastle, who, he said, was a good Man, and had promoted
the good Work of Peace with great Care; his Death would put him in Mind of his
Duty, as it should als of us.

He then spoke in a warm and pathetick Manner in Favor of the Peace now
settled, and implored the Assistance of the Most High to bring it to Perfection.

The Governor understanding that several of the Indians inclined to stay,
desired Teedyuscung to give him the Names of such as would live with their
Brethren the English. -- Teedyuscung, mistaking the Governor, as if he had
said, they must stay, answered, smiling, he did not understand any Indians were
to be forced to stay, but left to their Liberty. If the Governor wanted any to
stay, and desired it, he would stay himself, and his Wife and Family with him.
The Governor set the Matter Right, thanked him, and wished him well; took his
Leave of him, saying, they had met and parted Friends, and he hoped they would
meet again as good Friends as now.

Teedyuscung showed great Pleasure in his Countenance, and took a kind Leave of
the Governor and all present.

By his Honor's Command, RICHARD PETER'S, Secretary.

EXTRACT from the Minutes of the House of REPRESENTATIVES of the Province (...)
Pennsylvania, January ^7* 1757
The four Provincial Commissioners Members of this House, who were appointed to
attend the Governor at the late Conference with the Indians at Easton,
presented a Pape^ to the House, which was read, and is as follows, viz. WE, the
Committee, appointed to attend the Governor at the Conferences with the Indians
at Easton, in November last, have perused the Copy of those Conferences drawn
up and signed by the Secretary, and said before the House;

And as we apprehend it of Importance to the Province, that the Complaints made
by the Indians, whether justly founded or (...) be fully represented, and their
Sense of them understood, we think it necessary to ^erve to the House, that we
conceive the Warmth and Earnestness with which they ^ted on the Wrongs that had
been done them in the Purchases of Land, are much too ^tly expressed in this
Account of the Conference. Tha^ we were not present at the palliating Hearsay
Accounts, of the Walking Purchase, said to b^ given the Governor by Mr. Weiser,
and Mr. Peter's, on the Fourteenth of November; tho^ by the concluding
Paragraphs und^ that Date, it may seem as if we were: But we wel^ remember,
that the Transaction of that Walk was at Easton universally given up as unfair
and not to be defended, even from the Accounts of some of our own People who
were present at the Walking; even the Secretary, though he did say, that he
believed Satisfaction was afterward made the Indians, and that this was the
only Instance in which any Foundation of Complaint had ever been given them,
yet, this he allowed was (in his own Words) unworthy of any Government. We
would farther observe, that when Teedyascung claimed the Lands, even those on
which the Conferences were held, no Objection was made that neither he, nor any
with him, had any Right to them; nor did we ever understand h^ Reason, for not
accepting Satissaction to be as represented in the second Paragraph under
November 17, for that " the People to whom the Land belonged were absent;" --
but for that many of them were absent, and those who were absent, had not
empowered him to a^ for them in that Matter; but he would endeavor to bring
them in the Spring.

The Offer of the Commissioners to furnish the Means of making the Indians
immediate Satisfaction, not being fully related, we think it necessary to add,
That the Reasons we gave the Governor for that Offer, were, 1. The Absence and
great Distance of the Proprietaries, who being the sole Purchasers of Land from
the Indians, in this Province, ought, if the Indians were injured in such
Purchases, alone to make the Satisfaction; but their Agents here had not the
necessary Powers. 2. For that Promises [such being proposed] of enquiring into
Indian Complaints, and doing them Right hereafter, had been so often made in
other^ Governments, and so little observed, we imagined they could be of no
Weight, and would rather be looked upon as a Denial of Justic^ and therefore,
we thought it better, as their Demands are seldom very high, to make them
immediate Reparation for the Injuries they supposed they had received, and we
would furnish the Goods, and risque the Proprietarie^ repaying their Value to
the Province. The Secretary then told us, that he thought our Proposal very
considerate and well-judged; that he was (...) the Prop^etaries would think
themselves obliged to us, and repay the Money with Thanks: The (...) made, but
not accepted for the Reasons above^entioned. We (...) Governor in a Body, and
acquainted his Honor, That (...) had made the Offe^ ^ehalf of the Province,
not from an Opinion that the Province ^ght to be at such Expense, but from the
apparent immediate Necessity of the (...) and on Account of the Proprietaries
Absence a^ aforesaid; so now since the sinal Settlement of the Indians Claims
(...) postponed to the Spring, and there would be sufficient Time to write to
the Proprietaries and obtain their Orders to their Agents for the Payment of
such Sums as should he found necessary, we looked on ourselves and the Province
as totally disengaged from that Offer, and expected that the Proprietaries
would be wrote to accordingly.

January 29, 1757. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, WILLIAM MASTERS, JOSEPH FOX, JOHN HUGHES.

A true Extract from the Minutes,

WILLIAM FRANKLIN, Clerk of Affembly.




