MINUTES OF CONFERENCES, HELD WITH THE INDIANS, AT EASTON, In the Months of
July, and August, 1757.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, and D. HALL, at the
New-Printing-Office, near the Market. MDCCLVII.

Minutes of Conferences, etc.
At a MEETING with TEEDYUSCUNG, King of the Delawares, living on Sasquehannah,
who is empowered by the ten following Nations, viz. Lenopi, Wename, Munsey,
Mawhickon, Tiawco, or Nanticokes, and the Senecas, Onondagoes, Cayugas,
Oneidoes, and Mohawks, to settle all Differences subsisting between them and
their Brethren the English; and GEORGE CROGHAN, Esquire Deputy Agent to the
Honorable Sir WILLIAM JOHNSON, Baronet, His MAJESTY's sole Agent and
Superintendent of the Affairs of the Six Nations, their Allies and Dependents,
and Colonel of the same, at Easton, the Twentyfifth Day of July, 1757.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM ^ENNY, Esquire Lieutenant Governor, and Commander
in Chief of the Province of Pennsylvania, and the Counties of New Castle, Kent
and Sussex, on Delaware. Esquires, Members of the Governor's Council.
JAMES HAMILTON, WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S, LYN-FORD LARDNER, BENJAMIN
CHEW, JOHN MIFFLIN,
ISAAC NORRIS, Esquire Speaker of the House of Assembly. DANIEL ROBERDEAU, Esquire
Member of the Assembly. Esquires, Provincial Commissioners.
WILLIAM MASTERS, JOHN HUGHES, JOSEPH FOX, JOSEPH GALLOWAY,
A Number of Gentlemen of the City of Philadelphia, and others, Inhabitants of
this Province. Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONRAD WEISER,
Esquire Interpreter for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for
Teedyuscung. TEEDYUSCUNG, King of the Delawares, attended by several Chiefs and
Deputies of the Ten Nations be represents. [The Number of the Indians here at
present, is about Three Hundred Men, Women and Children.]


Teedyuscung sent his Interpreter to call Mr. Charles Thompson to the Table,
whom be bad appointed his Clerk, to take down the Minutes of this Treaty.

The Governor opened the Conference, directing his Discourse to Teedyuscung,
and spoke as follows.

Brother,

Six Nations, according to your Agreement with me at this Place in November
last. The Number of Indians you have brought down with you on this Occasion,
and the Pains you have taken to carry the News of our good Dispositions for
Peace to so great a Distance, confirms the good Opinion we have always had of
you, and shows the Sincerity of the Professions you have made of your earnest
Desire to restore the Friendship and Brotherly Love that always subsisted
between us and the Indians, till your foolish young Men were seduced by the
evil Spirit, and turned against us.

Brother Teedyuscung, and Brethren of the Ten-united-Nations,

We are now met together to finish, by the Assistance of the Almighty, the
Great Work of Peace, and to make a new Chain of Friendship so bright, that it
shall never rust, and so strong, that it shall never be in the Power of wicked
Spirits to break it, that we may always hereafter be as one Man, with but one
Heart and one Head. I invite you to join heartily and sincerely with me herein
by this Belt.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

You may remember, that when we were here last Fall, I asked you what was the
Cause of the Breach between our Brethren the Delawares and us; whether we, the
People of Pennsylvania, had done you any Injury; and desired you would open
your Hearts, and tell me your Mind freely. In answer to this you told me, that
your foolish and ignorant young Men, when they saw the Proceedings of our
Enemy, the French King, and believed the Things that were told them, were
persuaded by this false hearted King to strike your Brethren the English; and
that the Cause why the Blow came the harder on us was, that the Proprietaries
had defrauded you of some of your Land, and that you had been treated in the
same Manner in the Jerseys; but that this was not the principal Cause of your
striking us. I was willing to enquire into the Truth of this Charge at that
Time, but you declined it, because few of the Indians then present originally
owned those Lands; but said, that you would endeavor to bring as many of them
down as you could find to the next Meeting.

Brother,

According to the Promise I made you at our last Treaty, I laid all our
Proceedings before Sir William Johnson, who, you have been often told, is
appointed by our Great King his sole Agent for Indian Affairs in this District,
to take Care of them as a Father, that no one may wrong them. Sir William
Johnson has since deputed your (...) our Friend, Mr. George Crog^an, who is
well acquainted with your Affairs and Language, to act in his Behalf, to attend
this Treaty, and enquire into every Grievance you may have suffered, either
from your Brethren of Pennsylvania, or the neighboring Provinces.

Gave a String.

Brother,

I took Care also to send Copies of our several Treaties with you to England,
where they were laid before the King's Ministers, who, being desirous that
Justice should be done you, ordered that Sir William Johnson should enquire
into the Foundation of your Charge against this Province, in order that you may
receive Satisfaction, in case any Injury has been done you.

Brother,

I have freely opened my Heart to you, and am ready, with Mr. Croghan, His
Majesty's Deputy Agent, whenever you think proper, to hear any Thing you may
have to say to us about the Grievances you may think you labor under from this
Province.

Gave a String.

When the Governor had ended his Speech, I spoke as follows.

Brother Teedyuscung, and you my Brethren the Sachems and Warriors of the Ten
Nations you represent at this Meeting,

You have been informed by your Brother Onas, that the King of Great Britain,
your Father, has appointed Sir William Johnson, Baronet, to be His Majesty's
chief Agent and Superintendent of the Affairs of the Six Nations, their Allies
and Dependents in this District of America, and he has appointed me his Deputy,
and ordered me to attend this Meeting, and hear any Complaints you have to make
against your Brother Onas, in respect to his defrauding you of the Lands
mentioned in the Conference you held with this Government last Fall in this
Town; or any other Injuries you have received from any of His Majesty's
Subjects in this District. I am now ready to hear what you have to say; and I
assure you, in the Name of Sir William Johnson, I will do every Thing in my
Power to have all Differences amicably adjusted to your Satisfaction, agreeable
to his Orders and Instructions to me.

Gave a Belt.

When I had delivered my Speech, the Governor told Teedyuscung that we had done
for the present; and that whenever he was ready to give an Answer, we should be
ready to hear him. Then Teedyuscung replied, That he had something to say now;
and, ^^^ressing himself to the Governor and (...)* spoke as follows.

Brethren,

I will let you know in a few Words what my Desire is. I kindly receive your
Words this Day: They are true, and make my Heart glad. By this Belt (holding up
a Belt) I let you know I will speak Tomorrow. I think it proper to speak my
Mind with Openness. I think it my Duty to remember the Conduct of my foolish
young Men. I see a great deal of Mischief done. I will first begin with
cleaning up the Blood that has been shed, and removing the dead Bodies out of
the Way: After that, I will make known my Grievances. I remember what Sir
William Johnson said to me by the Messengers he sent to me: I sent back to him,
by the same Messengers, and desired him, as he was a wiser Man than I, and of
greater Abilities, that he would be strong, and lend his Assistance to cure
this Wound.

Gave a Belt.

When Teedyuscung had ended his Speech, he told the Governor he thought he
should be ready to speak Tomorrow Morning at Eight o'Clock; -- and that Time
was accordingly appointed for the next Meeting.

At a MEETING in Easton, Tuesday, July 26, 1757, A. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Governor, and c. The Council. The
same Members of Assembly. The Provincial Commissioners. A Number of Gentlemen
from the City of Philadelphia, and others of the Inhabitants of the Province.
The same Indians. Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONRAD
WEISER, Esquire Interpreter for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for
Teedyuscung.


I desired the Favor of Mr. Jacob Duche to assist Mr. Trent in taking down the
Minutes.

Teedyuscung spoke to the Governor and myself, desiring us to give Attention;
then directing his Speech to the King of Great Britain, and all His Subjects,
spoke as follows.

Brother,

YOU remember that you sent to me to come down to you, and invited me to bring
down with me as many of the Ten Nations as I could, by Reason of the Difficulty
of the Times. You then said to me, Brother, you are weak, I am strong: If you
come down, I will put away all the Difference and Uneasiness that has happened,
and will make a lasting Peace. Now, as I have brought some from each of the Ten
Nations with me, I would have you remember your Promise, and exert your Power.
Also, remember our Women and Children, that it may be well hereafter. Also, as
you must remember the Blood that has been shed, and the dead Bodies that lie
scattered up and down, I would have you join with me to remove these out of the
Way, that we may see one another Face to Face, and after this we will proceed
to other Business.

Brother,

As you are a great deal stronger than I, you must exert your Power. When
Differences arise between two Brothers, when one comes and makes Proposals of
Peace, if the other does not accept them, nothing can be done. Now, as much
Blood is spilt, I desire you will join with me to clear this away, and when
that is done, we will proceed to other Business.

Gave a Belt of eight Rows.

Brother,

According to the Promise I made you, that I would invite as many of the Ten
Nations as I could, I have now brought with me as many as I could, who are here
present to witness what shall be transacted; but, in order to make a lasting
and durable Peace, we must all exert our Abilities. When any Persons are
engaged to lift a great Weight out of the Way, if all do not exe^^ their
Strength, they cannot remove it; but if all join, they will easily remove it.
We (...) our Parts, gather up the Leaves that have been sprinkled with Blood;
we gather up ^he ^^ood, the Bodies and Bones; but when we look round, we see no
Place where to put them, but when we look up, we see the Great Spir^^ (...) It
is our Duty therefore to join in Prayer, that he would hide these Things, that
they (...) never be seen by our Posterity, and that the Great Spirit would
bless our Children, that they may hereafter live in Love together; that it may
never be in the Power of the evil Spirit, or any evil minded Persons, to cause
any Breach between our Pesterity.

Gave a Belt of seventeen Rows.

Brother,

As you remember you invited me to bring down some of the Ten Nations, so now
some from each of them are here present, particularly some from my Uncles the
Five Nations. When we had endeavored, as much as in our Power, to remove the
dead Bodies, and the Mischief past, you also invited me to come and take hold
of your Hand. We accordingly now come, and take hold of one of your Hands, and
the Five Nations also come and take hold of the other Hand, that we may all
stand together as one Man with one Heart. This now being done, when we look up,
and see the clear Light, we shall enjoy it; we shall also enjoy, in Peace and
Quietness, what the Land produces; and we shall enjoy the Comforts of the Day,
and the Comforts of the Night; we shall lie down in Peace, and rise in Peace.

Gave a Belt of twelve Rows, strung on Cords.

Brother,

The Reason of this great Cloud of Mischief that has been past is, that our old
Standers, or Forefathers, never took regular Methods to have a lasting Peace:
They never looked forward for their Children: They only had a View of this that
decays, and what lies round about upon the Earth. When they came into Council,
they only talked about the Things on the Earth, that are soon gone. They ought
to have looked forward, and to have made such Agreements on both Sides, that
their Children after might never disagree. And as we see their Mismanagement,
let us do better, that we, as long as we live, may be faithful, and that by
this our Meeting together our Children hereafter may enjoy a lasting Peace.

Gave a Belt of eleven Rows.

Brother,

You remember, according to your Orders, that Messengers have been sent to
carry your Messages to distant Parts among us, in order to promote this good,
this important Work of Peace, on which our Lives depend. One of these
Messengers is now in a dangerons Condition, being shot by one of your young
Men. Do not be too much grieved; but as I desire to be used with Justice,
according to your Laws, I insist, if this young Man die, that the Man who shot
him may be tried by your Laws, and die also, in the Presence of some of our
People, who may witness it to all the Nations, that their Brethren the English
have done them Justice. And if any Thing of the like Kind should happen on our
Parts, we will do you the same Justice; that is, if any of our People shall
murder any of yours, we will deliver up the Murderer, to be tried by your Laws.
And as the Relations of the young Man must be grieved, I desire, as you have it
in your Power, that you would remove the Grief and Sorrow from their Hearts.

A String.

The Governor then acquainted Teedyuscung, that we would take into
Consideration what he had now said; and when we were ready to give an Answer,
we would let him know.

As we were rising the King, by his Interpreter, told me, that what he had now
said was of great Importance; he desired therefore we would take Time to
confider it well; that he would wait with Patience till we were ready to give
him an Answer.

At a MEETING in Easton, Wednesday, July 27, 1757, A. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Governor, etc. The Council. The
same Members of Assembly. The Provincial Commissioners. A Number of Gentlemen
from the City of Philadelphia, and others of the Inhabitants of the Province.
The same Indians. Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONRAD
WEISER, Esquire Interpreter for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for
Teedyuscung.


The Governor opened the Conference by asking Teedyuscung if he was ready, and
letting him know that Mr. Croghan, the King's Agent, joined him in the Speeches
he was going to make, and then spoke as follows.

Brother,

YOUR Memory serves you faithfully, with Respect to what was pr^^^^ed by each
of us in the last ^onferences.

Our warmest A^^^^^^edgments are due to you for your just Performance of your
Engagements. You have made known our good Dispositions far and wide. You have
brought down your Uncles, and some of each of the other Nations with whom you
are joined. We are pleased to observe they have hearkened to you, and are come
so well disposed to conclude and establish a firm and durable Peace. We return
you very hearty Thanks in Behalf of His Majesty King GEORGE, the People of this
Province, and all His other Subjects.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

We are sensible with you, that unless we both exert the utmost of our
Strength, we shall not be able to accomplish the great Work we are mutually
engaged in.

Whilst we see the dead Bodies of our People lying uncovered, and exposed to
ravenous Birds, it is against Nature, and all the Principles of Religion and
Humanity, to proceed to the Confirmation of Peace.

We therefore, in Conjunction with you, diligently search for, and collect
together, not only their dead Bodies and scattered Bones, but the very Leaves,
Grass, and every Thing else that their Blood has touched; and join with you in
looking up to Heaven, from whence the God of Peace beholds with Delight our
Advances to Reconciliation, Concord and Unity. We pray he may cast a Veil over
all that has happened in these unhappy Times, that it may be no longer
remembered. We supplicate his Almighty Goodness to pardon all that is past. We
pray him to dispose all the People of this, and the succeeding Generations, to
the latest Posterity, to live in Love together. We entreat he will never permit
the evil Spirit to enter so far into our Hearts, or evil minded Men so far into
our Councils, as to interrupt the Course of Friendship, or blast the smallest
Leaf in the Tree of Peace.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

Having now collected the dead Bodies, we agree with you to stand together,
English and Indians, as one Man, with one Heart; we lay hold with you, your
Uncles, and the Ten Nations, of the Belt of Friendship; we hold it fast with
all our Strength. We bring with us all the Sincerity and Warmth of honest and
upright Hearts. We rejoice to behold again the Light of the Sun shining in a
clear Sky. We promise ourselves that, with the Blessing of the good Spirit,
your Endeavors, united with ours, will be able to secure to us, and to our
Children, and Childrens Children, durable Peace and Happiness, so that we may
quietly enjoy the various Comforts of Life with which this fruitful Country
abounds, and may sleep in Peace.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

Though our Forefathers and yours might make some Mistakes, and might not see
far enough into the Consequences of some of their Measures, yet in general we
can truly say, they were ever kindly disposed to one another; they were open
and upright in their Intentions; they lived together in perfect Peace, and the
mutual Exchange of good Offices.

It is very commendable in you to remind us that they have not been altogether
regular, but confined their Views to the then present Times, and to the
Interest of their own Generation, not so much consulting as they should have
done the Good of future Generations. We shall be glad to join with you in
promoting one general Interest, that may extend to the latest Posterity. We
will lay aside all narrow partial Regards, and put Matters on a lasting
Foundation, and endeavor to exceed our Ancestors, not only in the Goodness of
our Measures, but in a more careful and exact Manner of doing Business.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

We have observed what you say, with respect to one of your Messengers. The
Accident grieves us. In such Times, Indians should not go single, or into
inhabited Parts, without proper Passports and Escorts. -- We have careless and
unthinking Men amongst us; we have bad Men too, who have mischievous Hearts.
The Man who is supposed to have committed this Act is in Goal, and (in case the
Messenger dies) shall be tried by our Laws, which require Blood for Blood, in
the Presence of such Indians as you shall appoint to attend the Trial, of which
you shall have due Notice. It is a Matter firmly settled, by repeated Treaties,
between us and the Indians, that whenever an Englishman kills an Indian, or an
Indian kills an Englishman, the Murderer, or Person offending, shall be tried
by our Laws, in the Presence of both Nations.

Gave a String.

Brother Moses Tetamy,

You are the F^^^^^ of the young Man who has been unfortunately wounded. It
gives us great Concern that any Thing of this Kind should happen. We have
employed the most skilful Doctor we have amongst us to take Care of him, and we
pray (...) the Almighty would bless the Medicines that are administered for his
Cure. We by this String of Wampum remove the Grief from your Heart, and desire
no Uneasiness may remain there. We have assured our Brother Teedyuscung, that
strict Justice shall be done on the Trial, and we choose that you yourself
should be a Witness of it.

Gave a String.

At a MEETING in Easton, Thursday, July 28, 1757, P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Governor, etc. The Council. The
same Members of Assembly. The Provincial Commissioners. A Number of Gentlemen
from the City of Philadelphia, and others of the Inhabitants of the Province.
Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONRAD WEISER, Esquire Interpreter
for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for Teedyuscung. TEEDYUSCUNG,
King of the Delawares, attended by several Chiefs and Deputies of the Ten
Nations be represents.


Teedyuscung addressing himself to the Governor, spoke as follows.

Brother,

I DESIRE in a few Words to recollect what you told me the other Day, that the
Great King, beyond the Water, had appointed a Man to oversee the Affairs of the
Indians, viz. Sir William Johnson, who has nominated Mr. Croghan his Deputy. I
am glad to hear this News, and to see the Man that is appointed. I hope,
Brother, that it will be well accepted by both of us. It is our Duty to respect
the Person that the King has appointed, and with Sincerity of Heart to join
together, that as the present Business is well begun, it may end so. I hope he
will execute his Commission with Justice. According to your Desire, what you
mentioned in the last Treaty, and what you have said now, I will answer in a
few Words; and we hope Mr. Croghan will be faithful to see Justice done on both
Sides in the Name of the King.

Gave a String.

Brother,

After I have opened the Passage from your Heart and Mind, that you may see and
understand, by this Belt I desire you may fully understand what I now say. It
is plain the Proceedings of our Ancestors were shorter than they ought to have
been, in Respect and Behalf of their Children; and also their own everlasting
Peace in the World to come. You may easily see the Reason of the gloomy and
dark Days; they have proceeded from the Earth. Our Misunderstanding or
Mismanagement has proceeded from the Earth, as well as our Differences and
Grievances that have passed and repassed. Though it was not the principal Cause
that made us strike our Brethren the English, yet it has caused the Stroke to
come harder than it otherwise would have come. Now it lies much in your Power
to look strictly into your Hearts, as we always prefer and acknowledge you
above us in Abilities, Strength and Knowledge. And as it lies a great deal in
your Power to know whether what I have said be true or not, it depends much on
you, Brother, that it may be openly and publicly declared and published to the
Province or Provinces under the Government of the Great King, both to his
Satisfaction, and to the Satisfaction of those appointed to manage this Affair.
-- Brother, now as we have met together Face to Face to speak with great
Sincerity, I will endeavor to lay every Thing plain before you, not to cover
one Part, but to lay every Thing before you, that you may see plainly, in order
that we may have true Satisfaction from one another, and that what may be
proved to be our Right and Due, may be established for ever in a durable and
lasting Peace.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

I would desire also that you would look with all Diligence, and see from
whence our Differences have sprung. You may easily see they have sprung from
the Land or Earth, which was mentioned before, though it was not the principal
Thing. If regular Methods had been formerly taken for an Habitation or
Residence for the poor Indians in this Land, this would not have come to pass.
Now as it lies much in your Power to search particularly into what was
mentioned before, with respect to the Land, which was the Cause of our
Differences, if I now can prevail with you, as I hope I shall, honestly to do
what may be consistent with Justice, then I will, with a loud Voice, speak, and
the Nations shall hear me. Then it depends on you, Brother, as I shall speak
with a loud Voice, and as you are of great^^ Abilities than I, to assist me,
that what I speak to the Nations may be true, and that when I have made
Proclamation with a loud Voice, by your Assistance, the Nations may hear and
receive it with great Joy.

Gave a Belt.

Mr. John Pumpshire, being asked to explain what was meant by the first Part of
this Speech, he said, the Meaning was this: The Land is the Cause of our
Differences; that is, our being unhappily turned out of the Land, is the Cause:
And though the first Settlers might purchase the Land fairly, yet they did not
act well, nor do the Indians Justice; for they ought to have reserved some
Place for the Indians. Had that been done, these Differences would not have
happened.

Brother,

I have now in a few Words to let you know what my Inclination and Desire is,
agreeable to what I have said. I now put it into your Power to make a lasting
Peace, and that I may have my reasonable Enjoyment from this Land; as we are
sensible that this Land was made by that Almighty Power that has made all
Things, and has given this Land to us. I was the first to whom he gave it; and
as it pleased him to convey you to us, and unite us in Friendship in the Manner
already mentioned, which was well known by our Ancestors, it is now in your
Power, and depends entirely on your Care and faithful Diligence, that it may
not be broken as it has been; and if it be broken, it will be owing to you. I
think it is my Duty to mention to you in public, that I will comply with all
Submission. This I ask, that I may have some Place for a Settlement, and for
other good Purposes, in which we may both agree; but as I am a free Agent as
well as you, I must not be bound up, but have Liberty to settle where I please.

Gave a Belt of nine Rows.

Teedyuscung informed the Governor, that he had done for this Time, and left it
to the Governor's Pleasure to appoint a Time to answer him.

As the Governor had by Letter informed me, that Teedyuscung's Speech appeared
to him dark and confused, and desired me to call a Meeting in private with the
Indians, and know what they meant; I accordingly, on the 30th of July, at Five
a Clock in the Morning, sent for the King, and some of his Counselors, and
desired them to call a Council and confider well the Speeches the King had
made, and afterward to explain them to me. At Half after Nine o'Clock, King
Teedyuscung, with Jepiscauhunb, Epoweyowallund, Penawaghwottind, Lepaghpetund,
Kuhtanamaku, Jangepapawey, Weneywalika, his Counselors, and John Pumpshire,
Interpreter, met at my House, and explained his Speeches as follows.

The Complaints I made last Fall, I yet continue. I think some Lands have been
bought by the Proprietary, or his Agents, from Indians who had not a Right to
sell, and to whom the Lands did not belong. I think also, when some Lands have
been sold to the Proprietary by Indians who had a Right to sell to a certain
Place, whether that Purchase was to be measured by Miles or Hours Walk, that
the Proprietaries have, contrary to Agreement or Bargain, taken in more Lands
than they ought to have done, and Lands that belonged to others. I therefore
now desire that you will produce the Writings and Deeds by which you hold the
Land, and let them be read in public, and examined, that it may be fully known
from what Indians you have bought the Lands you hold, and how far your
Purchases extend, that Copies of the Whole may be laid before King GEORGE, and
published to all the Provinces under his Government. What is fairly bought and
paid for I make no further Demands about: But if any Lands have been bought of
Indians to whom these Lands did not belong, and who had no Right to sell them,
I expect a Satisfaction for these Lands. And if the Proprietaries have taken in
more Lands than they bought of true Owners, I expect likewise to be paid for
that. But as the Persons to whom the Proprietaries may have sold these Lands,
which of Right belonged to me, have made some Settlements, I do not want to
disturb them, or to force them to leave them, but I expect a full Satisfaction
shall be made to the true Owners for these Lands, though the Proprietaries, as
I said before, might have bought them from Persons that had no Right to sell
them.

With respect to our Settlement, we intend to settle at Wyoming, and we want to
have certain Boundaries fixed between you and us; and a certain Tract of Land
fixed, which it shall not be lawful for us or our Children ever to sell, nor
for you, or any of your Children, ever to buy. We would have the Boundaries
fixed all round, agreeable to the Draught we give you that we may not be
pressed on any Side, but have a certain Country fixed for our own Use, and the
Use of our Children for ever.

And as we intend to make a Settlement at Wyoming, and to build different
Houses from what we have done heretofore, such as may last not only for a
little Time, but for our Children after us; we desire you will assist us in
making our Settlements, and send us Persons to instruct us in building Houses,
and in making such Necessaries as shall be needful; and that Persons be sent to
instruct us in the Christian Religion, which may be for our future Welfare, and
to instruct our Children in Reading and Writing; and that a fair Trade be
established between us, and such Persons appointed to conduct and manage these
Affairs as shall be agreeable to us.

I then asked him, as Fort Augusta was within the Lands he desired to be
assigned to them, whether he would acknowledge that Fortress to belong to the
King of Great Britain, for the Use of His Subjects in Pennsylvania, and all His
other Subjects; and whether he would not be willing it should continue as a
Trading-House, not only for the Good of us the English, and the Nations he
represents, but of all the Nations that now are, or may be hereafter, in
Alliance with us; and whether he will not engage, in Conjunction with the
English, to defend it against any of His Majesty's Enemies that may come
against it?

To which the King, in Behalf of the Nations he represents, replied, That he
agrees that that Fort shall belong to the English; that it shall continue as a
Trading-House; and he and his People, in Conjunction with their Brethren the
English, engage to defend it against any of His Britannick Majesty's Enemies
that shall come to attack it.

At a MEETING in Easton, Sunday, July 31, 1757, P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Governor, etc. The Council. The
same Members of Assembly. The Provincial Commissioners. A Number of Gentlemen
from the City of Philadelphia, and others, the Inhabitants of the Province.
Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONRAD WEISER, Esquire Interpreter
for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for Teedyuscung. TEEDYUSCUNG,
King of the Delawares, attended by several Chiefs and Deputies of the Ten
Nations he represents, and a great Number of others.


King Teedyuscung desired that (before the Governor spoke) what passed between
him and me in a private Conference Yesterday should be read in public, which
was accordingly done, and interpreted to the Six Nations.

Then the Governor made the following Speech.

Brother Teedyuscung, and Brethren Sachems and Warriors of the Ten Nations,

IT gives me Pleasure to hear you declare your Satisfaction at the Appointment
our Great King has been pleased to make of Sir William Johnson to be the
Superintendent of the Affairs of the Indians, and that Sir William had
appointed Mr. Croghan to be his Deputy; and further, to hear you so fully and
openly acknowledge it to be the Duty of both of us to respect the Person whom
the King has thought fit to entrust with so important a Commission. I thank you
for these dutiful Expressions, and do not in the least doubt but they come from
the Bottom of your Hearts. -- I assure you, Brethren, I shall heartily join my
Endeavors to yours, that the good Work of Peace, so well begun, may be happily
finished to our mutual Satisfaction.

Gave a String.

Brother,

You say that the Proceedings of our Ancestors were shorter than they ought to
have been, in Respect and Behalf of their Children; and also of their own
everlasting Peace. Brother, our Ancestors of this Province have been always
esteemed a good, honest and wise People, and have always been distinguished for
their brotherly Love and kind Treatment of the Indians, and their upright
Dealing with them in their Public Transactions. You say that the Cause of our
Differences proceeded from the Land, and advise us to look strictly into our
Hearts for the Truth of this. Brother, we have, according to your Desire,
looked into our Hearts, and are not sensible that any of our Transactions with
the Indians, either with Respect to Land, or otherwise, could have given Reason
for the unhappy Breach between us. You have been so honest as to declare on all
Occasions, that the Land was not the principal Cause why you struck us, but was
only a Reason why the Stroke came the harder on us. As then, it was not the
Cause of our first Differences, it ought not to be any Obstacle to an immediate
Conclusion of the Peace, which we are now met together with such good
Intentions to establish. However we may differ in Opinion about Matters of
Property, these are trifling Considerations, compared to the important Affair
of uniting together in the firm Bands of Friendship. Let us therefore for the
present suspend them, and all Matters of less Moment, and apply ourselves in
the first Place heartily to the Great Work of Peace, so much wished for by both
of us, and put Things on such a Footing, that the Great King over the Waters,
and His Subjects, and all the Indians, shall be pleased with it.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

You say, that if you can prevail with us to do you Justice in your Complaint
about Land, you will then with a loud Voice speak, and the Nations shall hear
you. Brother, I must now inform you, that immediately after our last Treaty, I
sent to the Proprietaries a Copy of the Complaints you then made of their
defrauding you of your Lands, and received their Answer to it some Days before
I set out to meet you here, wherein they express the greatest Concern that you,
who they conceive have been so well treated both by their Father, William Penn,
and themselves, should charge them with Crimes of so heinous a Nature as Fraud
and Forgery, by which their Reputation (which to them and every honest Man is
dearer than Life itself) is so deeply wounded. Your Complaint has likewise been
laid before the King's Ministers, who, looking upon it as a Matter of great
Importance, determined that it should be carefully enquired into, and examined,
before some Person no ways concerned in Interest, on whose Honesty and Judgment
they could depend; and therefore appointed Sir William Johnson to hear the
Particulars of your Charge, and the Proprietary's Defense, and lay the whole
Matter before His Majesty for his Royal Determination, in order that he may do
you Justice himself, if you are injured. Our great King looks on you as His
Children; and therefore His Ministers have directed the same Method to be taken
in hearing the Merits of your Complaint, as is used among His own Subjects,
with this Difference only, that their Disputes are finally settled by Judges
appointed for that Purpose; whereas, in your Case, His Majesty will determine
it himself.

Before I received the Orders of His Majesty's Ministers, that your Complaints
should be heard before Sir William Johnson, I fully intended, at this Meeting,
to call on the Proprietaries Agents to answer the Charge you made against them,
and to have the Matter strictly enquired into; but as I am the King's Servant,
and bound by Duty as well as Inclination to obey His Orders, and His Majesty's
Deputy Agent, Mr. Croghan, who is now present, informs me he has no Power to
suffer any Altercations on this Complaint, and that he does not think it would
be for the Good of His Majesty's Service, I must refer you on this Occasion to
Sir William Johnson, to whom I shall send proper Persons to represent the
Proprietaries, with Records, Deeds and Evidences, to show the Justice of their
Title at any Time he shall appoint, of which he will give Notice to you, and
all Persons concerned. As that Gentleman is known to be a good Friend to the
Indians, and a Man of Honor and Integrity, it gives me great Pleasure to find
he is well approved of by you, and I do not doubt but you will most cheerfully
agree to leave the Examination of your Claims to him, and concur in the Method
His Majesty has directed for settling our Differences, in which you will be
certain of having strict Justice done you.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

I could give you many Instances of the great Affection and Regard the
Proprietaries have for you, and all the Indians; and that they set a far
greater Value on your Friendship, than on any private Interest or Advantage to
themselves; they have lately given to you and the World a most convincing Proof
of this. You no Doubt have heard, that the Proprietaries, about three Years
ago, at a general Meeting of the Six Nations, held at Albany, fairly and openly
purchased of them a great Country, lying on the West Side of the River
Sasquehannah; but upon its being represented, that some of the Indian Tribes
were dissatisfied with the Extent of that Grant beyond the Allegheny Hills, the
Proprietaries cheerfully agreed to surrender, and give up again to the Indians,
the Lands Westward of those Hills, and have given their Agents Orders to
release it to them at the proposed Meeting before Sir William Johnson, and to
settle Boundaries with them.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

I have considered what you said about a Settlement for yourselves and your
Posterity, and am informed by Mr. Croghan, that Wyoming is the Place you would
choose to settle at.

Brother,

The Proprietaries have never granted away any Lands, though within the Limits
of this Province, without first purchasing them of the Indians; and having
never bought of them the Lands between Shamokin and Wyoming, they have
therefore never laid Claim to them under any Indian Purchase, and expressly
desire this may be told to the Indians, lest evil-disposed Persons should have
suggested any Thing to the contrary; and, in the Name of the Proprietaries, I
now disclaim all such Right, of which I would have you take Notice. I am
pleased you have made Choice of that Place; it is perfectly agreeable to me,
and I assure you I will heartily concur with you in using all the Means in my
Power to have these Lands settled upon you and your Posterity, agreeable to
your Request. As to the other Purposes for which you desire this Settlement of
Lands, they are so reasonable, that I make no Doubt but, on my Recommendation
of them to the Assembly, they will cheerfully enable me to comply with them.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

I have now answered the Speeches you made me the other Day, and, I hope, to
your Satisfaction, as I agree with you to submit the Differences about Lands to
the Great King, which is your own Desire. I now assure you that I am heartily
disposed and ready, with the King's Deputy Agent, to confirm the Peace which
you and I have been for some Time taking Pains to establish.

At a MEETING with the Indians in Easton, on Monday, August 1, 1757, P. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Governor, etc. The Council. The
same Members of Assembly. The Provincial Commissioners. A Number of Gentlemen
from the City of Philadelphia, and others, the Inbabitants of the Province.
Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONRAD WEISER, Esquire Interpreter
for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for Teedyuscung. TEEDYUSCUNG,
King of the Delawares, attended by several Chiefs and Deputies of the Ten
Nations he represents, and a great Number of others.


Teedyuscung addressing himself to the Governor, spoke as follows.

Brother, the Governor,

BY this Belt (holding up a Belt) I remember what you said Yesterday in the
Evening. All was well accepted, and very good, only one Word, or one material
Thing. When the several different Nations of us, that call ourselves the Ten
Nations that are present, I mean the Counselors, had considered what you said,
we approved all except one Thing. Also this Morning early, when we came to sit
down by ourselves, and our Secretary with us, when we had done, and had fully
understood one another, and agreed on every Word, we then ordered our Secretary
to write it down. -- [ John Pumpshire said, I will just mention this in
Addition; we ordered him to read it over three or four Times, and approved it.]
-- Having done that, we have the Words already written down, and if it please
the Governor to hear it read, this that is written down is what was concluded
on.

The Governor, in Answer, told him, Brother, you know that this is quite a new
Method, and was never practiced before.

Brother, it is true, replied Teedyuscung, you are right; this was not formerly
practiced; it never used to be so. Don't you see that I aim, by having a Clerk
of my own, to exceed my Ancestors, by having every Thing for the best. I
endeavor, according to my Ideas, to look to those that have the Authority; as
for Instance, if they take up a Handful of Corn or Pebbles, if they drop any,
even one Grain, I will take Notice, and will speak of it, that they may take it
up.

The Governor then applied to Mr. Croghan, to know whether this had ever been
practiced in any Treaty; Mr. Croghan said it never was, and turning to the
King, said, Brother, this is quite a new Method, and what was never before
practiced. I well know the Indians have good memories, and can remember what
was transacted twenty Years ago, as if Yesterday, I should therefore be glad
the King would repeat himself what he has to say, as we are only treating with
him. Then Teedyuscung replied, Well, Brother the Governor, what we have
consulted and concluded on this Morning is this; I remember you told me last
Night, that what was transacted last Fall, was laid before the King's
Ministers; and we took particular Notice that you told us, that some Time
before you came from Philadelphia, you fully intended to make all Satisfaction
to me at this Treaty about Lands and Deeds; but that you received a Letter, or
Letters, from the King or Proprietaries, I am not certain which, you know best;
in Consequence of which, you told us that you could not act in this Affair, but
that Sir William Johnson was appointed to transact Indian Affairs, and Mr.
George Crogban was appointed to act in his Name. We remember very well, when we
had a private Conference with you at your Dwelling, that you and Mr. Croghan
rose up, shock Hands with me, and you told us, this was the very Man that was
appointed to act between the English and Indians. Now, in Consideration of
these Things, why should we be obliged to go to Sir William Johnson to have the
Proof of Lands and D eds examined by him, when there is nothing in the Way, the
Land Affair not being to be compared with the great Work of Peace, and should
not be any Hindrance to our making a League of Friendship.

Now I will give you my Reasons for not going.

In the first Place, I do not know Sir William Johnson; he may be an honest and
sincere Man. We do understand he treats his Indians very well; but we are
sensible that some of the Nations are there that have been instrumental to this
Misunderstanding, in selling Lands in this Province, having in former Years
usurped that Authority, and called us Women, and threatened to take us by the
Foretop, and throw us aside as Women. But, after a long Space, I believe it is
evident, nay, there are Witnesses present, who can prove that it is otherwise.
Also, when I have considered these several Particulars, as you told us there
was nothing in the Way to hinder us from confirming a durable and lasting
Peace, I at present desire nothing at all of my Brethren the English for my
Lands, I only want, for the Satisfaction of the Indians of the Ten Nations
present, and also of all other Indians, that the Deeds may be produced, and
well looked into; and as you have told me that Mr. George Croghan was the Man
that would settle Affairs for our Peace, here he is; I want nothing but to see
the Deeds fairly looked into, and true Copies of them taken and put with these
Minutes now taken. And, after they have been fairly taken down, if you agree to
this, then I shall, by two Belts tied together, take you by the Hand, and, with
my Uncles, confirm a lasting Peace with you; and if it please the Governor, and
Mr. Croghan, let the Copy of the Deeds be sent to Sir William Johnson, and to
the King, and let him judge. I want nothing of the Land till the King has sent
Letters back; then if any of the Lands be found to belong to me, I expect to be
paid for it, and not before. Brother, another Reason for not going is, if we
cannot agree to settle this Affair here, I am afraid the Nations that are
watching and looking into what is done here, will have Reason to think we have
not acted an honest Part, as they expect a real, true and lasting Peace will be
settled here. I am also concerned on Account of our Women and Children back,
and of our Brethren the English on the Frontiers. For these now present, who it
was expected would go Home with great Joy, will go Home with their Finger in
their Mouth, as every Body expected this would be the Time of confirming a real
and lasting Peace. I told you I would proclaim with a loud Voice, and those
present are Witnesses to what I said, and will not be easy if this is not done.
I think nothing hinders us at all.

As you told us you had Letters from the King, or Proprietaries, I desire they
may be produced and read, and put down with the Minutes. Now this is the
Conclusion, and in Confirmation of what I have said, I give you this Belt.

Gave a Belt.

The King further said, I desire also that a Copy of what passed in private
between you and me, may be given to be entered with these Minutes, and that it
may be read in public at our next Meeting.

As soon as the Meeting was over, I told the Governor, the Good of His
Majesty's Service required, that Teedyuscung's Request of having the Deeds and
private Conferences read, and Copies of them given him, with a Copy of so much
of the Proprietaries Letters as relates to having the Enquiry made by Sir
William Johnson, should be granted.

Easton, August 2, 1757.
TEEDYUSCUNG, with three Nanticokes, who arrived Yesterday, and three of his
Council, came to me at my Lodgings, and desired I would bear what those
Nanticokes had to say. Upon which the Nanticoke Chief made the following
Speeches.

Brother,

THE chief Man of the Nanticokes has sent me here, to see the Governor and you;
and desired me in his Name to wipe the Tears from your Eyes, which those
troublesome Times may have occasioned; and I do it with this String of Wampum.

A String.

Brothers,

You may have swallowed, since these Troubles arose, something bitter, which
has given your Heart some Uneasiness: I, with this String of Wampum, remove all
Grief from your Hearts, that your Minds may be as easy as they were in Times of
Peace.

A String.

Brothers,

I see a great deal of Blood spilt; I, with this String, clean the Blood from
off your Beds, that you may sleep easy, and from off your Council Seats, that
you may sit with Pleasure in Council with your Brethren; and with this Feather
I open your Ears, which the great high Winds may have stopped, that you may
hear what your Brothers may say to you.

Brothers,

We must consider, and think it was not the good Spirit that has occasioned
this Disturbance; no, it was the evil Spirit that surely occasioned all this
Mischief, and I hope God will direct us to do every Thing in our Power to
assist in the Good Work of Peace, that we may be once more united together, and
live in Friendship, as the good Spirit has ordered us.

Brothers,

I am come here to this Council Fire with our Cousins the Delawares and you, to
give all the Assistance I can to the good Work of Peace, and to join my Cousin
Teedyuscung, and the Six Nations, to gather up the dead Bodies and scattered
Bones together, and will join in Prayer to the good Spirit to hide them; and
when the Peace is confirmed, I will put both my Hands into the Chain of
Friendship with you, and our Cousins the Delawares and the Six Nations; to
confirm my Words, I give this String of Wampum.

Gave a String.

At a MEETING with the Indians in Easton, on Wednesday, August 3, 1757, A. M.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Governor, etc. The Council. The
same Members of Assembly. The Provincial Commissioners. A Number of Gentlemen
from the City of Philadelphia, and others, the Inhabitants of the Province
Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONRAD WEISER, Esquire Interpreter
for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for Teedyuscung. TEEDYUSCUNG,
King of the Delawares, attended by several Chiefs and Deputies of the Ten
Nations be represents, and a great Number of others.


The Governor told Teedyuscung, that Five o'Clock Yesterday was appointed for
the Time of Meeting; but understanding that the King was then particularly
engaged with some Friends lately come in, be had deferred meeting them till
this Morning.

The Governor spoke as follows.

Brother,

I HAVE well weighed and considered what you said to me at our last Meeting,
and am sorry you do not incline to go to Sir William Johnson to have your
Complaints strictly enquired into, and examined by him. It is true Sir William
has, for some Time past, had a general Commission from the King to superintend
Indian Affairs, and that he has given Mr. Croghan a Power to Act as his Deputy,
under which he might have been justified in going into an Examination as well
of your Complaints as the Proprietaries Defense, had not the King's Ministers
lately been pleased to direct the Hearing to be before Sir William Johnson
himself. Though you may think yourselves at Liberty, and may resuse to comply
with these Directions, yet, as I told you before, I am the King's Servant, and
obliged to obey, and cannot take upon me to go into a Defense of the
Proprietaries Title at this Time. But as you so earnestly desire to see the
Deeds for the Lands mentioned in your last Treaty, that you may be satisfied
whether they are genuine, or whether the Indians who signed them had a Right to
sell those Lands, I have brought them with me, and am willing to show them to
you now, or at any other Time you will appoint, and give you Copies of them,
agreeable to your Request.

Here the Deeds were laid down on the Table.

And now let all further Debates and Altercations concerning Lands rest here,
till they shall be fully examined and looked into by Sir William Johnson, in
order to be transmitted to the King for His Royal Determination.

Brother,

After having now gratified you in every reasonable Request, and being
sincerely desirous to re-establish that Friendship and brotherly Love which so
happily subsisted between your Ancestors and ours, I am ready, with the King's
Deputy Agent, to take hold of the two Belts you mentioned with both my Hands,
and confirm a lasting Peace, and exchange them with one prepared for that
Purpose, in the Name of the King of England, and all His Subjects, as soon as
we can agree upon the Terms.

Brother,

The Orders of His Majesty's Ministers, on this Occasion, have been signified
to me by the Proprietaries, which is the proper Channel through which they
should come. That you may the better understand this, it will be necessary to
inform you, that the Proprietaries are Governors in Chief over this Province,
and I am appointed their Deputy, with the Approbation of the Crown. When,
therefore, the last Treaty was laid before the King's Ministers, they gave the
Proprietaries Notice of their Resolution, that the Matter should be heard
before Sir William Johnson only, to whom they would send special Directions for
that Purpose. The Proprietaries, for whom I act in this Case, have made me
acquainted with the Ministers Orders, and desired me to regulate my Conduct by
them. It would have been irregular and improper to have sent the Order itself
to me, but I do not doubt the King's Ministers have transmitted it to Sir
William Johnson, as an Authority for him to hear and examine our Differences,
and that he has received it before this Time. As I could not suspect that you
would have required a Copy of such of the Proprietaries Letters as relate to
this Matter, I did not bring them with me here; wherefore, it is not in my
Power to comply with your Request, to furnish you with Copies of them; and to
confirm the Truth of this, I give you this Belt of Wampum.

When the Governor had ended his Speech, he asked the King whether he would
have the Deeds read now, and Copies taken. Before the King returned an Answer,
he took up the Belt which the Governor had just delivered, and rising up, spoke
first to the Delawares, and then to the Five Nations; then turning to the
Governor, said,

Brother,

I understand the Words you have said here, but they are not agreeable to your
Knowledge, nor a full Answer to what I said. There are two Things not agreeable.

The Governor said, Will the King please to tell what these two Things are. No,
replied the King, let the Governor find them out. The Governor said, he did not
know what the King meant; he wished he knew what Answer to make.

Teedyuscung then said, If it please the Governor, in a few Words, what has
been spoken on that Belt is as a Rumbling over the Earth, or Confusion about
Lands. I did not want you to make Mention of them, when I expected an Answer in
a loving Manner. I wanted you should come to the main Point, without having so
many Words with it.

As the Indians seemed very much at a Loss about the Governor's Speech, I spoke
to the King, and told him, that the first Part of the Governor's Speech was
only to inform the King that the Deeds are now produced, and Copies will be
given to him, agreeable to his own Request, that they may be sent to Sir
William Johnson, to be by him transmitted to the King for His Determination.
This done, we in the next Place now offer to take hold of the two Belts you
mentioned at the last Meeting: That what was said about agreeing upon Terms,
only referred to the Exchange of Prisoners, and other Things usual on making
Peace; which Teedyuscung said he would do after the Peace was confirmed: That
in the Conclusion of his Speech, the Governor only told the King, that the
Proprietaries Letters, for a Copy of which the King asked, were at
Philadelphia, for which Reason the Governor could not comply with what the King
requested, but that an Extract of as much of them as referred to this Affair,
will be delivered to me some Time hence: In Confirmation of which the Governor
gave the Belt.

As soon as the King heard this, he rose up, and taking up the two Belts tied
together, he spoke as follows.

I desire you would with Attention hear me. By these two Belts I will let you
know what was the ancient regular Method of confirming a lasting Peace. This
you ought to have considered, and to have done; but I will put you in Mind. You
may remember, when you took hold of my Hand, and led me down, and invited my
Uncles, several of whom are present, with some from each of the Ten Nations,
when we had agreed we came down to take hold of one of your Hands, and my
Uncles came to take hold of the other Hand. Now, as this Day and this Time is
appointed to meet and confirm a lasting Peace, we, that is, I and my Uncles, as
we stand, and you, as you stand in the Name of the Great King, three of us
standing, we will all look up, and by continuing to observe the Agreements by
which we shall oblige ourselves one to another, we shall see the clear Light,
and Friendship shall last to us, and our Posterity after us, for ever. Now, as
I have two Belts, and Witnesses are present who will speak the same, by these
Belts, Brothers, in the Presence of the Ten Nations, who are Witnesses, I lay
hold of your Hand (taking the Governor by the Hand) and brighten the Chain of
Friendship that shall be lasting; and whatever Conditions shall be proper for
us to agree to, may be mentioned afterward: This is the Time to declare our
mutual Friendship. Now, Brother the Governor, to confirm what I have said, I
have given you my Hand, which you were pleased to rise and take hold of; I
leave it with you. When you please, I am ready. Brother, if you have any Thing
to say as a Token of confirming the Peace, I shall be ready to hear; and as you
arose, I will rise up, and lay hold of your Hand. To confirm what I have said,
I give you these Belts. Gave two Belts tied together.

The Governor said, that he and I would be ready to give an Answer presently.

Then the King taking out another Belt, said, If the Governor please, I have a
Word or two more to say to you. In remembering the old ancient Rules of making
Friendship, I remember I was formerly represented as a Woman by my Uncles, the
Six or Five Nations; but they gave me a Pipe, and good Tobacco; those present
know it to be true; and what I say is in Behalf of all those present, and those
afar off. That Pipe and good Tobacco of Friendship, I now deliver to you.
Brother, when you shall smoke that good Tobacco, it will give you such a
Relish, that you shall feel it as long as the Sun shines. That very good
Tobacco and Pipe that I shall deliver into your Hand, represents among us a
perpetual Friendship. Now I deliver you an equal Part of it, and I desire it
may be a lasting Comfort in this World, and the World to come. Gave a Belt.

After Teedyuscung had confirmed the Peace in Behalf of the Ten Nations he
represents, his Honor the Governor, and myself, confirmed it in Behalf of the
King, and all His Subjects, and exchanged the Belts in the following Manner.

Brother Teedyuscung, and all our Brethren of the Ten Nations,

We your Brethren, all His Majesty's Subjects now present, have heard with
Satisfaction what you have said, and with great Pleasure receive the two Belts
you have given us, which will confirm a lasting Peace to us and our Posterity,
and we embrace this Meeting to exchange with you a Belt of Friendship, and take
hold of you with one Hand, and of the Five Nations with the other, and confirm,
in the Name of the King of Great Britain, and all His Subjects, a lasting
Peace, that may continue as long as the Sun and Moon give Light; and we hope
this Day may be always held in Remembrance by our Posterity; and we will be
ready to consult with you at any Time about settling other Matters, as you
yourself have said. We now rise and take you into our Arms, and embrace you
with the greatest Pleasure as our Friends and Brethren, and heartily desire we
may ever hereaster look on one another as Brethren, and Children of the same
Parents: As a Confirmation of this we give you this Belt.

Gave a very large white Belt, with the Figures of three Men in it,
representing His Majesty King GEORGE, taking hold of the Five Nation King with
one Hand, and Teedyuscung, the Delaware King, with the other, and marked with
the following Letters and Figure, G. R. 5 N. D. K. for King GEORGE, Five
Nations, Delaware King.

This done, the King again asked the Governor for a Copy of the Conferences
that had been held in private, that they might be read in Public, and entered
with the Minutes. The Governor said it was ready, and should be delivered
immediately, and one was sent for it. The Governor then asked the King when it
would be agreeable to him to have the Deeds read. The King said, Tomorrow
Morning, between Seven and Eight a Clock; which Time was accordingly agreed on;
and the Reading of the Private Conferences was deferred till that Time.

I think it necessary to insert here the following Speech of Laboughpeton, a
Delaware Chief, made to Teedyuscung at the Time he seemed at a Loss about the
Governor's Speech to him, which is as follows.

"What, has not our Brother desired you to bring us down by the Hand to make
Peace? why don't you do it? We have been here these twenty Days, and have heard
nothing but scolding and disputing about Lands: Settle the Peace, and let all
these Disputes stand till after."

As soon as the Meeting was over, I let the Governor know I could not help
taking Notice, that there was one Deed relative to those Lands wanting, which
is mentioned in a Treaty held by this Government with the Indians in 1728, said
there to be dated in 1718, and that I expected to see that Deed, and have a
Copy of it; and likewise Extracts of so much of the Proprietaries Letter to him
as relates to the Desire of His Majesty's Ministers, signifying to them, that
they ordered the Differences subsisting between them and the Indians to be
examined by Sir William Johnson. And that as Teedyuscung, in Answer to a
Message his Honor had sent by Mr. Weiser to him Yesterday Morning (which will
appear as follows) said, that he would be contented, so he see all the Deeds
relative to these Back Lands now in Dispute, and have Copies of them, and of
the Proprietaries Letter; and further said, as soon as that was done, he would
not say one Word more about the Disputes about Lands; I then let his Honor
know, as Teedyuscung had now confirmed the Peace, I expected his Honor would
now furnish me with a Copy of that Deed, and the Proprietaries Letter to him.

Easton, August 2, 1757.
THIS Morning Teedyuscung sent Samuel Evans for me to come to him at Colonel
Weiser's Lodging: I went there, and found him with five of his Counselors, and
Mr. Weiser. Upon my coming in, Mr. Weiser told Teedyuscung that he wanted to
have some Conversation with him. Teedyuscung asked him if it was by Order of
the Governor. Mr. Weiser replied, it was by Consent of the Governor and Council.

Mr. Weiser then asked Teedyuscung, whether he wanted to see all the Deeds of
the Province from the first Purchases, or only those relating to the Back Lands
where we are. Mr. Weiser said, the Reason for his asking was, that he believed
the whole of the Deeds were not brought up, but such only as were thought
necessary, and relating to his Complaint, and the late Purchases.

Teedyuscung answered, I should be well pleased to have seen all the Deeds, as
the Country to the Sea Shore was first ours; but if there be the Deeds for
these Back Lands, which is the main Point, I will be contented, so that I see
them, and have Copies of them, and of the Letters from the King's Ministers or
Proprietaries; as soon as that is done, I will not say one Word more about the
Differences or Lands, but confirm the Peace as soon as that is done.

This Evening the Governor wrote me, that his Letter from the Proprietaries was
in Philadelphia, Extracts of which he would give me as soon as I went to Town.
And he assured me, that he would give me a Copy of the Deed mentioned in the
Treaty of 1728.

At a MEETING with the Indians in Easton, Thursday, August 4, 1757.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Governor, etc. The Council. The
same Members of Assembly. The Provincial Commissioners. A Number of Gentlemen
from the City of Philadelphia, and others, the Inhabitants of the Province.
Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONRAD WEISER, Esquire Interpreter
for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for Teedyuscung. TEEDYUSCUNG,
King of the Delawares, attended by several Chiefs and Deputies of the Ten
Nations he represents, and a great Number of others.


THE Conferences held in Council between the Governor and King Teedyuscung were
produced, and read; and to them was added, by Order of the King, and approved
by the Governor, a Paragraph relating to the King's insisting a second Time on
having a Secretary, and the Governor's Answer.

The Deeds shown Yesterday were again produced, and Teedyuscung was told, that
Mr. Charles Thompson, his Secretary, had got Copies of them, and compared them
with the Originals; and was asked if he chose to see the Originals. The King
said, I am satisfied, as my Secretary has seen the Copies compared. If he is
satisfied that they are true Copies, I am satisfied that they should be sent to
the King for His Determination; then asked Mr. Thompson if he had seen them
compared. Mr. Thompson said, he had seen and compared all the Deeds that were
delivered Yesterday. The King then desired an Account of what Deeds were
produced, which was accordingly taken, and is as follows. 1. A Paper Copy of
the last Indian Purchase, 28th of Sixth Month, 1686. 2. A Release from the
Delaware Indians, August 25, 1737. 3. A Release of the Indians of the Five
Nations of the Lands on Sasquehannab River, October 11, 1736. 4. A Release from
the Six Nations of Lands Eastward to Delaware River, dated October 25, 1736,
with another indorsed on it, dated the 9th of July, 1754. 5. A Deed of Release
for Indian Purchase, dated the 22d of August, 1749.

Note, The above Deeds were shown in open Council, and Copies of them delivered
to Teedyuscung, which his Secretary acknowledged he had compared with the
Originals, and that they were true Copies.

When this was done, the Governor spoke to Teedyuscung as follows.

Brother Teedyuscung, and all our Brethren of the Ten Nations.

As you and all His Majesty's Subjects are now united again in the firm Bands
of Peace, it is our Duty to do every Thing in our Power to make each other
happy; and it was stipulated at the Conferences held at this Place last Summer,
that all Prisoners you had taken should be delivered up.

The Relations of those who yet remain Prisoners amongst you, have their Eyes
fixed on me, expecting at my Return to see their Friends restored to them; but
as few of them are brought down, and this will be a Bar to our Happiness, it is
necessary for you to do every Thing in your Power to restore to us, as soon as
possible, all our People that remain Prisoners amongst any of your Nations; and
to procure those who are among any other Tribes in Amity with you, to be sent
to us.

Brother,

It is a Rule among Nations, upon confirming a Peace, to deliver up all
Prisoners on both Sides. It is the only Method we can take to convince each
other of our Sincerity; and we do insist on this being done. You will be so
good, immediately on your Return, to convey them down by some of your young
Men, who shall be well rewarded for their Trouble.

Gave a Belt.

When the Governor had delivered his Speech, and gave the Belt, Teedyuscung
said, I will take no other Belt but the very same I have. Why have you done
this now? Why did you not do it before? After we had finished, why do you make
any Words about such Things? This was your Duty; you ought to have done it
before. If you really believed I would be faithful and honest, you might be
sure I would do it without your delivering a Belt. Now, as you have mentioned
these Things, I also will mention, that you must deliver me my just Due about
Lands. As you mention that your People look to you, expecting to see their
Relations sent back at this Treaty, so the Nations that lay Claim to these
Lands look to me for them.

Returned the Belt.

The Governor told Teedyuscung, that he did not do this, as if he had
distrusted his Honor, the King having already given a full Proof of that, by
delivering up some Prisoners. for which he thanked him; that he only meant to
put the King in Mind of his Promise.

I then told Teedyuscung, that before the Peace was concluded, when I was
explaining to him the Governor's Speech, that Part of it where the Governor
says, "as soon as we can agree upon the Terms," related entirely to the
Exchange of Prisoners, and Teedyuscung said, that should be settled afterward.

Teedyuscung then applied to his Secretary, to know if any such Thing had been
mentioned; and being informed by his Secretary, that it was entered in the
Minutes, he ( Teedyuscung) then rose up, and, having first consulted with his
own People, and the Five Nations spoke as follows.

Brother, the Governor,

Please to hear me in few Words. What you told me I have told to my Uncles the
Six Nations present, and also to all the Ten Nations. We have consulted on
these Words that you have now spoken: We now think they were very proper, and
are very agreeable: We look on it as our Duty: Why should we keep your Flesh
and Blood, or any of your People, when we have agreed as one, and look on one
another as one, and treat one another as Brethren? After we have all
considered, and all present have heard, we beg your Pardon, that we forgot to
give you an Answer immediately. As it was written down by our Clerk in the
Minutes Yesterday, it must be so; and as we are now sensible this Matter was
mentioned Yesterday, we accept your Words, and look on it as our Duty to answer
you, and to perform; whatever shall be in our Power, we shall endeavor to do.
In Confirmation of which I give you my Hand.

Gave the Governor his Hand.

After this Speech the Governor again delivered back the Belt to the King, who
readily accepted it.

The Governor then told the Indians, that a Present was prepared, and would be
delivered to them Tomorrow, as a Token of Friendship.

I told Teedyuscung, that as the Business was now nearly finished with Onas, I
had something to say to him, in the Name of the King of Great Britain, and that
I would let him know when I was to speak to him.

After the Council broke up, the Governor sent for Teedyuscung, and some of his
Counselors, to his Lodgings, from whence we went to Mr. Vernon's, where an
handsome Entertainment was provided, at which were present, the Governor, his
Council, the Speaker, and Members of Assembly, the Commissioners and Gentlemen
in Town; the Delaware King, his Counselors, Warriors, and all the Indians,
Men, Women and Children, in Number about Three Hundred. After Dinner Peace was
proclaimed in Form, and the Proclamation interpreted to the Delawares and Six
Nations; at the Close of which, the Governor, by his Secretary, expressed his
Satisfaction at being one of the happy Instruments of bringing about this
Peace. His Honor recommended it to all Ranks and Professions of Men, to
cultivate, to the utmost of their Power, a good Understanding with the Indians,
and to treat them kindly, that they may daily see the Advantage of preserving
our Friendship.

Having given this in Charge to the Freeholders present, be desired Teedyuscung
to do the same to his People, that we might on both Sides forget what was past,
and live affectionately together for the Time to come. A Detachment of the
Pennsylvania Troops was drawn up in the Front of the Company, and fired three
Vollies.

The Governor afterward continued his Entertainment, at which there was a
great Cheerfulness. At Night was a large Bonfire, and a Variety of Indian
Dances.

At a MEETING with the Indians in Easton, Friday, August 5, 1757.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DENNY, Esquire Governor, etc. The Council. DANIEL
ROBERDEAU, Esquire Member of the Assembly. The Provincial Commissioners. A Number
of Gentlemen from the City of Philadelphia, and others, the Inhabitants of the
Province. Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONR^D WEISER, Esquire
Interpreter for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for Teedyuscung.
TEEDYUSCUNG, King of the Delawares, and the same Indians as before.


THIS Morning another Sheet of Council Conferences was produced, which the
Governor said was omitted to be delivered Yesterday; for which Reason they were
delivered, and publicly read Today, and ordered to be annexed to the
Conferences in Council, delivered and read Yesterday.

After this was read, Teedyuscung arose and said, Brother, I am obliged to you;
I hope, as it lies in your Power, you will act for our mutual Good. I take you
as a Brother. When any Thing is omitted, I hope you will mention it to me; and
I likewise will mention any Thing that I find you may have forgotten. I hope we
both speak with an honest Heart. I trust much to my Interpreter. I thank you
for making that Addition, and, in Token of Friendship, I give you my Hand.

The Governor then addressed the Indians as follows.

Brethren,

The Peace, so happily concluded, gives an universal Joy. I shall proclaim it
far and wide, that all may hear and know it. The People of this Province are
disposed to observe it faithfully, and will do the Indians every good Office in
their Power.

Although we have now so solemnly entered into this Peace with each other, yet
you are sensible there are still many Enemy Indians, who are daily doing
Mischief on our Frontiers. Yesterday I received an Account of one Woman's being
killed, and four Persons taken Prisoners, between Tolbao and Monaidy. As it
will therefore be very difficult to distinguish between our Friends and our
Enemies, I should be glad you would favor me with your Advice how to act in
such a Manner, as not to hurt our Friends, or suffer our Enemies to escape.

Gave a String.

Brethren,

The Governor, and People of this Province, observe, with a brotherly
Compassion, the many Difficulties to which the Indians are exposed in these
troublesome Times, and have therefore provided a Quantity of Goods to supply
them in their Distress. You will, on your Return Home, proclaim the Peace,
Union and Friendship, which is now established between us, and let every one
know, as you have Opportunity, how well disposed you have sound us. Accept
these Presents, as a Testimony of the sincere Affection of us your Brethren
toward you.

To this Teedyuscung replied,

Brother,

I am obliged to you for putting me in Remembrance of these Things. I will take
them into Consideration, and Tomorrow, when I am ready to give you an Answer,
I will let you know. He further added,

Brother,

There is something which we intended to say before, but forgot, as we have not
the Use of Writing. But better late than never; we will therefore mention it
now. The Copy of the Deeds, and the Transactions of this Treaty, we entrust to
our Clerk. We believe him to be an honest Man. Every Thing is done to
Perfection. We hope you will not be against his making out a Copy, and giving
it to Mr. Isaac Norris, whom we also appoint for us, to transmit to the King a
Copy of the Deeds and Minutes of the Treaty, that, if one should misearry, the
other may go safe.

On which I acquainted Teedyuscung, that the Governor and myself had no
Objection to Mr. Norris's having true Copies of the Minutes of these
Conferences and Deeds, to send to the King, as he requested.

Then, by Order of the Governor, Proclamation was made, that no One should
cheat, defraud or purchase any of the Goods now ready to be given to the
Indians, upon the Pain and Penalties that may fall thereon.

Then Teedyuscung said, he had yet one Thing more to mention.

Brother,

I have some Complaints to make about Lands in the Jerseys, in Behalf of
myself, John Pumpshire, Moses Tetamy, and others; which Complaints are
contained in these two Papers: And as you represent Sir William Johnson, the
King's Agent here, I desire you may take them under your Consideration, and see
that Justice is done us on that Account, as it is the King's Orders to you, to
see Justice done to all the Indians in these Parts.

Teedyuscung then ordered Mr. Thompson to read the Papers, and give me true
Copies of them, which he did immediately in public Council.

The Papers delivered me are, a Copy of an old Indian Deed; and a Letter of
Complaint about Lands in the Jerseys, signed by John Pumpshire; I then
acquainted him, that I would take the Papers under my Consideration, and give
him an Answer.

Easton, August 6, 1757.
THIS Morning I expected to have had a Meeting with the Indians, but as the
friendly Association of Quakers had called the Indians together, to deliver
them a Present, the Indians thought proper to put off the Meeting for this Time.

After this the three Nan^^coke Messengers came to me, and congratulated the
Governor and myself on the Conclu^^on of the Peace, and said, they had put both
their Hands into the Chain of Friendship, as they were ordered by their Chief
before they left Home, and, by a String of Wampum, desired that the Governor
might send some Person with them to Lancaster, to take Care of them, and supply
them with Necessaries on the Road, as they were come to take the Bones of their
Friends which died at Lancaster, to their own Town, to be buried with their
Relations.

Gave a String.

This Afternoon Packsinosa, the Shawanese Chief, with Abraham, a Mohickon
Chief, and about Fifty or Sixty of their People, came to Town. Soon after Mr.
Peter's, and Conrad Weiser, went to them, and, with a String of Wampum, bid them
Welcome, agreeable to the ancient Custom of our Forefahters. Teedyuscung, and
the Six Nation Chief, did the same.

At a MEETING with the Indians in Easton, on Sunday, August 7, 1757, at Seven
of Clock in the Morning.
PRESENT, Esquires, Provincial Commissioners.
JOSEPH GALLOWAY, WILLIAM MASTERS, JOSEPH FOX, JOHN HUGHES,
Some Gentlemen from the City of Philadelphia; and others, the Inhabitants of
the Province. Captain THOMAS M'KEE, Interpreter for the Crown. CONRAD WEISER,
Esquire Interpreter for the Province. Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter for
Teedyuscung. TEEDYUSCUNG, King of the Delawares, and his Chiefs. PACKSINOSA,
Chief of the Shawanese. ABRAHAM, Chief of the Mohiccons. The Nanticoke
Messengers. ANAQUATEEKA, Chief of the Six Nations.


Teedyuscung, taking out the Peace Belt that had been delivered to him by the
Governor and myself, repeated over what had been said on it, informing
Packsinosa and Abraham of the Peace concluded by him between the English and
the Ten several Nations he represents, repeating over the Names of the Ten
Nations.

After which I spoke to them, in the Name of Sir William Johnson, as follows.

Brother Teedyuscung, and all the Chiefs and Warriors of the Ten Nations, our
Friends and Brethren,

AS we are now become one People, we must look on the Enemies of the one as the
Enemies of the other.

And I now, in the Name of the King of Great Britain, your Father, and my
Master, desire you will turn the Edge of your Hatchet against your and our
common Enemies, in Conjunction with your Uncles the Six Nations and us; and
that you will not suffer any of His Majesty's Enemies to pass through your
Country to war against any of His Subjects in this or the neighboring
Colonies: And if a Body of the Enemy, so large that you are not able to repel,
should attempt to pass across your Country, I expect you will give the earliest
Notice you can of it to your Brethren the English, either by Way of Fort
Augusta, or any other Way you shall judge most convenient.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

You said, as soon as the Peace should be confirmed, that you would speak with
a loud Voice, and the Nations around should hear you. As that good Work is now
happily accomplished, I desire you may proclaim it aloud, that all the Nations
may hear it.

Brother,

You must be sensible that your Brethren, the English, are the most wealthy and
powerful People on this Continent, and not only so, but the best inclined to
help and assist their Brethren the Indians with the Necessaries of Life; all
this you should let the Nations know that you speak to; and I assure you, in
the Name of the King of Great Britain, and of Sir William Johnson, His
Majesty's sole Agent, and Superintendent of the Affairs of the Six Nations,
their Allies and Dependents, in the Northern District, that they are ready to
receive with open Arms all the Nations you shall speak to, that desire to take
hold of the Chain of Friendship, and be united with the Six Nations, you, and
us, your Brethren the English.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

The Papers you delivered me Yesterday, containing your, John Pumpshire, Tundy,
alias (Moses) Tetamy, and others, Complaints of Lands you say you have been
defrauded of in the Jerseys; I assure you I will do every Thing in my Power to
have a strict Enquiry made about them, and when I can get the fair State of the
Case, I will lay it before Sir William Johnson, for him to send to the King for
His Royal Determination, unless the Difference can be settled here to your
Satisfaction.

Gave a String.

To this Teedyuscung answered,

Brother,

I will, in Answer to what you tell me, let you know what I intend to do. I
shall, Brother, as I promised to speak with a loud Voice to the Nations,
perform my Promise, and speak to the different Nations. I will faithfully let
them know what you have promised, and, as we are Witnesses that you are wealthy
and powerful, and well disposed to assist such as shall come in as Brothers, I
will let them know it. And also, as I think it is very proper that I should do
so, and as I think it my Duty, whatever Nation I see coming against the
English, whenever I see them, I will make ready, and do every Thing in my Power
to vindicate the Cause of myself, and of my Brethren. If I am able, I will let
them go no farther than where I tell them to stop. If they will not, by
reasonable Terms, turn about, and join with me, I will then either make an End
of them, or they of me. And if there is a great Number, so that I may not be
able to withstand them, I will take all prudent Steps to let my Brethren the
English know. And also, if I perceive that there is so great a Number, that it
is not safe for my Women and Children, I will acquaint my Brethren the English,
that they may assist me in defending my Women and Children, and I will leave my
Country, and bring them down to you.

Now, you may remember I was styled by my Uncles, the Six Nations, a Woman in
former Years, and had no Hatchet in my Hand, but a Pestle or Hominy Pounder,
but now, Brethren, here are some of my Uncles, who are present, to witness the
Truth of this; as I had no Tomahawk, and my Uncles were always styled Men, and
had Tomahawks in their Hands, they gave me a Tomahawk. And as my Uncles have
given me the Tomahawk, and appointed and authorized me to make Peace with a
Tomahawk in my Hand, I take that Tomahawk, and turn the Edge of it against your
Enemies the French. In Confirmation of what I now say, I give you this String.

Gave a String.

Brother,

I have just a Word or two more. I remember what you have spoken, in order that
we may prevent any Mischief, by having a Signal: I should be glad that the
French may not deceive us, that not one but several Signs and Methods may be
fixed on by you. And whatever you shall think proper, I will agree to.

Gave a Belt.

I then returned Teedyuscung Thanks for his kind Speech, and let him know that
I would consult with the Governor about settling the Signals, and would give
him an Answer.

Teedyuscung

Teedyuscung then taking up four Belts, and a String, spoke to his Uncles, the
Six Nations, telling them, that as they had empowered him, he had, in the
Presence of these Witnesses they had sent, made a firm Peace with their
Brethren the English; he, therefore, by these Belts desired, that they would
perform their Part; and as they said they would take hold of the English by one
Hand, and he by the other, he had now done it. And as the Chain of Friendship
was now brightened, he desired they would be strong, and if they see any
Enemies coming against us, they would look on it, that whoever strikes any one
of us strikes all. These Belts he gave to Anaquateeka, and desired he would
carry them to the Six Nations.

Teedyuscung then acquainted me that he had done; whereupon Packsinosa spoke to
me as follows.

Brother,

I heartily thank you for being so kind as to wipe the Sweat from our Faces,
picking out the Briars, and taking away all bad Thoughts from our Minds, and
cleaning the Passage from the Heart to the Throat, that we may see our
Brethren, and be well from all our Wounds. By these Strings we return you
Thanks.

Gave a String.

The same he said by another String to the Six Nations and Delawares.

Then the young Warrior, Anaquateeka, arose, and, directing his Speech to the
English, and his Cousins, said,

Brethren,

My Cousins have entrusted me with all that was here transacted, respecting the
great Work of Peace here confirmed, to lay it before the Six Nations. I assure
you I will execute the Trust reposed in me with Faithfulness, and lay it before
the Six Nations, particularly before the Senecas, to whom I belong. I do not
pretend to be a Counselor: I am a young Warrior; yet the Affairs of War and
Peace belong to us Warriors: And as I am entrusted, I assure you I will take
Care that all the Six Nations may know what is here done.

Then his Honor the Governor, Mr. Logan, and Mr. Peter's, came into Council. I
acquainted the Governor, that I thought it was proper what had been transacted
this Morning should be read, and it was accordingly done; after which the
Governor addressed Packsinosa as follows.

Brother Packsinosa,

You have been frequently invited by this Government to come and give us the
Pleasure of a Visit. I am glad to see you, I take you by the Hand, and bid you
heartily welcome, and thank you for bringing along with you Abraham, the
Mohiccon Chief; he is likewise extremely welcome.

Gave a String.

Brother,

We have often enquired after you, and always heard you continued to be our
hearty Friend, and a Lover of Peace. (...) William Johnson was kind enough to
send me an Account of the Conferences he lately held (...) you at Fort Johnson,
and they gave me great Satisfaction.

Brother,

With Pleasure I acquaint you, that Peace is now concluded, and it will add
much to the Joy all feel on this successful Issue of our Conferences; and I am
glad to see you and Abraham here to take hold of the Peace Belt.

Gave a Belt.

Brother,

We were in Hopes to have seen you with Teedyuscung when he came here. We heard
you was not come, but would follow: I have staid some Time in Expectation of
your Arrival. I should have been glad to have spent more Time with you, but the
Business of the Government obliges me to return to Philadelphia this Afternoon,
so that you will please to use Dispatch in letting me know any Thing you may
have to say to us.

Having finished this Speech, the Governor told Packsinosa, that some Presents
were reserved for him and his Friends, which should be delivered presently.

Teedyuscung then addressing himself to the Governor, spoke as follows

Brother,

I have a Word or two more to say. You know when you employ your Soldiers, they
are paid for their Services. As I am joined with you, you being rich, and I
poor, as I am going against your Enemies, and carrying my Flesh against them, I
think it would be proper, for the Encouragement of my young Men, to appoint
some Reward for Scalps, and Prisoners, and that some Place may be fixed, where
the Scalps and Prisoners may be brought in, and the Reward received, that my
Men may return quickly from thence.

Then the Governor said, he would take into Consideration what he, Teedyuscung,
had said, and in Half an Hour would return an Answer.

Teedyuscung further added; You may remember, when I mentioned Isaac Norris,
the Speaker, I mentioned him alone; but I did not intend to mention him alone,
but that he, with the Assembly, should look into it, and send Copies Home. -- I
then told Teedyuscung, that I had no Objection to Mr. Norris, with the
Assembly, sending authentic Copies of the Minutes of this Treaty, and Deeds,
Home.

Sunday, August 7, 1757.
PRESENT, The Honorable the GOVERNOR. Esquires, Members of the Council.
WILLIAM LOGAN, RICHARD PETER'S,
CONRAD WEISER, Esquire; Mr. JOHN PUMPSHIRE, Interpreter. TEEDYUSCUNG. Packsinosa,
Shawanese Chief. Abraham, Mohickon Chief. Seneca Chief. Daniel. A Nanticocke,
and 4 other Delaware Indians.


Teedyuscung addressed the Governor as follows.

Brother,

WE have now finished. The Treaty is over. Peace is confirmed. I told you I
thought of going to Philadelphia, but upon considering the Matter with more
Attention, I think it will be more for the public Service if I proceed
immediately to Diahogo: Many Nations will be uneasy to know what has been done
at this Council-Fire, and will take their Measures accordingly; I shall
therefore make the best of my Way to Diahogo, and proclaim there, and to
Nations still more distant, the Confirmation of the Peace with our Brethren the
English. This will take up three or four Months; after which I may perhaps come
and see you at Philadelphia. I wish the Governor a good Journey, and that we
may both live to enjoy the Fruits of this happy Peace, which gives my People
great Joy.

To which the Governor returned the following Answer.

Brother Teedyuscung,

It gives me great Pleasure that we have brought the important Business we met
about to so happy an Issue. You have very agreeably prevented my mentioning to
you the Necessity of your returning Home, in order to publish to the Indians
what has been transacted here. I thank you for the Change of your Purpose: It
is a further Sign of your Zeal for Peace, and I make no Doubt but you will use
your utmost Dispatch.

In Answer to what you requested this Morning, I assure you that your Warriors
will always find this Government ready to reward them for any Services they
shall do against the Enemy. I cannot at present give you a more particular
Answer, but shall lay your Proposals before the Assembly, who meet Tomorrow,
and consult with them thereupon.

Teedyuscung replied.

Brother, the Governor,

You have not so much as given us a rusty Iron to defend ourselves. If we meet
an Enemy on the Road, what are we to do? We cannot defend ourselves against
him. We have nothing to do it with. Our young Warriors think as much of
themselves, and their Lives are as dear to them as white People's. But you have
not given them any Encouragement to go against the Enemy. Can this be right?
You know you have not. Consider this well Brother.

Further, Brother, I think it proper to tell you, if English and Indians shall
go to War together, my young Men will not be subject to an English Captain; and
if any of your People will go to War with me, I expect they will be subject to
my Directions: We understand our own Way of Fighting better than you.

The Governor then said he had given Directions to Colonel Weiser to agree with
him on proper Signals for the Indians, when they were coming toward the
inhabited Parts of this Province, as this was a Matter that ought not to be
spoke of in Public.

They then took a kind Leave of each other, and the Governor set out for
Philadelphia.

Compared with the Original, by JACOB DUCHE, Assistant Clerk to Mr. CROGHAN.


