Anno Regni Regis GEORGII Secundi, etc. Tricesimo. An Act providing Remedy for
Bankrupts, and their Creditors.
WHEREAS diverse Persons in this Province having of late become Insolvent, have
secreted themselves, and their Estates, to the great Hurt of themselves, their
Families and Creditors:

For Remedy whereof, and to prevent many Inconveniences that happen to
Creditors and Debtors in Case of Insolvency:

Be it enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and House of
Representatives, That (...) Persons using, or that shall use the Trade of
Merchandise by Way of Bargaining, Exchange, Bartering or otherwise in Gross or
by Retail, or seeking his, her or their Living by buying and selling, who has
departed or shall depart this Province, begun or begin to keep his or her
House, or otherwise to absent him or her self, or suffer him or her self
willingly to be arrested for any Debt or other Thing not grown or due for Money
delivered, Wares sold, or other just or lawful Cause or good Consideration, or
has or shall willingly or fraudulently procure him or her self to be arrested,
or his or her Goods or Money to be attached, or depart from his or her
Dwelling House, or make or cause to be made any fraudulent Grant or Conveyance
of his, her or their Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels, to the Intent or
whereby his, her or their Creditors shall or may be defeated or delayed in the
Recovery of their just and true Debts, or being arrested for Debt, shall after
his or her Arrest lie in Prison six Months upon that Arrest, or upon any other
Arrest or Detention in Prison for Debt, or being arrested for a just Debt or
Debts shall at any Time after such Arrest escape out of Prison, shall be
accounted and adjudged a Bankrupt to all Intents and Purposes.

And be it further enacted, That the Commander in Chief with the Advice of any
five of his Majesty's Council, or the major Part of said five, upon every
Complaint made to him in Writing against such Person or Persons being Bankrupt,
shall have full Power and Authority by Commission under the great Seal of this
Province, to name, assign and appoint such honest and discreet Persons as to
them shall seem good, who, or the most Part of them, by Virtue of this Act and
of such Commission, shall have full Power and Authority, as in their Discretion
shall seem meet, to take such Order and Direction with the Body and Bodies of
such Person wheresoever he or she may be had, either in his or her House or
Houses or elsewhere, as well by Imprisonment of his or her Body or Bodies, as
also with all his or her Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which he or she
shall have in his or her own Right before he or she became Bankrupt; and also
with all such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as such Person shall have
purchased or obtained for Money or other Recompense jointly with his Wife,
Children or Child, to the only Use of such Bankrupt or Bankrupts, or of or for
such Use, Interest, Right or Title, as such Bankrupt or Bankrupts then shall
have in the same, which he or she may lawfully depart withal, or with any
Person or Persons of Trust to any secret Use of such Bankrupt or Bankrupts; and
also with his or her Money, Goods, Chattels and Debts, wheresoever they may be
found or known, and cause the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Money,
Chattels, Goods and Debts to be searched, viewed, rented and appraized, and by
Deed indented and duly acknowledged and registered, to make Sale of such Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, and of all Deeds, Writings and Evidences touching
only the same, belonging to such Debtor or Debtors; and also of all Annuities,
Goods and Chattels, or otherwise to order the same for the true Satisfaction
and Payment of the said Creditors, that is to say, a Portion Rate and Rate like
to the Sum of his or their Debt.

And for the better Distribution of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods,
Chattels and other Estate of such Bankrupt, to and amongst his or her
Creditors:

Be it enacted, That the said Commissioners or the greater Part of them, shall
and may examine upon Oath or by any other Ways and Means as to them shall seem
meet, any Person or Persons for the finding out and Discovery of the Truth and
Certainty of the several Debts due and owing to all such Creditor and Creditors
as shall seek Relief by such Course of Commission, to be sued forth as
aforesaid; and that all and every Creditor and Creditors having Security for
his and their several Debts by Judgment, Statute or Recognizance, or that have
made or shall make. Attachment of the Goods and Chattels of any such Bankrupt
on Supposal of his Absconding or Absence, whereof there shall be no Execution
served and executed upon any of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and
other Estate of such Bankrupt, before such Time as he or she shall or do become
Bankrupt, shall not be relieved upon any such Judgment, Statute, Recognizance,
Attachment, for any more than a Ratable Part of their just and due Debts, with
the other Creditors of the said Bankrupt.

And be it further enacted, That every Direction, Order, Bargain, Sale, and
other Things done by the said Persons so authorized as aforesaid, in Form
aforesaid shall be good and effectual in the Law to all Intents, Constructions
and Purposes against the said Bankrupt or Bankrupts, his or their Wife or
Wives, Heir and Heirs, Child and Children, and such Person and Persons as by
such joint Purchase with the said Bankrupt or Bankrupts as is aforesaid, have
or shall have any Estate or Interest in the Premises, and against all other
Person and Persons claiming by, from or under such Debtor or Debtors by any Act
or Acts had, made or done after any such Person shall become Bankrupt, as is
aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, That the said Commissioners, or greater Part of
them, after having declared such Person a Bankrupt, shall cause Notice thereof
to be given in the public Boston Newspapers for (...) Weeks successively, and
shall therein appoint Time and Place for the said Bankrupt to surrender him or
her self to them, and to conform to this Act, which Time they or the greater
Part of them may enlarge as is hereafter mentioned; and if the said Bankrupt
shall not at one or other of those Times surrender him or her self to the said
Commissioners, then the Body of all and every such Offender or Offenders shall
be adjudged, taken and deemed to all Intents and Purposes out of his Majesty's
Protection, and every Person and Persons that shall willingly and wittingly
help to hide, or shall willingly and wittingly receive, detain or keep secretly
any Person or Persons so demanded, as is aforesaid, shall suffer such
Imprisonment, or pay such Fine as to the Court of Assize, upon Conviction
thereof, shall seem meet; and the said Commissioners, or the greater Part of
them, shall or may at any Time after the issuing of such Commission as they in
their Discretion shall think sit, a ward a Warrant to such Person or Persons,
as they think meet, to apprehend the Body and Bodies of the said Bankrupt and
Bankrupts, and to bring him, her or them before the said Commissioners,
wheresoever the said Party or Parties may be found, to be examined by the said
Commissioners, or the greater Part of them: And it shall be lawful for the said
Commissioners, or the greater Part of them, or any other Person or Persons,
Officer or Officers, by them, or the greater Part of them, to be deputed and
appointed by their Warrant or Warrants under their Hands and Seals, to break
open the House or Houses, Chambers, Shops, Warehouses, Doors, Trunks or Chests
of the said Bankrupt, where any of his or her Goods or Estate shall be, or
reputed to be, and to seize upon, and order the Body, Goods, Chattels, ready
Money and other Estate of such Bankrupt, whether it be by Imprisonment of his
or her Body, or otherwise as to the said Commissioners, or the greater Part of
them, shall be thought meet: And it shall be lawful for the said Commissioners,
or the greater Part of them, to examine every Person against whom any
Commission shall be awarded, by Oath or solemn Affirmation, upon such
Interrogatories touching such Person's Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods,
Chattels, Debts, Bills, Bonds, Books of Accounts, and all other Matters
relating to his or her Trade and Effects, and such other Things, as may tend to
disclose his or her Estate, or the secret Grants, Conveyances and Eloyning of
his, her or their Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Money and Debts as
they shall think meet; and likewise so to examine the Wife of such Bankrupt for
the finding out and Discovery of the Estate, Goods and Chattels of such
Bankrupt, concealed, kept or disposed of by her, in her own Person, or by her
own Act and Means, or by any other Person or Persons, and likewise so to
examine any Person supposed or suspected to be indebted to the said Bankrupt,
or to have any of the Goods, Chattels, Debts, Estate or Securities of such
Bankrupt in his or her Custody, Use, Occupying, Direction or Command, or any
other Person duly summoned or present at the Meeting of the Commissioners,
touching the Premises, and any Acts of Bankruptcy committed by him or her; and
also to reduce into Writing the Answers of such Bankrupt, his Wife or other
Person, which Examination the Party examined is required to subscribe; and in
Case such Bankrupt, his Wife or other Person shall refuse to Answer, or shall
not fully answer to the Satisfaction of the Commissioners, all lawful Questions
put by the Commissioners, or shall refuse to subscribe his Examination (not
having a reasonable Objection to the Wording thereof, or otherwise to be
allowed by the Commissioners) it shall be lawful for the Commissioners by
Warrant to commit him or her to such Prison as the Commissioners shall think
fit, there to remain without Bail, until such Person shall submit him or her
self to the Commissioners, and full Answer make to the Satisfaction of the
Commissioners to all such Questions as shall be put to him or her, and
subscribe such Examination as aforesaid: And in Case any Person shall be
committed by the Commissioners for refusing to answer, or not fully answering
any Question, the Commissioners shall in their Warrant of Commitment specify
such Question. And in Case any Person committed by the Commissioners Warrant,
shall bring a Habeas Corpus in Order to be discharged, and there shall appear
any Insufficiency in the Form of the Warrant, it shall be lawful for the Court
or Judge, before whom such Party shall be brought by Habeas Corpus, by Rule or
Warrant, to commit such Person to the same Prison, there to remain until he or
she shall conform as aforesaid, unless it shall be made appear that such Person
has fully answered all lawful Questions put by the Commissioners, or (in Case
such Person was committed for not signing his Examination) unless it shall
appear that the Party had good Reason for refusing to sign the same: And in
Case any Jailer, to whom such Person shall be committed, shall wilfully suffer
such Person to escape, or to go without the Walls or Doors of the Prison, such
Jailer shall for such Offense, being convicted thereof by Indictment or
Information, forfeit Five Hundred Pounds, for the Use of the Creditors: And the
Jailer shall upon Request of any Creditor, having proved his Debt, and
producing a Certificate thereof under the Hands of the Commissioners (which the
Commissioners shall give gratis) produce such Person so committed, and in Case
such Jailer shall refuse to show such Person so committed, and being in his
actual Custody at the Time of such Request, to such Creditor requesting to see
such Person, such Jailer shall forfeit One Hundred Pounds, for the Use of the
Creditors, to be recovered by Action of Debt in the Name of the Creditor
requesting such Sight.

And be it further enacted, That if upon the Examination of such Bankrupt, it
shall appear that he, she or they have committed any wilful or corrupt Perjury,
tending to the Hurt or Damage of the Creditors of the said Bankrupt to the
Value of ten Pounds, or above, the Party so offending, shall or may thereof be
indicted in his Majesty's Court of Assize, and being lawfully convicted
thereof, shall stand in the Pillory one Hour, and have one of his Ears cut off.
And it shall and may be lawful for such Commissioners or the greater Part of
them, to issue such Process against the Wife of such Bankrupt, and every
Witness duly summoned, and not appearing before the said Commissioners at the
Time and Place by them appointed, shall incur such Danger and Penalty as is
above made and provided against the Bankrupt himself, and the lawful Costs of
all Witnesses shall be rateably born by the Creditors of such Bankrupt,
according to the Proportion of each of their several Debts.

And be it further enacted, That if any Bankrupt shall upon Examination before
the said Commissioners executing the said Com^^^^ion, be found fraudulently or
deceitfully to have conveyed away his or her Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Annuities or other Estate, or any Part thereof to the Value of twenty
Pounds, or above, to the End and Purpose to hinder the Execution of this Act,
or thereby to defraud, delay or hinder his or her Creditors of the same, and
shall not upon Examination discover to the said Commissioners, or the greater
Part of them, and if it lie in his or her Power, deliver unto the said
Commissioners all that Estate, Goods and Chattels so fraudulently conveyed away
as aforesaid, or by him or her, his or her Means kept or detained from the said
Commissioners, or shall not as far as lies in his or her Power convey to the
said Commissioners all his or her Estate lying out of this Province, to be
disposed by the said Commissioners as his or her other Estate for the Benefit
of the Creditors, shall or may be indicted for such Fraud or Abuse at the
Assizes or General Sessions to be holden before the Judges of Assize, or
Justices of the Peace of the County where he or she shall become Bankrupt, and
the Bankrupt upon Conviction thereof, shall stand in the Pillory one Hour, and
have one of his Ears cut off.

And be it further enacted, That if any Person which is or shall be a Bankrupt
by the Intent of this Act, shall convey or procure, or cause to be conveyed to
any Person or Persons any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Annuities, Leases,
Goods, Chattels, or transfer his Debts into other Men's Names, except the same
shall be purchased, conveyed or transferred for some good or valuable
Consideration, it shall be in the Power and Authority of the Commissioners in
this Behalf to be appointed, or the greater Part of them, to bargain, sell,
grant, convey, demise, or otherwise to dispose thereof in as ample Manner as if
the said Bankrupt had been actually seized or possessed thereof, or the Debts
were in his own Name, of the like Estate or Interest to his or their own Use at
such Time as he or she became Bankrupt; and that every such Grant, Bargain,
Sale Conveyance and Disposition of the said Commissioners, or the greater Part
of them, shall be good and available to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes
in the Law against the Offender and Offenders, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns; and such Persons as shall be subject to this Act,
and against all other Person and Persons claiming by, from or under such
Offender or Offenders, or such said other Persons to whom such Conveyance shall
be made by the said Bankrupt, or by his Means or Procurement.

And be it further enacted, That if any Person or Persons being known, supposed
or suspected to have or detain any Part of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Goods, Chattels or Debts of the said Bankrupt, or to be indebted to or for his
or her Benefit, shall not upon Examination disclose, and plainly declare and
show the whole Truth of such Things as he or they shall be examined of
concerning the Premises to his Knowledge, then every such Person or Persons
upon due Proof thereof to be made before the said Commissioners, or the greater
Part of them, so to be appointed as is aforesaid, by Witness, Examination or
otherwise, as to the said Commissioners, or the greater Part of them shall seem
sufficient in that Behalf, shall lose and forfeit double the Value of all such
Goods, Chattels, Wares, Merchandises and Debts by them or any of them so
concealed, and not wholly and plainly declared and showed; which Forfeiture
shall be levied by the said Commissioners, or the greater Part of them, of the
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of such Person not
disclosing the whole Truth as is aforesaid, by such Ways and Means, and in such
Manner and Form as is before limited and appointed for the principal Offender
or Offenders, Debtor or Debtors; and the same Forfeiture or Forfeitures to be
distributed or employed to and for the Satisfaction and Payment of the Debts of
the said Creditor or Creditors in such like Manner, Rate and Form, as is above
declared concerning the ordering of the Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels of
such Debtor or Debtors, as is aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, That if at any Time before or after that any such
Person or Persons depart the Province, keep his or their Houses, or otherwise
absent him or themselves, or suffer him or themselves to be arrested or
imprisoned, or escape as is aforesaid, any Person or Persons do fraulently by
Coven or Collusion, claim, demand, or recover any Debts, Duties, Goods,
Chattels, Lands or Tenements, which were or shall be due, belonging or
appertaining to any such Bankrupt or Bankrupts, other than such as he or they
can and do prove to be true by Right and Conscience, in Form aforesaid, for
Money paid, Wares delivered, or other just Consideration, or Cause reasonable
to the just Value thereof before the said Commissioners so to be appointed, or
the greater Part of them, as is aforesaid, and the same to proceed, bona fide,
without Fraud or Coven, that then every such Person or Persons so craftily
demanding and claiming any such Debt, Duty or other Thing as is aforesaid,
shall forfeit and lose double as much as he or they shall so claim and demand,
which said Forfeiture shall be recovered, levied and employed in Manner and
Form as is before rehearsed: And every Person who shall have accepted of any
Trust, and shall wilfully conceal any Estate of any Brankrupt, and shall not
within forty two Days after such Commission shall issue, and Notice given in
the public Newspapers, discover such Trust and Estate in Writing to one of the
Commissioners or Assignees hereafter mentioned, and submit to be examined
thereupon (if required,) shall forfeit One Hundred Pounds, and double the Value
of the Estate concealed, to the Creditors. And if any Person or Persons other
than the Bankrupt, either by Subornation, unlawful Procurement, sinister
Persuasion, or Means of any others, or by his own Act, Consent or Agreement,
shall wilfully and corruptly commit any Manner of wilful Perjury by his
Deposition to be taken before the said Commissioners, or the greater Part of
them, as aforesaid, that then the Party or Parties so offending, and all and
every Person and Persons that shall unlawfully and corruptly procure any such
unlawful, wilful and corrupt Perjury, shall or may therefore be indicted in his
Majesty's Superior Court, and after his or their Conviction thereof, shall
incur such Forfeiture, and receive and suffer such Pains and Punishment, as are
limited by the Statute made concerning Perjury, in the fifth Year of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth.

And be it further enacted, That all and every Sum and Sums of Money which
shall be forfeited by Force of this Act, shall be sued for and recovered by the
said Creditors only, or any of them that will sue for the same, by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record;
and the Sum and Sums of Money so recovered, (the Charges of Suit being
deducted) shall be distributed and divided toward the Payment of the said
Creditors.

Provided always, and be it enacted, That if it shall happen that the Creditors
of any such Bankrupt, as is aforesaid, be paid and satisfied their Debts and
Duties of or with the proper Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels and Debts of the
said Bankrupt, or of or with the same and some Part of the Forfeitures of the
said double Values to be forfeited as is aforesaid, and that there shall remain
an Overplus of the said Forfeiture of the said double Values, that the said
Overplus shall by the said Commissioners so executing the said Commission, be
paid to the Treasurer of this Province for the Use thereof.

And be it further enacted, That the Commissioners of Bankrupts, or the greater
Part of them, shall have Power to grant and assign, or otherwise to dispose all
or any of the Debts due, or to be due, to and for the Benefit of the said
Bankrupt, by what Person or Persons soever, or in what Manner and Form soever,
to the Use of the Creditors of the said Bankrupt. And that the same Grant,
Assignment or Disposition of the said Debts, in Form hereafter mentioned by the
said Commissioners, or the greater Part of them, shall so vest the Property,
Right and Interest of the said Debt and Debts, in the Person or Persons of him,
her or them, to whom it shall be granted, assigned or ordered by the said
Commissioners, or the greater Part of them, as fully to all Intents and
Purposes, as if the Bill, Bond, Bonds, Recognizances, Judgment or Contract,
whereupon the said Debt or Debts, Deed or Deeds shall arise or grow, had been
made, to or with, or for the said Person or Persons to whom the same shall be
so granted, assigned or disposed by the said Commissioners; and that after such
Grant, Assignment or Disposition made of the said Debts, that neither the
Bankrupt, nor any other to whom such Debts shall be due, shall have Power to
recover the same, nor to make any Release or Discharge thereof, neither shall
the same be attached as the Debt of the Bankrupt, or such said other Person or
Persons to whom the same shall be due, by any other Person or Persons; but that
the Party or Parties to whom the same Debt shall be assigned, shall have like
Remedy to recover the same, as fully and lawfully in the Name or Names of the
Person or Persons to whom the same shall be so granted, assigned or ordered by
the said Commissioners, in all Respects and Purposes, as the Party himself
might have had; any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, That no Debtor of the Bankrupt be hereby endangered, for any
Payment truly and bona fide made to any such Bankrupt before such Time as he
shall understand or know that he is become a Bankrupt.

Provided also, and be it further enacted, That such of the said Commissioners
as shall put the said Commission in Execution, shall upon lawful Request to
them made by the said Bankrupt, not only make a true Declaration to the said
Bankrupt, of the employing and bestowing of his, her, or their said Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, Goods, Wares, Chattels and Debts, which shall be
paid and satisfied to their said Creditors, but also make Payment of the
Overplus of the same, if any such there be, to the said Bankrupts, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns. And that the said Bankrupts, after the
full Satisfaction of the said Creditors, shall have full Power and Authority to
recover and receive the Residue and Remainder of the Debts to them owing; any
Thing in this Act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, That the Creditors who shall petition for a
Commission of Bankruptcy, shall be obliged at their own Costs to prosecute the
same, until Assignees shall be chosen; and the Commissioners shall, at the
Meeting appointed for the Choice of Assignees ascertain such Costs, and by
Writing shall order the Assignees to Reimburse such petitioning Creditors out
of the first Effects of the Bankrupt that shall be got in; and the
Commissioners shall forthwith, after they have declared the Person a Bankrupt,
and caused Notice thereof to be given in the public Newspapers, appoint Time
and Place for the Creditors to meet in Order to choose Assignees; at which
Meeting the Commissioners shall admit the Proof of any Creditor's Debt that
shall live remote from the Place of such Meeting by Affidavit or solemn
Affirmation, and permit any Person duly authorized by Letter of Attorney, (Oath
or Affirmation being made of the Execution thereof, either by an Affidavit
sworn, or Affirmation made before a Justice of the Peace, or before the
Commissioners viva voce; and in Case of Creditors residing in distant Parts,
such Affidavits or Affirmations shall be made before a Magistrate where the
Party shall be residing, and shall, together with such Creditor's Letters of
Attorney, be attested by a Notary-Publick) to vote in the Choice of Assignees
in the Place of such Creditor; and the Commissioners shall assign such
Bankrupt's Estate unto such Persons as the major Part in Value of such
Creditors, according to the Debts then proved, shall choose; and the Assignees
shall be obliged to keep Books of Account, wherein they shall enter all Sums of
Money, or other Effects which they shall have received out of the said
Bankrupt's Estate, to which Books every Creditor shall have free Resort; and no
Creditor, or other Person on the Behalf of any Creditor, shall be permitted to
Vote in such Choice of Assignees, whose Debt shall not amount to ten Pounds.

And it shall be lawful for the Commissioners immediately to appoint Assignees,
which Assignees shall be removed at the Meeting of the Creditors for Choice of
Assignees, if the major Part in Value of them then present, and of such Persons
authorized as aforesaid, shall think fit; and such Assignees as shall be
removed, shall deliver up the said Bankrupt's Effects and Estate unto the
Assignees chosen by the Creditors; and if such first Assignees shall neglect by
the Space of ten Days (after Notice in Writing) to make such Assignment and
Delivery, every such first Assignee shall forfeit Two Hundred Pounds, to be
distributed amongst the Creditors, and to be recovered by such Person as the
Commissioners shall appoint to sue for the same.

And it shall be lawful for the Commander in Chief, with the Advice of any five
of his Majesty's Council, or the major Part of them upon Petition of Creditors,
to make such Order for the Choice of new Assignees, as he with such Advice
shall think just; and in Case a new Assignment shall be ordered, then such
Effects of such Bankrupt shall be thereby effectually vested in such new
Assignees, and it shall be lawful for them to sue for the same in their Names,
and to give Acquittance for Debts, as the Assignees in the former Assignment
might have done; and the Commissioners shall cause public Notice to be given
in the Boston Newspapers that shall immediately follow the Removal of such
Assignees, and the Appointment of others: And before the Creditors shall
proceed to the Choice of Assignees, the major Part in Value of the Creditors
present, shall if they think fit, direct how, and with whom the Moneys to be
received out of the Bankrupt's Estate shall remain until the same be divided,
to which Rule such Assignees shall conform, as often as fifty Pounds shall be
got in.

And the Persons chosen Assignees, shall after the Expiration of four Months,
and within twelve Months from the Time of issuing such Commission, cause
twenty-one Days Notice to be given in the public Newspapers, of the Time and
Place the Commissioners and Assignees intend to meet to make a Dividend, at
which Time the Creditors who have not before proved their Debts, shall be at
Liberty to prove the same; and upon every such Meeting, the Assignees shall
produce Accounts of their Receipts and Payments, and of what shall remain
outstanding, and shall (if the Creditors present require the same) be examined
upon Oath, or solemn Affirmation touching the Truth of such Accounts; and the
Assignees shall be allowed all just Allowances, and the Commissioners shall
Order such Part of the neat Produce of the said Bankrupt's Estate in the Hands
of the Assignees, as they shall think fit, to be divided amongst the Creditors,
and shall make such Order for a Dividend in Writing, and shall cause one Part
of such Order to be filed amongst the Proceedings under the Commission, and
shall deliver unto each of the Assignees a Duplicate of such Order; which Order
shall contain an Account of the Time and Place of making such Order, and the
Sum total of the Debts proved, and the Sum total of the Money remaining in the
Hands of the Assignees, and how much in the Pound is then ordered to be paid;
and the Assignees in Pursuance of such Order, shall forth with make such
Dividend, and take Receipts in a Book for each Creditor. And it shall be lawful
for the Assignees, with the Consent of the major Part in Value of the Creditors
present at any Meeting, pursuant to Notice in the public Newspapers, to
submit any Difference between such Assignees and any Person whatsoever, by
Reason of any Matter relating to such Bankrupt, to the Determination of
Arbitrators, or otherwise to compound the Matters in Difference, as the
Assignees with such Consent can agree; and the Assignees are empowered, with
Consent of Creditors, to make Composition with any Debtors to such Bankrupts,
where the same shall appear necessary.

And the Commissioners shall appoint within the Time limited for the Bankrupt
to surrender and conform as aforesaid, not less than three Meetings, the last
of which shall be on the Day limited for such Bankrupt's Appearance; and three
Weeks Notice shall be given in the public Newspapers of the Time and Place of
such Meetings: And it shall be lawful for them to enlarge the Time for such
Person surrendering himself, and discovering his Effects, not exceeding fifty
Days from the End of the said Time limited as aforesaid, so as such Order for
enlarging the Time be made six Days before the Time on which such Person was to
surrender himself.

And every such Bankrupt, after Assignees shall be appointed, shall deliver
upon Oath or Affirmation, before a Justice of the Peace, unto such Assignees
all his Books of Accounts and Writings, not seized by the Messenger of the
Commission, or not before delivered up to the Commissioners, and then in his
Power, and discover such as are in the Power of any other Person that any Ways
concern his Estate; and every such Bankrupt, not in Prison, shall, after such
Surrender be at Liberty, and shall attend such Assignees upon Notice in
Writing, in order to assist in making out the Accounts of the Estate.

And every Bankrupt having surrendered, shall at all seasonable Times, before
the Expiration of the said first limited Time aforesaid, or such further Time
as shall be allowed to finish his Examination, be at Liberty to inspect his
Books and Writings in the Presence of some Person to be appointed by the
Assignees, and to bring with him for his Assistance, such Persons as he shall
think fit, not exceeding two at one Time, and to make Extracts and Copies to
enable him to make a full Discovery of his Effects; and the said Bankrupt shall
be free from Arrests in coming to surrender, and from actual Surrender, for
such Time as shall be allowed for finishing his Examination; provided such
Bankrupt was not in Custody at the Time of Surrender; and in Case such Bankrupt
shall be arrested for Debt, or on any Escape Warrant, coming to surrender, or
after his Surrender, within the Time beforementioned; then on producing such
Summons or Notice under the Hands of the Commissioners or Assignees, and giving
the Officer a Copy ther^^f, he shall be discharged; and in Case any Officer
shall detain such Bankrupt, such Officer shall forfeit to such Bankrupt for his
own Use five Pounds for every Day he shall detain him: And in Case any Bankrupt
be in Custody at the Time of issuing the Commission, and is willing to submit
to be examined, and can be brought before the Commissioners and Creditors, the
Expense thereof shall be paid out of the Bankrupt's Estate; but in Case such
Bankrupt is in Execution, or cannot be brought before the Commissioners, then
the Commissioners shall attend the Bankrupt in Custody, and take his Discovery;
and the Assignees shall appoint Persons to attend such Bankrupt in Prison, and
produce his Books and Writings, in order to prepare his Discovery* a Copy
whereof the Assignees shall apply for, and the Bankrupt shall deliver to their
Order ten Days before such last Examination. And all Bankrupts who shall
surrender and conform, as by this Act is directed, shall be allowed five per
Cent. out of the neat Produce of the Estate that shall be received, in Case the
neat Produce of the Estate, after such Allowance made, shall be sufficient to
pay ten Shillings in the Pound, and so as the said five per Cent. shall not
amount to above Two Hundred Pounds; and in Case the neat Produce of the Estate
shall be sufficient to pay twelve Shillings and six Pence in the Pound, then
all the Persons so conforming shall be allowed seven Pounds ten Shillings per
Cent, so as such Allowance shall not amount to above two Hundred and fifty
Pounds; and in Case the neat Produce shall over and above the Allowance be
sufficient to pay (...) Shillings in the Pound, then Persons so conforming
shall (...) all (...) ten per Cent. so as such ten per Cent. shall not amount
to above Thr^^ Hundred Pounds; and every such Bankrupt shall be discharged from
all Debts owing at the Time he did become Bankrupt.

And in Case such Bankrupt shall afterward be impleaded for any Debt due
before he became Bankrupt, such Bankrupt shall be discharged upon common Bail,
and may plead in general that the Cause of Action did accrue before such Time
as he became Bankrupt; and the Certificate of such Bankrupt's conforming, and
the Allowance thereof, shall be sufficient Evidence of the Trading, Bankruptcy,
Commission and other Proceedings precedent to the obtaining such Certificate;
unless the Plaintiff can prove the said Certificate was obtained unfairly, or
make appear any Concealment by such Bankrupt to the Value of ten Pounds*

And if the neat Proceeds of such Bankrupt's Estate shall not amount to ten
Shillings in the Pound, such Bankrupt shall not be allowed the five per Cent.
but shall be allowed so much as the Assignees and Commissioners shall think
fit, not exceeding three per Cent.

And in Case any Commission of Bankruptcy shall issue against any Person who
shall have been discharged by Virtue of this Act, or shall have Compounded with
his Creditors, or delivered to them his Effects, and been released by them, or
been discharged by any Act for the Relief of Insolvent Debtors, then the Body
only of such Person conforming, shall be free from Arrest and Imprisonment; but
the future Estate of such Person shall remain liable to his Creditors, (the
Tools of Trade, necessary Household Goods, and necessary wearing Apparel of such
Bankrupt, and his Wife and Children excepted) unless the Estate of such Person
shall produce clear fifteen Shillings in the Pound.

And be it further enacted, That no Discovery shall entitle such Bankrupt to
the Benefits allowed by this Act, unless the Commissioners, or the major Part
them, shall under their Hands and Seals certify to the Commander in Chief, that
such Bankrupt has made a full Discovery of his Estate, and in all Things
conformed himself according to the Directions of this Act, and that there does
not appear to them any Reason to doubt of the Truth of such Discovery; and
unless the greater Part in Number and in Value of the Creditors, who shall be
Creditors for not less than ten Pounds respectively, or some other Person by
them duly authorized, shall sign such Certificate; and the Commissioners shall
not certify till they shall have Proof by Affidavit or Affirmation in Writing
of such Creditors, or of the Persons by them authorized, signing the
Certificate, and of the Power by which any Person shall be authorized to sign
for any Creditor, (which Affidavit or Affirmation, together with such Authority
to sign, shall be laid before two of the Justices of the Superior Court with
the said Certificate); and unless such Bankrupt make Oath, or solemnly affirm
in Writing, that such Certificate was obtained without Fraud, and unless such
Certificate shall after such Oath or Affirmation be allowed by two of said
Justices, and any of the Creditors of such Bankrupt may be heard, if they think
fit, against the making such Certificate, and against the Confirmation thereof:
And every Security to be given to the Use of any Creditor as a Consideration to
persuade him to sign such Certificate, shall be void; and the Party sued on
such Contract may plead the general Issue, and under it give this special
Matter in Evidence. And Nothing in this Act shall give any Advantage to any
Bankrupt who shall have lost in one Day the Value of forty Shillings, or in the
whole the Value of ten Pounds within twelve Months, next preceding his
becoming Bankrupt, at Cards, Dice or other Game, or has born a Share in the
Stakes, or Betting.

And if any Bankrupt who shall have obtained his Certificate, shall be taken in
Executionor detained in Prison on Account of any Debts contracted before he
became a Bankrupt, by Reason that Judgment was obtained before such Certificate
was allowed, it shall be lawful for any one of the Judges of the Court wherein
Judgment has been so obtained, on such Bankrupt's producing his Certificate
allowed, to order any Sheriff or Jailer, who shall have such Bankrupt in his
Custody, to discharge such Bankrupt without Fee. And upon Certificate under the
Hands and Seals of the Commissioners, that such Commission is issued, and such
Person proved before them to become Bankrupt, it shall be lawful for any of his
Majesty's Justices of the Superior Court, or any of the Courts of Common
Pleas, and they are hereby required upon Application made, to grant their
Warrants for apprehending such Person, and him to commit to the common Goal of
the County where he shall be apprehended, and there to remain until he be
removed by Order of the Commissioners; and the Jailer to whose Custody such
Person shall be committed, is required to give Notice to one of the
Commissioners of such Person being in his Custody: And if any Person so
apprehended shall within the Time allowed, submit to be examined, and conform
as if he had surrendered, such Person shall have the Benefit of this Act, as if
he had voluntarily come in. And every Person who shall (after the Time allowed
to such Bankrupt) voluntarily make Discovery of any Part of such Bankrupt's
Estate, not before come to the Knowledge of the Assignees, shall be allowed
five 'Pounds per Cent. and such further Reward as the Assignees, and the major
Part of the Creditors in Value, present at any Meeting of the Creditors, shall
think fit.

And it shall be lawful for Persons taking Bills, Notes or other Security for
Money payable at a future Day, to Petition for a Commission, or join in
Petitioning.

And no Commission of Bankrupt shall be awarded, unless the single Debt of the
Creditor, or of more Persons being Partners petitioning for the same, amount to
fifty Pounds, or unless the Debt of two Creditors petitioning amount to Seventy
five Pounds, or unless the Debt of more Creditors petitioning amount to One
Hundred Pounds, and the Creditors petitioning shall, before the same be
granted, make Affidavit, or solemn Affirmation, before a Justice of the Peace
of the Truth of their Debts, and give Bond to the Secretary of the Province in
the Penalty of One Hundred Pounds, to be Conditioned for proving their Debts,
as well before the Commissioners, as upon a Trial at Law, in Case the due
issuing forth of the same shall be contested, and also for proving the Party a
Bankrupt, and to proceed on such Commission as herein is mentioned; and if such
Debts shall not be really due, or if after such Commission taken out it cannot
be proved that the Party was a Bankrupt, then the Secretary shall, upon Request
of the Party grieved, assign such Bond to the Party, who may sue for the same
in his own Name. And if any Bankrupt shall, after issuing of any Commission
against him, pay to the Person who sued out the same, or deliver to such Person
Goods, or Security for his Debt, whereby such Person suing out such Commission,
shall privately have more in the Pound than the other Creditors, such Payment,
Delivery of Goods, or giving Security, shall be deemed an Act of Bankruptcy,
whereby such Commission shall be superseded: And it shall be lawful for the
Commander in Chief, with Advice as aforesaid, to award to any Creditors
petitioning another Commission; and such Person receiving such Goods or other
Satisfaction, shall forfeit as well his whole Debt, as the whole he shall have
received, and shall pay back and deliver up the same, or the full thereof, to
be divided amongst the other Creditors. And where it shall appear that there
has been mutual Credit given, or mutual Debts between the Bankrupt and any
other Person, the Commissioners or Assignees shall state the Account, and one
Debt may be set against another, and the only Balance of such Account shall be
claimed or paid.

And if any Person shall before the Commissioners, or by Affidavit or
Affirmation exhibited to them, swear or affirm, that any Sum of Money is due to
him from any Bankrupt, which is not really due, knowing the same to be not due,
and being convicted by Indictment or Information, such Person shall suffer as
in Case of wilful Purjury, and shall be liable to pay double the Sum so sworn
or affirmed to be due.

And after such Bankrupt shall have obtained his Certificate, and the same
shall be confirmed, such Bankrupt shall be obliged upon Notice in Writing, to
attend the Assignees in order to settle any Account of such Bankrupt's Estate,
or to attend any Court of Record, to be examined touching the same, or for such
other Business, which such Assignees shall judge necessary for getting in the
Bankrupt's Estate; for which Attendance the Bankrupt shall be allowed (...) per
Diem; and in Case such Bankrupt shall neglect to attend, or refuse to assist in
such Discovery, without good Cause to be shown to the Commissioners, to be by
them allowed (such Assignees making Proof thereof, upon Oath or solemn
Affirmation, before the Commissioners) the Commissioners are hereby required to
issue a Warrant to such Persons as they shall think proper, for apprehending
such Bankrupt, and him to commit to the County Goal, there to remain in close
Custody until he shall conform to the Satisfaction of the Commissioners, and be
by the Commissioners or by due Course of Law discharged; and such Jailer is
required to keep such Person in close Custody within the Walls of the Prison,
under the Penalties beforementioned for suffering such Prisoners to escape:
and within eighteen Months after the issuing of any such Commission, the
Assignees shall make a second Dividend, in Case the Estate was not wholly
divided upon the first, and shall cause Notice to be inserted in the public
Boston Newspapers, of the Time and Place the Commissioners intend to meet to
make a second Dividend, and for the Creditors who shall not before have proved
their Debts, to come and prove the same; and at such Meeting every Assignee
shall produce upon Oath or Affirmation his Accounts, and what upon the Balance
shall appear to be in his Hands, shall by like Orders of the Commissioners be
forth with divided, which second Dividend shall be final, unless any Suit shall
be depending, or any Part of the Estate standing out, or unless some future
Estate of the Bankrupt shall afterward come to the Assignees, in which Case
the Assignees shall, as soon as may be, convert such future Estate into Money,
and shall within two Months after, by the like Order of the Commissioners,
divide the same. And all Factors are hereby declared liable to this Act.

And no Farmer, Grazier or Drover, or Receiver of Taxes, shall be entitled as
such to the Benefits given by this Act, or be deemed a Bankrupt: And upon
Petition of any Person, the Commander in Chief may order such Commissions,
Depositions, Proceedings and Certificates, to be entered of Record; and in Case
of the Death of the Witnesses proving such Bankruptcy, or in Case the said
Commissions or other Things, shall be lost, a Copy of the Records of such
Commissions or Things, signed and attested as herein is mentioned, may be given
in Evidence to prove such Commissions and Bankruptcy, or other Things; and all
Certificates to be allowed and entered of Record, or a true Copy of every
Certificate signed and attested as herein is mentioned, shall and may be given
in Evidence in any Courts of Record, and without further Proof taken to be a
Bar and Discharge against any Action for any Debt contracted before the issuing
of such Commission, unless any Creditor of the Person that has such
Certificate, shall prove that such Certificate was fraudulently obtained; and
the several Clerks of the Inferior Courts of Common Pleas where the said
Bankrupt last dwelt, shall in their several Offices enter of Record such
Commissions and other Things, and have the Custody of the Entries thereof; and
all Persons shall be at Liberty to search, and have Copies of them. And there
shall not be paid out of the Estate of the Bankrupt, any Moneys for Expenses in
Eating or Drinking of the Commissioners, or of any other Persons at the Times
of the Meetings of the Commissioners or Creditors; and no Schedule shall be
annexed to any Deed of Assignment, of the Personal Estate of such Bankrupt; and
if any Commissioner shall order such Expense to be made, or eat or drink at the
Charge of the Creditors, or out of the Estate of such Bankrupt, or receive
above (...) each Commissioner for each Meeting, every such Commissioner shall
be disabled to act in any Commission of Bankrupts.

And the Commissioners shall not be capable of acting until they respectively
shall have taken an Oath to the Effect following, viz.

I A. B. do Swear, that I will faithfully, impartially and honestly, according
to the best of my Skill and Knowledge, execute the several Powers and Trusts
reposed in me as a Commissioner, in a Commission of Bankruptcy against (...)
and that without Favor or Affection, Prejudice or Malice. So help me GOD.

Which Oath any two of the Commissioners are empowered to administer to each
other, and they are required to keep a Memorial thereof signed by them, amongst
the Proceedings on each Commission.

And no Commission of Bankruptcy shall abate by the Demise of his Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, but shall continue in Force; and if it shall be necessary
to renew any Commission by Reason of the Death of the Commissioners, or any
other Cause, such Commission shall be renewed, and only the Fees usually paid,
shall be paid for such renewed Commission.

And be it further enacted, That if any Action or Trespass, or other Suit shall
happen hereafter to be brought against any Commissioner, or any other Person or
Persons having Authority by Virtue or under the Commission, authorizing the
said Commissioner for the doing or executing any Matter by Force of this Act,
that the Defendant or Defendants, in any such Action or Suit, may plead not
guilty, or otherwise justify that the Act or Thing whereof the Plaintiff or
Plaintiffs complained, was done by the Authority of this Act, without
expressing or Rehearsal of any other Matter of Circumstance contained in this
Act, and without enforcing him or them to show forth their Commission
authorizing the said Act or Thing; whereunto the Plaintiff shall be admitted to
reply, that the Defendant did the Fact supposed in the Declaration of his own
Wrong, without any such Cause alleged by the said Defendant, whereupon the
Issue in such Action, shall be joined to be tried by Verdict of twelve Men, and
upon the Trial of that Issue, the whole Matter may be given by both Parties in
Evidence, according to the very Truth of the same, and if Verdict upon such
Issue shall pass for the Defendant, the Defendant shall have Costs.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, That if after any Commission of
Bankruptcy hereafter sued forth, and dealt in by the Commissioners, the
Bankrupt happen to die before the Commissioners shall distribute the Goods,
Lands and Debts of the Bankrupts, or any of them by Force of this Act, that
then nevertheless, the said Commissioners shall and may in that Case proceed in
Execution, in and upon the said Commission, for and concerning the Bankrupt's
Goods, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Debts, in such Sort as they might
have done, if the Bankrupt were living.

And be it further enacted, That the said Commissioners, or the major Part of
them, shall have Power by Virtue of this Act, by Deed Indented and duly
Registered within two Months after the making thereof, in the County where such
Lands lie, to grant, bargain, sell and convey any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, whereof any Bankrupt is or shall be in any Ways seized, of any
Estate, in Tail, in Possession, Reversion or Remainder, and whereof no
Reversion or Remainder is, or shall be in the King's Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, to any Person or Persons for the Relief and Benefit of the
Creditors of all such Bankrupts: And that all and every such Grants, Bargains,
Sales and Conveyances, shall be good and available in the Law to such Person or
Persons, and their Heirs, against the said Bankrupts, and against all and every
the Issues of the Body of such Bankrupts, and against all and every Person and
Persons, claiming any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, by, from or under the
said Bankrupts, after such Time as such Person shall become Bankrupt, and
against all and every other Person and Persons whatsoever whom the said
Bankrupt by common Recovery, or other Ways or Means might cut off, or debar
from any Remainder, Reversion, Rent, Profit, Title or Possibility, into or out
of any the said Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments.

And be it further enacted, That if any Person that now is, or hereafter shall
become a Bankrupt, have heretofore granted, conveyed or assured, or shall at
any Time hereafter, grant, convey or assure any Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels or other Estate, unto any Person or Persons,
upon Condition, or Power of Redemption, at a Day to come, by Payment of Money,
or otherwise, that it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said
Commissioners, or the greater Part of them, before the Time of the Performance
of such Condition, to assign and appoint under their Hands and Seals, such
Person or Persons, as they shall think fit, to make Tender or Payment of Money,
or other Performance, according to the Nature of such Condition, as fully as
the Bankrupt might have done: And that the said Commissioners, or the greater
Part of them, shall after such Tender, Payment or Performance, have Power to
sell and dispose of such Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels,
and other Estates so granted, conveyed or assured upon Condition, to and for
the Benefit of the Creditors, as fully as they (...) sell or dispose of any the
Estate of the Bankrupt.

Provided further, That no Purchaser, for good and valuable Consideration,
shall be impeached by Virtue of this Act, unless the Commission to prove him or
her a Bankrupt, be sued forth against such Bankrupt within five Years after he
or she shall become a Bankrupt.

And be it further enacted, That the Discharge of any Bankrupt, by Force of
this Act, from the Debts by him owing at the Time that he did become a
Bankrupt, shall not be construed to discharge any other Person who was Partner
with the Bankrupt in Trade, or stood jointly bound, or had made any joint
Contract together with such Bankrupt.

And every Person who shall give Credit on Securities payable at future Days to
Persons who are or shall become Bankrupts, upon good Consideration bona fide,
for Money or other Thing not due before the Time of such Person's becoming
Bankrupt* shall be admitted to prove their Securities or Agreements, as if they
were payable presently, and shall have a Dividend in Proportion to the other
Creditors, discounting from the actual Payment, to the Time such Money would
have become due; and the Bankrupt shall be discharged from such Securities, as
if such Money had been due before the Time of his becoming Bankrupt.

And be it further enacted, That where any Persons shall fraudulently swear or
depose, or being of the People called Quakers, affirm before the major Part of
the Commissioners named in any Commission of Bankruptcy, or by Affidavit or
Affirmation exhibited to them, that a Sum of Money is due to him or her from
any Bankrupt or Bankrupts, which shall in Fact not be really and truly so due
or owing, and shall in Respect of such fictitious and pretended Debt, sign his
or her Consent to the Certificate for such Bankrupt's Discharge from his Debts;
that in every such Case, unless such Bankrupt shall, before such Time as the
major Part of the said Commissioners shall have signed such Certificate, by
Writing by him to be signed and delivered to one or more of the said
Commissioners, or to one or more of the Assignees of his Estate and Effects,
under such Commissions, disclose the said Fraud, and object to the Reality of
such Debt, such Certificate shall be null and void, to all Intents and
Purposes; and such Bankrupt shall not in that Case be entitled to be discharged
from his Debts, or to have or receive any of the Benefits or Allowances given
or allowed to Bankrupts, by this Act; any Thing herein contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In the House of Representatives, Febr. 16 th 1757. Read a first Time. April 16
th 1757. Read a second Time, and referred for Consideration till the next May
Session. And

Ordered, That the Bill be printed for the Perusal of the Inhabitants of the
Province.

Attest Roland Cotton, Cler. Dom. Rep.


